978-1-6654-3540-6/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE 
ECC-Aided RAID for Reliability Improvement of 
SSD 
 
Kangseok Lee 
Samsung Electronics 
Hwaseong, Republic of Korea 
kangse0k.lee@samsung.com 
Geunyeong Yu 
Samsung Electronics 
Hwaseong, Republic of Korea 
geunyeong.yu@samsung.com 
Youngjun Hwang 
Samsung Electronics 
Hwaseong, Republic of Korea 
yj0.hwang@samsung.com 
Bohwan Jun 
Samsung Electronics 
Hwaseong, Republic of Korea 
bohwan.jun@samsung.com
 
 
Hongrak Son 
Samsung Electronics 
Hwaseong, Republic of Korea 
hr25.son@samsung.com 
Yong Ho Song 
Samsung Electronics 
Hwaseong, Republic of Korea 
yongho7.song@samsung.com 
 
Abstract—In the field of solid state drive (SSD), redundant 
array of inexpensive disk (RAID) is of great use due to its 
reliability and performance. In terms of reliability, RAID can be 
further enhanced with the help of error-correction code (ECC), 
which is another core technology for SSD applications. Recently, 
joint ECC-RAID schemes have been proposed for the reliability of 
SSD. Especially, due to high reliability with low computational 
complexity, joint ECC-RAID schemes based on RAID-5, denoted 
as ECC-RAID-5, are popularly adopted to devices as well as 
systems of data storage. In this paper, a new family of joint ECC-
RAID schemes, called ECC-aided RAID (EA-RAID), are 
proposed to further improve the reliability of the joint ECC-RAID 
schemes in the data storage applications. In the EA-RAID, new 
types of data checking and regenerating algorithms based on soft-
decision (SD) are introduced to enhance the error-correcting 
capability of the cooperative ECC decoding. The EA-RAID 
increases error-correction capability as at least 15% and 7% gain 
compared with the ECC-only schemes and the conventional ECC-
RAID-5, respectively. The improvement is demonstrated by 
productized SSD based on virtual 3-bit-over multi-level cell (MLC) 
NAND.  It is expected that the proposed technologies can be 
introduced as a potential solution for next generation NAND. 
Keywords— SSD, NAND flash memory, controller, RAID, ECC, 
joint ECC-RAID 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Recently, there have been dramatic changes on the area of 
data storage. The evolution of NAND flash memories [1] has 
created features such as non-volatility, high mobility, fast access, 
and low power consumption. Due to the valuable features, flash 
memories and their solutions have been developing a lot of 
applications in mobile, client, enterprise, and data center 
business by enabling data storage device and system to have not 
only a huge amount of capacity but also fast performance. As a 
result, solid-state drive (SSD), which is one of the main solution 
products based on flash memories, has widely occupied data 
storage markets instead of hard disk drives (HDDs). 
During the last decade, multi-level cell (MLC), which is a 
memory cell capable of storing more than a single-bit of 
information, has been developed as an effective solution in the 
field of flash memory, due to dramatically increased storage 
density with reduced cost. However, despite this advantage, 
MLC has performance and reliability problems, which should 
be 
solved 
for 
product 
competitiveness 
and 
stable 
commercialization on the market of MLC flash memories and 
their applications. In order to improve the performance of MLC, 
parallel I/O architectures in SSD are adopted as a solution 
because they enable parallel operations over multiple 
channels/ways to increase their overall throughput. 
However, as mentioned above, the reliability problem 
remains as a critical issue in MLC flash memories. Since multi-
bit data are programmed and read as multi-level state 
information at each single cell of MLC, the data reliability is 
critically degraded by their reduced operational margin in 
condition of physically restricted space. Moreover, intrinsic 
characteristics of flash memories, such as program/erase (P/E) 
cycles, data retention and cell-to-cell interference, make the data 
reliability further worse. Considering recent trend that the top 
flash memory manufacturers have been developing even 5-bit 
MLCs, it is expected in their next generation that the reliability 
will be degraded more significantly. 
In general, error-correction code (ECC) techniques are 
widely used as  one of core solutions to cope with the reliability 
problem in flash memories. In particular, MLC flash memories 
and their solutions have been requiring ECCs with strong error-
correcting 
capability. 
As 
a 
result, 
Bose–Chaudhuri–
Hocquenghem (BCH) codes [2], [3] or low-density parity-check 
(LDPC) codes [4], [5], [6] have been adopted as the ECC 
solution for MLC flash memories. Another solution for  
2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Selected Areas in Communications: Cloud
3772
GLOBECOM 2022 - 2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference | 978-1-6654-3540-6/22/$31.00 ©2022 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/GLOBECOM48099.2022.10000968
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
Fig. 1. Summarized block diagram of unit EA-RAID process 
reliability of flash memories is to use system or storage level 
technique such as Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks 
(RAIDs) [7] ,[8]. RAID technologies employs an array of small 
disks in order to increase both performance and reliability. 
As introduced above, ECC and RAID techniques have 
received a great amount of attention and thus have been 
intensively developed in a variety of solutions for flash 
memories. As an innovative solution, joint ECC-RAID schemes 
[9], [10] are introduced recently, which show more powerful 
error-correcting capabilities by combining ECCs and RAIDs. 
The joint ECC-RAID schemes alternately conduct ECC 
decoding and 
RAID error-correction, 
which performs 
complementary cooperation for error-correction resulting in the 
improvements of error-correction capability. Especially, the 
joint ECC-RAID schemes based on RAID-5 are widely used due 
to high error-correcting capability with low complexity. As a 
main effect, the joint ECC-RAID schemes can tremendously 
reduce uncorrectable bit-error rate (UBER), which is one of the 
most important specification guaranteeing the reliability of data 
storage. As summary, joint ECC-RAID schemes can achieve 
more reliability enhancement than the case that the ECC and 
RAID are operated independently. 
In this paper, a new family of joint ECC-RAID schemes, 
called as ECC-aided RAID (EA-RAID), are proposed. The EA-
RAID employs new kinds of data checking and regenerating 
schemes based on soft-decision (SD) in order to extremely 
improve error-correcting capability of the cooperative ECC 
decoding, which is operated in the EA-RAID joint decoding. 
The proposed scheme considerably increases error-correction 
capability compared with both of the ECC-only schemes and the 
conventional joint ECC-RAID schemes with RAID-5, denoted 
as ECC-RAID-5. Note that the error-correction capability of the 
proposed scheme is evaluated by demonstration of SSD on 
virtual 3-bit-over MLC NAND and the evaluation results are 
shown in this paper. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, 
the proposed EA-RAID are explained in terms of their structure, 
process, algorithm and implementation. As effects of the EA-
RAID, their performance and effectiveness are analyzed, and 
numerical results are shown in Section III. Finally, Section IV 
concludes with summary and presents the related future works. 
II. ECC-AIDED RAID 
In this section, a new kind of joint ECC-RAID scheme, 
referred to as ECC-Aided RAID (EA-RAID) is proposed in 
order to improve error-correction capability, compared with 
conventional joint ECC-RAID schemes as well as ECC-only 
schemes. Similar to the conventional RAID, the EA-RAID 
operates only if lower-layer error-correcting schemes, such as 
ECC-only schemes, fail to correct errors by themselves. In this 
paper, we assume that an ECC decoder in the EA-RAID is the 
same as the ECC decoder at the previous error-correcting stage, 
which already tries its error-correcting process but fails to 
recover the target error data by itself. This assumption is 
introduced for the reason that commercial flash memory 
controllers generally have adopted only one kind of ECC engine 
due to their hardware costs such as size, complexity, and power. 
In addition, it is assumed that an ECC decoding mode of the 
EA-RAID the same way as the existing ECC-only method, 
which already tries and fails to decode the target error data. Then, 
the effect of reliability improvements by the EA-RAID can be 
fairly explained. Also, we assume that data can be processed as 
SD data and 3-bit SD decoding is employed in both of ECC-only 
schemes and joint ECC-RAID including the EA-RAID. 
Compared to hard-decision (HD), SD data represents not only 
1-bit based decision, namely, HD, of the HD with the other extra 
bits. As the type of RAID for the proposed schemes, RAID-5 is 
employed but note that the EA-RAID can be universally adopted 
for any other type of RAID scheme with the parity based on its 
stripe. 
A. Structure and Process of EA-RAID 
The EA-RAID is generally composed of three stage process, 
which are data checking, data regenerating, and ECC decoding. 
This three-stage process is continuously and iteratively operated 
on a data unit of target error  until all the errors are eliminated 
in the corresponding RAID. 
In data checking, as the first stage, all the data striped with 
the target data in the corresponding RAID are used for the 
calculation of their RAID parities and SD data to check their HD 
data with errors in terms of reliability. Because the average error 
rate of all the striped data except the target erroneous data is 
much lower than that of the target data, the data checking is such 
a useful to check the reliability of the target data.  As results of 
data checking, new data with additional information of the HD 
data is used to refine the initial HD and SD data in the next stage. 
After the data checking stage, data regenerating is performed 
at the second stage in order to generate more correctable data for 
ECC decoding than the initial data, which has too many errors 
to be successfully decoded by ECC-only schemes and then 
becomes targeted for error-correction of joint ECC-RAID  
2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Selected Areas in Communications: Cloud
3773
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE I.  
EXPRESSION OF 2-BIT SD DATA 
Decision and Reliability 
2-bit SD Data Expression 
1-bit HD 
1-bit SD 
Strong 1 
1 
1 
Weak 1 
1 
0 
Strong 0 
0 
1 
Weak 0
0
0
 
schemes. By using SD-type check data generated at the first 
stage, new SD data with the same dimension with the initial SD 
data, or new SD data with SD information dimensionally higher 
than the original SD information are generated. Because the SD 
information with higher dimension is generated in forms of 
original dimension by operation of two or more previous SD 
information with original dimension, they have compressed  
SD information of higher dimension with enhanced reliability 
compared with the previous SD information of original 
dimension. 
The generated new SD data is to be decoded successfully by 
the corresponding ECC scheme, which previously fails to 
decode the target error data itself. At the last stage, ECC 
decoding with the new SD data generated at the second stage is 
performed to correct errors. Since the newly-generated SD data 
in data regenerating is different from the original SD data so as 
to be suitable for the corresponding ECC decoding to correct 
errors effectively. Fig. 1 illustrates the summarized unit process 
of the EA-RAID as explained above.  
B. Data Checking 
The EA-RAID joint decoding is operated only in case that 
the ECC-only decoding of  target error data is tried but failed. 
The EA-RAID joint decoding is classified into two types of 
error-correction modes depending on the number of error data 
in the corresponding stripe including the target error data. As 
noted above, we assume that the RAID type of the EA-RAID is 
RAID-5. In case that target error data is only one error data 
among all the corresponding striped data, the EA-RAID uses the 
conventional RAID-5 error-correction, which is operated by 
XORing all the corresponding striped data except for target error 
data, to correct errors of target data. This conventional XORing 
decoding has not only low computational complexity but also 
the certain and strongest error-correction capability in case of 
single data failure. As a result, in case of single error data on the 
corresponding stripe, the EA-RAID bypasses data checking and 
ECC decoding, but only operates data regenerating by the 
XORing decoding scheme. 
On the other hand, in case that there exist more than one error 
data in the corresponding stripe, the conventional RAID-5 error-
correction scheme based on XORing cannot correct the target 
error data and therefore cannot correct the rest of error data as 
well. In order to make up for the these decoding failure cases, 
the EA-RAID employs a new error-correction scheme, which 
even outperforms error-correcting capability of the conventional 
joint ECC-RAID scheme. In the case of more than one error data 
at RAID-5, the EA-RAID uses all the correspondingly striped 
data used at the conventional RAID-5 but utilizes not only HD 
data but also SD data, which is the characterized difference, 
compared with the conventional RAID-5 error-correction. 
The target error data composed of bit elements of the bit 
length 
𝑁 is 
represented 
as  𝐱ୌୈ= {𝑥ୌୈ(0), 𝑥ୌୈ(1),
⋯ , 𝑥ୌୈ(𝑁−1)} , which is referred to as HD data. It is 
assumed that the EA-RAID joint decoding employs 2-bit SD 
data among 3-bit SD data for target error data. In the strict sense, 
the first bit of SD data is HD data, the second bit is called SD 
data as it is. Then, the SD data of the targeted error data is 
represented as 𝐱ୗୈ= {𝑥ୗୈ(0), 𝑥ୗୈ(1), ⋯ , 𝑥ୗୈ(𝑁−1)}. SD 
data is obtained by SD read, which is operated by offset based 
on HD read. TABLE I shows the 2-bit SD data expression. As a 
decision of reliability in TABLE I, “strong” and “weak” 
represent that the corresponding HD is judged in relatively high 
probability and low probability, respectively. For example, 
“Strong 1”, denoted as HD 1 and SD 1, implies the decision of 
the corresponding data bit would be 1 with relatively high 
probability. For another example, “weak 0”, denoted as HD 0 
and SD 0, means that the determined value of 0 is not strongly 
reliable. Note that as 𝑛 in 𝑛-bit SD increases, the SD data 
reliability has higher precision and therefore help the 
cooperative ECC decoding or other signal processing scheme so 
as to have higher correct decision capability. However, the 
correct decision capability gain has saturation according to 𝑛 
and nearly reach the limit of the floating-decision in case of 
more than 4-bit SD. 
In addition with 2-bit SD data of target error data, the EA-
RAID utilizes 2-bit SD data of all the other corresponding data 
striped with the targeted data. Assume that  there exist 𝐿୉ 
error data in RAID-5 with stripe size 𝐿, that is, (𝐿, 𝐿−1) 
RAID-5, and these error data cannot be corrected by 3-bit SD 
decoding of the corresponding ECC-only scheme. It means that 
the rest 𝐿େ= 𝐿−𝐿୉ data are clean or correctable by up to the 
3-bit SD decoding of the ECC-only scheme. Let 𝑆, 𝑆୉ and 𝑆େ 
be the index set of the correspondingly striped all data, error data 
and clean data respectively, in RAID-5. Then it is satisfied that 
𝐿= |𝑆|,  𝐿୉= |𝑆୉| and  𝐿େ= |𝑆େ|. Also, the relation is valid 
that 𝑆= 𝑆୉∪𝑆େ and therefore 𝐿= 𝐿୉+ 𝐿େ. Let the 2-bit SD 
data of all the striped data in the EA-RAID be represented as HD 
data 𝐱ୌୈ
(௟) = ቄ𝑥ୌୈ
(௟) (0), 𝑥ୌୈ
(௟) (1), ⋯ , 𝑥ୌୈ
(௟) (𝑁−1)ቅand SD data 
𝐱ୗୈ
(௟) = ቄ𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(0), 𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(1), ⋯ , 𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(𝑁−1)ቅ
, 
respectively, 
where 𝑙= 0, 1, ⋯, 𝐿−1 denotes the ordered index of data 
RAID-5. Let 𝑙୘ be the index of target error data in RAID-5 and 
then we may describe 𝐱ୌୈ= 𝐱ୌୈ
(௟౐) and 𝐱ୗୈ= 𝐱ୗୈ
(௟౐). 
In case of more than one error data on the EA-RAID, data 
checking generates HD check data by element-wisely XORing 
all the correspondingly striped HD data except the target error 
data, expressed as 
 
𝑐ୌୈ(𝑛) =
⊕
௟∈ௌ\௟౐
𝑥ୌୈ
(௟) (𝑛) , 𝑛= 0, 1, ⋯, 𝑁−1 
(1) 
2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Selected Areas in Communications: Cloud
3774
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Algorithm 1. Bit-Wise Recursive Operation Algorithm for Generating 
Check SD Data in EA-RAID 
Input: 
𝐿: The Number of the striped data 
𝑁: The bit length of each striped data 
𝐱ୗୈ
(௟) = ൛𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(0), 𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(1), ⋯ , 𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(𝑁−1)ൟ: The SD data of the 𝑙-th striped 
data 
𝑙୘: The index of the targeted error data in EA-RAID 
1. Initialization: 
for 𝑛= 0: 𝑁−1 
Check SD Initialization: 𝑐ୗୈ(𝑛) = 1  
2. Recursive Bit-Wise Operation: 
for 𝑙= 0: 𝐿−1 
if 𝑙≠𝑙୘ 
for 𝑛= 0:N −1 
Check SD Update: 𝑐ୗୈ(𝑛) = 𝑐ୗୈ(𝑛) ⋅ 𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(𝑛)  
Output: 
𝐜ୗୈ= {𝑐ୗୈ(0), 𝑐ୗୈ(1), ⋯, 𝑐ୗୈ(𝑁−1)}: The check SD data for data 
regenerating
 
where 𝑐ୌୈ(𝑛)  denotes an element of the check HD data 
𝐜ୌୈ= {𝑐ୌୈ(0), 𝑐ୌୈ(1), ⋯ , 𝑐ୌୈ(𝑁−1)}
 and 
⊕ 
represents bit-wise XOR operation. It is noted that (1) is 
XORing operation of all the other data except for the target error 
data on stripe in RAID-5 and thus same calculation as the 
conventional RAID-5 decoding operation. However, unlike 
RAID-5, the EA-RAID utilizes the XORing operation not as 
direct error-correcting but as preprocessing for data regenerating 
in next stage process, which employs the XORed check HD data 
in order to generate more delicately revised 3-bit SD data. 
In addition with check HD data, data checking generates 
check SD data 𝐜ୗୈ= {𝑐ୗୈ(0), 𝑐ୗୈ(1), ⋯ , 𝑐ୗୈ(𝑁−1)}. Note 
that SD data represents the reliability of HD data. The check SD 
data 𝐜ୗୈ is generated by element-wise minimum operation on 
SD data of all the correspondingly striped data except the target 
error data, that is, 
 
𝑐ୗୈ(𝑛) = min
௟∈ௌ\௟౐𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(𝑛) , 𝑛= 0, 1, ⋯, 𝑁−1 
(2) 
In summary of the data checking algorithm, the HD and SD 
data checking of the EA-RAID is operated as (1) and (2) 
respectively. As the target 2-bit SD data, the 2-bit SD check data 
also follows the same expression in TABLE I.  It is worth 
noticing that data checking of the EA-RAID is similar as min-
sum algorithm, which is one of the most popular single-parity 
check algorithms for check node equations in LDPC decoding. 
In the perspective of hardware (HW) or software (SW) 
design of data regenerating of the EA-RAID, the HD data 
checking (1) can be simply implemented since it is just the bit-
wise operation. However, in case of the SD data checking (2), 
the bit-wise minimum operation can be burden on hardware 
implementation in case of HW, especially.  For low 
complexity implementation of data regenerating of the EA-
RAID, the SD data regenerating (2) can be transformed to 
simple bit-wise operations, which directly generate the check 
SD data 𝐜ୗୈ as below two types of algorithm.  
Algorithm 2. Bit-Wise Condition Operation Algorithm for Generating 
Check SD Data in EA-RAID 
Input: 
𝐿: The Number of the striped data 
𝑁: The bit length of each striped data 
𝐱ୗୈ
(௟) = ൛𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(0), 𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(1), ⋯ , 𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(𝑁−1)ൟ: The SD data of the 𝑙-th striped 
data 
𝑙୘: The index of the targeted error data in EA-RAID 
1. Initialization: 
for 𝑛= 0: 𝑁−1 
Check SD Initialization: 𝑐ୗୈ(𝑛) = 1  
2. Condition Bit-Wise Operation: 
for 𝑛= 0: N −1 
for 𝑙= 0: 𝐿−1 
if 𝑙≠𝑙୘ 
Check SD Update: 
if 𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(𝑛) = 0 
𝑐ୗୈ(𝑛) = 0 and end 𝑙 loop 
else 
continue 𝑙 loop 
Output: 
𝐜ୗୈ= {𝑐ୗୈ(0), 𝑐ୗୈ(1), ⋯, 𝑐ୗୈ(𝑁−1)}: The check SD data for data 
regenerating
 
The first proposed algorithm introduced in Algorithm 1 
operates bit-wise AND operations recursively. Note that the 
AND operation is the elementary operation to be most easily 
implemented in both of HW and SW, similar as the XOR 
operation. And the results of Algorithm 1 are quite the same as 
those of the original algorithm (2). 
In addition, the other algorithm proposed in Algorithm 2 
operates bit-wise “compare” operations conditionally. In 
Algorithm 2, at bit index 𝑛, the “compare” operation is 
conducted just until value of 𝑥ୗୈ
(௟)(𝑛) becomes 0. It is also noted 
for Algorithm 2 that the output results are exactly the same as 
those of the original algorithm (2). 
Comparing Algorithm 1 and 2, the hierarchy of the operation 
loops differs from each other in terms of the order of for-loop, 
i.e., the for-loop of the index 𝑙 is the higher hierarchy of the for-
loop of the index 𝑛 for Algorithm 1 but the order is the opposite 
for Algorithm 2. It is for low latency of entire operations and 
therefore Algorithm 1 and 2 are the results optimized for latency. 
Algorithm 1 and 2 can be adopted selectively depending on their 
efficiency considered according to various implementation 
conditions. 
C. Data Regenerating 
As assumed in the previous subsection, if 2-bit SD check 
data 𝐜ୌୈ and 𝐜ୗୈ are generated, data checking process is 
finished and then data regenerating process is conducted to 
generate new 3-bit SD data, which is well suited for ECC 3-bit 
SD decoding to correct error of the target data. Note that based 
on only 2-bit SD target data and 2-bit SD check data, the data 
with higher SD dimensional, for example in the paper, 3-bit SD 
data can be generated as alternative of the target error data for 
the EA-RAID joint decoding.  
 
2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Selected Areas in Communications: Cloud
3775
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
 
(a)                               (b) 
Fig. 2. Cooking rules in EA-RAID: (a) regular rule, (b) proposed rule 
The inputs of data regenerating is the target original error 2-
bit SD data 𝐱ୌୈ
(௟౐) and 𝐱ୗୈ
(௟౐), and the check 2-bit SD data 𝐜ୌୈ 
and 𝐜ୗୈ. As a result, let the new HD, SD and TD of 3-bit SD 
data generated in data regenerating be represented as 
𝐱തୌୈ
(௟) = ቄ𝑥̅ୌୈ
(௟) (0), 𝑥̅ୌୈ
(௟) (1), ⋯ , 𝑥̅ୌୈ
(௟) (𝑁−1)ቅ and  
𝐱തୗୈ
(௟) = ቄ𝑥̅ୗୈ
(௟)(0), 𝑥̅ୗୈ
(௟)(1), ⋯ , 𝑥̅ୗୈ
(௟)(𝑁−1)ቅ and  
𝐱ത୘ୈ
(௟) = ቄ𝑥̅୘ୈ
(௟)(0), 𝑥̅୘ୈ
(௟)(1), ⋯ , 𝑥̅୘ୈ
(௟)(𝑁−1)ቅ, respectively. It is  
important to generate the new 3-bit SD data 𝐱തୌୈ
(௟) , 𝐱തୗୈ
(௟)  and 
𝐱ത୘ୈ
(௟)  such that they are well refined for the ECC decoder, which 
suffered the decoding failure in the previous stage. Therefore, it 
can be good strategy that the 3-bit SD data is regenerated by 
quite a different rule from the regular one, which fails to decode 
again in high probability since it is already adopted to the 
previously failed decoding and the decoding result is known as 
fail. 
Based on the strategy mentioned above, the data 
regenerating rule should be optimized in terms of error-
correcting capability of the corresponding ECC decoding in 
order to obtain high reliability of the EA-RAID. For example in 
the paper, it is shown as the results that a kind of 3-bit data 
regenerating rule based on  2-bit SD target data and 2-bit SD 
check data is optimized  for the corresponding ECC 3-bit SD 
decoding by exhaustive search. Note that the data regenerating 
rule is bit-wise operated. As the result of the optimization, an 
irregular mapping rule is proposed as the regenerating rule in the 
EA-RAID. 
This paper shows two types of data regenerating rules in the 
EA-RAID. The first type rule is the regular rule, which is usually 
adopted in the conventional joint ECC-RAID. The other rule is 
the proposed rule in this paper. The proposed regenerating rule 
conducts irregular operations, which cannot be calculated by any 
regular operation such as uniform sum and quantization used in 
the regular rule, but its error-correcting capability for the 
corresponding ECC decoding, which already fails to decode by 
using the decoding rule similar with the regular rule, is 
considerably improved in case of the EA-RAID joint decoding. 
As the output of data regenerating based on the proposed 
irregular mapping, the new 3-bit SD data 𝐱തୌୈ
(௟) , 𝐱തୗୈ
(௟) and 𝐱ത୘ୈ
(௟)  
are generated. Fig. 2 shows the two types of data regenerating 
rules in the EA-RAID. 
  
Fig. 3. Flow of EA-RAID joint decoding 
As explained above, the proposed irregular mapping rule of 
data regenerating is the result optimized by exhaustive search 
algorithms and therefore its error-correcting capability is 
optimal in the optimization target ECC decoding and the EA-
RAID with the ECC decoding. Note that optimization results 
and the corresponding error-correcting capability of the irregular 
mapping rule can be varied according to types of ECCs and joint 
ECC-RAIDs. The error-correcting capability of the EA-RAID 
with data regenerating based on the irregular mapping rule is to 
be shown in Section III. 
D. EA-RAID Joint Decoding 
After regenerating data, the 3-bit SD data 𝐱തୌୈ
(௟) , 𝐱തୗୈ
(௟) and 
𝐱ത୘ୈ
(௟)  are newly generated and targeted to be decoded again by 
the corresponding ECC 3-bit SD decoding, which already tries 
and fails to decode by itself. As explained in previous parts of 
the Section, it is assume that ECC decoder and decoding mode 
in the EA-RAID are the same as those of the ECC-only mode 
conducted before the EA-RAID joint decoding. Nevertheless, 
assuming that the EA-RAID can use its specially optimized 
decoder and decoding mode for itself, much more improved 
error-correcting capability is expected. 
In terms of target error data, there exist two case of joint 
decoding results in the EA-RAID. One case is error-correction 
success where the new 3-bit SD data generated by data 
regenerating is decoded successfully to corrected data by the 
corresponding ECC decoding. In this case, the decoded data is 
no longer targeted as error data on the EA-RAID joint decoding 
engine. On the other hand, in the other case that the new 3-bit 
SD data after data regenerating fails to be decoded by the 
corresponding ECC decoding, it becomes to be in pending state 
where the failed data by the unit EA-RAID joint decoding waits 
for another error data to be corrected by the decoding. Note that 
if there exists no other error data, the EA-RAID engine makes 
decision on the target error data as uncorrectable data and the 
EA-RAID process is completely finished. 
 
2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Selected Areas in Communications: Cloud
3776
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
Fig. 4. FERs of several error-correcting schemes in AWGN channel 
In case that at least one of other error data is recovered by 
the unit EA-RAID joint decoding, the pending data gets out of 
the pending state and is retried to be in the unit EA-RAID 
process. In the retried unit EA-RAID process on target error data, 
its error-correction failure probability can be decreased since 
total number of error data is reduced and accordingly it enhances 
reliability of both data checking and data regenerating, which 
are updated by the striped data with reduced number of error 
data. These pending and retry states of the EA-RAID joint 
decoding are iteratively operated and then finally completed 
when there is no more correctable data by the process. Fig. 3 
shows flow of the EA-RAID joint decoding. 
III. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
In this section, the reliability performance of the EA-RAID 
is analyzed. The error-correcting capability of the EA-RAID 
joint decoding is mathematically derived as data error rate. In 
addition, this section shows numerical results for the error-
correction capability of the EA-RAID. 
The error-correction capability of the EA-RAID joint 
decoding can be mathematically derived as follows. Suppose 
that 𝑝 denote the probability of an ECC decoding failure in a 
channel and RAID is composed of 𝐿 striped data in the same 
channel. Supposed that all the 𝐿 striped data are decoded by 
using the same ECC decoder, the probability that ECC decoding 
failure occurs in 𝑢 striped data among all the 𝐿 striped data in 
RAID, that is, the probability of 𝑢 uncorrectable ECC (UECC) 
of data in RAID with L striped data, is represented as 
 
𝑃୙(𝑢) = ቀ𝐿
𝑢ቁ𝑝௨(1 −𝑝)௅ି௨. 
(3) 
Let 𝑃(𝑢)  denotes the probability that the EA-RAID joint 
decoding the targeted UECC at single try in condition of 𝑢 
UECC in RAID. Considering that the EA-RAID tries to recover 
UECCs one by one until one of UECCs is recovered 
successfully, the probability that the EA-RAID joint decoding 
cannot correct the targeted UECC is calculated as 
 
𝑃୉(𝑢) = 1 −∑
𝑃(𝑢)௩ିଵ൫1 −𝑃(𝑢)൯
௨
௩ୀଵ
= ൫𝑃(𝑢)൯
௨ିଵ. (4) 
Then, the expected UECC value after the EA-RAID joint 
decoding at 𝑢 UECC in RAID is derived as 
 
𝐸୉(𝑢) = 𝑢𝑃୉(𝑢) = 𝑢൫𝑃(𝑢)൯
௨ିଵ. 
(5) 
Based on (3), (4), and (5), we can represent the expected UECC 
value in case that full process of the EA-RAID joint decoding at 
initial condition of 𝑢 UECCs in RAID as a recursive equation 
of 𝐸୊(𝑢). 
 
𝐸୊(𝑢) = 𝐸୉(𝑢) + ൫1 −𝑃୉(𝑢)൯𝐸୊(𝑢−1). 
(6) 
From (3) and (6), the expected UECC value after full process of 
the EA-RAID is derived as 
 
𝐸ୋ= 1 −∑
𝑃୙(𝑢)𝐸୊(𝑢)
௅ିଵ
௩ୀଵ
. 
(7) 
The error-correcting capability of the EA-RAID joint decoding 
can be represented as data error rate after the EA-RAID joint 
decoding, referred to as frame error rate (FER). Since the EA-
RAID joint decoding covers all the case of UECCs in RAID, the 
FER of the EA-RAID joint decoding is represented as an 
average equation in (8). 
 
FER =
ாృ
௅. 
(8) 
Next, the numerical results for error-correction capability of 
the EA-RAID joint decoding is shown as FER. We used 
[18432, 16640] QC-LDPC code and  [32, 31] RAID-5 for 
the numerical results. Also, AWGN channel is employed such 
that all the striped data in RAID are in the equivalent level of 
error channels. Fig. 4 shows the error-correcting capability of 
the proposed schemes EA-RAIDs with the maximum number of 
permissible UECC T = 4 and T = 31.  Also, in order to 
show the effect of the EA-RAID schemes, Fig. 4 also shows the 
FERs of ECC-only scheme and the ECC-RAID5 scheme, which 
is the most conventional joint ECC-RAID scheme. Note that the 
ECC-RAID5 is used for decoding schemes in [9], [10] as base 
ECC-RAID joint decoding structures. Contrary to the EA-RAID, 
the ECC-RAID5 can have a chance to decoded successfully in 
only case that all the striped data except the target erroneous data 
is correctly decoded. The horizontal axis in Fig. 4 represents 
normalized target raw bit-error rate (NTRBER), which is raw 
bit-error rate (RBER) normalized on target RBER for purpose 
of easily view. Note that RBER is one of the most general 
measures for evaluating the error in data storage. 
In Fig. 4, the NTRBER of the ECC-only scheme is set to 1 
as reference. The EA-RAID with T = 4 has more than 14% 
2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Selected Areas in Communications: Cloud
3777
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
and 6% gain compared with ECC-only and ECC-RAID5, 
respectively, in terms of NTRBER at UBER 10ିଵହ in Fig. 4. 
Moreover, at UBER 10ିଵ଻, the EA-RAID with T = 4 shows 
more than 16% and 10% gain compared with ECC-only and 
ECC-RAID5, respectively. Note that UBER 10ିଵହ and UBER 
10ିଵ are most important point for end-of-life reliability in 
SSDs. In case of the EA-RAID with T = 31, their NTRBER 
has more than 15% and 7% gain compared with ECC-only and 
ECC-RAID5, respectively at UBER 10ିଵହ. Also, at UBER 
10ିଵ, the NTRBER of the EA-RAID shows more than 21% 
and 10% gain compared with ECC-only and ECC-RAID5, 
respectively.  
IV. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, a new family of joint ECC-RAID schemes 
called as the EA-RAID are proposed to enhance the reliability 
in flash data storage. In the EA-RAID, data checking and 
regenerating algorithms are newly introduced for high error-
correction capability. By the demonstration of the SDD on the 
virtual beyond-3-bit MLC NAND, it is shown that the EA-RAID 
scheme increases the error-correction capability compared with 
not only ECC-only schemes but also the conventional joint 
ECC-RAID schemes with RAID-5. Especially, in case of most 
popular storage systems with RAID-5 and subordinate ECC 
engines, the EA-RAID has the low-cost advantage that it can be 
simply implemented on the original systems only by the 
additional logics such as data cooking and data regenerating 
without any change of encoding logic. 
As future work about the subject of this paper, compressed 
data regenerating with higher dimensional information is 
considered as solution for achieving reliability limit of the 
universal joint ECC-RAID schemes. In addition, preprocessing 
schemes for data suitable for ECC decoding retry are expected 
for further error-correcting capability enhancement. Decoding 
scheduling in joint ECC-RAID schemes would be  also good 
topic for solving latency problem occurred in the joint decoding 
process. 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. Bez, E. Camerlenghi, A. Modelli, and A. Visconti, “Introduction to 
flash memory,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 91, pp. 489–502, 2003. 
[2] A. Hocquenghem, “Codes correcteurs d’erreurs,” Chiffers, vol. 2, pp. 
147–156, 1959. 
[3] R. C. Bose and D. K. Ray-Chaudhuri, “On a class of error-correcting 
binary group codes,” Information and Control vol. 3, pp. 68–79, 1960. 
[4] R, Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on 
Information Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, 1962. 
[5] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse 
matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–
431, 1999. 
[6] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Irbanke, Modern Coding Theory, Cambridge 
University Press, 2008. 
[7] P. M. Chen, E. K. Lee, G. A. Gibson, “RAID: High-performance, reliable 
secondary storage,” ACM Computing Surveysm vol. 26, pp. 145–185, 
1994. 
[8] G. Burd, “Implementing RAID in solid state memory,” U.S. Patent 
8,402,217, March 2013. 
[9] Q. Li and N. Zheng, “Joint decoder of RAID-ECC solutions of SSDs,” 
2017 55th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and 
Computing (Allerton), pp. 429–436, October 2017. 
[10] Q. Li, “Joint Decoder Design for SSDs,” IEEE Transactions on Signal 
Processing, vol. 67, pp. 2399–2409, 2019.
 
2022 IEEE Global Communications Conference: Selected Areas in Communications: Cloud
3778
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
