IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2017

979

Multi-Bit Flipping Decoding of LDPC Codes for NAND Storage Systems
Jaehwan Jung, Student Member, IEEE, and In-Cheol Park, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— This letter presents a new multi-bit flipping decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes, which can enhance hard-information-based decoding performance for NAND storage systems. Since the conventional enhancement techniques developed for bit-flipping decoding require soft information, the long latency taken to generate the soft information, makes it hard to apply them to practical NAND storage systems. The proposed algorithm requires only hard information and achieves the better performance than previous hard-informationbased algorithms. The proposed method flips multiple bits in each iteration, but the maximum number of bits to be flipped in an iteration is restricted to prevent overcorrection. To relax the hardware complexity of sorting, in addition, an efficient approximation method is proposed, reducing the hardware complexity of a 512-input sorter by 48.3% without degrading the performance noticeably.
Index Terms— Bit flipping decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, hard-information, NAND flash memory.
I. INTRODUCTION
S TORAGE systems built with NAND flash memory are extensively employing the low-density paritycheck (LDPC) code to protect user messages. Though algebraic codes such as BCH and RS codes have been used traditionally, they are being replaced with the LDPC code due to its superior error-correcting performance [1]–[3]. Unlike communication channels, it is required to read NAND flash memories multiple times [4]–[6] in generating the soft information from NAND flash, decelerating the system throughput severely. Since the channel condition is reliable for most lifetime of NAND flash memory, however, it is not desired to apply the maximum-effort soft-information-based decoding for the whole lifetime.
To enhance the overall system performance when the channel condition is relatively reliable, a NAND storage system can additionally adopt a fast hard-information-based algorithm. The bit flipping (BF) decoding, which is simple and induces a compact hardware, can be a good candidate for the fast decoding, but its error-correcting performance is not sufficient.
The original hard-information-based BF algorithm proposed by Gallager in 1962 [7] selects and flips the most suspicious bit in an iteration by examining the syndrome values of check nodes. As the error-correcting performance is not good enough, many methods such as threshold-weighted majority voting [8] and soft-information-aided decoding [9]–[13] have been proposed to boost up the error-correcting performance.
Manuscript received November 7, 2016; revised December 26, 2016; accepted January 12, 2017. Date of publication January 18, 2017; date of current version May 6, 2017. This work was supported in part by MSIP as GFP under Grant CISS-2011-0031860 and in part by the SK Hynix. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was C. Feng.
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institue of Science and Technology, Daejeon, 34141, South Korea (e-mail: jaehwan@kaist.ac.kr; icpark@kaist.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2017.2656119

The weighted BF (WBF) algorithm [9] assigns a weight to a syndrome value by exploiting soft-information values obtained from the channel, and the later algorithms, such as modified WBF (MWBF) [10] and improved MWBF (IMWBF) [11], also utilize the weight values computed from soft information.
A recent approach called the gradient-decent BF (GDBF) algorithm [13] flips multiple bits adaptively by considering the entropy calculated with soft-information-based weights. The GDBF improves the error-correcting performance dramatically thanks to the aid of soft information, but it is not proper for NAND storage systems in which the generation of soft information takes a long latency.
To overcome such a drawback of the conventional BF algorithms, this letter proposes a high-performance, low-latency multi-bit flipping (MBF) algorithm that relies only on hard information. The proposed decoding algorithm restricts the maximum number of flipping bits in order to prevent excessive error correction, and achieves the better performance than the previous hard-information-based BF algorithms. In addition, a simple yet effective approximation is proposed to relax the hardware complexity of the sorting unit.

II. PREVIOUS BIT-FLIPPING ALGORITHMS

Let H be the parity-check matrix of a regular binary (N, K )
LDPC code, where N is the code length and K is the length of a user message. The element of H on the m-th row and n-th column is denoted as hmn, i.e., H = [hmn], and every column and row of H has dv and dc ones, respectively. The set of variable nodes connected to the m-th check node is

N(m) = {n : hmn = 1} ,

(1)

and the set of check nodes connected to the n-th column is similarly denoted as

M(n) = {m : hmn = 1} .

(2)

Suppose a codeword of a binary LDPC code, c = (c1, c2, · · · , cN ), is modulated by binary phase shift keying and then transmitted over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. As the transmitted sequence x = (x1, x2, · · · , xN ), where xi = 2ci − 1 for i = 1, 2, · · · , N, is corrupted by Gaussian noise, the received real-value sequence r = (r1, r2, · · · , rN ) is the sum of the transmitted sequence x and a set of independent additive Gaussian noise values, v = (v1, v2, · · · , vN ). In other words, ri = xi + vi . Let the hard decision sequence of r be z = (z1, z2, · · · , zN ).

A. Original BF Algorithm

The BF algorithm [7] uses the syndrome to determine a bit to be flipped. The syndrome of the m-th check node in H is

N

sm = zi hmi ,

(3)

i =1

1558-2558 © 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:17:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

980

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2017

Algorithm 1 BF
Parameter
Imax: the maximum number of iterations for (i = 0; i < Imax; i ++) {
for ( j = 0; j < (N − K ); j ++) calculate s j if ( sm == 0) terminate the algorithm for ( j = 0; j < N; j ++) {
calculate E j k = argmax E j }
flip zk }

and the evaluation value of the n-th variable node is

En =

(2sm − 1) .

(4)

m ∈ M (n)

As described in Algorithm 1, the BF decoding procedure is simple and relatively easy to implement, but it suffers from contemptible error-correcting performance.

B. Weighted BF Algorithms

Since the error-correcting performance of the original BF
decoding is mainly affected by how to select a bit to be
flipped, the succeeding works [9]–[12] modify the method to
calculate En differently. The weighted BF (WBF) [9] uses a simple measure to estimate the reliability of a received symbol rn, which is its magnitude |rn|. In the AWGN channel, the larger |rn| implies that the corresponding hard-decision zn is more reliable. The reliability of the syndrome value from the m-th check node, wm, is defined as

wm = min |rn| ,

(5)

n∈ N (m )

and used in computing En, which reformulates (4) as

En =

(2sm − 1) wm .

(6)

m ∈ M (n)

The MWBF [10] considers not only the reliability of the
syndrome but also the reliability of the codeword. Similar to the WBF, |rn| is considered as the reliability of each code bit. To incorporate the reliabilities of the syndrome values and the received bit, wm and |rn|, (6) is revised as

En =

(2sm − 1) wm − |rn| .

(7)

m ∈ M (n)

The weight values are made based on soft information necessitating a long latency and lowering the system throughput severely. Hence, the modified algorithms are not suitable for NAND storage systems.

C. Gradient Decent BF Algorithm
Unlike the previous approaches, [13] applies the gradient decent method, which is widely used to find the optimal solution satisfying the given condition, to the BF decoding. In the gradient decent BF (GDBF), an entropy function f (r) is defined based on soft information to determine the number of bits to be flipped and thus increase the convergence speed.

Fig. 1. Overall flow of the proposed MBF algorithm.
Though the GDBF improves error-correcting performance, the soft-information-based entropy function still leads to a long latency, making it not appropriate for NAND storage systems.
III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM AND APPROXIMATION
While the previous works improves the error-correcting performance of the BF decoding by utilizing soft information, it would increase the processing latency severely in NAND storage systems, being not appropriate in practical implementations. To avoid the degradation, this section proposes a new MBF algorithm that relies only on hard information.
A. Proposed MBF Algorithm
To improve the error-correcting performance of the hardinformation-based BF decoding, multiple bits are flipped in one iteration under the constraint of the maximum number of bits to be flipped. The detailed procedure of the proposed decoding is described in Fig.1.
The proposed algorithm requires only the hard information normally provided in NAND flash memory. The decoding first checks the syndromes from the hard information. If there is no error, it terminates the whole process. Otherwise, it picks maximally x bits to flip by considering En in (4). Let Fx denote the maximum number of bits allowed to be flipped in an iteration. For instance, F16 implies that maximally 16 bits can be flipped in a single iteration. The evaluation value of a bit, En in (4), is compared with a certain threshold value, T H , which is in fact a positive integer less than or equal to dv . If En is greater than T H for a bit, the bit becomes a candidate to flip. If the number of candidates is less than or equal to Fx, all the candidates are flipped. Otherwise, we need to select x bits from the candidate set, which can be achieved by sorting the candidates in terms of En and selecting top x candidates. After performing the MBF process, the syndrome values are updated with considering the changed bits. We repeat the above MBF process until either all the syndrome values become zero or it reaches the maximum number of iterations allowed.
To examine the performance of the proposed MBF decoding, a regular QC type LDPC code that protects a user message of 4kB has been simulated. The code rate is 0.9 and the maximum number of iterations allowed is set to 50. The value of T H is determined to 3 by exploiting intensive simulations. Word-error rate (WER) performances are depicted for various x in Fig.2, where the error-correcting performance for F1, which flips one bit in an iteration, is theoretically identical to Gallager’s BF decoding [7]. Fig. 2 also shows that the more number of flips allowed in an iteration usually leads to the better error-correcting performance, and the errorcorrecting performance is almost saturated when the maximum number of flips is four. However, increasing the number of flips allowed in an iteration recklessly can cause a severe side

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:17:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JUNG AND PARK: MULTI-BIT FLIPPING DECODING OF LDPC CODES FOR NAND STORAGE SYSTEMS

981

Fig. 2. Word-error rate performances obtained by changing the maximum number of bits allowed to flip in an iteration, Fx. Multiple flips improve the performance usually, but degrade it when the number of flips is excessive.

Fig. 4. Error-correcting performances of the proposed MBF decoding based on approximate sorting. Approximate sorting with 8 or more groups leads to almost the same performance as the exact sorting (1 Sorting Group).

TABLE I CASUS NEEDED TO REALIZE A 512-TO-4 SORTER

Fig. 3. Word-error rate performances of the conventional and the proposed MBF algorithms for various codes.
effect of degrading the error-correcting performance. From (4), En can have dv different values, having a narrow range. In the early decoding iterations, evaluation values of many bit-positions are greater than T H due to the narrow range. Flipping too many bits may lead to overcorrection that flips non-erroneous positions, and eventually makes it impossible to decode the codeword successfully. Fig. 2 confirms that the error-correcting performances of F32 and F64, which are represented by filled symbols, are worse than that of F4. Based on the observation, the proposed MBF algorithm flips four bits maximally in an iteration. To investigate whether the proposed MBF algorithm is valid for different codes, two additional LDPC codes whose lengths are 1kB and 2kB have been designed and simulated. The WER performances resulting from the original BF and the proposed MBF that flips four bits are depicted in Fig. 3, where it is clear that the proposed algorithm is effective for different codes which have commonly been used for NAND flash storage systems.
B. Approximation of the Proposed MBF Algorithm
Since the proposed MBF decoding finds maximally four bit-positions that are associated with the highest evaluation values in a codeword of N bits, an N-to-4 sorter that finds four maxima from N inputs is required to implement the proposed decoding architecture. However, the hardware complexity is considerable in practical implementations, as the sorter can be realized with employing many compare-and-swap units (CASUs). To relax the sorting complexity, a grouping method is proposed to approximate the four global maxima.
An N-bit codeword c is divided into g groups, forming c1, c2, · · · , cg, where ci = c j : (i − 1)(N/g) < j ≤ i (N/g) . The proposed approximation first finds a local maximum in each group, and then select the top four maxima from g local maxima. The four maxima selected in such a way are not exactly equal to the four global maxima, but their values are

not much different. Intensive simulations have been performed to investigate the number of groups that does not degrade the error-correcting performance prominently.
In Fig. 4, the simulation results of the approximate MBF are compared to that of the exact MBF. Since the proposed method finds the four maxima from the whole codeword, the minimum number of groups is set to four. In the simulation, we compare the error-correcting performances achieved with the approximate maxima to that with exact maxima. The approximate maxima are generated by varying the number of groups from 4 to 16. The simulation result reveals that a partitioning of 8 groups is enough to sustain the errorcorrecting performance resulting from exact maxima. The approximate maxima do not degrade the performance noticeably, and the proposed approximation can be effective in reducing the hardware complexity.
We can save many CASUs required in the sorting hardware by adopting the proposed approximation. For the conventional bubble sorter architecture [14], for instance, the number of CASUs needed for selecting four exact maxima out of 512 candidates is compared to that for four approximate maxima in Table I, where 48.3% CASUs are saved when the approximate maxima are obtained from 8 groups. As a result, the proposed approximate sorting is effective in relaxing the hardware complexity of sorting.
IV. COMPARISONS AND ANALYSIS
The error-correcting performances of several BF algorithms that decode based on the hard information are compared in this section. The same code and simulation parameters specified in Section III are used in the simulation to protect a user message of 4kB against the AWGN channel, and the resulting WER performances are depicted in Fig. 5, where GDBF, WBF, MWBF decoding is simulated by using only hard information. The two-bit BF (TBF) algorithm [15] in which an additional bit is used to check the reliability of a check or a variable node is also compared. The simulation result shows that the proposed MBF outperforms the others, making the proposed MBF decoding appropriate for NAND storage systems.
The constraint that limits the number of bits to be flipped in a single iteration plays the role of reducing false flipping cases,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:17:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

982

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 5, MAY 2017

Fig. 5. Word-error rate performances of the proposed and previous hardinformation-based bit-flipping algorithms.

V. CONCLUSION
This letter has presented a new decoding algorithm for LDPC codes. The proposed decoding algorithm flips multiple bits in an iteration, but restricts the number of bits to be flipped in order to prevent false flipping cases. Compared to previous hard-decision-based decoding methods, the proposed multi-bit flipping achieves superior performance. Though the proposed method does not outperform algebraic codes for similar problem sizes, it requires less computational complexity and lower latency. In addition, the approximate sorting architecture developed to relax the complexity of selecting multiple maxima, the hardware complexity of the proposed MBF decoding is significantly reduced without degrading the error-correcting performance prominently. The proposed algorithm can be improved by considering one additional soft bit which is sometimes available in solid-state drives (SSDs), but how to take advantage of the additional information remains as a future work.

Fig. 6. Comparison of three error-correcting codes. (a) Word-error rate performance and (b) decoding latency.
TABLE II HARDWARE COMPLEXITIES OF 4kB DECODERS (R=0.9)
IN 65nm CMOS TECHNOLOGY
preventing the overcorrection problem encountered often in MBF decoding. As a result, the performance is improved over the conventional hard-information-based BF algorithms.
The BF algorithm is used to decode the LDPC code efficiently when the channel condition is relatively good, but it usually does not outperform the existing algebraic codes as shown in the Fig. 6(a). The proposed MBF algorithm shows worse performance than the BCH code has, but the softinformation-based LDPC decoding leads to the much better performance. As a result, the LDPC code is widely accepted in NAND storage systems to extend the warranty period. The decoding latencies of the preceding codes are shown in Fig.6(b). The latency of the proposed MBF algorithm is much shorter than the soft-information-based LDPC decoding and even shorter than the BCH code in most cases. As the soft-information-based LDPC decoding takes a long time and requires reading NAND flash memory multiple times, it is usually tried when the hard-information-based LDPC decoding fails. In addition, the decoding hardware of the proposed MBF algorithm can be implemented with much less complexity than the BCH decoder [16] as summarized in Table II.

REFERENCES
[1] D. Lee et al., “A 64Gb 533Mb/s DDR interface MLC NAND flash in sub-20nm technology,” in Proc. IEEE ISSCC, San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2012, pp. 430–431.
[2] Y. Lee, J. Jung, and I.-C. Park, “Energy-scalable 4KB LDPC decoding architecture for NAND-flash-based storage systems,” IEICE Trans. Electron., vol. E99–C, no. 2, pp. 293–301, Feb. 2016.
[3] J. Kim and W. Sung, “Rate-0.96 LDPC decoding VLSI for soft-decision error correction of NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1004–1015, May 2014.
[4] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Enabling NAND flash memory use soft-decision error correction codes at minimal read latency overhead,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2412–2421, Sep. 2013.
[5] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision error correction codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst., I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[6] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. Conf. USENIX Annu. Tech. Conf., San Jose, CA, USA, 2013, pp. 243–256.
[7] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[8] P. Zarrinkhat and A. H. Banihashemi, “Threshold values and convergence properties of majority-based algorithms for decoding regular lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2087–2097, Dec. 2004.
[9] X. Wu, C. Ling, M. Jiang, E. Xu, C. Zhao, and X. You, “New insights into weighted bit-flipping decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2177–2180, Aug. 2009.
[10] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density Parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[11] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814–816, Sep. 2005.
[12] Y. H. Liu, X. L. Niu, and M. L. Zhang, “Multi-threshold bit flipping algorithm for decoding structured LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 127–130, Feb. 2015.
[13] T. Wadayama, K. Nakamura, M. Yagita, Y. Funahashi, S. Usami, and I. Takumi, “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1610–1614, Jun. 2010.
[14] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein, Introduction to Algorithms, 3rd ed. MIT Press, 2009.
[15] D. V. Nguyen and B. Vasic, “Two-bit bit flipping algorithms for LDPC codes and collective error correction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1153–1163, Apr. 2014.
[16] Y. Lee, H. Yoo, I. Yoo, and I.-C. Park, “6.4Gb/s multi-threaded BCH encoder and decoder for multi-channel SSD controllers,” in Proc. IEEE ISSCC, San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2012, pp. 426–427.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:17:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

