Characterization of TLC 3D-NAND Flash
Endurance through Machine Learning for LDPC
Code Rate Optimization
Cristian Zambelli1, Giuseppe Cancelliere1, Fabrizio Riguzzi2,
Evelina Lamma1, Piero Olivo1, Alessia Marelli3, and Rino Micheloni1,3
1Universit`a degli Studi di Ferrara, Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Via Saragat 1, Ferrara, 44122, Italy
2Universit`a degli Studi di Ferrara, Dipartimento di Matematica e Informatica, Via Saragat 1, Ferrara, 44122, Italy
3Microsemi Corporation, Via Torri Bianche, Vimercate, 20871, Italy
Phone: +39-0532974993, E-mail: cristian.zambelli@unife.it
Abstract—The advent of the 3D-NAND Flash memories intro-
duced significant issues in terms of characterization and system-
level optimization that can be performed to increase the memory
reliability over its lifetime. Indeed, the knobs that a system
designer can leverage to this extent are many. In this work
we show that the application of machine learning algorithms
like data clustering on a large characterization data set of TLC
3D-NAND Flash devices can help the designers in optimizing
the countermeasures for improving the memory reliability while
reducing their implementation cost.
Index Terms—3D-NAND Flash; Data Clustering; Machine
Learning; LDPC; Optimization
I. INTRODUCTION
NAND Flash memories are an ubiquitous storage media
found in many applications like portable devices, smart-
phones, and Solid State Drives (SSDs). Their integration
capability depends on many factors. Among them, the low
cost-per-bit and the possibility of increasing their storage
capacity through multi-bit per cell architectures makes them
an attractive solution whenever data storage is needed [1].
Recently, the scaling path of the NAND Flash technology
evolved from a planar integration concept towards a three di-
mensional process (i.e., 3D-NAND), in the attempt of breaking
the 1Tb/in2 storage density barrier [2].
However, such a paradigm shift introduced substantial issues
in the characterization activities of the memory reliability.
The typical characterization flow of NAND Flash products
must follow strict guidelines in order to expose their reli-
ability metrics as a function of the memory lifetime [3].
Such experimental activity allows developing proper error
correction and management solutions to cope with the many
physical mechanisms that impacts on the reliability [4], [5].
Nevertheless, there is the need of a thorough exploration of all
the possible operative parameters (e.g., programming voltages,
timings, etc.) of a NAND Flash chip in the attempt to identify
the optimal working set that minimizes errors when data are
This work has been partially supported by the Universit`a degli Studi
di Ferrara through the initiative Bando per il finanziamento della ricerca
scientifica ”Fondo per l’Incentivazione alla Ricerca” (FIR) - 2016.
read from the memory. The number of parameter combinations
that needs to be explored on different scenarios (i.e., cycling
and temperature range) evolving from planar to 3D devices
increased to a point that it is becoming almost impossible to
find the best working conditions by simply using a ”judge-
by-eye” approach. Further, the variety of Error Correction
Codes (ECCs) strategies to be adopted [6] as well as secondary
correction mechanisms like the Read Retry or the 𝑉𝑇shift [7]
further enlarged the problem space. To complete the picture,
in dense architectures like Triple Level Cell (TLC) NAND
Flash there is a large variation of the reliability figures for
the pages and blocks constituting the memory, which makes
a single solution that fits the entire product very hard to find.
In this context, the data clustering algorithms typical of the
machine learning discipline could help. Previous works dealt
with machine learning for NAND Flash architectures [8]–[10].
The goal of those works was to provide a predictive solution
for memory reliability rather than considering memory opti-
mization.
In this work, we exploit a data clustering algorithm to find
homogeneous areas in terms of endurance reliability in a TLC
3D-NAND Flash product. By analyzing a large dataset, ob-
tained by an extensive characterization campaign of different
devices under different working conditions, we found that
the clustering helps in identifying, through a semi-supervised
learning approach, peculiar behaviors of different memory
regions. The results of the learning process are exploited in
the optimization of the ECC strategies to be adopted by the
system in order to find the optimal code rate of a Low-Density
Parity-Check (LDPC) code that balances memory reliability
and implementation cost.
II. EXPERIMENTAL SETUP
A. 3D-NAND Flash characterization system
The electrical characterization of 3D-NAND Flash memory
devices has been performed with the test equipment shown
in Fig. 1. The system is an advanced version of that already
presented in [11] and is composed by a state-of-the-art ASIC
978-1-5090-3274-7/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE
PCIe Gen3 NVMe memory controller used for SSDs [12] deal-
ing with NAND Flash commands for accessing the devices,
a DRAM buffer for temporary data storage, and a set of SO-
DIMM sockets for 3D-NAND Flash interfacing. The board
hosts up to 8 SO-DIMMs each one populated with 8 3D-
NAND Flash chip. A single chip contains 8 memory dies. The
supply voltages are provided by an external regulated power
supply. The characterization system communicates through a
PCIe interface with an x86-PC where the data are collected
for post-processing with machine learning algorithms.
B. Features for data clustering
The data clustering process requires a large amount of data.
Since the goal of this work is to find a general clustering rule
for 3D-NAND Flash under different endurance experiments,
we tested multiple memory devices mounted on different SO-
DIMMs each one with a proper testing sequence (i.e., different
temperature, cycling time, etc.). The memories under test are
TLC 3D-NAND Flash whose structure is depicted in Fig. 2. A
single memory block is composed by an arrangement of word-
lines, bitlines, and layers. The data analysis is performed on
all the 𝑊𝐿wordlines within a block considering lower, center,
and upper page types. The size of a page is 16 kB divided to
4kB chunks, which are the minimum unit read during tests by
the characterization system. Data clustering was performed on
more than 800 different memory blocks belonging to different
devices coming from multiple lots in order to improve the
consistency of the classification algorithms that are presented
in the next section of this paper. The testing time lasted several
months.
The characterization data are produced by repeatedly writ-
ing and erasing (i.e., P/E cycle) the memory blocks with a
random pattern and then reading out their contents to verify the
number of erroneous bits. From the characterization viewpoint,
this activity is very important since it allows understanding
the lifetime features of a memory while providing a starting
point for the design of ECC strategies through the calculation
of the Bit Error Rate (BER). In particular, since the system
designers mostly tailor the ECC correction capability on the
worst reliability case for the memory, we have evaluated the
BER at the end of each endurance experiment, namely after
3k P/E cycles.
III. DATA CLUSTERING RESULTS
The characterization data have been used as inputs to the
well-known k-means data clustering algorithm [13]. The goal
of the k-means is to partition the input data set (i.e., the
BER of the different TLC pages in a 3D-NAND Flash block)
in 𝑘different clusters. The algorithm repeatedly computes
the centroid of spherical clusters until the membership of
data points to clusters converges. The number of clusters is
specified a priori and depends on different factors like the
complexity of the algorithm execution and the computational
capabilities of the system. Fig. 3 shows an example of the
k-means application on the input data set when 𝑘is assumed
equal to 5. As can be seen from the figure, the clusters are
Fig. 1.
Test equipment used in the characterization of 3D-NAND Flash
memory devices.
Fig. 2.
Architecture of a 3D-NAND Flash memory showing the different
topological elements (i.e., wordlines and bitlines on different layers) and TLC
cell structure with its storage paradigm.
not clearly separated, although the algorithm seems to identify
specific regions of the Flash block that behave similarly in
terms of BER. To ease the data analysis process we have
separated lower, center, and upper TLC pages as their behavior
is known to be different in terms of endurance reliability.
From the system designer viewpoint, it becomes difficult
to derive proper conclusions for some applications like ECC
or secondary correction algorithms, since the clustering would
require a large complexity that cannot be implement in state-
of-the-art NAND Flash controllers. To this extent, we have
modified the k-means algorithm by applying a constrained
clustering rule, which is also known as semi-supervised learn-
ing. The rule is that all the chunks composing a TLC page
must belong to the same cluster. In addition to that, we
require that the TLC pages are as contiguous as possible (in
terms of addressing index) and, in order to ease firmware
implementation, that lower, center, and upper pages share the
same clusters. By analyzing the output of the constrained
clustering (see Fig. 4) it is possible to appreciate that the
clusters are more separated and easier to understand. The
algorithm clustered the pages on the 𝑊𝐿of a 3D-NAND Flash
in 6 different clusters, where a single cluster includes the three
0
WL/4
WL/2
3/4WL
WL
10-4
10-2
100
BER
Endurance
0
WL/4
WL/2
3/4WL
WL
10-6
10-4
10-2
BER
0
WL/4
WL/2
3/4WL
WL
Wordlines
10-6
10-4
10-2
BER
C5
C4 C3
C1
C2
C5
C2
C4
C1
C3
C5
C4
C1
C3
C2
Lower pages
Upper pages
Center pages
Fig. 3. Data clustering performed through 𝑘−𝑚𝑒𝑎𝑛𝑠algorithm. The cluster
centroids are indicated in the plot.
0
WL/4
WL/2
3/4WL
WL
10-4
10-2
100
BER
Endurance
0
WL/4
WL/2
3/4WL
WL
10-6
10-4
10-2
BER
0
WL/4
WL/2
3/4WL
WL
Wordlines
10-6
10-4
10-2
BER
Lower pages
Center pages
Upper pages
Fig. 4.
Constrained clustering results on 3D-NAND Flash. Six different
clusters have been identified in the data-set.
TLC page types. This can be translated to 6 different reliability
constraints that can be exploited in ECC design or in advanced
NAND Flash data management algorithms for the 6 specific
areas of a block. We evaluated the consistency of clusters
over different endurance testing conditions and we always
found clusters similar to those represented in Fig. 4. Such a
validation allows speculating that the cluster identification can
be performed once at the end of the memory characterization.
IV. LDPC CODE RATE OPTIMIZATION
A. Fundamentals of adaptive LDPC for 3D-NAND Flash
LDPC codes are known as capacity approaching codes, in
other words they are a category of codes that are able to
reach a Frame Error Rate (FER) value close enough to the
Shannon limit [14]. The FER is defined as the NAND Flash
error rate after the application of the ECC, therefore this metric
quantifies the performance of a code.
Fig. 5. Correction capabilities of a generic LDPC code [14] using different
code rates measured as a function of the sustainable BER at FER = 1e-4.
LDPC are block linear codes defined with a very sparse
parity check matrix 𝐻. To be a promising candidate for 3D-
NAND Flash memories, LDPC codes must not only achieve
excellent decoding performance, but also be suitable for high-
speed VLSI implementation to meet the high data rate require-
ments of Flash memory with minimal silicon and energy cost.
It has been shown that quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes are one
family of such implementation-oriented LDPC codes. The 𝐻
matrix of a QC-LDPC code consists of arrays of circulants.
A circulant is a square matrix in which each row is the cyclic
shift of the row above it, and the first row is the cyclic shift of
the last row. The parity check matrix 𝐻of a QC-LDPC code
can be written as:
𝐻=
⎛
⎜
⎜
⎜
⎝
𝐻1,1
𝐻1,2
⋅⋅⋅
𝐻1,𝑛
𝐻2,1
𝐻2,2
⋅⋅⋅
𝐻2,𝑛
...
...
...
...
𝐻𝑚,1
𝐻𝑚,2
⋅⋅⋅
𝐻𝑚,𝑛
⎞
⎟
⎟
⎟
⎠
(1)
where each sub-matrix 𝐻𝑖,𝑗is a binary circulant. The LDPC
encoder exploits the regular structure of the 𝐻matrix , so that
it can be implemented in a modular way. For the same reason,
the decoding (through belief propagation or an approximation
of it) can be made in a layered way exploiting the modularity
of the circulants [14].
Data storage systems such as Flash memories and hard disk
drives typically demand very high code rates (e.g., 0.89 and
higher). The code rate is the ratio between the user data and the
total stored codeword (user data plus parity bits). A high code
rate means a small overhead in parity bits but less correction
capacity, while a low code rate means good correction capacity
but large overhead in terms of parity bits and so a higher
waste of memory user capacity that results in higher costs of
the system (see Fig. 5). The modular characteristics described
above for the LDPC codes make them attractive for adaptive
code rate modifications [15]. In particular, for 3D-NAND
Flash where BER changes during the device lifetime are
strongly affected by the TLC page topology, it is key to have
TABLE I
WORST CASE BER AND ASSOCIATED LDPC CODE RATE AFTER DATA CLUSTERING
Worst BER L
Code Rate L
Worst BER C
Code Rate C
Worst BER U
Code Rate U
Cluster 1
2.8e-3
0.935
3.8e-4
0.97
6.7e-4
0.97
Cluster 2
1.5e-2
0.75
2.5e-3
0.935
1.3e-3
0.935
Cluster 3
1.2e-2
0.79
1.4e-3
0.935
9.9e-4
0.97
Cluster 4
7.8e-3
0.8475
8.7e-4
0.97
5.2e-4
0.97
Cluster 5
9.7e-3
0.81
1.5e-3
0.935
6.7e-4
0.97
Cluster 6
4.8e-3
0.9
5.8e-4
0.97
3.5e-4
0.97
an ECC that has the ability to change the code rate without
changing all the hardware structure.
B. Optimization results
The LDPC code rate optimization in 3D-NAND Flash can
be performed by evaluating the worst case BER for each iden-
tified cluster along with specific ECC design considerations.
In NAND Flash system design, it is important to guarantee
that the ECC will be able to sustain a defined FER at the
specified endurance conditions. Table I shows the measured
worst case BER after 3k P/E per identified cluster and the
correspondent LDPC code rate requested to sustain at least a
FER = 1e-4 [16]. The code rate chosen by the designer, when
no data clustering is performed and no diversification of lower,
center, and upper page is present, should consider the worst
BER of the whole device. In our experiments, this value is
equal to 0.75. Such a code rate is extremely conservative and
forces user space waste for parity purpose in locations where
the reliability is higher. By splitting the three different TLC
pages we gain in terms of code rate since the lower pages
will be associated with the lowest code rate, while center and
upper pages can be associated with 0.935, respectively. By
calculating the equivalent code rate as the average of the page
associated rates we obtain 0.87. This materializes in a 16%
gain of memory space that can be allocated for user data.
However, the best code rate optimization is performed when
data clustering is used. When the TLC page types are split as
well as the clusters, we can calculate the equivalent code rate
as follows:
∑
𝑖∈[𝐿,𝐶,𝑈]
∑6
𝑗=1 𝑛𝑗∗𝐶𝑅𝑖,𝑗
3 ∗𝑊𝐿
(2)
where 𝑛𝑗is the dimension of the 𝑗−𝑡ℎcluster (i.e., the number
of pages it contains), and 𝐶𝑅𝑖,𝑗is the associated code rate
for the 𝑖−𝑡ℎpage type of the 𝑗−𝑡ℎcluster. In this case we
obtained an equivalent code rate equal to 0.93, that allows a
24% gain on the memory user addressable space.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this work we have demonstrated the benefits of machine
learning in 3D-NAND Flash characterization for endurance
through the application of data clustering algorithms. The
characterization data set has been obtained by an extensive
testing campaign of 3D-NAND Flash devices under different
operating conditions. By developing a semi-supervised learn-
ing methodology we have been able to optimize the LDPC
code rate dedicated to ECC, resulting in a 24% gain of the
memory space addressable by the user. Such activity paves
the way for further applications in the memory characterization
context.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Micheloni, L. Crippa, and A. Marelli, Inside NAND Flash memories.
Springer-Verlag, 2010.
[2] W. Jeong, J. w. Im, D. H. Kim, S. W. Nam, D. K. Shim, M. H. Choi,
H. J. Yoon, D. H. Kim, Y. S. Kim, H. W. Park, D. H. Kwak, S. W. Park,
S. M. Yoon, W. G. Hahn, J. H. Ryu, S. W. Shim, K. T. Kang, J. D. Ihm,
I. M. Kim, D. S. Lee, J. H. Cho, M. S. Kim, J. H. Jang, S. W. Hwang,
D. S. Byeon, H. J. Yang, K. Park, K. H. Kyung, and J. H. Choi, “A
128 Gb 3b/cell V-NAND Flash Memory With 1 Gb/s I/O Rate,” IEEE
Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 204–212, Jan. 2016.
[3] JEDEC, “JESD22-A117 document,” Oct. 2011.
[4] Y. Park, J. Lee, S. S. Cho, G. Jin, and E. Jung, “Scaling and relia-
bility of nand flash devices,” in IEEE International Reliability Physics
Symposium (IRPS), 2014, pp. 2E.1.1–2E.1.4.
[5] E. Vatajelu, H. Aziza, and C. Zambelli, “Nonvolatile memories: Present
and future challenges,” in 9th International Design Test Symposium
(IDT), 2014, pp. 61–66.
[6] L. Zuolo, C. Zambelli, P. Olivo, R. Micheloni, and A. Marelli, “LDPC
Soft Decoding with Reduced Power and Latency in 1X-2X NAND
Flash-Based Solid State Drives,” in IEEE International Memory Work-
shop (IMW), May 2015, pp. 1–4.
[7] J. Yang, “High-Efficiency SSD for Reliable Data Storage Systems,” in
Proc. Flash Memory Summit, 2012.
[8] D. Hogan, T. Arbuckle, and C. Ryan, “Estimating MLC NAND Flash
Endurance: A Genetic Programming Based Symbolic Regression Appli-
cation,” in Proc. Conf. on Genetic and Evolutionary Computation, 2013,
pp. 1285–1292.
[9] T. Arbuckle, D. Hogan, and C. Ryan, “Learning Predictors for Flash
Memory Endurance: A Comparative Study of Alternative Classification
Methods,” Int. J. Comput. Intell. Stud., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 18–39, 2014.
[10] Y. Nakamura, T. Iwasaki, and K. Takeuchi, “Machine learning-based
proactive data retention error screening in 1Xnm TLC NAND flash,”
in International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS), Apr. 2016, pp.
PR–3–1–PR–3–4.
[11] C. Zambelli, P. King, P. Olivo, L. Crippa, and R. Micheloni, “Power-
supply impact on the reliability of mid-1X TLC NAND flash memories,”
in International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS), Apr. 2016, pp.
2B–3–1–2B–3–6.
[12] Microsemi Corp., “Flashtec nvme controllers,” [Online] - Available:
http://www.microsemi.com/products/storage/flashtec-nvme-controllers/
flashtec-nvme-controllers, 2017.
[13] J. MacQueen, “Some methods for classification and analysis of multi-
variate observations,” in Proc. of Berkeley Symp. on Math. Statistics and
Prob.
[14] A. Marelli and R. Micheloni, BCH and LDPC Error Correction Codes
for NAND Flash Memories.
Springer Netherlands, 2016, pp. 281–320.
[15] X. Hu, “LDPC Codes for Flash Channels,” in Proc. Flash Memory
Summit, 2012.
[16] A. I. V. Casado, W. Y. Weng, S. Valle, and R. D. Wesel, “Multiple-
rate low-density parity-check codes with constant blocklength,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 75–83, 2009.
