International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics ICEI 2017
FPGA Implementation of Min-Sum Algorithm for LDPC Decoder

Sreemohan P V
Dept. of Electronics and Communication Engineering Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Technology Kottayam, India sreemohanpv@gmail.com

Prof. Nelsa Sebastian
Dept. of Electronics and Communication Engineering Rajiv Gandhi Institute of Technology Kottayam, India nelsasebastian@gmail.com

Abstract— Low-density parity-check codes (LDPC) are among the most powerful error correcting tools today available. In this paper, it has aimed a Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) implementation of LDPC decoder with less complexity. The proposed decoding structure reduces complexity of the check node unit (CNU) and the variable node unit (VNU) based on minsum (MS) algorithm, thereby achieving less slice resources. A multiplexed storage structure is used for the storage of node messages which results in less slice resources. Hardware resources act as a crucial factor in many applications like deep space communications and its efficient utilization is an area which is highly explored. Both high performance and low complexity are expected from LDPC decoders used in space data systems. This low-complexity implementation is an efficient method to achieve the requirements put forward by many wired and wireless communication systems.
Keywords— LDPC decoder; Low-complexity implementation; Min-Sum algorithm
I. INTRODUCTION
In wireless communication, it is necessary that the communication systems must be robust in order to transmit the information from the source to the destination through a communication channel with high reliability. This in fact is a difficult task since in the physical world there exist many error causing factors. Detecting and correcting errors is very important while transmitting information. If errors occur and we cannot detect and correct them, the received information at the receiver will be of no use, as it will differ considerably from the original source information.
The noisy channel coding theorem [11], first presented by Shannon in 1948, states that for every communications channel, however noisy it may be, there exists a maximum, in most cases positive, rate, denoted by R, at which information can be transmitted with vanishingly small probability of error. The essential idea of forward error control coding [7] is to augment the message bits with deliberately introduce redundancy in the form of extra check bits to produce a code word for the message. In the past few years, some practical code classes which can achieve transmission at rates very close to the channel capacity have been introduced. Two major representatives of this class of codes are LDPC and Turbo codes.

Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes were first introduced by Gallager [9] in 1962, and after being rediscovered in 1996, these error correction codes have been constantly in the center of attention for researchers. Their superior correction performance and highly parallelizable decoding algorithms have resulted in adoption in many recent communication standards. LDPC codes are block codes with parity check matrices that contain only a very small number of non-zero entries. The linear increase in decoding complexity and minimum distance of LDPC decoders is attributed to this sparseness of H matrix. Graphically, the parity check matrix can be represented in the form of a Tanner Graph [10].
Throughput and power requirements of emerging communication systems have been constantly growing. For instance, recent wireless communication standards have increased their throughput to beyond 1 Gbps. These factors have resulted in high demand for innovative and adequate methods to tackle design challenges for LDPC codes.
II. LITERATURE SURVEY
An extensive review of various LDPC decoders is given in [2]. Discussion on various performance parameters is included in this work. Also comparisons among various published designs is presented by the authors.
The advantages of a novel non-binary LDPC decoder design are discussed in [3]. An efficient design is achieved by using a fully parallel design. The check node design is modified to further increase the throughput. This design used dynamic clock gating to improve energy efficiency.
The problem of designing generic and efficient LDPC decoders by using a non-symmetric NISC (No Instruction Set Computer)-based architecture is addressed in [4]. NISC architectures provide flexibility with a limited loss in hardware efficiency. The absence of instruction set makes the control of the data path more flexible. Unlike previous works, the NISC decoder included a number of processing units that is different than the number of memory units. This non-symmetric characteristic helped to achieve high utilization rate for the processing units. The decoder achieved higher hardware efficiency even for unstructured LDPC codes.
The design in [5] achieved a high-throughput for QuasiCyclic (QC) Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes. Two new techniques (parallel layered decoding architecture (PLDA)

978-1-5090-4257-9/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

821

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:17:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics ICEI 2017

and critical path splitting) are used in this design. PLDA enables parallel processing for all layers by establishing dedicated message passing paths among them. Critical path splitting technique is based on articulate adjustment of the starting point of each layer to maximize the time intervals between adjacent layers, such that the critical path delay can be split into pipeline stages. Furthermore, min-sum and loosely coupled algorithms were employed for area efficiency.
In [6], a novel formulation of the decoding algorithm that strongly simplified internal communication requirements is presented. It enabled the development of decoders supporting generally defined LDPC codes. This solution was partially parallel and scalable in terms of number of processors, in order to trade-off throughput and complexity. The designed architecture was strongly based on a reorganized messagepassing algorithm. The modified version of the Belief Propagation algorithm, called Low-Traffic BP (LTBP), shared the same processing hardware for modified check node and variable node processors. This led to a considerable area save.
An efficient implementation technique of the low density parity check code decoder is proposed in [8]. According to this technique, a decoder could be implemented with additions only and there was considerably lower complexity compared with the standard sum-product decoder. This new implementation was based on the fact that the parity-likelihood-ratio (PLR) technique is less sensitive to quantization. This method required no multiplication or table searching and achieved considerably reduced decoding cost.
In [13], a simplified check node operation is proposed, which reduced routing problems in VLSI implementations of LDPC decoders. This is achieved by sending the same messages to all variable nodes connected to a particular check node. Such an implementation could achieve performance close to sum-product decoders.
III. PROPOSED DECODER
The architecture of the proposed decoder is described in the following section.
A. Min-Sum Algorithm
The class of decoding algorithms used to decode LDPC codes are collectively termed message-passing algorithms since their operation can be explained by the passing of messages along the edges of a Tanner graph. Each Tanner graph node works in isolation, only having access to the information contained in the messages on the edges connected to it. The message-passing algorithms are also known as iterative decoding algorithms as the messages pass back and forward between the bit and check nodes iteratively until a result is achieved (or the process halted). Different message-passing algorithms are named for the type of messages passed or for the type of operation performed at the nodes.
In this work, the algorithm used for decoding is min-sum algorithm. The Min-Sum algorithm was first described by Tanner and was used as an approximation of Belief Propagation in (LLR) domain. It simplifies the calculation of in check nodes by recognizing that the term corresponding to the

smallest variable node message dominates the product term and so the product can be approximated by a minimum.
Let the binary encoded codeword (after BPSK modulation) be = { } ( ∈ [1, ]), where N is the codeword block length. If additive white noise sequence { } is an independent and identically distributed random variable having mean value and standard deviation being 0 and respectively, then the noise signal sequence received from the channel is = +
. At the output of channel the received sequence is obtained as a log-likelihood ratio (LLR) sequence.
As mentioned above, the min-sum algorithm consists of two phases of message passing .Let denotes the variable-tocheck message conveyed from the variable node to the check node and represents the check-to-variable message conveyed from check node to variable node . Let the received channel information (prior information of variable node j) be , and l be the number of iterations, then node message updates by MS algorithm as follows:
1) Initialization: Calculation of the LLR.

= ln (

| )=2

(1)

(

|)

2) Horizontal process: Message passing from variable

nodes to check nodes.

= ∏ ∈ ( )\

( ) min ∈ ( )\ (2)

where, ( )/ represents the variable node set linking with

check node ci except j. 3) Vertical process: Message passing from check nodes to

variable nodes.

=

+ ∑ ∈ ( )\

, =0 , > 0 (3)

where, ( )/ represents the variable node set linking with check node vj except i.

4) Hard decision:

0, ∑ <0

= 1, ∑ >0

(4)

B. Decoder Implementation
In [1], a novel partial parallel decoder architecture is proposed. The parity check matrix H is split both row-wise and column-wise into 4 sub-matrices. The breakup of H partitions the set of check mode C into two disjoint sets C1 and C2. Similarly the variable node V is partitioned into two disjoint sets V1 and V2.
The proposed decoder uses only one check node and one variable node, thus leading to a serial architecture. Such an architecture will result in less consumption of resources, but at the cost of decoding speed. A regular (3, 6) LDPC decoder is implemented in this paper. Hence the column weight of the H matrix is = 3 and the row weight is = 6.

1) Check Node Architecture:

978-1-5090-4257-9/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

822

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:17:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics ICEI 2017

The check node unit performs the computation described by

(2). From the analysis of (2), it can be seen that

can

exists only as ’s minima or sub-minima. This leads to the

generation of a node message common set, instead of

calculating the node specific message for each variable node.

= min ∈ ( )

, submin ∈ ( ) (5)

where ( ) corresponds to the variable nodes which are connected with current check node i, and submin(x) means to take x's sub-minima. In other words, the first and second minima values among the incoming messages are stored as the check node message. Thus only a single check node message is generated for all the 6 variable nodes connected to it. This scheme helps to store messages in compressed form and reduces the memory requirement.

Fig. 1. CNU structure.
The implementation structure of the check node unit is shown in Fig. 1. This implementation uses a parallel processing structure of the incoming messages. A sign processing unit finds out the sign of the value to be sent. The sign bit for each of the outgoing messages is calculated using a simple XOR operation. In Fig. 1, (min, submin) represents the calculation of minima and submina of . The (min, submin) calculation is performed by a 6-input MSM module whose structure is shown in Fig. 2. This structure is derived from the MSM implementation, given in [1].

Since weight of each row is 6, the number of inputs to the MSM module N = 6. The 6-input MSM module is constructed from several 2-input MSM modules. There are = ⌈log ( − 1)⌉ = 3 layers in the tree structure and the total
number of 2-input modules is 5. The basic unit is designed using a set of 2-input comparators and multiplexers, as shown in Fig. 3. Such a simple design features less computation. The form of each of the input to the MSM is defined as (mini, submini, indexi) where indexi is the serial number of the minima among the N absolute values.

In this paper, a new CNU structure is proposed in order to overcome the performance deterioration caused by the use of min-sum algorithm instead of the sum-product algorithm. The min-sum algorithm is simple to implement, but suffers from performance degradation compared to sum-product decoding. The normal min-sum computation works well when all the input LLR values, except one, are large. Otherwise, the minsum approximation overestimates the output LLR, compared to sum-product algorithm. The trade-off between performance loss and complexity is addressed by several approximations to the ordinary min-sum computation. Almost all these techniques start with the min-sum approximation and reduce the overestimated value by subtraction of a correction factor or by division.

In [12], a correction factor which depends only on the

degree of the individual check node, is proposed. The degree-

matched check node approximation subtracts a positive

correction factor from input LLR value |λ | , with

< |λ |, thus avoiding any sign change. According to

[12], the correction factor for (3, 6) code is β = 0.15. Then the

check node updating is given by:

= ∏ ∈ ( )\

( ).

min ∈ ( )\

− ,0

(6)

In the new check node design, this approximation is carried out by a CNU approximation unit, placed after the (min, submin) function.

Fig. 2. N- input MSM calculation.

Fig. 3. MSM implementation structure.
The format of the check node message is shown in Fig. 4. Both min and submin values are represented by 4-bits. The signs of messages for the 6 variable node connected to a

978-1-5090-4257-9/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

823

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:17:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics ICEI 2017

particular check node is stored in 6 consecutive bits. The index field stores the index of the min value.

Fig. 4. Storage format of check node message.

2) Variable Node Architecture: The basic functionality of the variable node unit is defined by (3). Since the storage form of the check node message is modified, the variable node unit has to incorporate a logic to select the correct input. From the input message, each variable node selects either minima or subminima according to the index value. The variable node message is rebuilt as follows:

=

,≠ ,=

(7)

To deal with the overflow problem during addition, a technique is employed in this design where the 4-bit signmagnitude messages are converted to 6-bit 2’s complement values. This is because the maximum value of adder output will be 28 (since there are four 4-bit inputs and the maximum value of each input is 7) and when the messages for check nodes are calculated, input messages are subtracted from this 6bit sum. The final outgoing messages are converted to 4-bit sign-magnitude representation.
3) The Modified Decoder Architecture: The implementation structure of the overall decoder is
shown in Fig. 6.

Fig. 5. VNU structure.
Message reading function of VNU is carried out using pairs of equality detectors and multiplexers. The 3 index values ( , , ) are extracted from the check node messages connected to current variable node. The VNU calculation is simple and is carried out using adder and subtractor, as shown in Fig. 5.
The messages passed between VNU and CNU are in signmagnitude form. In this design, 4-bit quantization is used where 1bit is used for sign and 3 bits are used for magnitude representation. To efficiently add the input messages, all the values are converted to 2’s complement representation. These values are added together in a ripple carry adder. The sign of this sum is the current estimate of the decoded bit at each variable node. The messages for each of the 3 check nodes are calculated by subtracting the corresponding input from this adder output. During the initialization phase, the channel values are directly passed to the outputs of the variable node unit. This bypassing is done by asserting a packet start signal.

Fig. 6. LDPC decoder architecture.
The decoder uses a multiplexed memory for storing the check and variable node messages. This approach reduces the consumption of FPGA resources. The check nodes can work by directly reading messages from the memory and store the computed messages back. On the other hand, the variable nodes find the address of the incoming messages using an LUT. The column information of 1’s in H matrix is lost in the storage scheme used in this design. Every row in the table stores 3 values (m,n) for each of the 3 check nodes connected to the variable node corresponding to the row. Here, m is the row number of the message in the storage unit and n is the position of the message in that row. The RAM Read/Write Logic extracts the column information from the LUT. The messages for VNU are read/written according to the address generated using LUT information.
As shown in Fig. 6, separate control units are designed for the check and variable node units. These units generates the control signals necessary for the operation of the CNU and VNU. The overall operation of the decoder is controlled by a master control. It is implemented as a 6 stage finite state machine. The master control unit synchronizes the data flow between various computation units and memory.

978-1-5090-4257-9/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

824

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:17:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics ICEI 2017

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The proposed LDPC decoder was implemented as a synthesizable Verilog HDL model in Spartan-6 FPGA. A MATLAB program was written to generate the input data for the decoder. Simulations of the synthesized modules were carried out using Xilinx ISIM simulator. The check node and variable node units were verified through separate simulations of the two units. Simulations were carried out by writing test bench programs for the modules.
Fig. 7 shows the simulation result of check node unit and Table I shows the device utilization summary of its implementation.

Fig. 7. Simulation results for check node function.

TABLE I.

DEVICE UTILIZATION OF CNU IMPLEMENTATION Selected device : Spartan-6 6slx25ftg256-3

Number of Slice LUTs

53 out of 15032

Number of LUT Flip Flop pairs used

53 out of 53

Number of IOs

39 out of 186

Fig. 8 shows the simulation result of variable node unit and Table II shows the device utilization summary of its implementation.

Fig. 8. Simulation results for variable node function.
It can be seen that the proposed CNU and VNU designs use less hardware resources. This is achieved through adopting min-sum algorithm for decoding, which is simpler compared to other decoding algorithms. But this reduction in decoding complexity comes at the expense of reduced performance.
Timing analysis was performed using Xilinx Timing Analyzer. The timing report shows that the maximum possible

clock frequency is 87 MHz (which corresponds to a minimum period of 11.54 ns).

TABLE II.

DEVICE UTILIZATION OF CNU IMPLEMENTATION Selected device : Spartan-6 6slx25ftg256-3

Number of Slice LUTs

90 out of 15032

Number of LUT Flip Flop pairs used

90 out of 53

Number of IOs

57 out of 186

Table III shows the device utilization summary of the LDPC decoder. Compared to the implementation in [1], the proposed system consumes less hardware resources. Also, the decoding algorithm converges to the output code word in 10 iterations.

TABLE III.

DEVICE UTILIZATION OF LDPC DECODER IMPLEMENTATION

Selected device : Spartan-6 6slx25ftg256-3

Number of Slice Registers

826 out of 30064

Number of Slice LUTs

2496 out of 15032

Number of LUT Flip Flop pairs used

2628 out of 53

Number of IOs

36 out of 186

V. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a low density parity check decoder implementation with modified check node and variable node architectures. The new check node design compensates for the performance loss incurred in the normal min-sum algorithm. The variable node architecture presented in this paper reduces the overflow error during manipulation of 4-bit quantized node messages. Also, the new implementation results in reduced consumption of hardware resources.
REFERENCES
[1] Wang Yongqing, Liu Donglei, Sun Lida and Wu Siliang, “Real-Time Implementation for Reduced-Complexity LDPC Decoder in Satellite Communication,” China Communications, December 2014.
[2] Peter Hailes, Lei Xu, Robert G. Maunder, Bashir M. Al-Hashimi and Lajos Hanzo, “A Survey of FPGA-Based LDPC Decoders,” IEEE Communications Surveys, Vol. 18, No. 2, Second Quarter 2016.
[3] Youn Sung Park, Yaoyu Tao, IEEE and Zhengya Zhang, “A Fully Parallel Nonbinary LDPC Decoder With Fine-Grained Dynamic Clock Gating,” IEEE Journal of Solid State Circuits, Vol. 50, No. 2, February 2015.
[4] Bertrand Le Gal, Christophe Jego and Camille Leroux, “A Flexible NISC-Based LDPC Decoder,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, Vol. 62, No. 10, May 2014.
[5] Kai Zhang, Xinming Huang and Zhongfeng Wang, “High-Throughput Layered Decoder Implementation for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communication, Vol. 27, No. 6, August 2009.
[6] Guido Masera, Federico Quaglio and Fabrizio Vacca, “Implementation of a Flexible LDPC Decoder,” IEEE Transactions On Circuits and Systems-II: Express Briefs, Vol. 54, No. 6, June 2007.
[7] W. C. Huffman and V. Pless, “Fundamentals of Error Correcting Codes,” Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK, 2003.

978-1-5090-4257-9/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

825

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:17:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

International Conference on Trends in Electronics and Informatics ICEI 2017
[8] W. K. Leung, W. L. Lee, Angus Wu and Li Ping, “Efficient Implementation Technique of LDPC Decoder,” IEE Electronic Letters, Vol. 37, No. 20, September 2001.
[9] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, IRE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 8, No. 12, January 1962.
[10] R. M. Tanner, “A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 27, No. 5, September 1981.
[11] C. E. Shannon, “Certain Results in Coding Theory for Noisy Channels, ” Information and Control, Vol. 1, September 1951.
[12] Sheryl L. Howard, Christian Schlegel and Vincent C. Gaudet, “DegreeMatched Check Node Decoding for Regular and Irregular LDPCs,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, Vol. 53, No. 10, October 2006.
[13] Saied Hemati, François Leduc-Primeau and Warren J. Gross, “A Relaxed Min-Sum LDPC Decoder With Simplified Check Nodes,” IEEE Communications Letters, Vol. 20, No. 3, March 2016.

978-1-5090-4257-9/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

826

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:17:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

