Çok-seviyeli Flash Depolama Sistemleri için Verimli bir Denkles¸tirme Yöntemi
An Efficient Equalization Technique for Multi-Level Cell Flash Memory Storage Systems

Reza A. Ashrafi, Ali E. Pusane Department of Electrical and Electronics Engineering
Bog˘aziçi University Istanbul, Turkey
{reza.ashrafi,ali.pusane}@boun.edu.tr

Özetçe —NAND Flash bellekler, sahip oldukları birçok avantaj nedeniyle veri depolamam teknolojisine yakın zamanda büyük katkıda bulunmus¸lar ve global pazarda önemli bir yere oturmus¸lardır. Çok-seviyeli hücre (MLC) kullanan Flash bellekler, hücrelerin birden çok bitlik bilgiyi tas¸ıyabilmeleri nedeniyle büyük ilgi görmüs¸ ve birçok çalıs¸manın hedefi haline gelmis¸lerdir. Bu konuda yapılan çalıs¸malar göstermis¸tir ki bu tip bellek kullanımındaki en kötü etki hücreler arası giris¸imdir. Bu nedenle, basit, pratik, ve etkili denkles¸tirme tekniklerinin gelis¸tirilmesi verinin okunabilmesi için çok önemlidir. Bu çalıs¸mada, etkin bir denkles¸tiricinin bas¸arımı analiz edilmis¸ ve düs¸ük-yog˘unluklu es¸lik-denetim kodları kullanan bir müs¸terek denkles¸tirici-kodlayıcı sistemi önerilerek incelenmis¸tir.
Anahtar Kelimeler—Çok-seviyeli Flash bellek, hücrelerarası giris¸im, düs¸ük-yog˘unluklu es¸lik-denetim kodları, birles¸ik denkles¸tirme-kodlama, simge hata oranı.
Abstract—NAND Flash memories, due to their several desirable characteristics, have recently dominated the storage technology and its global market. Multi-level cell (MLC) Flash memories, which have higher storage capacities as each cell contains more than one bit of data, have gained considerable amount of attention and researches to build smaller and denser memory cells continue. Studies have shown that, among various error sources in MLC memories, inter-cell interference is the significant one. Therefore, simple, feasible, and yet effective equalization techniques are vital for data reliability. In this paper, we have analyzed the error performance of the proposed effective equalizer, while lowdensity parity-check error control scheme has also been utilized to construct a joint equalization-coding scheme.
Keywords—MLC Flash memory, Inter-cell interference, Lowdensity parity-check code, Joint equalization-coding, Symbol-error rate.
I. INTRODUCTION
A Flash memory block is a two-dimensional (2D) structure, which consists of many floating-gate (MOSFET) transistors. Each row and column of a block are called page (wordline) and bitline, respectively. Note that the smallest unit of the memory to be simultaneously programmed is a page, while the smallest unit to be erased is the block [1].
978-1-5090-6494-6/17/$31.00 c 2017 IEEE

Programming a memory cell is performed by electrical charge injection into the floating gate of the transistor through applying a specific voltage. The amount of charges change the threshold voltage Vt of the transistor. Therefore, different threshold voltages represent different data stored. Specifically, data storage in an MLC NAND Flash memory is achieved by programming the Vt into one of several non-overlapping voltage intervals [2]. In this paper, we focus on 4-level cells, each of which can store 2 bits of binary data. There are several memory programming schedules, each of which exploit different levels of complexity and produce data reliability [3]. Throughout this paper, we assume the all-bitline programming, in which all cells (bitlines) along a page are simultaneously programmed, and afterwards, the next page is written.
There are several error sources in the MLC memory channel, however, inter-cell interference (ICI) has been determined to be the most critical one [4]. Due to sophisticated 2D structure of memory arrays, classical equalization techniques, as the immediate approach to tackle the ICI, cannot be readily utilized. Therefore, deeper understanding of the Flash channel and several modifications to available equalization techniques are inevitable.
In this paper, we first review the basics of the NAND Flash memory channel, in which ICI and channel equation are presented. In Section III, we focus on equalization techniques, and in the next section, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, as the error-control codes (ECC), are considered to realize a joint equalization-coding approach. In Section V, the symbol-error rate (SER) performance of the proposed scheme has been evaluated via computer simulations, where results indicate that the proposed method significantly improves the SER.
II. CHANNEL MODEL
Before programming the memory cell, the whole memory block should be erased. This is achieved by setting floatinggate threshold voltages Vt to the lowest voltage window Ve, which is assumed to follow the Gaussian probability density function (PDF), Ve ∼ N (μe,σe2) [5]. Next, to program a cell into desired data value, its threshold voltages should increase. The common approach to govern the threshold voltage for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:20:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1: Cell programming by ISPP.

Figure 3: Illustration of the victim cell (black) and interferer cells (shaded) under all-bitline programming.

Figure 2: ICI-free cell-threshold voltage distribution under allbitline programming.

data programming into memory cells is called incremental step pulse program (ISPP), or program-and-verify approach [1], in which verification voltage of the target programming state is denoted by VP . During each program-and-verify cycle, Vt is initially increased by fixed voltage step ΔV , and then compared with the targeted VP . If it is still lower than VP , the program-and-verify procedure continues. Otherwise, further voltage increasing is deactivated. This concept is depicted in Fig. 1.
Due to the uniform nature of ISPP, these levels follow the uniform distribution over the interval [VP : VP + ΔV ] [6]. Fig. 2 shows the histogram of the written data in a 4-level Flash memory, in which Gaussian distribution corresponding to erased state and three different uniform intervals related to the rest of programmed states are depicted. Binary numbers on the top of each separate PDF, shows the discrete binary tuples that each voltage interval represents. Note that without loss of generality, tuples’ representation and their corresponding voltage windows can differ in other research papers in the literature.

A. ICI

ICI is the major error source in Flash memories; it

originates from parasitic capacitance coupling effects among

the surrounding cells, due to the fact that each floating-gate

transistor with trapped charges inside resembles a capacitance

[2]. In other words, the final threshold voltage of the target cell

can change while its aggressor cells are under programming.

Interference ratio is defined as γi = parasitic capacitance between the ith

, Ciint
Cvic

where

Ciint

is

the

interferer and the victim

cell and Cvic is the capacitance of the victim cell.

Note that, the target cell is affected with the interferers, which are programmed after the victim cell. It is assumed that only immediate neighbors of a victim cell can affect the target cell, since the parasitic coupling strength quickly diminishes as the distance among cells grow. Therefore, in all-bitline programming, each cell suffers from three aggressors located in the next pages as illustrated in Fig. 3.

Note that in this case, the total ICI comes from three aggressors; one vertical (V) and two diagonal (D) interferers. In general, the interfering effect of diagonal aggressors is assumed to be weaker.

The channel equation is given as

1

yij = xij +

(xi+1,j+k − Vei+1,j+k )γi+1,j+k,

(1)

k=−1

i = 1, . . . , I, j = 1, . . . , J,

where xij denotes the target voltage of the cell located on ith page and jth bitline representing a non-binary symbol sij ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3}, γij is the interference ratio, and finally yij is the final voltage of the cell, which is shifted from the desired
voltage value due to the interference. It is important to note
that all of these parameters are random variables (RV) coming from different continuous distribution, i.e., xij has the PDF of a mixture of the Gaussian-uniform (shown in Fig. 2), Veij comes from the Gaussian distribution, and γij is assumed to comply with the truncated Gaussian distribution [6]. This is
due to the fact that support of interference has been limited to
immediate neighbors.

γij ∼ T N (μγ , σγ2, ω),

(2)

where ω determines the symmetric bound domain, i.e., PDF
of γij is nonzero over the domain μγ ± ω. Note that, σγ and ω are assumed to be proportional to μγ, i.e.,

σγ = α1μγ , ω = α2μγ ,

(3)

where 0 < α1, α2 < 1. It is also important to note that vertical and diagonal aggressors have different weights.

For sake of comparison, ICI strength factor S in introduced
and these values are then scaled with S, i.e., if μγ = β, it is modified into μγ = βS. Note that as a mathematical

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:20:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

result, higher values of S should lead to a more severe ICI, as intuitively expected.
Dealing with continuous RVs as channel’s input and its parameters, along with 2D and non-causal structure of the memory block, gives rise to a challenging problem of reliable data retrieving.

III. FLASH CHANNEL EQUALIZATION

Due to the large amount of SER in the Flash channel emanated from the ICI, an effective equalization technique is absolutely needed in order to achieve a reasonable error rate, even before ECC implementation. As an optimal solution, maximum-likelihood (ML) based equalization technique can be adopted in this scenario, however 2D nature of the Flash channel requires the 2D ML equalizer, which gives rise to an NP-hard problem [7]. Therefore, simple and feasible approaches should be sought. Authors in [2] have introduced a simple yet efficient (at least for mild ICI cases) method called post-compensation (PC) equalization.

Let us denote the ICI as

1

zij =

(xi+1,j+k − Vei+1,j+k )γi+1,j+k.

(4)

k=−1

Consequently, it is possible to write yij = xij + zij. This observation is the motivation behind the PC method as we can estimate RVs forming the ICI term, and the estimated ICI value can then be subtracted from the target cell voltage.

The estimate of the ICI term is given as

1

zij =

(yi+1,j+k − μ )μ . ei+1,j+k γi+1,j+k

(5)

k=−1

It is seen that random variables Ve and γ are estimated with their expected values. Since the verification voltage of the
aggressors xi+1,j+k, k ∈ {−1, 0, 1} have also been degraded during the programming phase, therefore the only available
ICI-affected voltages yi+1,j+k, k ∈ {−1, 0, 1} are plugged into equation.

The estimated programmed voltage can the be written as

xij = yij − zij .

(6)

A. Modified PC
The aforementioned PC technique fails to maintain reliable communications under severe ICI environment. This is due to the fact that instead of original programmed voltages of interfering neighbors xi+1,j+k, k ∈ {−1, 0, 1}, their ICIaffected measured voltages yi+1,j+k, k ∈ {−1, 0, 1} have been employed in the ICI estimation. To overcome this challenging issue, some modifications have been applied and a novel efficient modified PC (MPC) technique is proposed.
Note that, based on the physical structure of Flash memories, we can safely assume that the last page will not suffer from interference, since there is no other row to be programmed afterwards (buffer page). This observation is important as it enables an immediate demodulation of the original written data without any equalization process. This

Figure 4: SER of the Flash channel under no equalization, PC equalizer, and MPC equalizer.

demodulated symbol can then be fed into the equalizer as a confident starting step. Starting ICI estimation from the J − 1th page, estimating xi+1,j+k, k ∈ {−1, 0, 1} from yi+1,j+k, k ∈ {−1, 0, 1} is much more accurate than that of the PC, as the value of interfering cells from the last page are readily demodulated, which helps the current page to be demodulated more precisely. This process continues up until the first page as each of lower pages feed their confident demodulated information to their upper rows. Therefore, error performance of MPC will considerably outperforms the PC.

IV. JOINT EQUALIZATION-CODING

To achieve reliable low-error rates, employing ECC

along with equalization is necessary. To construct the joint

equalization-ECC, LDPC block codes with parity-check ma-

trices H of size (N − K) × N , well-known for their close-

to-optimal performance and low-complexity iterative decoding

algorithm

[8],

have

been

utilized.

The

code

rate

is

1 2

,

and

both hard and soft information can fed into the message-

passing algorithm employed to decode these codes. However

as expected, soft-information input substantially improves the

coding gain.

A. LLR calculation

Log-likelihood ratio (LLR) is the key component for soft information based signal detection and decoding. Let us define the binary LLR of a received bit as

li

=

log

P P

(yi|xi (yi|xi

= =

0) 1)

.

(7)

For simpler channels, LLR values can easily be calculated in closed-form expressions. However, in our case, the problem is not that straightforward.

Note that, the Flash channel output represents a non-binary symbol due to its MLC nature. Therefore, non-binary LLRs can be defined and employed in our analysis. However, for the sake of lower complexity (specifically in the ECC phase), it is preferred to continue in the binary LLR terminology. In the 4-level memory cell scenario, for each symbol two binary LLRs are calculated representing each of its binary bits. Let the binary tuple for a non-binary symbol be si = (b2i−1 b2i), where s ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3} and b ∈ {0, 1}. LLR values are then

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:20:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 5: SER of the Flash channel under different joint equalization-ECC schemes.

Table I: Simulation parameters

Parameter VP I
J ΔV μe σe

Value 2.55, 3.15, 3.75
128 2 KBytes
0.3 1.1 0.35

Parameter
μV σV ωV μD σD ωD

Value
0.08S 0.2μV 0.3μV 0.006S 0.2μD 0.3μD

calculated according to

lb2i−1

=

log

P (yi|si P (yi|si

= =

0) 2)

+ +

P (yi|si P (yi|si

= =

1) 3)

,

lb2i

=

log

P (yi|si P (yi|si

= =

0) 1)

+ +

P (yi|si P (yi|si

= =

2) 3)

.

(8)

Let us assume that probabilities P (yi|si) are available via extensive computer simulations.

V. RESULTS AND CONCLUSION
In this section, the SER of different scenarios have been analyzed via computer simulations and results are presented in Figs. 4 and 5. The simulation parameters, which are usually used in the literature, are listed in Table I.
As shown in Fig. 4, equalization improves the SER, and as discussed above, MPC outperforms the PC equalization approach. This improvement comes from injection of confident ICI-free demodulated symbol information from the last page to its upper page, which stepwise moves up all the way to the first page.
Fig. 5 presents the SER of different joint equalizationcoding schemes. As an immediate observation, it is seen that implementing the ECC phase drastically improves the SER. Longer code rates also decrease the error rate. Furthermore, by utilizing soft information as input to LDPC decoder, the overall SER is also largely ameliorated. These analyses show that an efficient joint equalization-coding scheme can greatly mitigate the degrading effect of ICI in Flash channels. However, as

discussed earlier, 2D structure of the Flash channel and several other related issues, including continuous random input data voltages, non-causality of the system, and total random nature of the ICI, hinder low-complexity adaptation of conventional optimal equalizers into this situation. Therefore, a simpler, and consequently suboptimal yet efficient equalizer has been suggested in the literature. In this paper however by modifications to the PC approach, a more powerful equalizer has been proposed, which exploits the physical formation of the Flash memory block. Furthermore, by employing both hard and softinformation-input LDPC based ECC, a joint equalization-ECC scheme has also been examined, and simulation results show that the SER under such scheme is considerably improved.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Bez, E. Camerlenghi, A. Modelli, and A. Visconti, “Introduction to Flash memory,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 91, no. 4, pp. 489–502, Apr. 2003.
[2] Guiqiang Dong, Shu Li, and Tong Zhang, “Using data postcompensation and predistortion to tolerate cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND Flash memory,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2718–2728, Oct. 2010.
[3] R. A. Ashrafi, A. E. Pusane, and I˙. Demirkan, “On the reliability and efficiency of novel programming architectures for next-generation Flash memories,” in Proc. International Conference on Telecommunications and Signal Processing, July 2015, pp. 289–293.
[4] Jae-Duk Lee, Sung-Hoi Hur, and Jung-Dal Choi, “Effects of floatinggate interference on NAND Flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron Device Letters, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264–266, May 2002.
[5] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and H. Nakamura, “A double-level-Vth select gate array architecture for multi-level NAND Flash memories,” in Proc. Symposium on VLSI Circuits, Digest of Technical Papers., Jun. 1995, pp. 69–70.
[6] Guiqiang Dong, Ningde Xie, and Tong Zhang, “On the use of softdecision error-correction codes in NAND Flash memory,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[7] E. Ordentlich and R. M. Roth, “Two-dimensional maximum-likelihood sequence detection is NP hard,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, no. 12, pp. 7661–7670, Dec 2011.
[8] R. G. Gallager, Low-density parity-check codes, M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, MA, 1963.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:20:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

