QC-LDPC codes and their Performance on
Power Line Communications Channel
Nikoleta Andreadou and Fotini-Niovi Pavlidou Aristotle University of Thessaloniki,
Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering, Telecommunications Division, Panepistimioupolis of Thessaloniki, 54124, Thessaloniki, Greece
+302310994192, e-mail: nandread@auth.gr

Abstract — In this paper Low Density Parity Check Codes (LDPC) are introduced in the Power Line Communications Channel (PLC). We investigate how different decoding algorithms, which are applied on LDPC codes, affect the system’s performance. Therefore, an iterative belief propagation decoding algorithm as well as a proposed variation of the original bit flipping algorithm are exploited. In addition, a hybrid technique combining these two algorithms is proposed. Irregular LDPC codes of various code rates are studied. Specifically, the cases of 1/2, 1/3, 2/3, 3/4 and 4/5 code rates are investigated. Regarding the irregular LDPC codes, they are constructed in a Quasi-Cyclic form. The system’s performance is expressed in terms of the resultant Bit Error Rate (BER) versus the Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR).
In order to design the power line communications channel, Middleton’s class A noise model is used to account for the system’s background and impulsive noise, while Zimmermann’s channel model is also used. The OFDM transmission technique is taken into account. Results are derived via computer simulations.
Keywords- Power Line Communications (PLC), Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes, decoding algorithms.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the past years there has been an increasing demand in voice and data transfer. Therefore, new technologies have emerged in order to support the market’s request. Power Line Communications constitute one of these new technologies, implying that the telecommunication signal is transferred through the already existing power line network. By definition, the greatest advantage concerning power line communications is that there is no need for new infrastructure, which is cost effective. Despite how advantageous this way of signal transferring sounds, it triggers off many problems, since the power line cables were originally designed for a far different purpose than the desired signal transmission. Severe interference needs to be encountered combined with the variant load introduced by the power line network due to the number of appliances connected to the network which alters with time, [1].
This work was supported by the Greek General Secretariat for Research and Technology (Program PENED 2003).

In order to investigate the power line network’s performance, an accurate channel needs to be employed. Several attempts have been made by the scientific community towards this direction. One of the first models to be introduced was Philipps’ channel model, [2] which takes under consideration the multipath phenomenon and each component is multiplied by a factor depending on its path. Later on, Zimmermann’s model was developed, [3]. According to this model, not only was the multipath scenario taken into account, but also the signal’s attenuation through the power line cable. Galli and Banwell proposed a channel model based on the fact that a power line can be represented by a multi-conductor configuration, [4]. In addition, many researchers have built their channel models being based on measurements, [5-6]. In this paper, we use Zimmermann’s channel model, since it is easy to be implemented and it is widely used in the literature.
A noise model also needs to be employed in order to simulate a power line communications system. Most researchers were based on their own measurements for the implementation of such models, [7-8]. One popular noise model, which is found a lot in the literature, is Middleton’s class A model, [9]. According to it, the total noise comprises from two parts, the background and the impulsive noise. Due to its simplicity and its effectiveness, it is also implemented in this study.
To complete our system, LDPC codes are used as the coding and decoding technique. These codes were first introduced by Gallager, [10], in the early 1960s, but were neglected for a long time. They became the target of research and investigation, after the evolution of decoding technology. Several decoding algorithms have been developed, which can be grouped into two categories, the hard and soft decision decoding algorithms respectively. The most famous hard decision decoding algorithm was introduced by Gallager, the bit flipping decoding algorithm, while a range of versions followed. Such variations are the weighted bit-flipping [11], the Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping [12] and the Implementation – efficient reliability ratio based weighted bitflipping [13] decoding algorithms. Regarding the soft decision decoding techniques, the dominant one is the sum-product or belief propagation algorithm [14-16]. However, various forms

978-A1ut-h4or2iz4e4d -lic3e7ns9e0d-u0se/0lim9/it$ed2t5o:.0Yo0ns©ei2U0ni0v.9DoIEwnEloEaded on J2u4n4e 24,2026 at 05:30:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of this algorithm have been presented in the literature. Other researchers have used a log domain sum-product algorithm [14-15], while others not, [16]. In this paper, the bit-flipping algorithm is used, whereas it is compared to the performance obtained by the sum-product algorithm. Further on, we propose a hybrid decoding scheme, which uses both soft and hard decision decoding algorithms and compare the system’s performance. In case the first method fails to produce a valid codeword, the second scheme follows. The purpose for this is to reduce the decoding complexity.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the LDPC coding and decoding techniques are analyzed. Section III shows the channel and noise models being utilized for the system’s realization, whereas in Section IV the simulation results are displayed. Finally the conclusions are drawn in Section V.

⎡1 0 1 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 0 0⎤

⎢⎢1 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 1 0 0⎥⎥

H

=

⎢0 ⎢⎢1

1 0

0 0

1 1

1 0

0 1

1 0

1 0

0 1

0 1

1 0

0⎥ 1⎥⎥

⎢0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 1 1 1⎥

⎢

⎥

⎣⎢0 1 1 0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1⎦⎥

II. LDPC CODING TECHNIQUE

A. Characteristics of LDPC codes

LDPC codes are a subgroup of linear block codes, implying

that the uncoded word (u) feeding the encoder consists of k

bits and is converted to a codeword (c) of n bits. As it was

explained above, these codes are characterized by their parity

check matrix (H) which is sparse and the majority of its digits

are zero. A codeword c is valid if the subsequent equation is

true:

H * cT = 0

(1)

The resultant code rate k / n defines the size of the parity

check matrix, which is specified as (n – k) x n, meaning that

its rows equal to the parity bits inserted at the encoding

procedure and its columns equal to the number of coded bits.

Regular and irregular codes are distinguished by whether or

not matrix H has uniform row and column weights, [17].

A typical characteristic of LDPC codes is that they can be

symbolized by a bipartite graph, which facilitates their survey.

Two groups of nodes, the check nodes and bit nodes constitute

this bipartite graph. The size of the parity check matrix plays

an important role in determining the number of these nodes,

meaning that if its size is mxn, then the graph will consist of m

check nodes and n bit nodes respectively. One row in the

parity check matrix is represented by one check node, whereas

each bit node corresponds to one codeword bit, [17]. The

presence of an ace in each row of the parity check matrix

means that the two corresponding nodes are connected to each

other in the bipartite graph, [18]. For example, if there is an

ace in the third column and fifth row of the matrix, then the

third bit node will be connected to the fifth check node. In

Fig. 1 an example of a parity check matrix and its equivalent

bipartite graph are demonstrated.

Fig. 1. Parity check matrix (H) and its corresponding bipartite graph.

In particular, such blocks are circulant submatrices based on

the identity matrix and could either be the zero matrix or

circulant permutation matrices. The main advantage of QC –

LDPC codes against randomly constructed codes is that they

involve easier implementation in terms of the encoding

procedure [18]. Equation (2) illustrates a permutation matrix P

of size q x q.

010

0

0 01K 0

(2)

P=M M M

M

0 0 0K 1

100

0

Let Pi stand for the circulant permutation matrix, which is

derived from the identity matrix I after the latter one is shifted

to the right by i times (0 ≤ i ≤ q). The zero matrix is defined as P∞, whereas the resulting parity check matrix H of size (j·q) x

(k·q) is denoted in (3):

P a11

P a12

L P a1( k −1)

P a1k

H = P a21

P a22

L P a2( k −1)

Pa2k

(3)

M

MM

M

M

P a j1

P L P a j 2

a j ( k −1)

P a jk

where ail Є {0, 1, …, q – 1, ∞} [18]. The resultant overall code rate is given by:

R≥1–j/k

(4)

B. Encoding Procedure of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes (QC LDPC)
This class of LDPC codes, which is used in this paper, is characterized by a parity check matrix H consisting of square blocks.

It should be also noted here that q ≥ k ≥ j and q is a prime number. In case this condition is not valid, then the encoding procedure will not work properly. Defining the parity check matrix in such a way results in reduced memory needed for storage, since after positioning the aces in the first row of each

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u4n5e 24,2026 at 05:30:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

block matrix P, then the rest aces can easily be located. Depending on how the blocks are defined, we can obtain both regular and irregular QC-LDPC codes. In case of regular codes, the code rate is larger than 1 – j / k, as shown in (4), [18].
In this paper we focus on irregular QC-LDPC codes. By taking into account the bipartite graph of an LDPC code, it is easily derived that some bit nodes are connected to a larger number of check nodes, implying that some information bits tend to correct their values quicker. Therefore, irregular codes perform better than regular ones. The QC - LDPC invested here, have a parity check matrix in the form of (5):

II IK I K

I

0 I P K P( j−2) K H (q, j, k) = 0 0 I K P 2( j−3) L

P (k−2) P 2(k−3)

(5)

MM MK M K

M

00K 0

I

K P ( j−1)(k − j )

It is noticeable from (5) that this matrix is in upper triangular form, which facilitates the encoding procedure, while the overall code rate is 1 – j / k.
C. Decoding Procedure via the sum-product algorithm
In general an iterative algorithm, the so-called Belief Propagation Algorithm or Sum-Product algorithm, describes accurately the decoding procedure followed by LDPC codes. This algorithm is better comprehended via the code’s bipartite graph. Although its main structure is similar, several versions have been presented in the open technical literature [15], [16]. According to this algorithm, each bit node sends a message to the check nodes with which it is connected, during each iteration round. This message is an estimation on the exact value of the corresponding codeword bit this node represents. Afterwards, all the messages received at each check node go under elaboration so that other messages are sent back to the neighbouring bit nodes, meaning that one iteration round is completed. Subsequently, the messages are further processed and the bit nodes send information back to check nodes, so that the algorithm is repeated. The messages exchanged between connected nodes entail extrinsic information only, which is the main feature of the algorithm. As a result, the message sent by a check node to one bit node is based on the information received by the check node from all the other bit nodes except for this particular bit node. The situation is similar when it comes to messages sent from bit nodes to check nodes. At the end of each iteration round and after the bit nodes’ messages are processed, a codeword is produced. Whether or not the resultant codeword is correct this is checked at the end of each iteration round. The algorithm stops either after a predefined number of iterations is carried out or in case the correct codeword is already found during the algorithm’s execution [15].
The nature of the messages sent by the nodes determines the difference between the algorithm versions. For instance, the

messages can be either log-likelihood ratios [15] or not [16]. In this paper, the messages sent at each iteration round of the decoding procedure are not in the log-domain, since this would lead to an increased system’s complexity. However, another problem needs to be overcome. The messages as described in the original algorithm are not designed to work for a PLC environment, since the variance of the Gaussian noise is taken into account. To deal with this problem, we calculate the variance of the received symbol, [15] and we apply this as the input value.
D. Decoding Procedure via the bit-flipping algorithm
This algorithm is also an iterative one, but has a different concept compared to the sum-product algorithm. It consists of four steps which are described as follows, [10]:
1) Calculate H·yT and find the checks for which H·yT equals 1, with y the potential codeword at each round. (The matrix multiplication implies modulo 2 additions).
2) For every bit node determine the number of unsatisfied checks involving that bit.
3) Find the largest number of unsatisfied checks. Change the bits of y vector that appear to have this number of unsatisfied check nodes.
4) Repeat the previous steps until H·yT = 0 or until a certain number of iterations is completed.
Whereas the original bit flipping algorithm implies that the value of several bits may be flipped during the algorithm, we propose a variation of this algorithm for the PLC environment. Instead of altering the value of several bits, we change the value of one bit at one iteration round. By this way, even if the correct codeword is not found in the next iteration, the situation changes for the unsatisfied checks and the bit nodes correct their values one at a time. By changing the values of more than one bit simultaneously entails some kind of risk, since it is possible to change a bit’s value that is already correct. However, this means that the minimum number of iteration rounds needs to be increased so as to ensure that a valid codeword can be obtained.
E. Proposed hybrid decoding scheme
A hybrid decoding technique is proposed in the PLC environment, in order to improve the system’s performance. According to this scheme, both decoding algorithms, soft and hard decision are applied. In particular, the sum product algorithm is applied at first and in case it fails to produce a valid codeword, the described bit flipping decoding algorithm is employed. The iteration rounds in each algorithm are fewer compared to the cases when each decoding scheme is used separately. By this way we have the advantages of both methods when applied to the PLC channel.
III. CHANNEL AND NOISE MODELS
A. Channel model
Regarding the channel model needed for the simulations to take place, Zimmermann’s frequency model [3] is being

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u4n6e 24,2026 at 05:30:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

utilized. It is a straightforward model taking into account the multipath phenomenon as well as the attenuation the telecommunication signal undergoes due to cable losses. According to this multipath phenomenon the signal travels to its destination through several paths. However, only the N dominant paths are calculated by the model. The model’s transfer function is shown in (6):

N

∑ Hchannel( f ) =

{gi

⋅ e1−(4α40+2α1⋅4f k14)3⋅di ⋅ e1−4j2π2f ⋅(d4i /υ3p ) (6)

i=1 weightingfactor attenuationportion delayportion

As it is obvious from the transfer function, each component suffers from a different amount of delay and attenuation, since it travels from a different route. The weighting factor also represents this difference between the various components. In (6) the constants α0, α1 and k1 are based on cable parameters, while the factor di / up corresponds to the time delay τi of each path, with τi:

τi

=

di ⋅ εr c0

= di υp

(7)

εr is the dielectric constant of the insulating material, di is the distance of the i-th path and c0 is the speed of light. The values of the parameters shown in equation (6), in addition to the number of the dominant paths used for the calculations of the channel model can be found in [3].

B. Noise Model

The noise model used for the system’s realization is

Middleton’s class A model. According to it, the noise

influencing the PLC channel consists of background and

impulsive noise. A Poisson distributed random sequence

determines how the impulsive noise contributes to the overall

noise sample. Equation (8) shows the probability density

function of the noise amplitude v:

where

p(v) =

∞
∑

e− A ⋅ Ak ⋅

k = 0 k!

σ 2 = P ⋅ (k / A) + Γ and

k

1+ Γ

1

2π

⋅σ k

⋅

exp

⎜⎛ ⎜⎝⎜

− 2⋅

v2 σ2
k

⎟⎞ ⎠⎟⎟

P = σ 2 + σ 2 (total
GI

(8) noise

power).

σ

2 I

is

the

Impulsive

noise

power,

σ

2 G

is

the

Gaussian

noise power, Γ = σ 2 / σ 2 (Gaussian to Impulsive noise power
GI
Ratio, GIR) and A is the Impulsive index characterizing how

often impulsive noise bursts occur. The noise sample is given

by (9):

n = xG + K m ⋅ y

(9)

where xG is a White Gaussian background noise sequence

with

zero

mean

and

variance

σ

2 G

,

y

is

a

White

Gaussian

sequence

with

zero

mean

and

variance

σ

2 I

/

A

,

Km

is

a

Poisson

distributed sequence whose pdf is characterized by the

impulsive index A. In our investigation parameters A = 0.05

and Γ = 0.1, are being used for the implementation of the

impulsive noise, implying that the impulsive noise is 10 times stronger than the background noise.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section we illustrate the results derived via computer simulations. The main difficulty in achieving this task was that a frequency channel model is used, while the OFDM transmission technique implies that a cyclic extension is needed in the time domain. Therefore, careful signal transformations from time to frequency domain and vice versa through the FFT and IFFT functions were necessary. These complex transformations together with the various system components caused an increase to the simulation time. As a result, a trade off between the minimum SNR value the results approach and the number of data blocks transmitted had to be made. The number of data blocks transmitted for each case was set to 1000, whereas the block size was set to 1024 bits. The total number of bits transferred through the channel depended on the code rate regarding each case. The resulting LDPC matrix sizes are shown in Table I, as explained in Section II-A. The results are grouped into two categories, according to the code rate regarding each case. So, we have the results corresponding in the high code rates and the results corresponding in the low code rates.

Table I

CODE RATES AND RESULTING LDPC MATRIX SIZES

Code rate LDPC matrix size

1/2

1024x2048

1/3

2048x3072

2/3

512x1536

3/4

342x1368

(with a block size of 1026 bits)

4/5

256x1280

In figures 2 and 3 the system’s performance is illustrated in terms of BER versus the Eb / N0 value, provided that the proposed bit flipping decoding algorithm is used. The number of iteration rounds is set to 150.

Fig. 2. Bit error rate versus Eb/N0 for QC – LDPC codes of code rate 1/2 and 1/3 using the bit flipping algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u4n7e 24,2026 at 05:30:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. Bit error rate versus Eb/N0 for QC – LDPC codes of code rate 2/3, 3/4 and 4/5 using the bit flipping algorithm.
From Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, it is noticeable that the code rates follow the same trend throughout the whole Eb/N0 range. It is also obvious that all curves experience a sharp decrease in their Bit Error Rate (BER) as the Eb / No value increases. Furthermore, it is clear that the deep fall in the BER plot occurs for higher Eb/N0 rates in Fig. 3 and lower ones in Fig 2. This is explicable by the fact that for higher code rates, the bits redundancy is decreased at the expense of the signal’s quality. Thus, at the presence of fewer parity bits, the protection offered to the original data bits is of inferior quality.
In figures 4 and 5 the system’s performance is shown when the sum-product algorithm is used. The number of iteration rounds is set to 20. Similarly to the previous case, all curves show a sharp decline in their BER values for higher Eb / N0 values, which is somehow expected. In addition, we observe that the lower the code rate, the better protection is offered to the information bits.

Fig. 5. Bit error rate versus Eb/N0 for QC – LDPC codes of code rate 2/3, 3/4 and 4/5 using the sum-product decoding algorithm.
After taking a closer look at the previous graphs, one may notice that the sum-product algorithm performs better than the bit flipping algorithm for low bit error rates. It is due to the decoder’s greater complexity that the system’s performance increases. However, for higher code rates, as for example for the 4/5 code rate the bit flipping decoding algorithm shows a better performance. This can be explained because for high rates the differences tend to become minor and the bit flipping algorithm comes to perform at the same level as the sumproduct decoding algorithm.
In figures 6 and 7 the system’s performance is displayed when the proposed hybrid decoding technique is applied. The iteration rounds are set to 15 for the sum-product algorithm and 85 for the bit flipping algorithm respectively. Again, there is a better performance when the Eb / N0 value increases, while for higher code rates the system’s performance deteriorates.

Fig. 4. Bit error rate versus Eb/N0 for QC – LDPC codes of code rate 1/2 and 1/3 using the sum-product decoding algorithm.

Fig. 6. Bit error rate versus Eb/N0 for QC – LDPC codes of code rate 1/2 and 1/3 using the hybrid decoding technique.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u4n8e 24,2026 at 05:30:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 7. Bit error rate versus Eb/N0 for QC – LDPC codes of code rate 2/3, 3/4 and 4/5 using the hybrid decoding technique.
However, it is worth noticing that the system seems to work better with the proposed hybrid algorithm than with the other algorithms discussed in Section II-B and C. Although the iteration rounds were decreased for each decoding method separately, their combination gives superior results. In this case we can have the advantages of both algorithms, so when the first fails to produce the correct codeword, the other one comes to make it up.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we investigate LDPC codes and how different decoding algorithms affect the system’s performance. For this purpose irregular Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes are being exploited with several code rates. Concerning the decoding algorithms that are studied, we adjust the sum-product decoding algorithm for the PLC channel and we propose a variation of the bit flipping decoding algorithm. In addition, a hybrid decoding method is also proposed. The results show that LDPC codes can perform well even at the hostile PLC environment. Furthermore, the proposed hybrid decoding technique seems to have a better performance compared to the other decoding schemes, making it a serious candidate for the PLC channel.

REFERENCES
[1] N. Pavlidou, A. J. Han Vinck, Javad Yazdani, “Power Lines Communications: State of the Art and Future Trends”, COST European Framework- Action 262, pp. 1-17.
[2] Holger Philipps, “Modelling of Powerline Communication Channels”, IEEE ISPLC, pp. 14 – 21, 1999.
[3] Manfred Zimmermann and Claus Dostert, “A multipath Model for the Powerline Channel”, IEEE Trans. on Communications, vol. 50, no. 4, pp. 553 – 559, April 2002.
[4] Stefano Galli and Thomas Banwell, “A Novel Approach to the Modeling of the Indoor Power Line Channel – Part II: Transfer Function and Its Properties”, IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 1869 – 1878, July 2005.
[5] K.Y. See. P.L. So, A. Kamarul, E. Gunawan, “Radio-frequency common-mode noise propagation model for power-line cable”, IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, vol. 20, Issue 4, pp. 2443 – 2449, Oct. 2005.
[6] Borge Meltzer Hansen, Jon Ranvholt Ovesen, Klaus Kolle, “Characteristics Measurements Using TDR and Modelling of the Transmission Channel”, IEEE ISPLC, pp. 319 – 323, 2007.
[7] H. Meng, Y.L. Guan, S. Chen, “Modeling and analysis of noise effects on broadband power-line communications”, IEEE Trans. on Power Delivery, vol 20, Issue 2, pp. 630 – 637, Apr. 2005.
[8] V. Degardin, M. Lienard, P. Degaugue, A. Zeddam, F. Gauthier, “Impulsive noise on indoor power lines: characterization and mitigation of its effect on PLC systems”, IEEE International Symposium on Electromagnetic Compatibility, vol. 1, pp. 166 – 169, May 2003.
[9] D. Middleton, “Statistical-physical model of electromagnetic interference”, IEEE Trans. Electromagn. Compat., vol. EMC-19, no.3, pp. 106 – 126, Aug. 1977.
[10] R. G. Gallager, Low – Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[11] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low Density Parity Check Codes Based on Finite Geometries: A Rediscovery and more”, IEEE Transactions Information Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711-2736, Nov.2001.
[12] Guo, F., and Hanzo, L. “Reliability ratio based algorithm weighted bitflipping decoding for LDPC codes”, Electronics Letters, 2004, 40, (21), pp.1356-1358.
[13] C.-H. Lee and W. Wolf, “Implementation-efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for LDPC codes”, electronics Letters 23rd June 2005, vol.41, no. 13.
[14] Hiroki Nakagawa, Daisuke Umehara, Satoshi Denno and Yoshiteru Morihiro, “A Decoding for Low Density Parity Check Codes over Impulsive Noise Channels”, IEEE ISPLC, pp. 85-89, 2005
[15] Hui-Myoung Oh, Young-Jin Park, Sungsoo Choi, Jae-Jo Lee, Keum-Chan Whang, “Mitigation of Performance Degradation by Impulsive Noise in LDPC Coded OFDM System”, IEEE ISPLC, pp. 331 – 336, 2006.
[16] Robert H. Morelos - Zaragoza, “The Art of Error Correcting Coding, Second Edition”, Wiley 2006.
[17] C. Spagnol, W. Marnane, E. Popovici, “Reduced complexity, FPGA implementation of quasi-cyclic LDPC Decoder”, Proceedings of the European Conference on Circuit Theory and Design, vol. 1, pp. I/289 I/292, 28 Aug.-2 Sept. 2005.
[18] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, “Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for Fast Encoding”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894 – 2901, Aug. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u4n9e 24,2026 at 05:30:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

