This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2009 proceedings.

Cross-Layer Iterative Decoding of Irregular LDPC Codes using Cyclic Redundancy Check Codes

Zhimin Yang, Shiju Li, Hao Feng, Thomas Honold and Guanding Yu Dept. of Information Science and Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang Univ.
ZheDa Road #38, Hangzhou, P.R.China, 310027 Email: bestyang@gmail.com, leesj@zju.edu.cn, fenghao666@126.com, honold@zju.edu.cn, yuguanding@zju.edu.cn

Abstract—This paper presents a cross-layer iterative decoder for irregular Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes which uses Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) codes. The key idea of the decoder is to use correctly decoded frames as an aid for correcting the remaining erroneous frames. To accomplish this, the decoder exchanges the relevant information between layers by using the cross-layer design method and an iterative decoding architecture. Moreover, the Unequal-Error Protection (UEP) property of irregular LDPC is exploited and both the multiple-error detection and single-error correction capabilities of the CRC code are used. Simulation results show that the proposed decoder outperforms the pure Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) decoder by a considerable gain while the increase in complexity is moderate. Furthermore, the error floor of irregular LDPC codes in the high Eb/N0 regime can be lowered effectively. The proposed cross-layer iterative decoder can be used for any irregular LDPC coded wireless system to boost the performance and lower the error floor.
Index Terms—Low-Density Parity-Check, Cyclic Redundancy Check, Iterative Decoder, Forward Error Correction, CrossLayer Design
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes, which were originally invented by Gallager [1] and then rediscovered by Mackay and Neal [2], are widely used in wireless systems to achieve data transmission at extremely low error rates in the physical layer [3] [4]. Irregular LDPC codes achieve better performance than their regular counterparts under the same code rate and block length [5]. However, they exhibit a higher error floor than the regular codes. So extra methods are used to reduce the error floor of irregular LDPC codes in wireless communications, e.g. BCH codes are used in DVB-S2 to obtain a lower error rate in the high SNR regime [3].
Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) codes—-one of the most powerful error detection codes—-are used in the Data Link Layer (DLL) to detect erroneous frames. The service data, which is delivered by the physical layer in the form of frames after channel decoding, is usually fed into the CRC error detecting circuit. The receiver accepts the frame if it passes the check and requests a frame retransmission otherwise.
Conventionally, the LDPC decoding in the physical layer and the CRC error detection in the data link layer are performed separately. But this processing strategy does not fully exploit the information that can be used for error recovery. In contrast, Cross-Layer Design (CLD) methodology, which

dimisses the design of independent protocols at different layers, aims at using as much information as possible by exchanging information between layers and optimizing the parameters jointly [6].
Unlike the conventional system in which channel decoding in the physical layer and error detection in the data link layer are independent, this paper presents a novel crosslayer iterative decoding architecture for irregular LDPC coded wireless system. The demodulated signal is decoded at first by the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) in the physical layer. The decoded bits are then delivered to the data link layer frame by frame. CRC processing in the DLL is performed and the corrected frames are fed back to the SPA decoder for another LDPC decoding attempt. The whole decoding process iterates until the termination condition is met.
The cross-layer iterative decoder is based on the following properties of its component codes:
Firstly, any code of minimum Hamming distance dmin ≥ 3 can at least correct all single bit errors. Most of the standardized CRC codes have dmin ≥ 4 for virtually all block lengths used in practice [7]. Hence these codes can simultaneously correct single-bit errors and detect double bit errors.
Secondly, irregular LDPC codes under SPA decoding exhibit the Unequal Error Protection (UEP) property. According to the Gaussian approximation analysis of the SPA decoder [8, p.664], the average bit error probability after iterations is given by

dl

s+i·t

P = λiQ

2

,

(1)

i=2

where λi is the fraction of degree-i variable nodes; s is equivalent to the mean of the channel LLR provided that the all-zero codeword is transmitted; t is equivalent to the mean of the external LLR about the variable node; Q (·) is the Q function and dl is the maximum degree of a variable node in the factor graph [9, p.619]. Equation (1) indicates that the
bit error probability of degree-i nodes is Q (s + i · t ) /2 ,
i.e., the bits corresponding to higher degree variable nodes are better protected.
Thirdly, the correctly decoded bits in a LDPC codeword can be used to facilitate decoding other bits [10].
Owing to the above properties, a DLL frame consisting

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a2d9e4d8o-n6/J0u9ne/$2245,2.00026©a2t 0050:927I:E57EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2009 proceedings.

of degree-dl variable nodes has a low error rate and can be corrected by the CRC code with high probability. The proposed decoder uses the correctly decoded frames as an aid for correcting the remaining ones by using a cross-layer design and an iterative architecture. To achieve this, we arrange the columns of the parity-check matrix with their weights in nonincreasing order, to obtain a codeword in which the elite bits [11] are grouped together. Thus the DLL frame consisting of the elite bits has the lowest error rate.
The main differences between the decoder described in [10] (we use A as a shorthand for this) and our decoder (denoted by B) are:
1) A needs an extra CRC code, while B uses the mandatory CRC in the DLL.
2) In A the CRC code is used only for error detection, whereas B uses CRC for both error detection and error correction.
3) In B (but not in A) the columns of the parity-check matrix are sorted in order of decreasing column weight.
4) A modifies the SPA algorithm and performs CRC checks in every iteration of the SPA decoder, while B employs a new cross-layer iterative decoder and performs CRC decoding after every layer iteration.
Simulation results show that our cross-layer iterative decoder outperforms the conventional pure SPA decoder considerably for most SNR’s at the expense of moderately increasing the complexity. Moreover, the error floor in the high SNR regime is noticeably lowered. ,The proposed decoder reduces the frame error rate and hence also the frame retransmission rate, thereby improving the overall bandwidth efficiency. The proposed decoder does not add extra redundancy but uses the available information more effectively.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section II the end-to-end diagram and the data structure of our decoder are described, followed by an overview of the key features. In Section III the details of the proposed crosslayer iterative decoder and a decoding complexity analysis are presented. Simulation results are shown in Section IV. The paper concludes with a discussion and some additional remarks in Section V.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND KEY FEATURES
A. End-to-End Diagram and Data Structure
Figure 1 depicts the data structure of our decoder. As in the figure we denote by n, k, h, L and r the code length, information length, header length, payload length and parity length of the DLL frame, respectively. The (NLDPC, KLDPC) LDPC codeword contains m DLL frames.
Figure 2 shows the end-to-end diagram of the irregular LDPC coded system. According to the seven-layer Open Systems Interconnect (OSI) model [12, p.20], parts of the data link layer’s functionality serve the Network Layer (NL) and deliver the structured data to the Physical Layer (Phy). To accomplish these tasks, the data link layer maps network packets to DLL frames by adding headers and appending CRC

NL NL pkt #1
Framing & CRC padding

NL pkt #p
header h

kn
payload L

CRC r

DLL DLL Frame #1 DLL Frame #2

KLDPC

Phy

LDPC info. bits

NLDPC

DLL Frame #m LDPC parity

Fig. 1. Data structure used in the irregular LDPC coded system

Network layer
Network packets

Data link layer
Framing & CRC padding

Physical layer

LDPC encoder

modulation

channel

To NL Map frames

Cross-layer

to pkts

iterative decoder

demodulation

Fig. 2. End-to-End diagram of the irregular LDPC coded system

checksums. The resulting DLL frames are delivered to the physical layer. A total of m DLL frames account for one input block to the LDPC encoder. The block is encoded using the irregular parity-check matrix. Before being fed into the channel, the LDPC codeword is modulated. At the receiver, the received signal is demodulated and the resulting Logarithm Likelihood Ratio (LLR) is injected into the cross-layer iterative decoder. The decoder performs LDPC decoding and CRC error correction/detection jointly and iteratively. It outputs the decoded bits frame by frame, and the resulting DLL frames are mapped to network packets.

B. Selection of CRC and DLL Frame Length

The most important criterion for CRC code selection is a sufficiently low probability of undetected error. All of the standardized CRC codes with parity length r ≥ 16 meet this requirement for any reasonable block length.
The actual length of the CRC code is determined by optimizing the length of a DLL frame as follows: Suppose the error detection based on CRC is error free and bit errors within each DLL frame occur independently with equal probability Pb. Let n = h + L + r be the frame length (Figure 1). Given h, r, the frame error probability can be written as Pf = 1 − (1 − Pb)n. The average bandwidth efficiency η in the link layer is given by

η

=

L n

(1

−

Pf ) .

(2)

The partial derivative of η with respect to n is

∂η ∂n

=

(h

+

r)

(1

−

Pf

)

−

nL

∂Pf ∂n

n2

(3)

=

1

− Pf n2

(h

+r

+

nL ln (1 − Pb))

(4)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:27:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2009 proceedings.

slightly heavy cols light cols

ª1 0 " 1 0 0 " 0º

««0 1 " 1 0 1 " 0»»

«1 0 " 0 0 1 " 0»

H

« «0

0

"

0

1

0

"

» 1»

«# # % # # # % #»

« «¬1

0

"

1

0

1

"

» 0»¼

(a) Random parity-check matrix

ª1 1 " 0 0 0 " 0º

««0 1 " 1 0 0 " 0»»

Hˆ

«1 « «0

0" 0"

1 0

0 1

1" 0"

0» »
1»

«# # % # # # % #»

« «¬1

1

"

1

0

0

"

» 0¼»

(b) Desired parity-check matrix

Fig. 3. Original and desired parity-check matrix of irregular low-density parity-check codes

where we have used

∂Pf ∂n

= (Pf

− 1) ln (1 − Pb).Setting

∂η ∂n

=

0 we obtain the optimal frame length n as a function of Pb:

⎛

⎞

nopt (Pb) = round ⎝

h+r 2

2

−

ln

h+r (1 − Pb)

+

h

+ 2

r⎠

,

(5) where round(x) denotes the nearest integer of x. Equation (5) shows that nopt is a monotonically decreasing function of Pb.

C. The Parity-Check Matrix of an Irregular LDPC Code
Given a degree distribution pair (λ, ρ) for an irregular LDPC code, where λ and ρ are polynomials defined in [9, p.620], the parity-check matrix (PCM) can be generated randomly or by other methods such as the Progressive-Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm [13]. If the PCM obtained looks as in Figure 3(a), in which columns with relatively high Hamming weight are called slightly heavy columns while the others are called light columns, then we perform column permutations in order to obtain a new PCM in which the columns are listed in order of non-increasing weight (cf. Figure 3(b)).
The column permutation corresponds to a variable node permutation in the factor graph and has no effect on the edges of the Tanner graph. It does not affect code performance either, but it makes each of the resulting DLL frames contain variable nodes having almost the same degree. Thus we finally obtain some elite DLL frames which consist of the high degree variable nodes. The elite frames have lower frame error probability than the other frames and can be used as an aid for correcting other erroneous frames, provided they are correctly decoded.

III. PROPOSED CROSS-LAYER DECODING METHOD
Figure 4 presents the architecture of the cross-layer iterative decoder. It mainly consists of a CRC sub-decoder in the data link layer, an SPA sub-decoder and a bit-LLR updating module in the physical layer. The whole decoder works as follows:
1) Initialization: Connect the Switch (SW) to 0. 2) The SPA sub-decoder starts working as described in Sec-
tion III-A, subsequently the decoded bits are delivered to the data link layer frame by frame. 3) The CRC sub-decoder starts decoding the DLL frames as described in Section III-B. It outputs the decoded frame and the associated FLAG, which indicates whether the frame has been successfully decoded into a codeword or not.

Channel From LLR buffer demodulator

Physical layer

0 1 SW

SPA sub-decoder

Bit-LLR updating

Data link layer

CRC

dec-out

sub-decoder

FLAG

Fig. 4. Proposed cross-layer iterative decoder for an irregular LDPC coded system

After all m frames are decoded, it performs the termination conditions checking. If any of the conditions is met, go to Step 5), otherwise go to Step 4). 4) The bit-LLR updating module updates the channel LLR as described in Section III-C. Connect SW to 1 and feed the new LLR into the SPA sub-decoder; go to Step 2) to start the next iteration. 5) Exit the decoding procedure.

A. The SPA sub-decoder

The standard SPA [14] (also known as Belief Propagation

(BP) algorithm) is used for irregular LDPC decoding. Al-

though the SPA is well-known, it is briefly described here

in order to make this paper self-contained. Let Hˆ = [Hˆmn] be the desired PCM obtained in Section
II-C. The set of check nodes connected to variable node n is denoted by M (n), and M (n)\m denotes the set M (n) with

check node m excluded. Similarly, the set of variable nodes

that participate in the m-th parity-check equation is denoted by N (m), and N (m)\n denotes the set N (m) with variable

node n excluded. Let u0(n) be the demodulator output LLR
of the n-th symbol. Then the SPA decoder works as follows: Initialization: For each index pair (m, n) such that Hˆmn =
1 set umn = u0(n), where umn is the LLR sent from bit node
n to check node m.

Horizontal step: For each m, n compute

⎛

⎞

vmn = 2 tanh−1 ⎝

umn ⎠ .

(6)

2

n ∈N (m)\n

where vmn is the LLR of bit n which is sent from the m-th check node to the n-th bit node.
Vertical step: for each m, n, compute

umn = u0(n) +

vm n.

(7)

m ∈M(n)\m

Decision step: For each n, compute the LLR of bit n as

zn = u0(n) +

vmn

(8)

m∈M(n)

Make a hard decision to obtain xˆ = [xˆ1, xˆ2, · · · , xˆn] which satisfies xˆi = 1 if zi < 0 and xˆi = 0 otherwise. If the paritycheck equation Hˆ xˆT = 0 is satisfied, then the SPA terminates. Otherwise go to the Horizontal step to continue with the next iteration until the check equation is satisfied or the maximum number of iterations is reached.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:27:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2009 proceedings.

B. CRC sub-decoder
Conventionally, CRC codes are only used for error detection [10] [15]. In fact, most of the CRC codes in use have minimum Hamming distance dmin ≥ 4 for all reasonable block lengths [16]. According to the theory these codes can correct all 1-bit errors (and simultaneously detect all 2-bit errors). Very rarely systems employ CRC codes for error correction, an exception being ATM [17].
Let g(x) be the generator polynomial of a binary CRC code C with parity length r. Usually g(x) is taken of the form

g(x) = (1 + x)g1(x),

(9)

where g1(x) is a primitive polynomial of degree M = r − 1. In this case [16, Theorem 4] shows dmin(C) ≥ 4 for all code lengths n ≤ 2M − 1 and hence that C can correct all 1-bit
errors (and simultaneously detect all 2-bit errors) by some
decoding method.
Let V (x), c(x) and e(x) be the polynomials corresponding
to the received word, codeword and error pattern, respectively.
Define the syndrome S(x) as the remainder of V (x) divided by g(x). Since V (x) = c(x) + e(x), we have S(x) = e(x) mod g(x). Suppose e1(x) = xi and e2(x) = xj, where 0 ≤ i, j < n ≤ 2M − 1. Then

xi = q1(x)g(x) + S1(x)

(10)

xj = q2(x)g(x) + S2(x)

(11)

xi + xj = [q1(x) + q2(x)]g(x) + S1(x) + S2(x) (12)

The error-correcting capabilities of C imply that S1(x) = S2(x) if and only if i = j. So every syndrome S(x) corresponds to at most one 1-bit error pattern e(x) = xj. The decoder precomputes a table TAB which maps syndromes of 1-bit errors to the corresponding error locations j. At runtime it can then correct any 1-bit error very fast by using Table Look-Up (TLU).
In order to indicate whether a frame is successfully decoded or not, the CRC decoder designates a FLAG to each frame. It is set to 1 if the associated frame was successfuly decoded into a codeword and to 0 otherwise.
The diagram of the CRC sub-decoder is depicted in Figure 5. The decoder first computes the syndrome S of the input V . If S = 0 (which indicates V is correct), it outputs V and sets FLAG=1 before exit. Otherwise, it tries to determine the error location j by TLU. If no j is found (which implies a multiple-bit error) it outputs V and sets FLAG=0 before exit. If an error location j is found, it flips V (j), outputs the resulting vector and sets FLAG=1 before exit.
Essentially, the CRC decoder is a coset-leader decoder (see for example [18, p.42-43]).
It should be noted that multiple-bit error patterns e(x) may produce the same syndrome S(x) as a single-bit error. Such errors remain undetected by the CRC decoder and may even lead to an additional falsified bit (introduced by the decoding map).

V
Calculate CRC syndrome S

S==0 ?
N
There exists j s.t. S=TAB(j)?

Y Output V, FLAG=1 & exit
N Output V, FLAG=0 & exit

Y
Flip V(j), FLAG=1 & exit

Fig. 5. CRC sub-decoder architecture

C. Bit-LLR updating

The bit-LLR updating module updates the channel LLR
according to the decoded DLL frame and its FLAG. Let un0ew(i) be the new LLR of the i-the bit bi in the frame and u0(i) the original LLR. Then the updating rule is formulated as

u0new(i) =

(−1)bi · MAX, u0(i),

if FLAG=1 (13) if FLAG=0 (14)

where MAX is a large positive number (e.g., MAX=20). Equation (13) ensures that the bit-LLR is large enough to indicate high reliability if the DLL frame is successfully decoded. Otherwise, it is not updated according to (14).

D. Complexity Reduction Strategies
In order to reduce the computational complexity, the crosslayer iterative decoder performs termination conditions checking in Step 3). The decoder exits if any of the following conditions is met:
i) The maximum number of iterations is reached. ii) All of the DLL frames are successfully decoded. iii) None of the DLL frames is corrected, i.e. FLAG=0 for
all frames. iv) No new frame is corrected in the current iteration.
The reason for condition iii) is that the bit-LLR would not be updated according to (13) and (14), and so there would not be any improvement during further iterations.

E. Complexity Analysis

Compared with SPA, the amount of computation of the CRC

decoder is neglectable since it only needs XOR-based logical

operations. Equations (13) and (14) show that the bit-LLR

updating module is extremely simple, and so SPA dominates

the total computational amount required. Define the average

number of iterations taken by SPA to decode one LDPC block

by

¯=

#total iterations taken by SPA , #decoded LDPC block

(15)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:27:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2009 proceedings.

TABLE I

PARAMETERS OF CODE-A AND CODE-B (CF. FIGURE 1)

100

Code Name RLDPC (NLDPC, KLDPC) m

comment

code-A

4/9 (16200, 7200) 24 DVB-S2 LDPC

10−1

code-B

2/3

(7200, 4800) 16 custom LDPC

10−2

pure SPA proposed CLID iter=2 proposed CLID iter=3

Frame Error Rate ¯

where one decoded LDPC block contains KLDPC bits. The quantity ¯ is used to evaluate the computational complexity of both the proposed cross-layer iterative decoder and the pure SPA decoder.

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. Simulation Setups
Two irregular LDPC coded systems (code-A and code-B) are simulated in this paper. Their parameters are listed in Table I. The header length h and CRC parity length r are set to 48 and 16, respectively. The CRC length is optimized for Pb = 1 × 10−3, which results in nopt = 287 according to (5). Finally we select n = 300 to ensure that KLDPC is divisible by n. The maximum number of iterations in SPA is set to 50 and the maximum number of iterations for the cross-layer iterative decoder (denoted as iter in the following figures) is set to 3. The CCITT CRC-16 code, whose generator polynomial is 0x1021 (0x11021 with the leading coefficient 1 included), is used for error detection/correction. The degree distribution pair (λ, ρ) of the custom LDPC code in code-B is optimized for the AWGN channel by using the online program [19]:
λ(x) = 0.2295x + 0.3171x2 + 0.0672x5 + 0.0486x6 +0.0266x7 + 0.3110x9
ρ(x) = x10

The PCM is generated via the PEG algorithm [13]. Note that

the designed code rate of the DVB-S2 LDPC code in code-A

is

1 2

,

but

the

real

code

rate

is

4 9

.

The

LDPC

coded

bits

are

modulated by BPSK before being fed into the channel. The

AWGN channel is used during the simulation.

B. Simulation Results and Discussion
The Frame Error Rate (FER) is used for performance evaluation, because the frame error rate more accurately than the bit error rate reflects the bandwidth efficiency according to (2).
Figure 6 shows the FER of code-A over the AWGN channel. Compared with the pure SPA decoder, the proposed CrossLayer Iterative Decoder (CLID) achieves an additional gain of 0.1 dB for most Eb/N0 after at most 2 iterations. The curves also reveal that the performance of CLID saturates after at most 3 iterations.
Figure 7 shows the average number of iterations (defined by (15)) taken by SPA to decode one LDPC block for code-A over the AWGN channel. The curves indicate that the complexity of the CLID is adaptive. The ¯ of CLID is moderate for low Eb/N0, compared with that of pure SPA. Both approach the same level for high Eb/N0.

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

−0.4

−0.3

−0.2

−0.1

0

0.1

Eb/N0, dB

Fig. 6. Frame error rate of code-A over the AWGN channel

90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 −0.4

−0.3

−0.2

−0.1

Eb/N0, dB

pure SPA proposed CLID iter=2 proposed CLID iter=3

0

0.1

Fig. 7. Average number of iterations per decoded LDPC block of code-A over the AWGN channel

Figure 8 presents the FER of code-B over the AWGN channel. It is shown that code-B with pure SPA decoding exhibits a high error floor. However, the error floor is lowered effectively by the CLID after at most 2 iterations and the performance gain is considerable in the high Eb/N0 regime. Figure 9 gives the average number of iterations needed to decode one LDPC block for code-B over the AWGN channel. The computational complexity of the CLID with 2 and 3 iterations is moderate for low Eb/N0 and becomes almost the same as that of the pure SPA.
The numerical results support the theoretical advantages of the proposed cross-layer iterative decoder for irregular coded LDPC systems. The key idea of the CLID is to use the correctly decoded frames as an aid for correcting the remaining erroneous frames by the iterative decoding architecture. This is well done by employing the cross-layer design method. The CLID does not add extra redundancy but exploits the relevant information in the data link layer. Moreover, the reduction of the FER improves the system bandwidth efficiency, and the new decoder can lower the error floor of irregular LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:27:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the WCNC 2009 proceedings.

Frame Error Rate ¯

100

pure SPA

proposed CLID iter=2

10−1

proposed CLID iter=3

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7 3.8 3.9 4 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 Eb/N0, dB

Fig. 8. Frame error rate of code-B over the AWGN channel

pure SPA

proposed CLID iter=2

60

proposed CLID iter=3

50

40

30

20

10 3.8 3.9 4 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4 4.5 4.6 4.7 Eb/N0, dB
Fig. 9. Average numbber of iterations per decoded LDPC block of code-B over the AWGN channel

effectively.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel cross-layer iterative decoder for irregular LDPC coded system is presented and evaluated. The proposed decoder uses the correctly decoded data link layer frames to help in correcting the remaining erroneous frames, thereby obtain better performance. The decoder is implemented by using cross-layer design methods and an iterative decoding architecture. The proposed decoder outperforms the pure sum-product algorithm decoder by a considerable margin at the expense of increasing the decoding complexity moderately in low Eb/N0. Moreover, the error floor of irregular LDPC in the high Eb/N0 regime is lowered effectively. The reduction of the frame error rate results in an improvement of bandwidth efficiency. Considering the above merits, we can use the proposed cross-layer iterative decoder in irregular

LDPC coded wireless systems to improve the overall perfor-
mance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Industrial Key Research &
Development Program of Zhejiang Province, China (Grant no.
2006C21009) and the National Nature and Science Foundation
of China (Grant no. 60872063).
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, January 1962.
[2] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar 1997.
[3] A. Morello and V. Mignone, “DVB-S2: the Second Generation Standard for Satellite Broad-Band Services,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 210–227, 2006.
[4] IEEE, “Draft Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems–Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Specific Requirements– Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications: Amendment 4: Enhancements for Higher Throughput,” IEEE Draft Std P802.11n D3.00, Sep 2007.
[5] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel, “Construction of Irregular LDPC Codes with Low Error Floors,” IEEE International Conference on Communications, vol. 5, pp. 3125–3129, May 2003.
[6] V. Srivastava and M. Motani, “Cross-Layer Design: a Survey and the Road Ahead,” Communications Magazine, IEEE, vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 112–119, Dec. 2005.
[7] G. Castagnoli, J. Ganz, and P. Graber, “Optimum Cycle RedundancyCheck Codes with 16-Bit Redundancy,” Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 111–114, Jan 1990.
[8] S.-Y. Chung, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of Sum-Product Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Using a Gaussian Approximation,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb 2001.
[9] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of CapacityApproaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, 2001.
[10] Y. Kwon, M. Oh, and D. Park, “A New LDPC Decoding Algorithm Aided by Segmented Cyclic Redundancy Checks for Magnetic Recording Channels,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 41, no. 7, pp. 2318–2320, 2005.
[11] X. Yang, D. Yuan, P. Ma, and M. Jiang, “New research on unequal error protection (UEP) property of irregular LDPC codes,” in The first Consumer Communications and Networking Conference, IEEE on, 2004, pp. 361–363.
[12] D. Bertzekas and R. Gallager, Data Networks, 2nd ed. Prentice-Hall, 1992.
[13] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Regular and Irregular Progressive Edge-Growth Tanner Graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[14] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H. Loeliger, “Factor Graphs and the SumProduct Algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, 2001.
[15] S. GOUNAI and T. OHTSUKI, “Lowering Error Floor of Irregular LDPC Codes by CRC and OSD Algorithm,” IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. E89-B, no. 1, pp. 1–10, 2006.
[16] W. Peterson and D. Brown, “Cyclic Codes for Error Detection,” Proceedings of the IRE, vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 228–235, Jan. 1961.
[17] S. Aikawa, Y. Motoyama, and M. Umehira, “Error Correction and Error Detection Techniques for Wireless ATM Systems,” Wireless Networks, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 1–6, 1997.
[18] J. Hall, “Notes on Coding Theory,” 2003. [Online]. Available: http://www.mth.msu.edu/˜jhall/classes/codenotes/Notes.pdf
[19] LTHC, “Efficient Optimization Program for LDPC Codes,” visited at Sep. 2008. [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/research/ldpcopt/

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:27:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

