IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, APRIL 2009

473

Fault Secure Encoder and Decoder for NanoMemory Applications
Helia Naeimi and André DeHon

Abstract—Memory cells have been protected from soft errors for

more than a decade; due to the increase in soft error rate in logic

circuits, the encoder and decoder circuitry around the memory

blocks have become susceptible to soft errors as well and must

also be protected. We introduce a new approach to design fault-se-

cure encoder and decoder circuitry for memory designs. The key

novel contribution of this paper is identifying and defining a new

class of error-correcting codes whose redundancy makes the de-

sign of fault-secure detectors (FSD) particularly simple. We fur-

ther quantify the importance of protecting encoder and decoder

circuitry against transient errors, illustrating a scenario where the

system failure rate (FIT) is dominated by the failure rate of the en-

coder and decoder. We prove that Euclidean Geometry Low-Den-

sity Parity-Check (EG-LDPC) codes have the fault-secure detector

capability. Using some of the smaller EG-LDPC codes, we can tol-
erate bit or nanowire defect rates of 10% and fault rates of 10 18

upsets/device/cycle, achieving a FIT entire memory system and a memory

rate at density

or of

1b0el1o1wbiotn/cemf2orwtihthe

nanowire pitch of 10 nm for memory blocks of 10 Mb or larger.

Larger EG-LDPC codes can achieve even higher reliability and

lower area overhead.

Index Terms—Decoder, encoder, fault tolerant, memory, nanotechnology.

I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
N ANOTECHNOLOGY provides smaller, faster, and lower energy devices which allow more powerful and compact circuitry; however, these benefits come with a cost—the nanoscale devices may be less reliable. Thermal- and shot-noise estimations [8], [12] alone suggest that the transient fault rate of an individual nanoscale device (e.g., transistor or nanowire) may be orders of magnitude higher than today’s devices. As a result, we can expect combinational logic to be susceptible to transient faults in addition to storage cells and communication channels. Therefore, the paradigm of protecting only memory cells and assuming the surrounding circuitries (i.e., encoder and decoder) will never introduce errors is no longer valid.

Manuscript received January 29, 2008; revised July 14, 2008. First published February 27, 2009; current version published March 18, 2009. This research was supported in part by National Science Foundation Grant CCF-0403674 and by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency under ONR Contract N00014-01-0651.
H. Naeimi was with the Computer Science Department, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125 USA. She is now with Intel Research, Santa Clara Laboratory, Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (e-mail: helia.naeimi@intel. com).
A. DeHon is with the Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104 USA (e-mail: andre@acm. org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2008.2009217

In this paper, we introduce a fault-tolerant nanoscale memory architecture which tolerates transient faults both in the storage unit and in the supporting logic (i.e., encoder, decoder (corrector), and detector circuitries).
Particularly, we identify a class of error-correcting codes (ECCs) that guarantees the existence of a simple fault-tolerant detector design. This class satisfies a new, restricted definition for ECCs which guarantees that the ECC codeword has an appropriate redundancy structure such that it can detect multiple errors occurring in both the stored codeword in memory and the surrounding circuitries. We call this type of error-correcting codes, fault-secure detector capable ECCs (FSD-ECC). The parity-check Matrix of an FSD-ECC has a particular structure that the decoder circuit, generated from the parity-check Matrix, is Fault-Secure. The ECCs we identify in this class are close to optimal in rate and distance, suggesting we can achieve this property without sacrificing traditional ECC metrics.
We use the fault-secure detection unit to design a fault-tolerant encoder and corrector by monitoring their outputs. If a detector detects an error in either of these units, that unit must repeat the operation to generate the correct output vector. Using this retry technique, we can correct potential transient errors in the encoder and corrector outputs and provide a fully fault-tolerant memory system.
The novel contributions of this paper include the following: 1) a mathematical definition of ECCs which have simple
FSD which do not requiring the addition of further redundancies in order to achieve the fault-secure property (see Section IV); 2) identification and proof that an existing LDPC code (EGLDPC) has the FSD property (see Section V); 3) a detailed ECC encoder, decoder, and corrector design that can be built out of fault-prone circuits when protected by this fault-secure detector also implemented in fault-prone circuits and guarded with a simple OR gate built out of reliable circuitry (see Section VI). To further show the practical viability of these codes, we work through the engineering design of a nanoscale memory system based on these encoders and decoders including the following: • memory banking strategies and scrubbing (see Section VI-E); • reliability analysis (see Section VII); • unified ECC scheme for both permanent memory bit defects and transient upsets (see Section VIII). This allows us to report the area, performance, and reliability achieved for systems based on these encoders and decoders (see Section IX). We start by reviewing the related work (see Section II) to put this development in context, and we provide

1063-8210/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

474

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, APRIL 2009

an overview of the system architecture for the fault-tolerant fault secure detector delivers protection without requiring ad-

memory system (see Section III) which uses these circuits.

ditional fault-tolerance circuitry.

We first introduced the concept of ECC with fault-secure de-

tector in [19]; then we developed the nanowire-based implementation and memory-system optimization in [20]. In addition

III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW

to combining the results from our earlier papers, this paper describes how to use the single ECC system for both permanent defect and transient fault tolerance. This article also provides a more detailed accounting of net memory bit density.

In this section, we outline our memory system design that can tolerate errors in any part of the system, including the storage unit and encoder and corrector circuits using the fault-secure detector. For a particular ECC used for memory protection, let

be the maximum number of error bits that the code can correct

II. RELATED WORK

and be the maximum number of error bits that it can detect, and in one error combination that strikes the system, let , ,

Traditionally, memory cells were the only circuitry suscep- and be the number of errors in encoder, a memory word,

tible to transient faults, and all the supporting circuitries around and corrector, and let and be the number of errors in

the memory (i.e., encoders and decoders) were assumed to be the two separate detectors monitoring the encoder and corrector

fault-free. As a result most of prior work designs for fault-tol- units. In conventional designs, the system would guarantee error

erant memory systems focused on protecting only the memory correction as long as

and

. In contrast, here

cells. However, as we continue scaling down feature sizes or we guarantee that the system can correct any error combination

use sublithographic devices, the surrounding circuitries of the as long as

,

, and

memory system will also be susceptible to permanent defects . This design is feasible when the following two fundamental

and transient faults [11].

properties are satisfied:

One approach to avoid the reliability problem in the sur- 1) any single error in the encoder or corrector circuitry can at

rounding circuitries is to implement these units with more

most corrupt a single codeword bit (i.e., no single error can

reliable devices (e.g., more reliable CMOS technologies [6],

propagate to multiple codeword bits);

[26]). However, from an area, performance, and power con- 2) there is a fault secure detector that can detect any combi-

sumption point of view it is beneficial to implement encoders

nation of errors in the received codeword along with errors

and decoders with scaled feature size or nanotechnology de-

in the detector circuit. This fault-secure detector can verify

vices. Consequently, it is important to remove the reliability

the correctness of the encoder and corrector operation.

barrier for these logic circuits so they can be implemented with The first property is easily satisfied by preventing logic sharing

scaled feature size or nanotechnology devices.

between the circuits producing each codeword bit or infor-

Almost all of the proposed fault tolerant encoders and de- mation bit in the encoder and the corrector respectively. In

coders so far, use the conventional fault tolerant scheme (e.g., Section IV, we define the requirements for a code to satisfy the

logic replication or concurrent parity prediction) to protect the second property.

encoder and corrector circuitry. That is, they add additional An overview of our proposed reliable memory system is

logic to check the correctness of the circuit calculation. In con- shown in Fig. 1 and is described in the following. The infor-

trast, the technique introduced in this work exploits the existing mation bits are fed into the encoder to encode the information

structure of the ECC to guarantee the fault-secure property of vector, and the fault secure detector of the encoder verifies

the detector unit without adding redundant computations.

the validity of the encoded vector. If the detector detects any

The work presented in [21], is an example of the scheme using error, the encoding operation must be redone to generate the

redundancy to generate fault tolerant encoder. Reference [21] correct codeword. The codeword is then stored in the memory.

develops a fault-secure encoder unit using a concurrent parity- During memory access operation, the stored codewords will be

prediction scheme. Like the general parity-prediction technique, accessed from the memory unit. Codewords are susceptible to

[21] concurrently generates (predicts) the parity-bits of the en- transient faults while they are stored in the memory; therefore

coder outputs (encoded bits) from the encoder inputs (informa- a corrector unit is designed to correct potential errors in the

tion bits). The predicted parity bits are then compared against retrieved codewords. In our design (see Fig. 1) all the memory

the actual parity function of the encoder output (encoded bits) words pass through the corrector and any potential error in

to check the correctness of the encoder unit. The parity pre- the memory words will be corrected. Similar to the encoder

dictor circuit implementation is further optimized for each ECC unit, a fault-secure detector monitors the operation of the

to make a more compact design. For this reason, efficient parity- corrector unit. All the units shown in Fig. 1 are implemented

prediction designs are tailored to a specific code. Simple parity in fault-prone, nanoscale circuitry; the only component which

prediction guarantees single error detection; however, no gen- must be implemented in reliable circuitry are two OR gates that

eralization is given for detecting multiple errors in the detector accumulate the syndrome bits for the detectors (shown in Fig. 3

other than complete replication of the prediction and compar- and described in Section VI-B).

ison units.

Data bits stay in memory for a number of cycles and, during

In contrast, our design detects multiple errors in the encoder this period, each memory bit can be upset by a transient fault

and corrector units. Furthermore, the fault-secure detector and with certain probability. Therefore, transient errors accumulate

checking logic for our FSD-ECC codes can be automatically in the memory words over time. In order to avoid accumulation

generated from the already known parity-check matrix. This of too many errors in any memory word that surpasses the code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAEIMI AND DEHON: FAULT SECURE ENCODER AND DECODER FOR NANOMEMORY APPLICATIONS

475

Fig. 1. Overview of our proposed fault-tolerant memory architecture, with pipelined corrector.

correction capability, the system must perform memory scrubbing. Memory scrubbing is the process of periodically reading memory words from the memory, correcting any potential errors, and writing them back into the memory (e.g., [22]). This feature is shown in the revised system overview in Fig. 10. To perform the periodic scrubbing operation, the normal memory access operation is stopped and the memory performs the scrub operation. In Section VI, we further detail the scrubbing operation and potential optimization to achieve high performance and high reliability. We also explain each of the above units, encoder, corrector, and detector, and memory operations in greater detail in Section VI.
IV. ECCS WITH FAULT SECURE DETECTOR

where is a identity matrix and is a

matrix

that generates the parity-bits. The advantage of using systematic

codes is that there is no need for a decoder circuit to extract the

information bits. The information bits are simply available in

the first bits of any encoded vector.

A code is said to be a cyclic code if for any codeword , all the

cyclic shifts of the codeword are still valid codewords. A code

is cyclic iff the rows of its parity-check matrix and generator

matrix are the cyclic shifts of their first rows.

The minimum distance of an ECC, , is the minimum number

of code bits that are different between any two codewords. The

maximum number of errors that an ECC can detect is

,

and the maximum number that it corrects is

. Any ECC

is represented with a triple

, representing code length,

information bit length, and minimum distance, respectively.

In this section, we present our novel, restricted ECC definition for our fault-secure detector capable codes. Before starting the details of our new definition we briefly review basic linear ECCs.

B. FSD-ECC Definition
The restricted ECC definition which guarantees a FSD-ECC is as follows.
Definition I: Let be an ECC with minimum distance .

is FSD-ECC if it can detect any combination of overall

A. Error-Correcting Code Reviews

or fewer errors in the received codeword and in the detector

Let

be the -bit information vector that

will be encoded into an -bit codeword,

.

For linear codes, the encoding operation essentially performs

the following vector-matrix multiplication:

circuitry.

Theorem I: Let be an ECC, with minimum distance .

is FSD-ECC iff any error vector of weight

, has

syndrome vector of weight at least .

Note: The following proof depends on the fact that any single

error in the detector circuitry can corrupt at most one output (1) (one syndrome bit). This can be easily satisfied for any circuit

where is a

generator matrix. The validity of a received

encoded vector can be checked with the Parity-Check matrix,

which is an

binary matrix named . The checking

or detecting operation is basically summarized as the following

vector-matrix multiplication:

by implementing the circuit in such a way that no logic element is shared among multiple output bits; therefore, any single error in the circuit corrupts at most one output (one syndrome bit).
Proof: The core of a detector circuitry is a multiplier that implements the vector-matrix multiply of the received vector and the parity-check matrix to generate the syndrome vector.

Now if errors strike the received codeword the syndrome (2) weight of the error pattern is at least from the assumption.

The

-bit vector is called the syndrome vector. A syn-

drome vector is zero if is a valid codeword, and nonzero if is

an erroneous codeword. Each code is uniquely specified by its

generator matrix or parity-check matrix.

A code is a systematic code if every codeword consists of the

original -bit information vector followed by

parity bits

[16]. With this definition, the generator matrix of a systematic

code must have the following structure:

Furthermore, the maximum number of tolerable errors in the

whole system is

and errors already exist in the encoded

vector, therefore the maximum number of errors that can strike

in the detector circuitry is

. From the previous note,

these many errors can corrupt at most

syndrome bit,

which in worst case leaves at least one nonzero syndrome bit

and therefore detects the errors.

The difference between FSD-ECC and normal ECC is simply

the demand on syndrome weight. That is, for error vector of

weight

, a normal ECC demands nonzero syndrome

(3) weight while FSD-ECC demands syndrome weight of

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

476

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, APRIL 2009

V. FSD-ECC EXAMPLE: EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY CODES A. Euclidean Geometry Code Review

TABLE I EG-LDPCS AND UPPER AND LOWER BOUNDS ON CODE LENGTH

This section reviews the construction of Euclidean Geometry

codes based on the lines and points of the corresponding fi-

nite geometries [27]. Euclidean Geometry codes are also called

EG-LDPC codes based on the fact that they are low-density

parity-check (LDPC) codes [14]. LDPC codes have a limited

number of 1’s in each row and column of the matrix; this limit

guarantees limited complexity in their associated detectors and

correctors making them fast and light weight [9].

Let be a Euclidean Geometry with points and lines.

is a finite geometry that is shown to have the following

fundamental structural properties:

1) every line consists of points;

2) any two points are connected by exactly one line;

3) every point is intersected by lines;

4) two lines intersect in exactly one point or they are parallel;

i.e., they do not intersect.

Let be a

binary matrix, whose rows and columns

corresponds to lines and points in an Euclidean geometry,

respectively, where

if and only if the th line of

contains the th point of , and

otherwise. A row in

displays the points on a specific line of and has weight

. A column in displays the lines that intersect at a specific

point in and has weight . The rows of are called the

incidence vectors of the lines in , and the columns of are

called the intersecting vectors of the points in . Therefore,

is the incidence matrix of the lines in over the points in

. It is shown in [15] that is a LDPC matrix, and therefore

Now a specific bit in the syndrome vector will be one if and

only if the parity-check sum corresponding to this syndrome

vector has an odd number of error bits present in it. Looking

from the Euclidean geometry perspective, each error bit cor-

responds to a point in the geometry and each bit in the syn-

drome vector corresponds to a line. Consequently, we are in-

terested in obtaining a lower bound on the number of lines that

pass through an odd number of error points. We further lower

bound this quantity by the number of lines that pass through

exactly one of the error points. Based on the definition of the

Euclidean geometry, lines pass through each point; so error

points potentially impact lines. Also at most one line con-

nects two points. Therefore, looking at the error points, there

are at most lines between pairs of error points. Hence, the

number of lines passing through a collection of these points

is lower bounded by

. Out of this number, at most

lines connect two or more points of the error points. Summa-

rizing all this, the number of lines passing through exactly one

error point, which gives us the lower bound on the syndrome

vector weight, is at least

.

From the code properties introduced in Section V-A and

knowing that

, we can derive the following inequality:

the code is an LDPC code.

A special subclass of EG-LDPC codes, type-I 2-D EG-LDPC,

is considered here. It is shown in [15] that type-I 2-D EG-LDPC

have the following parameters for any positive integer :

• information bits,

;

• length,

;

when

The previous inequality says that the weight of the syndrome

vector of a codeword with errors is at least

when

• minimum distance,

;

which is the required condition of Theorem (I). Therefore,

• dimensions of the parity-check matrix,

;

EG-LDPC is FSD-ECC.

• row weight of the parity-check matrix,

;

• column weight of the parity-check matrix,

.

C. Efficiency of EG-LDPC

It is important to note that the rows of are not necessarily

linearly independent, and therefore the number of rows do not

necessarily represents the rank of the matrix. The rank of

is

which makes the code of this matrix

linear code.

Since the matrix is

, the implementation has syndrome

bits instead of . The

, parity-check ma-

trix of an euclidean geometry, can be formed by taking

the incidence vector of a line in and its

cyclic shifts

as rows; therefore this code is a cyclic code.

It is important to compare the rate of the EG-LDPC code with other codes to understand if the interesting properties of low-density and FSD-ECC come at the expense of lower code rates. We compare the code rates of the EG-LDPC codes that we use here with an achievable code rate upper bound (Gilbert-Varshamov bound) and a lower bound (Hamming bound). Table I shows the upper and lower bounds on the code overhead, for each of the used EG-LDPC. The EG-LDPC codes are no larger than the achievable Gilbert bound for the same and value,

B. FSD-ECC Proof for EG-LDPC
In this section, we prove that EG-LDPC codes have the FSD-ECC property.

and they are not much larger than the Hamming bounds. Consequently, we see that we achieve the FSD property without sacrificing code compactness.

Theorem II: Type-I 2-D EG-LDPC codes are FSD-ECC. Proof: Let be an EG-LDPC code with column weight

VI. DESIGN STRUCTURE

and minimum distance . We have to show that any error vector In this section, we provide the design structure of the en-

of weight

corrupting the received encoded vector coder, corrector, and detector units of our proposed fault-tol-

has syndrome vector of weight at least .

erant memory system. We also present the implementation of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAEIMI AND DEHON: FAULT SECURE ENCODER AND DECODER FOR NANOMEMORY APPLICATIONS

477

Fig. 2. Structure of NanoMemory core. Please note that the address decoders are for memory access and are not related to the memory ECC decoders.
these units on a sub-lithographic, nanowire-based substrate. Before going into the design structure details we start with a brief overview of the sub-lithographic memory architecture model.

Fig. 3. Fault-secure detector for (15, 7, 5) EG-LDPC code. All the gates except the last OR gate are implemeneted with fault-prone nanoscale circuitry. The last OR gate is implemented with more reliable lithography technique.
TABLE II DETECTOR, ENCODER, AND CORRECTOR CIRCUIT AREA IN THE
NUMBER OF 2-INPUT GATES

A. NanoMemory Architecture Model

We use the NanoMemory [4], [6] and NanoPLA [5] archi-

tectures to implement the memory core and the supporting

logic, respectively. NanoMemory and NanoPLA are based on

nanowire crossbars [2], [10].

The NanoMemory architecture developed in [4], [6] can

achieve greater than

b/cm density even after including

the lithographic-scale address wires and defects. This design

uses a nanowire crossbar to store memory bits and a limited

number of lithographic scale wires for address and control lines.

Fig. 2 shows a schematic overview of this memory structure.

The fine crossbar shown in the center of the picture stores one

memory bit in each crossbar junction. To be able to write the

value of each bit into a junction, the two nanowires crossing

that junction must be uniquely selected and an adequate voltage

must be applied to them (e.g., [3], [24]). The nanowires can be

uniquely selected through the two address decoders located on

the two sides of the memory core.

The detail of the NanoMemory structure is presented in [4]

and [6]. For our design, we revise the original NanoMemory

structure introduced in [4] and [6]. Instead of using a litho-

graphic-scale interface to read and write into the memory core,

we use a nanowire-based interface. The reason that we can re-

move the lithographic-scale interface is that all the blocks inter-

facing with the memory core (encoder, corrector and detectors)

are implemented with nanowire-based crossbars. So we use a

nanowire-based DEMUX to connect the memory core to the sup-

porting logic blocks. The detail of the DEMUX structure is avail-

able in [17], [18], and [20].

Therefore each bit of the syndrome vector is the product of

with one row of the parity-check matrix. This product is a linear

binary sum over digits of where the corresponding digit in

the matrix row is 1. This binary sum is implemented with an

XOR gate. Fig. 3 shows the detector circuit for the (15, 7, 5)

EG-LDPC code. Since the row weight of the parity-check ma-

trix is , to generate one digit of the syndrome vector we need

a -input XOR gate, or

2-input XOR gates. For the whole

detector, it takes

2-input XOR gates. Table II illustrates

this quantity for some of the smaller EG-LDPC codes. Note that

implementing each syndrome bit with a separate XOR gate satis-

fies the assumption of Theorem I of no logic sharing in detector

circuit implementation.

An error is detected if any of the syndrome bits has a nonzero

value. The final error detection signal is implemented by an OR

function of all the syndrome bits. The output of this -input OR

gate is the error detector signal (see Fig. 3). In order to avoid

a single point of failure, we must implement the OR gate with

a reliable substrate (e.g., in a system with sub-lithographic

nanowire substrate, the OR gate is implemented with reliable

lithographic technology—i.e., lithographic-scaled wire-OR).

This -input wire-OR is much smaller than implementing the

entire

2-input XORs at the lithographic scale. The

area of each detector is computed using the model of NanoPLA

and NanoMemory form [5] and [4] and [6] accounting for all

the supporting lithographic wires and reported in Table III.

Fig. 4 shows the implementation of the detector on a

NanoPLA substrate. The framed block in Fig. 4(b) shows

B. Fault Secure Detector

a -input XOR gate, implementing a

-level XOR tree

in spiral form (see Fig. 4(a)). The solid boxes display the

The core of the detector operation is to generate the syn- restoration planes and the white boxes display the wired-OR

drome vector, which is basically implementing the following planes of NanoPLA architecture model [5], [7]. In Fig. 4, the

vector-matrix multiplication on the received encoded vector signals rotate counter clock-wise, and each round of signal

and parity-check matrix :

generates the XOR functions of one level of the XOR-tree. The

final output then gates a robust lithographic-scale wire. This

(4) lithographic-scale wire generates a wired-OR function of all the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

478

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, APRIL 2009

TABLE III DECOMPOSED AREA PER BIT OF THE DESIGN POINTS SELECTED FOR THE CURVES IN Fig. 14. THE MEMORY SIZE FOR THIS DESIGN IS 10
AREA IS NANOMETERS SQUARED PER BIT

bit. THE UNIT OF

2 Fig. 4. (a) 
-input XOR tree implemented on NanoPLA structure. (b) Detector circuit implemented on NanoPLA: The parameters in the figure are A = n 
, 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 B = 2 P l(
 1), C = P l(2 
 2) + 2 P l(
 1), and D = n=2 C, where P l(x), is the width of a NanoPLA plane with x nanowire, including
the area of the supporting lithographic scale wires.

-input XORs and is the final output of the detector circuit. The XOR gate is the main building block of the encoder and corrector as well.

C. Encoder

An -bit codeword , which encodes a -bit information

vector is generated by multiplying the -bit information

vector with a

bit generator matrix ; i.e.,

.

EG-LDPC codes are not systematic and the information bits Fig. 5. Generator matrix for the (15, 7, 5) EG-LDPC in systematic format; note must be decoded from the encoded vector, which is not desirable the identity matrix in the left columns.

for our fault-tolerant approach due to the further complication

and delay that it adds to the operation. However, these codes are [16] to convert the cyclic generator matrices to systematic gen-

cyclic codes [15]. We used the procedure presented in [15] and erator matrices for all the EG-LDPC codes under consideration.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAEIMI AND DEHON: FAULT SECURE ENCODER AND DECODER FOR NANOMEMORY APPLICATIONS

479

Fig. 6. Structure of an encoder circuit for the (15, 7, 5) EG-LDPC code; i to i are 7-bit information vector. Each of the XOR gates generate one parity bit of the encoded vector. The codeword consists of seven information bits followed by eight parity bits.

Fig. 5 shows the systematic generator matrix to generate (15,

7, 5) EG-LDPC code. The encoded vector consists of informa-

tion bits followed by parity bits, where each parity bit is simply

an inner product of information vector and a column of , from

. Fig. 6 shows the encoder circuit to compute

the parity bits of the (15, 7, 5) EG-LDPC code. In this figure

is the information vector and will be copied to

bits of the encoded vector, , and the rest of encoded

vector, the parity bits, are linear sums (XOR) of the information

bits.

If the building block is two-input gates then the encoder cir- Fig. 7. Serial one-step majority logic corrector structure to correct last bit (bit cuitry takes 22 two-input XOR gates. Table II shows the area of 14th) of 15-bit (15,7,5) EG-LDPC code.

the encoder circuits for each EG-LDPC codes under considera-

tion based on their generator matrices.

Once the XOR functions are known, the encoder structure is

very similar to the detector structure shown in Fig. 4, except it

consists of

XOR gates of varying numbers of inputs. Each

nanowire-based XOR gate has structure similar to the XOR tree

shown in Fig. 4.

A linear sum of the received encoded vector bits can be formed by computing the inner product of the received vector and a row of a parity-check matrix. This sum is called Parity-Check sum. The core of the one-step majority-logic corrector is generating parity-check sums from the appropriate rows of the parity-check matrix. The one-step majority logic

error correction is summarized in the following procedure.

D. Corrector

These steps correct a potential error in one code bit lets say, e.g., .

One-step majority-logic correction is a fast and relatively 1) Generate parity-check sums by computing the inner

compact error-correcting technique [15]. There is a limited

product of the received vector and the appropriate rows of

class of ECCs that are one-step-majority correctable which

parity-check matrix.

include type-I two-dimensional EG-LDPC. In this section, 2) The check sums are fed into a majority gate. The output

we present a brief review of this correcting technique. Then

of the majority gate corrects the bit by inverting the

we show the one-step majority-logic corrector for EG-LDPC

value of if the output of majority gate is “1”.

codes.

The circuit implementing a serial one-step majority logic cor-

1) One-Step Majority-Logic Corrector: One-step majority- rector for (15, 7, 5) EG-LDPC code is shown in Fig. 7. This cir-

logic correction is the procedure that identifies the correct value cuit generates parity-check sums with XOR gates and then

of a each bit in the codeword directly from the received code- computes the majority value of the parity-check sums. Since

word; this is in contrast to the general message-passing error- each parity-check sum is computed using a row of the parity-

correction strategy (e.g., [23]) which may demand multiple iter- check matrix and the row density of EG-LDPC codes are , each

ations of error diagnosis and trial correction. Avoiding iteration XOR gate that computes the linear sum has inputs. The single

makes the correction latency both small and deterministic. This XOR gate on the right of Fig. 7 corrects the code bit using

technique can be implemented serially to provide a compact im- the output of the majority gate. Once the code bit is cor-

plementation or in parallel to minimize correction latency.

rected the codeword is cyclic shifted and code bit is placed

This method consists of two parts: 1) generating a specific at position and will be corrected. The whole codeword can

set of linear sums of the received vector bits and 2) finding the be corrected in rounds.

majority value of the computed linear sums. The majority value If implemented in flat, two-level logic, a majority gate could

indicates the correctness of the code-bit under consideration; if take exponential area. The two-level majority gate is imple-

the majority value is 1, the bit is inverted, otherwise it is kept mented by computing all the

product terms that have

unchanged. The theory behind the one-step majority corrector and the
proof that EG-LDPC codes have this property are available in [15]. Here we overview the structure of such correctors for

ON inputs and one

-input OR-term. For ex-

ample, the majority of 3 inputs , , is computed with product terms and one 3-input OR-terms as follows:

EG-LDPC codes.

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, APRIL 2009

Fig. 8. (a) Four-input sorting network; each vertical line shows a one-input comparator. (b) One comparator structure.

Fig. 10. Partial system overview with serial corrector. Here only the corrector and its detector are shown; these blocks connect to the memory block and the rest of the system shown in Fig. 1.

Fig. 9. Eight-input majority gate using sorting network.

cycles to correct an erroneous codeword. If the fault rate is low, the corrector block is used infrequently; since the common

case is error-free codewords, the latency of the corrector will not

In the next section we presents a novel, compact implementation have a severe impact on the average memory read latency. The

of majority circuits.

serial corrector must be placed off the normal memory read path.

2) Majority Circuit Implementation: Here we present a com- This is shown in Fig. 10. The memory words retrieved from

pact implementation for the majority gate using Sorting Net- the memory unit are checked by detector unit. If the detector

works [13]. The majority gate has application in many other detects an error, the memory word is sent to the corrector unit

error-correcting codes, and this compact implementation can to be corrected, which has the latency of the detector plus the

improve many other applications.

round latency of the corrector.

A majority function of binary digits is simply the median 4) Parallel Corrector: For high error rates [e.g., when

of the digits (where we define the median of an even number of tolerating permanent defects in memory words as well (see

digits as the

smallest digit).

Section VIII)], the corrector is used more frequently and its

To find the median of the inputs, we do the following:

latency can impact the system performance. Therefore we

1) divide the inputs into two halves with size ;

can implement a parallel one-step majority corrector which

2) sort each of the halves;

is essentially copies of the single one-step majority-logic

3) the median is 1 if for

the th element of corrector. Fig. 1 shows a system integration using the parallel

one half and the

th element of the other half corrector. All the memory words are pipelined through the

are both 1.

parallel corrector. This way the corrected memory words

We use binary Sorting Networks [13] to do the sort operation are generated every cycle. The detector in the parallel case

of the second step efficiently. An -input sorting network is the monitors the operation of the corrector, if the output of the

structure that sorts a set of bits, using a 2-bit sorter building corrector is erroneous, the detector signals the corrector to

blocks. Fig. 8(a) shows a 4-input sorting network. Each of the repeat the operation. Note that faults detected in a nominally

vertical lines represents one comparator which compares two corrected memory word arise solely from faults in the detector

bits and assigns the larger one to the top output and the smaller and corrector circuitry and not from faults in the memory

one to the bottom [see Fig. 8(b)]. The four-input sorting net- word. Since detector and corrector circuitry are relatively small

work, has five comparator blocks, where each block consists of compared to the memory system, the failure rate of these units

two two-input gates; overall the four-input sorting network con- is relatively low; e.g., in a memory system that runs at 1 GHz

sists of ten two-input gates in total.

and

, the parallel corrector for a (255, 175, 17)

To check the condition in the third step, we use two-input code should see one upset every 30 hours (calculation is done

AND gates followed by a -input OR gate. Fig. 9 shows the using the reliability equations in Section VII). Therefore, the

circuit implementing the above technique to find the median error detection and repeat process happens infrequently and

value of 8 bits. It has two -input (four-input) sorting net- does not impact the system throughput.

works followed by combinational circuitry, consisting of four Assuming our building blocks are two-input gates, number

two-input AND gates and a four-input OR gate, which can be of -input parity-check sums will require

two-input

implemented with three two-input OR gates. Therefore in total XOR gates. The size of the majority gate is defined by the sorting

an eight-input majority gate implemented with sorting networks network implementation. Table II shows the overall area of a se-

take 27 two-input gates; in contrast, the two-level implementa- rial one-step majority-logic corrector in the number of two-input

tion of this majority gate takes

five-input AND gates gates for the codes under consideration. The parallel implemen-

and one 56-input OR gate.

tation consists of exactly copies of the serial one-step ma-

3) Serial Corrector: As mentioned earlier, the same one-step jority-logic corrector.

majority-logic corrector can be used to correct all the bits of Generating the linear binary sums (XORs) of the one-step ma-

the received codeword of a cyclic code. To correct each code-bit, jority sum is the same as Fig. 4. The majority gate is simply

the received encoded vector is cyclic shifted and fed into to the computed following the structure shown in Fig. 9 using the

XOR gates as shown in Fig. 7. The serial majority corrector takes nanowire-based substrate.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAEIMI AND DEHON: FAULT SECURE ENCODER AND DECODER FOR NANOMEMORY APPLICATIONS

481

Fig. 12. Banked memory organization with cluster size of 2.

Fig. 11. Banked memory organization, with single global corrector.

E. Banked Memory

cluster contains two memory banks. In Section IX, we calculate the appropriate cluster sizes to balance performance and area.

Large memories are conventionally organized as sets of smaller memory blocks called banks. The reason for breaking a large memory into smaller banks is to trade off overall memory density for access speed and reliability. Excessively small bank sizes will incur a large area overhead for memory drivers and receivers. Large memory banks require long rows and columns which results in high capacitance wires that consequently increases the delay. Furthermore long wires are more susceptible

VII. RELIABILITY ANALYSIS
In this section, we analyze the reliability of the system. To measure the system reliability, we estimate the probability that system fails—i.e., the system experiences a greater number of errors in a memory word than the number of errors the error-correcting code can tolerate. With this analysis, we then show the impact of protecting the ECC support logic (see Section VII-B).

to breaks and bridging defects. Therefore excessively large memory banks have high defect rate and low performance. The organization of NanoMemory is not different from the conventional memory organization, except that the overhead per bank is larger due to the scale difference between the size of a memory bit (a single wire crossing) and the support structures (e.g., microscale wires for addressing and bootstrapping). The work presented in [6] provides more detail on memory banks and shows how the banks would be integrated into a complete memory system. The memory system overview shown in Fig. 1 can be generalized to multiple banks as shown in Fig. 11, where similarly the encoder and correctors are protected with fault-secure detectors.
Memory words must be scrubbed frequently to prevent error accumulation. The number of faults that accumulate in the memory is directly related to the scrubbing period. The longer the scrubbing period is, the larger the number of errors that can accumulate in the system. However, scrubbing all memory words serially can take a long time. If the time to serially scrub the memory becomes noticeable compared to the scrubbing period, it can reduce the system performance. To reduce the scrubbing time, we can potentially scrub all the memory banks in parallel. For this, each memory bank requires a separate

A. Analysis
We assume the fault probability of each device at each cycle has i.i.d. and random distribution over the devices of the
memory system. Recall and are the nominal number of errors that occurs in encoder and encoder detector during memory write operation at one instance. Similarly, , , and are the number of errors that occur in a memory word and its corresponding corrector and detector. Let , , and be the size of the circuitry involved in an operation on a single code bit in the encoder, corrector, or detector, respectively. This is the size of the logic cone of a single output of each of the above units. For example, in a detector each logic cone is a -input XOR gate generating a single bit of the syndrome vector (see Section VI-B).
Let a nominal unit have a logic cone size of ( may be one of the values , , ). With worst-case analysis the output of the logic cone fails when any of the devices in the logic cone fails. So when at least one of the devices inside the cone is erroneous, the output of the logic cone, which is a code bit, would be erroneous. Therefore, the probability that a code bit is erroneous in any of the above units is
. Similarly the probability that a memory-bit is erroneous in scrubbing interval of cycles is

corrector and detector unit. It may not be necessary to go to

(6)

the extreme of scrubbing all banks in parallel. Instead, we can

cluster a number of memory banks together and consider a where is the number of devices contained in one memory

corrector and detector unit for each Cluster. Fig. 12 shows a cell. When using 6 T-SRAM cells,

. When using a

memory system with two parallel corrector units. Here each NanoMemory, the memory bit is essentially a single nanowire

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, APRIL 2009

crosspoint. However, since accessing each memory bit requires reading the signal value through a pair of nanowires (see Fig. 2), the correctness of each memory bit depends on the correctness of two nanowires. Therefore, for the NanoMemory design,
. Each unit or a memory-word experience errors among bits of the codeword with the probability

(7)

which is simply a binomial distribution; is the code-length,

is either

or

, and is , , , ,

or .

As explained in Section VI-B, errors in the encoder unit are

detected by its following detector, and are corrected by repeating

the encoding operation to generate a correct encoded vector. The Fig. 13. Impact of protecting logic on system reliability for fault rate equals

detector can detect up to

errors overall in these two units. 10 per bit per cycle (P = 10 ).

Where is the code distance. With worst-case assumptions, the

detector fails to detect the errors if there are more than

errors. Therefore, we define the first reliability condition as

Fig. 13 shows the FIT rate of the system decomposed into the

Cond. I)

contribution from the memory bank and the contribution from the supporting logic. The FIT in the supporting logic is without

which states that the total number of errors in the encoder unit

and the following detector unit must be smaller than the min-

imum distance of the code. The detector of the corrector is

also capable of detecting up to

errors accumulated from

memory unit, corrector unit and the second detector unit. Sim-

ilarly with worst-case assumption, the detector fails to detect

errors when they are more than . Therefore, the second re-

liability condition is defined as

a fault-secure detector (i.e., any error in the supporting logic re-

sults an erroneous output, with worst-case analysis). Obviously

the FIT of the whole system with no logic protection is the sum

of the above two FITs, illustrated with a solid line. This graph

is plotted for a device fault rate of

with a memory

scrubbing interval of 10 minutes. As you can see, for codes with

minimum distance larger than 9, the FIT of the system with

no logic protection is dominated by the FIT of the unprotected

logic. Using codes with greater redundancy will decrease the

Cond. II)

FIT of memory bank; however, since the unprotected logic has a nontrivial FIT rate, increasing the code redundancy without

Furthermore, the corrector can recover a memory-word with up

to

errors from the memory unit. If more

errors are accumulated in a memory word, then the EG-LDPC

codes cannot correct the memory word. Therefore, the third re-

liability condition is formulated as

protecting the logic does not decrease the FIT of the composite system. To achieve the higher reliability the logic must also be protected. The FIT of such system with fault secure logic is illustrated with the dashed line, and as you can see, the FIT of this system follows very closely the FIT of the memory bank. Protecting supporting logic, is essentially done by the fault-se-

Cond. III)

cure detector and the only cost to achieve the logic protection is the cost that we pay for the detectors. Table III shows that

the detector takes a negligible fraction of area compared to the which states that the maximum number of tolerable errors in memory core, encoder, and corrector. Therefore with minimal

each memory word is . Satisfying the three previous condi- area overhead the system reliability can be greatly improved. tions guarantees that the memory system operates with no un-

detectable or uncorrectable errors. We calculated the probability of each of the above conditions employing (7), for all the var- VIII. TOLERATING PERMANENT DEFECT IN MEMORY CELLS

ious EG-LDPC codes. Section IX illustrates the reliability of the system for different
device failure rate . It also presents the best design points for optimizing reliability, area, and throughput.

In this paper, so far we focused on a transient fault-tolerant memory structure. Equally important is to tolerate permanent defects in the memory systems. Since the memory unit has a regular structure, most of the defect tolerant designs are based

B. Impact of Providing Reliability for Supporting Logic

on row and column sparing. This means that we overpopulate the rows and columns based on the expected defect rate so that

It is important to understand the impact of protecting the sup- after removing all the defective rows and columns the memory

porting logic on the system FIT rate. Could the system FIT rate has the desired size. For example, if we want to have a 1 K

be low enough if only memory words were protected? What is 1 K memory, and the junction defect rate is 0.001% which

the potential cost of protecting the supporting logic? We answer results in nanowire defect rate of

,

these questions with the following example.

then, with 2% row and column overpopulation (20 more rows

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAEIMI AND DEHON: FAULT SECURE ENCODER AND DECODER FOR NANOMEMORY APPLICATIONS

483

and columns), the system yields a 1 K 1 K memory core with 99.6% probability

(8)

and the memory yields when both rows and columns yield

which is the product of the two probabilities

and

(9)
So when the defect rate is small (0.001%), even with very small area overhead (2% overpopulation), the system can yield a perfect 1 K 1 K memory core with high probability.
A. ECC for Defect Tolerance
However, with higher defect rates, the column and row sparing can be very costly. For example, a 1% junction defect rate on a nanowire with 1000 junctions implies that, with almost 100% probability, every nanowire in the memory block has at least one defective junction. At this defect rate we cannot afford to discard nanowires with any defective junctions. The work presented in [6] suggests a defect tolerant technique that is more efficient than the column and row sparing. This technique discards nanowires that have more defective junctions than a set threshold. These nanowires will be replaced with spare nanowires. The limited number of defective junctions on the remaining nanowires are tolerated using ECCs.
For the previous example with a junction defect rate of 1%, if we keep nanowires with up to 12 defective junctions, then the system would require only 31% row and column overpopulation to achieve 99% yield. The computation is shown as follows. The probability that a wire is accepted—i.e., has at most 12 defective junction—is
(10)
With only 31% column and row sparing we can get 99% yield

tion capability of the ECC is partitioned between fault tolerance and defect tolerance similar to the approach in [26]. For example, the EG-LDPC code (255, 175, 17) can correct up to eight errors in each memory word. This can be partitioned to tolerate four transient faults and four permanent defect in each code word. With this technique we allow each memory word (code word) to contain up to four defective junctions; with a row width of 1020, this is about 16 defective junctions per row since each row holds four memory words and each memory word tolerates four defects.
This reduces the area overhead compared to solely row and column sparing. The important point is that this area overhead reduction is achieved with almost no extra cost since it uses the structure which already exists for transient fault tolerance—i.e., encoder, corrector, and detector units. The only potential drawback point for this technique is that it increases the effective FIT rate of the memory block relative to the case where we had all 8 errors available to tolerate transient upsets. Therefore to guarantee the desired reliability, codes with larger minimum distance which can tolerate larger numbers of defects and faults must be used. Section IX shows detail results on how the reliability and area overhead costs are balanced.
[25] and [26] present more sophisticated schemes for memory defect tolerance at the cost of reliable, CMOS ECC circuitry and memories to remap or invert blocks. Our scheme minimizes the reliable support needed for the nanoscale memory.
B. Impact on Error Correction Frequency
When we have a limited number of defective junction in memory words, this means that with high probability a memory word has erroneous bits and must be corrected. Therefore, as mentioned in Section III we use a parallel, fully pipelined corrector to prevent throughput loss. The probability that a memory word has a limited number of defects is computed in the following. Remember that the memory words with more than a set threshold are removed. Let the set threshold of the number of defects in each memory word be , and the defect rate be , therefore the memory words have 0 to defective bits. The probability that a memory word is partially defective and requires correction is

(13)

and the final memory yield is

(11) For example for 1% defect rate and tolerating up to four defective bits per memory word, the probability that a 255-bit
memory word contains defective bits, and needs correcting,

is

. Therefore, 91% of the memory

(12) words must be corrected which motivates the use of the parallel

In [6], it is suggested that a reliable lithographic-scale encoder and decoder be used to encode and decode memory bits to tolerate limited defective bits in each row. With the techniques in-

and fully pipelined corrector to prevent high throughput loss.

In the following section, we show the effect of

on area,

throughput, and reliability.

troduced here, the encoder and decoder can be built with faultprone nanowire circuitry as well.

IX. AREA AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND RESULTS

Here we use the same EG-LDPC codes that we use for tran- There are three design aspects that are specifically important

sient faults for tolerating permanent defects. The error correc- when designing fault-tolerant designs: system reliability, area

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, APRIL 2009

overhead, and performance. It is important to see how these

three factors interact and generate various design points. There

are multiple design parameters that determines the balance be-

tween reliability, area, and performance. Among these parame-

ters, those that we keep variable in our simulations are as fol-

lows:

• maximum number of defects which exist per memory word

;

• scrubbing interval ;

• cluster size of memory banks for scrubbing .

For a fixed memory size, bank size, and transient fault rate, we

find the right value for , , and to minimize area while

achieving the desired performance and reliability. First, we re-

view the impact of each of these parameters on area, perfor-

mance, and reliability.

The threshold on the number of defects per memory word effects area, reliability, and performance.
• Increasing reduces the number of spare memory rows

Fig. 14. FIT of EG-LDPC codes for a system with 10 memory bits, memory bank size of 1 Mb, system frequency of 1 GHz, and the defect rate of 1%. The
curve labels are of the form: (n; k; d)D .

(e.g., nanowires) required [6].

• Since

defines where we partition the redundancy

in the error correcting code between defect tolerance

and fault tolerance, larger

means that the code has

weaker residual capability for tolerating transient faults

and therefore has lower system reliability.

• The decrease in reliability which comes from increasing

also increases overhead cost for error correction. For

fixed ECC, when we reduce the number of bits available for

tolerating transient faults, we must scrub more frequently

to prevent error accumulation to tolerate the same transient

fault rate. However scrubbing more frequently can reduce

performance. To reduce the impact on the system perfor-

mance, we may need to increase the parallelism in the scrub-

bing operation by increasing the number of corrector unit,

which in turn increases the overall area overhead.

The scrubbing interval length impacts the system perfor-

mance and the reliability. The longer the scrubbing interval is,

the less reliable the system will be, because more errors can

accumulate in each memory word during longer scrubbing in-

tervals. Equation (6) shows how scrubbing interval impacts the

reliability of each single memory bit. However the shorter the

scrubbing interval is, the lower the throughput will be, because

the system spends more time performing the scrubbing opera-

tion. Below we show how the value of impacts the system

throughput. Assume a memory system has bank size of and

cluster size of . This means that every memory banks share

one corrector and detector to perform the scrubbing operation.

During each scrubbing operation all the

memory words

in each cluster will be read, corrected, and written back into

the memory. With fully pipelined parallel corrector this takes

about

cycles. If the scrubbing interval is cycles then

the system throughput loss is

paper, we set the memory bank size to 1 K 1 K, to achieve

high enough memory density following the detail analysis on

memory bank size provided in [4] and [6]. Here we vary cluster

size to optimize the throughput and area overhead. When the

cluster size is large, the parallel corrector is shared among a

large number of memory words and therefore the area of the

corrector and detector is amortized over a large number of

memory words. However, the throughput loss can increase for

large cluster size (14).

For our simulation, we set the limit of throughput loss to

0.1% and reliability to 1 FIT, and then minimize the area

overhead. Fig. 14 shows the reliability of different codes for dif-

ferent . We also provided the case with

, which

means that the EG-LDPC codes are solely used for transient

faults and the permanent defects are not tolerated with current

ECC. Setting the limit on the throughput and reliability, deter-

mines the values of scrubbing interval and cluster size of

memory banks.

Fig. 14 plots the reliability of the systems that satisfy the

throughput loss limit and reliability limit while achieving the

minimum area overhead. The decomposed area of these design

points is shown in Table III. All of the previous design points are

for memory size of bits. For these calculations we assume

a memory unit with the following parameters: lithographic wire

pitch of 105 nm (45 nm node [1]), nanowire pitch of 10 nm, de-

fect rate of 0.01 per memory junction, and memory bank size of

bits.

Fig. 15 plots the total area per bit for different memory sizes,

when the upset rate is

errors/device/cycle. The area of the

memory banks are computed following the area model provided

in [4]. The area of the supporting units (encoder, corrector, and

detector) is computed using the area model of NanoPLA pro-

Throughput loss

vided in [5]. (14) The codes (255, 175, 17) tolerating 4 defects per memory

words and (63, 37, 9) tolerating 2 defects, are the most compact

If is too small, the throughput loss is large.

designs for EG-LDPC codes. The area overhead of the code in

The impact of memory bank cluster size and memory bank the flat part of the curve is defined by the following multiple

size is also clear on the system throughput: larger memory factors:

bank size and cluster size increase the throughput loss. In this 1) code overhead

;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAEIMI AND DEHON: FAULT SECURE ENCODER AND DECODER FOR NANOMEMORY APPLICATIONS

485

TABLE IV DECOMPOSED AREA PER BIT OF SINGLE CLUSTER (MEMORY SIZE OF 1 Mb).
THE UNIT OF AREA IS NANOMETERS SQUARED PER BIT

use more defective wires and requires less wire sparing. For ex-

ample, compare rows 4 and 6 of Table IV. The area of the Final

Memory when tolerating 4 defect per codeword is almost 1/3

compared to the case when tolerating 2 defect per codeword

(746 versus 2180). The maximum number of defective junctions

Fig. 15. Area of the memory system versus the memory size; the fault rate is

= 10 P

errors/device/cycle, the scrubbing interval and the cluster size is

< < set to values that satisfy FIT 1 and throughput loss 0.001. The curve labels

(n; k; d)D are of the format:

.

that the smaller codes can tolerate per row is larger than the maximum number of defective junctions of the larger codes. For our system with memory rows of 1000 bits, a (15,7,5) code which tolerates 1 defect per memory word essentially tolerates 66 er-

rors per row, and a (255,175,17) which tolerates 4 defective bits,

2) constant area overhead of the memory bank which makes

the per-bit area of the memory decrease for larger memory

size;

3) number of accepted defective junctions per memory word

.

The final area per bit shown in Fig. 15 is the combined result

of the above factors. The code overhead

is smallest for

larger codes; e.g., (255, 175, 17) has the lowest code overhead.

If all the other costs where amortized out over the large number

of memory bits, we would expect that the largest code shows

the lowest area per memory bit. However one important fact that

dominates the code overhead is the limited memory bank size.

We set the memory banks size fixed at 1 Mb, and for a cluster of

memory banks, which can be from 1 to 1000 banks per cluster,

we dedicate one corrector and one detector (see Fig. 12). The

area overhead of these units are amortized over the memory bits

of a cluster and is not reduced as the total memory size increase.

The only costs that are reduced as the total memory size grow is

the global encoder and its detector unit which are shared among

all the memory bits.

Finally, the memory core area per bit plays an important role

in the area overhead of the system. This is greatly influenced by

; the more defective junctions we can tolerate per memory

row, the fewer spare rows the system requires and the smaller

the area will be. This effect is visible when comparing the same

codes [e.g., (255, 175, 17)] for different

(e.g., 2, 3, and

4). The combination of all of these factors results in the curves

shown in Fig. 15.

tolerates 12 errors per row. Therefore, generally, smaller codes could result in lower area because they can tolerate more defective bits in a row. However larger codes have better code rates
. The combination of these factors makes the memory core using code (63, 37, 9) and tolerating 2 defective junctions, the smallest memory cores; note the second row of Table IV with the per-bit area of 719 nm .
The second part is the area overhead due to the corrector and detector per bank cluster. The area of the corrector and detector is amortized over the memory bits of one cluster. Table IV shows the area of the corrector and decoder amortized over 1 Mbitmemory bank (one cluster). For larger clusters (e.g., Table III) these net area per memory bit decrease.
The global encoder and its detector, are shared among the whole memory system. Therefore, the net per bit area of these units decrease as the memory size increases. For large enough memory ( 0.1 Gb) these units have negligible area overhead per bit compared to other parts of the system.
The overall area overhead per memory bit for large enough memories, is dominated mainly by the memory core area; the overhead of this core area is determined both by the defecttolerant overpopulation and rate of the ECC. The cluster corrector and detector also contribute to the area, but their area is a second-order effect compared to the memory core area. The global encoder contributes an even smaller amount to the effective memory bit area. The curves in Fig. 15 plot the total area per bit for a range of memory size, and shows its decrease as the memory size increases.

In order to understand how each part of the memory system contribute to the final area overhead and how they change with

X. SUMMARY

the cluster size, we show decomposed area for a memory system In this paper, we presented a fully fault-tolerant memory

of size 1 Mb, which is essentially one memory bank, in Table IV. system that is capable of tolerating errors not only in the

First of all, let us look at the memory core area per bit. The memory bits but also in the supporting logic including the ECC

memory core area per bit is fixed for the code and pair. It encoder and corrector. We used Euclidean Geometry codes.

does not change with the cluster size or with the total memory We proved that these codes are part of a new subset of ECCs

size increase. For one code, the larger number of defects it can that have FSDs. Using these FSDs we design a fault-tolerant

tolerate the smaller the area of the core will be, because it can encoder and corrector, where the fault-secure detector monitors

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

486

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 17, NO. 4, APRIL 2009

their operation. We also presented a unified approach to tolerate permanent defects and transient faults. This unified approach reduces the area overhead. Without this technique to tolerate errors in the ECC logic, we would required reliable (and consequently lithographic scale) encoders and decoders. Accounting for all the above area overhead factors, all the codes considered here achieve memory density of 20 to 100 Gb/nm , for large enough memory ( 0.1 Gb).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. S. Ghosh for her valuable reference to EG-LDPCs. This material is based upon work supported by the Department of the Navy, Office of Naval Research. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed in this material are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science Foundation or the Office of Naval Research.
REFERENCES
[1] ITRS, “International technology roadmap for semiconductors,” 2005. [Online]. Available: http://www.itrs.net/Links/2005ITRS/ Home2005.htm
[2] Y. Chen, G.-Y. Jung, D. A. A. Ohlberg, X. Li, D. R. Stewart, J. O. Jeppesen, K. A. Nielsen, J. F. Stoddart, and R. S. Williams, “Nanoscale molecular-switch crossbar circuits,” Nanotechnology, vol. 14, pp. 462–468, 2003.
[3] Y. Chen, D. A. A. Ohlberg, X. Li, D. R. Stewart, R. S. Williams, J. O. Jeppesen, K. A. Nielsen, J. F. Stoddart, D. L. Olynick, and E. Anderson, “Nanoscale molecular-switch devices fabricated by imprint lithography,” Appl. Phys. Lett., vol. 82, no. 10, pp. 1610–1612, 2003.
[4] A. DeHon, “Deterministic addressing of nanoscale devices assembled at sublithographic pitches,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., vol. 4, no. 6, pp. 681–687, 2005.
[5] A. DeHon, “Nanowire-based programmable architectures,” ACM J. Emerging Technol. Comput. Syst., vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 109–162, 2005.
[6] A. DeHon, S. C. Goldstein, P. J. Kuekes, and P. Lincoln, “Non-photolithographic nanoscale memory density prospects,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 215–228, Feb. 2005.
[7] A. DeHon and M. J. Wilson, “Nanowire-based sublithographic programmable logic arrays,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Field-Program. Gate Arrays, Feb. 2004, pp. 123–132.
[8] M. Forshaw, R. Stadler, D. Crawley, and K. Nikolic´, “A short review of nanoelectronic architectures,” Nanotechnology, vol. 15, pp. S220–S223, 2004.
[9] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[10] J. E. Green, J. W. Choi, A. Boukai, Y. Bunimovich, E. Johnston-Halperin, E. DeIonno, Y. Luo, B. A. Sheriff, K. Xu, Y. S. Shin, H.-R. Tseng, J. F. Stoddart, and J. R. Heath, “A 160-kilobit molecular electronic memory patterned at 10 bits per square centimeter,” Nature, vol. 445, pp. 414–417, Jan. 25, 2007.
[11] S. Hareland, J. Maiz, M. Alavi, K. Mistry, S. Walsta, and C. Dai, “Impact of CMOS process scaling and SOI on the soft error rates of logic processes,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI, 2001, pp. 73–74.
[12] J. Kim and L. Kish, “Error rate in current-controlled logic processors with shot noise,” Fluctuation Noise Lett., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 83–86, 2004.
[13] D. E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, 2nd ed. Reading, MA: Addison Wesley, 2000.
[14] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Jul. 2001.
[15] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.

[16] R. J. McEliece, The Theory of Information and Coding. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 2002.
[17] H. Naeimi, “A greedy algorithm for tolerating defective crosspoints in nanoPLA design,” M.S. thesis, Dept. Comput. Sci., California Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, Mar. 2005.
[18] H. Naeimi, “Reliable integration of terascale designs with nanoscale devices,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Comput. Sci., California Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, Sep. 2007.
[19] H. Naeimi and A. DeHon, “Fault secure encoder and decoder for memory applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Defect Fault Tolerance VLSI Syst., Sep. 2007, pp. 409–417.
[20] H. Naeimi and A. DeHon, “Fault-tolerant nano-memory with fault secure encoder and decoder,” presented at the Int. Conf. Nano-Netw., Catania, Sicily, Italy, Sep. 2007.
[21] S. J. Piestrak, A. Dandache, and F. Monteiro, “Designing fault-secure parallel encoders for systematic linear error correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Reliab., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 492–500, Jul. 2003.
[22] A. Saleh, J. Serrano, and J. Patel, “Reliability of scrubbing recoverytechniques for memory systems,” IEEE Trans. Reliab., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 114–122, Jan. 1990.
[23] M. Sipser and D. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[24] D. R. Stewart, D. A. A. Ohlberg, P. A. Beck, Y. Chen, R. S. Williams, J. O. Jeppesen, K. A. Nielsen, and J. F. Stoddart, “Molecule-independent electrical switching in pt/organic monolayer/ti devices,” Nanoletters, vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 133–136, 2004.
[25] F. Sun, L. Feng, and T. Zhang, “Run-time data-dependent defect tolerance for hybrid CMOS/nanodevice digital memories,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 217–222, Mar. 2008.
[26] F. Sun and T. Zhang, “Defect and transient fault-tolerant system design for hybrid CMOS/nanodevice digital memories,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 341–351, Jun. 2007.
[27] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.
Helia Naeimi (S’00–M’08) received the Ph.D. and M.Sc. degrees in computer science from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, and the B.Sc. degree in computer engineering from Sharif University of Technology in 2008, 2005, and 2002 respectively.
Since 2008, she has been a Research Scientist with Intel Research, Santa Clara Laboratory, Santa Clara, CA. Her main research interest is designing reliable systems with nanotechnology devices, which includes solving challenging issues such as high soft-error rate, low system yield, and high parameter variations.
André DeHon (S’92–M’96) received the S.B., S.M., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, in 1990, 1993, and 1996, respectively.
Since 2006, he has been an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical and Systems Engineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia. From 1996 to 1999, he co-ran the BRASS Group in the Computer Science Department, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley. From 1999 to 2006, he was an Assistant Professor with the Department of Computer Science, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena. He is broadly interested in how we physically implement computations from substrates, including VLSI and molecular electronics, up through architecture, CAD, and programming models. He places special emphasis on spatial programmable architectures (e.g., FPGAs) and interconnect design and optimization.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:30:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

