Modified Iterative Two-Stage Hybrid Decoding Algorithm for Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes

Hany R. Zeidan, Student Member, IEEE
Department of Electronics and Electrical Communications German University in Cairo (GUC) Cairo, Egypt ahmed_zeidane@yahoo.com
Abstract— This paper considers a modified iterative version of the two-stage hybrid algorithm for decoding low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes. The hybrid-decision scheme is a decoding scheme used that combines two iterative decoding algorithms for decoding LDPC codes. This scheme is suitable for many applications such as audio and video transmission that are sensitive to time. The hybrid-decision scheme mixes between the characteristics of the soft-decision decoding scheme and the harddecision decoding scheme to reduce the computational complexity of the whole decoding algorithm. The modification proposed in this paper is applied to the implementation-efficient reliability ratio weighted bit-flipping (IERRWBF) algorithm which represents hard-decision scheme in the hybrid algorithm. This modification is capable of achieving better performance than that of the hybrid decoding algorithm with reducing the number of iterations required at each SNR and approaching more to the performance of the SPA. This reduction is more observable as the maximum number of iterations assigned for the algorithm increases or as the code length increases with improving the error performance as proved by simulation results.
Keywords- Bit-Flipping (BF) algorithm, hybrid-decision scheme, implementation-efficient reliability ratio weighted bit-flipping (IERRWBF) algorithm, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, sum-product algorithm (SPA)
I. INTRODUCTION
T he family of low-density parity check codes (LDPC) was
first presented by Gallager [1], [2] in the early 1960s. It has been shown that these codes have remarkable performance that approach Shannon limit with iterative decoding. They become strong competitors for turbo codes [3] for error control coding for many communication systems. LDPC have attracted substantial research interest in the field of information theory. LDPC codes have been included in many applications such as DVB-S2, because of its brilliant Bit Error Rate (BER) performance.
LDPC can be decoded using various types of decoding schemes such as hard-decision decoding scheme, soft-decision decoding scheme and hybrid-decision decoding scheme. All these schemes are based on Gallager’s work in his thesis. The most brilliant hard-decision decoding algorithms include: one-

Maha M. Elsabrouty, Member, IEEE
Department of Electronics and Electrical Communications, Arab Academy for Science and Technology (AAST) Cairo, Egypt maha2000_eg@yahoo.com
step majority-logic (MLG) algorithm as in [13], bit flipping (BF) decoding presented by Gallager in his PhD thesis [1], weighted BF (WBF) decoding [6], modified weighted BF (MWBF) decoding [7], Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping (RRWBF) decoding [8] and Implementationefficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping (IERRWBF) [9] decoding.
As for the soft-decision decoding, belief propagation (BP) algorithm or the Sum-Product algorithm (SPA) [4-6] is the most famous algorithm used for decoding LDPC codes that can approach Shannon limit. As it was proved in [6], and [11], the SPA achieves the best performance among all decoding schemes that yield to excellent error correcting capability. However, a drawback for the SPA is the highest decoding complexity among all algorithms.
The last scheme used for decoding LDPC codes is the hybrid-decision decoding scheme as in [12], and [14-17]. The two-stage hybrid iterative decoding algorithm is a famous algorithm in this category. This algorithm which combines two iterative decoding algorithms reduces the computational complexity. If the first stage (soft-decision) decoding fails, the decoding is continued by the second stage (hard-decision) until the received codeword is decoded correctly.
In this paper, we investigate a modification to the two-stage hybrid algorithm by modifying the second stage (harddecision scheme). Using this modification, we enhance the performance of the existing hybrid algorithm and greatly reduces the computational complexity (by decreasing number of iterations required at each SNR) while maintains close performance close to that of the SPA which is considered to have the best error performance.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section (II), presents the background on the bit-flipping algorithms especially the implementation efficient reliability-ratio based weighted bit-flipping (IERRWBF) algorithm. Section (III) presents the existing two-stage hybrid decoding algorithm. In section (IV), the modification proposed to the two-stage decoding algorithm in the hard-decision scheme is presented. Section (V) presents simulation environment and section (VI) presents simulation results compared to the original algorithms. Finally, the conclusion and future work is presented in Section (VII).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o2w4n4lo-a2d5e1d7o-n4/J0u9ne/$2240,2.00026©a2t 0050:927I:E40EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1

II. A BRIEF REVIEW ON BIT-FLIPPING (BF) ALGORITHMS
As for the hard-decision decoding algorithms, it is more practical to use decoding algorithms based on bit-flipping algorithm which was known owing to Gallager in his thesis [1], [2]. This algorithm can be considered one of the most efficient hard-decision algorithms for decoding LDPC codes as they can be easily implemented and can provide relatively large coding gain [6].
There are many versions of the bit-flipping algorithm that have appeared such as weighted bit-flipping (WBF) algorithm [6] and modified weighted bit-flipping (MWBF) [7] algorithm as they are considered a good trade-off between error performance and decoding complexity compared to the SPA. They improve the error performance of the BF decoding with some additional computational complexity. The attractive property of weighted bit-flipping algorithm is that during each iteration, the weighted sum is computed resulting in a significantly lower decoding complexity with respect to that of the SPA. The modified weighted bit-flipping algorithm provides enhanced decoding performance compared to the weighted bit-flipping algorithm. However, this enhanced performance is dependent on the value of optimum α (a real number representing weighting factor where α≥0) that has to be found optimally for each individual SNR for each code). It was recently shown in [8] that reliability ratio based bitflipping (RRWBF) algorithm is the best algorithm among all decoding algorithms based on bit-flipping algorithm, but it is has a drawback of having large decoding time. This leads to the implementation efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping algorithm (IERRWBF) in [9] which helps to reduce decoding time to be suitable for simulation and hardware implementation especially when the maximum iteration number assigned for the algorithm is small. This version of RRWBF provides a way for interpreting its superior performance over the other bit-flipping algorithms. This algorithm is the last modified version of the bit-flipping algorithms that appeared until now [9]. The symbols used in this algorithm are shown in table I.

TABLE I.

SYMBOLS USED IN THE IERRWBF ALGORITHM [9]

H mn
rn zn N (m) M (n)

mth row, nth column of parity-check matrix H.. The size of the H matrix is (n-m)*n
nth bit received from the channel
Hard decision of rn
Set of variable nodes that participate in mth check node
Set of check nodes in which nth variable node participates

The algorithm is divided into four steps: initialization step,

variable node step, decision step and check node step. The

operation done in each step is shown as follows:

Initialization step:

Tm = ∑ | rn |

(1)

n∈ N ( m )

∑ Variable node step:

En

=

1 | rn

|

m∈M

(

(2
n)

s

m

− 1)Tm

(2)

Decision step: Flip the bit zn for n = arg maxn′ En′

N

Check node step:

∑ sm = zm H mn

(3)

n=1

In the last step (check node step) the syndrome vector is calculated for the decoded vector. This syndrome vector is

checked if it is all-zero vector, then the algorithm will be terminated and the received vector is decoded correctly. However, if the syndrome vector is not all-zero vector, then the received vector is not decoded correctly and the algorithm

continues trying to correct error in the received vector until it is corrected or the maximum number of iterations is achieved.

III.

TWO-STAGE HYBRID DECODING ALGORITHM

The hybrid algorithm [12] and [14-17] is a mixture between soft-decision algorithm and hard-decision algorithm. Hybrid iterative decoding can consist of one or two stages. First, decoding is implemented using the SPA with a small fixed number of iterations as the decoding of LDPC code using the SPA converges so fast. If all the parity-check equations are met, the whole decoding process halts and outputs the decoded vector. If decoding of LDPC code decoded by SPA converges slowly, it will take a large number of iterations to achieve the desired performance. At the completion of these iterations, hard decision of decoded symbols is made based on their LLR (log-likelihood ratio). This results in a binary sequence of estimated bits. So, it switches to the second stage and the decoding continues by using the (IERRWBF) algorithm, which is considered to have the best-performance for the remaining number of iteration till the defined maximum number of iterations is achieved.
In [17], the two-stage hybrid decoding algorithm was implemented to decode first using the hard-decision scheme (fast WBF) and then it switches to the second stage and the decoding continues by using the BP algorithm. The advantage of the first type, mentioned first, over the second type, mentioned latter, is that the first type required less number of iterations than the second type to achieve the same performance as decoding first using the standard SPA has the capability to converge fast with small number of iterations and correct most errors in the received codeword, and then the remaining errors can be corrected by the hard-decision decoding scheme. However, in the second type, decoding is begun with the hard-decision scheme then it is followed by the standard SPA. In this case the hard-decision scheme won’t have the capability to correct many errors as using SPA in the beginning, and also it may decode the received codeword incorrectly (in case of low SNR) and thus decoding using SPA will lead to incorrectly decoded message.
As for the complexity, it was proved in [6] that the number of operations required for each decoding iteration is of order
O(J ρ + nγ ) for hard-decision decoding scheme (hard

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:27:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2

iterations), while the number of operations required for each
decoding iteration is of order O(2J ρ + 4nγ ) for soft-
decision decoding scheme, especially SPA, (soft iterations). So, we can assume that each iteration for soft-decision decoding is equivalent approximately to 3 iterations for harddecision decoding assuming that (Jρ) is almost equal to (nγ).
Also, it was shown in [12] that this hybrid decoding scheme has decoding complexity lower than that of the SPA, but higher than that of RRWBF algorithm at the same number of iterations. This algorithm can be controlled to provide very similar performance compared to the SPA with significantly lower complexity than the complexity of the SPA as the number of iterations assigned for the SPA is divided between the hard-decision and soft-decision schemes and thus, calculating the total complexity of the hybrid algorithm will be less than that of the SPA with approaching more to the performance of the SPA.

IV.

MODIFIED IMPLEMENTATION EFFICIENT RELIABILITY

RATIO BASED WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING ALGORITHM

The modified two-stage hybrid decoding algorithm operates with the same concept of the two-stage hybrid decoding algorithm. It also consists of two stages, the first stage for the soft-decision scheme and the second stage for the harddecision scheme. The modification proposed in this paper comes from modifying the hard-decision scheme. The modification is proposed in the hard-decision decoding scheme as it is easier to implement the modification proposed here in terms of hardware implementation. Also, this modification will achieve better performance, as the performance of hard-decision algorithm is limited and any modification will lead to observable improvement in the performance, than modifying the soft-decision scheme, as the performance of soft-decision scheme is excellent and any improvement in the performance will not be much observed in the performance of the hybrid algorithm.
The main drawback of the IERRWBF algorithm, as stated in [9] which the authors failed to solve, was that the algorithm spends a larger percentage of time at the variable node step and the check node step, i.e. the higher the decoding iteration number, the more processing time is spent on the iteration part resulting in less improvement. As the maximum iteration number increases, this results in large delay without any significant improvement in the performance.
The modified version of the IERRWBF decoding algorithm is based on the original scheme described as in [9]. The initialization, decision and variable node steps are the same as the original algorithm. However, the new modification in the proposed algorithm is added in the check node step. Such a modification that is introduced has a great effect on significant reduction of the decoding time.
However, what is required is to try decreasing the number of iterations required for decoding any received vector to a limited number of iterations as extending the algorithm to more number of iterations will not achieve any observable or enhanced performance. This is done by adding an extra

conditional step to examine such situations and control the

iteration loop by deciding whether to continue decoding or

exit the iteration loop and stop the algorithm to have a final

decoded vector.

Since the bit-flipping algorithm is based by flipping only

one bit at certain position after each iteration according to the

error-sum E n computed. The algorithm observes the decoded

vector and computes the syndrome for this decoded vector.

The error-sum E n at any iteration (i) depends on the

syndrome bits sm and the received vector rn according to

equation (2). Since Tm is always constant as it is calculated at

the initialization step only and the received vector rn is also

constant for every received codeword. So, if the syndrome

vector of the decoded vector obtained at any iteration (i-2) is

identical to the syndrome at iteration (i),

then E n = E n−2 resulting that the decoded vector at (i-2)

will be found to be repeated at iteration (i) i.e. The same

vector is obtained after two iterations (this also means that the

same bit in the vector is being flipped twice to obtain the same

vector). If the decoded vector begins to be repeated, i.e. the

syndrome is also repeated, this repetition will continue

endlessly or at least till the maximum predefined number of

iterations is achieved and the syndrome will never be all-zero

vector to get a decoded vector still containing erroneous bits.

N
∑ So, if sm1 = z H m1 m n are the syndrome bits forming n =1

the syndrome vector obtained from iteration (i-2)

N
∑ and sm 2 = z m 2 H m n are the syndrome bits forming the n =1

syndrome vector obtained from iteration (i) where the

difference between these two iterations is 2. Also, if

∑ E n1

=

1 | rn

(2 sm1 | m∈M ( n)

− 1)Tm1

is

the

error

sum for

iteration

∑ (i-2) and

E n2

=

1 | rn

(2sm2 | m2∈M (n)

− 1)Tm2

is the error

sum for iteration (i).Since Tm is always constant and the

received vector is also constant for each codeword,

so Tm1 = Tm2 .

If sm1 = sm2 for 0 ≤ m1 < N − M and 0 ≤ m2 < N − M

where m1 is the syndrome bit for the first iteration, m2 is the syndrome bit for the second one, N is the number of columns

and M is the number of rows of the parity-check matrix H for

a given LDPC code.

So, E n1 = E n2 for 0 ≤ n1 < N , 0 ≤ n2 < N .It results

that zn1 = zn2 and the decoded vector will be found to be

repeated after two iterations. So, the syndrome and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:27:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3

decoded vector obtained are stored in 3-entry register (the register is chosen to be of minimum size equal to 3 precisely because we need at least 2 iterations to get the same decoded vector, starting from initial vector, if the same bit in the decoded vector is being flipped two times to return to the initial state, so the 3 entries corresponds to the initial vector in the register, the vector after first iteration and the vector after second iteration. So, size 3 is the minimum size of register that could be used for storing decoded vector for comparing between the first and the third (last) one) where each new entry is stored at the top of the register and the remaining entries are shifted down to remove the last entry.

V.

SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT

The simulations are performed using an (n,k,v) regular LDPC codes where n stands for the code word length, k is the message length, and v is the number of ‘1’s per column in the parity check matrix H. Random LDPC codes were used as the construction method for generating the parity check matrix H of these regular LDPC codes based on the approach of Mackay [4]. The regular LDPC codes used in the simulation were (250,125,3) and (2000,1000,3) by decoding each LDPC code using the two-stage hybrid algorithm presented in [12] and the modified version of this algorithm proposed in this paper. All codes used are of rate ½. The coded data are then modulated using a BPSK modulation scheme and sent over channel having AWGN and Rayleigh fading (for multipath fading) to simulate the effect of real wireless channel. The simulations were run on MATLAB.

VI.

SIMULATION RESULTS

The figures show the observable trade-off between the decoding processing time (number of iterations required) and the error performance. Fig. 1 shows the performance of decoding (250,125,3) LDPC code with 15 maximum iterations using modified IERRWBF, two-stage hybrid decoding, modified two-stage hybrid decoding and SPA. The 15 maximum iterations assigned for the hybrid algorithms were divided into 3 soft iterations and the 12 hard iterations. It is clear that the performances of the SPA and the modified twostage hybrid have the best performance with almost very small difference between them. The performance of the two-stage hybrid decoding is lower than that of its modified version but the difference is also very small but begins to be observable as the SNR increases. The figure also shows the WER (or the FER) of the modified two-stage hybrid decoding algorithm.
Fig. 2 shows the average number of iterations for the twostage and its modified version obtained at each SNR for 10 and 50 maximum iterations for decoding (250,125,3) regular LDPC where the 10 iterations are divided into 2 soft iterations and 8 hard iterations, and the 50 iterations are divided into 10 soft iterations and 40 hard iterations. It is clear from the figure that the reduction in the number of iterations (the gap between the curves of the hybrid decoding and its modified version) in case of 10 iterations is so small compared with the reduction in the number of iterations in case of 50 iterations. This

reduction in the number of iterations begins to increase more and more as the maximum number of iterations increases. This reduction occurs due to the decoding failures that occur with the iterations as the modified hybrid algorithm requires efficient number of iterations to decode any received codeword and the hybrid algorithm use all the iterations assigned for it as long as the syndrome is not equal to zerovector. In case of comparing the successful decoding iterations, the average for the two algorithms will be the same.
Fig. 3 shows the performance of (2000,1000) regular LDPC when decoded with IERRWBF, modified IERRWBF, hybrid decoding, modified hybrid decoding and SPA for 15 maximum iterations. It is clear that the performance of modified IERRWBF is slightly better than that of the IERRWBF at the same number of iterations. With increasing number of iterations for the hybrid decoding to 25 iterations, the difference in performances between the two curves almost vanishes. This shows that the modified hybrid decoding is better than that of the hybrid decoding in terms of performance and complexity. The same is also applied when comparing the performance the hybrid decoding and that of the modified hybrid decoding at the same maximum number of iterations and when increasing number of iterations for the hybrid decoding algorithm. Also, it is observable that the performance of the modified hybrid decoding is so close to that of the SPA at the same number of iterations.
Table II shows the number of iterations required at each SNR for (250,125,3) and (2000,1000,3) regular LDPC codes for 50 maximum iterations for the hybrid and its modified versions obtained from 0 dB to 5 dB. The 50 iterations are divided into 10 soft iterations and 40 hard iterations. The reduction in the number of iteration required increases as the maximum number of iteration increases or as the code length increases. Also, this reduction is more observable in case of large codeword lengths. This reduction in the number of iterations is clear from the difference between the number of iterations required in case of the hybrid algorithm and that required in case of modified hybrid algorithm.
VII. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
A modified version of the iterative two-stage hybrid algorithm is proposed in this paper. The modification is proposed in the hard-decision scheme (second stage) of the hybrid algorithm by modifying the IERRWBF algorithm. This modification is capable of having slightly better performance than that of the two-stage hybrid algorithm with reducing number of iterations required at each SNR (reducing the computational complexity) for the modified version than that required for the original algorithm. This reduction increases more as the number of iterations assigned for the algorithm increases or as the code length of the code increases.
As for the future work, the performance of the modified two-stage hybrid algorithm can furthermore be applied to irregular low-density parity-check codes to enhance its performance. Also, the performance of the modified two-stage hybrid decoding algorithm can be enhanced to act as that of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:27:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4

the SPA which is considered to have the best performance with reducing its computational complexity.
Figure 1. Error performances of the (250, 125) regular-LDPC code with the modified IERRWBF, two-stage hybrid decoding, modified two-stage hybrid
decoding, and SPA algorithms
Figure 2. Average number of iterations of the two-stage hybrid decoding and modified two-stage hybrid decoding algorithms for decoding (250,125) regular LDPC code with 10 and 50 maximum iterations
Figure 3. BER performance of the (2000,1000) regular LDPC code with the IERRWBF, modified IERRWBF, hybrid decoding, modified hybrid decoding
and SPA algorithm

TABLE II.

NUMBER OF ITERATIONS FOR (250,125,3) CODE AND

(2000,1000,3) CODE USNG THE ORIGINAL AND MODIFIED HYBRID

ALGORITHMS

SNR/LDPC code SNR=0 dB
SNR=1 dB

Original Modified Original

(250,125,3) code 83 75 79

(2000,1000,3) code 90 73 83

Modified

63

59

SNR=2 dB

Original

75

76

Modified

45

43

SNR=3 dB

Original

68

71

Modified

33

20

SNR=4 dB

Original

65

66

Modified

24

11

SNR=5 dB

Original

55

58

Modified

14

5

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Information Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. [3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit
error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Comm., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070. [4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electronics Lett., vol.32, no.18, 1996. [5] David J. C. MacKay “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999. [6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001. [7] Zhang, J., and Fossorier, M.P.C.: ‘A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes’, IEEE. Comm. Lett., 2004, 8, (3), pp. 165–167 [8] Guo, F., and Hanzo, L.: ‘Reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for low-density parity-check codes’, Electronics Lett., 2004, 40, (21), pp. 1356–1358 [9] C.-H. Lee and W. Wolf “Implementation-efficient reliability ratio based weighted bit-flipping decoding for LDPC codes”, Electronics Lett.,23rd June 2005 Vol. 41 No. 13 [10] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity approaching irregular codes,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol.47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001. [11] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 47, pp. 673–680, May 1999. [12] Hany R. Zeidan, Maha M. Elsabrouty “Two-stage hybrid decoding for low-density parity check (LDPC) codes”, Innovations’04, Dubai, UAE, Nov. 18-20, 2007. [13] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004. [14] M. Ardakani, F. R. Kschischang, ”Gear-Shift Decoding”, IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 54, pp. 1235–1242, July 2006. [15] A. H. Banihashemi, A. Nouh, and P. Zarrinkat, “Hybrid (multistage) decoding of low-density parity-check codes”, the 40th Annual Allerton Conf. on Communications, Control and Computing, Illinois, USA, pp. 1437-1438, Oct. 2002. [16] P. Zarrinkhat, A. H. Banihashemi, “Hybrid decoding of low-density parity-check codes”, (ISTC’03), Brest, France pp. 503-506, Sept. 2003. [17] Jian Li, Xian-Da Zhang, “Hybrid Iterative Decoding for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Based on Finite Geometries”, IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 12, NO. 1, pp. 29–31, January 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:27:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5

