Channel Characteristics Dependence of the Performance of Decoding Algorithms for Efficient
Error-Control Codes

M. C. Liberatori, L. Coppolillo, L. J. Arnone, David M. Petruzzi, J. Castiñeira Moreira
Electronics Department, School of Engineering, Mar del Plata University and ICYTE Mar del Plata, Argentina

Patrick G. Farrell
University of Kent Kent, United Kingdom

Abstract—In this paper we study the initialization step of decoding algorithms for efficient error-control coding techniques, and its dependence of the channel characteristics over which transmission is performed. LDPC and Polar codes are selected as efficient error-control codes operating over different channels. Channels under study are the classic Additive White Gaussian noise channel, the Rayleigh fading channel, and the Middleton’s Class A impulsive noise channel. An efficient initialization step is performed when the initialization step uses estimates based on the corresponding probability density function of the channel, evaluated for the two possible transmitted signals of a binary transmission. However, real time evaluation of these estimates can be an operation of high complexity. A low complexity alternative decoding strategy is proposed, based on the estimation of square Euclidean distances propagated using antilog operations, in combination with a simple signal amplitude limiter. This low complexity strategy avoids the need of channel characteristics estimation, and results into a reasonable good BER performance, especially for decoding LDPC codes.
Index terms — Decoding of efficient Error-Control Codes; Non-Gaussian channels
I. INTRODUCTION
Decoding algorithms of efficient error-control techniques have an important influence on the Bit Error Rate (BER) performance of the scheme. For a given error correcting code, the way the corresponding decoding algorithm is implemented makes a difference with respect to the BER performance obtained. Among the best error-correcting codes usually utilized in practice in the standards of many communication systems, Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [1], [2], [ 3] stands out because of their excellent performance. On the other hand, and due to its theoretical and practical relevance, Polar codes [4] appear as a good alternative for error-control coding to be considered and studied.
On the other hand, most of the well-known error-control techniques are usually studied under the presence of Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN). These codes are studied as operating over the well-known AWGN channel, since this channel properly models several communication scenarios present in practice. There are however other real communications environments that are characterized by other

sources of noise, generated by natural causes (e.g., lightning strikes) or by human activities (such as vehicle ignition systems, home appliances, power transmission lines, etc.). These channels are usually characterized by the presence of impulsive noise that it adds to the effect of the classic AWGN. Since their behavior is different from the classic AWGN channel, they are known as non-Gaussian channels. Impulsive noise channels are examples of non-Gaussian channels. Among the different statistical models for impulsive noise, we have adopted one of the most utilized models for this type of noise, the Middleton’s Class-A model [5], which is especially suitable for modeling power line communications (PLC).
Another channel of practical interest is the usually used to model the effect of fading in wireless transmissions, which is known as the Rayleigh fading channel. Rayleigh fading is due to multipath reception. We adopt the Rayleigh channel model used in [7], that is, a slow memory-less frequency nonselective (flat) Rayleigh fading channel with channel state information (CSI). Sometimes we will also describe situations on the same channel when CSI is not available.
A. LDPC and Polar codes over different channels
The dependence in performance of the channel characteristics for efficient error control coding techniques like LDPC and Polar codes is evaluated for the operation of these codes over different channels. We study this problem in the Rayleigh fading channel, and among non-Gaussian channels, we have selected the Middleton’s Class A impulsive noise channel. Attention is paid to the influence of the initialization step of the decoding algorithms for operating over these channels.
B. AWGN channel
The AWGN channel is the most common model for a given communication scenario, that is related to the contribution of a big number of independent sources of noise, that are combined to result into a Gaussian process. This sort of model is characterized by a probability density function (pdf), known as the Gaussian pdf, which is related to a stochastic of random process with zero mean value a dispersion , and pdf equal to:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PG( y )

1

e( y ym )2 ( 2V 2 )

2S V

(1)

Where ym is the mean value, is the dispersion, and is
the variance of the distribution.

C. Rayleigh fading Channel
Rayleigh fading is due to multipath reception. The mobile antenna receives a large number of waves reflected by obstacles. Due to cancellation effects, the received instantaneous power is defined as a random variable.

Since there are multiple propagation paths, an attenuation

factor

can be associated with each one of them. There is

also a time delay . Both parameters are time dependent

because in general terms the channel is time varying.

The transmitted signal can be represented as:

(2)

Where

is the baseband signal and

frequency. The received signal is:

is the carrier (3)

The corresponding baseband received signal is:

(4)

where

is the phase of the n-th path. Thus,

the baseband impulse response is:

(5)

The magnitude is a vector of normalized Rayleigh fading

factors with

and probability density function (pdf):

(6)
The above description corresponds to the Rayleigh fading channel model. A detailed description of this model can be seen in [8].

D. Middleton’s Class-A Impulsive Noise Channel
Middleton’s Class A noise model [5] for non-Gaussian noise channels is frequently used for modeling impulsive noise channels. This impulsive noise is constituted of a background or Gaussian component with variance , and of an impulsive
component with variance . Its probability density function (pdf) is a Poisson weighted sum of Gaussian distributions given by:

Pn( y )

f
¦
m0

Ame A

e

y2

/(

2V

2 m

)

(6)

2S m!/ V m

In the above expressions, is the number of impulses, is the average number of impulses during interference time, and it is called the impulsive index, is the ratio between the background noise power and the impulsive noise power ,
called the Gaussian-to-impulsive noise power ratio (GIR), is the variance of the Poisson random variable , and is the total noise power.

II. EFFICIENT ERROR CONTROL CODES: LDPC AND POLAR
CODES
In this paper the dependence on the channel characteristics of the decoding algorithms of two of the most efficient error control techniques is studied. The codes under study are LDPC and Polar codes. This relationship between the BER performance of the decoding algorithm and the channel characteristics is mainly studied at the initialization step of the corresponding decoding algorithm, which shows a strong dependence with respect to the way this initialization step is performed. It is however known that for Polar codes specially, the construction of the code also depends on the characteristics of the channel for which the code is designed.

A. Brief description of LDPC codes
A brief introduction of the LDPC codes is presented here. LDPC codes belong to a very efficient class of linear block codes. They are constructed by designing a sparse (few nonzero elements scattered among rows and columns) parity check matrix related to a generator matrix , which is used to encode a message vector with elements in a code word
, with elements.

Any word belonging to the code satisfies the syndrome

condition:

. This matrix satisfies certain conditions that

provide optimum performance in terms of BER [1], [2], [3].

Binary LDPC codes operate with message and codeword

vectors defined over the binary field, so that their components

belong to the discrete alphabet {0,1}. Digital transmission has

the best performance if polar format is adopted, i.e. bits are

transmitted by sending signals from the discrete alphabet {-

1,1}. Then, codeword is sent through the channel as a signal

, where it is affected by the presence of noise and by

multipath fading. The aim of the decoding algorithm is to find

the vector , considered as an estimation of the transmitted

vector, able to satisfy the condition

.

The most commonly used decoding algorithm for decoding LDPC codes is the so called Sum-Product (SP) algorithm [1][3], which is implemented in its logarithmic form to reduce complexity, in the form of the so called Logarithmic SumProduct (LogSP) algorithm. Details of this decoding algorithm can be seen in [2]-[3]. This algorithm has an initialization step that is based on statistical measures based on the channel samples.

With

,

, and

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Brief description of Polar codes

Polar codes are linear bock codes of length constructed by forming its generator matrix with

Kronecker power of the root matrix

.

that are rows of the

The input (information-bit) vector is denoted as

,

whereas

represents the output vector to be sent through

the channel. In this notation describes the sequence of bits

, . . . , of the vector . Input bits are encoded by the

Kronecker operation, resulting in the codeword vector . Each

pair of input and output bits, where

,

corresponds to a sub-channel in the channel polarization

scheme. The transmitted word is a serial version of the output

bits.

Polar codes are usually decoded by the procedure called Successive Cancellation (SC) decoding, which operates using a recursive butterfly-based SC decoder [4], [6], to estimate an
error probability for each input bit . As proved in [4], there is a phenomenon called channel polarization, which for a large enough N means that some of the N sub-channels estimate bits with error probability close to zero, whereas other sub-channels estimate bits with error probability close to 0.5; that is, some sub-channels become very reliable, whereas others become highly noisy. As indicated by Arikan in [4], we can take advantage of this phenomenon, and devise an error controlcoding technique, known as Polar coding, by selecting the most reliable sub-channels to transmit K input information bits, and by setting the remaining N-K input bits to a known value, typically equal to 0. These bits are usually known as the frozen bits.

The selection of the best channels is done by determining the Bhattacharyya coefficients [4], which are a measure of the transformation of the sub-channels to be noise-free or completely noisy.

III. INITIALIZATION ALTERNATIVES OF DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR LDPC AND POLAR CODES
As described in the previous section, LDPC codes are usually decoded using the SP algorithm that in practice is implemented in its logarithmic form as the LogSP decoding algorithm. In the case of Polar codes, the SC decoding algorithm is the most commonly used decoding algorithm and it is implemented in its logarithmic form [6]. A third option to use for both codes is the Euclidean metric based algorithm that performs estimate propagation with antilog (AL) operations described in [9]. This last decoding algorithm does neither require the knowledge of the channel characteristics in its initialization step, nor the estimate of the signal to noise ratio at the channel.
For both LDPC and Polar codes, decoding algorithms start with an initialization step. There are different alternatives for initializing the decoding algorithms under study for the decoding of both LDPC and Polar codes:
a) Initialization with statistical values corresponding to the Gaussian Channel, independently of the channel over which

the code operates. In this case estimation of the value of the noise dispersion σ is required.
b) Initialization with statistical values corresponding to the channel over which the code operates. (In this case statistics based on the Rayleigh fading channel pdf or on the Middleton’s Class A impulsive Noise channel pdf, expressions (5) and (6) and (7) respectively, have to be determined). This is suggested in [7] for LDPC codes over the Rayleigh fading channel. We extend this procedure to the decoding of Polar codes over the Rayleigh fading channel with Channel Side Information (CSI). It has been also used in [10] for LDPC codes over PLC channels. We extend its application to the decoding of Polar codes over the same channel.
c) Initialization with square Euclidean distances and internal operation of the decoding algorithm using the AL operation. In this case neither the estimation of the value of the noise dispersion nor the estimation of the channel parameters, are required.
In the case of the Rayleigh fading channel initialization estimations require from the knowledge of the value of the noise dispersion and of CSI, to determine the vector , which is the vector of coefficients that represents the fading effect over each received sample.
In the case of the Middleton’s Class A impulsive noise channel, initialization estimations require from the knowledge or estimation of the background noise power and the impulsive noise power , and from the channel parameter . These estimations allows us to determine the variance of the Poisson random variable , , and the parameter , both needed for finally using expressions (12.a) and (12.b) for a proper determination of the statistical initialization value for this option. Real time measurements of the above described quantities could however be quite difficult to implement in practice, and on the other hand expressions (12.a) and (12.b) could be related to a rather complex implementation.
Assuming the transmission of coded binary information
c (c1 c2 ! cj ! cn ) in normalized polar format with signals of amplitudes r1 , and for a received vector y ( y1 y2 ! y j ! yn ) , where the transmitted
symbol 1 is represented by the signal +1, and the transmitted symbol 0 is represented by the signal -1, initialization estimates are calculated as:
AWGN channel:
(8.a)
(8.b)
For decoding algorithms operating using Log Likelihood Ratios (LLR) the initialization values for this channel are:
(9)
Estimates depend on the knowledge of the channel noise variance . This initialization can be used for channels like the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Rayleigh fading channel and the Middleton’s Class A impulsive noise channel when the pdf of the corresponding channel cannot be calculated.
Rayleigh fading channel [6]:
(10)
Where α is an equalizer vector that comes from the perfect estimation of the fading on the channel under the condition known as CSI [6].
For decoding algorithms operating using LLR values the initialization values for this channel are:
(11)
Middleton’s Class A impulsive noise channel [9]:
(12.a)

level limiter operates over the channel samples by applying the following rule:
(15)
The input of the decoder is now the value that the limiter generates, then the decoder operates by implementing its own initialization step, by applying the corresponding expressions selected among (8) to (14), depending on the channel and code that are utilized.
We will apply a signal amplitude limiter especially in the case of non-Gaussian noise channels, because as it will be seen in next sections, this sort of noise produce strong BER performance degradation over the operation of LDPC, and especially over Polar codes. The degradation effect can be mitigated by simply limiting the input amplitude level.

(12.b)
For decoding algorithms operating using LLR values the initialization values for this channel are:

¦ ln

§ ¨¨©

f m0

Ame A 2S m!/ V

m

e(

y 1

)2

/

(

2V

2 m

)

· ¸¹¸

(13)

¦ 

ln

§ ¨¨©

f m0

Ame A 2S m!/ V

m

e(

y

1

)2

/

(

2V

2 m

)

· ¹¸¸

In the case of Euclidean metric based algorithms decoding for every channel is performed with the following simple expressions (which assume transmitted signals in polar format ±1):
(14)

IV. SIMPLIFIED ALTERNATIVE DECODING OF EFFICIENT ERROR-CONTROL CODES USING THE SAL-SD ALGORITHM WITH
A SIMPLE SIGNAL AMPLITUDE LIMITER
The use of a signal level limiter placed at the front-end of the SC decoder for LDPC codes is proposed in [10], to mitigate the degradation caused in non-Gaussian noise. The input block is proposed in that paper, but the value of the limiting amplitude is not clearly described.

The signal level limiter is simply a non-linear function in

the time domain that limits the amplitude of the input signal to

be in a determined amplitude range

. It is applied as the

first block of the block diagram decoder to conform the

sampled values obtained from the channel, which in the case of

the simplified antilog-soft distance (SAL-SD) decoding

algorithm is directly a scaled value of the channel sample that

is input to the corresponding decoder under study. The signal

V. SIMULATION RESULTS
Figure 1 shows simulation results obtained for a (1024, 512) LDPC code operating over the Rayleigh fading channel. This code is decoded using different decoding algorithms and initialization procedures, a LogSP decoder with classic Gaussian initialization (Case denoted as LogSP), and a simplified soft Euclidean distance metric AL algorithm, denoted as SAL-SD with initialization as in (14). These two decoders can be utilized when CSI is not available. The same code over the same channel is then simulated assuming the ideal circumstance of being in CSI condition, which allows us to apply the initialization described by (10) and (11), in cases denoted as LogSP_CSI Init and SAL_SD_CSI Init.

In the case of the Rayleigh fading channel, classic

(Gaussian) initialization corresponds to the case when CSI is

not available. If decoding is performed using the initialization

that applies the CSI, the performance is highly improved with

respect to the decoding when CSI is not known. SAL_SD

decoding performance is the same as the LogSP decoding

performance when initialization is done under the classic

Gaussian initialization, and it is better than the LogSP decoder

when it is used with an amplitude signal limiter. This last

decoding technique is a good alternative for the Non-CSI

condition initialization due to its reduced complexity. LogSP

and SAL-SD decoders are studied for a value of the signal

amplitude limiter

.

Figure 2 shows simulation results obtained for a (1024, 512) Polar code operating over the Rayleigh fading channel. The code is simulated when CSI is or is not available.

In Fig. 2, SC denotes the classic algorithm for decoding

Polar codes with Gaussian initialization, SAL-SC is its

Euclidean soft distance metric version, and both algorithms are

applied with a signal amplitude limiter

, and without

signal amplitude limiting. SC Rayleigh init denotes the SC

decoder initialized with CSI.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. BER performance of different alternative decoders for a (1024, 512) LDPC code over the Rayleigh fading channel.

Fig. 2. BER performance of different alternative decoders for a (1024, 512) Polar code over the Rayleigh fading channel.

Figure 3 shows simulation results obtained for (1024, 512)

LDPC code operating over a Middleton’s Class A impulsive

noise channel with parameters

,

and

.

LogSP and SAL-SP decoders are studied for a value of the

signal amplitude limiter

. The channel dependent

initialization algorithm is denoted as LogSP Class A pdf LLR

Init.

It is noted in this case that the SAL-SP algorithm with a

signal amplitude limiter

has a BER performance that

is better than the algorithm initialized with estimates of the pdf

of the channel. This is obtained with a much less complexity

implementation.

Figures 4 shows simulation results obtained for a (1024,

512) Polar code operating over a Middleton’s Class A

impulsive noise channel with parameters

,

and

. SC and SAL-SC decoding algorithms are studied for a

value of the signal amplitude limiter

, and without

signal amplitude limiting. The channel dependent initialization

algorithm is denoted as SC LLR Class A pdf Init.

As seen in Fig. 3, the proposed SAL-SD decoder for LDPC

codes using a signal amplitude limiter

shows the best

performance among the studied alternatives.

Figure 2 however shows that the best alternative in the case of the decoding of Polar codes is a classic LogSP decoder that is initialized using statistics of the corresponding channel for a classic LogSP decoder, in this case, values determined using the pdf of this channel, expressed in (1) and (2).

As mentioned previously, a proper calculation of these estimates requires to determining several parameters of the
channel, including the background noise power and the
impulsive noise power , which should be measured independently form the total noise present at the channel, and the channel parameter . These are quantities needed for determining the variance of the Poisson random variable ,
, and the parameter , required in expressions (12.a) and (12.b) for implementing the statistical initialization for this option. Another issue is the complexity of the implementation in electronic devices of expressions (12).

Fig. 3. BER performance of different alternative decoders for a (1024, 512) LDPC code over the Middleton’s Class A impulsive noise channel.
Fig. 4. BER performance of different alternative decoders for a (1024, 512) Polar code over the Middleton’s Class A impulsive noise channel.
VI. CONCLUSIONS In general terms, the best BER performance of LDPC and Polar codes under study is given for the initialization that takes into account the characteristics of the given channel, by determining those initialization values by using the corresponding pdf of the channel. However, in many cases this can be difficult to implement, and involves high complexity implementation of the corresponding decoders and of the channel estimators. An alternative and low complexity decoder is the Euclidean distance metric AL based decoder, implemented together with a simple signal amplitude limiter. This decoder has the same performance as the classic (Gaussian) initialization, but it does not require the knowledge of the channel parameter . On the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

other hand, it becomes the best alternative when CSI is not available.
The strong dependence of the initialization step in the case of Polar codes over this sort of channels can be as a result of the inherent error propagation that happens in the decoding using the SC decoder under very noisy conditions, which can be strongly incremented in the presence of impulsive noise.
In this sense, and by paying the complexity cost of the iterative decoding for LDPC codes, in comparison to on way decoding using the SC algorithm for Polar codes, LDPC codes over impulsive noise channels seem to be more robust than Polar codes.
In a first glance it seems to very difficult to be able to properly determine estimates using (12.a) and (12.b) since channel parameters to be obtained can be very difficult to estimate in practice. Similar difficulties can rise also in the case of the Rayleigh fading channel for operating with CSI. The alternative of the use of the SAL-SD decoding algorithm for LDPC codes or the SAL-SC decoding algorithm in the case of decoding of Polar codes, combined with a simple signal amplitude limiter, can be a non-optimal, but easily implemented option in practice.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. MIT Press, 1963. [2] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal. “Near Shannon limit performance of
low density parity check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 33, pp. 457458, 1997. [3] D.J.C. MacKay, “Good Error-Correcting Codes based on Very Sparse Matrices,” IEEE Trans Information Theory, Vol. IT-45, pp. 399-431, 1999. [4] E. Arikan, “Channel Polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, pp. 3051-3073, 2009. [5] D. Middleton, “Statistical-physical models of electromagnetic interference,” IEEE Trans. on Electromagnetic Compatibility, vol. 3, EMC-19, pp. 106-127, 1977. [6] C. Leroux, A. Raymond, G. Sarkis and W. Gross, “’A Semi-Parallel Successive-Cancellation decoder for Polar codes,” IEEE Trans. on Sig. Proc., vol. 61, no. 2, Jan 2013. [7] R. Yazdani and M. Ardakani, “Linear LLR Approximation for Iterative Decoding on Wireless Channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 57, No. 11, pp. 3278-3287, November 2009. [8] D. Tse and P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of Wireless Communication, Cambridge University Press, 2005. [9] P.G. Farrell, L.J. Arnone and J. Castiñeira Moreira, “Euclidean distance soft-input soft-output decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” IET Commun., Vol. 5, Iss. 16, pp. 2364–2370, 2011. [10] H. Nakagawa, D. Umehara, S. Denno, and Y. Morihiro, “Decoding for Low Density Parity Check Codes over Impulsive Noise Channels,” International Symposium on Power Line Communications and Its Applications, ISPLC 2005, pp. 85-89, 2005. [11] M. Johnston, B.S. Sharif, C.C. Tsimenidis, and L. Chen, “Sum-Product Algorithm Utilizing Soft Distances on Additive Impulsive Noise Channels”, IEEE Trans. on Comm., Vol. 61, (6), pp. 2113-2115, 2013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:58:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

