IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 64, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2017

1057

Low-Power LDPC-CC Decoding Architecture Based on the Integration of Memory Banks
Injae Yoo, Student Member, IEEE, and In-Cheol Park, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This brief proposes a low-power low-density parity check convolutional code (LDPC-CC) decoder that is fully compatible with the IEEE 1901 standard. The proposed architecture merges multiple memory banks into one to make it consume much less power than the conventional architecture. Memory operations conducted by all the unit processors are synchronized in the proposed decoder to merge the memory and avoid any possible data hazard. The data hazard happens when a unit processor tries to read a log-likelihood ratio before a different processor updates it, degrading the errorcorrecting performance. Memory-access patterns appearing in a memory-based LDPC-CC decoder are formulated to determine the size of a sliding window adequate for decoding. Experimental results show that the decoding architecture employing the merged memory and the proper window size reduces the power consumption by up to 40% compared to the conventional architecture that employs multiple memory banks.
Index Terms—IEEE 1901, layered decoding, low power, lowdensity parity check convolutional codes (LDPC-CC), low-density parity check convolutional codes decoders.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE LOW-DENSITY parity check block code (LDPC-BC), invented by Gallager [1] in early 1960s, has widely been applied to wireless communication systems and solid-state drives due to its powerful error-correcting capability [2], [3]. On the other hand, the convolutional counterpart of the LDPC-BC, which is called the LDPC convolutional code (LDPC-CC), was first proposed in 1999 [4]. The LDPC-CC is known to be suitable for streaming video and packet-switching network applications, since it can encode the data stream continuously irrespective of the length. In addition, the encoding and decoding complexities can be significantly smaller than those of an LDPC-BC, because the maximum distance between a pair of LDPC-CC code bits in a parity-check relation, which is limited to the constraint, is usually much shorter than the code length of an LDPC-BC. Due to these benefits, the LDPC-CC is adopted in the IEEE 1901 standard as an optional error-correction method [5].
A number of memory-based LDPC-CC decoders have recently been presented in [6]–[8]. For example, a quasicyclic
Manuscript received September 21, 2016; revised November 11, 2016; accepted December 6, 2016. Date of publication December 12, 2016; date of current version August 25, 2017. This work was supported by the Center for Integrated Smart Sensors funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning as Global Frontier Project under Grant CISS-2011-0031860. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor F. C. M. Lau.
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, South Korea (e-mail: ijyoo.ics@gmail.com; icpark@kaist.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2016.2638472

LDPC-CC decoder with extremely high throughput is implemented with a fully pipelined structure, but requires enormous memory [7]. On the other hand, a multirate LDPC-CC decoder compatible with the IEEE 1901 standard is presented in [8]. Note that most of the previous architectures have used multiple separate memory banks for constituent unit processors [6], [8]. It is well known that multiple memory banks consume a lot more power than an integrated memory of which capacity is the same as the total capacity of the memory banks.
In this brief, a low-power LDPC-CC decoding architecture is proposed for the IEEE 1901 standard, which saves a large amount of power by merging multiple memory banks into one. Memory-access operations of all the unit processors must be synchronized to merge memory banks. The synchronization may degrade the error-correcting performance due to data hazards that may happen when a unit processor reads a log-likelihood ratio (LLR) before another processor updates it. Therefore, memory-access patterns in a memorybased LDPC-CC decoder are formulated to formally define data hazards, and a proper sliding-window size adequate for LDPC-CC decoding is determined to make it possible to merge memory banks without inducing any data hazard. The proposed decoder employing the merged memory is implemented in 65-nm CMOS technology, which reduces the power consumption by up to 40% compared to the conventional decoder.
II. CONVENTIONAL MEMORY-BASED LDPC-CC DECODERS
The conventional decoding architecture has been implemented based on two common methods to accelerate the convergence speed of LDPC-CC decoding, i.e., on-demand variable-node activation (OVA) scheduling [9], [10] and layered decoding [11]. Though the two methods are both effective in reducing the number of decoding iterations without degrading the error-correcting performance, the layered decoding in general requires less memory than the OVA scheduling in hardware implementation. Based on the layered decoding, therefore, we will explain the conventional memory-based LDPC-CC decoding architecture.
The conventional memory-based decoder consists of a number of unit processors and many memory banks storing a posteriori probabilities (APPs) and check-to-variable (C2V) messages as depicted in Fig. 1 [8]. The overall operation of the decoder is briefly explained based on the bipartite graph shown in Fig. 2. Decoding a rate-(b-1)/b (M, J, K) LDPC-CC for I iterations, where M is the encoding-memory depth, J is the number of check nodes (CNs) connected to a variable node (VN), and K is the number of VNs connected to a CN, needs I unit processors, each of which deals with a separate sliding window. Note that b, J, and K in Fig. 2 are 2, 3, and 6, respectively. In addition, a sliding window denoted as

1549-7747 c 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1058

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 64, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2017
TABLE I LDPC-CCS SPECIFIED IN THE IEEE 1901 STANDARD

Fig. 1. Conventional memory-based LDPC-CC decoding architecture.
Fig. 2. Bipartite graph of a rate-1/2 (M, 3, 6) LDPC-CC.
a dotted rectangle in Fig. 2 includes at least M + 1 CNs and b × (M + 1) VNs.
The layered decoding algorithm processes CNs one after another, and for a CN it updates K APPs of the neighbor VNs connected to the CN. In the example depicted in Fig. 2, therefore, the APPs of six neighbor VNs of the rightmost CN in a window must be updated to slide the window right for a CN. Note that the corresponding nodes are marked with “1” in Fig. 2. Unit processors update APPs in three steps. First, variable-to-check (V2C) messages are calculated by subtracting old C2V messages from old APPs, which are obtained from the C2V and APP memories, respectively. Second, new C2V messages are calculated using the V2C messages. Finally, APPs are computed by adding the new C2V messages and the V2C messages. The new APPs and C2V messages must be written into the APP and C2V memories, respectively.
Since the layered decoding proceeds in the order of CNs, all the C2V messages corresponding to a CN can be combined into one and stored in an entry of the C2V memory. In processing a CN, therefore, a unit processor attempts two accesses, a read and a write, to the C2V memory, and K read and K write accesses to the APP memory. Since I unit processors are working in parallel, the APP memory is implemented by employing I ×b banks of dual-port SRAM to cope with the necessary bandwidth [8]. On the other hand, the C2V memory is realized with I-1 banks. As a result, the processing of a CN takes K/b clock cycles in a unit processor. For more details of the LDPC-CC and memory-based decoding architecture, please refer to [4] and [8].
III. MEMORY-ACCESS PATTERNS IN MEMORY-BASED LDPC-CC DECODERS
Based on the conventional memory-based LDPC-CC decoding architecture illustrated in Fig. 1, we will formulate memory-access patterns. As the access patterns of the C2V memory are rather straightforward, we will concentrate on the APP memory. In addition, this brief focuses on the LDPCCCs specified in the IEEE 1901 standard. The standard defines time-varying periodic LDPC-CCs for four different rates [5]. The parameters of the codes are summarized in Table I. Note that all the codes have the same period, that is, T = 3.

A. Formulation of Memory Addresses

For an APP-memory bank, the read and write addresses can be defined independently because it has two access ports. Let us define some notations to be used hereinafter: t is the present clock cycle, i is the index of the ith unit processor, and S is the size of a sliding-window and also represents the depth of an SRAM bank.
For the codes in the IEEE 1901 standard, K/b is always three as summarized in Table I, which implies that the ith unit processor must wait for i × 3S clock cycles before starting the decoding. Therefore, the reading time of the ith processor is

tR = t − (i × 3S)

(1)

and the writing time is

tW = t − td − (i × 3S)

(2)

where td is the processing latency of the processor. Since processing a CN takes three clock cycles, the indexes of CNs being processed are kR = [tR/3] and kW = [tW/3] for reading and writing, respectively. Finally, the read address to an
APP-memory bank is

AR = kR − ckR%3(tR%3) %S

(3)

and the write address is

AW = kW − ckW%3(tW%3) %S.

(4)

Note that cx(y) is an offset depending on the code structure, where x indicates the xth parity-check polynomial, and y rep-

resents the yth VN set among K/b neighbor VN sets of the

CN being processed. Since the period of the codes is 3 in the

standard, x is kR%3 or kW%3. As K/b is 3 in the standard, y is tR%3 or tW%3.

B. Analysis of Memory-Access Patterns

Merging I × b banks of APP memory into b banks, where each bank is I times wider in width, necessitates two conditions. First, all memory accesses attempted by I unit processors should be synchronized. If the size of a sliding window is divisible by 3, the condition is satisfied from the following theorem.
Theorem 1: If S is divisible by 3, all the memory accesses of I unit processors are synchronized.
Proof: The read and write addresses of the ith processor must be the same as those of the (i + 1)th one. In other words, the read addresses are required to be

kR − ckR%3(tR%3) %S = kR2 − ckR2%3(tR2%3) %S (5)
where the left side is the read address of the ith processor and the right side with subscript R2 is that of the (i + 1)th processor. Therefore, kR = [tR/3], where tR is defined in (1), and kR2 = [tR2/3], where tR2 = t − ((i + 1) × 3S). From the definitions of tR and tR2, tR%3 = tR2%3. Hence, (5) becomes

kR − ckR%3(q) %S = kR2 − ckR2%3(q) %S

(6)

where q = tR%3 = tR2%3. Since kR%S = kR2%S, (6) is true if

ckR%3(q)%S = ckR2%3(q)%S.

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YOO AND PARK: LOW-POWER LDPC-CC DECODING ARCHITECTURE BASED ON INTEGRATION OF MEMORY BANKS

1059

If S is divisible by 3, kR%3 = kR2%3, which ensures that (7) is always true. For write addresses, the same result can be easily
deduced if the processing latencies of all the unit processors
are equal to each other.
Second, data hazards must be avoided in addition to the
first condition. An APP value read from the memory is used by either the ith processor or the (i + 1)th processor. More precisely, the APP is used by the (i + 1)th processor when the
cx(y) offset is 0. Note that one of the three possible values of c0(y) is always 0, and this property also applies to c1(y) and c2(y). Therefore, a data hazard occurs when the (i + 1)th processor reads an APP value before the ith processor updates it, which happens if t ≤ t and

kR2%S = kW − ckW%3(tW%3) %S

(8)

where kR2 = [tR2/3], tR2 = t − ((i + 1) × 3S), kW = [tW/3], and tW = t − td − (i × 3S). The following theorem is useful
in determining the minimum sliding-window size that avoids

the data hazard.

Theorem 2: There is no data hazard if S > M + (td + 2)/3.
Proof: Let us assume that the left side of (8), kR2%S, is an integer d. Then kR2 = eS + d and t = 3kR2 + f + (i + 1) × 3S, where e is also an integer, and f = {0, 1, 2}. On the other

hand, since the right side of (8) is d, kW can be expressed as kW = gS+d +ckW%3(tW%3), where g is an integer. Therefore, t = 3kW + h + td + i × 3S, where h = {0, 1, 2}. Finally, the
condition for no data hazard is

t>t

3kR2 + f + (i + 1) × 3S > 3kW + h + td + i × 3S

3(eS + d) + f + (i + 1) × 3S > 3 gS + d + ckW%3(tW%3)

+ h + td + i × 3S

(3e − 3g + 3)S > 3ckW%3(tW%3) + td + h − f

S

>

ckW%3(tW%3)

+

td

+ 3

2.

(9)

Since the maximum value of cx(y) is equal to the depth M of the encoding memory, the sliding-window size must be larger than M + (td + 2)/3 to avoid any data hazards.
In short, if we make the sliding-window size divisible by 3 and larger than M + (td + 2)/3, I × b APP-memory banks can be merged to b banks that are I times wider. On the other hand, no data hazard occurs in the C2V memory, since the (i + 1)th processor reads an entry of the C2V memory always after the ith processor writes it. As a result, if memory-access operations of all unit processors are synchronized, multiple C2V memory banks that have been separately implemented in conventional decoders can be merged into one memory.
Though this brief focuses on the codes specified in the IEEE 1901 standard, the same approach can be applied to other LDPC-CC decoders to reduce power consumption. For other decoders, however, different constraints on the sliding-window size may be derived to merge memory banks.

IV. PROPOSED DECODER ARCHITECTURE WITH INTEGRATED MEMORY
In this section, a low-power LDPC-CC decoding architecture is presented based on the merged memory described in the previous section. The proposed decoder implements the layered decoding method based on the normalized minsum (NMS) algorithm [12], and is fully compatible with the IEEE 1901 standard. To support ten decoding iterations, the proposed decoder consists of ten unit processors that

Fig. 3. Unit processor of the proposed low-power LDPC-CC decoder.
Fig. 4. (a) Two component units and (b) tree-based searching module finding the first two minima among seven inputs.
are concatenated serially. All the unit processors except the last one have the same structure, and the last processor has a hard-decision block additionally to produce final decoding results.
The unit processor consists of three pipeline stages as depicted in Fig. 3, where a thick gray bar separates two sequential stages. The first stage calculates new V2C messages by subtracting old C2V messages from old APPs. By virtue of the NMS algorithm, the old C2V messages resulted from the previous iteration can be reproduced from a 30-bit C2V vector read from the C2V memory. The vector consists of two magnitudes corresponding to the first and second minima of the old V2C messages, the index of the first minimum, and the sign values of the old C2V messages.
The unit processor is designed grounded on 5-parallel architecture in order to support a code-rate of 4/5, which is the maximum code rate of the IEEE 1901 standard. To increase the operating frequency, four of five newly calculated V2C messages are presorted in the first stage, which is achieved by using two CMP2 units that determine the larger and smaller values as depicted in Fig. 4(a).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1060

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 64, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2017

Fig. 5. Interconnection between the unit processors and the integrated APP Fig. 6. Interconnection between the unit processors and the integrated C2V

memory banks.

memory.

The second stage finds two minimum magnitudes among the newly computed V2C messages. When the code rate is 4/5, processing a CN needs to find the first and second minimum magnitudes out of 15 V2C messages. As computing 15 V2C messages takes three clock cycles in the five parallel architecture, the two minima are found incrementally to reduce the processing latency. The incremental searching module, which corresponds to the rectangle in the second stage of Fig. 3, has seven inputs to deal with five V2C messages and two minimum candidates. In Fig. 3, the first minimum candidate is denoted as Min1 and the second one as Min2.
The conventional tree-based architecture that finds the first two minima from seven inputs can be easily deduced by referring to [13] and [14]. As illustrated in Fig. 4(b), the search architecture can be simplified on the fact that Min1 is always not greater than Min2. The proposed architecture consists of two parts: 1) a 4-input part finding two minima of four V2C messages and 2) the other 3-input part finding two minima from a V2C message and two minimum candidates. The data-path of the 3-input part is reduced to two comparator stages, as Min1 is not greater than Min2, whereas the 4-input part that is exactly the same as the conventional one consists of three stages. To take advantage of the difference, the upper comparison stage of the 4-input part, which is called a presorting stage, is moved to the first pipeline stage. Since the critical path of the unit processor is in the searching module, this modification plays an important role in increasing the operating frequency.
There are five multiplexers connected to the inputs in Fig. 4(b), where three inputs are V2C messages and the rest two inputs are the minimum candidates. Since a code associated with a code rate lower than 4/5 requires a less number of V2C messages in processing a CN, three multiplexers are used each to select a constant maximum instead of a V2C message. The other multiplexers connected to the minimum candidates select constant maximum values in the first cycle because there is no minimum candidate at the moment.
In the last pipeline stage, the magnitudes of the final two minima are reduced according to the NMS algorithm, and the index of the minimal magnitude V2C message is obtained in the index calculator. A new C2V vector is formed by using the reduced magnitudes and the index, and stored into the C2V memory. Note that for the sake of simplicity the datapath dealing with sign bits is not illustrated in Fig. 3. Finally, APPs are updated by adding the new C2V messages and the V2C messages latched in the pipeline registers, and written into the APP memory.
To merge the APP and C2V memory banks, the slidingwindow size is deliberately determined by considering Theorems 1 and 2. Theorem 2 says that the sliding-window

size must be larger than M+(td +2)/3. Since the proposed unit processor takes three clock cycles and the maximum encodermemory depth of the target LDPC-CCs is 226, the minimum sliding-window size is 228. As the minimum size is divisible by 3, it also accords with Theorem 1. If the APP is expressed in an 8-bit binary representation, there are I ×5 banks in the conventional APP memory, where each bank is a dual-port SRAM of S × 8 bits. In the proposed decoder, on the other hand, the APP memory has I banks each of which width is I times wider as depicted in Fig. 5. In addition, the conventional architecture implements the C2V memory by employing I-1 SRAM banks of S × 30 bits each. Since all memory accesses attempted by I unit processors are synchronized in the proposed decoder, the I-1 C2V memory banks can be merged to a memory of S × (I − 1) × 30 bits as shown in Fig. 6. Note that the C2V memory is realized with a single-port SRAM, as only a pair of read and write accesses are required every three clock cycles.
As depicted in Fig. 3, each unit processor deals with at most five APP inputs and outputs. Fig. 5 illustrates how the unit processors and the APP memory banks are interconnected. To cope with the maximum code rate, 4/5, there are five APP memory banks in the proposed decoding architecture. If the code rate is less than 4/5, some memory banks can be disabled to mitigate power consumption. Since I memory banks required in the conventional architecture are merged to a single bank, I APPs produced by I unit processors are first concatenated and stored in the memory. An I× 8-bit word read from the memory is decomposed into I APPs and delivered to I unit processors. The multiplexers shown in Fig. 5 shift right an I× 8-bit word sometimes, implying that the extrinsic information made by the ith processor is transferred to the (i + 1)th one. Note that the 0th processor takes the channel LLRs instead of the extrinsic information.
Meanwhile, a 30-bit C2V vector produced by the ith processor is always read by the (i + 1)th one, which makes the interconnection between the processors and the merged C2V memory simpler than that of the APP memory banks as depicted in Fig. 6. I-1 C2V vectors are concatenated and stored in an entry of the C2V memory as a whole. A (I − 1)× 30-bit word read from the memory is taken into I-1 vector pieces each of which is fed to a processor. Note that the 0th processor takes a constant zero instead of a C2V vector.
V. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
The proposed LDPC-CC decoder is designed in a 65-nm CMOS process using design compiler of synopsys for logic synthesis and IC compiler of synopsys for place and route, and realized with 87.5k equivalent gates and 152.8k bits of memory. The implementation characteristics are summarized

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YOO AND PARK: LOW-POWER LDPC-CC DECODING ARCHITECTURE BASED ON INTEGRATION OF MEMORY BANKS

1061

TABLE II CHARACTERISTICS OF THE PROPOSED LDPC-CC DECODER

Table IV compares the proposed LDPC-CC decoder with previous designs. Note that only the results of 1/2-rate codes are included due to the lack of space. The proposed work shows the better energy efficiency compared to the previous memory-based designs, [6] and [8].

TABLE III POWER CONSUMPTION OF LDPC-CC DECODERS
TABLE IV COMPARISON OF LDPC-CC DECODER IMPLEMENTATIONS1

VI. CONCLUSION
This brief has presented a low-power LDPC-CC decoder that is fully compatible with the IEEE 1901 standard. The conventional decoding architecture has employed separate memory banks, while the proposed decoder merges the memory banks into one in order to reduce power consumed in accessing memories. For this, memory-access patterns occurring in the decoder are formulated to find the conditions necessary to merge. Based on the analysis of memory-access patterns, a proper sliding-window size of LDPC-CC decoding is determined, which enables the memory banks to be integrated without inducing any data hazard. To investigate the effectiveness, the proposed decoding architecture with the merged memory and the conventional one with separate memory banks were both designed and implemented in a 65-nm CMOS process. Compared to the conventional decoder, the proposed decoder mitigates the power consumption by up to 40%.

in Table II along with a layout image of the proposed decoder. Since the proposed decoder operating at 375.9 MHz takes three clock cycles to process a CN and supports the maximum code rate of 4/5, the maximum data rate is 501.2 Mb/s, 375.9/3 × 4, which meets the data-rate requirement of the IEEE 1901 standard.
To estimate the amount of power saved by merging the memory banks, the conventional decoding architecture that has separate memory banks is also designed in the same process. The total capacity of the separate SRAM banks is equal to the capacity of the merged SRAM. Table III shows the power consumed in the conventional and the proposed LDPC-CC decoders. The power is estimated by power compiler of synopsys, and switching activities obtained by conducting prelayout simulations are considered to make the estimation realistic. Note that Table III represents the power consumption of a whole decoder including logic circuitry and memory, not of the memory only. As the merged SRAM consumes much less power than the separate SRAM banks, even though their total capacities are equal to each other, the power consumption is dramatically reduced by up to 40%. In addition, the conventional architecture operating at the same speed as the proposed one is implemented with 82.4k equivalent gates. The complexity is slightly smaller than that of the proposed one, because separate SRAM banks have more relaxed timing constraints than the merged one.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] K. Zhao, J. Li, J. Ma, R. Micheloni, and T. Zhang, “Overclocking NAND flash memory I/O link in LDPC-based SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 61, no. 11, pp. 885–889, Nov. 2014.
[3] Y. Hu et al., “A dominating error region strategy for improving the bitflipping LDPC decoder of SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 578–582, Jun. 2015.
[4] A. Jimenez-Feltstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[5] IEEE Standard for Broadband Over Power Line Networks: Medium Access Control and Physical Layer Specifications, IEEE Standard 1901-2010, Sep. 2010.
[6] T. Brandon et al., “A compact 1.1-Gb/s encoder and a memory-based 600-Mb/s decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1017–1029, May 2009.
[7] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, F. C. M. Lau, Y. Zhao, and W. M. Tam, “A 2.0 Gb/s throughput decoder for QC-LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 1857–1869, Jul. 2013.
[8] Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, D. Wu, C. Zhou, and X. Zeng, “An efficient multirate LDPC-CC decoder with a layered decoding algorithm for the IEEE 1901 standard,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 992–996, Dec. 2014.
[9] A. E. Pusane, M. Lentmaier, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, “Reduced complexity decoding strategies for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, USA, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 490.
[10] A. E. Pusane et al., “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
[11] D. Chang et al., “LDPC convolutional codes using layered decoding algorithm for high speed coherent optical transmission,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf. Expo., Mar. 2012, pp. 1–3.
[12] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[13] C.-L. Wey, M.-D. Shieh, and S.-Y. Lin, “Algorithms of finding the first two minimum values and their hardware implementation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3430–3437, Dec. 2008.
[14] Y. Lee, B. Kim, J. Jung, and I.-C. Park, “Low-complexity tree architecture for finding the first two minima,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 61–64, Jan. 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:59:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

