IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2017

1905

Lower Bounds on the Size of Smallest Elementary and Non-Elementary Trapping Sets in Variable-Regular LDPC Codes
Yoones Hashemi and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Trapping sets are known to be the main cause for the error floor of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. They are often classified by their size a and the number of unsatisfied check nodes b in their subgraph. Trapping sets can be partitioned into two categories of elementary and non-elementary, where the first category are those whose subgraph only contains degree-1 and degree-2 check nodes. Empirical results have shown that often the most harmful trapping sets are elementary. In this letter, we derive a lower bound on the size of the smallest non-elementary trapping sets for a given b in variable-regular LDPC codes. The derived lower bound demonstrates that the size of the smallest possible non-elementary trapping set is, in general, larger than that of an elementary trapping set with the same b value. This provides a theoretical justification as to why non-elementary trapping sets are often not among the most harmful trapping sets.
Index Terms— Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, error floor, elementary trapping set (ETS), leafless elementary trapping set (LETS), non-elementary trapping set (NETS).
I. INTRODUCTION
I T IS well-known that the error-floor performance of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes is related to the presence of certain problematic graphical structures in the Tanner graph of the code, commonly referred to as trapping sets (TS). Consider an LDPC code with a Tanner graph G, and denote the set of variable nodes and the set of check nodes in G, by V and C, respectively. We call an LDPC code variableregular if all the variable nodes in G have the same degree dv. A subset S of V is called an (a, b) trapping set, if |S| = a, and if the number of odd-degree (unsatisfied) check nodes in the subgraph G(S) induced by S in G is b. Such a TS is said to belong to the class of (a, b) trapping sets. An elementary trapping set (ETS) is a trapping set for which all the check nodes in G(S) have degree 1 or 2. Experimental results show that among TSs, the most harmful ones are elementary, see, e.g., [1], and the references therein. To simplify the representation of ETSs, similar to [1], [2], we use an alternate graph representation of ETSs, called normal graph. The normal graph of an ETS S is obtained from G(S) by removing all the check nodes of degree-1 and their incident edges, and by replacing all the degree-2 check nodes and their two incident edges by a single edge. Following the same terminology as in [2], we call an ETS S leafless (LETS), if its normal graph is leafless, i.e., if each variable node in G(S) is connected
Manuscript received February 4, 2017; revised April 12, 2017; accepted May 20, 2017. Date of publication May 29, 2017; date of current version September 8, 2017. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was J. Li. (Corresponding author: Amir H. Banihashemi.)
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2017.2707553

to at least two satisfied check nodes. Otherwise, the set S is called an ETS with leaf (ETSL). Leafless ETSs are recognized as the main culprit in the error-floor of variable-regular LDPC codes [2]. A non-elementary trapping set (NETS) is a trapping set which is not elementary. Trapping sets are thus partitioned into three categories of LETS, ETSL and NETS.
While reported experimental results show that the vast majority of harmful trapping sets are elementary, to the best of our knowledge, no theoretical result is available to justify such results. It is, however, well-known that smaller trapping sets are often more harmful. This is due to the fact that, in the error-floor region, where the probability of channel errors is very low, the chances of the decoder being trapped in a TS decreases rapidly with the increase in the size of the TS. In this letter, we derive a lower bound on the size of the smallest possible NETSs with a given b in variable-regular LDPC codes, and demonstrate that this lower bound is larger (in some cases, significantly) compared to the smallest size of ETSs with the same b value. This provides a theoretical justification for why NETSs are, in general, less harmful than their ETS counterparts.
II. LOWER BOUNDS ON THE SIZE OF SMALLEST TSs
The following result applies to all TSs. Lemma 1: In a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable degree dv, (i) if dv is odd, then there does not exist any (a, b) TS with odd a and even b, or with even a and odd b; and (ii) if dv is even, then there does not exist any (a, b) TS with odd b.
Proof: We only prove the first part of Claim (i ). The proofs of the second part of Claim (i ) and Claim (ii ) are similar. We note that the number of edges in the subgraph G(S) of the trapping set S under consideration is adv. For the case where dv and a are both odd numbers, the number of edges in G(S) will be an odd number. Now, counting the number of edges incident to the check nodes of G(S), we note that the contribution of satisfied check nodes is always an even number. If the number of unsatisfied check nodes b is even, then the contribution of unsatisfied check nodes will also be an even number, implying that the number of edges incident to check nodes is an even number. This is a contradiction.
The presence of a degree-k check node in the induced subgraph G(S) of a trapping set S of a variable-regular Tanner graph G is studied in the following theorem.
Theorem 1: Consider a variable-regular Tanner graph G with variable degree dv and girth1 g. A lower bound on the size a of an (a, b) trapping set in G, whose induced subgraph
1The girth of a Tanner graph G is defined as the length of the shortest cycle(s) in G.

1558-2558 © 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1906

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2017

Fig. 1. A tree-like expansion of a TS rooted at a check node of degree k.

contains a check node of degree k (≥ 2) is given in (1), as

shown at the bottom of this page, where b = b − (k mod 2),

T = k(dv − 1) − b , and b is assumed to satisfy b < k(dv − 1) + (k mod 2). (Notation mod is for modulo

operation.)

Proof: To prove the result, we consider the tree-like

expansion of the induced subgraph of the TS starting from

the degree-k check node c as the root with g/2 layers (depth

g/2 − 1). Fig. 1 shows such an expansion. (Variable nodes,

satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes are represented by circles,

empty and full squares, respectively.) Since we are interested

in a TS with minimum size, we consider a case where the

degree of all the other check nodes in the subgraph is either

2 or 1, depending on whether they are satisfied or unsatisfied,

respectively. In this tree, node c, in layer one (L1), is connected

to k variable nodes, in layer two (L2), and each variable node in L2 is connected to dv − 1 check nodes in L3. To minimize

the size of the TS, we assume that all the remaining b

unsatisfied check nodes are in this layer. (If k is odd, node c

itself is unsatisfied, and b = b − 1. Otherwise, b = b.)

Therefore, there are T degree-2 check nodes, and T degree-dv

variable nodes in L3 and L4, respectively. For the rest of the

variable layers, number of variable nodes at layer L2i+2 is dv − 1 times the number of variable nodes at layer L2i , for i = 2, 3, . . . , g/4 − 1 .

To satisfy the constraint of having a Tanner graph with

girth g, all the variable and check nodes in the first g/2 layers

of the tree should be distinct. Based on the construction of the

tree, it is easy to see that at layer L2i+2, 1 ≤ i ≤ g/4 − 1 ,

of the tree, we have T (dv − 1)i−1 variable nodes, for a total

g/4−2

of k +

T (dv − 1)i , in the first g/2 layers.

i =0

For even values of g/2, the tree will end at variable nodes

in the last layer, Lg/2, and thus the lower bound of (1) follows.

For odd values of g/2, the tree will end at check nodes in

g/4−2

layer Lg/2. So far, there are k +

T (dv − 1)i distinct

i =0
variable nodes in the tree (subgraph), and (T (dv − 1) g/4−1 )

distinct check nodes in the last layer, Lg/2. To complete the subgraph of the TS, at least L1 = (T (dv − 1) g/4−1 )/dv

Fig. 2. A tree with 5 layers rooted at a degree-3 check node within the induced subgraph of a NETS in a variable-regular graph with dv = 4 and g = 10.
variable nodes are needed in layer Lg/2+1 to be connected to the check nodes in layer Lg/2. On the other hand, in the tree, there are k sub-trees, each starting from one variable node at L2. One can easily see that to avoid having cycles shorter than g in the subgraph, any new variable node at Lg/2+1 can only be connected to the check nodes of each such sub-tree at most once (see, Fig. 2). Therefore, at Lg/2+1, we need, at least, as many variable nodes as check nodes of each sub-tree at Lg/2. To derive the lower bound, we need to minimize the maximum number of such check nodes in each sub-tree. Therefore, all the b unsatisfied check nodes at L3 should be allocated to the k sub-trees as equally as possible (either exactly in equal numbers if b is divisible by k, or with the difference of at most one between the subtrees, otherwise). This results in the maximum of L2 = (dv − 1 − b /k )(dv − 1) g/4−1 ) check nodes in each subtree at Lg/2, which is also equal to a lower bound on the minimum number of variable nodes needed at Lg/2+1. Therefore, at least max{L1, L2} variable nodes are needed to complete the subgraph.
Note that if b = k(dv − 1) + (k mod 2), then T = 0, and the lower bounds provided in (1) are both equal to k and still valid.
Remark 1: Based on Lemma 1, the bound provided in (1) can sometimes be improved by one. For example, based on Theorem 1, the size of smallest possible (a, 2) TS containing a degree-3 check node, in variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6 is 5. However, based on Lemma 1, no (5, 2) TS can exist in a variable-regular graph with dv = 3. The lower bound in this case is thus improved by one to 6.
Corollary 1: Theorem 1 with k = 2 provides a lower bound on the size of the smallest possible ETSs.
We note that the bound of Corollary 1 applies to both LETSs and ETSLs. This bound however, can often be improved, for each category of LETSs and ETSLs, based on the results provided in [2] and [3], respectively. In particular, LETSs for variable-regular LDPC codes were fully characterized in [2]. One can thus use the characterization algorithm of [2] to obtain

⎧

⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨k + T

g/4−2
(dv − 1)i ,

for g/2 even,

a ≥ ⎪⎩⎪⎪⎪⎪k + T

i =0 g/4−2
(dv − 1)i + max { (T (dv − 1) g/4−1 )/dv , (dv − 1 −

b /k )(dv − 1) g/4−1 },

for g/2 odd,

(1)

i =0

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: LOWER BOUNDS ON THE SIZE OF SMALLEST ELEMENTARY AND NETS

1907

Fig. 3. ETSLs in (a) (4, 6) class and (b) (5, 3) class in variable-regular graphs with dv = 3.

the size of the smallest (a, b) LETS structure for any value of b in a variable-regular Tanner graph with a given variable-
degree dv and girth g. ETSL structures, on the other hand, can be partitioned into two categories [3]: (i ) ETSLs that contain at least one LETS sub-structure, denoted by ETSL1, and (ii ) those that do not contain any LETS sub-structure, denoted by ETSL2. Examples of ETSL1 and ETSL2 structures, along with their normal graphs, are shown in Figs. 3 (a) and (b),
respectively. ETSL1 structures are obtained from their largest LETS substructure by successively appending single variable
nodes, through a single connection, to the unsatisfied check
nodes of the LETS structure and its subsequent children [3]. We thus have the following result.
Proposition 1: If for a given b (b > dv − 2), the size of the smallest ETSL1 in variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv is a∗, then there must exist either a LETS structure or an ETSL1 structure in the (a∗ − 1, b = b − dv + 2) class. In either case, the value a∗ − 1 is the size of the smallest TS (in the corresponding category of LETS or ETSL1) in all the classes with the number of unsatisfied check nodes equal to b .
Proposition 1 allows us to find the minimum size of (a, b) ETSL1 structures for a given value of b, using similar results obtained for LETS structures based on the characterization algorithm of [2]. We also note that since any ETSL1 structure has at least one leaf (in its normal graph), it must have at least dv − 1 unsatisfied check nodes, thus the following remark.
Remark 2: In variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv, there does not exist any (a, b) ETSL1 structure with b < dv − 1.
It was shown in [3] that ETSL2 structures contain no cycles, and are thus trees. All ETSL2 structures for variable-regular graphs are thus in (a, a(dv − 2) + 2) classes, depending on their size a. The following result is then easy to prove.
Proposition 2: In a variable-regular graph with variable degree dv, there does not exist any (a, b) ETSL2 structure with b < dv. For b ≥ dv, the size of ETSL2 structures is limited to only a = (b − 2)/(dv − 2) (this is only if a is a positive integer and the conditions of Lemma 1 are satisfied).
The results of [2] and [3], used here to find the minimum sizes of LETS and ETSL structures, rely heavily on
the normal graph representation of ETSs and the one-to-
one correspondence that exists between the Tanner graph and normal graph representations for LETSs. Such results do not
extend to NETSs. NETS structures have at least one check node with degree 3 or larger in their subgraph. We thus have
the following corollary of Theorem 1. Corollary 2: Theorem 1 with k = 3 (k = 4) provides a
lower bound on the size of the smallest possible NETSs with b > 0 (b = 0).

Fig. 4. Examples of smallest NETS structures in graphs with different variable degrees and girths.
The results for the minimum sizes of LETS and ETSL structures along with the lower bound of Corollary 1 on the size of ETSs, and the lower bound of Corollary 2 on the size of NETSs are reported in Table I. The results are given for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, and girths 6, 8, 10, and for values of b = 0 to 5.
In Table I, having the symbol “−” for ETSLs means that it is not possible to have an ETSL structure for the specific value of b in variable-regular graphs with the given g and dv. Having the symbol “−” for ETSs (that appears in the entries corresponding to dv = 3, and b = 4, 5) is stemming from the upper bound on the values of b in Theorem 1. Moreover, the symbol “?” in Table I indicates that finding the smallest size LETS or ETSL was too complex to be performed in a day on a desktop computer with 2.4-GHz CPU and 8-GB RAM.
It should be noted that the lower bounds of Corollary 2 on the minimum size of NETSs are tight in many cases reported in Table I. Figure 4 shows three examples of NETS structures in variable-regular graphs where the lower bound is tight. Moreover, one can see that except for few cases, in all the cases reported in Table I, the lower bounds on the smallest size of NETSs are larger, in some cases significantly, than those of ETSs. For example, in variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 10, the smallest size of ETSs and NETSs with b = 1 are respectively 9 and 13. Figure 5 shows examples of LETS and NETS structures in the (5, 1) and (7, 1) classes of variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, g = 6 and dv = 5, g = 6, respectively. These are related to the only two cases in Table I, where the minimum sizes of NETSs and LETSs are equal for values of b ≤ 2. The structures in Figs. 5(a)-(b) are the only non-isomorphic LETS and NETS in the (5, 1) class.
Example 1: Using the characterization algorithm of [2], one can find all the non-isomorphic LETS structures of variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, g = 8, in the range of a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 2. There are 48 such non-isomorphic structures. The only ETSL structures in the same range are in (8, 2) and (10, 2) classes, with only 1 and 4 non-isomorphic structures in each class, respectively. These correspond to 1 and 4 non-isomorphic LETS structures in the (7, 1) and (9, 1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1908

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2017

TABLE I
SMALLEST SIZE OF ETSs (LETSs AND ETSLs), AND LOWER BOUNDS OF COROLLARIES 1 AND 2 ON THE SIZE OF ETSs AND NETSs, RESPECTIVELY, FOR TANNER GRAPHS WITH dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, g = 6, 8, 10, AND FOR b ≤ 5

TABLE II
TRAPPING SETS OF VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3 AND g = 8 FOR a ≤ 10 AND b ≤ 2

Fig. 5. LETS and NETS structures in the (5, 1) and (7, 1) classes of variableregular graphs with dv = 3, g = 6 and dv = 5, g = 6, respectively.
classes, respectively. Moreover, based on Table I, the only possible NETS structures in the interest range are in (8, 2), (9, 1) and (10, 2) classes. Table II shows the possible classes of LETS, ETSL and NETSs with a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 2 in variableregular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8. The multiplicity of non-isomorphic structures for LETSs and ETSLs is given in parentheses. Table II clearly shows that for each value of b, the minimum size of LETS structures is smaller than that of NETS structures.
Tanner (155,64) code [4] is an example of a variableregular code with dv = 3 and g = 8. Within the range a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 2, this code has 465 and 1395 instances of LETSs in (8, 2) and (10, 2) classes, respectively [2]. These structures are known to be the dominant TSs of this code [1]. The same TSs are also identified in [5] (using an exhaustive search) to be the only TSs of this code in this range, which implies that the code does not have any NETSs in the range a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 2.

III. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we derived a lower bound on the size of nonelementary trapping sets (NETS) of variable-regular LDPC codes. Using this bound, we demonstrated that the size of the smallest possible NETSs is, in general, larger than that of ETSs with the same number of unsatisfied check nodes. This provides a theoretical justification for why NETSs are often less harmful than ETSs.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5188–5203, Sep. 2014.
[2] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713–6736, Dec. 2016.
[3] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for elementary trapping sets of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, submitted for publication. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1611.10014
[4] R. M. Tanner, T. D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun. Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370.
[5] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient algorithms to find all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., Houston, TX, USA, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:54:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

