On the Performance of High-Rate LDPC Codes
with Low-Resolution Analog-to-Digital Conversion
Niklas Doose and Peter A. Hoeher
Information and Coding Theory
Faculty of Engineering, Kiel University, 24143 Kiel, Germany
Email: {nd,ph}@tf.uni-kiel.de
AbstractвҖ”Future wireless networks put high requirements on
many system components. Data rates of the order of 100 Gbps
and beyond, currently used in wired optical networks only, are
expected for 5G applications. This imposes high effort with
respect to code design and decoding algorithms. Due to their
low complexity, LDPC codes are an essential part of many
modern communication systems. Additionally, high symbol rates
will require high-rate analog-to-digital conversion which turns
out to be very power consuming. In order to explore trade-offs
between hardware complexity and digital baseband processing,
this contribution investigates the bit error rate performance
and soft Monte Carlo simulation of LDPC codes together with
reduced-complexity analog-to-digital conversion.
I. INTRODUCTION
On the road to 5G industry and research face tremendous
challenges. Among the goals are low latency, ultra-high peak
data rates, low outage rate, larger areal coverage, low power
consumption, and flexible adaption to user demands [1], [2].
The requirements are essential for upcoming applications like
virtual reality and the adoption of existing applications like
cloud computing by the masses [3]. Data rates for future
wireless networks are anticipated to be 100 Gbps and beyond
[4]. Especially these high peak rates together with low la-
tency uncover existing issues of state-of-the-art channel coding
schemes.
Concerning the bandwidth allocation, many proposals for
future networks consider millimeter wave frequencies around
60 GHz up to 240 GHz. In this regime the spectral efficiency
can be chosen reasonably low, enabling moderate modulation
orders. Specifically, often BPSK or QPSK (4-QAM) is as-
sumed in this context. Besides many technological challenges
for hardware manufacturers, the main drawback of the mil-
limeter wave bands is the huge path loss. Although smart
antennas are likely to produce a large gain to overcome this
loss, the constraints on the equivalent isotropic radiated power
(EIRP) may be prohibitive for larger communication distances.
Alternatively, radio frequencies below 12 GHz pose lower
requirements on hardware and have a much lower path loss.
For many system components commercial off-the-shelf prod-
ucts are available. Inherently, the smaller available bandwidth
increases the spectral efficiency that is needed for a given
target data rate. Therefore, high-order modulation schemes are
crucial to obtain the desired data rates. In [5], [6] spectral
efficiencies around 40 bps/Hz are anticipated. The underlying
assumption is a target rate of 100 Gbps in the frequency
band between 6.0 to 8.5 GHz. By means of novel antenna
designs the system is able to use multiple parallel data streams
even for mobile handsets [7]. The framework uses the theory
of characteristic modes [8] to realize orthogonal radiation
characteristics on single radiating elements. Hence, the number
of bits per complex data symbol can be decreased to obtain
modulation orders that are high but not prohibitive. For an
anticipated number of five modes, the number of bits per
symbol in a multicarrier system can be decreased to eight,
which corresponds to 256-QAM or similar constellations.
In the early days of channel coding, hard-input hard-
output decoding has been performed. Towards this goal, for
several families of channel codes, including Reed-Solomon
codes (1960), powerful algebraic decoders have been invented.
Later, soft-input hard-output decoding has been proposed, an
important example is the Viterbi algorithm (1967). With the
introduction of turbo codes (1993) and the re-invention of
LDPC codes (1995), soft-input soft-output decoding became
popular. Examples of this class of channel decoders are the
Bahl-Cocke-Jelinek-Raviv algorithm (1974) and the soft-input
Viterbi algorithm (1989), respectively. It is interesting to note
that the fourth combination, namely hard-input soft-output
decoding, still seems to be unexplored in these days.
In mobile receivers the analog-to-digital conversion (ADC)
poses difficulties on the technological realization and is one of
the major power consumers. Typically, the number of bits that
is used for the digital representation of the analog signal in-
creases the complexity and power consumption exponentially
[9], [10]. Consequently, low-complexity ADC with a minimum
number of bits is desirable. On the other hand, the coding
community has widely adopted soft-input soft-output decoding
as the favorable scheme, when high coding gain is desired [11],
[12]. The fact that in high-speed implementations usually low-
resolution ADCs are employed is rarely considered explicitly
in the channel coding community. Often, such effects are
modeled by an additional noise source. The special case of
1 bit ADCs have been investigated thoroughly in [13]вҖ“[15].
Also in the context of massive MIMO systems 1 bit ADCs are
currently investigated. Besides channel estimation and capacity
considerations for QPSK [16], 1 bit ADCs are examined in
base stations with higher order modulation schemes [17]. For
the latter case, the excess of receive antennas in a base station
effectively oversample the signal in space instead of doing
temporal oversampling as in [15].
978-1-5090-5935-5/17/$31.00 В©2017 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:56:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
After their initial invention by R. G. Gallager [18] in
the 1960s, in recent years low-density parity check (LDPC)
codes have been intensively investigated, after they were
rediscovered by MacKay and Neal [19], [20]. Being linear
block codes they can be represented by a sparse parity check
matrix рқ‘Ҝor a bipartite graph, which leads to low-complexity
decoding algorithms. Additionally, well-designed codes have
shown to perform very close to the Shannon limit in additive
white Gaussian noise. In fact, their superior performance under
maximum decoder complexity of 14 mm2 lead to the adoption
of an LDPC code in the second standard for satellite commu-
nication of the digital video broadcasting (DVB) project, in
short DVB-S2 [21]. In the literature much attention has been
paid to reduced complexity decoding of LDPC codes by means
of quantization within the decoder structure [22], [23]. Some-
times binary modulation is considered together with quantized
messages in the decoding algorithm [24]. In [25] рқ‘Җ-QAM
is considered together with finite resolution messages in the
decoding algorithm: The message quantization is assumed and
the resolution of the demapper that includes the ADC is chosen
so that there is no additional performance degradation. For
the binary symmetric channel (BSC) finite alphabet iterative
decoders are introduced in [26], [27], which improve error
floor performance compared to infinite resolution message
passing. However, an explicit consideration of low-resolution
ADC in conjunction with high-order modulation and non-
quantized messages in the decoding algorithm is reasonable.
In this contribution we investigate the performance of the
LDPC code released in the DVB-S2 standard in conjunc-
tion with high-order modulation schemes and low-complexity
analog-to-digital conversion. As a core component of the
standard, the specified LDPC code serves as an example
of a hardware-friendly code that has actually been adopted
by industry. Its properties as a quasi-cyclic code and as
an irregular repeat-accumulate code enables low-complexity
encoding. The available code rates рқ‘…vary from 1/4 to 9/10
and therefore cover a large range of user demands. In order to
observe and examine soft-valued information at the decoder
output, within the decoder itself floating point operations is
assumed.
The remainder of this contribution is structured as follows:
In Sec. II the system model is outlined and the properties of
the DVB-S2 LDPC code are presented. In Sec. III decoding
methods for LDPC codes are summarized and examined with
respect to low-complexity ADC at the receiver. Numerical
results for ultra-high-speed wireless communications with low-
complexity ADC is presented and analyzed in Sec. IV. Finally,
conclusions are drawn in Sec. V
II. SYSTEM DESCRIPTION
In order to investigate the properties of the LDPC code
in conjunction with high-order modulation schemes and low-
complexity ADC in the receiver, the system models the
channel as an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.
While the DVB-S2 standard incorporates an additional BCH
code to avoid an error floor, we ignore the BCH to isolate
the effects on the LDPC decoding. Therefore, the system is
modeled as in Fig. 1.
An LDPC encoder (ENC) produces the binary code vector
рқ’„of length рқ‘ӣfrom the binary information vector рқ’–of length рқ‘ҳ
employing code rate рқ‘…= рқ‘ҳ/рқ‘ӣ. The code vector is modulated
block-wise, such that log2(рқ‘Җ) bits yield a complex symbol
рқ‘Ҙрқ‘–of cardinality рқ‘Җ. If рқ‘ӣis not a multiple of рқ‘ҡ, then рқ’„is
filled-up with uniform random bits until it forms a multiple of
рқ‘ҡ. The symbol vector рқ’ҷis corrupted by AWGN to yield the
receive vector рқ’ҡ. If the expected power of the data symbols is
normalized as рқҗёs = E
{
рқ‘Ҙ2
рқ‘–
}
= 1, the noise variance is given
by рқңҺ2 = рқ‘Ғ0
рқҗёb
1
рқ‘…вӢ…log2(рқ‘Җ).
Before the received signal vector is demodulated, it is
quantized to simulate the effect of an ADC. The quantized
complex vector рқ’ҡq is processed by the demodulator (DEM)
as soft-valued information. Hence, the demodulator should
produce soft-valued information ЛҶрқ’„for the decoder (DEC). The
decoder is not limited to the finite resolution of the ADC
and works with floating point metrics. Before the vector is
decoded, the additional tailing bits that carry no information
are removed. Finally, the decoder produces a hard-decision for
the estimate ЛҶрқ’–of the information vector.
Within the DVB-S2 standard an LDPC code serves as the
inner code of a serial concatenation together with a BCH code.
The outer BCH code aims at the elimination of residual bit
errors at high рқҗёb/рқ‘Ғ0, where most LDPC codes suffer from an
error floor. Two code word lengths are specified, the default
length рқ‘ӣ= 64800 and an optional short length of рқ‘ӣ= 16200.
The various code rates of the LDPC component are formed by
the use of different info word lengths рқ‘ҳ. As a systematic, quasi
cyclic, irregular repeat-accumulator code the code words can
be determined very efficiently without the need for a generator
matrix.
To be more precise, the info bits are processed block-wise
with the block length рқҗҝ= 360. The рқ‘ҷ-th info bit in each block
is added modulo-2 to the parity bit рқ‘қрқ‘–, where the index рқ‘–is
given by
рқ‘–= {рқ‘—+ (рқ‘ҷmod рқҗҝ) рқ‘һ} mod (рқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘ҳ).
(1)
The initial addresses рқ‘—are given tabulated for each code rate
and рқ‘һis a rate dependent constant рқ‘һ= (рқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘ҳ)/рқҗҝ. Finally, the
parity bits are recursively added modulo-2 as
рқ‘қрқ‘–= рқ‘қрқ‘–вҲ’1 вҠ•рқ‘қрқ‘–
for
рқ‘–= 1, . . . , рқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘ҳвҲ’1.
(2)
The рқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘ҳparity check bits рқ‘қрқ‘–are appended to the рқ‘ҳinfo
bits. The complexity of this encoding scheme is linear with
respect to рқ‘ҳ. The parity check matrix exhibits the structure
рқ‘Ҝ= [рқ‘Ёрқ‘©], where sub-matrix рқ‘©is lower-triangular with
a double non-zero diagonal. This structure is due to the
recursive calculation of the parity bits according to (2) and
can potentially decrease the storage requirements.
III. DECODING METHODS
The graphical representation of an LDPC code as a bipartite
graph (Tanner graph) enables easier access to the investigation
of LDPC decoding algorithms. The Tanner graph of an LDPC
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:56:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
ENC
MOD
AWGN
Quantizer
DEM
DEC
рқ’–
рқ’„
рқ’ҷ
рқ’ҡ
рқ’ҡq
ЛҶрқ’„
ЛҶрқ’–
Figure 1. Block diagram of the system model.
code consists of variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes (CNs)
that are connected through edges. Each вҖң1вҖқ in the parity
check matrix рқ‘Ҝrepresents one edge between a CN and a
VN. Message passing relies on the turbo principle of iterative
processing. For academic reasons the Tanner graph of an
LDPC code can be altered to form a collection of single
parity check (SPC) codes that are concatenated through an
interleaver to a collection of repetition (REP) codes [28]. In
this formulation the SPC codes are regarded as the outer codes,
which are not directly connected to the channel, while the
REP codes are the inner codes. For iterative processing, this
structure is able to exchange extrinsic information between
the inner and outer codes. For the individual SPC and REP
decoder nodes the maximum a posteriori probability (APP)
criterion can be applied to derive processing rules of the CNs
and the VNs. The processing rules can be calculated distribu-
tive and therefore parallelized for all VNs or all CNs. The
rules are also responsible for the name of the algorithm sum-
product algorithm (SPA), although it is also often referred to
as belief propagation (BP). The algorithm iteratively produces
an estimate of the code word, which is optimal when there are
no cycles in the Tanner graph. This is caused by the inherent
independence assumption of incoming messages. If there are
cycles in the graph, the information passed in the graph starts
to be correlated and the estimate will be sub-optimal.
The original SPA by Gallager calculates the outgoing mes-
sages of CNs as log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) рқҗҝрқ‘–вҶ’рқ‘—from
incoming LLR messages рқҗҝрқ‘—вҶ’рқ‘–as
рқҗҝрқ‘–вҶ’рқ‘—= 2 tanhвҲ’1
вҺӣ
вҺқ
вҲҸ
рқ‘—вҖІвҲҲрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–)вҲ’{рқ‘—}
tanh
(1
2 рқҗҝрқ‘—вҖІвҶ’рқ‘–
)вҺһ
вҺ ,
(3)
where the product is over all neighboring CNs of рқ‘–, denoted
by рқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–), except for CN рқ‘—, which will receive the message.
The outgoing messages of the VNs are computed by the sum
of extrinsic input LLRs and the channel input LLR рқҗҝрқ‘—
рқҗҝрқ‘—вҶ’рқ‘–= рқҗҝрқ‘—+
вҲ‘
рқ‘–вҖІвҲҲрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘—)вҲ’{рқ‘–}
рқҗҝрқ‘–вҖІвҶ’рқ‘—.
(4)
Due to numerical instabilities and implementation complexity
of the tanh function and its inverse, multiple approximations
are applied in practice to calculate the outgoing messages of
the CNs as an alternative to (3). As an elementary approach
the equation can be reformulated in a recursive manner with
a so called boxplus-operation, that only works on to operands
[11]. Besides the exact solution for (3) often the so-called min-
sum approximation with correction term is used as the boxplus
operator вҠһ. The approximate solution to (3) is given as
рқҗҝ1 вҠһрқҗҝ2 = sign(рқҗҝ1) sign(рқҗҝ2) min(вҲЈрқҗҝ1вҲЈ, вҲЈрқҗҝ2вҲЈ) + рқ‘ (рқҗҝ1, рқҗҝ2),
(5)
where рқ‘ (рқ‘Һ, рқ‘Ҹ) is the correction term
рқ‘ (рқ‘Һ, рқ‘Ҹ) = log
(
1 + eвҲ’вҲЈрқ‘Һ+рқ‘ҸвҲЈ)
вҲ’log
(
1 + eвҲ’вҲЈрқ‘ҺвҲ’рқ‘ҸвҲЈ)
.
(6)
For discrete output channels like the BSC, the binary erasure
channel (BEC) and the binary symmetric erasure channel
(BSEC), specialized or simplified versions of the SPA exist.
Often the messages are then also treated as discrete binary or
ternary values as in the erasure filling algorithm [28]. For a
concatenation of binary input modulator, AWGN channel with
quantized output and demodulator expressions to convert the
noise power spectral densities to the transition probabilities of
either BSC, BEC or BSEC are well known. Specifically, for
a BPSK signal quantized with three decision regions assume
that received values in the interval [вҲ’рқӣҝ, +рқӣҝ] are mapped to
zero. The effective channel is a BSEC channel with crossover
probabilities рқ‘қand erasure probability рқ‘һgiven as
рқ‘қ= 0.5 вӢ…erfc
( 1 + рқӣҝ
вҲҡ
2 рқңҺ2
)
(7)
рқ‘һ= 0.5 вӢ…erfc
( 1 вҲ’рқӣҝ
вҲҡ
2 рқңҺ2
)
вҲ’0.5 вӢ…erfc
( 1 + рқӣҝ
вҲҡ
2 рқңҺ2
)
(8)
and the capacity рқҗ¶BSEC = (1 вҲ’рқ‘һ) вӢ…(1 вҲ’в„Һ(рқ‘қ)), where в„Һ(вӢ…) is
the binary entropy function.
In order to estimate the bit error probability ЛҶрқ‘ғb two methods
can be applied: The first method produces hard-decisions on
the soft-outputs and actual bit errors are counted and averaged
over рқҗҫbits according to
ЛҶрқ‘ғb

hard = 1
рқҗҫ
рқҗҫвҲ’1
вҲ‘
рқ‘—=0
рқ‘‘H(рқ‘ўрқ‘—, ЛҶрқ‘ўрқ‘—),
(9)
which is the well-known bit error rate (BER). In the second
method the magnitude of the soft-outputs is used to yield the
averaged estimate
ЛҶрқ‘ғb

soft = 1
рқҗҫ
рқҗҫвҲ’1
вҲ‘
рқ‘—=0
1
1 + eвҲЈрқҗҝрқ‘—вҲЈ
(10)
which is known as soft Monte Carlo simulation [29]. In this
sense we are using soft-valued information at the output of the
BP algorithm, although the quantization eventually delivers
hard decisions at the input. Therefore, we consider these
considerations as hard-input soft-output.
The LLRs for each quantized and received symbol рқ‘ҹat the
output of the demodulator are produced according to the log-
APP rule
рқҗҝрқ‘—= log
вҺӣ
вҺқ
вҲ‘
рқ‘ рқ‘–вҲҲрқ‘Ҷ0 exp
(
вҲ’вҲЈрқ‘ҹвҲ’рқ‘ рқ‘–вҲЈ2
рқ‘Ғ0
)
вҲ‘
рқ‘ рқ‘–вҲҲрқ‘Ҷ1 exp
(
вҲ’вҲЈрқ‘ҹвҲ’рқ‘ рқ‘–вҲЈ2
рқ‘Ғ0
)
вҺһ
вҺ ,
(11)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:56:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
where the sets рқ‘Ҷ0 and рқ‘Ҷ1 are the constellation points with
вҖң0вҖқ or вҖң1вҖқ for the рқ‘—-th bit, respectively. Implicitly, this rule
assumes additive white Gaussian noise with noise power
рқ‘Ғ0. Therefore, the BP algorithm will not work optimally in
the HISO case. In this case the low-resolution ADC will
increase the noise power at the input to the BP algorithm
and produce an рқҗёs/рқ‘Ғeff> рқҗёs/рқ‘Ғ0. Hence, the BP algorithm
overestimates the quality of the input LLRs compared to
optimal APP detection for the hard-input case. An indicator
for this overestimation is provided at the output of the BP
decoder, if the BER is larger than the estimated bit error
probability from soft Monte Carlo simulation. On the other
hand, we define the equality
ЛҶрқ‘ғb

soft = ЛҶрқ‘ғb

hard
(12)
as the condition for вҖңtrueвҖқ LLR values at the output of the BP
decoder. To overcome the overestimation and obtain equality
in (12), the input LLRs to the BP algorithm can be rescaled to
match the effective SNR including the quantization noise. This
rescaling is able to replace an optimal APP demodulator for
the quantized case, which is not derived in this contribution.
In order to explore the trade-offs between error rate per-
formance and ADC complexity, this contribution compares
the SPA with min-sum approximation with correction term
as in (5) for a system without quantization and a system
with quantized received vectors. Additionally, our contribution
is the examination of the output LLRs of the BP decoder
by means of hard-input soft-output evaluation. Throughout
numerical simulations, we consider the case where the number
of decision regions per dimension, рқҗ·q, is equal to the number
of constellation points per dimension as hard-valued input.
Because of the processing as soft-valued information by the
belief propagation algorithm we denote the case hard-input
soft-output (HISO). As an example that means for QPSK that
there is one threshold for each dimension, which is equivalent
to 1 bit ADC per dimension.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In order to obtain numerical results, Monte Carlo simula-
tions are performed. For the DVB-S2 LDPC code, the code
word length of рқ‘ӣ= 64800 is chosen. In order to investigate
low-complexity ADC in the receiver, the quantization block
quantizes the received samples into рқҗ·q decision regions. The
centers of the decision regions are located equally spaced
between the minimum and maximum value of the constella-
tion. If not stated differently, the decision thresholds lie in the
middle between those centers. The quantization is performed
individually on the real and imaginary part of the complex
baseband signal рқ’ҡ. An ideal automatic gain control (AGC) is
assumed, so that the thresholds can be matched ideally to the
magnitudes of the original constellation points. For each point
of the BER curve we run the simulation until at least 2000
errors occur.
In Fig. 2 the BER of the DVB-S2 LDPC code with рқ‘…=
9/10 is shown versus рқҗёb/рқ‘Ғ0. Various modulation formats are
compared for the case of soft-valued input (SISO), hard-valued
0
2
4
6
8
10 12 14 16 18 20 22 24
10вҲ’6
10вҲ’5
10вҲ’4
10вҲ’3
10вҲ’2
10вҲ’1
рқҗёb
рқ‘Ғ0 in dB
BER
SISO, 4-QAM
HISO, 4-QAM
SISO, 256-QAM
HISO, 256-QAM
Figure 2.
Bit error rate for the рқ‘…= 9/10 DVB-S2 LDPC code with
рқ‘ӣ= 64800 in conjunction with 4-QAM and 256-QAM over an AWGN
channel and belief-propagation decoding (рқ‘Ғit = 50). The hard-inputs (HISO)
correspond to an ADC that is matched to the number of constellation points
per dimension (for example 1 bit per dimension for 4-QAM). For soft-inputs
(SISO) floating point precision ADCs is assumed.
input (HISO) and the uncoded case. The modulation formats
cover рқ‘Җ-QAM for рқ‘Җ= {4, 16, 64, 256}, but we only show
4-QAM and 256-QAM for clarity. In all of our simulations
the BPSK performance was equal to the performance for 4-
QAM as expected, so we do not show it here. The dashed
black curves indicate the uncoded case for the modulation
formats. The red curves show the SISO performance for
each modulation order and the blue curves show the HISO
performance. It can be observed that both, SISO and HISO,
follow the uncoded curve for low рқҗёb/рқ‘Ғ0. In the waterfall
region, the SISO case outperforms the HISO case. At this code
rate, the loss of using HISO is roughly constant with about
2 dB at a BER of 10вҲ’6. The same loss occurs for 16-QAM
and 64-QAM.
Remarkably, when investigating the rate рқ‘…= 1/2 DVB-
S2 LDPC code, in Fig. 3 the loss of HISO processing is
not constant any longer. Here, low modulation orders suffer
a higher loss than high modulation orders. In fact, the loss
at a BER of 10вҲ’6 decreases from 2 dB for 4-QAM to below
1 dB for 256-QAM. Please have in mind that, in fact, the HISO
case for 256-QAM uses 4 bit per dimension, while for 4-QAM
only 1 bit is used. Consequently, the behavior of the curves for
рқ‘…= 1/2 is more intuitive than for рқ‘…= 9/10.
The effect of overestimated LLRs is examined numerically
by varying a scaling factor for the LLRs until (12) is fulfilled.
In Fig. 4 the BER performance for 4-QAM with a scaling of
вҲ’3.8 dB is shown as a blue dashed line. The improvement
compared to the non-optimized case is roughly 0.1 dB. An
additional curious detail can be observed in Fig. 4 for the
HISO case and 4-QAM without LLR scaling: In the low
рқҗёb/рқ‘Ғ0 regime the BER slowly decreases with increasing
рқҗёb/рқ‘Ғ0. Shortly before the waterfall region, it increases again
just to strictly decrease again. However, when properly scaling
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:56:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
10вҲ’6
10вҲ’5
10вҲ’4
10вҲ’3
10вҲ’2
10вҲ’1
рқҗёb
рқ‘Ғ0 in dB
BER
SISO, 4-QAM
SISO, 16-QAM
SISO, 64-QAM
SISO, 256-QAM
HISO, 4-QAM
HISO, 16-QAM
HISO, 64-QAM
HISO, 256-QAM
Figure 3.
Bit error rate for the рқ‘…= 1/2 DVB-S2 LDPC code with
рқ‘ӣ= 64800 in conjunction with various modulation formats over an AWGN
channel and belief-propagation decoding (рқ‘Ғit = 50). The hard-inputs (HISO)
correspond to an ADC that is matched to the number of constellation points
per dimension (for example 1 bit per dimension for 4-QAM). For soft-inputs
(SISO) floating point precision ADC is assumed.
1
2
3
4
5
6
10вҲ’6
10вҲ’5
10вҲ’4
10вҲ’3
10вҲ’2
10вҲ’1
рқҗёb
рқ‘Ғ0 in dB
BER
SISO
HISO
HISO, scaling вҲ’3.8 dB
Figure 4.
Bit-error rate for the рқ‘…= 9/10 DVB-S2 LDPC code with
рқ‘ӣ= 64800 in conjunction with 4-QAM over an AWGN channel and belief-
propagation decoding (рқ‘Ғit = 50). The hard-inputs (HISO) correspond to
an analog-to-digital-conversion (ADC) that is matched to the number of
constellation points per dimension (for example 1 bit per dimension for 4-
QAM). For soft-inputs (SISO) infinite precision ADCs are assumed (only
limited by the floating point representation).
the inputs to the BP algorithm the behavior is not observed any
longer. Thus, for working points before the waterfall region it
is essential to rescale the hard-inputs, which delivers LLRs
according to optimal APP demodulation.
In Fig. 5 the BER performance for BP is shown for
рқ‘…= 9/10 with an additional quantization level at zero for
each dimension. Individually for the real and imaginary part,
all values в„ңрқ”ў{рқ‘Ұрқ‘–} and в„‘рқ”Ә{рқ‘Ұрқ‘–} respectively within 0 Вұ рқӣҝare
mapped to this level. For code rate рқ‘…= 9/10 the numerical
results do not show the expected improved performance with
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
10вҲ’6
10вҲ’5
10вҲ’4
10вҲ’3
10вҲ’2
10вҲ’1
рқҗёb
рқ‘Ғ0 in dB
BER
uncoded
рқҗ·q = 2
рқҗ·q = 3, рқӣҝ= 0.5
рқҗ·q = 3, рқӣҝ= 0.2
рқҗ·q = 4
SISO
Figure 5.
Bit error rate for the рқ‘…= 9/10 DVB-S2 LDPC code with
рқ‘ӣ= 64800 in conjunction with BPSK over an AWGN channel and belief-
propagation decoding with рқ‘Ғit = 50. For the ADC either 1 bit, 3 quantization
levels with different values for рқӣҝ, 2 bits or floating point precision is assumed.
The interval for the decision region at zero is determined by the threshold
value рқӣҝas [вҲ’рқӣҝ, +рқӣҝ].
increasing number of levels for all values of рқӣҝ. In fact, for
рқӣҝ= 0.5 the additional decision region around zero mitigates
the performance significantly compared to the HISO case
(рқҗ·q = 2, 1 bit) as shown in Fig. 5. However, a smaller value
of рқӣҝ= 0.2 improves the BER performance significantly. The
performance loss compared to the case of 2 bit ADCs (рқҗ·q = 4)
is about 0.1 dB.
The previous observation can be supported by the consider-
ation of the capacity of the BSEC. Therefore the variance of
the AWGN channel in conjunction with the chosen threshold
value рқӣҝyields different capacities for the working point of
the code.
In Fig. 6 the optimal threshold value рқӣҝвҳ…that
maximizes the capacity for a given noise variance is shown
versus рқҗёb/рқ‘Ғ0. For each SNR point рқӣҝвҳ…can experimentally
be found by sweeping through an interval of values for рқӣҝ.
Consistently with the BER performance for different threshold
values, рқӣҝвҳ…around 5 dB is 0.25. For the optimization of the
BER performance we propose two methods: The first method
is a fixed value for рқӣҝper code rate, that is taken from the
curve in Fig. 6 for the expected waterfall region for the code
rate. The second method is the adaptation of the current рқӣҝto
the optimal рқӣҝвҳ…according to the current рқҗёb/рқ‘Ғ0.
V. CONCLUSION
5G is expected to revolutionize the area of wireless commu-
nications. Immense data rates, low-delay requirements, low-
cost hardware, and power consumption restrictions impose
severe and sometimes even conflicting constraints on channel
coding. In this contribution we investigate the impact of low-
resolution ADC on the BER of LDPC codes using BP. For
practical reasons, an advanced LDPC code has been investi-
gated, and combined with modulation schemes of anticipated
order for upcoming systems. Numerical results support the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:56:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
вҲ’1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1
рқҗёb
рқ‘Ғ0 in dB
рқӣҝвҳ…
Figure 6. Optimal threshold Вұрқӣҝвҳ…for BPSK modulated signals over AWGN
with three decision regions. The optimum is found experimentally by exam-
ining the analytic capacity of the equivalent DMC which is the BSEC.
practical relevance of the anticipated setup, because the losses
caused by the low-resolution ADC become smaller for high
rates and high modulation orders. In order to optimize the
performance for the hard-input case, scaling factors for the
input LLRs to the BP algorithm have been found numerically
by soft Monte Carlo simulation. For the special case of
BPSK and three decision regions for the quantization, this
contribution provides methods to optimize BER performance
by tweaking the threshold value. When one does not properly
take care of this threshold value, the results show that an
increasing number of quantization regions does not always
improve the BER performance.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is supported by the Deutsche Forschungsgemein-
schaft (DFG) within the priority program SPP 1655 under
grant HO 2226/14-1.
REFERENCES
[1] Next Generation Mobile Networks Alliance. (2015) NGMN 5G
white paper. [Online]. Available: http://www.ngmn.org/uploads/media/
NGMN 5G White Paper V1 0.pdf
[2] The
5G Infrastructure Partnership
Project.
(2016) View
on 5G
architecture. [Online]. Available: https://5g-ppp.eu/wp-content/uploads/
2014/02/5G-PPP-5G-Architecture-WP-July-2016.pdf
[3] G. P. Fettweis, вҖңThe tactile internet: Applications and challenges,вҖқ IEEE
Vehicular Tech. Mag., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 64вҖ“70, Mar. 2014.
[4] D. Dudek, вҖңFunding of the Priority Program вҖқWireless 100Gb/s and
BeyondвҖқ,вҖқ in Panel Session P10, IEEE Int. Conf. on Communications
(ICC), 2013.
[5] N. Doose and P. A. Hoeher, вҖңMassive MIMO ultra-wideband communi-
cations using multi-mode antennas,вҖқ in Proc. Int. ITG Conf. on Systems,
Communications and Coding (SCC), Feb. 2015, pp. 1вҖ“6.
[6] P.
A.
Hoeher
and
N.
Doose,
вҖңA
massive
MIMO
terminal
concept based on small-size multi-mode antennas,вҖқ Trans. Emerging
Telecommunications Technologies, Mar. 2015. [Online]. Available:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1002/ett.2934
[7] R. Martens and D. Manteuffel, вҖңSystematic design method of a mobile
multiple antenna system using the theory of characteristic modes,вҖқ IET
Microwaves, Antennas & Propagation, vol. 8, pp. 887вҖ“893, Sep. 2014.
[8] R. F. Harrington and J. R. Mautz, вҖңTheory of characteristic modes for
conducting bodies,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Antennas Propag., vol. 19, no. 5, pp.
622вҖ“628, Sep. 1971.
[9] R. H. Walden, вҖңAnalog-to-digital converter survey and analysis,вҖқ IEEE
J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 539вҖ“550, Apr. 1999.
[10] H. S. Lee and C. G. Sodini, вҖңAnalog-to-digital converters: Digitizing the
analog world,вҖқ IEEE Proc., vol. 96, no. 2, pp. 323вҖ“334, Feb. 2008.
[11] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, вҖңIterative decoding of binary block
and convolutional codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp.
429вҖ“445, Mar. 1996.
[12] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, вҖңA Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision
outputs and its applications,вҖқ in Proc. IEEE Global Communications
Conf. (GLOBECOM), vol. 3, Nov. 1989, pp. 1680вҖ“1686.
[13] A. Mezghani and J. A. Nossek, вҖңOn ultra-wideband MIMO systems with
1-bit quantized outputs: Performance analysis and input optimization,вҖқ
in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2007, pp.
1286вҖ“1289.
[14] вҖ”вҖ”, вҖңAnalysis of Rayleigh-fading channels with 1-bit quantized out-
put,вҖқ in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2008, pp.
260вҖ“264.
[15] L. Landau and G. Fettweis, вҖңInformation rates employing 1-bit quantiza-
tion and oversampling at the receiver,вҖқ in Proc. IEEE Signal Processing
Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications
(SPAWC), Jun. 2014, pp. 219вҖ“223.
[16] C. Risi, D. Persson, and E. G. Larsson, вҖңMassive MIMO with
1-bit ADC,вҖқ ArXiv e-prints, Apr. 2014. [Online]. Available: http:
//arxiv.org/abs/1404.7736
[17] S. Jacobsson, G. Durisi, M. Coldrey, U. Gustavsson, and C. Studer,
вҖңOne-bit massive MIMO: Channel estimation and high-order modula-
tions,вҖқ in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Communication Workshop (ICCW),
Jun. 2015, pp. 1304вҖ“1309.
[18] R. G. Gallager, вҖңLow-density parity-check codes,вҖқ IRE Trans. Informa-
tion Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21вҖ“28, 1962.
[19] D. J. C. MacKay, вҖңGood codes based on very sparse matrices,вҖқ in Proc.
IMA Conference Cryptography and Coding, Dec. 1995, pp. 100вҖ“111.
[20] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, вҖңNear shannon limit performance of
low density parity check codes,вҖқ IET Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 18,
pp. 1645вҖ“1646, Aug. 1996.
[21] ETSI, European Standard EN 302 307-1 V1.4.1, Second generation
framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for Broad-
casting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and other broadband
satellite applications; Part 1 (DVB-S2), European Telecommunications
Standards Institute, Nov. 2014.
[22] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, вҖңReduced complexity
iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief
propagation,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673вҖ“680, May
1999.
[23] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu,
вҖңReduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun.,
vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288вҖ“1299, Aug. 2005.
[24] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, вҖңOn finite precision implementation
of low density parity check codes decoder,вҖқ in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp.
on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), vol. 4, May 2001, pp. 202вҖ“205.
[25] M. Baldi, F. Chiaraluce, and G. Cancellieri, вҖңFinite-precision analysis
of demappers and decoders for LDPC-coded M-QAM systems,вҖқ IEEE
Trans. Broadcast., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 239вҖ“250, Jun. 2009.
[26] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, L. Danjean, and B. Vasic, вҖңFinite alphabet
iterative decoders вҖ“ part i: Decoding beyond belief propagation on the
binary symmetric channel,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp.
4033вҖ“4045, Oct. 2013.
[27] D. Declercq, B. Vasic, S. K. Planjery, and E. Li, вҖңFinite alphabet iterative
decoders вҖ“ part ii: Towards guaranteed error correction of LDPC codes
via iterative decoder diversity,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10,
pp. 4046вҖ“4057, Oct. 2013.
[28] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Leiden:
Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[29] I. Land, P. A. Hoeher, and U. Sorger, вҖңLog-likelihood values and Monte
Carlo simulation вҖ“ some fundamental results,вҖқ in Proc. Int. Symp. on
Turbo Codes & Related Topics (ISTC), Sep. 2000, pp. 43вҖ“46.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:56:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
