488

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2017

Antiwear Leveling Design for SSDs With Hybrid ECC Capability
Chien-Chung Ho, Member, IEEE, Yu-Ping Liu, Yuan-Hao Chang, Senior Member, IEEE, and Tei-Wei Kuo, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— With the joint considerations of reliability and performance, hybrid error correction code (ECC) becomes an option in the designs of solid-state drives (SSDs). Unfortunately, wear leveling (WL) might result in the early performance degradation to SSDs, which is common with a limited number of P/E cycles, due to the efforts to delay the bit-error-rate growth. In this paper, an anti-WL design is proposed to avoid such a performance problem so that the performance of SSDs with hybrid ECC capability can be improved without sacrificing their reliability. The capability of the proposed design was evaluated by a series of experiments, for which it was shown that the proposed design could greatly improve the read and write performance of SSDs up to 50% without affecting the endurance of the investigated SSDs, compared with traditional approaches.
Index Terms— Antiwear leveling, Bose–Chaudhuri– Hocquenghem (BCH), Flash memory, Flash storage device, hybrid error correction code (ECC), low-density parity check (LDPC), solid-state drive (SSD), storage systems.
I. INTRODUCTION
W HILE multilevel-cell (MLC) Flash-memory chips prevail in the storage markets, the growing bit error rate (BER) of MLC cells is more likely to cause data loss. The problem is even exacerbated, due to the programming scheme and data encoding, when more than one page share Flash cells in many MLC chip designs. In order to improve the system performance and reliability, it becomes a good option to solid-state drive (SSD) vendors to adopt two error correction code (ECC) hardwares at the same time (referred to as the hybrid ECC capability) [5], [24]. Wear leveling (WL) is commonly adopted to delay the time in using the ECC hardware with stronger correction capability, due to the decoding delay. Unfortunately, WL itself presents overheads on not
Manuscript received December 4, 2015; revised March 31, 2016 and May 25, 2016; accepted June 20, 2016. Date of publication August 1, 2016; date of current version January 19, 2017. This work was supported in part by the Ministry of Science and Technology under Grant 104-2221-E-001020-MY3, Grant 105-3111- Y-001-041, Grant 105-2221-E-001-004-MY2, and Grant 105-2221-E-001-013-MY3.
C.-C. Ho is with the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan, and also with the Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan (e-mail: f99922110@csie.ntu.edu.tw).
Y.-P. Liu is with the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan (e-mail: b00902016@csie.ntu.edu.tw).
Y.-H. Chang is with the Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan (e-mail: johnson@iis.sinica.edu.tw).
T.-W. Kuo is with the Research Center for Information Technology Innovation, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan, and also with the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei 106, Taiwan (e-mail: ktw@csie.ntu.edu.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2016.2589318

only performance (in extra live data copying and erases) but also reliability (in erases under the limit P/E cycle constraint). It becomes very important to resolve the negative impacts of WL without harming the lifetime of Flash memory. Such an observation motivates this paper in the proposing of an anti-WL design to enhance the performance of SSDs.
Each (NAND) Flash-memory chip is usually partitioned into blocks, and each block contains a fixed number of pages. A page, which consists of a data area (to store user data) and a spare area (to store house-keeping data), is the unit for read and write operations. These days, Flash device does not maintain separated spare area any more. The data area and the spare area are scrambled together in modern Flash devices. Data are not directly updated to their residing pages unless their belonging blocks are erased first. As a result, only pages of up-to-date data are valid to read, where pages of out-of-date data are called invalid pages and need to be recycled when the number of free pages is low in the space management. Because of the out-place-update policy, there is a need to map the logical block address (LBA) of each access to its corresponding physical block address. The mapping is done by the Flash translation layer (FTL), which runs on the Flashmemory controller. Because each block can survive only over a limited number of program/erase operations (that come with P/E cycles), WL is needed to evenly distribute erases over blocks to lengthen the lifetime of a Flash-memory chip.
In the past decades, many excellent FTL designs have been proposed to resolve the management issues of Flash memory. Lots of attention was paid to address translation (i.e., address mapping), in which researchers tried to achieve a good compromise between the system performance and the required dynamic RAM (DRAM) space [2], [4], [14], [19], [20], [26]. Due to the rapid deterioration of Flash-memory reliability, WL has also been a highly important research direction in the FTL designs, in which the FTL tries to evenly distribute erases over blocks [1], [3], [6]–[8], [13], [25]. WL designs are roughly classified as dynamic or static WL. Dynamic WL (DWL) tries to recycle blocks with invalid pages [1], [3], [6], [7], [13]. Static WL might even migrate (cold) data around so that erases could also be done over blocks of only valid pages, where regular activities are designed to move data around with specially designed limited information [8], or a way to restrict the potential erases among blocks [25].
Reliability enhancement is also explored at a lower layer using the ECC technology to manage the growing BER concerns. Stronger capability in ECC recovery usually means higher hardware cost and, most of the time, more space

1063-8210 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: ANTI-WL DESIGN FOR SSDs WITH HYBRID ECC CAPABILITY

489

overheads and lower performance. In the past years, it has been an active area in the exploring of better ECC technology to optimize the reliability, performance, and capacity of SSDs. In particular, researchers tried to characterize data patterns and exploit the locality for data errors to occur (and/or then apply some caching ideas) [22], [23]. Some proposed to use stronger cells to cover weak cells to lengthen the overall lifetime [17], [18]. Some look-ahead memory sensing idea was proposed with decoding methods to minimize the latency in soft-decision sensing and data transfers [37]. Some advanced ECC designs were proposed to reduce the required redundant parity bits to improve the capacity of Flash-memory devices [27]–[29]. More recently, researchers started exploring the possibility in adopting more than one ECC hardware (or hybrid ECC) to improve both performance and reliability [5], [9], [21], [24], [33]. To improve the lifetime, some researches propose to reuses memory pages that contain hard faults by dynamically forming pairs of complementary pages that act as a single page of storage [16].
Different from the past work in reliability enhancement or hybrid ECC, this paper is motivated by the observation that WL might result in the early performance degradation to SSDs, which commonly go with a limited number of P/E cycles, due to the efforts to delay the BER growth. In particular, an anti-WL design is proposed to avoid such a performance problem so that the performance of SSDs with hybrid ECC capability can be improved without sacrificing their reliability. We shall jointly consider the access patterns and the characteristics of different ECC schemes so as to minimize the performance overheads caused by WL and garbage collection. In contrast to the previous popular approaches, we intend to deliberately generate an uneven WL distribution over blocks. We hope to naturally separate different types of data over sets of blocks to achieve great system performance. At the same time, we aim to hide the performance overheads over the access to blocks of better correction strength. A series of experiments was conducted to evaluate the capability of the proposed design. It was shown that the proposed design could greatly improve the read and write performance by nearly 50% without affecting the system endurance, compared with lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) code approaches. Furthermore, our design can not only provide better performance by hiding the overheads of LDPC but also guarantee the device lifetime with the isolation of hot/cold data.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the background and research motivation. Section III presents our anti-WL design over the hybrid-ECC-equipped Flash storage devices. Strategies in executing writes and garbage collection are also proposed. Section IV evaluates the capability of the proposed design. Section V concludes this paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
NAND Flash is a type of nonvolatile memory that utilizes the different threshold voltage (Vth) levels to represent the stored data by controlling the amount of electrons trapped in the floating gate of Flash cells. Typically, each cell of NAND Flash can be programmed to one of the 2N voltage levels to represent

TABLE I CHARACTERISTICS OF SLC AND MLC FLASH MEMORY
N bits of data. According to the capacity of each Flash cell, NAND Flash memory can be further classified into two types: single-level-cell (SLC) and MLC Flash memory. Each cell of the SLC (respectively to MLC×n) Flash memory can store 1 bit (respectively to n bits) of data. As shown in Table I, MLC Flash memory has lower cost due to its higher cell density, compared with SLC Flash memory. Nevertheless, the more complicated processes on programming and verifying a Flash cell in one of the multiple voltage levels also let MLC Flash memory suffer poor read/write performance. Meanwhile, maintaining a Flash cell among multiple voltage levels also makes MLC Flash memory more sensitive to program disturbance. Besides, MLC Flash memory can also endure a smaller number of program/erase cycles and has higher BER.
ECC is commonly adopted in the design of Flash storage devices, especially SSDs, to handle data errors caused by the read/write disturbance, electrical noise, and retention discharge. Given a pending write request, ECC units generate several redundant parity bits to follow the originally issued data to construct a corresponding codeword. With their redundant parity bits, data stored in the device can be detected and recovered from corruption caused by a limited number of error bits so as to improve the reliability of Flash-memory storage devices. In practice, Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes and LDPC codes are two widely used ECCs on NAND Flash storage devices due to their implementation simplicity and correction strength [29], [32], [36]. BCH is a kind of ECC algorithm based on the finite fields for multiple-bit error correction. A t-bit-correction (n, k) binary BCH encodes k bits of data into n-bit codeword with the minimal 2t +1 code distance. BCH utilizes parity-checking matrix and solves error locator with hardware circuits to guarantee that at most a fixed number t of error bits can be corrected effectively. Instead of solving the error locator explicitly, LDPC relies on the loglikelihood ratio (LLR) to process the decoding procedures. LDPC takes the probability vector that describes how possibly a bit received is 1 versus 0 in the original codeword as input, and then iteratively refines the LLRs to recover variable amount of error bits with a success probability distribution. Therefore, LDPC requires more complicated hardware and higher decoding overheads, but provides much flexible and powerful correction strength. The settings of (n, k, t) and code rate for BCH and LDPC are highly related to the specification of the adopted Flash memory. Let us take Intel MD332 NAND Flash memory as an example. It is pointed out that a minimum of 12-bit ECC for MLC devices is required per

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2017

Fig. 1. Development trend of BCH and LDPC.

512 B of data [15]. As a result, for a typical 512 B encoding units, the (n, k, t) BCH code should at least be (8360, 8192, 12) or more advanced setting [29]. Note that the time on encoding/decoding data of a Flash page is much shorter than that on reading/writing data of a Flash page, especially when the development trend is to enlarge Flash page size causing much more time on transferring data between Flash cells and RAM buffers.
Fig. 1 shows the development trend of BCH and LDPC in the design of Flash storage devices [10], [36]. It is observed that the hardware complexity of BCH significantly increases when the stronger correction strength is needed to handle the higher raw BER (RBER) so as to gain an acceptable number of P/E cycles on SSDs. Note that a Flash storage device needs more redundant parity bits to form a codeword while it provides the higher correction strength. It is also observed that LDPC decoders have a higher initial barrier, but complexity does not increase as quickly as BCH decoders at higher correction strengths. As the growing of RBER caused by the continuous technology scaling and aggressive use of MLC Flash-memory chips, vendors tend to adopt LDPC as their default ECC on the design of SSDs. However, such an approach might be overkill since the RBER of Flash cells in the initial phase is low; this implies that the required correction strength is relatively low in the initial phase. Thus, adopting LDPC to deal with the data with lower RBER will lead to the degradation of I/O performance.
The above observations motivate us to propose a hybrid ECC management design to simultaneously consider the I/O performance and reliability of SSDs. Although the hybrid ECC architecture might result in more energy consumption since it adopts two different ECC units. Fig. 2 shows a potential hybrid ECC architecture that consists of the perchannel BCH units and one shared LDPC unit. When the RBER of a block is low, the proposed hybrid ECC uses the BCH mode as its default ECC so as to achieve better read/write performance. A block will be switched to the LDPC mode to gain the longer lifetime while its RBER is rising up. We choose to adopt BCH with the low correction strength and LDPC with the high correction strength. The reason is twofold.
1) The RBER of Flash cells will gradually increase while the number of P/E cycles increases. This means that the need of a higher correction strength ECC is necessary at the later usage stage of SSDs.
2) The gate count of low-strength BCH is relative smaller than that of LDPC.
Furthermore, in the initial phase, the expected reliability

Fig. 2. Hybrid ECC architecture.
of a block will be not affected by adopting BCH. This is because we use only BCH to encode/decode data while the RBER is low, and switch the block back to LDPC mode when the BCH unit is almost not able to correct the error bits. With the flexibility of two different-strength ECCs, the correction strength can be utilized adaptivity based on the characteristics (i.e., RBER) of the blocks to maximize performance but not affect the device lifetime. As astute readers might point out, the read/write performance of LDPC blocks can be further improved using more gate counts in the hardware design. Note that an LDPC block (respectively BCH block) denotes a block that is supported by LDPC (respectively BCH) for error bit corrections. However, this approach might introduce expensive hardware cost and more energy consumption. Thus, with considering the hardware cost and I/O performance, the considered I/O performance of the shared LDPC unit is worse than that of per-channel BCH units in this paper.
To simultaneously improve system performance and maintain the device lifespan, existing management designs tend to adopt WL to delay the time on using the ECC with stronger error correction capability due to the decoding delay. However, WL itself is also a major overhead on Flash management since it results in the additional data copies that are generally for the purpose of the data migration instead of the space reclamation. In addition, these designs usually overlook the fact that the decoding delay occurs only on the data being read from Flash memory. This problem will become more serious while the hybrid ECC is adopted in the SSD design. That is, to evenly wear each block will exhaust the BCH lifespan of each block at the early usage stage of the device lifetime, and it will result in the early performance degradation. Note that the BCH lifespan indicates the partial lifetime of a block while it adopts BCH to encode/decode the stored data. Thus, different from existing designs [5], [9], [24] that trade storage capacity for the reliability and lifetime, the objective of this paper is to explore how to simultaneously improve the system performance by avoiding the WL and still maintain the device lifetime with the hybrid ECC capability. To achieve this objective, we will present an anti-WL design that deliberately creates uneven WL

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: ANTI-WL DESIGN FOR SSDs WITH HYBRID ECC CAPABILITY

491

distribution over blocks by utilizing the characteristics of the hybrid ECC architecture, so as to meet the requirement of the access performance and data reliability. This design is also different from those works that improve performance with WL schemes to avoid the fast-increasing BER, because WL will quick exhaust the BCH lifespan of blocks and result in the degradation of system performance. Note that to minimize the hardware cost, we consider that the storage device includes only one LDPC hardware; thus, another objective of our design is on how to minimize the frequency on using the LDPC hardware so as to reduce the performance impact caused by the LDPC hardware. In other words, based on the hybrid ECC architecture, the main objective of this paper is to improve the access performance of an SSD by wearing Flash blocks unevenly, so that the SSD can: 1) minimize the overheads on performing WL and 2) improve the access performance by having enough blocks in the weak ECC mode in its early and late usage of device lifetime to serve frequently accessed (hot) data.
III. ANTIWEAR LEVELING DESIGN OVER THE HYBRID ECC NAND FLASH STORAGE DEVICES
A. Overview
In this section, an anti-WL design is presented to improve the access performance of SSDs with hybrid ECC capability without sacrificing the reliability of SSDs. With the hybrid ECC capability, the proposed design can avoid the early performance degradation problem caused by WL, that is, to let Flash blocks endure different levels of wears (without the activation of WL), and then exploit the two hybrid ECC properties to have a better compromise between performance and reliability. The two properties are as follows.
1) Flash blocks have a relatively low BER at their early usage stage such that a weak ECC (e.g., BCH) with better encoding/decoding performance is enough.
2) Flash blocks have a relatively high BER at their late usage stage such that a stronger ECC (e.g., LDPC) is required and applied to enhance block reliability.
The objectives of the proposed design are twofold. The first is to hide the decoding (read) overhead of LDPC blocks. This means that we should efficiently reduce the access rate of LDPC blocks and intelligently select the data stored in LDPC or BCH blocks to take advantage of both BCH and LDPC blocks. The second is to avoid doing WL so as to reduce the performance overhead, since WL might invoke a series of live page copies and garbage collection. Furthermore, evenly distributing wear levels (or erases) to each block will be harmful to the lifespan of BCH blocks. Thus, an antiWL write strategy is proposed to generate an uneven WL distribution over blocks to take advantage of the hybrid ECC module, as shown in Fig. 3. Note that the proposed design is still workable if the strong and weak ECC units (i.e., BCH and LDPC) of the considered hybrid ECC architecture can be replaced with other ECC units (e.g., LDPC with hard decision for the replacement of BCH). Without loss of generality, the number of P/E cycles of each block is used to represent its BER, where a larger (respectively smaller)

Fig. 3. Overview of the proposed anti-WL management design.
number of P/E cycles implies a higher (respectively lower) BER in the corresponding block. Note that although blocks of the same Flash chip may have different BERs after enduring the same number of P/E cycles (due to the process variation), the results of some studies show that the number of P/E cycles can still represent the average BER of Flash blocks in a certain degree [5], [11], [12]. Therefore, we will focus our study with P/E cycles and consider process variation as a future work.
In the proposed design, a block with the number of P/E cycles smaller than a given threshold will be entered the BCH mode to encode/decode data with BCH for this block because the errors can be corrected by BCH. On the other hand, a block with the number of P/E cycles larger than a given threshold will be switched to the LDPC mode, which is to use LDPC to encode/decode data on this block since the errors cannot be corrected by BCH. The given threshold is varied according to the capability of the provided BCH capability in the SSD. To simplify the discussion, it is assumed that the bit errors cannot be corrected by BCH while the accumulated number of P/E cycles of a block is higher than the given threshold, even if the BCH hardware still can correct the bit errors. Furthermore, the endurance of a block will remain unchanged while it is switched to the LDPC mode. This is because that the guaranteed P/E cycles of a Flash cell are decided by the correction strength of the adopted LDPC, and a block uses only BCH to encode/decode data while the BER is low at the early stage of device lifetime. Meanwhile, adopting BCH to encode/decode data can reduce the amount of data written to Flash memory because redundancy (or parity) generated by BCH is smaller than that generated by LDPC for the same amount of user data. That is, the considered model in this paper is that the size of BCH redundancy for the data of a page is small enough to be directly stored in the spare area of a page, but the LDPC redundancy cannot fit in the spare area of a page. In other words, a BCH block has more pages to store user data, and this can be better explained with the example shown in Fig. 4. Consider a Flash storage device with two data blocks, i.e., one BCH block and one LDPC block. Suppose that the size of each of block is 16 kB and each page is of 4 kB. If the size of BCH redundancy for the data of a page is small enough to be directly stored in the spare area of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2017

corresponding block. Meanwhile, to simplify the presentation of the proposed idea, a fine-grained page-level mapping scheme, such as FTL and DFTL, is adopted to handle the mapping information in the proposed anti-WL design. In Section III-B, the anti-WL write strategy will be presented. Section III-C presents the anti-WL GC policy that reclaims the block space of invalid data according to the status (or types) of blocks.

Fig. 4. Comparison between BCH and LDPC blocks.
a page, the LDPC redundancy cannot fit in the spare area of a page. Then, a BCH block can store four pages of data, but an LDPC block can only store three pages of data. That is, BCH blocks used at the early stage of device lifetime can have more space to store user data. Note that once a BCH block is switch into an LDPC block, it will not be switched back due to the consideration of data reliability. As astute readers may point out, there might be some changes in the mapping table when a block is changed from the BCH mode to the LDPC mode. To meet the larger redundancy requirement of LDPC mode, a certain amount of pages will be reserved for storing the LDPC redundancy as a block is changed to LDPC mode. That is, data and redundancy are separately stored on the different pages within an LDPC block. This results in the degradation of read performance of LDPC blocks since it needs to read data and redundancy from two different pages to form a correct LDPC codeword for decoding. Furthermore, the number of available pages of a LDPC block is reduced due to reserve some pages for storing the LDPC redundancy. However, it will not introduce any overhead on the mapping table management since we can usually adopt the specific pages to store the LDPC redundancy, e.g., the first or the last k pages.
To efficiently utilize BCH blocks to hide the LDPC overhead and improve the I/O performance, the proposed anti-WL design deliberately generates uneven WL distribution over blocks. This design ensures that the system can avoid exhausting the BCH lifespan of each block at the early stage of device lifetime, where the BCH lifespan indicates the partial lifetime of a block while the block can adopt BCH to encode/decode its residing data. That is, we have to stably maintain a certain amount of BCH blocks to speed up the write performance within the device lifetime. An anti-WL garbage collection (anti-WL GC) policy is also proposed to reclaim blocks of invalid pages and also properly separate hot data from cold data without the intervention of WL, where hot data (respectively cold data) indicate the frequently updated data (respectively infrequently updated data). Meanwhile, the read/write flags (i.e., R/W flags) and invalid page ratio of each block are maintained to help identify the characteristics of the data stored in each block, so as to facilitate the future data migration among BCH and LDPC blocks, as shown in Fig. 3. Note that the read flag (respectively write flag) indicates whether its corresponding block has been read (respectively written) since the block was checked last time, and the invalid page ratio indicates the percentage of invalid pages in its

B. Antiwear Leveling Write Strategy and Data Management Strategy
In this section, we will present an anti-WL write strategy and its design considerations. In the considered hybrid ECC model, each block is categorized into one of three block sets (i.e., BCHold block set, BCHyoung block set, and LDPC block set). Among the blocks with their P/E cycles smaller than the (P/E cycle) threshold guaranteed/provided by BCH, the first k blocks with the largest P/E cycles are classified into the BCHold block set and the remaining blocks are assigned to the BCHyoung block set. Meanwhile, the blocks with their P/E cycles larger than the threshold guaranteed by BCH are assigned to the LDPC block set. In other words, blocks are classified into three types: a block in the BCHold, BCHyoung, and LDPC block set is classified as a BCHold block, a BCHyoung block, and an LDPC block, respectively. BCHold and BCHyoung blocks adopt BCH for bit error correction, and LDPC blocks use LDPC as their ECC hardware. As shown in Fig. 3, a data structure is maintained to keep track of the number of P/E cycles of each block in the storage device so as to classify the type of each block. The reason to classify the type of each block (or put each block into a block set) is that BCHold and BCHyoung blocks have good read/write performance, but LDPC blocks have poor read/write performance due to the longer encoding/decoding time of LDPC; meanwhile, the lifespan of BCHold blocks is shorter than BCHyoung blocks due to the number of accumulated P/E cycles. Note that as the time elapsed, some BCHold blocks will exhaust their P/E cycles, and will be put into the LDPC block set (or turned into LDPC blocks). As a result, the number of LDPC blocks will be increased as the Flash storage device receives more and more writes. In practice, the sequential read performance of LDPC blocks is still acceptable since the decoding overhead of LDPC is relatively small, compared with the decoding overhead of BCH. Thus, the large number of LDPC blocks can be exploited to absorb (or share) the loading of reads for BCH blocks.
In the proposed anti-WL write strategy, an uneven wearing distribution over blocks will be deliberately generated to improve the read and write performance of the device and to maintain the block lifespan by exploiting the characteristics of the three block sets. The proposed anti-WL write strategy will limit the number of active BCHold blocks and use them to serve the received updates and writes. The proposed strategy that tries to concentrate/redirect writes and updates to BCHold blocks will result in the situation that most of the block erase operations are centralized toBCHold blocks, instead of evenly spreading the erase operations to all the blocks over the device. Furthermore, the use of BCHyoung blocks is decreased as much

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: ANTI-WL DESIGN FOR SSDs WITH HYBRID ECC CAPABILITY

493

Fig. 5. Overview of data and block managements of the proposed anti-WL design.
as possible to avoid quickly accumulating the P/E cycles on BCHyoung blocks. This is because we should keep a certain number of BCHyoung blocks to replace the overerased BCHold blocks for the preserving of the read/write performance of the storage device at the later usage stage. In addition, an overerased BCHold block will be evicted and switched to be an LDPC block due to the reason that the BCH hardware can no longer guarantee to correct the error bits of the block. To maintain the number of BCHold blocks, a BCHyoung block with the largest accumulated P/E cycles will be selected to become a BCHold block. Fig. 5 shows the main idea of the proposed anti-WL strategy. The time complexity of P/E cycle sorting procedure is only O(log Nblock), where Nblock is the number of blocks in a device. The black bold curve indicates the accumulated P/E cycles of blocks to illustrate the uneven wearing distribution in different block sets, where BCHold (respectively BCHyoung) blocks are with larger (respectively smaller) accumulated P/E cycles, and LDPC blocks are with the largest accumulated P/E cycles. Many researches related to file systems have pointed out that only about 10% of files are used and nearly 90% of files are not used in most applications [35]. This observation implies that we can use a small amount of blocks as BCHold blocks to capture the 10% of working-set (file) data and serve these data with better read/write performance. For the other 90% of infrequently updated data/files, we manage them with BCHyoung blocks and LDPC blocks since they can help to delay the speed of P/E cycles accumulated in these two types of blocks. By deliberately generating the uneven WL distribution over blocks and purposely assigning different data to different types of blocks according to the access patterns of data, the proposed anti-WL strategy can fully exploit the properties of the hybrid ECC model.
When a write request is received, the proposed anti-WL write strategy will write the (written) data to the BCHold blocks no matter where the previous version of the written data is. Thus, the proposed strategy can achieve better read/write performance and absorb most of the P/E cycles with a small (or a certain) amount of BCHold blocks to serve the frequently updated data (or hot data). Then, it can further avoid the WL and garbage collection overheads because the ratio of valid data over those blocks is potentially low (due to the frequent update feature of hot data). That is, assigning the most part

of updates/writes to BCHold blocks will easily result in the generation of a large amount of invalid pages in BCHold blocks. This implies that garbage collection overheads over BCHold blocks can be significantly reduced. [Note that the reduction of garbage collection overhead can be reflected by the ratio of write amplification (WA), and it is shown in Section IV.] Furthermore, when garbage collection is activated to reclaim or erase a BCHold block, data in the live pages of the BCHold block are migrated to BCHyoung blocks because they are very likely to be infrequently updated data or cold data (denoted by writecold data in Fig. 5). As a result, hot data are gathered in BCHold blocks, and cold data are redirected to BCHyoung blocks. Note that if the cold data (denoted by writecold data) in the BCHyoung blocks are seldom read, they are further identified as readcold data (shown in Fig. 5) and migrated to LDPC blocks such that data stored in LDPC blocks are seldom read or write to avoid decreasing the read/write performance of the storage device. Of course, if some data stored in LDPC blocks become frequently read ones, they are identified as readhot data and will be migrated to BCHyoung blocks due to the performance consideration. The details about the data migration as well as the BCHyoung and LDPC block managements are discussed in the following (or the next paragraph).
The data management for BCHyoung and LDPC blocks is very different to that for BCHold blocks since data stored in BCHyoung and LDPC blocks are infrequently updated. Meanwhile, the properties of BCHyoung and LDPC blocks are also different. BCHyoung blocks are good at handling random and sequential reads, and have endured a smaller number of (accumulated) P/E cycles. To simultaneously exploit the read performance of BCHyoung blocks and preserve a certain amount of BCHyoung blocks to replace the overerased BCHold blocks, data stored in BCHyoung blocks should be used to serve the frequently read but infrequently updated/written data (denoted by readhot data in Fig. 5). Note that the data stored in BCHyoung blocks are seldom updated since the frequently updated data will be centralized in BCHold blocks due to the proposed anti-WL write strategy. When the space of BCHyoung blocks is not enough, the blocks storing the infrequently read–write data (denoted by readcold data in Fig. 5) will be evicted, and the readcold data will be migrated to LDPC blocks by the proposed anti-WL GC policy (see Section III-C for the details). Thus, the reclaimed BCHyoung blocks can be reserved to serve the future readhot data so as to achieve better read performance. On the other hand, LDPC blocks are good at handling (sequential) read operations, but they have endured more P/E cycles. Thus, the most important goal of the LDPC block management is to prolong the lifetime of LDPC blocks. Thus, we migrate the infrequently read–write data (i.e., readcold data) from BCHyoung blocks to the LDPC blocks, so as to reduce the accessing rate to LDPC blocks. When the space of LDPC blocks is not enough to serve the migrated data from BCHyoung blocks, LDPC blocks with the minimal garbage collection overheads will be selected and reclaimed. If the data stored on the reclaimed LDPC blocks are readhot data, they will be migrated to BCHyoung blocks. Note that, as shown in Fig. 3, we can use the read/write flags

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

494
Algorithm 1 Anti-WL GC

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2017
Algorithm 2 BCHold Block Reclamation

(i.e., R/W flags) to identify the data access pattern, where the read flag (respectively write flag) indicates whether its corresponding block has been read (respectively written) since the block was checked last time. Thus, the proposed anti-WL write strategy can naturally distribute/redirect data to the most proper block sets according to the data’s access pattern, and thus can take advantage of both the high-performance BCH blocks and the high-reliability LDPC blocks.

C. Antiwear Leveling Garbage Collection Policy
This section presents the design considerations of the anti-WL GC policy in the proposed anti-WL design. The proposed anti-WL GC policy cooperates with the proposed anti-WL write strategy to deliberately generate the uneven WL distribution over blocks to take advantage of the characteristics of the hybrid ECC model. Thus, the main goals of the anti-WL GC policy are not only to reclaim blocks for the subsequent writes/updates but also to regulate the access pattern of each block set. A block containing improper data might be resulted in the degradation of the read/write performance, fast P/E cycle accumulation, and/or additional WL as well as garbage collection overheads. Thus, to simultaneously gain the performance and meet the properties of the three block sets, the proposed anti-WL GC policy has to find out the blocks that contain improper data, migrate them to the proper block sets, and reclaim the space of victim blocks to serve the subsequent requests. Furthermore, due to the management of the proposed anti-WL write strategy, the properties of the three block sets are different (e.g., read/write performance and the accumulated P/E cycles), so that the proposed anti-WL GC policy should use different considerations to reclaim different types of blocks. Algorithm 1 shows the procedure of the proposed anti-WL GC policy (Lines 1–6), and it is separated into three parts, which are discussed in Algorithms 2–4.
According to the main concept of the proposed anti-WL design, it is expected that most of the erase operations are distributed to BCHold blocks. BCHold blocks tend to contain the frequently updated data (i.e., writehot data), and the invalid page ratios of the BCHold blocks are typically high. Note that invalid page ratio is the ratio of the number of invalid pages to the number of total pages in a block. In addition, BCHold blocks have to avoid the occupation of the infrequently updated data (i.e., writehot data) because data of write requests are written to BCHold blocks. That is, the goals of the proposed anti-WL GC policy for the BCHold block reclamation are

to improve the space reclaiming efficiency and maintain the write performance. Thus, Algorithm 2 is proposed to handle the reclamation of BCHold blocks, and it focuses on the migration of the infrequently updated data (i.e., writecold data) from BCHold blocks to BCHyoung blocks so as to maintain system efficiency (Lines 1–11). When the space of BCHold blocks is not enough, Algorithm 2 is triggered to reclaim the blocks for the subsequent requests. If there are still enough available BCHyoung blocks to store writecold data from the victim BCHold block, the anti-WL GC policy will select the block with higher invalid page ratios (e.g., 90% of invalid pages) or the block that is not recently updated according to the write flag (i.e., write flag = 0) of the victim block; otherwise, we set the write flag as 0, and then check the next BCHold block. If a victim block is found, the live pages in the victim block will be copied to the available BCHyoung block, and then the space of this victim block will be reclaimed (Lines 2–7). On the other hand, if there is no available BCHyoung block for the live pages from the victim BCHold block, Algorithm 2 will directly seek the block with the maximum invalid page ratio among the BCHold blocks as the victim block for the purpose of reducing the GC overhead (Lines 8–10).
In the case of BCHyoung block set, the properties of data stored in BCHyoung blocks are frequently accessed but infrequent updated (i.e., readhot data but not writecold data) due to the decision of the proposed anti-WL write strategy, which is to utilize the read performance of BCH blocks to serve the frequently read data (i.e., readhot data). In addition, we also need to delay the accumulation of P/E cycles on the BCHyoung blocks so that we will have enough BCHyoung blocks to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: ANTI-WL DESIGN FOR SSDs WITH HYBRID ECC CAPABILITY

495

Algorithm 3 BCHyoung Block Reclamation
Algorithm 4 LDPC Block Reclamation
replace the overerased BCHold blocks. Thus, Algorithm 3 is proposed to handle the reclamation of BCHyoung blocks, and it focuses on migration of the infrequently accessed data (i.e., readcold data) from BCHyoung blocks to LDPC blocks (Lines 1–11). When the space of BCHyoung blocks is not enough, Algorithm 3 will be triggered to reclaim the BCHyoung blocks for the subsequent requests. On the other hand, if there are still available LDPC blocks to store readcold)data from the victim BCHyoung block, the anti-WL GC policy will select the block that is not recently accessed according to its read flag (i.e., read flag = 0) as the victim block; otherwise, we

set the read flag as 0 and look for the next victim block. If a victim block is found, the live pages in the victim block will be copied to the available LDPC block, and then the space of this victim block will be reclaimed (Lines 2–7). While the LDPC block set has no available block for the live pages form victim BCHyoung blocks, Algorithm 3 will directly seek the block with the maximum invalid page ratio among the BCHyoung blocks as the victim block to reduce the GC overhead (Lines 8–10).
Furthermore, the properties of the data stored in LDPC blocks are infrequently accessed data (i.e., readcold and writecold data) due to the decision of the proposed anti-WL write strategy. In addition, the accumulated P/E cycles of LDPC blocks are usually high because they are switched from the overerased BCHold blocks. Thus, the goals of the proposed anti-WL GC policy for the LDPC block reclamation are to simultaneously improve the recycle efficiency and balance their WL distribution. Algorithm 4 is proposed to handle the reclamation of LDPC blocks (Lines 1–9). When the space of LDPC blocks is not enough, Algorithm 4 will be triggered to reclaim LDPC blocks. A probability-based manner is proposed to model the reclaiming probability of each LDPC block in Algorithm 4, as shown in (1)–(3).
Equation (1) is the erase weight werase of an LDPC block according to the ratio of the erase count of a given LDPC block to the total block count of LDPC blocks. A block with less accumulated P/E cycles will be assigned with a larger erase weight, and it will be reclaimed with the higher probability for the purpose of balancing the WL distribution over LDPC blocks. Equation (2) is the invalid weight winvalid (i.e., invalid page ratio) of an LDPC block. A block with more invalid pages will be assigned a larger invalid weight, and it will be reclaimed with a higher probability to improve the GC performance over LDPC blocks. Equation (3) calculates the reclaiming probability blkR P of each LDPC block. The symbol ρ (0 ≤ ρ ≤ 1) is the reclaiming weight, and we use it to adjust the block reclaiming probability blkR P according to whether the WL to LDPC blocks is more important than the GC performance to LDPC blocks or not. That is, if we tend to balance the WL distribution over LDPC blocks, we set a larger value to ρ; if we tend to have a better GC performance on reclaiming LDPC blocks, we should set ρ with a smaller value. Note that according to our experimental results, it is observed that data stored in LDPC blocks are almost readcold data (see Section IV-B for the details). This implies that the LDPC block reclamation might be inefficient if it excessively focuses on searching for the LDPC blocks with higher invalid page ratios. Thus, in practice, we should set ρ with a larger value to balance the WL distribution as well as to reduce the reclaiming overhead

werase = 1 −

blkErase Count blk∈LDPC block bl kErase Count

(1)

winvalid

=

bl kInvalid Page number

Count
per block

(2)

blkR P = ρ · werase + (1 − ρ) · winvalid.

(3)

Note that Algorithm 4 will be triggered to reclaim LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

496

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2017

Fig. 6. Example of the proposed anti-WL GC. (a) Issue a write request to BCHold. (b) Data migration due to the anti-WL GC. (c) Finish the issued write request.

blocks for the subsequent requests when the space of LDPC blocks is not enough. In this algorithm, the reclaiming probability will be first calculated according to (1)–(3), and a victim block will be selected according to the resulted probabilities (Lines 2–4). Then, the live pages in the victim block will be copied to available/free BCHyoung blocks if some free BCHyoung blocks can be used to store the live pages from the victim LDPC block; otherwise, the data will be copied to another available LDPC blocks (Lines 5–8).
The proposed anti-WL GC policy can be better explained with the example shown in Fig. 6. Consider a snapshot of an SSD consisting of 11 blocks (referred to as blk[1]–blk[11]), which are divided into four BCHold blocks, four BCHyoung blocks, and three LDPC blocks. Suppose that the free blocks of the three block sets are exhausted and all of the currently allocated blocks are full, except block 9 (i.e., blk[9]) in the LDPC block set. Now, consider that a single page write request is received and distributed to the BCHold block set [as shown in Fig. 6(a)], the anti-WL GC policy should be activated to reclaim some blocks from the BCHold block set. However, since all block sets are full, a recursive GC process must be triggered when the proposed policy attempts to copy live page data from BCHold blocks to BCHyoung blocks and then from BCHyoung blocks LDPC blocks. This forms a chain or a set of live page copies [as shown in Fig. 6(b)]. That is, we need to perform garbage collection for each block set in the order of the LDPC block set, BCHyoung block set, and BCHold block set as follows.
1) For the LDPC block set, we calculate each block’s reclaiming probability blkR P, which is positively correlated to its invalid page ratio and negatively correlated to its P/E cycles according to (3). Then a victim LDPC block is selected according to the reclaiming probability distribution. In this case, blk[10] is selected as the victim LDPC block, because it has the smallest P/E cycles in the LDPC block set and can result in high reclaiming probability. Then, live pages are copied from the victim block blk[10] to the LDPC block blk[9] since it still has free pages.
2) For the BCHyoung block set, the second chance approach with read flags is used to select a victim BCHyoung block with the following procedure: the cursor moves from blk[5] to blk[7] and resets their read flags to 0, and then the cursor stops at blk[7] that is selected as a victim

block since its read flag is already 0 (indicating readcold). Then, live pages are copied from the victim block blk[7] to the newly reclaimed LDPC block blk[10]. 3) Similar to the case of the BCHyoung block reclamation, the BCHold block reclamation uses the write flag information to select the victim blocks with a second chance policy. The cursor moves from blk[1] to blk[2] and resets their write flags to 0, and the cursor stops at blk[2] that is selected as the victim block since its write flag is already 0 (indicating writecold). Then, live pages are copied from the victim block blk[2] to the newly reclaimed BCHyoung block blk[7].
Once the victim blocks are selected in each block set, live page copies are carried out between block sets as the dotted arrows shown in Fig. 6(b). Then these victim blocks become new free blocks. Finally, the pending write request can be executed on the new free block of BCHold (blk[2]), as shown in Fig. 6(c).
The computation overheads of Algorithms 1–4 are also discussed here. Assume that Npage and Nblock are the number of pages in a block and the number of blocks in a device. The time complexity of executing Algorithms 1–4 are O(Nblock), O(Npage), O(Npage), and O(Nblock), respectively. In general, the DRAM access latency is 20–35 ns, and the number of pages and that of blocks in our evaluated 32-GB Flash device are 256 and 32 768, respectively. Thus, the time to execute Algorithms 2 and 4 will be about 5 μs (256 ns × 20 ns) and 650 μs (32 786 ns × 20 ns) in the worst case. However, the number of LDPC blocks is certainly less than 32 768 at the early and middle usage stage of the device lifetime. Besides, since the management complexity of SSDs keeps increasing and has become more and more complex in recent years, SSD vendors have started to improve the capability of CPUs in SSD controllers. For example, Samsung’s consumer 3-D V-NAND SSD device and Samsung 850 PRO SSD adopt Samsung MEX controller, which includes a 400-MHz three-core ARM Cortex R4 and will be upgraded to include a 500-MHz threecore ARM processor. With the improved CPU performance, the SSD controllers of SSDs can handle the more and more complicated management designs. According to the above two considerations, the computation overhead in Algorithms 1–4 can be ignored without obviously affecting the results of performance evaluation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: ANTI-WL DESIGN FOR SSDs WITH HYBRID ECC CAPABILITY

497

TABLE II EVALUATED MLC FLASH-MEMORY CHIP CONFIGURATION
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Evaluation Metrics and Experimental Setup
In this section, a series of experiments was conducted to evaluate the performance and endurance of proposed anti-WL design (referred to as anti-WL) by a trace-based simulator. In Section IV-B, we first show the performance based on the average response time (ART) per received request and the average WA during the device lifespan of the proposed anti-WL design. Then, the lifetime of the proposed design is also measured based on the total amount of reads/writes to the investigated SSD before its first failure time (FFT) (i.e., the first time that an error cannot be recovered by LDPC). In general, the FFT occurs with an exponentially growing probability after any block exceeds the capability of the adopted ECCs. The proposed design is compared with the pure LDPC and the pure BCH frameworks (referred to as LDPC and BCH), and both of them are implemented with DWL [1] approach that is widely adopted by the state-of-the-art SSDs. As shown in Table II, a 32-GB TLC NAND-based SSD is simulated. The sizes of each page and each block are 4 kB and 1 MB, respectively. The channel number of the simulated SSD device is four. Each of them is assigned with a BCH unit, and one global LDPC unit is equipped. Each block has two modes (i.e., BCH and LDPC modes) since the hybrid ECC model is adopted in our design. The guaranteed P/E cycles of the BCH and LDPC blocks are set to 512 and 1024, respectively. We build an exponential probability density function covering these targeted P/E cycles to emulate the BER that is ascending with the P/E cycles. The read and write latencies of BCH were set to 75 and 1300 μs, respectively, and the read and write latencies of LDPC were set to 300 and 1300 μs, respectively. Note that the time spent on encoding and decoding data of a Flash page is already included into the read/write latency of both BCH and LDPC blocks. The re-encoding overhead (move data from BCH blocks to LDPC blocks or vice versa) is also considered into our simulator. For example, if the data are moved from a BCH block to an LDPC block, the procedure might include: 1) read data from its resident BCH block and 2) write the data into a located LDPC block. Both of BCH read latency and LDPC write latency are included into the re-encoding overhead in our simulator.
As what we described in the previous sections, the settings of (n, k, t) and code rate for BCH and LDPC are highly related to the specification of the adopted Flash memory. Due to this reason, there are very little Flash chip vendors who have the willing to announce their ECC implementation details. To evaluate the capability of our proposed hybrid

ECC management, we adopt (8262, 8192, 5) BCH code and (8360, 8192) LDPC for our proposed hybrid ECC design. On the other hand, the upper bound of the P/E cycles of BCH blocks in the experiments is based on the characteristics of Toshiba 32-GB Flash TLC memory [30]. In the meantime, we assume that the P/E cycle of the LDPC block is set to 1024. Furthermore, the additional overhead to store the LDPC redundancy is set to 9.39%, which means that the space required to store the additional LDPC redundancy is equal to that of eight physical pages (9.39% × 256 = 24) per block. Thus, the LDPC block can store only 232 pages of data, instead of 256 pages of data that can be stored in each BCH block. Note that the capacity is also set to 32 GB in the compared approaches, BCH and LDPC in which all the blocks are BCH blocks or LDPC blocks, respectively. In addition, to evaluate the power consumption of the proposed anti-WL design, we follow the setups of [34] to assume the power consumption of LDPC and BCH codes for the evaluated Flash memory. The power consumption of LDPC is set to 1.4X mW, and that of BCH is set to X mW.
Three public traces collected from the media server, Web server, and source server at famous Microsoft Research Cambridge [31] were investigated to evaluate the effectiveness and capability of the proposed design. These traces have different ratios of reads/writes, average requested LBA length (random/ sequential), and locality that can provide diverse aspects in the evaluation: the Web server trace is highly sequential read intensive because 76.2% of its requests are reads with LBA length > 32 (referred to as sequential access); the media server trace is highly random write intensive since 42.6% of its requests are writes with LBA length < 32 (referred to as random access); and finally, the source server trace is random read and sequential write intensive, and contains about 50.9% random reads and 8.3% sequential writes. In addition, we repeat the entire trace until the FFT occurs in all of our experiments to ensure the accuracy and fairness. All of the statistics are captured and calculated from each request during the entire device lifespan for realistic results.
B. Experimental Results
1) Implementation Overhead: The storage overhead to maintain the data structures for the proposed design includes the mapping table of FTL, R/W flag, invalid information, and P/E cycle information in Fig. 3. To simplify the presentation of the proposed idea, a fine-grained page-level mapping scheme, such as FTL, is adopted to handle the mapping information in the proposed anti-WL design. The fine-grained page-level mapping scheme for 32-GB Flash memory is 32 MB. On the other hand, the storage overhead can be derived by the following equation: the number of blocks × (P/E cycle count size + invalid page count + read/write flag). Thus, the overhead of other data structures is 32 K× (4 B + 4 B + 2 bits) ≈ 265 kB. As a result, the storage overhead of our proposed scheme for a 32-GB Flash chip is about 32.3 MB. Compared with FTL, the proposed anti-WL design increases the storage overhead for only around 1%.
For the logic overhead of our proposed design, we use an example to demonstrate it. Assume that the expected P/E cycle

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

498

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2017

Fig. 7. ART of read/write requests over the different initial data loadings and traces. (a) Web2. (b) MediaServer. (c) Src2.

of a Flash block is 3 × 104. We can reversely look up the required correction. According to Fig. 1, we can know that the VLSI gate counts of BCH and LDPC to meet the required correction strength are about 2 × 106 and 106, respectively. To achieve the same expected P/E cycles, the VLSI gate count of the proposed hybrid ECC design is about 1.2 × 106–1.4 × 106. Although the gate count size of our proposed design is higher than that of LDPC, the experimental results show that the performance of our approach is much better than the LDPC (please see Section IV-B2).
2) Performance: Fig. 7 shows the read/write ART comparison between the pure BCH design, pure LDPC design, and our anti-WL on the different trace sets and initial data occupancy (i.e., capacity loading), where the x-axis denotes the initial occupancy percentage and the measured operation type (read/write), and the y-axis denotes the measured ARTs until the FFT. It is observed that the read performance of both of BCH and LDPC schemes is stable and does not correlate to the utilization ratio of devices. As we expected, the read performance of the proposed anti-WL design is very close to that of the BCH design since the proposed design can efficiently exploit the property of BCH blocks (e.g., low decoding overhead) to reduce the read ART. On the other hand, the write ARTs of both the BCH and LDPC designs are positive correlated the capacity loading. However, proposed anti-WL design can efficiently reduce the write ARTs since it can effectively utilize property of BCH blocks to reduce the number of live copies when the capacity loading of the device is high. Compared with the proposed anti-WL design, the average number of required live page copies for each write request (WA of each write request) increases when the device has less free space on both the LDPC and BCH schemes. Thus, the write ARTs of the proposed are only about 66.5%, 50.5%, and 60.9%, compared with that of the LDPC design under the 80% capacity loading of the device on the Web, media, and source server trace, respectively. The major reasons for this phenomenon are as follows.
1) Anti-WL design adopts BCH blocks from the early to middle phase to gain read/write performance and thereby reduces the read/write ARTs.
2) The readhot and writehot are buffered in the BCH blocks in most cases, which avoids frequent accesses to LDPC blocks that are with high decoding overheads.
3) Additional capacity benefited from the less parity redundancy of BCH blocks relieves and amortizes the

Fig. 8. Normalized amount of read/write and average WA before FFT.
write/update stresses. This makes garbage collection more efficient and reduces the ARTs indirectly.
On the other hand, in Fig. 7(b) and (c), it is observed that the write ART is close to the design with only LDPC in MediaServer and Src2 traces simulation when the initial occupation rate is smaller than 50%. This is because many free blocks can be used to serve write requests. As a result, the frequency of the data migration triggered by WL and garbage collection can be reduced, and the chance of adopting BCH blocks to gain read/write performance in the early stage of device lifespan is also reduced. However, for the read response time, it is not affected by the initial occupation rate since we can adopt BCH blocks to serve hot data so that the ART of read requests can be improved apparently.
Furthermore, the normalized amount of read/write before the FFT happens and the average WA under different initial data occupancies on the source server trace are shown in Fig. 8, where the y-axis denotes the normalized amount of read/write (based on the LDPC design under 20% capacity loading) on the left-hand side and average WA until the FFT on the right-hand side. Each bar represents the normalized amount of read/write under different configurations, and each line represents the average WA under different configurations. The significant deteriorations of endurance and growth of the ratio on the WA are observed on the LDPC and BCH designs when the capacity loading is increased. In contrast, the proposed anti-WL design effectively relieves negative WA impacts when the free space in the device is insufficient by centralizing hot writes/updates in BCH blocks to eliminate unnecessary live page copies. In fact, the anti-WL design can still outperform LDPC by about 50.6% and 50.5% on read/write endurance,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: ANTI-WL DESIGN FOR SSDs WITH HYBRID ECC CAPABILITY

499

Fig. 9. Distribution of P/E cycles among blocks from the initial to the final phase.

Fig. 11. Average power consumption of each scheme.

Fig. 10. Read/write ART over the device lifespan.
respectively, even the device is heavy loaded (i.e., 80% capacity loading). In addition, the average WA until the FFT of the proposed anti-WL design is only 64.4%, compared with that of the LDPC design. The primary rationales are twofold. First, anti-WL concentrates hot accesses on BCH blocks to reduce live page copy, which prolongs the device lifetime. Second, additional capacity benefits from BCH blocks extending the total amount of writes per P/E cycle on the device, which enables the device to endure more data writes when BCH blocks are not exhausted.
To further explore the capability of the proposed anti-WL design, Fig. 9 shows the distribution of P/E cycles among all blocks, and Fig. 10 shows the comparison of read/write ARTs under different phases in the device lifespan, respectively. In Fig. 9, the y-axis denotes the normalized P/E cycles (i.e., 1.0 represents the maximum P/E cycles among all block at FFT) of each block, and the x-axis denotes the sorted blocks according to their P/E cycles. Obviously, as our expected, a few ratios of BCH blocks quickly accumulate high P/E cycles in the initial phase (at about 10% lifespan) and form an uneven wearing distribution. These BCH blocks are BCHold blocks, and they can concentrate and store the most of writehot data within them. This will significantly reduce the ARTs and gradually migrate the cold data to BCHyoung blocks so as to reduce the GC overhead. When the device enters median phase (at about 35% lifespan), the worn-out BCHold blocks are switched to be the LDPC blocks due to the fact that their high RBER cannot be corrected by BCH units any more. However, as long as BCHold blocks exist, the proposed anti-WL design can keep concentrating writehot on BCHold blocks and sustain the performance as good as the initial phase. Moreover, the

proposed GC policy can migrate cold data to LDPC blocks to hide LDPC overheads. Finally, the device enters the final phase (at about 60% lifespan) when its BCH blocks become insufficient or even run out. Since the device gradually lose the opportunity of hiding the overheads of LDPC blocks with BCH blocks, the proposed anti-WL design will be switched to be the DWL to evenly distribute erases among all LDPC blocks to prolong the device lifetime as well as maintain the GC performance. This will result in the even P/E cycles distribution, as shown in Fig. 9.
3) Lifetime: In Fig. 10, the y-axis denotes the snapshot of read/write ARTs of each time stamp on the x-axis over the entire device lifespan. The proposed anti-WL design can significantly reduce the ratio of WA to approximately 1.0, and the read ART (respectively write ART) of the proposed design is only 24.9% (respectively 29.0%), which is compared with that of the LDPC design during the initial phase. And the proposed anti-WL design still outperforms the pure LDPC design significantly in the median phase, just like it did in the initial phase. When device enters the final phase (at about 60% lifespan), the BCH blocks might be insufficient or even run out. However, the properties of hot/cold data isolation caused by the proposed anti-WL design can still outperform the pure LDPC design by reducing the GC overheads. In fact, the ratio of WA under the proposed anti-WL design is only 69.4% to that under the pure LDPC design. The improved WA ratio further improves the read/write performance with 63.0%, 62.2% of read/write ARTs compared with that of LDPC. It is also obvious that the lifespan on the x-axis of the LDPC design is about 66.6% of the anti-WL one in Fig. 10, which means that our design can produce about 1.5 times of lifetime than LDPC. These observations reflect the fact that schemes adopting BCH without WL overheads from the initial to the median phase, such as the proposed anti-WL design, might have great potential of improving the performance while extending device lifetime under the hybrid ECC architectures.
4) Power Consumption: Fig. 11 shows the power consumption results of three approaches. The power consumption result of each approach is normalized to the result of BCH. It is observed that the power consumption of LDPC is 1.4 times to that of BCH, and the power consumption of the proposed anti-WL design is 1.18 times to that of BCH. The experimental result shows that the proposed anti-WL scheme has

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

500

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 25, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2017

better power efficiency since our scheme can serve the hot data accesses with BCHold and BCHyoung blocks so as to limit the number of using LDPC blocks. As a result, the power consumption can be efficiently limited in the proposed anti-WL scheme.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper is motivated by the need to improve the performance of Flash storage devices by avoiding the frequently triggering of WL. In particular, an anti-WL design is proposed to avoid such a performance problem so that the performance of SSDs with hybrid ECC capability can be improved without sacrificing their reliability. The proposed anti-WL write strategy and anti-WL GC policy are proposed to deliberately generate an uneven WL distribution over blocks. By doing this, we can avoid the early coming of performance degradation on the hybrid ECC models. In addition, the proposed antiWL design can separate different types of data into the three different block sets according to the access patterns of data. A series of experiments was conducted to evaluate and verify the efficacy/capability of the proposed design. The results show that the proposed design could greatly improve the performance of SSDs without affecting their endurance. The proposed design can not only provide better performance by hiding the overheads of LDPC but also extend the device lifetime with the capacity gained from the smaller size of BCH redundancy and the isolation of hot/cold data.
In the future work, we will explore the possibility to further utilize the hybrid ECC architecture to cooperate with some cost-efficient mapping designs instead of the fine-grained level mapping (i.e., FTL) considered in this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] “Increasing Flash solid state disk reliability,” SiliconSystems, Tech. Rep., Apr. 2005. [Online]. Available: http://www.storagesearch.com/ siliconsys-art1.html
[2] A. Ban. “Flash file system,” U.S. Patent 5 404 485, Apr. 1995. [3] A. Ban, “Wear leveling of static areas in Flash memory,”
U.S. Patent 6 732 221, May 4, 2004. [4] A. Ban, “Flash file system,” U.S. Patent 5 404 485, Apr. 4, 1995. [5] S. Bates, “Using rate-adaptive LDPC codes to maximize the capacity of
SSDs,” in Flash Memory Summit, Santa Clara, CA, USA: PMC-Sierra, Inc, 2013. [Online]. Available: http://pmcs.com/ [6] L.-P. Chang, “On efficient wear leveling for large-scale Flash-memory storage systems,” in Proc. ACM Symp. Appl. Comput., Mar. 2007, pp. 1126–1130. [7] L.-P. Chang and T.-W. Kuo, “An adaptive striping architecture for Flash memory storage systems of embedded systems,” in Proc. IEEE RealTime Embedded Technol. Appl. Symp. (RTAS), Sep. 2002, pp. 187–196. [8] Y.-H. Chang, J.-W. Hsieh, and T.-W. Kuo, “Improving Flash wearleveling by proactively moving static data,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 53–65, Jan. 2010. [9] C.-C. Ho, Y.-H. Chang, C.-W. Tsao, and P.-L. Suei, “Block reinforcement to optimize lifetime of Flash storage devices,” in Proc. IEEE 3rd Global Conf. Consum. Electron. (GCCE), Oct. 2014, pp. 717–718. [10] R. Codandaramane, “How LDPC enables new NAND Flash for enterprise SSDs,” in Flash Memory Summit. Santa Clara, CA, USA: PMCSierra Inc, 2015. [Online]. Available: http://pmcs.com/ [11] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Techniques for embracing intracell unbalanced bit error characteristics in MLC NAND Flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps), Dec. 2010, pp. 1915–1920. [12] D. Vanstee G. Tressler and T. Griffin, “Enterprise MLC NAND industry comparison,” in Flash Memory Summit. Santa Clara, CA, USA: IBM Corporation, 2011. [Online]. Available: http://www.ibm.com/

[13] E. Gal and S. Toledo, “Algorithms and data structures for Flash memories,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 138–163, Jun. 2005.
[14] A. Gupta, Y. Kim, and B. Urgaonkar, “DFTL: A Flash translation layer employing demand-based selective caching of page-level address mappings,” in Proc. ASPLOS, 2009, pp. 229–240.
[15] Intel. (2009). Intel MD332 NAND Flash Memory. [Online]. Available: http://www.intel.com/
[16] E. Ipek, J. Condit, E. B. Nightingale, D. Burger, and T. Moscibroda, “Dynamically replicated memory: Building reliable systems from nanoscale resistive memories,” ACM SIGPLAN Notices, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 3–14, Mar. 2010.
[17] A. N. Jacobvitz, R. Calderbank, and D. J. Sorin, “Coset coding to extend the lifetime of memory,” in Proc. IEEE 19th Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit. (HPCA), Washington, DC, USA, Feb. 2013, pp. 222–233.
[18] X. Jimenez, D. Novo, and P. Ienne, “Wear unleveling: Improving NAND Flash lifetime by balancing page endurance,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 366–375, May 2002.
[19] J. Kim, J. M. Kim, S. H. Noh, S. L. Min, and Y. Cho, “A space-efficient Flash translation layer for CompactFlash systems,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 48, no. 2, pp. 366–375, May 2002.
[20] S.-W. Lee, D.-J. Park, T.-S. Chung, D.-H. Lee, S. Park, and H.-J. Song, “A log buffer-based Flash translation layer using fullyassociative sector translation,” ACM Trans. Embedded Comput. Syst., vol. 6, no. 3, Jul. 2007, Art. no. 18.
[21] S. Li et al., “MAGE: Adaptive granularity and ECC for resilient and power efficient memory systems,” in Proc. Int. Conf. High Perform. Comput., Netw., Storage Anal. (SC), Nov. 2012, pp. 1–11.
[22] R.-S. Liu, M.-Y. Chuang, C.-L. Yang, C.-H. Li, K.-C. Ho, and H.-P. Li, “EC-Cache: Exploiting error locality to optimize LDPC in NAND Flash-based SSDs,” in Proc. DAC, Jun. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[23] R.-S. Liu, M.-Y. Chuang, C.-L. Yang, C.-H. Li, K.-C. Ho, and H.-P. Li, “Improving read performance of NAND Flash SSDs by exploiting error locality,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 1090– 1102, Apr. 2016.
[24] R.-S. Liu, C.-L. Yang, and W. Wu, “Optimizing NAND Flash-based SSDs via retention relaxation,” in Proc. 10th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2012, p. 11.
[25] M. Murugan and D. H. C. Du, “Rejuvenator: A static wear leveling algorithm for NAND Flash memory with minimized overhead,” in Proc. MSST, May 2011, pp. 1–12.
[26] Z. Qin, Y. Wang, D. Liu, Z. Shao, and Y. Guan, “MNFTL: An efficient Flash translation layer for MLC NAND Flash memory storage systems,” in Proc. 48th ACM/EDAC/IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), Jun. 2011, pp. 17–22.
[27] M. K. Qureshi, “Pay-As-You-Go: Low-overhead hard-error correction for phase change memories,” in Proc. 44th Annu. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microarchitecture (MICRO), New York, NY, USA, 2011, pp. 318–328.
[28] F. Sun, S. Devarajan, K. Rose, and T. Zhang, “Design of on-chip error correction systems for multilevel NOR and NAND Flash memories,” IET Circuits, Devices Syst., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 241–249, Jun. 2007.
[29] F. Sun, K. Rose, and T. Zhang, “On the use of strong BCH codes for improving multilevel NAND Flash memory storage capacity,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), Design Implement., 2006, pp. 1–5.
[30] Toshiba. (2011). Toshiba TC58NVG5T2HTA00 TLC NAND Flash Memory. [Online]. Available: http://www.toshiba.com/
[31] A. Traeger, E. Zadok, N. Joukov, and C. P. Wright, “A nine year study of file system and storage benchmarking,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 4, no. 2, 2008, Art. no. 5.
[32] E. Yaakobi, L. Grupp, P. H. Siegel, S. Swanson, and J. K. Wolf, “Characterization and error-correcting codes for TLC Flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput., Netw. Commun. (ICNC), Jan./Feb. 2012, pp. 486–491.
[33] C. Yang, Y. Emre, and C. Chakrabarti, “Product code schemes for error correction in mlc nand Flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2302–2314, Dec. 2012.
[34] J. Yang,“Low-power error correction for mobile storage,” in Flash Memory Summit. Santa Clara, CA, USA: Silicon Motion, 2014. [Online]. Available: http://www.siliconmotion.com/
[35] S.-F. Yang and C.-H. Wu, “A low-memory management for log-based file systems on Flash memory,” in Proc. 15th IEEE Int. Conf. Embedded Real-Time Comput. Syst. Appl. (RTCSA), Aug. 2009, pp. 219–227.
[36] E. Yeo, “An LDPC-enabled Flash controller in 40 nm CMOS,” in Flash Memory Summit. Santa Clara, CA, USA: Marvell Semiconductor, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.marvell.com/

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: ANTI-WL DESIGN FOR SSDs WITH HYBRID ECC CAPABILITY
[37] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng, “LDPC-in-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. 11th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2013, pp. 243–256.
Chien-Chung Ho (M’16) received the B.S. degree in computer science and information engineering from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2010. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
His current research interests include memory/ storage systems, operating systems, embedded systems, and real-time systems.

501
Yuan-Hao Chang (SM’14) received the Ph.D. degree in networking and multimedia of computer science and information engineering from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2009.
He joined the Institute of Information Science, Academia Sinica, Taipei, as an Assistant Research Fellow from 2011 to 2015, where he has been an Associate Research Fellow since 2015. His current research interests include memory/storage systems, operating systems, embedded systems, and real-time system.

Yu-Ping Liu received the B.S. degree in computer science and information engineering from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2015, where he is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering.
His research interests include memory/storage systems and compiler optimization.

Tei-Wei Kuo (F’11) received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in computer sciences from the University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX, USA, in 1990 and 1994, respectively.
He is currently the Director of the Research Center for Information Technology Innovation with Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. His current research interests include embedded systems, real-time task scheduling, real-time operating systems, Flashmemory storage systems, and real-time database systems. Dr. Kuo is a fellow of the IEEE Computer Society.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

