1068

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 69, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2023

ALCod: Adaptive LDPC Coding for 3-D NAND Flash Memory Using Inter-Layer RBER Variation
Meng Zhang , Xiaoyi Zhang, Fei Wu , Member, IEEE, Kai Tao, Feng Zhu, Shu Li , Yahui Zhao, and Changsheng Xie , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Three-dimensional (3D) NAND flash memory has been frequently utilized in consumer electronics as a popular storage device. However, data reliability has become an important problem to be solved. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with superior error correction capability are commonly used in 3D NAND flash memory to ensure data reliability. Unfortunately, high raw bit error rate (RBER) induced by retention time and program/erase (P/E) cycles leads to increased the number of decoding iterations, failing to correct bit errors. Consequently, data reliability cannot be well ensured by using conventional LDPC coding. Moreover, the number of decoding iterations between layers fluctuates greatly due to process variation, which leads to a large difference in decoding latency. To reduce and shorten the gap of inter-layer decoding iterations, this paper proposes ALCod: an adaptive LDPC coding scheme for 3D triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash memory by exploiting the inter-layer RBER variation. Specifically, this paper first conducts a preliminary experiment, which shows that RBER and the number of decoding iterations between layers and pages have a great difference. And, high RBER induces decreased decoding performance, thus introducing more decoding iterations and time consumption. Then, inspired by these findings, ALCod adaptively performs LDPC coding operations according to the RBER variation induced by retention time and P/E cycles. For pages and layers with higher RBER, by using ALCod, the original bit sequence is split into two parts on average and encoded separately. During decoding, known bits of 0 information are used to improve the initial decoding information (i.e., loglikelihood ratio (LLR) information per bit). To help with the decoding of the codeword’s unknown information, the LLR amplitude of known bits of 0 is increased. The known information and unknown information participate in the same check equation, which, according to the LDPC decoding principle, can provide useful LLR information to speed up decoding update
Manuscript received 9 December 2022; revised 27 February 2023, 11 May 2023, and 21 July 2023; accepted 21 September 2023. Date of publication 27 September 2023; date of current version 21 February 2024. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62102156, Grant U2001203, Grant 62372197, and Grant U22A2071; in part by the Alibaba Group through Alibaba Innovative Research Program; in part by the Joint fund Fog Intelligent Computing of Shandong Natural Science Foundation under Grant ZR2023LZH007; in part by the 111 Project under Grant B07038; and in part by the Key Laboratory of Information Storage System, and Engineering Research Center of Data Storage Systems and Technology, Ministry of Education of China. (Corresponding author: Fei Wu.)
Meng Zhang is with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zgmeng@hust.edu.cn).
Xiaoyi Zhang, Kai Tao, Feng Zhu, and Shu Li are with the Alibaba Cloud, Alibaba Group, Hangzhou 310052, China.
Fei Wu, Yahui Zhao, and Changsheng Xie are with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: wufei@hust.edu.cn; yahuiz@hust.edu.cn; cs_xie@hust.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCE.2023.3319638

for unknown information. ALCod can improve LDPC decoding performance and effectively eliminate soft decision decoding at higher RBER. Simulation results show ALCod can significantly reduce the uncorrectable bit error rate (UBER), decoding iterations, and time consumption.
Index Terms—3D NAND flash memory, RBER, P/E cycles, retention time, LDPC codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
N AND flash memory has been widely utilized in consumer electronics as the main storage device, such as smartphones and tablet computers (i.e., ubiquitous in our lives) [31], [32]. It has great benefits of small size, low power consumption, high performance, huge capacity, and high storage density [33], [34]. Particularly, three-dimensional (3D) NAND flash memory has a large capacity and high storage density, taking use of the multi-layer structure and multiple bits per cell, which lowers the cost per bit in consumer devices [1], [35]. Due to the several benefits listed above, it is currently the subject of considerable interest in the consumer electronics sector. However, inter-layer interference, retention, and program/erase (P/E) errors have made data reliability a major issue [2]. To ensure data reliability, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes as mainstream error correction codes (ECC) are commonly used in 3D flash storage systems [3]. LDPC decoding used in flash memories includes hard sensing decoding (HSD) and soft sensing decoding (SFSD) which have different error correction capabilities. For short retention time and a small number of P/E cycles, the raw bit error rate (RBER) is less, and HSD can satisfy the error correction requirement. Unfortunately, as retention time and P/E cycles gradually increase, the growing RBER exceeds the error correction capability of HSD, leading to decoding failure and more decoding iterations. As a result, data reliability cannot be well guaranteed by using traditional coding approaches, leading to data loss. Especially, for 3D NAND flash, the number of decoding iterations between layers fluctuates significantly due to process variation, introducing a large gap of decoding latency. Subsequently, SFSD with stronger error correction capability needs to be leveraged. More interestingly, although SFSD can improve data reliability, read levels are significantly increased due to fine-grained memory sensing by applying multi-read voltages [4]. Consequently, it is necessary to design more efficient coding schemes to avoid the use of SFSD.
To take full advantage of HSD and reduce decoding latency, this paper proposes ALCod: an adaptive LDPC coding scheme

1558-4127 c 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ALCod: ADAPTIVE LDPC CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

1069

for 3D triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash via exploiting the inter-layer RBER variation. This paper first gives the motivation by implementing a preliminary experiment. Results demonstrate that there is a larger difference for RBER and LDPC decoding iterations between layers and pages. And, decoding performance is significantly reduced due to higher RBER, resulting in more decoding iterations and longer decoding latency. Then, motivated by these interesting phenomena, this paper develops ALCod, which can adaptively correct bit errors for different RBERs introduced by P/E cycles and retention time. Specifically, aiming at pages and layers with higher RBER, ALCod divides the raw information sequence into two groups on average and encoded separately. For pages and layers with lower RBER, the normal coding is performed. In the process of decoding, if decoding the page with higher RBER, ALCod adjusts the initial decoding information (i.e., loglikelihood ratio (LLR) information per bit) based on the known bits of 0. Conversely, if decoding the page with a lower RBER, a conventional layered decoding algorithm is launched by assigning LLR with the same magnitude.
For HSD, the hard sensing result only involves bits 0 and 1. With traditional LDPC coding, the initial LLR information is obtained by mapping 0 to 1 and 1 to –1, only changing in sign but not magnitude, which results in poor decoding performance. The hard sensing result for ALCod is split into two sequences, each of which contains a portion of known bits of 0. The initial LLR information of known bits of 0 is adjusted to raise the magnitude, which has relatively high accuracy by changing both the sign and the magnitude. ALCod can improve LDPC HSD performance and data reliability. The effectiveness of ALCod is verified by simulation experiments. Results show that the decoding success ratio is improved. Decoding iterations, latency, decoding layers, BER, and uncorrectable bit error rate (UBER) are reduced.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• By testing the 3D TLC NAND flash chip on a real FPGA hardware platform, we observe that RBER has a larger difference between storage layers and pages under different retention periods and P/E cycles. When using traditional LDPC codes with HSD to correct bit errors, the number of decoding iterations is greatly different between layers and pages, resulting in a large delay fluctuation. Unfortunately, the number of decoding iterations gets to the maximum value in some layers and pages, failing to ensure reliability.
• Motivated by these observations, we propose ALCod that segments data to encode and appropriately adjusts LLR for improving LDPC HSD performance and data reliability. Specifically, according to the changes of RBER, we judge whether it falls within the threshold range and select the appropriate coding method. If RBER is greater than the threshold, the proposed information segmentation LDPC coding method is adopted. The original information is evenly divided into two parts, and the corresponding positions are filled with zeros. Interestingly, the complemented zeros are considered as the known information, the corresponding LLR amplitude

Fig. 1. The basic structure of 2D and 3D flash memories.
value can be adjusted in the decoding process to speed up the decoding of unknown information in the codeword (Before decoding, it cannot determine whether the information of bits 0 or 1 is correct or incorrect in the codeword. We define such bit information as unknown information.). More importantly, ALCod can enhance the error correction performance and SFSD is effectively circumvented. • We verify the effectiveness of ALCod through extensive simulation experiments. The decoding performance is significantly improved, and decoding iterations, latency, decoding layers, and BER are significantly reduced. The rest of this paper is arranged as follows. Section II describes the background and related work. Section III the motivation of this paper. Section IV gives the design of ALCod in detail. Finally, simulation results are analyzed, followed by the conclusion in Sections V and VI, respectively.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
A. Basics of Flash Memory
According to the number of storage layers, flash memory is divided into two-dimensional (2D) and 3D stacked flash memories. 2D flash blocks with the plane structure are composed of word lines (WL) and bit lines (BL), as shown in Fig. 1 (a). 3D stack flash blocks with the three-dimensional structure consist of multiple storage layers, and each layer contains multiple WLs, as shown in Fig. 1 (b). The source selective line (SSL) and drain selective line (DSL) in 2D and 3D flash memories control data write, read, and erase operations. Moreover, 2D flash cells are the main type of floating gate (FG). 3D flash cells are the main types of FG and charge trap (CT). The distinct difference is that FG and CT cells use polysilicon (i.e., a conductor) and silicon nitride film (i.e., an insulator) as the storage material, respectively.
According to the number of bits stored per cell, 2D and 3D flash memories are split into the types of single-level cell (SLC), multi-level cell (MLC), triple-level cell (TLC), and quad-level cell (QLC). Each cell of SLC, MLC, TLC, and QLC stores 1 bit with 2 states, 2 bits with 4 states, 3 bits with 8 states, and 4 bits with 16 states, respectively. For 3D

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 69, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2023

Fig. 2. The working process of layered LDPC decoding based on the Tanner graph.

TLC NAND flash memory with the FG structure, the first bit stored in each cell is called the least significant bit (LSB), the center bit is called the central significant bit (CSB), and the third bit is called the most significant bit (MSB). In terms of one WL, all LSBs make up the lower page (LP), all CSBs make up the upper page (UP), and all MSBs comprise the extra page (EP) [17], as shown in Fig. 1 (c). When electrons are injected into storage cells, the threshold voltage is generated. Fig. 1 (c) illustrates the mapping relationship between storage states and threshold voltage distributions. When reading data from LP, only one read voltage is applied between the threshold voltage of state 101 and state 001. Two and four read voltages are applied with reading data from UP and EP, respectively.

B. Layered LDPC Decoding

When LDPC codes are used in 3D NAND flash memory, the layered decoding can be leveraged, which is popular because of the high convergence speed [16]. The working process of the layered decoding algorithm can be clearly explained by using a Tanner graph. As illustrated in Fig. 2, the length of check nodes (CN) and variable nodes (VN) is 8 and 16, corresponding to the number of redundancy bits and the codeword length, respectively. The LDPC decoding can be divided into M/p layers, where p represents the size of the identity matrix and M denotes the number of CNs. The concrete layered decoding process is described as follows. First, the information of VNs is initialized by computing LLR per bit from the channel. Second, the information of VNs in the first layer is updated by using the formula (2). Third, the information of CNs in the first layer is updated through exploiting the formula (3). Finally, the decoding decision is made. If the decoding is successful, terminate the decoding and output the codeword. Otherwise, update the information of VNs and CNs in the next layer and make the decoding decision. The overall layered decoding algorithm is given as follows [16].
1. The initialization information Lj of each variable node can be computed by using the following formula (1).

Lj

=

ln

P P

bj|rj bj|rj

= =

0 1

(1)

Here, rj is the jth bit that is originally stored. bj is the jth bit that is sensed. P denotes the conditional probability. Initialize Tj = Lj (1 ≤ j ≤ n) and ciijtr−1 = 0 for itr = 1. For HSD, the sensing result Bstm = (b1, b2, b3, . . . , bn−1, bn) only involves

bit 0 and 1. Lj only has two possible values (i.e., Ljbj=0 and Ljbj=1. We have Ljbj=0 = −Ljbj=1 under the condition of equal prior probability. For the layered min-sum decoding, it only
has linear calculation. If we set the same magnitude for all bj, the decoding results are unchanged. Thus, we can set Ljbj=0 = −Ljbj=1 as an arbitrary value. In general, we set Ljbj=0 = 1 and Ljbj=1 = −1 as the initialization information of Tj. For SFSD, we need to use formula (1) to calculate the initialization
information of Tj by combing the threshold voltage distribution and additional read reference voltage.
2. Update the information of VNs by computing formula (2)

vj

=

Tj

−

c(itr−1). ij

(2)

Here, Tj and vj represent the a-posterior probability information of the jth(1 ≤ j ≤ n) variable node, where n is the codeword length. ciijtr−1 denotes the check node information of the (itr − 1)th(1 ≤ itr ≤ Imax) decoding iteration, where Imax is the maximum number of decoding iterations.

3. Update the information of p CNs by calculating for-

mula (3)

⎛

⎞

ciijtr = ⎝

sign(vk)⎠ ·

k∈M(i)\j

min {|vk|} · α ,
k∈M(i)\j

(3)

where α ∈ (0, 1) is a normalized factor and M(i)\j denotes the set {j : Hij = 0} excluding the jth bit.
4. Calculate the maximum likelihood information of all bits
through formula (4)

Tj

=

vj

+

citr . ij

(4)

In formulas (2) (3), and (4), lay is the layer number, itr is the

number of decoding iterations, (lay − 1) · p < i ≤ lay · p,

1 ≤ j ≤ N, and Hij = 0.

5. Make otherwise vj

decoding =0. If H ·

−→Vdec=isi0onor

and get

check: if Tj < to the maximum

0, vj=1, layer and

iteration, decoding output. Otherwise, the iterative decoding is

continued.

C. Related Work
There are many previous works proposed to optimize LDPC codes for flash memory. Optimization of RBER is beneficial to improve LDPC decoding performance. Aslam et al. [5] studied the read reference voltage adjustment and data recovery scheme that can reduce the RBER. Papandreou et al. [10] explored the bit error characteristics of 3D QLC flash memory and proposed a calibration strategy of read voltage based on page recombination to lessen the RBER. Li et al. [11] used the reserved information to adjust and optimize the read reference voltage of 3D QLC, but this method can only approximate the optimal read reference voltage through the pre-stored information, which will inevitably lead to the readretry operation. Guo et al. [8] proposed the Flexlevel scheme to reduce the RBER by reducing the data storage state and expanding the noise tolerance area. When data are written into a flash memory cell, different storage states are affected by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ALCod: ADAPTIVE LDPC CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

1071

programming interference. According to the access characteristics of data, the storage state is remapped [13] to reduce the RBER. In addition, data caching [6] also can reduce the RBER. The decoding delay can be significantly reduced by optimizing the LLR information. Cui et al. [14] optimized the LLR information according to the influence of P/E periods and retention noise on the threshold voltage distribution. Sandell and Ismail [17] used the machine learning algorithm to calculate the LLR information. Although this method can optimize the LLR information, it increases additional computational complexity and overhead. In the process of acquiring LLR information, the read reference voltage needs to be applied several times, which increases the detection delay. Optimizing the use of read reference voltage can reduce the detection delay, thus improving the LDPC read performance. Li et al. [18] proposed a new reading reference voltage placement method to reduce detection delay based on the asymmetric error characteristics of flash memory cells. Du et al. [4] took advantage of the reliability difference of the 3D flash storage layer to record the initial read reference voltage applied in each layer to reduce the detection overhead. Yong and Chang [19] proposed an error dilution scheme to reduce detection delay by using the feature of RBER between different layers of 3D flash memory. Sun et al. [9] observed that intracell unbalanced bit error probability and data dependence exist in planar MLC NAND flash memory. By utilizing the observation, [9] adopted data interleaving to balance intracell bit errors of planar MLC NAND flash memory. Unlike this method, we divide the original information into two parts equally for encoding and decoding based on the variation of RBER induced by 3D TLC NAND flash storage layer, page type, retention time, and P/E cycles. Besides, [9] proposed data dependence aware LDPC decoding to enhance decoding throughput. Different with this approach, we fill in some bits of 0 as known information in the segmented sequence. Additionally, we leverage the known bits of 0 information with an improved LLR amplitude to aid in the decoding of the unknown bit information in the codeword during decoding. As a result, the error correction capability of LDPC codes with HSD is dramatically improved and the decoding iterations are drastically decreased.
Previous works mainly focused on optimizing the read reference voltage to reduce the RBER and LLR information. Compared with these prior works, this paper does not consider optimizing read reference voltage to improve LLR and reduce RBER, and will not introduce additional read operations. In addition, this paper mainly aims to improve the error correction capability of LDPC hard decoding and avoid soft decoding with high read overhead effectively, especially for 3D NAND flash memories. According to the variation of RBER, the proposed ALCod can adaptively execute LDPC coding operations. The implementation is simple and LDPC decoding performance can be significantly enhanced. More importantly, only performing HSD can reduce bit errors and improve data reliability. More interestingly, this paper exploits known bits of 0 information in ALCod to facilitate decoding for unknown information, further upgrading LDPC error correction capability with HSD.

TABLE I 3D TLC NAND FLASH CHIP INFORMATION
III. MOTIVATION We test 3D TLC NAND flash memory chips with floating gate structure using a real FPGA hardware platform and the chip information is shown in Table I. During the experiment, commands to program, read, and erase blocks with a given physical address are issued. Randomly generated data can be written to the selected page while completing the program operation. When the read operation is conducted, the raw data are read out to count RBER. Direct access to flash memory media is possible. The testing platform includes the main controller, the peripheral component interface express (PCIe) interface, and eight sockets for attaching eight flash chips. The firmware on the testing board primarily provides certain basic operating interfaces to the host, such as block erasure, page program, and page read. These interfaces can be used by the host to perform the necessary operations on the flash memory chip. In the retention experiment, we use high-temperature baking to reduce real testing time. The raw data are retrieved in three steps: 1) select physical blocks with a specific amount of P/E cycles; 2) bake the chip at a high temperature (i.e., 85◦C) once the data have been written into the physical blocks; and 3) collect the data under a certain number of P/E cycles and retention periods. By the real platform experiments, we first investigate the variation of the inter-layer RBER under different retention time and P/E cycles. We then study the influence of the inter-layer RBER variation on conventional LDPC decoding iterations, UBER, and BER. With the increase of retention time and P/E cycles for 3D NAND flash memory, RBER increases gradually. More interestingly, RBER shows a larger difference between storage layers due to process variation. Besides, it also demonstrates a larger gap between pages. Consequently, LDPC codes are exploited to reduce bit errors and thus improve data reliability, displaying a larger gap for decoding iterations between layers and pages. Especially, for some layers and pages, decoding iterations become extremely high due to much higher RBER, getting to the maximum value and thus failing to ensure data reliability. This paper concentrates on improving LDPC decoding performance and therefore cutting down the decoding iterations and latency. Through preliminary experiments, this section describes the motivation of this paper in detail as follows. This paper studies the effects of the inter-layer RBER on LDPC decoding iterations when 3D TLC NAND flash memory suffers from different retention periods and P/E cycles, as shown in Fig. 3. For retention 3 months and P/E 1K, 3K, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1072

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 69, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2023

Fig. 3. The variations of decoding iterations and RBER between layers and pages (i.e., LP (a, d), UP (b, e), and EP (c, f)) under different P/E cycles and retention time.

5K, Fig. 3 (a), (b), and (c) show the variation of the inter-layer RBER and decoding iterations. Experimental results show that RBER and decoding iterations increase with the growth of P/E cycles, regardless of storage layers and pages. For LP, RBER and decoding iterations are much lower than that of UP and EP. Interestingly, RBER and decoding iterations are much higher for the bottom and top layers. For LP and UP, decoding iterations are low between layers. Bit errors can be corrected and therefore data reliability is guaranteed. However, for EP, decoding iterations are much higher (i.e., close to the maximum value of 30), especially for the bottom layers due to higher RBER, resulting in failing to ensure reliability.
Along with the growing retention time, the RBER gradually increases at a certain number of P/E cycles. The RBER difference among LP, UP, and EP continually broadens with the prolongation of retention time. In addition, the decoding iterations also rise with retention time. When the P/E cycle is 5k and retention time is 6 months, the decoding iterations have reached the maximum value at the bottom and top layers, bit errors cannot be fully corrected, failing to improve reliability, as shown in Fig. 3 (d), (e), and (f).
Moreover, the RBER has a great influence on BER and UBER of LDPC HSD, as shown in Fig. 4. Within a certain RBER range (i.e., < 6.5 × 10−3), the BER after decoding is 0, fully correcting bit errors. However, once the RBER is beyond 6.5 × 10−3, UBER and BER increases rapidly. Consequently, data reliability cannot be ensured completely by using conventional LDPC HSD (i.e., also called normal (Norm) LDPC). In general, once the RBER exceeds a certain value, the bit error cannot be completely corrected in one codeword, and we define the certain value of RBER

Fig. 4. The variations of the uncorrectable bit error rate (UBER). and bit error rate (BER) with LDPC HSD under different RBERs.
as the threshold. The threshold of RBER is the upper limit of error correction capability using the Norm LDPC codes with HSD.
In summary, the decoding performance of LDPC coding is an important factor affecting decoding iterations and data reliability. Specifically, for many pages (e.g., UP and EP) and layers (e.g., bottom and top layers) with a certain number of P/E cycles and retention time, the decoding performance is poor, bit errors cannot be fully recovered. Thus, this paper proposes ALCod to improve decoding performance by appropriately encoding the information bits and optimizing LLR per bit. Decoding iterations and decoding latency can be reduced. More importantly, data reliability can be improved by only using HSD, effectively avoiding activating SFSD.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ALCod: ADAPTIVE LDPC CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

1073

Fig. 5. The overview of ALCod mainly including encoding and decoding. Here, BS1 and BS2 denote bit sequence 1 and bit sequence 2, respectively.
IV. THE PROPOSED ALCOD SCHEME
This section presents the proposed ALCod scheme for 3D NAND flash memory in detail.
A. ALCod Overview
The overview of ALCod is illustrated in Fig. 5 including encoding and decoding. In the process of encoding, the RBER is considered to select the appropriate encoding involving Norm LDPC and segmentation (Sege) LDPC encoding. When decoding, Norm and Sege decoding are adaptively implemented according to the variation of RBER.
The raw bit information sequence with length N is divided into two bit information sequences of equal length by ALCod when RBER is much higher (i.e., beyond the threshold). The two bit sequences are each filled with N/2 bits of known information, as shown in Fig. 5. Utilizing LDPC codes, two full bit information sequences of length N are encoded separately. To enable error correction during decoding, more bit errors are dispersed throughout the two codewords. Compared to traditional LDPC error correction techniques, the pressure of error correction is greatly reduced. Moreover, the bit errors in a single codeword fall within the range of LDPC codes with HSD error correction. And, the filled N/2 known bits of 0 are fully utilized to aid in the decoding of the information pertaining to the unknown bit. Due to the fact that known information and unknown information are both a part of the same check equation, it can offer useful LLR information to speed up decoding update for unknown information. In other words, known information can aid in the decoding of unknown information by appropriately altering LLR per bit of known bit information. Increased precision is the result of modifications

Algorithm 1 ALCod Algorithm

Input: Raw informtion −→X = (x1, x2, x3, . . . , xN−1, xN ) Output: Delter, latency, Delayer, BER, and UBER

1: 2:
3:

if

R−R−→ →YBeE←←R(x<(1−→X−→ ,th,xrR−→e2,et)hxe3n, . . . , xN−1,

xN ) · MRT×N

4: Program Y into the 3D NAND flash page

5: 6: 7: 8:

els−R−−Re→ → →Yee12←← ← (((−→x0X11,,,−R→x0e221,,,

x3 . . . R−0→e32, ). .

, .,

xN/2, 0N/2,

0N/2+1, . . . , xN/2+1, . . . ,

0N ) · MRT×N xN ) · MRT×N

9: Implement step 4

10: end if

11: if Use Norm LDPC encoding then

12: Readout Y ← (x1, x2, . . . , xN , re1, re2, . . . , reR) 13: for i from 1 to N do

14:

if xi = 1 then

15:

LLRi ← −1

16:

else

17:

LLRi ← 1

18:

end if

19: end for

20: for j from 1 to R do

21:

if rej = 1 then

22:

LLRj ← −1

23:

else

24:

LLRj ← 1

25:

end if

26: end for

27: Use formulas (1), (2), and (3) to perform layered

LDPC decoding and make decoding decision

28: Count Delter, latency, Delayer, BER, and UBER

29: else

−→

30:

Readout Y −→

← (x1, . . . , xN , re1, . . . , reR, re1, . . . , reR)

31: −→ Y1 ← (x1, . . . , xN/2, 0N/2+1, . . . , 0N , re1, . . . , reR)

32: Y2 ← (01, . .−→. , 0N/2,−→xN/2+1, . . . , xN/2, re1, . . . , reR)

33: Gain LLR of Y1 and Y2 respectively

34: for i from 1 to N/2 do

−→

35:

Perform step 1−→4 − 18 (LLR of Y 1) and LLRi =

5 or 10 (LLR of Y2)

36: end for

37: for i from N/2 + 1 to N do −→

38:

LLRi ← 5 −→or 10 (LLR of Y 1) and perform step 14 −

18 (LLR of Y2)

39: end for

40: for j from 1 to R do

41:

if rej = 1 or rej = 1 then

42:

Perform step 21 − 25

43:

end if

44: end for

45: Implement step 27 and 28

46: end if

in the sign and amplitude of the improved LLR. The details

are described in Section IV-C. By combining Sege decoding and optimized LLR, the error correction capability of ALCod with HSD is greatly improved and the decoding iterations are significantly reduced. Therefore, ALCod can reduce decoding latency and avoid soft decoding. Overall, the working process is described in Algorithm 1, which mainly describes the processes of Norm encoding and decoding as well as Sege encoding and decoding with optimized LLR information.
In Algorithm 1, the first step is to determine whether the RBER is less than the threshold. If so, the Norm

cLt−l→XheoDnedgPetwCrh=eodrueodnnf(dcxo−a→ 1YRnd, tix.n2g,ibR−→ nxicte3ol,upv.deie.sirc.nat,gtoixoorNbnt−th−R→ a1eiie,nsxerNdap=)werbfwyo(irrintmefhc1oe,ordmrnleevan2ettgo,riot.tihn.ng.ge,onbrfeiettrhRaNe)tveewpcattainhotrdherioaidtnbyedtnaitcR−→ nihtiyeencg=km(tahmxte1rai,xtxrc.i2ox,dIxte3Hw,s.oa.rttido.s,fix−→ e[YNMs−R1[×,−→ =XNxNI−R→R)(e×−→ ·]XRM]·−R→ ,RT[e×Mw)N,hRe×iirtnNeIiRssIt×eRRp×w]RTr2it.ties=Anfttheto0er

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1074

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 69, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2023

the 3D NAND flash page in steps 3−→and 4. If the

−XR→B1 ER= (01, 02,

is greater than the threshold, X

.

.

(.x,10,Nx/22,,xx3N,/.2.+.1,,x.N./.2,,x0NN)/.2+−→ X12,

.

. . , 0N−→) and X2

isandsplX−→ it 2 involve

into =
N/2

bits of 0, respectively. The to g−→ enerate th−→e redundant

Sege LDPC encoding bit vectors Re1→ and

is−R→ela2unbcahseedd

on

X1 −→an−d→X2

in

steps 6 −→−→

and

7.

The

produced

code-

w−→Yords=[X2[R−→Xe1−R]→e1a−Rn→de2][X2toRe2s]toraere

combined into a sequence in the 3D NAND flash

page in steps 8 and 9. In the decoding process, −→if the Norm LDPC encoding is used, the bit sequence Y −→= (x1, x2, . . . , xN , re1, re2, . . . , reR) is readout in step 12. Y contains some bit errors due to channel noise i−→ nterference. It is used to obtain LLR information per bit. In Y , bit 1 is

mapped to –1, bit 0 is mapped to 1 in steps 13-26. After

gaining LLR per bit, using formulas (1), (2), and (3) given

in Section II-B performs the layered LDPC decoding oper-

ation and counts Delter, latency, Delayer, BER, and UBER

in steps 27 and−→28. If the proposed Sege LDPC encod-

ing is exploited, Y = (x1, . . . , xN , re1, . . . , reR, re1, . . . , reR)

including bit errors −→ due to channel noise interference is

read−→out in step 30. Y is divided into two-bit sequences

of −→

Y1

=

(x1, . . . , xN/2, 0N/2+1, . . . , 0N/2, re1, . . . , reR) and

Y2

=

(01

,

.

.

.

,

0N/2,

xN/2+1

,.. −→

.

,

xN−→, re1

,

.

.

.

,

reR)

in

steps

31

and 32. LLR information of Y1 and Y2 is obtained respectively

in steps 34-44. The LLR amplitude value of N/2 known bits of

−→ −→

0 in Y1 and Y2 is enhanced. Other unknown LLR information

can be obtained by performing similar operations in steps

14-18 and steps 21-25. Once the optimized LLR information

is gained, the layered LDPC decoding is executed and Delter,

latency, Delayer, BER, and UBER are counted in step 45.

B. ALCod Encoding
When performing ALCod encoding for raw information bits with length N, the RBER is judged by exploiting the variations of page types, 3D storage layers, P/E cycles, and retention time. Before being used, 3D NAND flash chips are randomly sampled and rigorously tested by manufacturers to determine their reliability and performance. A crucial criterion for measuring reliability is the RBER, which is examined and tested across various page types, 3D storage layers, P/E cycles, and retention times. The specific RBER value (e.g., 6.5 × 10−3) can be recorded for a certain page type, 3D storage layer, P/E cycles, and retention period. This is due to the fact that before running ALCod, it is required to ascertain whether RBER exceeds the cutoff point (i.e., 6.5 × 10−3 described in Section III) based on page type, 3D storage layer, P/E cycles, and retention period. If the RBER is less than the threshold (thre), the Norm LDPC encoding is executed to generate redundant bits (RB). Information bits together with RB make up a complete codeword. It is then written to the flash page. If the RBER is larger than thre, Sege LDPC encoding is launched. Especially, raw information bits with length N are split evenly into two pieces with length N/2. When encoding, two complete sequences of information with

Fig. 6. An example for explaining the Sege LDPC encoding process.
length N are produced by the complement of 0 with length N/2, as shown in Fig. 5. Two new information sequences are encoded in parallel, generating the corresponding RB and codewords. When programming, two codewords are combined to store in the 3D NAND flash page. We take an example to clearly explain the Sege LDPC encoding process, as shown in Fig. 6. Assume that raw bit information is 110101011001 with length 12. It is evenly divided into two parts, each filled with six zeros, to form an information sequence of length 12. As a result, an original information sequence is divided into two information sequences 110101000000 and 000000011001, which are Sege LDPC encoded, thus generating the corresponding RB. Two code words are combined into a complete sequence of information written to the same flash page.
In the beginning, according to Fig. 3, retention time is short and P/E cycles are less, RBER is much lower, all pages are encoded by the normal LDPC process. However, with the increase of storage time and P/E cycles, some pages become weak pages with higher RBER and need to trigger ALCod coding to ensure reliability. ALCod is activated based on whether the RBER exceeds the threshold. Based on the workload access characteristics, we can determine how long the data will be saved once it is encoded [4]. The storage duration for hot read data is usually short. Cold read data is typically kept on hand for a long period (e.g., six months) [7]. When this period has passed, data refresh procedures are performed to lower the error rate. However, premature refresh triggers can shorten flash memory lifetime and increase write amplification [4]. The controller periodically keeps track of the retention time, P/E cycles, storage layer, and page type information (i.e., based on address mapping information) to assess the health state of the flash memory. The information can be used to the ALCod coding design.
C. ALCod Decoding
When implementing ALCod decoding, Norm and Sege LDPC decoding are adaptively selected based on the encoding rules. If the raw information bits are encoded using Norm LDPC encoding, the corresponding Norm LDPC decoding is executed. If the raw information bits are encoded via the Sege LDPC encoding, the corresponding Sege LDPC decoding is activated. In the process of Sege LDPC decoding, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ALCod: ADAPTIVE LDPC CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

1075

V. EVALUATION
This section first introduces the evaluation methodology for ALCod, and then analyzes the variations of decoding iterations, latency, layers, BER, and UBER.

Fig. 7. An example for explaining the Sege LDPC decoding process.
stored information sequence happens to more errors due to noise interference and is evenly divided into two parts for decoding. The segmentation rule is the same when encoding. The rest of the space is filled in with 0’s with length N/2. The corresponding RB is attached to the new sequences with length N that needs to be decoded. More interestingly, N/2 bits of 0 are known information in the decoding sequences, which can assist other unknown bits of information with length N/2 for decoding. Specifically, we can boost the LLR magnitude for N/2 bits of 0 to facilitate decoding. For N/2 unknown bit information, we cannot judge the correctness of bit 0 or 1. Therefore, we set the same magnitude for bits 0 and 1. Once we obtain the LLR per bit, ALCod iterative decoding is performed. If decoding successes, output results and count decoding iterations, decoding time, BER, UBER, and decoding layers. If decoding fails, continue iteration until satisfying the condition of decoding termination.
Let’s give an example to understand the decoding process clearly, as shown in Fig. 7. The original read bit sequence 1111000010111011 is split into two information sequences 11110000000010 and 00000000101111. The red bits in the figure indicate that an error occurs. It can be seen from the figure that the error bits are scattered between two sequences of information to be decoded. In addition, the two information sequences contain known and unknown information. Specifically, the six zeros added are known and the other bits are unknown. For known information, the amplitude can be increased when the LLR information P0 is obtained. Instead, the LLR information of bit 0 with L0 and bit 1 with L1 is assigned the same magnitude value for unknown information. Namely, L0 + L1 = 0 and |P0| > |L1| or |L0|. In other words, P0 has a higher amplitude value. Conversely, L0 and L1 have a lower amplitude value. Once the LLR information for each bit is obtained, the Sege LDPC decoding is initiated. After that, bit errors are corrected (i.e., marked in blue), the two information sequences are merged to recover the original information.

A. Evaluation Methodology
ALCod is evaluated via computer simulations, which mainly involve data encoding, adding noise, and decoding. First, randomly generated data of 2KB are encoded by using Norm LDPC codes to produce the codeword. We then add Gaussian noise to the codeword. As a result, because of interference from noise, some bits are error-prone. The RBER is calculated by comparing it with the original information. LLR information per bit in the interfered codeword can be gained by mapping bit 0 to 1 and mapping bit 1 to −1. Once obtaining the initial LLR information, the LDPC decoding is activated by using the layered min-sum algorithm, which is widely used in NAND flash memory [15]. When the decoding is complete, the number of decoding iterations, the decoding delay, BER, and UBER are counted under a given RBER.
To prove the validity of ALCod, we encode the randomly generated data of 2KB by exploiting the proposed Sege LDPC coding. The same signal-to-noise ratio is added to the generated codeword to compare Norm and Sege LDPC coding error correction capability at the same RBER. LLR information is optimized by using known bits of 0 information, as described in Section IV-C. Specifically, bit 0 in the unknown information is mapped to 1, bit 1 is mapped to −1, and known bits of 0 information is mapped to 5 and 10. The LLR mapping for the known bits of 0 information is related to the decoding decision rule given in Section II-B. The decision rule is defined as follows. If the LLR of the variable node Tj in the formula (3) is less than 0, the decoding result is judged as bit 1. Otherwise, the decoding result is judged as bit 0. Therefore, the LLR mapping for the known bits of 0 information corresponds to the decoding decision rule. Known bits of 0 information is fully utilized to speed up the decoding of unknown information. The LLR information amplitude value is adjusted. By using ALCod, LLR not only has the changes of symbol but also the changes of amplitude value, which can greatly improve the decoding error correction capability. The decoding algorithm is also the layered min-sum algorithm. We compare the number of decoding iterations, decoding delay, BER, and UBER under the same RBER. We use the Gaussian error model to simulate the RBER variation for verifying the effectiveness of ALCod, which has been proved that flash channel approximates Gaussian channel [1], [9], [14], [30].
B. Results Analysis
In the process of evaluation, when using ALCod and conventional scheme (ConSc) [12], we first study the variations of decoding iterations (Delter), decoding layers (Delayer), normalized decoding time by ConSc, total Delayers, BER after decoding, and UBER, as shown in Fig. 8 (a), (b), and (c). Simulation results show that Delter and Delayer with ConSc increase with the increase of RBER and get to the maximum value of 30 and 4 each iteration at 1.2 × 10−2, as shown in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1076

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 69, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2023

Fig. 8. The variations of average decoding iterations (Delter), average decoding layers (Delayer) (a), decoding time, total Delayer (b), UBER, and BER after decoding (c) when using the conventional scheme (ConSc) and the proposed ALCod scheme.

Fig. 8 (a). Interestingly, when adopting ALCod in BS 1 and BS 2, Delter and Delayer are much lower, compared with ConSc. Although at a higher RBER of 1.8 × 10−2, ALCod can still reduce Delter and Delayer. Consequently, after exploiting ALCod, Delter and Delayer can be significantly reduced. Then, we explore the effects of ALCod on decoding time and the total Delayer when correcting bit errors in BS 1 and BS 2, as shown in Fig. 8 (b). The decoding time is normalized by ConSc. Simulation results demonstrate that decoding time and total Delayer increase with the increase of RBER. When adopting ConSc, the total Delayer increases rapidly and reaches the maximum value of 120 at 1.2 × 10−2. However, for ALCod, the total Delayer grows smoothly and is extremely low, which is greatly reduced, compared with ConSc. Moreover, the decoding time in BS 1 or BS 2 is also much lower than ConSc. More importantly, the total decoding time (i.e., sum of decoding time in BS 1 and BS 2) is also much lower except in the higher RBER. The total decoding time is slightly high. This is because that the higher RBER is beyond the error correction capability of ALCod, inducing more Delter and thus consuming more time. Nevertheless, if independently decoding BS 1 or BS 2, the decoding time is still low. Therefore, parallel decoding can be adopted for reducing decoding time.
In addition, we study the decoding performance of ALCod by counting the variations of BER and UBER. Simulation results in Fig. 8 (c) illustrate that when using ConSc, UBER increases sharply with the increase of RBER. When the RBER gets to 1.2 × 10−2, UBER becomes much higher due to limited error correction capability. For ALCod in BS 1, UBER and BER are maintained at 0 until the RBER reaches 1.8 × 10−2. For ALCod in BS 2, UBER and BER can be kept at 0 until the RBER is close to 1.4 × 10−2. When utilizing ConSc, the BER and UBER after decoding increases with the RBER at a higher rate. Conversely, by exploiting ALCod regardless of BS 1 or BS 2, the BER is 0 at RBER close to 1.4×10−2, fully correcting bit errors. When the RBER excesses 1.4 × 10−2, the BER increases slowly and is still lower compared with ConSc. As a result, ALCod can significantly improve decoding performance.

From the above results, ALCod can greatly lower down
Delter, Delayer, decoding time, total Delayer, and UBER as
well as BER. This is because that ConSc with one BS includes
more bit errors, thus inducing greater error correction pressure
in the limited error correction range for LDPC HSD. However,
by leveraging ALCod, bit errors are dispersed to address in
two different BS, relieving the pressure of error correction for
LDPC HSD and therefore improving decoding performance.
More interestingly, AlCod decoding performance can be fur-
ther improved by optimizing LLR for known bits of 0 in one
ALCod codeword, verified in Section IV-C.
Additionally, we compare error correction performance
by using Norm LDPC with 4096 parity bits adopting LLR0=1 [12] and the proposed ALCod with optimized LLR0=5. Fig. 9 (a) shows the results of the simulation. A case
where UBER is not shown is BS1 using ALCod with optimized LLR0=5. Bit errors can also be completely repaired,
with UBER equal to 0, when the RBER is within a spe-
cific range. The advantage of the proposed method is that
it lowers UBER as RBER rises. Nevertheless, UBER rises
sharply and reaches a higher level when RBER is about greater than or equal to 1.73 × 10−2. When RBER for BS 1 utilizing ALCod with optimized LLR0=5 approaches 1.94 × 10−2, UBER remains 0 since bit errors have been com-
pletely repaired. When RBER is approximately less than or equal to 1.53 × 10−2, UBER is 0, and ALCod is used with optimized LLR0=5 for BS 2, bit errors are also fully rectified. When RBER is approximately 1.94 × 10−2, UBER after
using the proposed method is much lower than Norm LDPC with 4096 parity bits utilizing LLR0=1 [12]. Additionally,
the average UBER for BS 1 and BS 2 is significantly lower. Therefore, using ALCod with optimized LLR0=5 can improve
error correcting performance.
In addition, we count the Delter, add the Delter from BS1
and BS2, and compare the results to the Norm LDPC. Fig. 9(b)
illustrates the results of the simulation. With Norm LDPC utilizing LLR0=1 and 4096 parity bits, Delter increases signif-
icantly as RBER rises. Delter reaches a considerably higher level when RBER is about 1.94 × 10−2. With ALCod and optimized LLR0=5 for BS 1, Delter gently rises and keeps a
low level at increased RBER. In comparison to Norm LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ALCod: ADAPTIVE LDPC CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

1077

Fig. 9. The variation of UBER (a) and average decoding iterations (Delter) (b) under different RBERs using Norm LDPC with 4096 parity bits and ALCod.
When PE is 5K, the RBER exceeds the tolerable range of the Norm LDPC coding at some layers. However, the maximum RBER (i.e., about 1.1 × 10−2) is still less than the tolerable range of LDPC, and there is a certain gap. Therefore, the proposed ALCod scheme can extend the lifetime of 3D TLC NAND flash memory to at least 5K when RT is 3-month.

Fig. 10. The variation of tolerating RBER with Norm LDPC coding and ALCod. The proposed scheme can extend the lifetime of 3D TLC NAND flash memory to at least 5K when RT is 3-month.
with 4096 parity bits using LLR0=1, BER for BS 2 utilizing ALCod with optimized LLR0=5 is also lower. We add up the Delter of BS1 and BS2 using ALCod with optimized LLR0=5. The simulation result shows that the sum of Delter is significantly less than that of Norm LDPC utilizing LLR0=1 and 4096 parity bits. Generally, Norm LDPC with 4096 parity bits and ALCod have the same amount of redundant bits. However, ALCod performs error correction more effectively and has less Delter.
Finally, let’s take retention 3-month as an example to analyze lifetime improvement. We measure flash lifetime by P/E cycles. When retention time is fixed, the RBER increases with the increase of P/E cycles. The higher the RBER that ECC (such as LDPC codes) can tolerate, the more P/E cycles, and the longer the flash memory lifetime. In addition, for 3D TLC NAND flash memory, the lifetime of the block depends on the RBER of the weakest page. We find that the EP pages have higher RBER by real testing on the FPGA hardware platform, as shown in Fig. 3. Therefore, we analyze the RBER of EP pages to discuss lifetime improvement. Fig. 10 shows the variation of tolerating RBER with the Norm LDPC coding and ALCod. The RBER that ALCod can tolerate is significantly higher than the Norm LDPC coding. The result is shown in Fig. 8 (c). The Norm LDPC coding can tolerate the RBER of 6.5×10−3. ALCod can tolerate the RBER close to 1.4×10−2.

C. Sensitivity Analysis
In this section, we analyze the effects of different LLR
values (i.e., including traditional and optimized LLR) for
known bits of 0 in one ALCod codeword on Delter, UBER,
and decoding time. First, by utilizing ALCod, we count
the variation of Delter under different LLR values involving traditional LLR0=1, optimized LLR0=5, and LLR0=10, as shown in Fig. 11 (a). Here, LLR0 denotes LLR of known
all 0 in one ALCod codeword. Simulation results show that when the RBER is relatively low, such as 8.0 × 10−3 and 1.0×10−2, there is a small difference in Delter for using traditional LLR0=1, optimized LLR0=5, and LLR0=10. However, the difference is obvious when the RBER is relatively high such as 1.8 × 10−2, Delter in BS 1 and BS 2 is significantly reduced by using optimized LLR0=5 and LLR0=10. More interestingly, the gap of Delter is not obvious between adopting LLR0=5 and LLR0=10, inducing low sensitivity. Besides, we further explore the variation of decoding time
under traditional and optimized LLR. Simulation results in
Fig. 11 (b) display that decoding time can be further eliminated by integrating optimized LLR0=5 and LLR0=10. The difference in decoding time is also small between such two
optimized LLR.
ALCod can further cut down Delter and decoding time
as well as UBER by optimizing LLR of known bits of 0
information. This is because that adjusting and expanding the
LLR amplitude value of the known information can assist the
decoding convergence for the unknown information. In the
process of decoding, it can promote the rapid convergence of
the decoding to the correct codeword information. In addition,
LLR information accuracy is improved, resulting in improved
decoding performance and speed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1078

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 69, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2023

Fig. 11. The variation of Delter (a) and decoding time (b) by exploiting traditional LLR and optimized LLR via ALCod.
D. Overhead Analysis
Buffer overhead analysis: Usually, a sequence of length N is encoded by LDPC codes with code rate of N/(N + R). R redundant bits are generated to form a codeword of length N + R. After that, it is stored in the buffer, then transferred and written to the 3D TLC NAND flash page. For ALCod, a sequence of length N is split two N-bit sequences denoted N1 and N2 with N/2 known bits of 0, respectively. After performing ALCod encoding with code rate of N/(N +R), N/2 known bits of 0 do not need to be stored in the buffer. The total length stored in the buffer is N + 2R. After the sequence of length N+2R is written to the 3D TLC NAND flash page, it is cleared from the buffer. It needs additional space to store R redundant bits. Assume that the size of the buffer is 8GB = 236 bit, the LDPC code rate is 8/9 used in the paper, the sequence of length N = 2KB is encoded. R = 2048 redundant bits are generated. The ratio of the additional buffer space to the total buffer space is 2048/236 = 1/225. Therefore, the buffer overhead is negligible.
For 3D TLC NAND flash memory, assume that the maximum retention time is 6-month and the maximum P/E cycle is 5K. We only record the information of page type, 3D storage layer, retention time, and P/E cycle when RBER gets to the threshold (i.e., 6.5 × 10−3). For one 3D TLC block, only some layers and pages reach the RBER threshold when retention time is less than or equal to 6-month and the P/E cycle is less than or equal to 5K. For example, when retention time is less than or equal to 3-month and the P/E cycle is less

than or equal to 5K, the EP RBER of 6 layers (i.e., 2nd, 3rd, 7th, 8th, and 9th layer) can reach the threshold, as shown in Fig. 3 (c), which is record in the buffer. The UP RBER of only 2nd layer can reach the threshold. When retention time is less than or equal to 6-month and the P/E cycle is less than or equal to 5K, the LP RBER of 3 layers (i.e., 2nd, 3rd, and 63rd layer) can reach the threshold, as shown in Fig. 3 (d). The UP RBER of 36 layers (i.e., from 2nd to 23rd layer and from 54th to 63rd layer) can reach the threshold, as shown in Fig. 3 (e). The EP RBER of 33 layers (i.e., from 2nd to 25th layer, from 33rd to 35th layer, from 56th to 58th layer, 42nd layer, 62nd layer, and 63rd layer) can gets to the threshold, as shown in Fig. 3 (f). When limiting the maximum retention time and P/E cycle, the RBER in other cases does not exceed the threshold and does not need to be recorded. It only needs to record the information that may exceed the threshold. When encoding and decoding, it just needs to look up the table to see if the RBER exceeds the threshold. The retention time is recorded using 3 bits, the page type is recorded using 3 bits, the number of layer is recorded using 7 bits, the RBER threshold is recorded using 7 bits, and the P/E cycle is recoded using 13 bits.
For one block, when retention time is less than or equal to 3-month and the P/E cycle is less than or equal to 5K, only the EP RBER of 6 layers, UP RBER of 2nd layer, the corresponding retention time, the P/E cycle, layer, and page type are required to store, as explained above. The needed extra buffer space is 6 × (6 + 3 + 13 + 7 + 7) + (6 + 3 + 13 + 7 + 7) = 252 bits. Similarly, when retention time is less than or equal to 6-month and the P/E cycle is less than or equal to 5K, only the LP RBER of 3 layers, UP RBER of 36 layers, EP RBER of 33 layers, the corresponding retention time, the P/E cycle, layer, and page type are required to store, as explained above. The needed extra buffer space is (3 + 36 + 33) × (6 + 3 + 13 + 7 + 7) = 2592 bits. For one block, there are 2844 (i.e., 252 + 2592) bits required to store. For one chip with 8 × 504 blocks, the extra buffer space needed is 2844 × 8 × 504 bits (the chip information is given in Table I), which is about 1.37MB. The buffer overhead is acceptable for gaining the benefits of reliability and latency.
Storage overhead analysis: The storage cost of ALCod depends on the RBER. In the early stage of 3D TLC NAND flash memory (i.e., less P/E cycles and shorter retention time), the RBER is lower and thus it is not required to launch ALCod. Norm LDPC coding can ensure data reliability, without introducing additional overhead. In the late stage of 3D TLC NAND flash memory, the RBER is much higher, which may be beyond the error correction capability of Norm LDPC coding. As a result, Sege LDPC coding needs to be activated. The storage space is sacrificed for obtaining the reliability benefit. Raw information is split to encode and thus it needs to store one more piece of redundant information.
The user data size for each page is 16KB=8 pieces of 2KB. In this manuscript, the 2KB of data are encoded using an 8/9 LDPC code rate, producing 0.25KB ECC. Each 2KB of user data requires an additional 0.25KB of ECC. Therefore, a total of 0.5KB of ECC needs to be stored for each 2KB of user data. Some user space is sacrificed to store additional ECC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ALCod: ADAPTIVE LDPC CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

1079

TABLE II THE SIMULATION ENVIRONMENT AND PARAMETERS
information. For a page, 2KB of user data space is sacrificed to store extra ECC information. Hence, the number of ECC codewords on one page is reduced from 8 to 7. The available space for user data is reduced for storing additional ECC information. The sacrificed codeword space of 2KB for one page is used to store additional ECC. The number of ECC codewords will not decrease on every page. The number of ECC codewords for pages with a higher raw bit error rate (RBER) that are only required to start ALCod is reduced. For 3D TLC NAND flash memory, RBER of each page varies greatly in different storage layers after a certain retention time and P/E cycles, as shown in Fig. 3 in the text. Not every page needs to sacrifice 2KB of user space to store additional ECC. The proposed ALCod scheme is only used for some pages with higher RBER (i.e., exceeds a certain threshold of explained in the text in Section III). When RBER is below a specific threshold, only normal LDPC coding needs to be enabled to ensure reliability with no storage overhead.
Next, we analyze the storage overhead when some pages with higher RBER ((i.e., exceeds a certain threshold)) are required to launch ALCod. When the retention time is 3 months and the P/E cycle is 5K, as shown in Fig. 3 (c) in the text, for EP, RBERs of 6 layers (i.e., 2nd3rd, 7th, 8th, and 9th layer) exceed the threshold. ALCod needs to be started to correct bit errors of EP with 6 layers. The extra space that is sacrificed is 2KB × 6 = 12KB. For UP, the RBER of only one layer (i.e., 2nd layer) exceeds the threshold. ALCod needs to be launched to correct bit errors of UP with 1 layer. The extra space that is sacrificed is 2KB × 1 = 2KB. For LP, the RBER of all layers is below the threshold, ALCod does not need to be started, and no additional overhead is introduced. A block has 2304 pages in it. The total block size is 41832KB (i.e., 2304×18592B). Thereby, after the above calculation, the additional storage space sacrificed is 12KB + 2KB = 14KB,

which takes up 0.03% (i.e., (12 + 2)/41832 × 100%) of a block storage space. When retention time is 6 months and the P/E cycle is 5K, as shown in Fig. 3 (d), for EP, RBERs of 33 layers (i.e., from 2nd to 25th layer, from 33rd to 35th layer, from 56th to 58th layer, 42nd layer, 62nd layer, and 63th layer) exceed the threshold. ALCod needs to be started to correct bit errors of EP with 33 layers. The extra space that is sacrificed is 2KB × 33 = 66KB. For UP, RBERs of 36 layers (i.e., from 2nd to 23rd layer and from 54th to 63rd layer) exceed the threshold. ALCod needs to be launched to correct bit errors of UP with 36 layers. The extra space that is sacrificed is 2KB × 36 = 72KB. For LP, RBERs of 3 layers exceed the threshold. ALCod needs to be launched to correct bit errors of LP with 3 layers. The extra space that is sacrificed is 2KB×3 = 6KB. Therefore, when retention time is 6 months and the P/E cycle is 5K, for EP, UP, and LP, the total amount of extra space sacrificed is 66KB + 72KB + 6KB = 144KB, which takes up about 0.34% (i.e., 144/41832 × 100%) of a block storage space.
To reduce access overhead, we put additional ECC information in the same data page along with the information bits. If the read request is 2KB, either sequential or random reads, it does not need to read data across pages. This is because both the 2KB user data and the 0.5KB ECC parity are stored in the same pages. For sequential read requests of 4KB, the data in each page are read sequentially. The proposed ALCod does not affect performance, having obvious advantages. Sequential read requests have been found to be useful for enhancing flash system performance in earlier work [37]. For random read requests of 4KB, one page may include 7 pieces of 2KB, it needs to read an additional of 2KB across other pages to compose a 4KB of data. In this case, partial page reads (i.e., 4KB read) can be used to minimize the performance penalty. It takes an extra partial page read time (i.e., about 45us) to get an extra 2KB.
When 3D TLC NAND flash memory experiences heavy wearing and long time storage, RBER becomes higher and reliability cannot be guaranteed by using the traditional error correction method. Data loss may occur, which is considered as an important issue that must be guaranteed. Compared with the traditional error correction method, the ALCod scheme can significantly improve the reliability. However, some buffer and storage space as well as some performance may be sacrificed for obtaining the reliability improvement. After the above analysis, there is a partial performance penalty for only 4KB random read requests. For 2KB sequential or random read requests, the proposed ALCod does not incur a performance penalty. After buffer overhead analysis in Section V-D, the buffer overhead is minimal and acceptable for the reliability improvement. Moreover, for the space overhead, after the above analysis, when retention time is 3 months and the P/E cycle is 5K, the additional storage space sacrificed takes up 0.03% of a block storage space. When retention time is 6 months and the P/E cycle is 5K, the additional storage space sacrificed takes up 0.34% of a block storage space. Very little storage overhead and performance penalty can be exchanged for a significant reliability improvement.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1080

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 69, NO. 4, NOVEMBER 2023

Computation overhead analysis: We also analyze the com-

putation overhead induced by encoding and −→ decoding. When

ApikX−→nne2ltrogof·woo−XMr→ rnimt2RThib×mnaiNgnts.d1AB,oX−→Lfew2Cc0a−→ eoi,undsvh,teohatlveh−X→ veei2anrmRgawweoNi1ut→ hb/n2ittthobi=enfitfsloec−X→ rnoom2gmfath·p0tiu,oMotnrafRTet×siNXopNnecciasotfinrnvosdteemalgiy−Rnm.→ sReeF2enNr1ot/e→=md2

is the−→half of Re. Similarly, −t→he amount of computation

−Rf→roem=Re−→X2

is also · MRT×N

the =

h(−Xa→l2f

of ⊕

−X→R2e).

·

MMoRTr×eNove=r,−→wRee1→ fin⊕d R−t→hea2t.

oTfheR−r→ eef1oraen, dthe−R→ea2m. oWunhtenof

computation from encoding, there is

Re no

is the sum increase in

computation compared with the Norm LDPC encoding.

When implementing ALCod decoding, assume that the dis-

−→ −→

turbed

codeword

is

Y1

and

Y2

involving

bit

errors. −→

In

the −→

decoding

process,

the

initial

LLR

information −→

of

Y1

and

Y2

is updated iteratively by computing. For Y1 , the LLR of N/2

is known due to obtained from N/2 known bits of 0. When

decoding, the known LLR does not need to be calculated

for updating. Only the remaining N/2 + R unknown LLRs

need to be calculated for updating. The amount of computa-

tion is reduced in one codeword. Moreover, the known LLRs

are fully utilized to speed up the updating of the unknown

L−→LRs, leading to reduced decoding iterations. Similarly, for Y2 , only the remaining N/2 + R unknown LLRs need to be computed for updating and thus having fewer decoding

iterations. However, for the Norm LDPC coding, all LLRs

(i.e., N + R LLRs) in one codeword are unknown and require

to be updated, resulting in more decoding iterations. For example, when RBER is 1.3 × 10−2, if the Norm LDPC

coding is used to correct bit errors, the decoding iterations

reach the maximum of 30 (shown in Fig. 8 (a)), failing to

ensure data reliability. Interestingly, after exploiting ALCod,

the decoding iterations are close to 4 and 6 when correcting

errors in BS 1 and 2, respectively. If sequential decod-

ing is carried out, the sum of decoding iterations is about

10. Compared with the Norm LDPC coding, the amount of

computation is not increased in one codeword. More interest-

ingly, the decoding iterations can be reduced by about 66.7%

(i.e.,

30−10 30

× 100%).

The

decoding

delay

is

proportional

to

the

decoding iterations, so it can be also greatly reduced, as shown

in Fig. 8 (b).

VI. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes ALCod for 3D TLC NAND flash memory to reduce Delter, Delayer, decoding time, BER, and UBER by enhancing LDPC error correction capability with HSD at higher RBER. To efficiently improve LDPC decoding performance and thus ensure data reliability, ALCod implements adaptive LDPC coding operations based on the variation of RBER. When the RBER is higher, ALCod launches Sege LDPC coding. Conversely, ALCod activates Norm LDPC coding. As a result, decoding latency is greatly decreased and decoding performance is significantly improved. To further upgrade error correction capability, ALCod exploits known bits of 0 information to optimize LLR, facilitating decoding

convergence for unknown information. Simulation results
show ALCod can greatly decrease Delter, Delayer, decoding
time, BER, and UBER.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, and O. Mutlu, “Improving 3D NAND flash memory lifetime by tolerating early retention loss and process variation,” Proc. ACM Meas. Anal. Comput. Syst., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–48, 2018.
[2] W. Liu et al., “Modeling of threshold voltage distribution in 3D NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Design Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhib. (DATE), 2021, pp. 1729–1732.
[3] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
[4] Y. Du, Q. Li, L. Shi, D. Zou, H. Jin, and C. J. Xue, “Reducing LDPC soft sensing latency by lightweight data refresh for flash read performance improvement,” in Proc. IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2017, pp. 1–6.
[5] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Read and write voltage signal optimization for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1613–1623, Apr. 2016.
[6] F. Li, Y. Lu, Z. Wu, and J. Shu, “ASCache: An approximate SSD cache for error-tolerant applications,” in Proc. IEEE Design Autom. Conf. (DAC), 2019, pp. 1–6.
[7] E. Farjallah, J. M. Armani, V. Gherman, and L. Dilillo, “Improvement of the tolerated raw bit error rate in NAND flash-based SSDs with selective refresh,” Microelectron. Reliabil., vol. 96, pp. 37–45, May 2019.
[8] J. Guo, W. Wen, J. Hu, D. Wang, H. Li, and Y. Che, “FlexLevel NAND flash storage system design to reduce LDPC latency,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Des. Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 37, no. 7, pp. 1167–1180, Jul. 2017.
[9] H. Sun, W. Zhao, M. Lv, G. Dong, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “Exploiting intracell bit-error characteristics to improve min-sum LDPC decoding for MLC NAND flash-based storage in mobile device,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 2654–2664, Aug. 2016.
[10] N. Papandreou et al., “Open block characterization and read voltage calibration of 3D QLC NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Reliabil. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), 2020, pp. 1–6.
[11] Q. Li et al., “Shaving retries with sentinels for fast read over high-density 3D flash,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microarchitect. (MICRO), 2020, pp. 483–495.
[12] M. Zhang et al., “BeLDPC: Bit errors aware adaptive rate LDPC codes for 3D TLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), Mar. 2020, pp. 302–305.
[13] Y. Zhao, W. Tong, J. Liu, D. Feng, and H. Qin, “CeSR: A cell state remapping strategy to reduce raw bit error rate of MLC NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Massive Storage Syst. Technol. (MSST), 2019, pp. 161–171.
[14] L. Cui, F. Wu, X. Liu, M. Zhang, and C. Xie, “VaLLR: Threshold voltage distribution aware LLR optimization to improve LDPC decoding for 3D TLC NAND flash,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comput. Design (ICCD), 2019, pp. 668–671.
[15] J. Kim, J. Cho, and W. Sung, “A high-speed layered min-sum LDPC decoder for error correction of NAND flash memories,” in Proc. MWSCAS, 2011, pp. 1–4.
[16] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Q. Yu, W. Liu, Y. Wang, and C. Xie, “Exploiting error characteristics to optimize read voltage for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 5490–5496, Dec. 2020.
[17] M. Sandell and A. Ismail, “Machine learning for LLR estimation in flash memory with LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 792–796, Feb. 2021.
[18] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020.
[19] K.-K. Yong and L.-P. Chang, “Error diluting: Exploiting 3-D NAND flash process variation for efficient read on LDPC-based SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 3467–3478, Nov. 2020.
[20] C. Ma, Y. Wang, Z. Shen, R. Chen, Z. Wang, and Z. Shao, “MNFTL: An efficient flash translation layer for MLC NAND flash memory,” ACM Trans. Design Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 25, no. 6, pp. 1–19, 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ALCod: ADAPTIVE LDPC CODING FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

1081

[21] Y. Wang, J. Huang, J. Yang, and T. Li, “A temperature-aware reliability enhancement strategy for 3-D charge-trap flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 234–244, Feb. 2019.
[22] M. Mucha and P. Sankowski, “Maximum matchings via Gaussian elimination,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Found. Comput. Sci., 2004, pp. 248–255.
[23] B. Fitzgerald, C. Ryan, and J. Sullivan, “An optimal machine learning classification model for flash memory bit error prediction,” in Machine Learning Paradigms. Cham, Switzerland: Springer, 2019, pp. 89–110.
[24] T. Nakamura, Y. Deguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “Adaptive artificial neural network-coupled LDPC ECC as universal solution for 3-D and 2-D, charge-trap and floating-gate NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 745–754, Mar. 2019.
[25] P. Graumann, “LDPC code rate adaptation methods for NAND flash,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, 2016, pp. 1–15.
[26] Y. Zhou, F. Wu, Z. Lu, X. He, P. Huang, and C. Xie, “SCORE: A novel scheme to efficiently cache overlong ECCs in NAND flash memory,” ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1–25, 2018.
[27] Y. H. Chang, M. C. Yang, T. W. Kuo, and R. H. Hwang, “A reliability enhancement design under the flash translation layer for MLC-based flash-memory storage systems,” ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1–28, 2013.
[28] X. Zhang, J. Li, H. Wang, K. Zhao, and T. Zhang, “Reducing solid-state storage device write stress through opportunistic in-place delta compression,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2016, pp. 111–124.
[29] B. Mao, S. Wu, H. Jiang, Y. Yang, and Z. Xi, “EDC: Improving the performance and space efficiency of flash-based storage systems with elastic data compression,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1261–1274, Jun. 2018.

[30] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in Proc. Design, Autom Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), 2013, pp. 1285–1290.
[31] Y. Luo, M. Lin, Y. Pan, and Z. Xu, “Dual locality-based flash translation layer for NAND flash-based consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 281–290, Aug. 2022.
[32] H. Yong, J. Lee, and J.S. Kim, “Design and implementation of virtual stream management for NAND flash-based storage,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 149–157, May 2021.
[33] H. Yan, Y. Huang, X. Zhou, and Y. Lei, “An efficient and non-timesensitive file-aware garbage collection algorithm for NAND flash-based consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 73–79, Feb. 2019.
[34] Y. Pan, M. Lin, Z. Wu, H. Zhang, and Z. Xu, “Caching-aware garbage collection to improve performance and lifetime for NAND flash SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 67, no. 2, pp. 141–148, May 2021.
[35] J. H. Choi, K. M. Kim, and J. W. Kwak, “WPA: Write pattern aware hybrid disk buffer management for improving lifespan of NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 66, no. 2, pp. 193–202, May 2020.
[36] S. Wang et al., “Lifetime adaptive ECC in NAND flash page management,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), 2017, pp. 1253–1256.
[37] F. Chen, D. A. Koufaty, and X. Zhang, “Understanding intrinsic characteristics and system implications of flash memory based solid state drives,” in Proc. SIGMETRICS Perform., 2009, pp. 181–192.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:54:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

