1
Low Power LDPC Decoding by Reliable Voltage Down-Scaling
Joonas Valkama1, Mehdi Safarpour1, Ha˚kan Dicander2, Zhongmin Deng2, Andreas Burg3, and Olli Silve´n1 1Center for Machine Vision and Signal Analysis, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland 2Huawei technologies AB, Kista, Sweden 3E´ cole Polytechnique Fe´de´rale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland firstname.lastname@oulu.fi

2023 IEEE Nordic Circuits and Systems Conference (NorCAS) | 979-8-3503-3757-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/NorCAS58970.2023.10305442

Abstract—Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) decoder is among the power hungry building blocks of wireless communication systems. Voltage scaling down to Near-Threshold (NT) voltages substantially improves energy efficiency, in theory up 10x. However, tuning the voltage and clock frequency to the optimum error free operating point is challenging. This is mainly due to exacerbated sensitivity to Process, Voltage and Temperature (PVT) variations at reduced voltages. By definition, in many telecommunication standards, a Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) error detection is carried out after each forward error correction operation, e.g., LDPC decoding. Given channel information, successful CRC checking opens an opportunity for ”safe” voltage down-scaling and optimum frequency tuning of LDPC decoder hardware. The strategy is explored on a Zynq System-on-Chip with CRC guiding the adaptive voltage scaling with microcontroller and LDPC decoder residing in different voltage islands. Around 40% power saving was achieved with negligible degradation in throughput.
Index Terms—energy efficiency, low power, decoding, Baseband processing, accelerator, near threshold.
I. INTRODUCTION
T He ultra-densified 5G wireless systems can be envisioned to consist of very low power nodes that incorporate radios in addition to the necessary sensors and actuators for environment, vehicle, and human interfacing. The massive deployment of energy constrained nodes pose a challenge for energy-efficient digital design [1]. In part that stems from the communication demands from the model updates of federated machine learning approaches. Limitations from power supplies, e.g., batteries, thermal budget, associated cooling costs, and essentially the bill of material incentivizes developers to create solutions that target energy efficiency in digital processing. In particular, in the context of Internet of Things (IoT) [2], where occasional faults are tolerable while power supply resources are extremely stringent, energy reduction becomes a high priority.
Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) coding is among the crucial building blocks of modern communication systems. It is employed for correction of transmission errors occurring in a wireless channel [3]. Using LDPC codes, channel capacities that are near the theoretical Shannon Limit are achievable, however, the associated hardware is among the most energy
979-8-3503-3757-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

Fig. 1. In LTE standard CRC detections are used in tandem with coding.
hungry components in digital baseband processing [4]. Reduced voltage operation and in particular operating at near and below the threshold voltage of the transistors promises quadratic energy savings, most optimistically up to 10x [5], [6], [7]. Even with new process nodes that provide low nominal voltages, recent research, e.g. [8], has shown that vendors insert non-trival voltage margins on top of ”best operating” voltages of the off-the-shelf components such as FieldProgrammable-Gate-Arrays (FPGA) and CPUs [9]. That is to accommodate for ”unseen” Process, Voltage and Temperature (PVT) variations, and to increase the final yield. Studies have shown that on average from 10% to even 30% voltage margins exist on commercial CPUs, GPUs and FPGAs [8]. Up to half of the power dissipation can be due those margins [8].
Chip designers are often reluctant to adopt aggressive voltage scaling approaches. This is mainly due to the substantial timing uncertainties stemming from the difficulty of lowvoltage modeling and temperature dependencies. As the supply voltage is reduced the impacts of process variations increase [10], [11]. Finding optimum energy points without sacrificing reliability or performance is the main challenge [7].
For enabling reduced voltage operation, adaptive adjustment of voltage with respect to variations has proven to be a working solution. A feedback loop between the detection of errors and Dynamic Voltage and Frequency Scaling (DVFS) unit is a fundamental concept [12]. However, the challenge is the reliable detection of computing and memory errors. There is a large body of work in circuit design on Timing Error Detection (TED) or slack timing estimation at circuit level, e.g. using Razor [7] and replica circuits [11], for voltage scaling and PVT compensation. However, those are always complex in the back-end and even after many years not too well accepted by the industry as they cause hick-ups in the design flow. This calls for simpler approaches which are easy to implement and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2

are reliable enough for error detection. Here1 we propose an algorithmic technique by exploiting
communication system design to adapt voltage, tolerating errors at system level. In the development toward energy optimized baseband processing our prior algorithmic error resiliency studies include [13] and [14] for FFT and matrix multiplication, respectively.
In wireless communications [15] after LDPC decoding Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) error detection is done. Hybrid automatic repeat requests (HARQ) saves bandwidth by removing part of the parity bits. Those are requested separately in case of errors, then proceeding to LDPC decoding and CRC again. In case of good Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) that extra step is not necessary [16]. A similiar approach based on estimated SNR of the signal was used by [4] for tuning parameters of an LDPC decoder.
We imitate this approach for guiding DVFS governing voltage and frequency of the LDPC block to ”safely” save energy. In this manner, it is possible to find an energy optimum operating point while avoiding introducing timing errors and hence error in the decoder itself [16]. Notice that the equalizer in the receiver chain can provide a hint whether CRC failure, after exhausting the HARQ process, is due to channel quality - or too low voltage [17].
The solution can be applied irrespective of any additional underlying circuit error detection measures. This approach can simplify circuit solutions when gate conserving design is needed.
II. BACKGROUND
A. LDPC encoder/decoder
A Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) decoder is a type of forward error correction decoder used in digital communications and storage systems. It is designed to mitigate errors that occur during data transmission or storage by correcting them in a reliable and efficient manner. LDPC codes are constructed using sparse parity-check matrices, which result in low-density connections between bits and check nodes [3], [16].
LDPC decoder aims to recover the transmitted or stored data by iteratively performing computations between the check nodes and variable nodes based on the received data and parity-check equations. There are several decoding algorithms used in LDPC decoders, including, Belief Propagation (BP) Algorithm, Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA), Min-Sum Algorithm [18].
LDPC decoders have been extensively studied and optimized for both software and hardware implementations. FieldProgrammable Gate Array (FPGA) and Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) implementations offer efficient and high-performance solutions for LDPC decoding compared to even highly optimized vectorized software implementations [19].
Since even LDPC hardware accelerator implementations are energy hungry, investigations have explored means to increase the efficiency. Techniques such as efficient memory access,
1Implementation and test results are available online at https://github.com/jiisloth/slothLDPCproject

low-complexity message passing algorithms, and optimized circuit designs have been explored while architectural level approaches such as parallel and pipelined decoding architectures have been studied [19].
Voltage down-scaling is an orthogonal method to the previous solutions regardless of the particular decoding algorithm and its implementation paradigm. That is, it can be exploited with any existing LDPC accelerator design.
B. Prior Approaches for voltage down-scaling
One technique to optimize the operating voltage is to incorporate a delay chain into the design, simulating the timing behavior of the longest delay path in the circuitry. However, this method is unable to effectively model local variations and cross-coupled noise, resulting in either overly optimistic or pessimistic voltage tuning. Another solution is to employ Timing Error Detection (TED) circuits [20], which are placed on critical paths to detect timing errors and adjust voltage and clock frequency accordingly. However, TED schemes require significant development investment for custom designs and add power consumption overhead. Due to the increased impact of variations at lower voltages, deterministic operation may only be achievable by sacrificing performance or energy efficiency through clock frequency reduction or error correction. These approaches can be costly in terms of silicon real-estate or overly conservative designs [21].
In the following a simple yet effective algorithm-level solution is proposed, enabling low-voltage integrated circuit design with sub-linear (with respect to decoder size) overheads in terms of power and performance. Our solution is application specific, i.e., only for forward error correction decoders, but it can be employed in tandem with other application specific energy conserving methods [22], [13] contributing to the development of low-power baseband processors.
III. PROPOSED SOLUTION
In order to operate at low voltage, detection of computational errors in LDPC logic is necessary. When the SNR of the input signal is sufficiently high, the error rate at the Block Level is significantly reduced after LDPC correction. As a result, CRC error detections are infrequent. This implies that error detections from the decoder can be identified by leveraging CRC detections in high SNR signals.
We propose adjusting the voltage and frequency according to errors detected at the data output of the computing logic. For detections an CRC scheme is integrated into the design. The objective is to enable pushing the supply voltage down, while maintaining reliability with minimal overheads. The restriction of this approach is that it is specific to the telecom standards that incorporate error detection in addition to error correction. The conceptual block-diagram of proposed solution is depicted in Fig. 2.
If the errors are determined to be unrelated to the LDPC decoder, a typical approach would involve requesting retransmission. However, in this paper, we do not address HARQ nor re-transmission request policy.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3
as shown in [24], a significant voltage reduction is also possible even for VCCAUX.

Fig. 2. DVFS unit decides the operating point of LDPC according to estimated signal SNR and detections from CRC.

1) Description of Voltage Scaling Policy: The voltage scaling policy algorithm aims to minimize voltage while maintaining LDPC functionality. When the signal’s SNR ensures successful LDPC decoding, the algorithm scales voltage. In poor signal conditions, higher voltage ensures decoding, clearly differentiating voltage-related failures from signalrelated ones. The algorithm tracks previous failed voltages to adjust the critical threshold. It continually lowers voltage after successful decoding, reducing steps near critical levels, which eventually cause failures. CRC confirms decoding results at low cost. On failure, voltage increases for re-decoding; success indicates voltage-related failure, allowing further adjustments. Re-decoding failures suggest signal quality issues, requiring re-transmission and lower voltage.
Voltage scaling can be a slow process, and during decoding failures, waiting for the voltage to return to the safe zone is undesirable. Therefore, when a quick voltage increase is required, the decoder’s frequency can also be reduced, enabling better performance with less voltage. Once the target voltage is reached, the frequency can be safely increased again.
It is crucial to carefully consider the voltage scaling steps to prevent the algorithm from being overly aggressive in voltage reduction. Striking a balance between the benefits of voltage lowering and the occurrence of decoding failures is essential when determining the optimal voltage level.
IV. EXPERIMENTATION
An implementation on Xilinx Zynq-XC7Z020 FPGA SoC along with a MATLAB model was developed to demonstrate and investigate the proposed solution. The programmable logic (PL) side of the SoC was used to synthesize a run-of-themill LDPC decoder operating with single-precision floatingpoint numbers. Meanwhile, the processing system (PS) was programmed for monitoring and communication purposes. The PL clock was configured to run at 100 MHz.
Three voltage rails power the PL: VCCINT supplies power to internal circuitry such as LUTs and DSPs; VCCBRAM powers the Block-RAMs and VCCAUX the auxiliary components and I/O. Each rail can be adjusted independently through power management BUS (PMBUS) commands [23] transmitted via the serial I2C bus connected to either the host PC or the PS. Figure 3 illustrates the setup. In the experiment VCCAUX voltage rail was spared from down-scaling as its overall impact is trivial on total power consumption, however,

Fig. 3. A Zynq SoC with LDPC decoder as HW accelerator on PL side [24].
V. RESULTS In the experimental setup utilizing the FPGA board, we implemented a LDPC decoder within the PL section, and reduced the voltage with instructions transmitted to the voltage controller. On the PS side, data was fed to the LDPC accelerator located on the PL side, and the reconstructed signal was examined for CRC detections. Figure 4 presents the outcomes of our experiments, showing the dynamic power consumption from the PL and the CRC detections that were compared against CRC detections from LDPC decoding carried out in SW as the golden results.
Fig. 4. Power saving and errors detected with regard to voltage for a high SNR arrival signal.
The primary objective of our proposed solutions is to identify the critical Point of First Failure (PoFF) and consistently maintain the voltage slightly above this threshold. This approach ensures error-free LDPC operation while minimizing energy consumption. In these experiments, we utilized relatively high SNR signals; however, the influence of SNR may be investigated separately. Remarkably, we successfully reduced the voltage to a critical point of 0.7 volts. Beyond this critical point, CRC consistently detected errors, indicating that LDPC was no longer able to reconstruct the signal effectively. Additionally, when the voltage dropped below 0.6 volts, the FPGA system crashed. By employing our voltage scaling policy and utilizing CRC error detection, we could maintain the voltage slightly above the critical PoFF voltage.
This approach resulted in power saving of approximately 40%. Importantly, due to the continuous monitoring of CRC errors and the ongoing operation of the voltage scaling policy in the background, the solution adapts to environmental

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4

changes such as ambient temperature, aging, voltage noise, and other factors. Consequently, the critical point is adjusted accordingly to ensure optimal system performance.
VI. PRIOR ART AND DISCUSSION
Similar to our work, in [4] and [25], SNR estimation is exploited for increasing energy efficiency of LDPC decoding. However, those approaches uses SNR estimate to either decide number of iteration or quantization level of processing and hence saving energy. Our solution uses SNR estimates to reduce voltage to minimum, which has higher impact on total energy/power consumption.
In reference [26] it is proposed to exploit the intrinsic error correcting property of LDPC decoder to correct for errors arising from low-voltage operation in addition to the errors within the input signal. The problem is that the extent of voltage reduction is difficult to control without guidance from an error detection mechanism. In reference [27] SNR was used to guide voltage and frequency scaling, however, CRC is not employed to ensure correct operation. The approach in [12] adjusts the delay and voltage of an LDPC decoder for low power consumption based on the expected decoding effort in a conservative manner hence avoiding introduction of timing errors.
Similar to [4] and [25], the solution presented in this paper relies on channel information, hence, e.g., a base-station unit can not utilize the method since it deals with multiple devices each with different and possibly varying channels. This makes it difficult to adjust voltage multiple times per second to meet the ”minimum” voltage that suitable for each channel.
The presented solution in this paper, is a step toward a whole low-voltage mobile baseband processor, in particular in conjunction with previously introduced ”algorithmic” low voltage enabling methods, i.e., [13], [14], [28] and [24]. The further circuit level fortification can function as “safety-net” on top of our solution.
VII. SUMMARY
The presented easy-to-integrate approach to achieve voltage down-scaling in LDPC decoder hardware takes advantage of CRC error checking. To validate the effectiveness of the method, experiments were conducted using a Zynq SoC. The approach can enable even more aggressive voltage scaling, potentially approaching the threshold level. Notably, this solution demonstrates negligible throughput loss caused by voltage scaling, while achieving a 40% reduction in power consumption. The solution fits mobile and IoT nodes with stringent power supply resources.
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by the Research Council of Finland (former Academy of Finland) under 6G Flagship Programme (Grant Number: 346208).

REFERENCES
[1] D. A. Warnakulasuriya, K. Mikhaylov, and O. L. A. Lo´pez, “Wireless power transfer for bluetooth low energy based iot device: an empirical study of energy performance,” in 2022 14th International Congress on Ultra Modern Telecommunications and Control Systems and Workshops (ICUMT). IEEE, 2022, pp. 1–7.
[2] Z. Weijia and D. N. K. Jayakody, “An adaptive exponential min sum decoding algorithm,” in 2023 6th Conference on Cloud and Internet of Things (CIoT). IEEE, 2023, pp. 34–39.
[3] M. Meidlinger, G. Matz, and A. Burg, “Design and decoding of irregular ldpc codes based on discrete message passing,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 3, pp. 1329–1343, 2019.
[4] J.-Y. Park and K.-S. Chung, “An adaptive low-power ldpc decoder using snr estimation,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2011, no. 1, pp. 1–9, 2011.
[5] A. Wang and A. Chandrakasan, “A 180-mv subthreshold fft processor using a minimum energy design methodology,” IEEE Journal of solidstate circuits, vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 310–319, 2005.
[6] M. Hiienkari, N. Gupta, J. Teittinen, J. Simonsson, M. Turnquist, J. Eriksson, R. Anttila, O. Myllynen, H. Ra¨ma¨kko¨ et al., “A 0.4-0.9 v, 2.87 pj/cycle near-threshold arm cortex-m3 cpu with in-situ monitoring and adaptive-logic scan,” in 2020 IEEE Symposium in Low-Power and High-Speed Chips (COOL CHIPS). IEEE, 2020, pp. 1–3.
[7] D. Ernst, S. Das, S. Lee, D. Blaauw, T. Austin, T. Mudge, N. S. Kim, and K. Flautner, “RAZOR : Circuit-level Correction of Timing Errors for Low-power Operation,” IEEE Micro, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 10–20, 2004.
[8] G. Papadimitriou, A. Chatzidimitriou, D. Gizopoulos, V. J. Reddi, J. Leng, B. Salami, O. S. Unsal, and A. C. Kestelman, “Exceeding conservative limits: A consolidated analysis on modern hardware margins,” IEEE Transactions on Device and Materials Reliability, 2020.
[9] B. Salami, O. S. Unsal, and A. C. Kestelman, “Comprehensive evaluation of supply voltage underscaling in fpga on-chip memories,” in 2018 51st Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture (MICRO). IEEE, 2018, pp. 724–736.
[10] Minima Processor, “Dynamic Margining: The Minima Approach to Near-threshold Design,” Minima Processor oy, Tech. Rep., November 2017. [Online]. Available: https://minimaprocessor.com/wp-content/ uploads/2017/11/minima-margining-white-paper.pdf
[11] K. Singh and J. P. de Gyvez, “Twenty years of near/sub-threshold design trends and enablement,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 5–11, 2020.
[12] R. Ghanaatian and A. Burg, “Dvfs based power management for ldpc decoders with early termination,” in 2017 IEEE International Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS). IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[13] M. Safarpour and O. Silve´n, “Lofft: Low-voltage fft using lightweight fault detection for energy efficiency,” IEEE Embedded Systems Letters, 2022.
[14] M. Safarpour, R. Inanlou, and O. Silve´n, “Algorithm level error detection in low voltage systolic array,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, 2021.
[15] M. Shafi, A. F. Molisch, P. J. Smith, T. Haustein, P. Zhu, P. De Silva, F. Tufvesson, A. Benjebbour, and G. Wunder, “5g: A tutorial overview of standards, trials, challenges, deployment, and practice,” IEEE journal on selected areas in communications, vol. 35, no. 6, pp. 1201–1221, 2017.
[16] L. L. Mendes, C. S. Moreno, M. V. Marquezini, A. M. Cavalcante, P. Neuhaus, J. Seki, N. F. T. Aniceto, H. Karvonen, I. Vidal, F. Valera et al., “Enhanced remote areas communications: The missing scenario for 5g and beyond 5g networks,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 219 859– 219 880, 2020.
[17] D. R. Pauluzzi and N. C. Beaulieu, “A comparison of snr estimation techniques for the awgn channel,” IEEE Transactions on communications, vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 1681–1691, 2000.
[18] S. Boumard, “Novel noise variance and snr estimation algorithm for wireless mimo ofdm systems,” in GLOBECOM’03. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (IEEE Cat. No. 03CH37489), vol. 3. IEEE, 2003, pp. 1330–1334.
[19] B. Le Gal, C. Jego, and V. Pignoly, “High-performance hard-input ldpc decoding on multi-core devices for optical space links,” Journal of Systems Architecture, vol. 137, p. 102832, 2023.
[20] D. Ernst, N. S. Kim, S. Das, S. Pant, R. Rao, T. Pham, C. Ziesler, D. Blaauw, T. Austin, K. Flautner et al., “Razor: A low-power pipeline based on circuit-level timing speculation,” in Proceedings. 36th Annual IEEE/ACM International Symposium on Microarchitecture, 2003. MICRO-36. IEEE, 2003, pp. 7–18.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5
[21] L. Koskinen, M. Hiienkari, J. Ma¨kipa¨a¨, and M. J. Turnquist, “Implementing minimum-energy-point systems with adaptive logic,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 24, no. 4, pp. 1247–1256, 2015.
[22] M. Fojtik, D. Fick, Y. Kim, N. Pinckney, D. M. Harris, D. Blaauw, and D. Sylvester, “Bubble razor: Eliminating timing margins in an arm cortex-m3 processor in 45 nm cmos using architecturally independent error detection and correction,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 48, no. 1, pp. 66–81, 2012.
[23] A. Podlubne, J. Haase, L. Kalms, G. Akgu¨n, M. Ali, H. U. Khar, A. Kamal, and D. Go¨hringer, “Low power image processing applications on fpgas using dynamic voltage scaling and partial reconfiguration,” in 2018 Conference on Design and Architectures for Signal and Image Processing (DASIP). IEEE, 2018, pp. 64–69.
[24] M. Safarpour, L. Xun, G. V. Merrett, and O. Silve´n, “A high-level approach for energy efficiency improvement of fpgas by voltage trimming,” IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, 2021.
[25] S. Kim, G. E. Sobelman, and H. Lee, “Adaptive quantization in min-sum based irregular ldpc decoder,” in 2008 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS). IEEE, 2008, pp. 536–539.
[26] B. Sedighi, N. P. Anthapadmanabhan, and D. Suvakovic, “Timing errors in ldpc decoding computations with overscaled supply voltage,” in Proceedings of the 2014 international symposium on Low power electronics and design, 2014, pp. 201–206.
[27] Y. Ahn, J.-y. Park, and K.-S. Chung, “Dynamic voltage and frequency scaling scheme for an adaptive ldpc decoder using snr estimation,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2013, pp. 1–10, 2013.
[28] M. Safarpour, T. Z. Deng, J. Massingham, L. Xun, M. Sabokrou, and O. Silve´n, “Low-voltage energy efficient neural inference by leveraging fault detection techniques,” in 2021 IEEE Nordic Circuits and Systems Conference (NorCAS). IEEE, 2021, pp. 1–5.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

