A High-Throughput QC-LDPC Encoder 
 
 
Yifan Ding  
Wuhan National Laboratory 
 for Optoelectronics,  
Huazhong University of  
Science and Technology 
Wuhan, China 
yifanding@hust.edu.cn 
Qiang Cao 
Wuhan National Laboratory 
 for Optoelectronics, 
Huazhong University of  
Science and Technology 
Wuhan, China 
caoqiang@hust.edu.cn 
Jie Yao 
Wuhan National Laboratory 
 for Optoelectronics, 
Huazhong University of  
Science and Technology 
Wuhan, China 
jackyao@hust.edu.cn 
Abstract—Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes have 
been widely used in communication and storage fields to support 
high reliability of data channel. Quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC as a 
regular code can sufficiently exploit hardware parallelism of 
Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) to accelerate the 
encoding/decoding performance. However, existing FPGA 
encoders are generally dedicated to a specialized LDPC code 
and hardware platform with limited flexibility. In this paper, to 
achieve high throughput and flexibility simultaneously, we 
propose a High-level synthesis (HLS) based QC-LDPC encoder 
microarchitecture. The encoder designs a fine-grained partially-
parallel iterative process execution to exploit intra-codeword 
parallelism by fully leveraging capability of HLS . The proposed 
encoder further optimizes data-layout and HLS-function 
implementation. The encoding throughput of the proposed 
encoder achieves 98.4Gbps higher than the state-of-the-art QC-
LDPC encoder by up to 𝟏𝟒. 𝟕𝟓×.  
Keywords—QC-LDPC encoder, vector matrix multiplication, 
HLS, FPGA 
I. INTRODUCTION  
Low-density parity-check(LDPC) codes, proposed by 
Gallager in 1963, are considered to achieve channel capacity 
near Shannon limit with strong error-correction ability. Quasi-
cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) as a subset of LDPC codes has a 
regular code structure benefiting hardware implementation, 
thus broadly adopted in communication (e.g. IEEE 802.16e 
and CCSDS) and data storage. Emerging storage and network 
technology have been demanding high-throughput QC-LDPC 
hardware encoders to build their own reliable and fast data 
channels upon highly-noisy physical channels. 
Researchers have proposed various QC-LDPC encoders 
including LU decomposition[1], forward substitution[2] and 
RU algorithm[3]. However, these algorithms adopt specific 
codes with their unique features such as dual-diagonal matrix 
and approximate lower triangular matrix. Their optimized 
implementations are dedicated to specific encoding 
architectures without flexibility for code adjustment. Vector 
matrix multiplication (VMM) algorithm is relatively general 
and widely used in most encoders. However, existing VMM 
encoders such as Yasotharan[4] Nguyen[5] Cohen[6], do not 
fully exploit hardware parallelism due to serial process[4] or 
parallel process but with a limited bit-width of data access per 
cycles. 
Besides, in traditional, these encoding algorithms are 
manually described by hardware-description language (e.g., 
verilog) to implement Register-Transfer Level (RTL) 
hardware upon FPGA. This development generally is long, 
error-prone, more importantly, strict coupled with a targeted 
hardware, code, and algorithm. Recently, High-level synthesis 
(HLS) as an automated design process is widely used to 
transform high-level behavior description to low-level 
Register-Transfer Level (RTL) structure, thus improving the 
hardware development productivity and quality of result. 
However, HLS generally lacks precise and detailed semantic 
descriptions to characterize a specific and complex hardware 
implementation as QC-LDPC encoding. 
To sufficiently leverage HLS to implement a high-
bandwidth and flexible LDPC FPGA encoders, we propose a 
high 
throughput 
pipelined 
QC-LDPC 
encoding 
microarchitecture to exploit both data and hardware 
parallelism. The encoder designs an efficient fine-grained 
partially parallel encoding architecture to effectively reap 
intra-codeword parallelism.  
We implement and evaluate the encoder. Compared to the 
RTL-based VMM implementation from Hariri [7], it 
improved the throughput by 2.39× with lower code length, 
lower code rate, and higher frequency. Compared to the state-
of-art implementation based on RTL [8], the proposed 
encoder’s throughput outperforms it by 14.75× [9]. 
The main contributions of this paper are: 
1) 
We design a fine-grained partially-parallel encoding 
microarchitecture to exploit intra-codeword. 
2) 
We utilize HLS to accurately implement the encoder 
in real FPGA hardware, and evaluate its throughput, 
flexibility and scalability. 
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Sec. II 
introduces the encoding procedure of QC-LDPC code and 
HLS. Sec. III elaborates the decoder design. Sec. IV evaluate 
 
 
Fig. 1: Partially parallel VMM algorithm 
1bit
1bit
1bit
1bit
X
X
X
X
2023 Asia Communications and Photonics Conference/2023 International Photonics and Optoelectronics Meetings (ACP/POEM) | 979-8-3503-1261-4/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ACP/POEM59049.2023.10369210
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:56:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the effectiveness of the proposed encoder. Sec. V concludes 
this paper. 
II. BACKGROUND 
A. LDPC 
A (n,k) Low-density parity-check(LDPC) code is 
composed of k information bits (i.e., dataword) and n coded 
bits (i.e., codeword)with the code rate as rate=k/n. The 
dataword s multiplies the k × n generator matrix to obtain the 
codeword c, as denoted in the equation: 
𝑐 =  𝑠𝐺                                    (1) 
When G has a high density with many non-zero elements, 
the encoding computation consumes considerable hardware 
resources. Researchers attempt to avoid dense G by acquiring 
specific algorithms leveraging the sparsity of the parity check 
matrices (PCM). 
Quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC as a subset of LDPC codes has 
a relatively regular generator matrix with circular shifting 
feature. QC-LDPC facilitates the hardware implementation 
and is widely used in many communication standards (e.g., 
WiFi, DVB-S2 and 5G NR) and in data storage (e.g., solid-
state drives). 
B. Encoding Algorithm 
Prior works have proposed direct multiplication of 
dataword with generator matrix [6], [10]. However, their 
generator matrices are quite dense. 
Several works proposed forward substitution algorithm 
solving a set of linear equations defined by the sparse PCM. 
Because of the feature of a particular code like the double 
diagonal of IEEE 802.16e. The linear equations can be solved 
iteratively. All parity bits are obtained by a few clock cycles.  
Richardson-Urbanke (RU) is another popular algorithm 
used in many works [3], [11]. Its PCM is an approximate 
lower-triangular matrix constructed by basic row and column 
permutations. The PCM is divided into six parts. Then the 
parity check bits of the codeword are computed by solving a 
set of equations [12]. The algorithm is complex as temporary 
matrices need to be computed. The processing cycles for each 
operation is linear to the sparsity of the submatrices. Although 
the hardware complexity is low because of the sparsity of 
PCM, the extra control logic is relatively complex. 
In this article, we consider a general direct generator 
matrix multiplication algorithm, which can be applied to 
different codes. When an LDPC code is systematic, the left 
part of the generator matrix G is a large k × k identity matrix, 
the computation can be simplified into two steps. A replication 
of the dataword and a vector matrix multiplication. The 
encoding algorithm can be generally called as vector-matrix 
multiplication (VMM) [1]. 
C. Pipelined Partially-Parallel Encoding 
Partially parallel VMM uses the circular shift feature of 
QC-LDPC to exploit parallelism in three dimensions as 
shown in Fig. 1. The generator matrix consists of a set of 
submatrices with a size of z × z. z is expansion factor. The 
super r row and c column of the generator matrix are 
composed of rows and columns of its all submatrices, 
respectively. The encoding computation is parallel between 
super rows, but is serial inside super rows. The encoding is 
performed in two steps in each cycle. First, r vectors 
composed of one element of the dataword multiply with r 
rows of the matrix. Second, the results are added to the 
codeword buffer. Then the resting rows of the submatrices 
are calculated iteratively and the whole computation is 
completed in z cycles. These operations are under GF(2). The 
computation uses AND gate arrays and XOR gate trees. The 
codeword buffers connect to the XOR gate trees and are part 
of the addition operation in every cycle. 
D. HLS 
The FPGA designers employ Verilog or VHDL to 
describe 
Register-Transfer 
Level 
(RTL) 
circuit 
implementation with long and error-prone development 
process [13]. Recently,  
High-level synthesis (HLS) automatically transforms 
behavior description using high-level language (e.g., C/C++) 
into RTL-level hardware implementation, to accelerate 
development and verification. With  rapid advancement of 
HLS, software engineers conveniently use C/C++ to design 
domain-specific hardware accelerators without consideration 
the details of underlying FPGA hardware. There are popular 
production-level HLS toolchains, e.g., Mentor Graphics 
Catapult, Intel HLS Compiler and Xilinx Vivado HLS 
(renamed as Vitis HLS) as used in this work. The Vitis HLS 
design is developed with C/C++ or OpenCL with pragmas 
that guide the hardware synthesis.  
Considering that a high-level abstract logic cannot map to 
a variety of low-circuit implementations without detailed 
specifications, HLS depends on some pragmas such as 
PIPELINE, UNROLL and DATAFLOW to accurately 
describe the behavior of expressions. Take PIPELINE as an 
example, PIPELINE guides building a pipeline upon every 
single expression no matter in a loop or function. HLS 
internally schedules the implementation based on its own 
delay models with an available frequency. To fully exploit 
the hardware running the targeted algorithm as QC-LDPC 
encoding, the designers still carefully consider hardware-
implementation 
details 
to 
specifically 
describe 
the 
corresponding behaviors using HLS. 
III. DESIGN 
The encoder consists of 𝑟 ×  𝑐 PEs. Inside each encoding 
PE, we propose a fine-grained pipeline to execute the partially 
parallel encoding as in Fig. 2. Firstly, a dataword from the 
hls::stream interface is buffered in a temporary memory 
through high bit width. Vector Splitter reads and splits the 
dataword into the super-row’s number of vector chunks. 
Secondly, Cells in each super column perform computation in 
two steps: 1) the vector chunks are encoded in parallel for 
different cells of different super rows; 2) the results are added 
by XOR trees. Finally, Vector Aggregator aggregates the 
results and combines them with the dataword to generate the 
whole codeword. These three steps are not pipelined due to 
data dependency. 
The sequential three steps of encode PE are described in 
HLS. As shown in Fig. 3, the stream data is read in line 3. 
Then the stream data in_tmp is separated into chunks in_m in 
line 5-8.  The multiple cells are implemented with a loop at 
line 9-13. The codeword chunks aggregate at line 14-16. The 
codeword out_tmp streamed out at line 17. 
Cell Array in the encoder performs partially parallel 
encoding. The cell array’s size is defined by the number of the 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:56:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
super rows and the super columns. Let's take an example that 
z of 8, c of 4, r of 4. The cell array is 4×4, either of which can 
be adjusted flexibly according to different codes using HLS 
fast development flow. 
In partially parallel process, the computations between 
Cells are fully parallel and pipelined intra-Cell. Different rows 
of the submatrices are multiplied iteratively. Each cell stores 
one submatrix and pipelines the vector-vector multiplication 
of different rows.  
The identical Cells multiplicate the chunks with 
submatrices in parallel. Inside each cell, the computation is 
pipelined and executed in eight cycles serially which is 
tunable with varying codes. The submatrix is stored in shift 
registers. To start, the registers are initialized with the first row 
of each submatrix. A group of 8 AND and XOR gates 
performs the multiplication of row vectors of the submatrix 
and dataword vectors. Then the next row of the submatrix is 
obtained by shifting the connected registers. And the next 
operation executes in the following cycle. After 8 cycles, Cells 
finish vector matrix multiplication in partially parallel. The 
results of these multiplications in the same column are added 
up into one bit of the encoded codeword buffer.  
The codeword buffer would be refreshed with the latest 
result of VMM computation in every cycle. XOR trees 
inferred by HLS add the temporary results up and write the 
result in the buffer.  
HLS can be used to describe such a fine-grained level with 
the help of HLS pragmas. However, the structure description 
and the use of pragmas are still challenging. We carefully 
design the code structure, maneuvering the connection of 
signals and compiling pragmas. XOR trees accumulate the 
temporary vector matrix multiplication results with the 
preceding result to refresh the codeword buffer with the latest 
result. The branches of them are the VMM results from cells 
of the same super column in different super rows. Then the 
addition operations are done by pure combinational circuits, 
XOR gates, which introduce high throughput.  
The XOR trees generate the parity bits of a codeword. The 
whole codeword is obtained by concatenating the dataword. 
Two parts of codeword buffer is inferred. The dataword is 
directly stored in the first part with direct connections. The 
other part buffer the parity bits result from XOR trees. The 
two part of codeword buffer is filled in parallel improving the 
throughput of Encode PE, improving the encoder throughput. 
The RTL design generated by HLS always consumes the 
minimum hardware maintaining correct behavior. HLS uses 
various optimization to realize it. For example, bitwidth 
analysis lowers the number of bits required by datapath 
operators, and the speculation step can allow the operation to 
execute anytime in the control region which may discard 
certain operation [13]. 
IV. EVALUATION 
A. Experiment Setup 
We use Xilinx hardware development platform Vitis to 
implement the encoder. We employ a server with two Intel 
Xeon E5-2670s and 128GB memory. The FPGA hardware is 
Alveo U50 data center acceleration card from Xilinx with 
8GB of HBM offering total bandwidth of 316 GB/s, the 
FPGA can be connected to the server through PCIe Gen3x 16. 
Theoretically, the PCIe bandwidth can be doubled. With the 
help of HLS, the design is conveniently ported to any other 
FPGA platform. We are running on an official firmware 
(Xilinx_u50_gen3x16_xdma_201920_3) and the version of 
Vitis is 2020.2, the version of XRT is 2.8.743. 
B. Performance  
The encoding architecture recommended in CCSDS is 
used as the baseline design with only the column parallelism. 
We implement the baseline and proposed design  in four 
different code rates 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 5/6 and the code length is 
set to 1536. 
The throughput of out encoder increases with the code 
rate. Because more datawords are encoded as the code rate 
rises, and more datawords are encoded in parallel. In Fig.4, 
the peak throughput reaches 5019.95Mbps and outperforms 
the baseline by up to 17.62×. Note that the throughput for the 
baseline is fixed, because only the column parallelism is 
considered, the datawords are encoded sequentially. And the 
throughput also is affected by the datawords loading relating 
to the constant clock frequency in this experiment. The 
throughput of the proposed encoder at code rate 1/2 is 
noticeably lower than the others due to the pipeline failure of 
the HLS tool, there are 768 operations should be pipelined, 
which exceeds the tool limit. 
As shown in Fig. 5, Hardware consumption decreases as 
the code rate increases due to the fewer parity check bits. The 
proposed encoder increases hardware consumption by up to 
 
 
Fig. 2: Encode PE architecture 
cell
cell
cell
cell
…
…
…
…
…
cell
cell
cell
cell
…
cell
cell
cell
cell
…
cell
cell
cell
cell
…
Vector Splitter
Vector Aggregator
Encode PE
dataword chunk
(n-k)/z
× k/z
codeword chunk
k
z
z
n
 
 
Fig. 3: Encode PE HLS code 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:56:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
19.31% to improve the overall throughput significantly, 
indicating high hardware efficiency. Because we employ 
VMM algorithm, the simple logic gate-based computation 
architecture consumes quite little hardware resource. So, the 
extra hardware consumption introduced by partially parallel 
architecture is considerably little. 
V. CONCLUSION 
In this work, we propose a two-level pipelined QC-LDPC 
microarchitecture. We design a three-stage coarse-grained 
word-stream pipeline to serve varying codes. We further 
present a fine-grained encoding operation both on row and 
column by exploiting the QC-LDPC feature. We leverage 
HLS to accurately implement the microarchitecture while 
flexibly adjusting to different codes in a scalable way. 
Experimental results show that this design’s throughput 
achieves 98.4 Gbps which is higher than the state-of-the-art 
QC-LDPC encoder by up to 14.75×. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This work was supported in part by National key research 
and development program of China No. 2018YFA0701800 
and Key Research and Development Project of Hubei 
No.2022BAA042. 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
A. Mahdi and V. Paliouras, “A low complexity-high throughput qc-
ldpc encoder,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 62, no. 10, 
pp. 2696–2708, 2014. 
[2] 
H. Zhiyong, S. Roy, and P. Fortier, “Encoder architecture with 
throughput over 10 gbit/sec for quasi-cyclic ldpc codes,” in 2006 IEEE 
International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 
Conference Proceedings, p. 4 pp. 
[3] 
Z. Hao and Z. Tong, “Block-ldpc: a practical ldpc coding system design 
approach,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular 
Papers, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, 2005. 
[4] 
H. Yasotharan and A. C. Carusone, “A flexible hardware encoder for 
systematic low-density parity-check codes,” in 2009 52nd IEEE 
International Midwest Symposium on Circuits and Systems, 
Conference Proceedings, pp. 54–57. 
[5] 
T. T. B. Nguyen, T. Nguyen Tan, and H. Lee, “Efficient qc-ldpc 
encoder for 5g new radio,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 6, p. 668, 2019. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/8/6/668 T. T. 
B. Nguyen, T. Nguyen Tan, and H. Lee, “Efficient qc-ldpc encoder for 
5g new radio,” Electronics, vol. 8, no. 6, p. 668, 2019. [Online]. 
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/8/6/668 
[6] 
A. E. Cohen and K. K. Parhi, “A low-complexity hybrid ldpc code 
encoder for ieee 802.3an (10gbase-t) ethernet,” IEEE Transactions on 
Signal Processing, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 4085–4094, 2009. 
[7] 
A. A. A. Hariri, F. Monteiro, L. Sieler, and A. Dandache, “A high 
throughput configurable parallel encoder architecture for quasi-cyclic 
low-density parity-check codes,” in 2013 IEEE 19th International 
OnLine Testing Symposium (IOLTS), Conference Proceedings, pp. 
163–166. 
[8] 
V. L. Petrovic, D. M. El Mezeni, and A. Radosevic, “Flexible 5g new 
radio ldpc encoder optimized for high hardware usage efficiency,” 
Electronics, 
vol. 
10, 
no. 
9, 
2021. 
[Online]. 
Available: 
https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/9/1106 
[9] 
A. Mahdi, N. Kanistras, and V. Paliouras, “A multirate fully parallel 
ldpc encoder for the ieee 802.11n/ac/ax qc-ldpc codes based on reduced 
complexity xor trees,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale 
Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 51–64, 2021. 
[10] Y. M. Gu, W. Lee, and B. Kim, “Telemetry standard 106-17 ldpc 
encoder design using hls,” Journal of the Korean Society for 
Aeronautical and Space Sciences, vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 831–835, 2020. 
[11] C. P. Fewer, M. F. Flanagan, and A. D. Fagan, “A versatile variable 
rate ldpc codec architecture,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and 
Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 2240–2251, 2007. 
[12] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density 
paritycheck codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, 
no. 2, pp. 638–656, 2001. 
[13] R. Nane, V.-M. Sima, C. Pilato, J. Choi, B. Fort, A. Canis, Y. T. Chen, 
H. Hsiao, S. Brown, F. Ferrandi, J. Anderson, and K. Bertels, “A survey 
and evaluation of fpga high-level synthesis tools,” IEEE Transactions 
on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 35, 
no. 10, pp. 1591–1604, 2016. 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 4: The throughput of baseline is constant while that 
of the proposed encoder increases with code rate 
 
 
Fig. 5: The proposed encoder hardly increases the 
hardware consumption  
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:56:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
