2894

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 27, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

An FCResNet-Based Iterative Detection for Protograph LDPC-Coded SRMR-DCSK Systems Under Correlated Noise
Chengquan Lu , Yi Fang , Senior Member, IEEE, Lin Dai , Pingping Chen , and Guojun Han

Abstract— In the protograph-coded short reference multifold rate differential chaotic shift keying (SRMR-DCSK) systems, the signal transmission reliability is affected by the channel noise, especially when the noise is correlated. To solve this problem, this letter proposes a fully convolutional residual network (FCResNet)-based iterative detection structure to suppress the correlated noise in the protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK systems. Specifically, we design a new FCResNet tailored for the considered systems to accurately extract the characteristics of correlated noise, and thus the correlated noise can be easily removed from the received signal in an iterative fashion. In addition, we derive the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) expression of the protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK systems to facilitate the proposed detection. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed FCResNet-based detection structure can obtain more desirable performance gain compared with the existing detection over Gaussian and multipath Rayleigh fading channels.
Index Terms— Short reference multifold rate differential chaotic shift keying, fully convolutional residual network, protograph codes, correlated noise, deep learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
CHAOTIC modulation has attracted more and more attention due to its low cost, low complexity, low power consumption, which can be effectively used in spread spectrum communication systems [1], [2]. Among all chaotic modulation schemes, differential chaotic shift keying (DCSK) has been the most widely researched because of its excellent performance and simple implementation [3], [4]. In the DCSK system, the receiver does not need complex signal synchronization and channel estimation [5]. However, the DCSK system only uses half of energy for transmitting informationbearing signals, but uses the remaining half one for transmitting reference signals, which leads to the reduction of the spectral efficiency and transmission efficiency [6]. To deal with this issue, a high-efficiency differential chaotic keying (HE-DCSK) system has been proposed [7], in which each modulation signal transmits 2 bits simultaneously. Furthermore, a short reference
Manuscript received 13 July 2023; revised 21 August 2023; accepted 16 September 2023. Date of publication 20 September 2023; date of current version 9 November 2023. This work was supported in part by the NSF of China under Grants 62322106, 62071131, 62171135, the Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation under Grant 2022B1515020086, and the International Collaborative Research Program of Guangdong Science and Technology Department under Grant 2022A0505050070. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M.-R. Sadeghi. (Corresponding author: Yi Fang.)
Chengquan Lu, Yi Fang, Lin Dai, and Guojun Han are with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: lucq56@163.com; fangyi@gdut.edu.cn; bs0109dl@163.com; gjhan@gdut.edu.cn).
Pingping Chen is with the Department of Electronic Information, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, China (e-mail: ppchen.xm@gmail.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2023.3317677

DCSK (SR-DCSK) system has been presented [8], in which the length of the constituent reference time slot is shortened and the information-carrying signal is repeated multiple times to improve energy efficiency. In order to further improve the transmission efficiency of the SR-DCSK system, a short reference multifold rate DCSK (SRMR-DCSK) has been developed [9], in which the transmitter simultaneously transmits multiple information bits based on each reference signal.
In order to boost system performance, error-correction coding can be introduced to alleviate the effect of channel noise and fading. In [10] and [11], the authors have introduced protograph low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes into the DCSK system to obtain a large performance gain. However, the aforementioned DCSK systems only consider the effect of white Gaussian noise on system performance. Actually, in some application scenarios of DCSK systems (e.g., power line communication [10]), there exists the correlated noise in addition to the white Gaussian noise [12], [13]. When the channel noise is correlated, the system reliability is severely degraded [14]. Therefore, it is necessary to design a robust detection structure to suppress the correlated noise in the protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK systems.
In recent years, deep learning (DL) has been extensively used in the fields of communication systems, which fully reflects its excellent performance and convenient optimization ability [15]. In [16], the authors have proposed to utilize the feature extraction capability of the deep neural network (DNN) to learn the transmission patterns to demodulate the received signals. Following this research work, in [17] the authors have proposed an intelligent detector to achieve the joint demodulation and de-spreading at the receiver. In [13], the authors have proposed a belief propagation-convolutional neural network (BP-CNN) detection structure to help decode LDPC codes effectively over additive correlated Gaussian noise (ACGN) channel. However, the detection structures are only designed for the non-spread spectrum communication systems. In the protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK, the modulated symbol length is often much larger than the codeword length, and hence much severer noise is introduced. Therefore, the above-mentioned neural networks designed for the nonspread spectrum communication systems may not accurately extract the characteristics of correlated noise in the protographcoded SRMR-DCSK systems.
With this motivations, we make an investigation on the protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK systems with DL over the correlated noise channels. The main contributions of this letter are summarized as follows.
1) We propose a fully convolutional residual network (FCResNet) iterative detection structure based on the characteristics of the protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK systems, in which a novel neural network, referred

1558-2558 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: FCResNet-BASED ITERATIVE DETECTION

2895

to as FCResNet, is designed to accurately extract the correlated-noise characteristics. 2) We derive the a-priori LLR expressions for the protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK systems. Since the proposed FCResNet-based iterative detection structure may change the residual noise distribution, the derivation of LLR expression can facilitate the proposed signal detection. 3) We perform various simulations and comparisons to verify that the proposed FCResNet-based iterative detection can improve the error performance of the protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK systems.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

A. Transmitter of Protograph-Coded SRMR-DCSK

Fig. 1 describes the block diagram of a protograph-

coded short reference multifold rate DCSK (SRMR-DCSK)

system with the proposed fully convolutional residual network (FCResNet)-based iterative detection structure1. At the trans-

mitter, the information bits are first encoded by a protograph

LDPC encoder to generate coded bits b1i, b2i, b3i . . . , bNi (N is the length of the code block) in the i-th frame, where bki ∈ {0, 1}, k = 1, 2, · · · , N, and i = 1, 2, · · · . Here, we assume

that a rate-0.5 regular-(3, 6) protograph code [18] is used as

the channel coding scheme. Then, the transmitter generates a

chaotic sequence xj of length M (i.e., the spreading factor) by a logistic map x(j) = 1 − 2 × x2(j − 1). Especially,

the chaotic sequence xj is regarded as the reference signal for b1i, b2i, b3i . . . , bNi in the modulation. When a bit “0” is sent, the reference signal is the same as the information

bit; otherwise (when a bit “1” is sent), the reference signal is

the opposite of the information bit. However, in the SRMR-

DCSK, the lengths of the reference signal and the data signal

are different from those in traditional DCSK (see Fig. 2). For

the protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK system, the length of the

modulated signal consisting of both data signal and reference

signal is β +M , and the length of the reference signal changes

from β to M , where M is 1/R of the data signal length.

Meanwhile, the reference signal can be repeatedly transmitted

R times in order to carry R information bits as the data signal.

As such, the modulated signal s passed through a channel can

be expressed by



xj,i, 

for 0 ≤ j < M,

sj,i = bN,i · xj−M,i, for M ≤ j ≤ (1 + R)M,

(1)

 

and xj−M,i ≡ x0,i, modM.

where xj,i is the chaotic sequence of the reference signal and xj−M,i is the delay signal of xj,i.

B. Proposed Receiver of Protograph-Coded SRMR-DCSK
At the receiver, the received symbol vector y can be written as y = s + n, where n is the correlated noise. In this letter, the channel is modeled as an additive Gaussian correlated noise (ACGN) channel. In particular, the single coefficientexponential correlation matrix θ can be
1Since the SRMR-DCSK can improve the energy efficiency and the transmission efficiency, we choose the SRMR-DCSK system as the modulation method in this letter. Nonetheless, the proposed FCResNet-based iterative detection structure can be also applied to other DCSK systems, such as the traditional DCSK system [1].

Fig. 1. Block diagram of a protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK system with the proposed FCResNet-based iterative detection structure.

Fig. 2. Frame structures of the DCSK and the SRMR-DCSK: (a) DCSK; (b) SRMR-DCSK.

represented as

θt,p =

ξnt−p, (ξnt−p)∗,

t ≤ p, t > p, (t, p = 1, 2, . . . , N )

(2)

where |ξn| ≤ 1, θt,p is the (t, p)-th element of θ, ξn is the correlation coefficient of noise n, and (·)∗ is the conjugate operation√. Therefore, the correlated noise n can be expressed as n = ξnw, where nw is the additional white Gaussian noise with the same mean and variance as n.
At the receiver, a novel FCResNet-based iterative detection structure is designed in this letter, as shown in Fig. 1, where the FCResNet is used to predict the correlated noise of the “corrupted” signals output by the ACGN channel. At the k-th iteration, the received symbol vector y(I) is written as

y(I) = y(I−1) − n = s + n − n = s + r,

(3)

where r is residual noise, n is the correlated noise estimation, and I is the Ith iteration. When I = 0, we first utilize the FCResNet to estimate the correlated noise from the received signal y(0). Applying Eq. (1), we can obtain a new estimated symbol vector y(1). After that, we can choose to pass y(1) directly to the decoder. However, since the FCResNet cannot completely estimate the correlated noise, some residual noise r still exists in the symbols. As such, we can perform an iterative process between the SRMR demodulator and the FCResNet to further suppress the noise. Specifically, we first perform SRMR demodulation on the new symbol vector y(1) to get the observation value Z, then we perform LLR calculation and conduct a hard decision on LLR to get the estimated bits c2. Finally we re-modulate c and pass it to the FCResNet. Through I iterations, one can get a more accurate y(I).

III. PROPOSED FCRESNET-BASED ITERATIVE DETECTION FOR PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED
SRMR-DCSK SYSTEM

A. Proposed FCResNet Structure

Fig. 3 shows the structure of the proposed FCResNet with 10 convolutional layers, where every two continuous

2In order to avoid noise correlation passed between check nodes and variable nodes in the protograph decoder, we use hard decision to get estimated bits.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2896

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 27, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023
TABLE I STRUCTURE PARAMETERS OF FCRESNET-BASED DETECTION

Fig. 3. Structure of the proposed FCResNet.

Fig. 4. Flowchat of the identity mapping.

TABLE II SUMMARY OF PARAMETER SETTINGS AT OFFLINE TRAINING STAGE

convolutional layers within the 8 convolutional layers except

the first and the last layers constitute a residual block (RB).

In each RB, its input passed by a feedforward network is added

to its output as the input of next RB. The above operation is

called as identity mapping [19]. The details about the identity

mapping operation are shown in Fig. 4. Suppose that E(x)

and F (x) (x is the input of the RB) respectively represent the

expected mapping output and the actual mapping output of an

RB. One can assume that the sum of the actual mapping output receptive field and more features in the training process, we set

F (x) and the input x equals the expected mapping output the convolution kernel sizes of the first convolution layer

E(x), i.e., F (x) + x = E(x). Thereby, the aim of using the and the last convolution layer of the proposed FCRetNes to

RB is to convert the problem of optimizing the actual mapping be 87 and 30, respectively. The detailed parameters of the

F (x) into optimizing the residual mapping E(x)−x. Actually, FCResNet structure are shown in Table I.

it would be easier to push the residual to zero than to fit the

actual mapping by a stack of nonlinear layers. The identity

mapping operation neither introduces additional parameters B. Offline Training and Online Deployment

nor increases the computational complexity with respect to the conventional CNN.
After each convolution layer, the output is processed by a linear correction linear unit (ReLU) activation function, which is given by

Since FCResNet is used to predict correlated noise, the data of noise n and received signal y can be stored directly through the simulation program during the training phase. Note that the generated noise n serves as the data label paired with y, and y serves as the input of the proposed FCResNet. We also

0, x ≤ 0,

Relu(x) = max(0, x) =

(4)

x, x > 0.

For the FCResNet, the input of the neural network is the received vector y, which will be processed by the convolution kernel. This process can be expressed as follows

Cm = Relu(wm ∗ cm−1 + bm),

(5)

generated the validation data to help making the decision to stop training. All the datasets were generated at different signal-to-noise ratios (SNR) across different channels and at different correlations ξ. For each channel model, a total of 630, 000 frames were generated. The ratio of the datasets at different SNRs are identical, which ensures the generalization ability of the neural network. Because different channel models have

where Cm represents a feature map of the mth layer, wm and bm are the weights and bias values of the mth layer, respectively, and cm−1 is the feature map of the (m − 1)th layer. When m = 1, Eq. (5) represents the input and output

different channel characteristics, we train each channel model separately to optimize the noise extraction capability of the proposed network, thereby improving system performance. The specific hyper-parameters are shown in Table II.

process of the first convolutional layer. When m = 10, Eq. (5) Specifically, the proposed FCResNet is trained using the

represents the input and output process of the last layer, and traditional mini-batch gradient descent algorithm, where the

cm is the estimated noise.

mini-batch algorithm consisting of a fixed number of training

In spread spectrum communications, since chaotic signal samples is randomly selected to evaluate the gradient. In the

has desirable auto-correlation property, the proposed FCRes- simulation, each mini-batch contained 140 blocks of data.

Net can easily separate the correlated noise from the received It should be noted that the proposed detection structure can be

signal to accurately extract the characteristics of correlated applied to the other DCSK systems, since the learning process

noise. Therefore, we reduce the correlated noise power by is independent of the DCSK modulation scheme.

subtracting the estimated noise from the received signal. Subsequently, in the online deployment stage, through the

However, the length of modulated signal usually becomes trained FCResNet, the noise power can be reduced and the

much longer than the codeword length in spread spectrum initial LLR can be calculated by the demodulator. Afterwards,

communication, thus much several noise is introduced in the the soft channel decoder will do the corresponding decoding

transmitted signal. In this case, the existing neural network is process based on the denoised LLR.

particular designed for non-spread spectrum communication, Considering the traditional receiver designed based on

which can no longer accurately extract the characteristics of Gaussian noise, an enhancement loss function in [13] that

correlated noise [13]. Consequently, in order to obtain a larger combines residual noise suppression with the Jacques-Bella

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU et al.: FCResNet-BASED ITERATIVE DETECTION

2897

test [13] is proposed as follows

Loss

=

∥r∥2

+

λ(S2

+

1 (C

−

3)2),

(6)

N

4

where λ is the scaling factor. Using the loss function,

the estimated noise of the output will follow the Gaussian

distribution as much as possible. In particular, S and C in

Eq. (7) and Eq. (8) are respectively defined as

1

S= N

(

1 N

N ι=1

(r(ι)

−

¯r)3

N ι=1

(r(ι)

−

¯r)2)

3 2

,

(7)

1

C= N

(

1 N

Nι=1(r(ι) − ¯r)4

N i=1

(r(ι)

−

¯r)2)2

,

(8)

where ι is the ιth element of the residual noise vector

r (1 ≤ ι ≤ N ), and r is the sample mean.

C. LLR Calculation

As shown in Fig. 1, the a-priori LLR of each bit bu is necessary for protograph decoding. Hence, we derive the

expression of LLR in the protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK

system over Gaussian channel and multipath Rayleigh fading

channel. In this letter, we assume that bu is sent with equal probability with values of 1 and 0 at the transmitter, and

chaotic signal duration are much longer than the multipath

time delays. As such, we can use the Gaussian approximation

method to derive the LLR expression of the protograph-coded

SRMR-DCSK system, as follows

LLRk

=

log

P (ru|bu P (ru|bu

= =

0) 1)

=

2

·

Z

·

Ec/varc,

(9)

varACGN = (R + 1)/2 · σ2 + M · R · σ4,

(10)

varMulti =

L v=1

hu2 v

M

+ R + 1σ2 2R

M

hu2v + R · M · σ4,

v=1

(11)

where huv represents the fading factor of the bit bu from the vth path, bu is the uth transmitted bit of the codeword b, ru is the uth received bit of the received signal vector r, LLRk is the kth LLR value of the vector LLR, Z is the observation value

output by the demodulator, R is the number of bits carried

by a block, M is the length of the reference sequence, Ec is the chaotic fragment of length M , σ2 = N0/2, and N0 is the
unilateral power spectral density.

Since the proposed FCResNet-based iterative detection may

change the residual noise distribution, we have recalculated the power of the residual noise σr2, where σr2 is the power of the residual noise that can be estimated using the training.

D. Proposed FCResNet-Based Iterative Detection Algorithm
The details of the proposed FCResNet-based iterative detection algorithm are summarized in Algorithm 1.
In the offline training procedure, we first obtain the training set to train the FCResNet. Since more accurate estimated noise nˆ can be obtained by the trained FCResNet, we can obtain the estimated symbol ˆs by subtracting the estimated noise from the received symbol (i.e., y − nˆ). Because FCResNet cannot completely suppress noise, the estimated symbol ˆs will still retain the residual noise r. Subsequently, we will calculate the LLR and will do hard demodulation of the obtained LLR. The residual noise r can be reflected in the hard demodulator.

Algorithm 1 Proposed FCResNet-Based Iterative Detection Algorithm
Input: y Output: LLR
1: for l = 1 : m (maximum number of detection iteration) do 2: Extract the characteristics of correlated noise using the trained
FCResNet 3: Calculate the estimated signal y by Eq. (3) 4: Calculate LLR for y and then re-modulate after hard demodulation 5: end for
Fig. 5. Performance comparison among FCResNet-based detection, and BP-CNN detection and traditional detection with ξ = 0.5 over two different channel models: (a) ACGN channel; (b) multipath Rayleigh fading channel.
Therefore, we can re-estimate and denoise the demodulated bits in the next iteration. In particular, the proposed FCResNetbased detection algorithm can be performed iteratively to achieve better performance.
E. Complexity Analysis Finally, we analyze the computational complexity of the
one-dimensional FCResNet-based detection structure, and compare it with BP-CNN detection structure in terms of floating-point multiplication-adds (FLOPs). Specifically, the complexity of a convolutional layer is directly related to the number and length of kernels and the output length of each layer. Assuming the kernel size is K, the number of kernels is C and the input feature map size is N , the FLOPs calculation for the first convolutional layer is O(N · K2 · Cin · Cout). Therefore, the total complexity of our proposed scheme is O(1.58×105 ·N ), while the BP-CNN complexity is O(0.32× 105 · N ). However, the proposed network design can achieve a desirable performance improvement compared to BP-CNN at the price of sacrificing some complexity.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS In the simulations, we consider ACGN and multipath Rayleigh fading channel. In the multipath Rayleigh fading channel, the number of the path P = 2, the corresponding delay is (d1, d2) = (0, 1), the spreading factor β = 100, and we use perfect channel estimate. The number of bits that a block carries is R = 4. The regular-(3, 6) protograph code [18] is applied to the considered SRMR-DCSK systems, and the codeword length is set to 1200. In this letter, we set λ to 0.1 and 10 for ξ = 0.8 and 0.5, respectively. The maximum number of iterations of the BP algorithm is set to 50. As shown in Fig. 5, considerable gain can be obtained by the proposed FCResNet-based iterative detection algorithm in protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK system over both ACGN and multipath Rayleigh fading channels. Specifically, in the ACGN channel (see Fig. 5(a)), when ξ = 0.5 and I = 0, the proposed FCResNet-based detection can obtain about 0.6 dB

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2898

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 27, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2023

Fig. 6. Performance comparison among FCResNet-based detection, and BP-CNN detection and traditional detection with ξ = 0.8 over two different channel models: (a) ACGN channel; (b) multipath Rayleigh fading channel.
Fig. 7. Performance comparison between multiple iterations with ξ = 0.5 under ACGN channel.
and 1 dB gains compared with the BP-CNN detection [13] and the traditional detection without any deep learning technique, respectively, at a BER of 1 × 10−5. When ξ = 0.5 and I = 1, this performance gains of the proposed FCResNetbased detection with respect to the BP-CNN detection and the traditional detection are about 1.6 dB and 2 dB, respectively. In the multipath Rayleigh fading channel (see Fig. 5(b)), when ξ = 0.5 and I = 1, at a BER of 1 × 10−5, the proposed FCResNet-based iterative detection benefits from performance gains of about 0.9 dB and 1 dB compared with the BP-CNN detection and the traditional detection, respectively.
In Fig. 6, we compare the performance of the proposed FCResNet-based iterative detection with two counterparts in protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK system over ACGN and multipath Rayleigh fading channels when ξ = 0.8. Traditional detection schemes suffer more severe performance degradation as the correlation coefficient ξ increases, while a higher ξ presents a better opportunity for FCResNet to extract the characteristics of correlated noise. To be specific, when ξ = 0.8 and I = 1, the proposed FCResNet-based detection can obtain about 0.7 dB gain compared with the BP-CNN detection, at a BER of 1 × 10−5. As Eb/N0 continues increasing, the proportion of noise power in the received signal gradually decreases, thus the noise extraction capability of the proposed FCResNet-based detection scheme is limited. However, when I increases from 0 to 1, the iterative structure can obtain a larger performance gain.
As a further insight, when the iteration number I varies from 1 to 4, the performance gain of the proposed FCResNetbased iterative detection is discussed in Fig. 7. One can observe that the proposed FCResNet-based iterative detection with I = 4 does not have a significant performance gain over that with I = 1. This is because, when I = 1, the performance of system has converged and has achieved optimum results, thereby reducing complexity.

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we proposed a novel FCResNet-based
iterative detection in protograph-coded SRMR-DCSK system
to effectively suppress the correlated noise in ACGN channel.
In order to mitigate the extra noise introduced by SRMR-
DCSK, we also specially designed a FCResNet, which is
composed of fully convolutional neural networks to better
extract the characteristics of correlated noise. Moreover,
we derived the LLR expression of protograph LDPC-coded
SRMR-DCSK system to facilitate the proposed detection.
We finally performed simulations to demonstrate that our
design can achieve desirable performance gain compared with
the state-of-the-art counterparts over both the ACGN and
multipath Rayleigh fading channels.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Kaddoum and N. Tadayon, “Differential chaos shift keying: A robust modulation scheme for power-line communications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 31–35, Jan. 2017.
[2] H. Ma et al., “A novel differential chaos shift keying scheme with multidimensional index modulation,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 237–256, Jan. 2023.
[3] Y. Fang et al., “Design and analysis of a new index-modulation-aided DCSK system with frequency-and-time resources,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 6, pp. 1–15, Jun. 2023.
[4] H. Ma et al., “Reconfigurable intelligent surface-aided M -ary FMDCSK system: A new design for noncoherent chaos-based communication,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 4829–4843, Apr. 2023.
[5] Y. Fang et al., “A neural network-aided detection scheme for indexmodulation DCSK system,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., early access, Sep. 11, 2023, doi: 10.1109/TVT.2023.3313813.
[6] R. Luo et al., “A novel SR-DCSK-based ambient backscatter communication system,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 1707–1711, Mar. 2022.
[7] H. Yang and G.-P. Jiang, “High-efficiency differential-chaos-shift-keying scheme for chaos-based noncoherent communication,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 312–316, May 2012.
[8] G. Kaddoum et al., “Design of a short reference noncoherent chaosbased communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 680–689, Feb. 2016.
[9] G. Zhang et al., “Design and performance analysis of MISO-SRMRDCSK system over Rayleigh fading channels,” Int. J. Antennas Propag., vol. 2018, pp. 1–10, Aug. 2018.
[10] M. Miao et al., “Performance and capacity analysis of MDCSK-BICM for impulsive noise in PLC,” IEEE Trans. Power Del., vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 3164–3175, Aug. 2022.
[11] Y. Lyu et al., “Iterative receiver for M -ary DCSK systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 3929–3936, Apr. 2015.
[12] S. S. Tehrani et al., “On the effects of colored noise on the performance of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. Design Implement., Oct. 2006, pp. 226–231.
[13] F. Liang et al., “An iterative BP-CNN architecture for channel decoding,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 144–159, Feb. 2018.
[14] Y. Liu et al., “A new LDPC decoding scheme based on BP and gated neural network,” in Proc. 5th Int. Conf. Inf. Sci., Comput. Technol. Transp. (ISCTT), Nov. 2020, pp. 346–349.
[15] Y. LeCun et al., “Deep learning,” Nature, vol. 521, no. 7533, pp. 436–444, May 2015.
[16] L. Zhang et al., “Intelligent and reliable deep learning LSTM neural networks-based OFDM-DCSK demodulation design,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 16163–16167, Dec. 2020.
[17] H. Zhang et al., “An intelligent detection based on deep learning for multilevel code shifted differential chaos shift keying system with M ary modulation,” IEEE Trans. Cognit. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 155–169, Mar. 2022.
[18] D. G. M. Mitchell et al., “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[19] K. He et al., “Deep residual learning for image recognition,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Jun. 2016, pp. 770–778.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:58:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

