Proceedings of the 2008 IEEE International Conference on Information and Automation
June 20 -23, 2008, Zhangjiajie, China

An Effective Algorithm for Construction of LDPC Codes

Jing Lei and Chaojing Tang
National University of Defense Technology ChangSha Hunan ,410073, P.R. China leijing@nudt.edu.cn

Jianhui Wang
National University of Defense Technology ChangSha Hunan ,410073, P.R. China Unit 66018 of the PLA, Beijing, 100041

Abstract-Based on the analysis of the cycle structure of quasi-cyclic codes, an effective algorithm for LDPC codes’s construction is presented in this paper. The influence of cycle structure on the BER performance of LDPC codes is analyzed. We also propose a construction algorithm of LDPC codes which describes the parity-check matrix with a base matrix and a shift matrix. Simulations show that the code we construct has as good BER performance as that by PEG algorithm at the same codeword length and code rate. For having quasi-cyclic structure, the code has lower encoding complexity and can be implemented with a set of shift registers.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check(LDPC) codes have attracted considerable attention owing to their outstanding bit error rate(BER) performance these years. The encoding complexity of LDPC codes is the bottleneck of their application which can be solved by the design of parity-check matrix H.. The design methods of LDPC’s H can be divided into two classes: random construction methods and structured construction methods. The random constructions don’t have too many constraints,they can fit quite well to the parameters of the desired class, but the encoding complexity of these codes is very high in general, which is hard to implement. On the other hand, structured LDPC codes have lower encoding complexity, which can be implemented easily. Kou et al presented a geometric approach to design LDPC codes over finite fields[1]. Codes constructed from this approach have no cycles of length four. Mackay and Davey have constructed four-cycle-free LDPC codes based on balanced incomplete block designs(BIBD) [2], which can achieve very high code rate, but these codes can only guarantee four-cycle-free. M.P.C Fossorier analyzed the performance of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes

constructed from circulant permutation matrices[3]. The girths of these codes are not more than 12. The parity-check matrices of these codes are constitutive of circulant permutation matrices, which is not flexible. Zongwang Li et al present a class of LDPC codes based on PEG graph[4], which has as good performance as randomly well-constructed LDPC codes. But they did not research the cycle structure of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, and did not eliminate more short cycles.
In this paper, we analyze the cycle structure of a class of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, and present a new quasi-cyclic extension algorithm based on PEG algorithm. More short cycles can be eliminated using the presented algorithm in this paper.
Short or medium LDPC codes constructed from the algorithm in this paper which can satisfy the requirement of remote control system about error-correcting performance and real-time property can be applied to the control system of satellites.
II. CYCLE STRUCTRUE OF A CLASS OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES
A cycle in the Tanner graph of a LDPC code manifests itself as a closed path in associated parity-check matrix, as showed in Fig.1. The bold part denotes a cycle of length 6 in Fig.1. This cycle relates to a closed path in its associated parity-check matrix H. The closed path associated with this cycle of length 6 is unique, and vice versa. This closed path is a polygon with 6 edges, and every two consecutive edges are vertical. Two vertices associated with the same edge are either in the same row or in the same column. Every vertex’s value is ‘1’.

ª1 1 0 1 º H = ««0 1 1 0»»
¬«1 0 1 1 »¼

Fig.1. Relation between a cycle in a Tanner graph and a closed path in associated parity-check matrix

978-1-4244-2184-8/08/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE.

1542

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:43:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

If the k(k>1) times cyclic shift of every codeword of a code is still a codeword, this code is called a quasi-cyclic code[8]. Lemma 1 gives a sufficient condition whether a code is quasi-cyclic.

ªH1 º

Lemma

1: If

H

=

« «

H

2

» »

«H «¬#

3

» » ¼

,

where H1,H2,…

are

nonzero quasi-cyclic matrices, and Hi involves all rows which can be gained by cyclic shifting right(or left) the first row multiple k bits, the code whose parity-check matrix has the same format as H is quasi-cyclic. In Hi, except the last row, that every row cyclic shifts right(or left) k bits can get the next row, and that the last row cyclic shifts right(or left) k bits can get the first row. The proof of lemma 1 is omited.
If Hi has multiple k columns, and p( = n ) rows, k
where n is the length of the code, by changing its

columns’ position we can transform H into H '
as follows:

H'

=

§ ¨ ¨©¨

A11 # Am1

! % "

A1k # Amk

· ¸ ¸¸¹

(1)

Where Aij is a p × p cyclic matrix, called

a block element of H ' .
A code whose parity-check matrix has format like formula (1) can be transformed into a quasi-cyclic code by changing its bits’ position. We treat a matrix having format of formula (1) as a parity-check matrix of a qusi-cyclic code in this paper.
Theorem 1: If the Tanner graph of a quasi-cyclic code with a parity-check matrix having format of formula (1) involves a cycle of length 2t, it must involve p cycles of length 2t at least, where p is the number of rows(or columns) of every block element(a block element involves only one edge in a cycle at most).
Proof: A cycle in a Tanner graph relates to a closed path in its associated parity-check matrix. Fig.2 shows a closed path in a parity-check matrix. Every vertex in the closed path is involved in a block element(a block element involves only one edge in a cycle at most), having value ‘1’.

Fig.2. A closed path in a matrix having format of formula (1)
Let a1, a2 ,", a2t be the 2t vertices of a closed path of length 2t in H. Without loss generality,
locate a1 in the mth row of Aij . Because Aij
is cyclic, the mth row can be obtained by cyclic shifting right(or left) the (m −1) mod p th row
one bit. Let b1 be the associated element
corresponding to a1 , that is to say, if we cyclic
shift right(or left) the (m −1) mod p th row, a1
and b1 are in the same column. We call b1 the
‘mother element’ of a1 . Obviously, a1 and b1
have the same value(1 or 0). Let b1,b2,",b2t be the mother element sequence of a1, a2,", a2t . If
ai and a j are in the same row(or column), bi
and bj will be in the same row(or column) too,
and vice versa. That is to say, b1, b2 ,", b2t and
a1, a2 ,", a2t are parallel. So we can conclude that if a1, a2 ,", a2t is a closed path,
b1, b2 ,", b2t will be a closed path too. Namely,
if there is a cycle in the Tanner graph of H, there will be another one.
In the same way, we can find the mother
element sequence of b1, b2 ,", b2t . We can get
other p-1 closed paths in H. Taking
a1, a2 ,", a2t into account, we get p closed
paths in H. That is to say, if the Tanner graph of a quasi-cyclic code with a parity-check matrix having format of formula (1) involves a cycle of length 2t, it must involve p cycles of length 2t at least, where p is the number of rows(or columns) of every block element. This completes the proof.
Theorem 1 denotes that the Tanner graph of a quasi-cyclic code whose parity-check matrix has format like formula (1) may have multiple p cycles. That is to say, if one cycle is eliminated, p cycles may be eliminated, when the parity-check matrix is constructed.

1543
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:43:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. QUASI-CYCLIC EXTENSION BASED ON PEG ALGORITHM
PEG algorithm constructs Tanner graph edge by edge, and can guarantee that there are short cycles as few as possible and that the girth is as large as possible, when the degree distribution is fixed[4]. This algorithm is one of the most effective algorithms to construct short and medium LDPC codes. But codes constructed by this algorithm have high encoding complexity, especially for long codes. In this paper, we use some concepts of protograph to construct the parity-check matrix of a code. Firstly, a small base matrix is constructed with PEG algorithm. Secondly, the ‘1’ elements of the base matrix are
replaced by p × p circulant permutation
matrices, which can be gained by cyclic shifting right(or left) the identity matrix some times, and the ‘0’ elements of the base matrix are replaced
by p × p zero matrices. The dimension of the
base matrix is determined by the codeword length n, the dimension of the block elements p and the code rate. The dimension of the extended matrix which has format of formula (1) satisfies design requirement, so the code determined by the extended matrix has low encoding complexity, which is good for implemention.
Replacing all ‘1’ elements by identity matrices and all ‘0’ elements by zero matrices, we also can gain a extended matrix. But the BER performance of this extended code is as bad as the code determined by the base matrix, because the parity-check relation and cycle structure of this extended code are not improved. If we replace the ‘1’ elements with circulant permutation matrices whose shifts are determined properly, more cycles can be eliminated and the parity-check relation can be improved too.
Now the problem is how to determine the shifts.
The extended matrix has format as follows:
Where Si, j is the shift of I (Si, j ) , and −1 ≤ Si, j ≤ p −1 , Si, j ∈ Z .
I (−1) represents a p × p zero matrix.

Fig.3 shows a closed path in the extended matrix.
Fig.3. a closed path in the extended matrix
Theorem 2: The Tanner graph of a parity-check matrix having format of Fig.3 involves a cycle of length 2t, if and only if the parity-check matrix involves a closed path which satisfies the following equation:
2t
¦( (−1)k+1 Sαk,βk ) = 0 mod p k =1
Where Sαk ,βk represents the shift of I (Sαk,βk ) in which the kth vertex of the closed path locates.
The proof of theorem 2 can be found in [3] and [7].
If the shifts of all closed path of length 2i(1<i<t) in the base matrix do not satisfy the restriction condition of theorem 2, the girth of the code constructed is likely 2t at least. So shifts properly determined can further eliminate the closed paths in the base matrix.
Based on the presented analysis, we present a extension algorithm as follows:
1). Construct a base matrix satisfying the degree distribution condition, and record all cycles.
2). Replace ‘1’ elements with circulant permutation matrices cycle by cycle. That is to say, select one cycle replaced incompletely(if there are more than one these cycles, select randomly), replace the ‘1’ elements in this cycle with circulant permutation matrices whose shifts do not satisfy the restriction condition of theorem 2.
3). Repeat step 2) until all ‘1’ elements of all cycles recorded are replaced.
4). Considering some ‘1’ elements are not involved in any cycle, replace these ‘1’ elements with circulant permutation matrices with random shifts.
5). Replace all ‘0’ elements with zero matrices.
6). Search the girth of the extended matrix. If the cycles of length girth involves too many symbol nodes to satisfy the design requirement, repeat steps 1) to 5). If not, the extended matrix is the output.
In step 4), we use random shifts to improve

1544
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:43:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the parity-check relation. There is only one ‘1’ in every row or column
of every circulant permutation matrix, so the replacement does not change the degree distribution.
To extend the base matrix multiple times, we may eliminate more cycles.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this paper, we construct three kinds of LDPC codes based on our presented extension algorithm, PEG algorithm and simple extension algorithm which ‘0’ and ‘1’ are replaced by zero matrix and identity matrix respectively. These codes are denoted respectively with ‘PEG-E-LDPC code’, ‘PEG-LDPC code’ and ‘PEG-PE-LDPC code’. They have the same codeword length, approximate degree distribution and code rate. The parameters of the base matrix in this paper are as follow: girth 6 , 84 columns, 42 rows, and every column’s weight is 3. The PEG-E-LDPC code and the PEG-PE-LDPC code, which have the same codeword length 1008, are extended from the same base matrix. The dimension of the matrices replacing the ‘1’s and
‘0’s in the base matrix is 12 ×12 (it means
p=12). We evaluate the BER performance of these
three codes by simulation. These codes are decoded with the Belief Propagation(BP) algorithm and the Min-Sum(MS) algorithm. The performance of these codes are showed in Fig.4 and Fig.5. The simulation results indicate that the performance of the PEG-E-LDPC code is not worse than the PEG-LDPC code.
Table I compares every symbol node’s localgirth[4](the length of the shortest cycle getting across some node) of four codes, where ‘B-LDPC code’ denotes the LDPC code derived directly from the base matrix. In the Tanner graph of the B-LDPC code, there are 60 symbol nodes involved in cycles of length 6.

Fig.5. BER performance of PEG-E-LDPC code, PEG-LDPC code and PEG-PE-LDPC code under MS algorithm
From Table I, we can see that the localgirth of all symbol nodes of the B-LDPC’s and the PEG-PE-LDPC’s Tanner graph is 6. There are only 60 symbol nodes with localgirth 6, 936 symbol nodes with localgirth 8 and 12 symbol nodes with localgirth 10. It indicates that the extension algorithm presented in this paper can eliminate most of the cycles of length 6 and some cycles of length 8 in the Tanner graph of B-LDPC code.
On the other hand, seeing from Table I we find that PEG-LDPC code has better properties in terms of girth and localgirth than PEG-E-LDPC code, but the performance of them is approximately the same. The reason will be that the girth of a LDPC code is a kind of parameter influencing the performance of LDPC codes,but the cycle structure and the parity-check relation may play a greater role, while the code we presented has better properties than that of PEG-LDPC code in these aspects.
PEG-PE-LDPC code and B-LDPC code have the same cycle structure and parity-check relation, so they have approximately the same BER performance. PEG-PE-LDPC code has longer codeword length, which does not improve the BER performance at all just as what Fig.6 shows.

. Fig.4 BER performance of PEG-E-LDPC code, PEG-LDPC
code and PEG-PE-LDPC code under BP algorithm

Fig.6.BER performance of PEG-PE-LDPC code and B-LDPC code under BP algorithm

1545
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:43:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Num of Nodes with local girth 4 Num of Nodes with local girth 6 Num of Nodes with local girth 8 Num of Nodes with local girth 1 0 Num of Nodes with local girth 1 2 Num of Nodes with local girth 1 4 Num of Nodes with local girth 1 6

TABLE I LOCALGIRTH OF SYMBOL NODES
B-LDPC PEG-PE-LDPC

0

0

84

1008

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

PEG-E-LDPC 0 60
936 12 0 0 0

PEG-LDPC 0 0 7
1001 0 0 0

V. CONCLUSION
This paper analyzed the cycle structure of the Tanner graph of a class of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, and presented an extension algorithm in which there are two steps, constructing a base matrix by PEG algorithm, replacing respectively the ‘0’s and ‘1’s in the
base matrix with p × p zero matrices and some
circulant permutation matrices, whose suitable shift numbers are obtained by some constraints. Simulation results show that a well-constructed PEG-E-LDPC code has as good BER performance as a well-constructed PEG-LDPC code at the same codeword length and code rate. The girth of a LDPC code is an important parameter of its BER performance, but the BER performance depends on codes’ cycle structure further. Because the PEG-E-LDPC codes presented in this paper is quasi-cyclic, its encoder can be implemented with a set of shift registers, so it is practical.
Multiple extensions can eliminate more cycles, and get better BER performance, but it increases the encoding complexity. The base matrix properly constructed can improve BER performance.

REFERENCE
[1] Yu Kou, Shu Lin and M.P.C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,”[J].IEEE Trans.Inform. Theory, 2001, 47(7):2711–2736.
[2] D.J.C. Mackay and M.C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications”, [J].in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models; IMA Volumes in Mathematics and Its Applications, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2000, 123:113–130.
[3] M.P.C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity -check codes form circulant permutation matrices”,[J].IEEE Trans .Inf. Theory, 2004, 50(8): 1788-1793.
[4] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Progressive Edge-Growth Tanner Graphs,”[J].IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001, 2:995-1001.
[5] Zongwang Li and B.V.K. Vijaya Kumar, “A Class of Good Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity Check Codes Based On Progressive Edge Growth Graph,” [J].Signals, Systems and Computers. Conference Record of the Thirty-Eighth Asilomar Conference on, 2004, 2:1990-1994.
[6] Jeremy Thorpe, "Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes Constructed from Protographs",[J].JPL INP Progress Report 42-154 , August 15,2003˖1-7
[7] Jin Lu, José M. F. Moura, "Partition-and-Shift LDPC Codes",[J].IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, 2005, 41(10): 2977-2979.
[8] Shu Lin,“Ꮒ⏝᥻ࠊේ‫˄”ۅ‬ৰ 2 Č˅[M]ˈᴎẄᎹϮߎČ ࠂˈ2007 ᑈ 6 ᳜˖113

1546
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:43:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

