FPGA IMPLEMENTATION OF VARIANTS OF MIN-SUM ALGORITHM

Sina Tolouei and Amir H. Banihashemi

Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada {stolouei, ahashemi}@sce.carleton.ca

ABSTRACT
This paper presents the FPGA implementation of a number of popular decoding algorithms for a regular rate-1/2 low density parity check code with block length 504 bits. The so-called minsum (MS) algorithm and two of its variants, known as MS with successive relaxation (SR-MS) and MS with unconditional correction (MS-UC), are implemented. We implement the algorithms on a Xilinx XC2VP100 FPGA device with 4-bit quantization. We show that for MS-UC, the circuit utilization increases by about 2% compared to standard MS and that the throughput is the same as that of MS. For SR-MS, the device utilization is increased by about 26% and the throughput is decreased by approximately 20% compared to standard MS. While the throughput and the area and power consumption of our implementation is comparable to the most recent FPGA implementations of LDPC decoders, ours is the first attempt at implementing an iterative decoding algorithm with memory (SRMS).
1. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have recently attracted great research interest because of their high performance and relatively low complexity. They have been adopted as part of a number of standards such as Wi-Max (IEEE 802.16). In high-speed applications, parallel implementations of iterative message-passing algorithms for the decoding of LDPC codes are of great interest [4]-[6]. To reduce the complexity of the algorithm, which translates to reducing the area and power consumption as well as increasing the throughput, researchers have used min-sum (MS) algorithm and its modifications as prime candidates for implementing iterative decoders [5], [6], [7]. In [5], a bit-serial approximation of MS for a fully-parallel LDPC decoder is implemented in FPGA. This implementation is for a (480,355) LDPC code, is based on 3 quantization bits, and has a throughput of 650 Mb/s for 15 decoding iterations at maximum clock frequency of 61 MHz. This implementation is on a single Altera Stratix EP1S80 FPGA device. In [6], a fully-parallel FPGA-based LDPC decoder for a (1200,600) code is presented. The decoder has a maximum throughput of 6 Gb/s with 3 quantization bits and 10 iterations at maximum clock frequency of 100 MHz. This implementation is on a Xilinx Virtex-4 FPGA device.
MS is an approximation of belief propagation (BP). Although, it performs inferior to BP but it does not require the estimation of channel signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and is more robust against quantization errors [2]. To maintain the low complexity of MS and close its performance gap to BP, research has been performed on different modifications of MS, see, e.g., [2]. Among the existing modifications for MS, MS with unconditional correction (MS-UC)

[2] is particularly attractive. It performs as well as BP, and in some cases even outperforms BP for finite-lengths codes, while its complexity is only slightly higher than that of MS. More recently, and inspired by the dynamics of analog decoders, a new framework for iterative message-passing called “successive relaxation (SR)”, has been introduced in [3]. SR can be applied to both BP and MS in different domains such as likelihood ratio (LR) and loglikelihood ratio (LLR). Among the four algorithms SR-BP-LR, SR-BP-LLR, SR-MS-LR and SR-MS-LLR, the last one appears to have the best performance and the least complexity [8].
In this paper, we implement MS-UC and SR-MS-LLR as well as standard MS for a rate-1/2 regular LDPC code with block length n = 504 and variable and check node degrees equal to 3 and 6, respectively. Our implementations are on a Xilinx Virtex-ii FPGA based on a fully parallel architecture. We use 4 quantization bits to represent all the messages. This limit is imposed by the available space on the FPGA. The decoder operates at a maximum clock of 64MHz for MS and MS-UC, and 51 MHz for SR-MS-LLR. With a maximum number of iterations equal to 15, the decoder has a data throughput of 1.075 Gbps for MS and MS-UC, and 856 Mbps for SR-MS-LLR.
In the following section, we briefly describe the MS algorithm and its variants. In Section 3, we describe the architecture of the decoder for the three algorithms. Sections 4 is devoted to the test results and discussions.
2. MIN-SUM ALGORITHM AND ITS VARIANTS
We consider a binary (n,k) LDPC code with a parity-check matrix H, which has n columns and m rows (m=n-k). The code rate is R = k/n, and the code is used for communication over a binary-input additive white Gaussian (AWGN) channel where the input signal x corresponding to the code bit c is given by x = 1-2c. The output of the channel y is equal to y = x + N, where N is Gaussian with zero-mean and variance σ 2 = 1/(2REb / N0) , in which Eb is the average energy per information bit and N0 is the one-sided power spectral density of the AWGN.
In the LLR domain, we use the notation L(qij ) for the message passed from the variable node i to check node j, and L(rji ) for the message from check node j to variable node i.
2.1. MS Algorithm The MS algorithm is described by the following steps in each iteration:
Step 0: The initial messages at variable nodes are set to: L(qij ) = L(ci ) = yi

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Step 1: Check node update:

∏ L(rji

)

=

( αi′j
i′∈V j \i

).

min
i′∈V j \i

(β

i′j

)

αi′j = sign(L(qi′j ))

βi′j = L(qi′j ) ,

where Vj\i is the set of variable nodes connected to check node j excluding variable node i.

Step 2: Decision at variable nodes:

∑ L(Qi ) = L(ci ) + L(rji ) j∈Ci

cˆ i

=

1  0

if otherwise

L(Qi ) < 0

where Ci is the set of check nodes connected to variable node i and

cˆi is the estimate of the code bit i. The algorithm stops if

 (c1

,...,

 cn

).H

T

=0,

or

if

the

maximum

number

of

iterations

is

reached.

Step 3: Variable node update:
∑ L(qij ) = L(ci ) + L(rj′i ) j ′∈Ci \ j

2.2. Min-Sum with Unconditional Correction

Min-sum with unconditional correction (MS-UC) has the same variable node operation as the standard MS does. The only difference is in the magnitude of the check node outgoing messages:

∏ L(rji )

=

(
i′∈V

j

α
\i

i′j

).

max(

min(
i′∈V j \i

βi′j

)

−

yc ,0)

where yc is called the “correction factor.”

2.3. Successive Relaxation of Min-Sum

Compared to standard MS, SR-MS-LLR has the same initial

messages for variable nodes, and the same check node operations.

The variable node messages however, are calculated by:

∑ L( A +1)

(qij

)

:=

L( A )

(qij

)

+

β

 

  

L(ci

)

+

L(A)
j′∈Ci \ j

(rj′i

 ) 

−

L(A)

(qij

)

where A is the iteration number.

3. IMPLEMENTATION OF MIN-SUM AND ITS VARIANTS

To implement the iterative algorithms, we consider the received
values to be clipped symmetrically at a threshold cth, and then uniformly quantized in the range [-cth , cth]. There are 2q – 1 quantization intervals, symmetric with respect to the origin, and each represented by q quantization bits. Integer numbers – (2q-1 – 1), … , 2q-1 – 1 are assigned to the intervals. Operations are
performed on integers, and at bit nodes an outgoing message is clipped to ± (2q-1 – 1) if it exceeds the threshold.
Our simulation results indicate that the optimal clipping
threshold which minimizes the BER over a wide range of Eb/N0 values for the (504,252) code and q = 4 is 1.5 for all the three
algorithms.

In this paper, to implement the variable nodes with degree 3, we use the same basic architecture as the one used in both [4] and [6]. We have however made some changes to the architecture of [4], as shown in Fig. 1. In our design, we calculate the maximum number of bits needed inside the adder module by assuming the maximum values for the inputs. Considering 4-bit quantization, we have 4 inputs with maximum absolute value of ‘7’. So the absolute value of the maximum total sum would be ‘28’ which can be represented by a 6-bit signed number. Messages are thus converted from 4-bit sign-magnitude to 6-bit 2’s complement and passed to the full adder. Also, messages are clipped to ± (2q−1 − 1) when they are
converted back from 6-bit 2’s complement domain to 4-bit signmagnitude domain before being passed to the check nodes.

input 0 SM-2’s
4 bits

6 bits

input 1

SM-2’s

6 bits
2’s-SM 4 bits

output 0 4 bits

sum

2’s-SM

output 1

input 2

SM-2’s

SM-2’s

MSB

2’s-SM

1 bit

output 2 decoded_out

received_in

4 bits packet_start

Fig. 1. The architecture of variable nodes of degree 3 for MS

The check node architecture consists of two components, one for sign and the other for magnitude. The messages from the variable nodes have 1 bit for the sign and 3 bits which represent the magnitude. The sign bits of the incoming messages to a check node are XOR-ed together, and then the sign of the outgoing message on each edge is obtained as the XOR of the sign of the incoming variable message on that edge and the XOR of the signs of all the incoming messages. Fig. 2 shows the architecture of the sign update circuit for a degree 6 check node.

3.1. Implementation of min-sum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

parity input 1 parity input 2
parity input 3 parity input 4 parity input 5

6-input XOR

parity output 1

parity output 2

2-input XOR

parity output 3

parity output 4 parity output 5

parity input 6

1 bit

parity output 6

Fig. 2- Architecture of the sign update circuit for a check node of degree 6

To calculate the magnitude of the messages in check nodes, 12 2-input minimum functions are used. This architecture is shown in Fig. 3.

3 bits

Input 1

Min

Min

Min

Output 1

Input 2

Min

Output 2

Input 3 Min
Input 4

Min

Output 3

Min

Min

Output 4

Input 5 Min
Input 6

Min

Output 5

Min

Min

Output 6

Fig. 3- Architecture of the magnitude update circuit for check nodes of degree 6

3.2. Implementation of min-sum with unconditional correction
For MS-UC, the variable node structure is the same as that of MS. The only change is in the check node structure, where a fixed correction factor is subtracted from the magnitude of the outgoing messages of check nodes. For the (504,252) code, the optimal correction factor with 4-bit quantization is yc = 1over a large range of Eb/N0 values.
3.3. Implementation of SR min-sum in the LLR domain
In the SR-MS-LLR algorithm, check nodes architecture is the same as that of standard MS, and the only change is in the variable nodes architecture. For the (504,252) code, our simulations show that the optimum value of β over a large range of Eb/N0 values is 0.5. The

variable nodes architecture for SR-MS-LLR is shown in Fig. 4, where the multiplication by β is implemented by a shift to the right.
The registers we have used to synchronize the message passing algorithm contain the values of the outgoing messages of the variable nodes from the last iteration. So the values of these registers are now used as extra inputs to the variable nodes.

6 adder_input (1)
prev_input (1) adder_input (2) prev_input (2)
6

X 0.5 X 0.5

6 adder_output (1)
adder_output (2)

adder_input (4)

adder_input (3) prev_input (3)

MSB

X 0.5 adder_output (3)

1 bit_output
Fig 4- Variable node architecture for SR-MS-LLR

It is important to note that the module of Fig. 4 is designed by the addition of only 3 adders, 3 subtractors and 3 shift registers to the variable node architecture of standard MS.

4. TEST RESULTS: THROUGHPUT AND UTILIZATION COMPARISON

Table 1 summarizes the FPGA implementation results of standard MS, MS-UC and SR-MS-LLR. The information throughput is calculated based on 15 iterations for each block.

Table 1- Throughput and complexity of different decoders

Algorithm MS

Maximum Clock Frequency 64 MHz

Information Throughput
1.075 Gbps

Total Number of 4input look-up tables
66738 (75%)

MS-UC 64 MHz 1.075 Gbps 68378 (77%)

SR-MS 51 MHz 856 Mbps 85935 (97%)

Table 1 shows that while the circuit utilization for MS-UC is slightly higher than that of standard MS, the throughput of both algorithms is the same. For SR-MS, the circuit utilization is increased by a factor of about 26% with respect to MS-UC and standard MS, while the maximum clock frequency and throughput has reduced by a factor of about 20%. The BER performance of the three decoders is shown in Fig. 5. For reference, BER curves of standard floating-point BP and MS are given in the figure as well. We have also simulated the three algorithms and the performance curves obtained from simulations match very well with the test results from the FPGA implementation [7].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5. BER curves of the three implemented decoders with maximum number of iterations equal to 15 as well as floating-point simulations of standard MS and BP.

been observed in [2]. Fig. 5 also shows that for maximum number of iterations equal to 15, MS-UC has the best performance among the three quantized algorithms, and that SR-MS slightly outperforms standard MS at higher error rates. The improvement in performance of SR-MS increases with the number of quantization bits and the maximum number of iterations. This is shown in Fig. 6(b) where the performance curves for the three algorithms are given for q = 7 and compared with those of q = 4 (in Fig. 6(a)) for the maximum number of iterations equal to 200. As can be seen, for larger number of quantization bits and larger number of iterations, SR-MS outperforms both standard MS and MS-UC. It even outperforms the floating-point implementation of BP in lower error rates.
Compared to the state-of-the-art FPGA implementations of LDPC decoders, our implementations have throughputs in between those of [5] and [6]. Our lower throughput compared to [6] is mainly due to the smaller number of iterations used in [6] as well as the better performance of the FPGA used in [6]. To the best of our knowledge, however our implementation of SR-MS-LLR is the first implementation of SR algorithms.

5. REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge

MA: MIT Press, 1963.

[2] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari and A. H. Banihashemi, ``On

implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for

decoding LDPC codes," IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 53, no. 4,

pp. 549-554, April 2005.

[3] S. Hemati and A. H. Banihashemi, ``Dynamics and

Performance Analysis of Analog Iterative Decoding for Low-

Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes," IEEE Trans. Comm.,

vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 61 - 70, Jan. 2006.

[4] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, "A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b,

rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder," IEEE J.

(a)

Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404-412, March 2002.

[5] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone and F. R. Kschischang, "A bit-

serial approximate min-sum LDPC decoder and FPGA

implementation," in Proc. IEEE Circuits and Systems, 2006.

[6] R. Zarubica, S. Wilson and E. Hall, "Multi-Gbps FPGA-based

Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Decoder Design" Proc.

IEEE Globecomm, pp. 548 – 552, 2007.

[7] S. Tolouei, "Design and FPGA Implementation of Min-Sum

Algorithm and Its Variants", M.A.Sc. Thesis, Dept. Syst.

Comput. Eng., Carleton Univ., Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2007.

[8] H. Xiao, S. Tolouei and A. H. Banihashemi, "Successive

Relaxation for Decoding of LDPC Codes," accepted for presentation at 24th Biennial Symposium on Comm., Queen’s

Univ., 2008.

(b) Fig. 6. BER curves of floating-point implementation of BP and quantized versions of MS, MS-UC and SR-MS with maximum number of iterations equal to 200: (a) q=4, (b) q=7.
As can be seen in Fig. 5, quantized MS outperforms floatingpoint MS. This phenomenon, which is due to clipping, has also

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:46:00 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

