SUCCESSIVE RELAXATION FOR DECODING OF LDPC CODES

Hua Xiao, Sina Tolouei and Amir H. Banihashemi

Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada {huaxiao, stolouei, ahashemi}@sce.carleton.ca

ABSTRACT
The application of successive relaxation (SR) to the fixed-point problem associated with the iterative decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is studied. We consider finite-length codes decoded by belief propagation (BP) and a well-known approximation of it, referred to as min-sum (MS), over a binary input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channel. For both algorithms, we show that the application of SR in different domains results in different error correcting performance. In particular, the performances of SR in log-likelihood ratio (LLR) and LR domains for BP and MS are compared, and it is shown that SR-MS-LLR has the best performance. For the tested codes, SRMS-LLR outperforms standard BP by up to about 0.5dB, offering an attractive solution in terms of performance/complexity tradeoff. We also investigate the effects of quantization on SR-MS-LLR and demonstrate that at least 6-7 bits of quantization is required to capture close to floating-point performance.
I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [5] and the associated iterative message-passing algorithms have been the subject of much research in the past decade. Thanks to the flurry of research in this area, we now have a rather complete picture of the asymptotic performance of LDPC codes at infinite block length using analysis tools such as density evolution [10] and EXIT charts [1]. Our knowledge of iterative decoding algorithms at finite block lengths however is not nearly as complete. This is despite the fact that in practice, we always have to deal with finite-length codes. The difficulty in analyzing LDPC codes with finite block length under iterative message-passing algorithms is originated from the fact that the Tanner graph representation [11] of these codes includes many short cycles. These cycles, even for memoryless channels where the initial messages are independent, create dependencies among the messages after the first few iterations are passed.
The existence of cycles and dependencies among messages has some interesting consequences. One example is that while belief propagation (BP) converges to the optimal a posteriori probabilities for bits on a cycle-free graph [12], on graphs with cycles, it only provides a suboptimal solution. There has been some research to improve the performance of BP for short codes [7], [9], [13], [14]. In another direction, researchers have been busy devising algorithms that are less complex than BP [2], [3], [15]. The most well-known algorithms in this category for soft-decision decoding are min-sum (MS) algorithm, also known as max-product or max-sum, and its modifications [3], [15]. Min-sum is also important as it converges to the maximum likelihood codeword on cycle-free graphs [12]. Only slightly inferior to BP in performance,

MS has a much simpler check node operation compared to that of

BP. The variable node operation is the same for both algorithms.

Considering that the check node operation is much more complex

than the variable node operation in BP, the complexity of MS is

substantially less than that of BP.

In their conventional form, iterative message-passing

algorithms pass messages between the check nodes and the

variable nodes and subsequently between the variable nodes and

the check nodes in each iteration. The message passing is

performed in parallel or according to the flooding schedule in each

direction, i.e., all the nodes on one side of the Tanner graph send

their messages to the nodes on the other side simultaneously in

discrete-time and in a synchronized fashion. Making a

correspondence between one iteration and a time unit starting from

time zero, the output messages of a variable node (check node) at a

discrete-time k are only a function of the input messages to that

node at time k (k -1) and aGlso the initial message in the case of

variable noGdes. The output V of variable nodes at time k+1 is then

relateGd to V GatGtimGe k by the following equation

Vk +G1 = h(Vk ,V0 ) ,

(1)

oTwphheeerranetuiomhnbsreiernpoorefnseeelniettmesreathntietosnco,ofamnvbdeicnVtGao0 triisosnVtGh0oe,fvVGvekacartnioadrbVolGekf+1ianniistdiaeclqhmueacelksstoangotedhsee.

number of edges in the graph, which is the same as the number of

nonzero elements in the parity-check matrix of the code. This

framework is referred to as successive substitution (SS), pointing

out the fact that it represents the application of the well-known

iterative numerical method of successive substitution to the

followGing GfixGed-Gpoint problem of iterative decoding

V = h(V ,V0 ) .

(2)

Inspired by the dynamics of analog decoders, a different

iterative message-passing algorithm was introduced in [6]. This

algorithm, which is based on the application of the well-known

successive relaxation (SR) method to the fixed-point problem of

( ) (2), hGas memGory andG isG repGresenGted by Vk+1 = Vk + β h(Vk ,V0 ) − Vk ,

(3)

where β is called the "relaxation factor", and can be optimized for

the best performance. For β=1, SR reduces to SS. The optimal

value of β, which is usually less than one, results in performance

improvement of a few tenths of a dB over SS (β=1) [6].

While it is known that SR outperforms SS in general, no

comparative analysis of the performance of SR for different

algorithms and in different domains is available. In this work, we

study the application of SR to BP and MS in likelihood ratio (LR)

and log-likelihood ratio (LLR) domains. We use the notations SR-

BP-LR, SR-BP-LLR, SR-MS-LR and SR-MS-LLR to identify the

four algorithms. The comparison among the four algorithms leaves

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:44:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

us with three main conclusions: i) For BP, SR in both LR and LLR domains performs similarly; ii) For MS, SR in the LLR domain outperforms SR in the LR domain; iii) SR-BP-LR and SR-BP-LLR perform in between SR-MS-LR and SR-MS-LLR. Combining (i), (ii) and (iii), we thus conclude that among the four SR algorithms, SR-MS-LLR has the best performance. Moreover, the performance of SR-MS-LLR is superior to that of the conventional SS-BP by up to about 0.5 dB for the tested codes. This makes SR-MS-LLR one of the best choices for iterative decoding of LDPC codes in terms of performance/complexity tradeoff. We also study the implementation of this algorithm by investigating the effects of quantization. Our results show that for coarser quantization (smaller number of quantization bits, say up to 6) the performance of SR-MS-LLR is comparable with that of other well-known modifications of MS, such as MS with unconditional correction [15]. For larger number of quantization bits however, the performance of SR-MS-LLR is superior.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In the next section, we explain the system model, provide the variable and check node operations for BP and MS in LR and LLR domains, and describe successive relaxation in LR and LLR domains. We also define the quantization scheme in this section. Section III is used for simulation results, and Section IV concludes the paper.

II. SR IN LR AND LLR DOMAINS APPLIED TO BP AND MS II.1. BP and MS in LR and LLR domains

We consider the application of a binary (n,k) LDPC code over a binary input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channel.
Consider a BIAWGN channel with input X that can take values ±1, and has output Y=X + N, where N is a Gaussian random variable with mean zero and variance σ2=N0/2, independent of X. In the LLR domain, messages are in the form of Λ( p−1, p1) = ln( p1 / p−1) ,
where p−1 and p1 are the probabilities of a bit being -1 or 1,
respectively. The initial messages in the LLR domain for BP and MS algorithms for each bit are 2Y/σ2 and Y, respectively. The following variable and check node operations describe BP and MS in the LLR domain for two input messages. For a larger number of inputs a cascade of two-input modules can produce the output.

BP in LLR domain:
VAR: f (Λ0, Λ1, Λ2 ) = Λ0 + Λ1 + Λ2 (Λ0 is the initial

message)

CHK:

g

(Λ1,

Λ2

)

=

2

tanh

−1

 

tanh(

Λ1 2

)

tanh(

Λ2 2

)

 

MS in LLR domain:
( ) VAR: f Λ0 , Λ1, Λ2 = Λ0 + Λ1 + Λ2 (Λ0 is the initial

message)
( ) CHK: g(Λ1, Λ 2 ) = sgn(Λ1Λ 2 )min Λ1 , Λ 2 ,

where sgn(x) =1, for x > 0, and = -1, otherwise.

In the LR domain, messages are in the form of λ( p−1, p1) = p1 / p−1 , and the following operations are performed in the variable nodes and the check nodes for BP and MS.

BP in LR domain:
VAR: f (λ0,λ1, λ2 ) = λ0λ1λ2 (λ0 is the initial message)

CHK:

g

(λ1

,

λ2

)

=

1+ λ1

λ1λ2 + λ2

MS in LR domain:
VAR: f (λ0,λ1, λ2 ) = λ0λ1λ2 (λ0 is the initial message)

[ ( )] λ λ λ λ CHK:

g( , ) = min , 1 2

sgn(λ1 −1) 1

sgn(λ2 −1) sgn(λ1 −1) sgn(λ2 −1) 2

It is worth noting that although the operations for MS in the LR

domain are min(.) and product, we still use the term min-sum for

this algorithm to emphasize the fact that this set of operations is in

fact equivalent to that of MS in the LLR domain; it is just

performed in a different domain (LR instead of LLR).

II.2. SR in LR and LLR domains

On cycle-free graphs, the successive substitution version of BP

(SS-BP) and MS (SS-MS) converges to the optimal maximum a

posteriori (MAP) solution for bits and codewords, respectively.

This is regardless of the domain in which the algorithms are

implemented. For graphs with cycles, which always appear in the

representation of good codes [4], however, SS-BP and SS-MS are

suboptimal. The suboptimality is attributed to the dependencies

created among the messages passed along the edges of the graph

throughout the iterative process, and can be interpreted as lower

reliability of messages compared to the optimal scenario, i.e., the

true reliability of messages is overestimated in the suboptimal

algorithm [14].

The main idea behind SR is to weigh down the reliability of

newly created messages by only partially moving in their direction.

In SR, this is performed by moving slightly (a frGaction of β) along

the

line

connecting the GG

current G

set

of

messages

Vk

and the newly

created messages h(Vk ,V0 ) . This is shown in Fig. 1(a) for two

messages, i.e., where the message vectors have only two elements,

in the LLR domain by the full line. Unlike the case for SS, the

implementation of SR in different domains however, results in

different trajectories for iterative decoding. This is explained in

Figures 1(a) and 1(b), where one iteration of SR is shown in LLR

and LR domains, respectively. For each case, the corresponding

trajectory in the other domain has also been shown. The

trajectories for SR in the LLR domain and the LR domain are

shown by full have assumed

aGnd dasheKd lines, V 'k = exp(Vk ) , and

rtehsupsechGti'v(VeKl'ky,.VIGn'0 )t=heexfpi[ghGu(VrGeks,V,G0w)]e,

where the exponential operation is defined component wise. The

figures demonstrate that the application of SR in the LR domain

(SR-LR) is equivalent to moving along a logarithmic curve in the

LLR domain, while SR-LLR is equivalent to following an

exponential trajectory in the LR domain. So, for the two SR

algorithms, although the start and the end points of the two

trajectories are the same, their directions are different. This results

in different messages at the end of the SR iteration if β < 1. For

β=1, SR reduces to SS and the messages at the end of the iteration

in both cases are the same and are equal to the end point of the

trajectory.

While in this work, we make no attempt in finding the best

domain in implementing the SR algorithm, we observe that the

performance of SR for MS in the LLR domain is in general

superior to its performance for MS-LR, BP-LR and BP-LLR.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:44:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Λ2

GK G

λ2

GGG

h (Vk ,V0 )

h

'

(V

' k

,

V0'

)

G

ln(V

' k +1

)

G Vk

GG

GG G G

Vk+1 = Vk + β (h (Vk ,V0 ) − Vk )

Λ1 (a)

GG

GGG G

V' k +1

=

V

' k

+

β

' (h ' (Vk' ,V0' )

− Vk' )

G Vk'

G exp(Vk+1 )

λ1
(b)

Fig 1: Illustration of trajectories of SR in (a) LLR and (b) LR domains.

II.3. Quantization scheme
We consider the received values to be clipped symmetrically at a threshold cth, and then uniformly quantized in the range [-cth , cth]. There are 2q – 1 quantization intervals, symmetric with respect to the origin, and each represented by q quantization bits. Integer numbers –(2q-1 – 1), …, 2q-1 – 1 are assigned to the intervals. Operations are performed on integers, and at bit nodes an outgoing message is clipped to ± (2q-1 – 1) if it exceeds the threshold.
III. SIMULATION RESULTS
The application of asymptotic analysis tools such as density evolution to SR algorithms is not straightforward due to the existence of memory. We have thus performed extensive simulations on a number of LDPC codes to study these algorithms. The trends discussed here are generally the same for all codes. Here, we just report the results for a regular (504,252) code [8]. In our simulations, we stop iterations as soon as a codeword is detected or when a maximum number of iterations M is reached. We have investigated the code’s performance with SR for both BP and MS algorithms in both LR and LLR domains, i.e., under SRBP-LR, SR-BP-LLR, SR-MS-LR and SR-MS-LLR. For all the reported results, we have 100 codeword errors per simulation point. Two values of M =200 and 10,000 are considered here.
For a given maximum number of iterations M and a given Eb/N0, where Eb is the average energy per information bit, there exists a value of β that minimizes the BER of the SR method. Our experiments show that the optimal β is rather independent of Eb/N0, and M and is mainly a function of the code and the decoding algorithm (BP or MS in LR or LLR domain). For the (504,252) code, the optimal β for SR-BP-LR, SR-BP-LLR, SR-MS-LR and SR-MS-LLR is about 0.8, 0.5, 0.98 and 0.5, respectively. Our results show that while the performance of SR-MS-LR is highly sensitive to the choice of β, the performance of the other three algorithms is more robust against changes in β. The BER performance of the algorithms with optimal β values are shown in Figures 2 and 3, for M = 200 and 10,000, respectively. In each figure, we have also reported the BER of the conventional SS-BP and SS-MS for reference. Comparing the results of Fig. 3 with those of Fig. 2 reveals that, similar to the case for SS, the performance of SR improves by increasing M. As can be seen in both figures, and more clearly in Fig. 3, SR-MS-LLR has the best performance followed by the pair of SR-BP-LR and SR-BP-LLR, both performing roughly the same. SR-MS-LR performs the worst, still better or the same as SS-BP. The fact that SR-MS-LLR has the best performance and the simplest variable and check node operations among the four SR algorithms, and that it also performs

considerably better than SS-MS and SS-BP, make SR-MS-LLR a prime candidate for the iterative decoding of LDPC codes. In the following, we discuss the effects of quantization on SR-MS-LLR.
10−1

10−2

10−3

BER

10−4

SR−BP−LR, β=0.8

SR−BP−LLR, β=0.5

10−5

SR−MS−LR, β=0.98

SR−MS−LLR, β=0.5

Conventional MS

Conventional BP

10−6

1.5

2

2.5

3

E /N (dB)
b0

Fig 2: BER curves of SR algorithms applied to (504,252) code with M=200.
10−1

10−2

10−3

BER

10−4

10−5

SR−BP−LR, β=0.8

SR−BP−LLR, β=0.5

10−6

SR−MS−LR, β=0.98 SR−MS−LLR, β=0.5

Conventional MS

Conventional BP

10−7

1.5

2

2.5

3

E /N (dB)
b0

Fig 3: BER curves of SR algorithms applied to (504,252) code

with M =10000.

To investigate the effects of clipping and quantization, we have simulated the performance of the code for different values of cth and q. Throughout the simulations, we use β = 0.5 and M = 200. Figures 4(a) and (b) show the BER curves versus cth at different Eb/N0 values for q = 4 and 7, respectively. As can be seen, the optimal value of cth, which minimizes the BER, is an increasing function of both Eb/N0 and q. This result is expected for q, as having a larger number of quantization bits for a given Eb/N0 will allow for covering a larger range of LLR values with the same precision. For a given q, the increase in optimal cth as a result of the increase in Eb/N0 is less obvious and can be attributed to the increase in the probability of having larger LLR values throughout the iterative process. BER curves of quantized SR-MS-LLR for different number of quantization bits are given in Fig. 5 along with the BER curve of the floating-point implementation. For each
simulation point, the optimal value of cth is used. This figure shows that to capture the full performance of SR-MS-LLR, especially at low error rates, a larger number of quantization bits is required.
Another iterative decoding algorithm which offers an attractive performance/complexity tradeoff is MS with unconditional correction [15]. For comparison, we have also reported the BER curve of this algorithm for q = 7 in Fig. 5. Optimal parameters for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:44:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

this algorithm are cth = 1.5 and yc = 3. As can be seen, the performance is inferior to that of the corresponding SR-MS-LLR algorithm. This is while both algorithms have roughly the same average number of iterations. The complexity of implementing SRMS-LLR is only slightly larger than that of MS with unconditional correction. It however requires more memory to store the LLR values of the last iteration.
(a)
(b) Fig 4: BER curves of quantized SR-MS-LLR vs. cth for different Eb/N0 values: (a) q = 4, (b) q = 7.
Fig 5: BER curves of floating-point implementation and quantized versions of SR-MS-LLR as well as MS with unconditional correction (MS-UC).
IV. CONCLUSIONS The application of successive relaxation (SR) to belief propagation (BP) and min-sum (MS) algorithms in LR and LLR domains is studied. Our results show that among the four variants of SR, SRMS-LLR performs the best and has the lowest complexity. This algorithm also provides substantial improvement over standard BP and MS algorithms for short codes. It is therefore an attractive candidate for implementation. We have also investigated the effects of clipping and quantization on SR-MS-LLR. Our results indicate that to fully exploit the potential for performance improvement at least 6-7 bits of quantization is required.

While the performance of SR-MS-LLR is impressive, we have no reason to believe that the application of SR to the MS algorithm in the LLR domain provides the best performance in the category of SR message-passing algorithms. Investigating the performance of SR with other algorithms and in other domains is an interesting topic for future research.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic Information Transfer Functions: model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657-2673, Nov. 2004.
[2] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier and X.Y. Hu, ``Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288-1299, August 2005.
[3] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, ``Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes," IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 50, no. 3 , pp. 406-414, March 2002 .
[4] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg and A. Vardy, ``Which codes have cycle-free Tanner graphs?” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2173-2181, Sept. 1999.
[5] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[6] S. Hemati and A. H. Banihashemi, ``Dynamics and Performance Analysis of Analog Iterative Decoding for LowDensity Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes," IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 61 - 70, Jan. 2006.
[7] M. Isaka, M. P. C. Fossorier and H. Imai, ``On the suboptimality of iterative decoding for turbo-like and LDPC codes with cycles in their graph representation,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 52, pp. 845 – 854, May 2004.
[8] D. J. MacKay, ``Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes," [online]: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html.
[9] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Decoding low-density paritycheck codes with probabilistic schedule,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 414-416, Oct. 2001.
[10] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of lowdensity parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001.
[11] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, no. 9, pp. 533547, Sept. 1981.
[12] N. Wiberg, Codes and Decoding on General Graphs. Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping University, Sweden, 1996, available at: http://www.it.isy.liu.se/publikationer/LIU-TEK-THESIS440.pdf.
[13] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, ``Graph-based messagepassing schedules for decoding LDPC codes," IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2098 - 2105, Dec. 2004.
[14] M. R. Yazdani, S. Hemati, and A. H. Banihashemi, ``Improving belief propagation on graphs with cycles," IEEE Comm. letters, vol. 8, no. 1, pp.57-59, Jan. 2004.
[15] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari and A. H. Banihashemi, ``On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding LDPC codes," IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549-554, April 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:44:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

