226

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 2, JUNE 2008

Configurable Multi-Rate Decoder Architecture for QC-LDPC Codes Based Broadband Broadcasting System
Luoming Zhang, Lin Gui, Youyun Xu, Member, IEEE, and Wenjun Zhang, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper we present a Base-matrix based decoder architecture for multi-rate QC-LDPC codes proposed in broadband broadcasting system. We use the Modified Min-Sum Algorithm (MMSA) as the decoding algorithm in this architecture, which lowers the complexity of the LDPC decoder while keeping almost the same performance or even better. Based on this algorithm, we designed a novel check node processing unit to reduce the complexity of the decoder and facilitate the multiplex of the processing units. The decoder designed with hardware constraints is not only scalable in throughput, but also easily configurable to support different QC-LDPC codes flexible in code rate and code length.
Index Terms—Base-matrix, broadcast, channel coding, FPGA, MMSA, multi-rate, quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes (QC-LDPCC), scalable throughput.
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC CODES, which have powerful error control capability, have been used in many broadband broadcasting systems to protect high-speed data transmission, such as DVB-S2 [1], [2]. Recently, as a branch of LDPC codes, QC-LDPC codes [3] have attracted increasing attention in the research area of LDPC codes. QC-LDPC codes have good error-correcting performance comparable to randomly constructed LDPC codes, while keeping lower encoding complexity [4]. So QC-LDPC codes are suited for practical uses. Furthermore, due to the structured construction, it is easy to design QC-LDPC codes with different code rates and code lengths under the same structure. Therefore, more and more broadband broadcasting systems, like 802.16e [5], 802.11n [6] and China’s DTTB (Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting standard) [7]–[9], use multi-rate QC-LDPC codes as their channel coding schemes to support the flexibility in code rate and code length.
Manuscript received September 18, 2007; revised November 11, 2007. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Funds for Distinguished Young Scholar under Grant 60625103, and also in part by the Key Project by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 60332030 and also in part by theScience and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (STCSM) under Grant 05DZ22102.
L. Zhang and W. Zhang are with the Institute of Image Communication and Information Processing, Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China (e-mail: luomingzhang@sjtu.edu.cn).
L. Gui and Y. Xu are with the Institute of Wireless Communication, Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2007.913400

Increasingly, as a number of applications are using multi-rate QC-LDPC codes, the implementation of decoder supporting several codes with different code rates and code lengths is a popular issue in the research of QC-LDPC codes. As an important part in the receiver of the broadband broadcasting system, the main challenge for multi-rate decoder of QC-LDPC codes is the limitation in the silicon area while keeping very high data throughput. This requires well-designed decoder architecture with low complexity which utilizes the parallel decoding character of LDPC codes and multiplexes the decoding units. Several papers have contributed to lower the complexity and lift the data throughput of the decoder for a single QC-LDPC code using the same amount of resource [10], [11]. In order to reduce the heavy burden of interconnecting wires especially for long codes, partial parallel LDPC decoder is a good compromise between the data throughput and hardware complexity. Following the method proposed by Tong Zhang [12], L. Yang et al. [13] implemented a rate compatible decoder for two regular and one irregular wide-sense QC-LDPC codes by jointly considering the code construction and implementation. By this approach, decoder for QC-LDPC codes is less complex than the pseudo-random constructed codes. However, the decoder using this approach is usually hard to configure since the exchange of messages between the processing units is still very complex. Moreover, parallelism for this kind of decoders is always fixed in order to utilize the regularity of QC-LDPC codes. This introduces waste in hardware resource because of the higher throughput than the requirement. In this paper, we propose a multi-rate decoder architecture which supports different QC-LDPC codes with great flexibility in code rate and code length. The multi-rate decoder with a novel processing unit is well designed that it facilitates the multiplex of the processing units and reconfiguration of the routing paths when decoding different code rates of QC-LDPC codes.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we first briefly review the QC-LDPC codes. Some basic definitions are introduced and the decoding algorithm of LDPC codes is also given. Then we present our multi-rate decoder’s general architecture and the detailed processing units in Section III. To facilitate description, we just show the case of decoding single code rate in Section III. Issues of decoding multi-rate QC-LDPC codes are discussed in Section IV. Finally, some conclusions are drawn in Section V.

0018-9316/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:45:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: CONFIGURABLE MULTIRATE DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CODES-BASED BROADCASTING SYSTEM

227

Fig. 2. An example of QC-LDPC code.

Fig. 1. The LDPC code (left) and its corresponding Tanner graph (right). The arrows illustrate how the extrinsic messages traverse along the edges in the decoding algorithm.

TABLE I WEIGHT DISTRIBUTION OF THE BASE MATRIX CORRESPONDING TO
QC-LDPC CODES IN DTTB

II. BRIEF REVIEW OF QC-LDPC CODES

In this section, we first give a brief overview of QC-LDPC

codes. Some basic definition is given for further discussion.

Then some properties of multi-rate QC-LDPC codes are also shown in this section. These properties are utilized in the design B. Multi-Rate QC-LDPC Codes

of multi-rate QC-LDPCC decoder. The decoding algorithm is Most of the QC-LDPC codes are constructed by algebraic

introduced in the later part of the section.

methods based on finite geometry. The method has strictly

mathematical description which is very useful during the

construction of the multi-rate codes. Under this way, people

A. Introduction to QC-LDPC Codes

could design QC-LDPC codes with different code rates and

code lengths using nearly the same structure. This is very

LDPC codes are linear block codes which are defined by useful in hardware implementation when there is requirement

a sparse parity check matrix [14], where the weights of the for the flexibility of code rate and code length. Since the same

columns and the rows are far smaller than the size of its lo- structure of multi-rate QC-LDPC codes facilitates the multiplex

cated columns and rows. LDPC codes can be well described by of decoding modules in the design of QC-LDPC codes, the

a bipartite graph, called Tanner graph [15]. Fig. 1 shows an ex- decoder supporting these QC-LDPC codes would be much

ample of a parity matrix (7, 4) in (2) and its corresponding more efficient in the size of silicon area. As mentioned above,

Tanner graph. In the Tanner graph, there are two kinds of nodes, the corresponding base-matrix cares most when we look into

the variable and check nodes, which are corresponding to the the properties of QC-LDPC codes. Let’s take an example for

columns and rows of the parity check matrix respectively. The the multi-rate channel coding scheme, proposed in the China’s

two kinds of nodes are connected by edges, corresponding to DTTB standards, to have a glimpse at the common properties of

the “1” elements in the matrix. It is often think of an edge as a the multi-rate QC-LDPC codes. In the standard, there are three

pair of nodes {V, C}, where V and C are the variable and check QC-LDPC codes with different code rates but the same code

nodes incident to the corresponding edge. If the pair is an or- length, which are (7493, 3048), (7493, 4572) and (7493, 6096),

dered one, the edge is called a directed edge; otherwise, the pair corresponding to code rate 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8 approximately.

is called a undirected edge. The nodes in the pair are called the Table I shows some properties of base-matrix corresponding

neighboring nodes to each other.

to the multi-rate QC-LDPC codes proposed in China’s DTTB.

QC-LDPC codes are a subclass of LDPC codes. They are de- In the table, the numbers in the square brackets denote the

fined by a base-matrix and the shift value corresponding to each variety of the column or row weight, while the ones in the curly

nonzero position in the base-matrix. QC-LDPC codes can be brackets stand for the quantity corresponding to that variety

constructed by filling the base-matrix with square matrix which of column or row weight. For example, the number of column

is called circulant matrix. The circulant matrix is a zero matrix weight 3, 4, 11 is 31, 18, 10 respectively for code rate 0.4.

if there is a zero entry in the base-matrix or a permuted iden- From Table I, we conclude several common properties of the

tity matrix if there is nonzero entry in the base-matrix. Fig. 2 multi-rate QC-LDPC codes as follows:

shows an example of QC-LDPC codes. In the example, the size 1) The column number of the base-matrix is same for different

of the base-matrix is 5 9. Given the size of circulants , the

QC-LDPC codes with various code rates or code lengths.

size of the QC-LDPC code is 5 m 9 m. Since the circulant

Here the quantity is equal to 59;

matrix is either a zero matrix or a permuted identity matrix, we 2) The number of nonzero elements of their corresponding

could see that the base-matrix presents many attributes of the

base-matrix is almost same, which means that each code

corresponding QC-LDPC code such as the degree distribution

has the same number of permuted identify matrixes. Here

property.

the quantity is around 290;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:45:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

228

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 2, JUNE 2008

3) The variety of the column weight of the base-matrix is nearly same. Here, there are 5 kinds of column weight and two codes have the same kinds of column weight.
These properties are exploited during the design of multi-rate QC-LDPC decoder discussed in Section IV. In the sequel, we will assume the channel coding scheme in China’s DTTB as the default example in this paper if not mentioned specifically.
C. Decoding of LDPC Codes
The Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) [16] is regarded as the standard algorithm for the decoding of LDPC codes, which exchanges extrinsic messages along the edges between the check and variable nodes (see Fig. 1). Though the algorithm performs well in software simulation, there is a non-linear function, which is usually implemented by LUT form in the hardware [17]. This method suffers performance loss especially when the processing data has wide dynamic range, since a tradeoff must be made between hardware resources and data precision. To solve this problem, we use a lower complexity decoding algorithm, namely the Modified Min-Sum Algorithm (MMSA) [18], which could achieve nearly the comparable performance to SPA. In the algorithm, the messages traverse the directed edges of the corresponding Tanner graph in the following steps:
1) Initialize The value of the received symbol is initialized to the intrinsic message , which is defined as the Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) of that symbol:
(1)
Where, stands for the transmitted symbol. After normalized by the channel factor, the intrinsic message can be written as:

because the extrinsic messages from the variable nodes are unknown which are then set to be zero. 3) Update the messages from variable nodes to check nodes The message from each variable node is updated as follows:

where

(4)

Similar to the computation of check node, the outgoing messages of the variable node are updated by adding the intrinsic message and the incoming messages , which the extrinsic message traversed from its neighboring check nodes but the target one. After addition, the outgoing messages are normalized by a factor . To reduce the implementation complexity while keeping good performance, the factor is usually set to be 0.75 [18]. 4) Check the stop criterion The step 2) and 3) accomplish a cycle of iteration. The LLR
of each symbol is calculated by using the addition of the intrinsic message with all the incoming messages
from the neighboring check nodes. The computation progress is depicted as follows:
(5)

According to the signs of the messages of each symbol, a hard decision is made as:

if

(6)

else

After hard decision, we get the decoded codeword as:

(2)

2) Compute the messages from check nodes to variable nodes The outgoing messages from each check node are calcu-

If the parity check

is satisfied, then stop iteration

and output codeword ; otherwise, go to step 2) and step

3) until the iteration time reaches the max iteration number.

lated by using the incoming messages which are from the neighboring variable nodes except the destination one. The

III. ARCHITECTURE OF QC-LDPC MULTI-RATE DECODER

detailed computation of the check node’s outgoing mes- In this section, we will describe our decoder architecture of

sage is as follows:

QC-LDPC codes for a fixed code rate in detail. We start by

giving a processing diagram of our decoder in conjunction with

(3) the decoding algorithm discussed in Section II. As the normal decoding procedure, we divide a cycle of iteration into two

phases: variable and check node computation. Following the

where,
if if if

introduction of the processing flow, we will propose a general structure for the decoder. Since the structure has a tight connection with the base-matrix of the corresponding QC-LDPC codes, we call this structure the base-matrix based architecture. After a brief look at the general structure, the detailed

denotes the outgoing message from the check node processing units are discussed to show how the processing

to its neighboring variable node , while represents units complete the iteration progress depicted in the processing

the incoming messages gathered at the check node from flow. The data storage format, the Check Node Processing Unit

its neighboring variable nodes except the node in the (CNPU), the Variable Node Processing Unit (VNPU) and the

Tanner graph. In the first round of iteration, the intrinsic Parity Check Unit (PCU) are shown sequentially. A little modi-

messages are used as the messages from the variable nodes, fication is made to the algorithm described in Section II in order

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:45:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: CONFIGURABLE MULTIRATE DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CODES-BASED BROADCASTING SYSTEM

229

Fig. 4. An demonstrating structure of base-matrix based QC-LDPC decoder.

heavy complexity. In order to support the flexibility of different

codes and easy configuration, the function unit is designed to

be independent object-oriented module. Meanwhile, to coop-

erate with the function unit, the messages storage topology is

arranged the same as the base-matrix. We call this decoder struc-

Fig. 3. The decoding block diagram of base-matrix based QC-LDPC decoder. ture the base-matrix based structure.

Fig. 4 shows an example of base-matrix decoder structure for

a QC-LDPC code (7493, 6096) whose base-matrix has a size of

to make the hardware implementation easier. Finally, some (11, 59). This is a general structure which just shows the concept

practical issues, e.g., how to get scalability of the decoder’s of our decoder. The more detailed practical issues will be dis-

throughput, are discussed.

cussed in the later part of the section. In the decoder, the memory

A. Decoding Pipeline

bank is composed using dual-port RAMs, and locates in such a topology that where there is a nonzero element in the base-ma-

Fig. 3 shows the block diagram of processing pipeline in our decoder. The major computation units are the check node processing unit (CNPU) and the variable node processing unit (VNPU), which comprises an iteration cycle described in step 2) and step 3). The hard decision is done after the messages updated at variable nodes, which generates the decoded codeword. The codeword is then validated by the parity check unit (PCU). In our decoder, there are two criteria on when to stop the process of the iteration computation for current data block. The criteria are: parity check and maximum iteration number. If either of the two criteria is satisfied, the decoded codeword output from VNPU will be sent out and the iteration computation progress will stop. Then, the decoder enters into a new decoding round of the received block.

trix there is a memory bank. As mentioned before, a cycle of iteration is completed in two phase: check node computation and variable node update. These two phases are done in Check Node Processing Unit (CNPU) and Variable Node Processing Unit (VNPU) respectively. These two function units cooperate with the memory bank in the following way:
1) The message is read out from each memory bank and sent into the corresponding processing unit;
2) After operation in that unit, the result is sent back to the same address of each memory bank, and ready for the next processing phase;
3) The decoder enters into next processing phase until all the messages in the same memory bank are updated.
The partial parallel decoder architecture has different parallel factors during the check and variable node process, which

B. General Structure of the Decoder
We employ the partial parallel decoding scheme in our decoder. Because of the regularity in the circulants of QC-LDPC codes, we use the corresponding base-matrix as the elementary processing unit. This means the messages traversing along

are proportional to the number of processing units in each processing unit. Given the processing clock for message processing in one check node and that for message processing in one variable node , then the net throughput is calculated as follows:

the edges in the same circulant are sequentially processed in

the same function unit. This reduces the permuting and deper-

muting work in some decoders’ structure [12] which leads to

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:45:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

230

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 2, JUNE 2008

Fig. 6. Check node processing unit.

Thus, we only need to calculate the minimum and sub-

minimum magnitude of the incoming messages of all the

neighboring variable nodes. According to (9), the sub-min-

imum value is used as the magnitude of updating message

Fig. 5. Memory block and data storage format.

when the minimum value equals to the incoming value of the edge to be updated.

Fig. 6 shows the block diagram of CNPU. In the decoder,

the incoming messages in the same row are transmitted to

Where stands for the code length, stands for the max-

CNPU simultaneously. After a conversion from parallel to

imum iteration number, stands for the synthesis frequency,

serial , the data is serially processed by Check node Pro-

stands for the code rate of the QC-LDPC code.

cessing Unit (CPU). The CPU is divided into two parts:

a comparator and a XNOR gate. The comparator is used

C. Processing Unit

to compare the magnitude of the new data with the pre-

In this part, four elementary processing units will be introduced. The data storage unit mainly discusses the data storage format. The check node process unit gives a novel check node process style that makes it support scalable throughput and easy configure for multi-rate QC-LDPC codes. The variable node process unit is modularized for different kinds of column weight. And the parity check unit is used for adaptive decoding. We will show how these units cooperate with each other to complete the process work as discussed above.
• Data storage unit In the decoder, there are two elements to be stored: the sign of the message and the magnitude of the message. According to “1” position in circulants of QC-LDPC code, the message can be stored in memory block using column-wise or row-wise order. For example, in column-wise order, the message corresponding to the first column of circulants is stored in the first position of memory block and the one in the second column is stored in the second position and so on (see Fig. 5).
• Check Node Processing Unit (CNPU) In the computation of messages which is from check nodes to variable nodes, the minimum value of the incoming messages of the neighboring variable nodes is required. To facilitate implementation, (3) can be rewritten as (8) and (9) with a little modification:

vious data in order to compute the minimum and sub-minimum value of the magnitude. The counter accompanied with the comparator is used to record the queue position of the minimum in the processing sequence and offers a reference on whether the processing sequence is ended. And there is an XNOR logic operation which is used to calculate the product of the signs of the incoming messages simultaneously. Then the data is sent to a data distributor, which distributes the updated message to all the neighboring variable nodes at the same time. The data distributor implements the message updating operation in the following way: There are four elements received by the data distributor, which is minimum, sub-minimum, the product result of the signs of all the messages and the queue location of the minimum. The distributor compares the local address with the queue position received. If the two values are the same, then the sub-minimum one is selected as the magnitude of the outgoing messages; otherwise, the minimum one is selected. Meanwhile, the sign of the outgoing messages is obtained by an XNOR logic operation with the original sign and the product of the signs of all the messages that is calculated in CPU. • Variable Node Processing Unit (VNPU) The VNPU is simpler than CNPU, which only includes addition operation. Fig. 7 illustrates the implementation of a 4-port VNPU. In the figure, the VNPU is a parallel-pro-

cessing block capable of updating three variable nodes of

(8)

messages simultaneously. There are four inputs and four

outputs. First, the incoming messages and the intrinsic

if if

(9)

message of the variable node are added according to the fixed routing. Then the result of the addition multiplies

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:45:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: CONFIGURABLE MULTIRATE DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CODES-BASED BROADCASTING SYSTEM

231

Fig. 7. Variable node processing unit.

the coefficient to complete the normalization operation.

This operation facilitates the finite precision implementation which keep the same bit widths in the memory. The Fig. 8. Average iteration number for code (7493,3048).

normalization progress is implemented as follows: Before

the updated messages are sent out, there is a block called SCALER. By cutting down the lower bits of the data, the SCALER makes the output data satisfy the requirement of finite precision in the next cycle of iteration. • Parity Check Unit (PCU) This unit makes our decoder support adaptive decoding. As discussed in the front of this section, there are two ways

check node to be processed in one CNPU. If the required throughput is very high, we may use more than one CNPU to process the messages from one check node. But this will lead to the dependence of operation in CNPU, which leads to more complexity in the decoder. To solve this problem, we introduce a concept of group factor. Usually, we use the

to stop iteration. In most cases, the criterion of maximum

same number of CNPUs as the row number of the base-ma-

iteration number is not used, i.e. the received code can

trix to process the messages in check nodes. We call these

be decoded out using less iteration cycles. Fig. 8 shows

CNPUs a processing group. But if this structure can not ful-

a statistic on the average iteration number for code (7493, 3048). From the figure, it is obvious that the average iteration number is much less than the maximum iteration number. So parity check is needed to determine whether the iteration progress can be terminated adaptively. Adaptive decoding method is very useful for saving the power cost of the decoder, especially when the channel condition is not too bad. This unit consists of an XNOR logic operation.It is completed simultaneously with the check node operation.

fill the throughput requirement, we use another processing group to handle the messages from the following check nodes. Here, we call the number of processing groups the group factor. Though there will be a pipeline delay if the group factor is not one, the processing clock in CNPU is shortened equivalently which leads to the increase of decoder’s throughput. • Overlap Scheme In the VNPU, as described above, the variable node operation is completed in one clock. Actually, the operation is

D. Practical Issues

very complicated in practical case, which results in huge delay in the processing clock. This greatly affects the syn-

The previous part in this section shows basic decoding

thesis frequency of the hardware implementation. There-

pipeline and the modularized processing units along the

fore, pipeline structures are needed to reduce the delay in a

pipeline. Here, we introduce two concepts to show our de-

processing clock. The added pipeline structure means that

coder’s scalability in throughput and how to change the

several clocks are needed in the VNPU operation, which

throughput. The concepts are group factor and the overlap

leads to drop in the throughput of the decoder. This is

decoding scheme [19].

mainly because the messages processed in check (or vari-

• Group Factor

able) node should wait until all the messages are updated

From (7), we could find the throughput of our decoder is

in another node in the normal decoding scheme as the pro-

determined by the processing clocks in CNPU and VNPU.

cessing flow discussed in the front of this section. So there

Given the fixed processing clock in VNPU, we first con-

is a waiting progress in each cycle of iteration. Time is

sider the processing clocks in CNPU. Since CNPU serially

wasted that it prohibits promoting the throughput of the

compares the messages traversing to the same check node,

decoder, especially when there are pipeline structures in

the processing clocks in CNPU is proportional to the row

VNPU. Here, we introduce the overlap decoding scheme

weight of the base-matrix. So if the required throughput is

to solve this problem. The overlap decoding scheme can

very low, we could arrange messages from more than one

well utilize the spare time during each cycle of iteration by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:45:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

232

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 2, JUNE 2008

Fig. 9. Comparison of the normal decoding scheme and the overlap decoding scheme.

carefully choosing the sequence of check or variable operation. From Fig. 9, we find that the processing time of a cycle of iteration is reduced to the processing clocks in CNPU, despite the initial and final time of the whole iteration process. (7) can be rewritten into (10) under the overlap decoding scheme.
(10)

IV. ISSUES OF MULTI-RATE DECODER
In this section, we will show how to use the architecture discussed in Section III to decode different rate codes. First, we will analyze the feasibility of multi-rate decoder of the base-matrix based QC-LDPC architecture by jointly considering the properties of multi-rate QC-LDPC codes and characteristics of our architecture. Then we will show how to extend our architecture from just decoding single code to support different codes. Our experimental results on the implementation of multi-rate QC-LDPC codes in China’s DTTB standards are shown at last.

The overlap decoding scheme generally works as follows. Let’s first look at the transiting progress from the check node operation to the variable node operation. First, according to the shift values in the base-matrix corresponding the QC-LDPC codes, we choose the right starting reading address in each memory bank. The message is read out from each memory bank sequentially and handled in CNPU just like the way described above. Then, after several processing clocks, for example clocks, some messages in the memory banks are ready for updating operation in VNPU. Because of the cyclic character of QC-LDPC codes, it is easy to know that the messages in the sequential addresses are also ready for updating operation in VNPU. We choose the ready address as the starting reading address for each memory banks and do the variable node processing operation. So the remaining processing time is saved for variable node operation. It is the same for the transiting progress from the variable node operation to check node operation. And we find that the key point of the overlap decoding scheme is how to calculate the right starting address for CNPU and VNPU in each memory bank. The detailed algorithm can be found in [19].

A. Feasibility
The base-matrix based QC-LDPC decoder architecture is designed considering the common properties of the multi-rate QC-LDPC codes discussed in Section II. Its flexible structure is suited for decoding multi-rate QC-LDPC codes, which can be concluded as follows:
1) Base-matrix based memory bank. In the decoder, the number of memory blocks is proportional to the number of nonzeros in its corresponding base-matrix. As mentioned above, the multi-rate QC-LDPC codes have almost the same number of nonzeros in its corresponding base-matrix. So it becomes easy for multiplexing the memory bank when decoding different multi-rate QC-LDPC codes.
2) Modularized CNPU. In CNPU, the message is updated serially and controlled by the counter. The same CNPU can be used for message updating of different check nodes just by changing the counter number. Therefore, one CNPU can be used for processing more than one check nodes. Even more, CNPU uses serially processing mode to complete the parallel processing of check nodes. This makes the resource cost less than direct parallel processing of check node, in which the messages traversing to one check node are processed simultaneously.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:45:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: CONFIGURABLE MULTIRATE DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CODES-BASED BROADCASTING SYSTEM

233

3) Simple and clear routing between the memories and processing units. In the traditional LDPC decoder [12], there is a shuffle to exchange the order of the data into the processing unit so as to enable parallel processing or partially parallel processing. This makes the routing very complex and costs many hardware resources. In our decoder, the routing task is done in CNPU. There is no complex data routing between the processing unit and the memory bank. This method not only cuts down much hardware payload while keeping the parallel processing property, but also makes the processing block and the memory block to be separate module. In order to decode different rates of multi-rate QC-LDPC codes, we only need to change the connections between the memory bank and the processing unit, which are controlled by simple data selectors.
B. Extension to Multi-Rate Decoder
In order to make the decoder suitable for practical use, slight modifications are needed according to the system requirement and the specified multi-rate QC-LDPC codes. First, the proper group factor required for different codes is calculated according to their system requirement. We will get the minimum number of CNPU for different codes and select the maximum number M of the minimum CNPU as the number of CNPU for the multirate decoder. Then in the same way, we can get the minimum numbers of different kinds of VNPU to support multi-rate codes. Finally, it is required that the data selectors are placed between the data storage module and the mapping CNPU or VNPU.

TABLE II PARAMETERS OF MULTI-RATE DECODER FOR
QC-LDPC CODES IN CHINA’S DTTB
TABLE III RESOURCE USAGE STATISTICS OF FPGA

C. Experimental Results

Employing the architecture described in Section III and

Section IV, we implement a multi-rate decoder support the

China’s DTTB channel coding scheme. In the implementation,

a (1:4:1) quantization scheme is used which stands for the

signed bit, decimal part of the data and the integer part of the

data respectively. Our implementation has passed the RTL

simulation using ModelSim, though has not been tested on

chip board. We choose the Xilinx Vertex-II XC2VP70 device

as our target FPGA. And the detailed implementation progress

and results are as follows. We first choose different param-

eters for the multi-rate decoder. Since the maximum system requirements for net throughput is 26 Mbps, the max mass throughput requirement is around 35 Mbps (the corresponding code rate is 0.8) [7]. According to (9), given the target synthesis frequency to 100 MHz and the maximum number of iteration

Fig. 10. The BER performance for float-point simulation and hardware implementation over AWGN channel under BPSK modulation. The lines with x-marks correspond to the float-point performance, while the lines with circles correspond to the performance of the hardware implementation. The maximum iteration number is 20.

20, the threshold of processing time in CNPU should be within

5 clocks. Recall the processing flow in the CNPU, the minimum memory since the decoder needs a large number of memory to

processing time is 7 clocks at least since the minimum row support the parallel processing of messages. So a well sched-

weight in the base-matrix is 7. So the minimum group factor uled memory scheme is necessary. Since each RAM requires

should be 2. In the same way, by considering the requirement independent reading/writing, we combine two memory banks

for three code rates, the total number of CNPU is selected as 70 into one dual-port RAM. Each memory bank needs only a little

and the group factor is 2, 3, 6 respectively. The parameters of RAM, which is just 6 127. After combination, 149 dual-port

the multi-rate decoder are shown in Table II.

RAMs are required. Taking into account of the memory usage

The XC2VP70 FPGA belongs to the Xilinx Virtex-II family, in the CNPU and the memory banks for storing the initial

and is developed for broadband communication and complex messages, the total RAM blocks are 234. Table III shows the

DSP applications. The device contains 33,088 slices and hardware utilization statistics for our decoder.

328 blocks of 18-kbit dual-port RAM. In our decoder archi- During the behavior simulation, the decoder is able to op-

tecture, one of the most challenging problems is how to use erate at maximum frequency of 120 MHz. And given the clock

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:45:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

234

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 2, JUNE 2008

frequency 80 MHz and the maximum iteration number 20, the decoder reaches the net throughput of 20 Mbps, 24 Mbps and 32 Mbps for code (7493, 3048), (7493, 4572) and (7493, 6096) respectively. By using bit-true validation, we find that there is just a small loss in the performance between the software simulation and hardware implementation (see Fig. 10).
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presented a base-matrix based decoder architecture for multi-rate QC-LDPC codes. First, by exploiting the properties of multi-rate QC-LDPC codes, we proposed the base-matrix based decoder structure to handle the processing data flow between the processing unit and the storage unit. Different from the code aware structure, this structure can support a wide range of QC-LDPC codes. Then, under this structure, we proposed several processing units include a novel object-oriented Check Node Processing Unit which can be easily configured to process the message computation in various kinds of check nodes. These units greatly reduce the complexity of the multi-rate decoder and relieve the data routing burden between the processing units. Finally, we introduced the concept of group factor and the overlap decoding scheme in the design of multi-rate decoder to facilitate the scalability of the decoder’s throughput. Given the same system requirement for the decoder’s throughput, the capability of supporting scalable throughput of the decoder can make the utilization of hardware resources more efficient. The multi-rate decoder under this architecture is easily configurable to support different QC-LDPC codes with the flexibility in code rate and code length.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[6] Draft Amendment to STANDARD 802.11-Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications: Enhancements for Higher Throughput, IEEE P802.11n/D1.0 Std.
[7] Framing structure, Channel coding and modulation for digital television terrestrial broadcasting system, R. P. China Standard Number: GB20600- 2006 Std.
[8] W. Zhang, Y. Guan, W. Liang, D. He, F. Ju, and J. Sun, “An introduction of the Chinese dttb standard and analysis of the pn595 working modes,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 8–13, March 2007.
[9] J. Song, Z. Yang, L. Yang, K. Gong, C. Pan, J. Wang, and Y. Wu, “Technical review on chinese digital terrestrial television broadcasting standard and measurements on some working modes,” IEEE Trans. Broadcasting, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 1–7, March 2007.
[10] Z. Wang and Q. Jia, “Low complexity, high speed decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic ldpc codes,” in Proc. 2005 IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS’05), Kobe, Japan, May 2005, pp. 5786–5789.
[11] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “Area-efficient parallel decoder architecture for high rate qc-ldpc codes,” in Proc. 2006 IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems (ISCAS’06), Island of Kos, Greece, May 2006, pp. 5107–5110.
[12] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “Joint(3, k)-ldpc codes and encoder/decoder design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Processing, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 1065–1079, April 2004.
[13] L. Yang, H. Liu, and C.-J. R. Shi, “Code construction and FPGA implementation of a low-error-floor multi-rate low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems-I: Regular Papers, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 892–904, April 2006.
[14] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[15] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 27, no. 9, p. 533C547, September 1981.
[16] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, March 1999.
[17] R. Hu, J. Li, and E. Kurtas, “Quantization and quantization sensitivity of soft-output product codes for fast-speed applications,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Int. Symp. Advances in Wired and Wireless Communication, April 2004, pp. 175–178.
[18] J. Heo and K. M. Chugg, “Optimization of scaling soft information in iterative decoding via density evolution methods,” IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 957–961, June 2005.
[19] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems-I: Regular Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, June 2004.

During the research of the paper, many people have at-

tributed their help. The authors would like to give their thanks to them, especially to Hao Gong from SJTU for his useful discussion, Dr. Jingyu Zhou, Dr. Xinbing Wang from SJTU and Dr. Jisheng Wang from PSU for their comments during the drafting progress.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Wu, S. Hirakawa, U. H. Reimers, and J. Whitaker, “Overview of digital television development worldwide,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 8–21, January 2006.
[2] A. Morello and V. Mignone, “Dvb-s2: The second generation standard for satellite broad-band services,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 210–227, January 2006.
[3] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-shannon-limit quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, July 2004.
[4] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, January 2006.
[5] Part 16:Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems-Amendment 2: Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands and Corrigendum 1, IEEE Std 802.16e-2005 Std.

Luoming Zhang received the B.S. degree in information engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University (SJTU), Shanghai, China, in 2003. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Institution of Image Communication and Information Processing in SJTU.
As a member of China’s FuTURE project, he anticipated in the receiver design in TDD demo from 2003 to 2005. And now he is taking part in the wireless communication research supported by several grants of the China’s National Science Fund and the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China. His main research interests are in the area of wireless broadband communications such as channel coding, MIMO and iterative receiver techniques.
Lin Gui received the Ph.D. degree from ZheJiang University in 2002. Since 2002, she worked in the Institute of Wireless Communication Technology of Shanghai Jiao Tong University. Her primary research work and interests are in the area of HDTV and wireless communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:45:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: CONFIGURABLE MULTIRATE DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CODES-BASED BROADCASTING SYSTEM

235

Youyun Xu was born in 1966, received the B.S. degree from Xi’an Institute of Telecommunication Engineering in 1988, the M.S. degree from Nanjing Institute of Communication Engineering in 1993 and Ph.D. degree from Shanghai Jiao Tong University in 1999. He is currently a professor at Nanjing Institute of Communication Engineering and a part-time Professor with the Institute of Wireless Communication Technology at Shanghai Jiao Tong University. He has more than 15 years research and development experience on satellite communications and wide-band wireless/mobile communications. His group is working on technology research for B3G mobile communication trial system developing (FuTURE Project in China). His research interests are focusing on mobile communications, satellite communications, HF radio communications, channel coding and modulation techniques, information theory and radio resources management, etc. He is also a member of IEEE in communication society.

Wenjun Zhang received the B.S., M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 1984, 1987 and 1989, respectively.
He is the Changjiang Scholarship Professor of the Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. As the head of HDTV Technical Executive Experts Group (TEEG) of China, Dr. Zhang successfully led the implementations of several generations of HDTV prototype systems in China from 1995 to 2000. After that, He participated the standardization of Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting system of China and made great contribution to the standard. And now, his research interests mainly fall in the area of multimedia retrieval, wireless video transmission and intelligent video processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:45:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

