 
 
 
 
An Energy Efficient Decoding Scheme for 
Wireless Body Area Sensor Networks 
 
O. Rehman,  N. Javaid, A. Haider, N. Amjad,  A. A. Awan, M. Qamar, Z. A. Khan*, U. Qasim# 
COMSATS Institute of Information Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan. 
*Internetworking Program, Faculty of Engineering, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Canada. 
#University of Alberta, Alberta, Canada. 
ABSTRACT 
One of the major challenges in Wireless Body Area Networks (WBANs) is to prolong the lifetime of 
network. Traditional research work focuses on minimizing transmit power; however, in the case of 
short range communication the consumption power in decoding is significantly larger than transmit 
power. This paper investigates the minimization of total power consumption by reducing the decoding 
power consumption. For achieving a desired Bit Error Rate (BER), we introduce some fundamental 
results on the basis of iterative message-passing algorithms for Low Density Parity Check Code 
(LDPC). To reduce energy dissipation in decoder, LDPC based coded communications between 
sensors are considered. Moreover, we evaluate the performance of LDPC at different code rates and 
introduce Adaptive Iterative Decoding (AID) by exploiting threshold on the number of iterations for a 
certain BER (10−4). In iterative LDPC decoding, the total energy consumption of network is reduced 
by 20 − 25%. 
 
KEYWORDS: Error correction, Low Density Parity Check, Iterative decoding, Block codes, 
Convolutional codes, Adaptive Iterative Decoding 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
 
A WBAN is a special case of Wireless Sensor Networks (WSNs) that enables remote monitoring of 
various sensors in several environments. One of the most studied application of WBANs is health care 
monitoring, where few or large number of patients can be observed, diagnosed, and prescribed 
remotely. Smart sensor nodes can be connected to various parts of the body or fabricated inside the 
clothes to transmit the information to a base station. Thus WBANs emerged as a promising alternative 
for traditional wired network systems. Recent advances in wireless communications, signal processing 
and digital electronics enabled the development of tiny wireless sensors with small batteries and the 
capability to sense, process and communicate with each other. In WBANs, area occupation and 
energy consumption are important aspects. 
 
The issue of energy consumption is very critical and needs to be minimized at the design levels like 
modulation/demodulation, Media Access Control (MAC) protocols, routing protocols and error 
correction coding. Reliable communication primarily depends on the applications and user specified 
constraints such that, receiver should embed the error correction strategies to recover original data. In 
a particular error correction code, the amount of energy spent to perform channel coding should be 
significantly less than the energy saved by transmitter. 
 
Fig. 1 shows a Wireless Body Area Network(WBAN). To tackle erroneous transmission in WBAN, 
Automatic Repeat Request (ARQ) strategy is usually implemented by using ARQ protocol. In this 
protocol sensor nodes implement error detection code for identifying corrupted frames and then 
requests for a retransmission. However, this technique is inefficient when we deal with energy and 
delay. For a lossy channel Error Correcting Codes (ECC) are commonly used to reduce the number of 
retransmissions. Incase of packet encoding and decoding, ECC requires more processing power at 
sensor nodes. To recover errors before a transmission request is sent HARQ protocol is used. 
 
For ECC error correction is directly related with complexity. Powerful codes increases the processing 
energy consumption at the receiver. So, there is trade-off between transmission and processing energy 
consumption at decoder. FEC use simple error correction techniques like Reed-solomon, Bose and 
Ray Chaudhuri (BCH) and conventional codes and their ability to correct errors is obtained by 
introducing high redundancy in transmitted data. Coding and decoding process introduces delay in 
delivering packets to the base station. For bad quality of communication channels, LDPC codes are 
used to achieve low BER with low redundancy. 
 
 
 
Fig. 1: Wireless Body Area Sensor Network 
 
 
ECC introduces redundancy into an information sequence U of length k by adding extra  parity bits, 
based on various combination of bits of u, to form a codeword x of length 𝑛𝐶 > k. The redundancy 
provided by these extra 𝑛𝐶 − k parity bits allows the decoder to possibly decode noisy received bits of 
x correctly which if uncoded, would be demodulated incorrectly. Compared to an uncoded system, 
ECC over noisy channel provides better BER performance for same Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR). In 
comparison to an uncoded system to achieve a certain BER at required SNR for coding and decoding 
algorithm is known as the coding gain for that code and decoding algorithm. Typically there is 
tradeoff between coding gain and decoder complexity. Very long codes provide higher gain. However, 
require larger decoders with high power consumption, and similarly for more complex decoding 
algorithms. ECC are mainly categorized into two types: 
 
(1) Block Codes have fixed length nc that include 𝑛𝐶 − k parity bits. These codes are decoded one 
codeword at a time. (2) Conventional codes have a code rate 
𝑘
𝑛𝑐 , where k are number of input bits and 
𝑛𝐶 are number of output bits that are decoded in a continuous stream of length L >> 𝑛𝐶. Block codes 
include Hamming codes, repetition codes, Reed-Solomon (RS) codes. The terminology (𝑛𝐶, k, 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛) 
represents a code of length 𝑛𝐶 with input bits of length k and minimum distance 𝑑𝑚𝑖𝑛. 
 
 
Fig. 2: Basic Communication Model 
 
 
ECC are also categorized in terms of decoding algorithms: 
1.  
Non iterative decoders are divided into two types. (a) Hard decision decoder is a threshold 
detector stage of a decoder where decision is based on binary signaling that includes 1 or 0. (b) In soft 
decision decoders more than one voltage levels are considered for a single bit. These Soft information 
are calculated in the form of Log Likelihood ratios (LLRs). 
2.  
For each iteration, iterative decoders require soft information as an input. These algorithms 
provide higher coding gain. However, they require complex decoder and consume significant power. 
LDPC codes are applicable in WSNs because of Joint source coding and channel coding. Basic 
communcation model has been depicted in Fig. 2. 
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In section 2, we briefly discuss related work. Section 3 
focuses on our motivation for research work. In Section 4, we discuss LDPC Codes. Section 5 
presents AID scheme for LDPC. Simulation results are shown in Section 6 and Section 7 concludes 
our research work. 
II. 
BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION 
This work is an extension of [2]. Recent research in WSNs mostly deals with the aim to maximize 
energy efficiency ([3]). In this regard, some authors worked at routing layer ( [4], [5], [6]) while 
others ( [7], [8], [9]) explored MAC layer. However, our directions are more focused on different 
decoding schemes to achieve maximum energy efficiency. In [10], P. Grover et al. investigate the 
perspective of interference on decoding power. They suggest that in short range communication the 
transmit power is smaller than decoding power and uncoded transmission requires more transmit 
power than coded transmission. Andrea et al. designed LDPC decoder architecture for WSN. 
Different LDPC codes are considered to analyze the energy saving w.r.t un-coded communication, 
depending on distance, BER and Environment [11]. S.L.Howard et al. calculate critical distance dc at 
which the decoder’s energy consumption per bit is equal to transmit energy per bit. In comparison to 
an un-coded system, authors provide results for dc in different environments over a wide frequency 
range [12]. Marcelo et al. investigate the tradeoff between transmission and processing energy 
consumption in sensor nodes by employing convolutional codes. For each sensor node, authors select 
appropriate complexity for ECC to prolong network lifetime [13]. Z. Hajjarian et al. define the 
relationship between the number of quantization bits and decoder’s energy consumption using LDPC 
in WSN. Decoder’s complexity is reduced by replacement of functional blocks with look up tables. 
They suggest that LDPC codes are more energy efficient than conventional and block codes. Using 
iterative decoding, the network lifetime is increased up to four times with regular LDPC codes [14]. In 
[15], authors propose a packet error reduction technique for reliable communication in WBAN. 
Firstly, they calculate Received Signal Strength (RSS) around the human body. Secondly, based on 
these calculations of RSS, they calculate Packet Error Rate (PER). LT codes are considered for 
WBAN to reduce the PER. In [16], authors use rateless codes to provide an adaptive duty cycling for 
power management. Analytical results show that with same structure used for WSNs, upto 80 percent 
of energy is saved as compared to IEEE 802.15.4 physical layer standard. Z. H. Cai et al. propose an 
efficient early stopping method to reduce number of iterations for LDPC decoders. This method is 
very efficient at low SNR [17]. Energy efficiency plays a vital role in enhancing the lifetime of a 
network. As in [18] – [40], many efforts have been made to improve the energy efficiency and, hence, 
the improving the lifetime of network.   
 
WBAN consists of small sensors with limited battery power. In this paper, our objective is to increase 
the network lifetime or to minimize the energy consumption of network. Reliability is another primary 
requirement for communication. The level of reliable communication depends on applications and 
user specific constraints. Error correction schemes provide reliable communication between 
transmitter and receiver by reducing 𝑃𝑏. In practical situations, such as WBAN there are two ways to 
reduce 𝑃𝑏. 
 
1.  
Increasing the transmit power improves the SNR: 
For Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel, p(b) for BPSK modulation is expressed as: 
 
𝑝𝑏= 𝑄  ට
2𝐸𝑏
𝑁0  
                     (1) 
 
where Q is a scaled form of the complementary Gaussian error function. 
2.  
Use complex decoder by increasing the decoding power: 
In the case of WBAN an increase in transmit power is not sufficient because increase in transmit 
power damages the human tissues. Another problem is the existence of small distance between 
receiver and transmitter. 
 
The transmit power increases the Signal to Interference and Noise Ratio (SINR). In this case how we 
can improve SINR? This is done by increasing the distance between transmitters. However, in WBAN 
it is not possible because of limited area. In any communication system a tradeoff between transmit 
power and decoding power exists. WBAN requires low transmitting power so, there is need to 
implement energy efficient decoder to reduce the decoding power consumption to enhance the 
network lifetime. We use LDPC, because its performance for low BER communication is same as 
complex decoders such as viterbi decoding algorithms. 
III. 
LDPC CODES 
LDPC codes are a class of linear block codes, their parity check matrix contains only a few number of 
1s in comparison of 0s . The main advantage of this code provides decoding performance very close to 
the capacity and linear time complex algorithms for different AWGN and fading channels. Like all 
linear block codes, LDPC codes can be represented in two different possibilities. They can be 
described via graphical representation and matrices. LDPC codes are represented as as Tanner Graph 
that contain two set of nodes: Check Nodes (CNs) and Variable Nodes (VNs). VNs are associated 
with N bits of codeword and CNs corresponds to M parity-check constraints. Edges in Tanner graph 
correspond to 1′ s in H and exchange of information along these edges as shown in Fig. 3.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 3: Tanner graph for LDPC code 
 
 
Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm is commonly used to decode LDPC codes. VNs receive LLR from 
the channel and update it according to parity check matrix computed at CNs. This process is iterated 
until iterations reach a maximum level. This criteria helps in successful decoding of a codeword. BP 
algorithm has two main scheduling schemes: two phase scheduling and layered scheduling. In layered 
scheduling, parity check constraints are grouped in the form of layers. Each layer is associated with a 
component code. One iteration is complete when all layers are successfully decoded. To achieve a 
reliable pattern of information, the whole process is iteratively repeated up to several times. 
Let 𝑆𝑗 represents the LLR of the bit in column j of H. LLR is initialized to the corresponding 
received soft value. For each parity constraint m in a given layer, the following operations are 
executed [5]: 
 
 
 
𝐻= ተተ
0
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
1
0
ተተ 
 
𝑄𝑚𝑗= 𝑆𝑗
(𝑜𝑙𝑑) −𝑅𝑚𝑗
(𝑜𝑙𝑑) 
(2) 
 
 
𝐴𝑚𝑗= ∑
 
𝜂𝜀𝑁𝑚,𝑛≠𝑗𝜓(𝑄𝑚𝑛) 
(3) 
 
 
𝑠𝑚𝑗= ∑
 
𝜂𝜀𝑁𝑚,𝑛≠𝑗𝑠𝑔𝑛(𝑄𝑚𝑛) 
(4) 
 
 
𝑅𝑚𝑗
(𝑛𝑒𝑤) = −𝑠𝑚𝑗. 𝜓(𝐴𝑚𝑗) 
(5) 
 
 
𝑆𝑗
(𝑛𝑒𝑤) = 𝑄𝑚𝑗+ 𝑅𝑚𝑗
(𝑛𝑒𝑤) 
(6) 
 
 
     𝑆𝑗
(𝑜𝑙𝑑) is the extrinsic information received from previous layer and updated in equation (5). This 
information is propagated to succeeding layer. 𝑅𝑚𝑗
(𝑜𝑙𝑑) is used to compute equation (1) then updated in 
equation (4). Term, 𝑅𝑚𝑗
(𝑛𝑒𝑤) is used again in following iteration. 𝑁𝑚 in equations (2) and (3) represents 
set of  all bits connected to parity constraint m. Whole operation of LDPC decoder is given in Fig. 4. 
 
 
Fig. 4: Flow chart for LDPC decoder 
IV.     SENSOR NODES ENERGY MODEL 
For encoded data of transmission , the energy consumption per bit of a node is the sum of radio energy 
per bit 𝐸𝑟 and computation energy per bit 𝐸𝑐𝑜𝑚𝑝. Radio energy is sum of SLEEP, TRANSIENT, and 
ON mode energies. The transceiver is off all the times and keeping it ON only when data is 
transmitting or receiving. 
 
The radio energy per bit for transmitting N bits is calculated as in [12]: 
 
𝐸𝑟=
𝑝𝑠𝑙𝑒𝑒𝑝𝑇𝑜𝑛+𝑝𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑇𝑡𝑟+𝑝𝑜𝑛𝑇𝑜𝑛
𝑁
 
(7) 
 
Power consumed in radio during ON-mode is the sum of transmitting power 𝑝𝑡 and power 
consumption in circuitry 𝑝𝑐𝑘𝑡. The radio energy consumption is: 
 
𝐸𝑟=
(𝑝𝑡+𝑝𝑐𝑘𝑡)𝑇𝑜𝑛
𝑁
                              (8) 
 
Transmission power in free space is expressed by using Friis equation: 
 
𝑝𝑡=
𝑝𝑟
𝐺𝑟𝐺𝑡× (
4𝜋
𝜆)2𝑑𝑛 
               (9) 
 
The received power is calculated as: 
 
Assign Received codeword
R=(R1,…………..Rn)
To variables nodes
V=(V1,……..…,Vn)
Compute Parity check
matrix
(C1,………….,Cn)^T
LLR calculation for
Message Nodes
Parity check
Ok?
If iterations reached at
maximum limit?
LLR calculation for
Check nodes
LLR calculation for Prior
information
LLR calculation
for extrinsic Information
LPDC decoder
Output sequence
Yes
No
Yes
 
𝑝𝑟= 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑏𝐵
𝑁0
2 𝑁𝐹               (10) 
 
Where, 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑢𝑛𝑐𝑜𝑑 is SNR for transmitting uncoded data, b is the number of bits per modulation 
symbol, B is bandwidth, 
𝑁0
2  is noise spectral density and NF is Noise Figure. 
For coded data received power is: 
 
𝑝𝑟= 𝑆𝑁𝑅𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑒𝑑𝑏𝐵
𝑁0
2 𝑁𝐹               (11) 
 
Transmission energy for coded data frame is expressed as: 
 
𝐸𝑡𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑠
𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒= 𝐸𝑑𝑒𝑐
𝑏𝑖𝑡. 𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒
𝐶 
               (12) 
 
The required processing energy to decode a bit is 𝐸𝑑𝑒𝑐
𝑏𝑖𝑡. Therefor the energy required to decode a 
frame 𝐸𝑑𝑒𝑐
𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒 is computed as: 
 
𝐸𝑑𝑒𝑐
𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑚𝑒= 𝐸𝑑𝑒𝑐
𝑏𝑖𝑡. 𝑓𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒
𝐶. 𝑟(𝐽/𝐹) 
 (13) 
 
where r is the coding rate. 
    There is tradeoff between transmitting power and decoding power. To reduce the total power 
consumption, transmitting power must strictly be larger than Shannon limit. In [9] the Shannon 
capacity limit for both coded and uncoded systems is shown in Fig. 5. 
 
 
 
Fig, 5: Shannon Capacity estimation for coded and uncoded system 
 
Fig. 6: Flow chart of AID for LDPC 
 
 
 
V.    AID 
In this paper, we propose an efficient early stopping method to reduce the number of iterations for 
LDPC decoders. This method is efficient at low SNR. 
AID predicts the threshold at number of iterations for undecodable blocks. Another 
advantage is reduction in processing delay. LDPC codes yield excellent performance when they are 
decoded with iterative message passing algorithms. The performance of an iteratively decoded LDPC 
code is typically reported in terms of  𝑝𝑒 for a specific SNR value. For high SNR values, the value 𝑝𝑒 
is small that requires a large number of iterations in order to obtain reliable estimate. In AID, we 
introduce a threshold on the number of iterations after achieving a certain BER (10−4). The whole 
process of AID is shown in Fig. 6. 
We assume that each PE consumes a fixed 𝐸𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 joules of energy per iteration. We assume 
that the 𝑅𝑑𝑒𝑐 is equal to data rate 𝑅𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 measured in information bits per second. The power received 
at distance x meter is given in Eq [9]. In Eq [13] the 𝐸𝑑𝑒𝑐 is the energy consumed in decoder 
operation. For any rate 𝑅𝑑𝑎𝑡𝑎 the average probability of error (𝑝𝑒) → 0. Let the number of decoding 
iterations be denoted by l, the number of computational nodes can be lower bounded by m, the 
Assign Received codeword
R=(R1,…………..Rn)
To variables nodes
V=(V1,……..…,Vn)
Compute Parity check
matrix
(C1,………….,Cn)^T
LLR calculation for
Message Nodes
Parity check
Ok?
If
BER>10^-4 ?
LLR calculation for
Check nodes
LLR calculation for Prior
information
LLR calculation
for extrinsic Information
LPDC decoder
Output sequence
Yes
Yes
No
No
Calculate BER
and number of iterations
 
number of received channel outputs. Since each node consumes 𝐸𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 joules of energy in each 
iteration, the decoding energy 𝐸𝑑𝑒𝑐 is lower bounded in [2] as: 𝐸𝑑𝑒𝑐 ≥ 𝐸𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒 × m × l. We assume 
channel encoding is free. This result is the following lower bounds on the weighted total power is 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡 
≥ 𝑝𝑇 + 
𝐸𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒×𝑚×𝑙
𝑇𝑑𝑒𝑐
, and 𝐸𝑡𝑜𝑡= 𝑃𝐿𝑃𝑅+
𝐸𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒×𝑚×𝑙
𝑇𝑑𝑒𝑐
 . Where 𝑇𝑑𝑒𝑐=
𝑘
𝑅𝑑𝑒𝑐 is the time consumed in 
decoding. Thus, 𝑝𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙≥𝑃𝐿𝑃𝑅+
𝐸𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒×𝑚×𝑙×𝑅𝑑𝑒𝑐
𝑘
 and 𝑝𝑡𝑜𝑡𝑎𝑙= 𝑃𝐿𝑃𝑅+
𝐸𝑛𝑜𝑑𝑒×𝑙×𝑅𝑑𝑒𝑐
𝑅𝑐
 , where, 𝑃𝐿 is 
power loss and 𝑃𝑅 is received power. 
 
Fig. 7: Relationship between SNR and BER using LDPC 
 
 
 
VI.     RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
LDPC code with Code Rate (𝑅𝑐) has been used in simulation over AWGN channel with  an iterative 
probabilistic decoding algorithm. The bandwidth is large (3GHZ) and the throughput is 1.5 Gbps. The 
power of a PE is 10 pico-Joules. For indoor environment, path-loss exponent are assumed to be 3 and 
noise figure is 3dB. The transmitter power is in few milli Watts for 3m distance between sensor and 
base station. If the transmit power 𝑃𝑇 is extremely close to that required for channel capacity then 
large number of iterations l are required. Large number of iterations consume high decoding power. 
Encoder should have larger power as compared to its Shannon limit in order to minimize decoding 
power consumption. 
Simulations parameters are shown in Fig. 10. 
 
Fig. 8: Iterations in AID for desired BER(10−4) 
 
 
Fig. 9: Energy Consumption in AID 
 
 
 
Fig. 10: Simulation Parameters 
 
 
Fig. 7 , shows the relationship between the SNR and BER, as we increase the SNR, BER 
decreases. By imposing five iterations (l = 5), it is observed that targeting a specific BER of 10−4 the 
requried SNR is 3.5 at 𝑅𝑐 0.75 and SNR 2.5 at 𝑅𝑐 0.5. Fig. 8 , shows the relationship between number 
of iterations and BER. For a fixed SNR (1.5dB) our target is to achieve a BER of 10−4 and calculate 
the number of iterations till desired BER of 10−4 is achieved.` 
Results show that at 𝑅𝑐, 0.75 the required iterations are 16 and at 𝑅𝑐 0.5, 12 iterations are required. 
Fig. 9 , shows the relationship among the total number of iterations and total power consumption by 
using LDPC decoder and AID. For the case of LDPC code, we use 50 iterations at a code rate of 0.75. 
There is no threshold for achieving a certain value of 𝑃𝑒. As 𝑃𝑒 → 0 the total power consumption 𝑝𝑇 
→ ∞. Simulation results show that 𝑝𝑇 increases by increasing the number of iterations. For 50 
iterations 𝑝𝑇 is 1.3 joule. In 
AID, our requirement is to achieve a BER of 10−4, it is achieved at 16th iteration. Hence, we save the 
energy consumption of 35 iterations and also minimize the processing delay of decoder. This scheme 
is equally performed well for such applications in which we cannot afford delay. Simulation results 
show that the total energy consumption of error correction code is exactly 1.05 joule. With the code 
rate of 0.5, energy consumed is 0.5 joule in total. We save 22% of total energy as compared to LDPC 
codes. Hence, AID defines threshold on the number of iterations for a desired BER. Benefit of this 
 
decoding scheme is that it reduces the processing time of decoder and decoding energy consumption 
in WBAN. 
 
VII.    CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we proposed AID Scheme to reduce the decoding power consumption and to prolong the 
lifetime of WBANs. To achieve BER to (10−4), we calculate the total number of iterations required 
for LDPC decoder. As 𝑝𝑏 approaches 0, iterations approach infinity and iterations stop after achieving 
a desired BER. We reduce decoding energy consumption by stoping the iterations after achieving a 
certain BER. By using this scheme, 20 − 25% of total energy consumption is reduced. 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] M. Aslam, N. Javaid, A. Rahim, U. Nazir, A. Bibi, Z. A. Khan, Survey of Extended LEACH-
Based Clustering Routing Protocols for Wireless Sensor Networks, 5th International Symposium on 
Advances of High Performance Computing and Networking (AHPCN-2012)in conjunction with 14th 
IEEE International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications (HPCC-2012), 
25-27 June, Liverpool, UK, 2012. 
 
[2] N. Javaid, O. Rehman, N. Alrajeh, Z. A. Khan, B. Manzoor, S. Ahmed, "AID: An Energy Efficient 
Decoding Scheme for LDPC Codes in Wireless Body Area Sensor Networks", 4th International 
Conference on Emerging Ubiquitous Systems and Pervasive Networks (EUSPN-2013), Niagara Falls, 
Ontario, Canada. 
 
[3] N. Javaid, A. Bibi, K. Dridi, Z. A. Khan, S. H. Bouk, “Modeling and Evaluating Enhancements in 
Expanding Ring Search Algorithm for Wireless Reactive Protocols”, 25th IEEE Canadian Conference 
on Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE2012), Montreal, Canada, 2012. 
 
[4] K. Latif, A. Ahmad, N. Javaid, Z. A. Khan and N. Alrajeh, “Divide-and-Rule Scheme for Energy 
Efficient Routing in Wireless Sensor Networks”, The 4th International Conference on Ambient 
Systems, Networks and Technologies (ANT 2013), 2013, 
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada, Procedia Computer Science, Volume 19, 2013, Pages 340-347. 
 
[5] A. Ahmad, K. Latif, N. Javaid, Z. A. Khan and U. Qasim, “DENSITY CONTROLLED DIVIDE-
AND-RULE SCHEME FOR ENERGY EFFICIENT ROUTING IN WIRELESS SENSOR 
NETWORKS”, 26th IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering 
(CCECE2013), Regina, Saskatchewan, Canada, 2013. 
 
[6] M. B. Rasheed, N. Javaid, Z. A. Khan, U. Qasim and M. Ishfaq, “E-HORM: AN ENERGY-
EFFICIENT HOLE REMOVING MECHANISM IN WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS”, 26th 
IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE2013), Regina, 
Saskatchewan, Canada, 2013. 
 
[7] Hayat. S, Javaid. N, Khan. Z. A, Shareef. A, Mahmood. A, Bouk. S. H, “Energy Efficient MAC 
Protocols in Wireless Body Area Sensor Networks”, 5th International Symposium on Advances of 
High Performance Computing and Networking (AHPCN-2012) in conjunction with 14th IEEE 
International Conference on High Performance Computing and Communications (HPCC-2012), 25-27 
June, Liverpool, UK, 2012. 
 
[8] Rahim. A, Javaid. N, Aslam. M, Qasim. U, Khan. Z. A, “Adaptive-Reliable Medium Access 
Control Protocol for Wireless Body Area Networks”, Poster Session of 9th Annual IEEE 
Communications Society Conference on Sensor, Mesh and Ad Hoc Communications and Networks 
(SECON2012), Seoul, Korea, 2012. 
 
[9] A. N Alvi, S. S. Naqvi, S. H. Bouk, N. Javaid, U. Qasim, Z. A. Khan, “Evaluation of Slotted 
CSMA/CA of IEEE 802.15.4”, Broadband, Wireless Computing, Communication and Applications 
(BWCCA), 2012 Seventh International Conference on, vol., no., pp.391,396, 12-14 Nov. 2012. 
 
[10] A. Biroli, M. Martina, and G. Masera, “An ldpc decoder architecture for wireless sensor network 
applications”, Sensors, vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 15291543, 2012. 
 
[11] P. Grover, K. Woyach, and A. Sahai, “Towards a communication-theoretic understanding of 
system-level power consumption”, Selected Areas in Communications, IEEE Journal on, vol. 29, no. 
8, pp. 17441755, 2011. 
 
[12] L. Howard Sheryl, S. Christian, I. Kris, and I. Kris, “Error control coding in low-power wireless 
sensor networks: When is ecc energy-efficient”, EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and 
Networking, vol. 2006. 
 
[13] M. Pellenz, R. Souza, and M. Fonseca, “Error control coding in wireless sensor networks”, 
Telecommunication Systems, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 6168, 2010. 
 
[14] Z. Kashani and M. Shiva, “Power optimised channel coding in wireless sensor networks using 
low-density parity-check codes”, Communications, IET, vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 12561262, 2007. 
 
[15] Y. Hamada, K. Takizawa, and T. Ikegami, “Highly reliable wireless body area network using 
error correcting codes”, in Radio and Wireless Symposium (RWS), 2012 IEEE, pp. 231234, IEEE, 
2012. 
 
[16] J. Abouei, J. Brown, K. Plataniotis, and S. Pasupathy, “Energy eciency and reliability in wireless 
biomedical implant systems”, Information Technology in Biomedicine, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 15, 
no. 3, pp. 456466, 2011. 
 
[17] Z. Cai, J. Hao, and L.Wang, “An efficient early stopping scheme for ldpc decoding based on 
check-node messages”, in Communication Systems, 2008. ICCS 2008. 11th IEEE Singapore 
International Conference on, pp. 13251329, IEEE, 2008. 
 
[18] Javaid, N.; Mohammad, S.N.; Latif, K.; Qasim, U.; Khan, Z.A.; Khan, M.A., "HEER: Hybrid 
Energy Efficient Reactive protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks," Electronics, Communications and 
Photonics Conference (SIECPC), 2013 Saudi International , vol., no., pp.1,4, 27-30 April 2013. 
 
[19] Javaid, N.; Khan, Z.A.; Qasim, U.; Khan, M.A.; Latif, K.; Javaid, A., "Towards LP modeling for 
maximizing throughput and minimizing routing delay in proactive protocols in Wireless Multi-hop 
Networks," Electronics, Communications and Photonics Conference (SIECPC), 2013 Saudi 
International , vol., no., pp.1,4, 27-30 April 2013. 
 
[20] T M. Tahir, N. Javaid, A. Iqbal, Z. A. Khan, N. Alrajeh, “On Adaptive Energy Efficient 
Transmission in WSNs”, International Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks, Volume 2013 (2013), 
Article ID 923714, 10 pages http://dx.doi.org/10.1155/2013/923714. 
 
[21] Javaid, N.; Khan, A.A.; Akbar, M.; Khan, Z.A.; Qasim, U., "SRP-MS: A new routing protocol 
for delay tolerant Wireless Sensor Networks," Electrical and Computer Engineering (CCECE), 2013. 
26th Annual IEEE Canadian Conference on , vol., no., pp.1,4, 5-8 May 2013. 
 
[22] Ahmad, A.; Latif, K.; Javaidl, N.; Khan, Z.A.; Qasim, U., "Density controlled divide-and-rule 
scheme for energy efficient routing in Wireless Sensor Networks," Electrical and Computer 
Engineering (CCECE), 2013 26th Annual IEEE Canadian Conference on , vol., no., pp.1,4, 5-8 May 
2013. 
 
[24] Rasheed, M.B.; Javaid, N.; Khan, Z.A.; Qasim, U.; Ishfaq, M., "E-HORM: An energy-efficient 
 
hole removing mechanism in Wireless Sensor Networks," Electrical and Computer Engineering 
(CCECE), 2013 26th Annual IEEE Canadian Conference on , vol., no., pp.1,4, 5-8 May 2013.  
 
[25] Kashaf, A.; Javaid, N.; Khan, Z.A.; Khan, I.A., "TSEP: Threshold-Sensitive Stable Election 
Protocol for WSNs," Frontiers of Information Technology (FIT), 2012 10th International Conference 
on , vol., no., pp.164,168, 17-19 Dec. 2012. 
 
[26] Ahmed, S.H.; Bouk, S.H.; Javaid, N.; Sasase, I., "Combined Human, Antenna Orientation in 
Elevation Direction and Ground Effect on RSSI in Wireless Sensor Networks," Frontiers of 
Information Technology (FIT), 2012 10th International Conference on , vol., no., pp.46,49, 17-19 
Dec. 2012. 
 
[27] Abbas, Z.; Javaid, N.; Khan, M.A.; Ahmed, S.; Qasim, U.; Khan, Z.A., "Simulation Analysis of 
IEEE 802.15.4 Non-beacon Mode at Varying Data Rates," Broadband, Wireless Computing, 
Communication and Applications (BWCCA), 2012 Seventh International Conference on , vol., no., 
pp.46,52, 12-14 Nov. 2012. 
 
[28] Ain, Q.; Ikram, A.; Javaid, N.; Qasim, U.; Khan, Z.A., "Modeling Propagation Characteristics for 
Arm-Motion in Wireless Body Area Sensor Networks," Broadband, Wireless Computing, 
Communication and Applications (BWCCA), 2012 Seventh International Conference on , vol., no., 
pp.186,191, 12-14 Nov. 2012 
 
[29] Kumar, S.; Javaid, N.; Yousuf, Z.; Kumar, H.; Khan, Z.A.; Qasim, U., "On link availability 
probability of routing protocols for urban scenario in VANETs," Open Systems (ICOS), 2012 IEEE 
Conference on , vol., no., pp.1,6, 21-24 Oct. 2012. 
 
[30] Sagar, S.; Javaid, N.; Saqib, J.; Khan, Z.A.; Qasim, U.; Khan, M.A., "On probability of link 
availability in original and modified AODV, FSR and OLSR using 802.11 and 802.11p," Open 
Systems (ICOS), 2012 IEEE Conference on , vol., no., pp.1,6, 21-24 Oct. 2012. 
 
[31] Qureshi, T.N.; Javaid, N.; Malik, M.; Qasim, U.; Khan, Z.A., "On Performance Evaluation of 
Variants of DEEC in WSNs," Broadband, Wireless Computing, Communication and Applications 
(BWCCA), 2012 Seventh International Conference on , vol., no., pp.162,169, 12-14 Nov. 2012. 
 
[32] Anas, M.; Javaid, N.; Mahmood, A.; Raza, S. M.; Qasim, U.; Khan, Z. A., "Minimizing 
Electricity Theft Using Smart Meters in AMI," P2P, Parallel, Grid, Cloud and Internet Computing 
(3PGCIC), 2012 Seventh International Conference on , vol., no., pp.176,182, 12-14 Nov. 2012. 
 
[33] Mahmood, D.; Javaid, N.; Qasim, U.; Khan, Z.A., "Routing Load of Route Calculation and Route 
Maintenance in Wireless Proactive Routing Protocols," Broadband, Wireless Computing, 
Communication and Applications (BWCCA), 2012 Seventh International Conference on , vol., no., 
pp.149,155, 12-14 Nov. 2012. 
 
[34] Manzoor, B.; Javaid, N.; Bibi, A.; Khan, Z. A.; Tahir, M., "Noise Filtering, Channel Modeling 
and Energy Utilization in Wireless Body Area Networks," High Performance Computing and 
Communication & 2012 IEEE 9th International Conference on Embedded Software and Systems 
(HPCC-ICESS), 2012 IEEE 14th International Conference on , vol., no., pp.1754,1761, 25-27 June 
2012. 
 
[35] Khan, N. A.; Javaid, N.; Khan, Z. A.; Jaffar, M.; Rafiq, U.; Bibi, A., "Ubiquitous HealthCare in 
Wireless Body Area Networks," Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and Communications 
(TrustCom), 2012 IEEE 11th International Conference on , vol., no., pp.1960,1967, 25-27 June 2012.  
 
 
[36] ur Rehman, O.; Javaid, N.; Bibi, A.; Khan, Z.A., "Performance Study of Localization Techniques 
in Wireless Body Area Sensor Networks," Trust, Security and Privacy in Computing and 
Communications (TrustCom), 2012 IEEE 11th International Conference on , vol., no., pp.1968,1975, 
25-27 June 2012. 
 
[37] Hayat, S.; Javaid, N.; Khan, Z. A.; Shareef, A.; Mahmood, A.; Bouk, S.H., "Energy Efficient 
MAC Protocols," High Performance Computing and Communication & 2012 IEEE 9th International 
Conference on Embedded Software and Systems (HPCC-ICESS), 2012 IEEE 14th International 
Conference on , vol., no., pp.1185,1192, 25-27 June 2012. 
 
[38] Javaid, N.; Bibi, A.; Javaid, A.; Malik, S.A., "Modeling routing overhead generated by wireless 
proactive routing protocols," GLOBECOM Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2011 IEEE , vol., no., 
pp.1072,1076, 5-9 Dec. 2011.  
 
[39] Javaid, N.; Bibi, A.; Djouani, K., "Interference and bandwidth adjusted ETX in wireless multi-
hop networks," GLOBECOM Workshops (GC Wkshps), 2010 IEEE , vol., no., pp.1638,1643, 6-10 
Dec. 2010. 
 
[40] Javaid, N.; Javaid, A.; Khan, I.A.; Djouani, K., "Performance study of ETX based wireless 
routing metrics," Computer, Control and Communication, 2009. IC4 2009. 2nd International 
Conference on , vol., no., pp.1,7, 17-18 Feb. 2009 
