Paper ID# 901556.PDF

A NOVEL APPROACH FOR CONSTRUCTION OF RATE-COMPATIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

Liang Chen Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of Maryland College Park, MD 20740, USA

Ziyu Wu NVIDIA Corporation Zhangjiang Hi-Tech Park Shanghai 201203, China

ABSTRACT
In this paper, we construct rate compatible low density parity-check (RC-LDPC) codes from a new perspective. In traditional methods, the columns of parity-check matrix, each of which corresponds to a bit of a codeword, are deleted or added to obtain codes at various rates. Different from them, only the rows of parity-check matrix are operated in our method. Since the number of columns remains unchanged, the block lengths of RC-LDPC codes across a range ofrates are always invariable. In our novel construction method, new rows are appended to form the new matrices corresponding to lower-rate codes while some selected rows are eliminated to obtain higher-rate codes. We employ a modified progressive edge growth (PEG) construction with zigzag pattern to actualize lineartime encoding. Before implementing this modified PEG algorithm, a constrained density evolution algorithm is applied to optimize the degree distributions of the mother code. To those columns in the left portion of a mother parity-check matrix which correspond to information bits of a codeword, specified weights are allocated as the condition of the posterior PEG algorithm. We also demonstrate that a single decoder can be used over the entire range of rates. Moreover, the decoder always operates at a high code rate so that energy consumption and circuit size can be reduced. In addition, based on our construction of RC-LDPC codes, a novel effective scheme for hybrid ARQ protocols has been proposed as well.
INTRODUCTION
In order to address the different error protection requirements of various data sources and the time varying nature of wireless channels, error-correction codes are required to be flexible with respect to their code rates depending on the current channel state. Rate adaptability can be realized with several pairs of encoders and decoders for the desired code rates. However, it is sometimes unacceptable due to complexity. Complexity-constrained systems may benefit from the adoption of a ratecompatible (RC) family of codes.

Techniques for implementing rate compatibility in the context of LDPC coding have also primarily pursued parity puncturing [1] like convolutional codes [2], RCPT codes [3] etc. In [4], Li and Narayanan show that puncturing alone is insufficient for the formation of a sequence of well-performing LDPC codes across a wide range of rates. The problem with puncturing occurs at higher rates where a large percentage of punctured bits paralyze the iterative soft-decision decoder. To overcome this, in addition to puncturing, the authors use extending (adding columns to the code's parity-check matrix so that the number of parity bits of a codeword increases) to create a sequence of rate-compatible codes from a single regular LDPC mother code. Lower-rate codes are obtained by extending the parity-check matrix and higher rate codes are obtained by puncturing. In [5], Yazdani and Banihashemi improve the approach of extending to construct RC-LDPC codes from an irregular LDPC mother code instead of the regular one in [4]. In another related work, Tian et al. [6] present a different way to construct RC-LDPC codes by nulling the information bits to achieve lower rates.
So far most of the works concerning RC-LDPC codes focus primarily on the column-wise adjustment (or equivalent adjustment) of parity-check matrix because every column directly corresponds to one bit (parity bit or information bit) of a codeword. In this research, we construct RC-LDPC codes from a new perspective. New rows of parity-check matrix are appended to form the new matrices corresponding to lower-rate codes and some selected rows are eliminated to obtain higher-rate codes. Since the number of columns remains unchanged, the block lengths of RC-LDPC codes across a range of rates are always invariable. We also demonstrate that the implementation of encoding and decoding is simple by using our novel construction method. In most of the prior work of RC schemes, the decoder hardware is not efficiently used, because it always operates at the lowest code rate, requiring a large parity-check matrix.

978-1-4244-5239-2/09/$26.00 ©2009 IEEE

10f7

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Unfortunately, with growing matrix dimensions the chip area dedicated to the decoder also increases. Another issue associated to the matrix size is power consumption. Typically, larger circuits will also consume more power due to the increased activity within the decoder module. Further, in deep sub-micron designs the leakage power becomes an important issue. Leakage power is proportional to the chip size and hence grows with the matrix size. In our scheme, the decoder architecture always operates on the same decoding hardware with low complexity at a high code rate. Thus, energy consumption and circuit size can be reduced.

d,
p(x) = LP/-t
i =2
where ,1.i is the fraction of edges emanating from variable nodes with i edges (or a degree of i), Pi is the fraction of edges emanating from check nodes with i edges (or a degree of i) and d, and de denote the maximum variable and check nodes degrees, respectively.

The paper is organized as follows: In Section II, we introduce important definitions and notations and analyze some important properties determining the performance of the codes. They will be employed to construct RC-LDPC codes in our method. Section III presents novel construction of RC-LDPC codes with linear-time encoding by appending or eliminating rows of parity-check matrix. In Section IV, we present the decoding scheme for the RCLDPC codes generated by our construction method. Section V concludes this paper.
DEFINITIONS, NOTATIONS AND ANALYTIC PROPERTIES
An LDPC code can be defined by an m X n sparse paritycheck matrix H, where m is a number of parity-check equations, and n is a block length. H can be graphically represented by a Tanner graph depicted in Figure 1, which
consists of two sets of nodes: Le., variable nodes, S; = {vi}, j = 0, 1,2,3, ..., n-l, and check nodes, S, = {c.}, i = 0, 1,2,
3, ..., m-l. A column of the parity-check matrix corresponds to a variable node represented as a circle in the lower side of the Tanner graph and a row corresponds to a check node represented as a square in the upper side. The edge between a variable node vi and a check node c, is constructed if there is 1 at (i,j) in the parity-check matrix. Therefore each check node represents a check equation used in generating parity bits and each variable node represents one bit in the codeword. Say, if a variable node vi is connected with a check node c., the jth codeword bit is involved in the ith parity-check equation. The number of edges emanating from a node defines its degree.
While a parity-check matrix and a Tanner graph specify an instance of an LDPC code, an ensemble of LDPC codes can be described with a degree distribution pair (,1.(x), p(x)).
d.
A(x) = L AiX;-t
1=2

Figure 1. Tanner graph of an LDPC code.

Thus, we can have many different parity-check matrices which comply with a degree distribution pair, and either a parity-check matrix or a Tanner graph is a realization of a degree distribution pair. The rate of LDPC codes specified by a degree distribution pair (A.(x), p(x)) is computed as

d,

r p(x)dx

LP;1i

R(A , p ) = I - . b

=1_...:..:;:::2..._ _

! A(x)dx

LA; Ii

1=2

The degree distribution from an edge perspective can be

converted to a node perspective with the following

relations:

Ai Ii ,1; ,'= d

<:> Ai = iAi ' d.

LAj / j
j =2

L }'Aj • j=2

and

Pi Ii

ip, '

p,.'= d,

<:> P; = d,

LPj / j j=2

LjPj • j=2

where ,1./ ( p/) is the fraction of variable (check) nodes

having i edges.

We will see the introduction of degree distribution from

the edge perspective is useful in the discussion of Section

III later.

Richardson and Urbanke present the density evolution technique in [9, 10] for evaluating thresholds of LDPC codes as a block length approaches infinity. The density evolution technique tells us a lower bound on the required

20f7
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for error-free decoding averaged over all LDPC codes in an ensemble specified by a degree distribution pair.

Theorem 1: Assume we are given a degree distribution pair (A, p) and a symmetric density Po. For I ~ 1 define
~ := Po (8)A(r-l (p(r(p/_ )))). 1
Let
i r := -In( Po (x)e-~ dx)
1 and assume that e'"d(jPo)(x) < 00 for all s in some

neighborhood of zero.
[Necessity] IfA '(O)p '(1) > e' then there exists a constant
~ = ~ (A, p, xo), ~ > 0, such that for alII EN, Pe(P,) > ~. [Sufficiency] If A'(O)p'(I)<er then there exists a

constant ~ = ~ (A, p, xo), ~ > 0, such that if, for some lEN,

Pe(P,(Po)) ~ ~ then Pe(P,) converges to zero as I tends to

infinity.

D

Using Gaussian approximation (GA) for message densities under density evolution to simplify the analysis of the decoding algorithm, we have the following theorem.

stable under density evolution. However, stability under density evolution guarantees stability under the Gaussian approximation. In any case, these two are the same if Pk = 1 for some k ~ 2, and are very close ifp(x) is concentrated at two consecutive degrees, which is the case for most good degree distributions found so far.
From Mean Inequality, we know that A2* attains the minimum value iff all Pi are equal, so we conclude that the selection of a uniform (or nearly uniform) row weights yields good threshold performance.
Enlightened by this important property, we may tentatively propose that the weight of every newly appended row should maintain identical and be close to the ones of the original rows of the mother parity-check matrix when new rows are appended to achieve the lower rates. When part of rows is eliminated to achieve the higher rates, we may select those whose weights have the maximal deviation from others. In the next section, we discuss particularly whether these conceits can be involved in our construction method.
CONSTRUCTION OF RC-LDPC CODES

.....L.
e 2 0';
Theorem 2: Let = A; - d - - - nU-l)p)

j=2
if A2 < A2*, then the mean of the output message at the Ith iteration m;(l) will converge to infinity as I tends to infinity if m;(0) is large enough. If A2 > A2*, then m;(l) cannot

converge to infinity regardless of its initial value.

D

Note that this condition is similar to the stability condition
......L
e 20'; ~ <-d----

!p/j-l)

j=2

which can be deduced from Theorem 1, except that

! n d

d

P (j -1) is replaced by j

(j -l)Pj •

j=2

j=2

Using Jensen's Inequality, we know that

de

de

IT(j-I)Pj ~LPj(j-I)

j=2

j=2

for all p(x), with equality iff Pk = 1 for some k ~ 2.

Therefore, the approximate stability condition is looser

than the original, which implies that stable degree

distributions under the Gaussian approximation may not be

A. Matrix Structure for Linear-time Encoding

One of the advantages to employ RC-LDPC codes is that they can be encoded and decoded by using single or simple encoding/decoding scheme over a range of rates. It is not difficult to implement when technique of parity puncturing (or information nulling) is used to obtain RC-LDPC codes. The encoder always generates a full set of codeword bits, but some are not transmitted (punctured/nulled) and the decoder inserts erasures to where bits are punctured (or nulled) and performs the decoding algorithm as in a nonpunctured (or non-nulled) case. Although superfluous bits are generated, resulting in somewhat low efficiency, it is acceptable and effective.

It is not universal to have simple encoders when extending technique [4] is used to achieve lower rates despite lower complexity in some cases. The same situation occurs when row operation is used in RC scheme. Therefore, it is important to find a simple encoding scheme. We employ LDPC codes constructed by PEG method [7] with zigzag pattern as the mother code.

To facilitate easy encoding, we partition the variable node

S: . S: set S, into two disjoint subsets: an information subset S~

and a redundant subset

contains the last m variable

nodes which are check bits (redundant bits) in a codeword

30f7
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

S: and whose associated edges are pre-specified as the simple
"zigzag" pattern shown in Figure 2(a). contains the other n-m variable nodes which correspond to information bits in a codeword. With the zigzag edges already in the graph, the edges of the information nodes can be established by using the PEG algorithm to guarantee a good girth histogram.
S: When new rows are appended, the elements in S; and
increase but the ones in S v keep invariable. We connect new edges to these new check nodes {C-h C_2, C_3, ••. } with zigzag pattern as well, shown in Figure 2(b).

...... ..........; ;, Infor m.lloll \uh ~1

_.....................•....

~ I Zi I rn

-

~ r - -oll rrdundaol\ub\C'1

(a)

C.}

('0

c". .~

('FN- I

,,, ,
:F:;~T.

l. ~.0 ...

. ~:"oM·: \'". ", ./ "".",

la forrn llflon \ ub\t'l 1 - 1 - - - - - Zie.UEpatina

~I

on r rd und .anl ,ut~1

(b)

Figure 2. Linear-time encodable PEG Tanner graph with zigzag pattern. The solid edges correspond to the zigzag pattern specified. The dashed lines correspond to the edges established by the PEG algorithm. (a) Tanner graph corresponding to the mother code constructed by the PEG method with zigzag pattern. (b) Tanner graph corresponding to lower-rate codes obtained by row appending with modified PEG method.

check nodes. By this algorithm, the connections are
S: established between the set of newly added check nodes
{ C-h C-2, C-3, ... } and updated and the PEG Tanner graph constructed with a relatively large girth based on the previous one.
Encoding can easily be accomplished in an iterative procedure operating on the resulting PEG Tanner graph. First the information subset of the graph is initialized with information bits taking values from the set {O, I}. Now consider the last (rightmost) check node, which is associated with only one redundant variable node whose value is unknown and multiple information nodes whose values are known as well. The value of the last (rightmost) redundant variable node can be uniquely determined by satisfying the last check node representing a check equation. After the last redundant variable node has been determined, we move to the last second redundant variable node by checking the second check node, and determine its value accordingly, as it is the uniquely unknown variable node having an edge incident to the last second check node. This iterative procedure continues until all values of unknown redundant variable nodes have been decided. The complexity of this simple encoding algorithm is linear in time.
Figure 3 presents the proposed matrix structure corresponding to the process of row appending. It could be found that the parity-check matrices are always in approximate lower triangular form (in fact, the rightmost column has weight 2) and the new rows are appended on the top of the previous matrix.

o row appending

o

o
mother matrix

The PEG algorithm presented in [7] is only applied to variable nodes. Here we can effectively extend its application to check nodes. It is easy to calculate the mean of the row weights of the original matrix and then round off it to a nearest integer. If we employ this integer as the weight of all newly added rows to construct new matrices, what has been discussed in the preceding section demonstrates that good threshold performance can be achieved. Since the degree of new check nodes is known, it is easy to apply a modified PEG algorithm to these

Figure 3. Matrix structure corresponding to the process of row appending .
Now we pay attention to row eliminating to achieve higher rates. If we select those whose weights have the maximal deviation from others to be eliminated Gust as we conceive in the preceding section), the matrix structure for linear-

4 0f7
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

time encoding is usually destroyed, so the notion should be abandoned. Row eliminating should begin from the lowermost rows, thus keeping the matrix structure for linear-time encoding.
B. Optimization for Mother Matrix
If a mother code is designed carefully, the performance of RC-LDPC codes can be further improved over a range of rates.
In our construction methodology, before PEG algorithm with zigzag pattern is implemented to construct a mother code, we try to find more analytic properties in favor of row operation and then apply them on the design of a mother code; thus we can improve the construction algorithm further. In the optimization procedure for the mother code, we first obtain a degree distribution for each of the target rates. And then we allocate specified weights to the columns in the left portion of the mother paritycheck matrix which correspond to information bits of a codeword as the condition of the posterior PEG algorithm.

*
/ A ,(R)

=

l-R _ _ * 0_ ') (R)

0

ifp{RO)/l",

< -

R

< -

R
0

To find a degree distribution for each of the virtual rates R*,

we enforce some constraints, such as

(i) Monotonicity constraint

< A * ,(R.) /

< -

_ ilf-p_ {RR0O)_

A

(R
/

*

)

-

A

*
,(R 2 )

VR E (R

R)

/'

"I' 2'

where

0:::; R.

::; R 2

:::; Ro •

(ii) Continuity constraint

A A = A + ,(0)

,(1)

,(Ro )

iii

With these constraints, degree distributions are found by using a linear program whose objective and other common constraints are determined by Gaussian approximation [11]. Optimal normalized degree distributions are obtained by this modified constrained density evolution algorithm. Through this process of optimization, we control the row budget in a way such that the distribution of row weights of virtual nulled matrices is as concentrated as possible.

To understand easily, our method of row appending may be equivalently regarded as two sequential virtual processes. The matrix is shortened by information nulling at the first stage, and then it is extended by adding columns and rows at the second stage. The columns added during extending are the selfsame ones deleted during the process of information nulling.

If our target code rate is R (R<Ro, Ro denotes the code rate of the mother code), the achieved virtual code rate after information nulling R* should be
R R*=---
l+R-Ro

A(R*) (p(R*)) denotes degree distributions of variable (check)
nodes from a node perspective at virtual code rate R* and A ,(R*) (p ,(R*)) denotes ones from an edge perspective.

A,(R*) is further normalized to

l-R = _ _ *
A,(R)

*
0 A,(R)

l-R*

since the component distributions must fit the matrix of the

mother code.

From the definitions and formulae in Section II, we can obtain

Next we allocate specified weights to the columns in the left portion of the mother parity-check matrix. In our method of constructing RC-LDPC codes, the number of columns of the various parity-check matrices associated with the diverse code rates never changes, but some columns corresponding to information bits of a codeword of the mother code will become corresponding to parity bits after row-appending. Therefore, we try to make optimal or nearly optimal the performance of the lowerrate codes whose rate is desired when the function of certain columns transforms. We use a greedy algorithm to allocate weights to the columns in the left portion of the mother parity-check matrix which correspond to information bits of a codeword of the mother code. The algorithm is designed to fit the degree distribution associated with a given code rate to the desired degree distribution which is optimized for that rate by our modified constrained density evolution algorithm. The column being constructed is allotted the degree (weight) where the two distributions have the largest mismatch. The jth column which corresponds to an information bit of a codeword of the mother code is allocated weight Wj

W.

=

a

r

g

m

a

x

[

n

(

A

.

'

(

R
0

)

-

A

.

'(1.) n

)-n.]

J

i

I

I

I

so as to minimize the difference between the distribution realized in the virtual nulled matrix and the distribution intention obtained by density evolution.

c. Simulation Results

50f7
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Bit error rate (BER) results for the designed RC-LDPC codes in AWGN channels are shown in Figure 4. We
employ the LDPC code at rate Ro = 0.5 and block length n = 18432 as the mother code, and Figure 4 presents the
performance of a set of RC-LDPC codes of rates 8/19, 8/18,8/17,8/16,8/15,8/14,8/13,8/12,8/11,8/10 constructed by our method. The simulation results demonstrate that RC-LDPC codes based on row operation work quite well.
1.E· 0 2
1.E·04

DECODING SCHEME FOR RC-LDPC CODES
The block length of the RC-LDPC codes generated by our method across a range of rates is always invariable. And we may demonstrate that a single decoder can be used over the entire range of rates.
For the lower-rate codes produced by row appending, their parity-check matrices Ha enlarge the mother matrix Ho longitudinally and retain the whole original rows as the part of new matrices, which correspond to check equations.
. . Therefore, any codeword Ca at lower rates which satisfies C H T =0
must naturally satisfy

1.E·06
1.E-07
1.E-08 -2 -1.6 -1.2 -0.8 -0.4 0 0.4 0.8 1.2 1.6 2 2.4 2.8
Es /N o(dB)
Figure 4. E/No simulation results for AWGN channels.
In order to evaluate the goodness of the RC-LDPC codes obtained by our new construction method, we compare the performance of the codes obtained by row appending with the RC codes obtained by extending. We can obtain the lower-rate codes from a mother code by both of these two approaches. The comparison has been done in Figure 5, for the rates from 8/19 to 8/16. We can see that the performance of the codes obtained by our method is better than those obtained by extending.

1.E'01 ~. 1.E-02

', \. .

1.E-0 3

a: 1.E-04

w

cD 1.E-05

.\

so that C, can be decoded by the decoder designed for the mother code.
For the higher-rate codes produced by row eliminating, their parity-check matrices He are just portions of the mother matrix Ho, whose constraints is less than Ho. Therefore, the codeword C, at higher rates which satisfies
CeHeT = 0 may not satisfy
We adjust the mother matrix from approximate lower triangular form (the rightmost column has weight 2) to normal triangular form (the rightmost column has weight 1, which makes the variable degree distribution slightly deviate from the former, but in practice, this has a negligible effect on performance [5]). In this case, it is easy to find that eliminating the lowermost rows is equivalent to implement parity puncturing. Like puncturing, the decoder can perform the decoding algorithm as in an original case.
Based on our construction method of RC-LDPC codes, we also propose a novel effective scheme for hybrid ARQ protocols [12].

1.E·07

-3 -2.6 -2.2 - 1.8 -1.4 -1 -0.6 -0.2 0.2 0.6

1.4

Es /N o(dB)

Figure 5. Evaluating the performance of codes at rates from 8/19 to 8/16. The solid lines: performance ofRC codes obtained by our new method; The dashed line: performance of the codes obtained by extending.

In our type-II hybrid ARQ scheme, a packet is first transmitted using the highest rate code. If it is not judged correctly decoded, a negative acknowledgment (NACK) is fed-back. A set of the parity bits which are equivalently punctured in the preceding case at higher rate are regenerated by the linear-time encoder and retransmitted. This set of parity bits replaces the counterpart in the preceding codeword. The receiver then decodes the

60f7
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

updated codeword, which is more likely successful due to the lower code rate. If decoding is still unsuccessful, the receiver requests additional redundancy by sending back an NACK once more. Another set of parity bits which are equivalently punctured previously is regenerated and retransmitted. This newly received set of parity bits, combined with all prior transmissions, is treated as a codeword of a lower-rate code which provides stronger error correction capability. This procedure continues if decoding keeps failing until all parity bits which are equivalently punctured previously are retransmitted, which
means the code rate reduces to Ri: In this case, it also
indicates that current channel state is abominable, so we select to reduce the information bits and increase the parity bits. The parity bits are newly generated by the linear-time encoder, which are fully different from the previously parity bits, but associated with a lower rate. Then the receiver combine these newly received parity bits with the corresponding information bits that are a segment of previously received codeword to decode. If decoding is still judged in error, another set of totally updated parity bits corresponding to a lower rate is required. All previously received bits should not be discarded and are useful for future decoding. Once the decoding is successful, we employ these correct information bits (which are a segment of information bits of the codeword at rate Ro) and the preceding set of parity bits which has been reserved before to decode more information bits. This procedure continues until all information bits received at rate Ro and higher rates are successfully decoded.
CONCLUSIONS
A novel construction method of RC-LDPC codes from a new perspective is presented. The RC-LDPC codes generated from this method can be encoded in linear-time complexity and decoded by a single decoder, which could be effectively used in type-II hybrid ARQ schemes. The designed decoder architecture always operates on the same low complexity decoding hardware at a higher rate. Thus, energy consumption and circuit size can be reduced.

compatible punctured turbo (RCPT) codes," IEEE Trans. Comm., vo1.48, No.6, June 2000. [4] J. Li and K. Narayanan, "Rate-Compatible Low Density Parity Check Codes for CapacityApproaching ARQ Scheme in Packet Data Communications," in Proc. lASTED Int. Conf. Commun., Internet, and Inform. Tech. (CIIT), St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, USA, Nov. 2002. [5] M. R. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, "On construction of rate-compatible low-density paritycheck codes," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, Mar. 2004. [6] T. Tian, C. Jones, and J. D. Villasenor, "Ratecompatible low-density parity-check codes," in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory (ISIT), Chicago, IL, USA, Jun.lJul. 2004. [7] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, "Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 5I,no.I,Jan.2005. [8] R. Tanner, "A recursive approach to low complexity codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, Sep. 1981 [9] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, "Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, Feb. 2001. [10] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, "The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under messagepassing decoding," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, Feb. 2000. [11] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, "Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, Feb. 2001. [12] L. Chen, X. Shi, S. Van, Z. Wu, W. Zhang and Y. Guan, "A novel scheme for type-II hybrid ARQ protocols using LDPC codes, " in Proc. IEEE Wireless Communication and Networking Conference (WCNC), Hong Kong, March 2007.

REFERENCES

[1] J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, "Ratecompatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, Nov. 2004.
[2] J. Hagenauer, "Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes) and their applications," IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 36, April 1988.
[3] D. N. Rowitch and L. B. Milstein, "On the performance of hybrid FECIARQ systems using rate

70f7
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

