IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2009

4085

A Low-Complexity Hybrid LDPC Code Encoder for IEEE 802.3an (10GBase-T) Ethernet
Aaron E. Cohen, Member, IEEE, and Keshab K. Parhi, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a novel hybrid encoding method for encoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The design approach is applied to design 10-Gigabit Ethernet transceivers over copper cables. For a specified encoding speed, the proposed method requires substantially lower complexity in terms of area and storage. Furthermore, this method is generic and can be adapted easily for other LDPC codes. One major advantage of this design is that it does not require column swapping and it maintains compatibility with optimized LDPC decoders. For a 10-Gigabit Ethernet transceiver which is compliant with the IEEE 802.3an standard, the proposed sequential (5-Parallel) hybrid architecture has the following implementation properties: critical path: (log2(324) + 1)Txor + Tand, number of XOR gates: 11 056, number of AND gates: 1620, and ROM storage: 104 976 bits (which can be minimized to 52 488 bits using additional hardware). This method achieves comparable critical path, and requires 74% gate area, 10% ROM storage as compared with a similar 10-Gigabit sequential (5-Parallel) LDPC encoder design using only the G matrix multiplication method. Additionally the proposed method accesses fewer bits per cycle than the G matrix method which reduces power consumption by about 82%.
Index Terms—Encoder, hybrid, IEEE 802.3an, low-density parity check (LDPC), 10GBase-T.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes are one of the most powerful error correcting codes available to designers today. These were originally proposed by Gallager in 1963 [1]. However, more recently they were rediscovered by MacKay, Neal, and Wiberg [2], [3].
LDPC codes have the unique property of being able to achieve near Shannon limit channel capacity which make them extremely efficient in terms of bandwidth utilization. One of their main drawbacks is that they exhibit a higher computation complexity for encoding and decoding, and hence they require more complicated architectures in terms of area, critical path, and power consumption.
For their efficiency, LDPC codes have been adopted into the latest standards for 802.3an, 802.11n, and 802.16e [4]–[6]. While 802.3an uses a fixed LDPC code, 802.11n and 802.16e
Manuscript received June 26, 2008; accepted March 24, 2009. First published May 12, 2009; current version published September 16, 2009. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. An-Yeu Wu. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under contract 0441632. Parts of this paper have been published in the U. S. Patent Application 20070033485, February 2007 [31].
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (e-mail: cohen082@umn.edu; parhi@umn.edu).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2009.2022919

were designed for multiple rates and hence both require the use of variable rate encoders and decoders for efficient implementation.
Previous research on LDPC encoding has focused on complicated methods which work in a variety of cases such as the Richardson-Urbanke (RU) LDPC encoding method [7]. Further research in LDPC encoding has taken advantage of certain properties that exist in certain LDPC codes. These methods include iterative graph-based message-passing encoders [8], and the more trivial designs such as the quasi-cyclic LDPC encoding method [9], [10] and structured LDPC encoders [11] which only apply to specific LDPC codes. Research in high performance soft-decision LDPC decoding architecture design originated with approximating the belief propagation (BP) algorithm with the fixed point sum-product algorithm (SPA) or the min-sum algorithm (MSA) [12]. The MSA has been modified further to achieve faster convergence through the use of a scalar factor [13] or a correction factor [14] or both. Due to the numerous methods for implementing LDPC decoders and encoders, comparing architecture designs focuses on comparing bit error rate (BER) performance, throughput, and power dissipation for a given technology. The majority of implementations target field programmable gate array (FPGA) technology or application specific integrated circuit (ASIC) technology [15]–[22].
In [18], the authors present a sequential LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.3an (10GBase-T ethernet) that achieves 16GB/s throughput with 4 bit quantization and 8 iterations per frame in 90-nm technology with an area footprint of 9.8 . A broadcasting technique was introduced in [19] to mitigate routing congestion for LDPC decoders for 10GBase-T. Throughput was subsequently increased by 60% with their broadcasting technique. Recently, a 10.5–W chip for 10GBase-T in 0.13
has been implemented [20]. The Shannon limit is approximately 3 dB less than the performance achieved with their LDPC decoder.
After ratification of the IEEE 802.16e standard (WiMax) [6], multimode soft decision LDPC decoder design has become increasingly important. These newer LDPC decoder designs must be reconfigurable in terms of allowing different rates (k/n) or modes depending on the channel encoding. In [21], the authors developed a multimode soft decision LDPC decoder consuming only 52 mW with an area footprint of 8.29 . This decoder is limited to quasi-cyclic codes only and is not compatible with the LDPC code from the IEEE 802.3an standard [4]. In [22], the authors present a fully compliant multimode LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.16e. This architecture was able to achieve 109 MHz operating frequency with 90 nm technology and dissipates 186 mW with a 1.0-V supply.

1053-587X/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:24:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4086

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2009

One of the main reasons to optimize LDPC encoding is to minimize the area and storage complexity of encoding. Reducing area and storage allows for lower power consumption for the LDPC encoder design. In general, the time complexity has less importance because soft-decision LDPC decoding requires significantly more time to complete than LDPC encoding.
This paper is organized as follows. First an introduction to LDPC and LDPC encoding is provided in Section II. Next the proposed novel low-complexity Hybrid LDPC code encoder is presented in Section III. Section IV provides an overview of architectural optimizations to increase the performance on our low-complexity Hybrid LDPC code encoder. Afterwards we perform a comparison in terms of area and critical path for a field programmable gate array (FPGA) and an application specific integrated circuit (ASIC) assuming our goal is 10 Gigabit Ethernet LDPC encoding (as specified by the IEEE 802.3an standard [4]) in Section V. Then the performances of various LDPC encoder approaches are compared and the advantages of the proposed encoders are demonstrated through these target implementations. Finally, a conclusion and future research directions are discussed in Section VI.
II. BACKGROUND
The LDPC block codes are very important error correcting codes that have proven to have excellent performance (i.e., near Shannon limit performance). As in the case of block codes, we define a generator matrix (G) and a parity check matrix (H). In order to achieve a systematic LDPC code G must be in the following form:
(1)
where is an identity matrix and defines the parity bits [23]. In some cases, a code may be specified by only the H matrix
and it becomes necessary to solve for the G matrix. If the H matrix is in an arbitrary format, it must be converted into echelon canonical form shown here

Fig. 1. Sequential LDPC encoder based on G matrix multiplication.

which is based on Reed-Solomon codes [25]. Therefore, when simple encoder architectures are not available, two generic encoding methodologies can be applied to implement the LDPC encoder. These are as follows:
1) the (G) matrix multiplication method; 2) the RU method [7].

A. LDPC Encoding With (G) Matrix Multiplication
The encoding method which uses the G matrix is simply a matrix multiplication. Given systematic bits (s), one can derive the codeword (c) by multiplying by the matrix (G) as follows:

(3)

Then a typical LDPC encoder implementation based on the

matrix G multiplication consists of performing the matrix mul-

tiplication in a sequential manner [26] such that one only per-

forms the and computations as shown in Fig. 1.

The sequential LDPC encoder based on G matrix multiplica-

tion requires a ROM to store the portion of the G matrix used to

compute and . The field multiplication block is composed

of AND gates for

operations. The field summation block

is composed of XOR gates for

operations. The AND gates

perform the bitwise row multiplication. Then each XOR tree adds

up the results to compute one parity bit. The AND and XOR logic

gates can be replicated to generate -parallel designs (i.e., de-

signs which output parity bits in one clock cycle).

(2) B. LDPC Encoding With the RU Method [7]

where

is an identity matrix and defines the parity bits

[23].

This conversion can be accomplished with the assistance of

a computer program. Afterwards, the G matrix can be observed

by inspection.

Typically, encoding consists of using the G matrix to compute

the parity bits and decoding consists of using the H matrix and

soft-decision decoding.

The complexity of the LDPC encoding algorithm is much

lower than that of various soft decision LDPC decoding al-

The RU encoding method was first published in [7]. This method uses a unique trick to reformulate the H matrix into a special H matrix which requires the following operations: backsubstitution for multiplication by rather than a true inversion, linear computations, and multiplication by smaller dense matrices. Therefore, this method can reduce the complexity over the G matrix multiplication method. Next the RU method will be described.
First let’s assume that the H matrix can be converted into the approximate lower triangular form as shown in Fig. 2 and here

gorithms. Prior research includes developing generic encoder design methods such as the G matrix multiplication method

(4)

and the RU method [7]. For applications with no constraints on types of LDPC codes, more efficient methodologies such as the quasi-cyclic encoder architectures [9] and alternative encoders based on permuted H matrices, which do not require inversions [24], can be used. For now we will focus on constrained encoder

where is lower triangular and

is nonsin-

gular in GF(2).

Then using Gaussian Elimination (which works whether is

singular or not), find

design because we are interested in the IEEE 802.3an 10 Gigabit Ethernet standard [4] and its published (2048, 1723) LDPC code

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:24:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

COHEN AND PARHI: A LOW-COMPLEXITY HYBRID LDPC CODE ENCODER
TABLE I p AND p COMPLEXITY

4087

Fig. 2. Approximate lower triangular form for the H matrix.

this will lead to a less efficient decoder if the original H matrix

had special properties which simplify the decoder.

Now the new matrix gives us two equations to use

to solve for the parity bit values. Assuming codeword

where contains the systematic in-

formation bits and , are parity bits with

for all

valid codewords. Then the two equations are given by:

and

The two equations above allow one to solve for the parity bits using only the supplied systematic bits such that:

(6) (7)

Assuming we are using precomputation we can perform the

calculation with one dense matrix multiplication or several

smaller sparse multiplications and one smaller dense multipli-

cation. Similarly, the calculation can be computed by two

small sparse matrix multiplications and one back substitution

or two larger and denser matrix multiplications.

Fig. 3 contains the final computational flow for the RU en-

coder architecture. There are three primary paths with the crit-

ical path determined by the

. These

three paths contain multiple complex operations which in-

Fig. 3. The RU LDPC encoder [27], [28].

creases the complexity of the design and leads to a long critical

path. Thus, it is desirable to explore alternative simpler methods

which have a smaller critical path and significantly less area

If

is singular in GF(2) then it is necessary overhead. Table I contains the area complexity involved with

to swap columns to generate a nonsingular matrix. Swapping the encoding process where HW(X) represents the Hamming

columns at this stage means we will need to swap columns back weight of matrix X.

prior to decoding which basically makes this a nonsystematic

encoding approach. Another idea is to perform row swapping but this may suffer from a large matrix which significantly

III. NOVEL HYBRID APPROACH

degrades encoding performance. Richardson and Urbanke sug- The last two LDPC encoder designs suffered from two

gested using the permuted matrix as the decoding matrix but main problems. First the sequential LDPC encoder required

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:24:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4088

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2009

where T is lower triangular of the form

...

...

...

...

...

(9)

Fig. 4. Sequential hybrid LDPC encoder.

With T in lower triangular form of size (m-g) (m-g) we do not need an inverse of T to exist to solve for the bits because back substitution is valid. However it is important to note that back substitution is limited by its linear increase in critical path as L increases where L is the level of parallelism. An example of back substitution for a 4 by 4 T matrix is illustrated below.
Example Back Substitution: Finding ’s from T and ’s

significant storage overhead which makes it less ideal for implementation. The RU Method suffered from a long critical path

(10)

and odd constraints which could make the LDPC encoder non-

systematic. To overcome these two problems, we developed a novel low-complexity Hybrid LDPC code encoder which requires significantly less area and storage and maintains a systematic encoder form as in Fig. 4. As shown in Fig. 4, the values are generated by the G matrix whereas the values are

Finding is trivial but it is important to note that subsequent ’s after require the results from the previous ’s. Below we have provided the equations required for solving the ’s given the T matrix above.

generated by the RU method. In Fig. 4, the GROM corresponds to the read only memory which stores the G matrix coefficients

(11)

and the TROM corresponds to the read only memory which

(12)

stores the T matrix coefficients. This method will be described

(13)

next.

(14)

The main idea of this method is to compute the values

by using the G matrix. Therefore, we do not need the inverse As can be seen above, increasing parallelism leads to a longer of the matrix as in the RU method. This leads to the Hybrid critical path. In this case, the critical path is method’s primary advantage over the RU method; it does not

require row or column swapping when is singular because

the values are computed with the G matrix. We propose to

compute the values sequentially as in the sequential LDPC

encoder. However, instead of using the G matrix to compute

values we use the special property

from the RU method to compute using a parallel sparse ma-

trix multiplication

and a

We can write the equations for the Hybrid encoder by using the G matrix to compute the values (which works even when
is singular) and using the RU method to perform the calculations as follows:

sequential back substitution (or matrix multiplication) compu-

(15)

tation. This has two advantages. First this method has a shorter

critical path when the back substitution is implemented in an where columns

to

are used and

L-parallel fashion with small L. Second the memory storage re-

quirements can be significantly reduced because T is lower tri-

(16)

angular and much smaller than the parity check equations (P) from the G matrix. Therefore this effectively cuts the memory storage in half when using back substitution versus matrix multiplication. Also, if T is singular then no inverse exists and matrix multiplication by cannot be implemented but back substitution is still a valid alternative to obtain the values.
The following steps are required to design the Hybrid encoder. First use row swapping to reformulate the H matrix into approximate lower triangular form as shown in Fig. 2 and below.

Fig. 5 contains a block diagram based on these equations for the low-complexity Hybrid LDPC code encoder. In Fig. 5, the GROM corresponds to the read only memory which stores the G matrix coefficients, the TROM corresponds to the read only memory which stores the T matrix coefficients, the MROM corresponds to the read only memory which stores the coefficients for the loop unrolling technique which will be described later, the SR block corresponds to the shift register for storing previous values for the next iteration for an L-parallel design,

the blocks correspond to XOR trees for generating the in-

(8)

termediate results of the current computations, the block corresponds to the matrix multiplication specified by the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:24:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

COHEN AND PARHI: A LOW-COMPLEXITY HYBRID LDPC CODE ENCODER

4089

the ROM size and structure. In this section, we will develop a method of performing balancing on the back substitution operation to shorten the critical path and we will develop fast architectures for implementing the ROM structures.
A. Back Substitution
A typical 5-parallel back substitution design would normally be limited to a critical path or more specifically a loop bound
. Therefore, without optimizing the critical path of the 5-parallel back substitution computation the critical path is longer than the G matrix multiplication. However, with advanced techniques and a small increase in storage overhead we can reduce the critical path below the G matrix multiplication method. First let’s consider the back substitution example for a 2-parallel design as

Fig. 5. L-parallel hybrid method of encoding.

(17)

RU method, and the G matrix block corresponds to the matrix Now considering and are computed in the same cycle

multiplication to generate the values.

then it is important to remove the dependence on from the

Finally, the constraints imposed on our method are that the

computation (marked by parentheses ()) in order to mini-

G matrix is known and that the H matrix can be converted mize the critical path. By conditionally adding the equations for

into approximate lower triangular form with a relatively large and together we can generate new equations for

value of (m-g) and sparse matrices A and B. Unlike the RU which do not rely on but instead require slightly more com-

method we do not require the inverse of a matrix which is not in putation on the right hand side of the equation as shown below

lower triangular form and therefore we do not need to perform

column swapping to find a nonsingular matrix. Maintaining

column compatibility with the decoder is essential in preventing

(18)

additional latency and unwarranted storage.

In the case of the RS (2048, 1723) LDPC code (

and , are sparse) we need to compute one

parity bit for (i.e., the GROM is not required) which

(19)

can be accomplished in

time by a fully parallel

implementation. Pipelining cutsets need to be used before the

back substitution architecture to help minimize the critical path. Similarly, the sparse matrix multiplication lends itself well to a fully parallel implementation. It may be beneficial to add a pipelining cutset to the sparse matrix multiplication computation. In this way, the matrix multiplication can be performed in parallel with the computation in order to minimize circuit glitches. For this application T is singular and therefore we must utilize back substitution in the final step of the computation.

This new modification has removed the dependence but requires the additional storage of 1 bit (marked by braces {} above) per cycle. This technique is a modified version of look-ahead adapted for our specific application. A typical hardware implementation, Fig. 6, would consist of performing the previous computation and the computation in parallel followed by an exclusive or gate to generate the current ’s.

Finally the majority of the engineering work for this LDPC en- B. Read Only Memory (ROM)

coder design will revolve around 1.) optimizing the sequential back substitution architecture involved in the final step of the computation and 2.) in efficient structures for implementing the read only memory blocks.

The ROM implementation is another area where performance gains and/or power consumption reduction can be achieved due to the nature of the memory accesses. Therefore, we investigated several alternative methods for the ROM implementa-

IV. ARCHITECTURAL OPTIMIZATIONS

tions. The first method was to utilize a standard ROM implementation based on the NAND and NOR plane implementation

In the previous section, we determined that designing an method for PLAs. The second method was to utilize shift reg-

LDPC code encoder for 10GBase-T requires utilizing back isters with parallel load. Both methods store the actual matrix

substitution and read only memory (ROM) architectures. Both coefficients in the architecture.

of these architectural characteristics can contribute to long PLA-Based ROM: One method is to implement a typical

critical path delays. In the case of back substitution, the critical ROM implementation using a NAND and a NOR plane [29].

path grows linearly with the degree of parallelism whereas in This method is derived from converting the logic function

the case of the ROM architectures the critical path is related to into sum-of-products format for implementation purposes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:24:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4090

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2009
TABLE II ROM POWER CONSUMPTION COMPARISON

Fig. 6. Example 2-parallel back substitution design.

For the shift register implementation the number of switching nodes is related to the Hamming weight of the matrix. For the lower triangular T matrix this corresponds to a Hamming weight of 1457. The position of the ones dictates how many times it will cause a transition. Therefore the power consumption of the shift register implementation of the ROM can be computed by the following formula
(21)

This method has the following advantage: automatic layout generation. Automatic layout generation is useful when designing ASICs because it does not require full custom design. This method has the following disadvantage: long wires with high capacitance. The long wires with high capacitance is dependent on the implementation of the ROM. Additionally there are methods for implementing ROMs which rely on precharging nodes that have significant speed advantages [29]. These methods can achieve performance closer to the shift

where

represents the Hamming weight of the

matrix,

represents the number of cycles for the th bit,

represents the number of cycles for the L-parallel

design, and represents the standard power equation.

For the PLA implementation the number of switching nodes

is related to the number of bits read and the Hamming weight

of each entry. Therefore the power consumption of the PLA

implementation of the ROM can be computed by

register method which is described next but precharge ROM

methods suffer from higher power consumption and increase

the required computation time due to the precharge phase.

(22)

Shift Register-Based ROM: Another method is to implement

the ROM using a shift register. This method has the following advantages: 1) short critical paths during computation cycles and 2) nearest neighbor routing for all but parallel load. The parallel load is the most difficult part of the shift register design and it can be implemented in a multicycle method to provide

where

represents the Hamming weight of the th

row, , represent the size of the matrix, and represents the

standard power equation. Alternatively, if the ROM stores only

the information for the location of the ones then

additional slack for routing purposes during the design phase

and/or increase yield in the manufacturing phase. This method

is able to achieve a very short critical path because it uses nearest neighbor communication with the exception of the parallel load

(23)

operation which occurs in the beginning before the computation cycles. Hence this method is the fastest available implementation method for the read only memories because it has the least capacitance on the output leading to the computation blocks in the hybrid LDPC encoder. This method has the following disadvantage: higher power consumption. The numerous read and write operations cause the system to have higher power consumption than an alternative based on the ROM implementation.
Comparison: The best method for comparing these two techniques is to compare their power consumption. Power consumption on a wire with a capacitance can be computed using

We compared the power consumption of these two methods using the matrix from the low-complexity Hybrid LDPC code encoder for 10GBase-T Ethernet and obtained the results shown in Table II. As can be seen from this table the shift register method achieves lower power consumption when compared to storing the location of the zeros. Although its power factor appears higher in the sequential design it benefits tremendously once parallelism is applied while the PLA-like method based on precharging does not. Ideally, the second method (PLA2) for storing the location of the ones should be applied when using low Hamming weight matrices. This second method achieves better power consumption but requires a charging and evalua-

tion phase plus an additional inversion to generate the correct

(20) output and hence will increase the critical path. In either PLA

case, implementing a static CMOS design is not practical due

where is the capacitance load, is the supply voltage, to the complexity of the pull-up (PLA2) or pull-down (PLA1)

and is the frequency.

network.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:24:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

COHEN AND PARHI: A LOW-COMPLEXITY HYBRID LDPC CODE ENCODER
TABLE III FPGA IMPLEMENTATION COMPARISON

4091

V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND COMPARISON

The previous sections have focused on the development of

methodologies for implementing LDPC code encoders and ar-

chitectural techniques to improve the encoders; however a de-

tailed comparison has not been made. This section explores the

design characteristics for the different LDPC code encoders.

First, this section will compare our novel hybrid LDPC encoder

in terms of implementation on a field programmable gate array

(FPGA). Afterwards, this section will analyze our novel hybrid

LDPC encoder in terms of implementation on an application specific integrated circuit (ASIC). Finally, this section will com-

Fig. 7. FPGA implementation of the hybrid LDPC code encoder.

pare the FPGA and ASIC LDPC encoder implementations with

other published encoder designs.

plemented design with the serial to parallel conversions. These

A. FPGA Implementation Analysis and Comparison

results indicate that the Hybrid/RU methodology generates a more efficient encoder design.

We took our design from the previous sections (Hybrid/Seq) The OpenCores design did not fit on the chip. It was a factor

and implemented it in Verilog HDL. This design consists of the of 2 larger than our design. Additionally, the G matrix methods MROM implemented as a ROM by using the Xilinx ROM block, ran for several days before running out of memory; therefore, TROM implemented as shift registers due to FPGA design con- they did not complete.

straints on memory implementations, and the computation Fig. 7 includes a picture of the Hybrid LDPC code encoder

computed immediately in a 5-Parallel hybrid LDPC code en- synthesized to the Xilinx Virtex 4 (xc4vlx25-12sf363) with se-

coder design. This method was compared with the fully par- rial to parallel converters. The OpenCores design used more re-

allel Hybrid/RU method. The RU method requires several ma- sources than is available in the FPGA; therefore, it has been

trix multiplications to compute but we have instead used the omitted. Additionally, the G matrix method did not complete Hybrid method which makes use of the matrix to compute . the synthesis phase of the design.

By simplifying the matrix multiplications from the RU method into one equation the matrix equation can be derived but it B. ASIC Implementation Analysis and Comparison

technically is not using the RU method anymore because then In order to achieve a fair comparison for application specific

it computes using the matrix. We believe a practical im- integrated circuit (ASIC) implementation we took a target ap-

plementation would take this simplification with or without the plication (RS (2048, 1723) LDPC code for 10 Gigabit Ethernet)

understanding that it is now using the matrix to minimize la- with a total cycle limitation of 80 cycles which requires at the

tency. Therefore, we are calling this method the fully parallel minimum a 5-parallel LDPC encoder and derived the following

Hybrid/RU method because it makes use of the G matrix but it architectural requirements listed in Table IV. Technically, the

does not make use of the folding techniques. Additionally we Hybrid method can be implemented in a 3-parallel fashion

implemented the G matrix method in VHDL and a fully par- without pipelining or a 4-parallel fashion with pipelining due to

allel pipelined Hybrid/RU method with the G matrix for cal- the relative sparseness of the T matrix (the first 86 rows contain

culating in Verilog for comparison. The Hybrid/Seq design a single one) but our comparison is for the unoptimized general

is compared to the fully parallel Hybrid/RU design we imple- case. In Table IV, the Hamming weights of the matrices were

mented, the fully parallel design published on OpenCores [30], used in computing the critical path and gate count, the matrix

and a 5-parallel G matrix multiplication method which we im- size was used in computing the ROM storage, and the number

plemented. We utilized Xilinx ISE 9.1i (www.xilinx.com) to of bits for pipelining was used in computing MEM for the

generate the statistics for a Virtex 4 FPGA. This allows us to LDPC encoders. For reference the values for implementing the

analyze our method compared to alternative methods and gen- fully parallel Hybrid/RU method are listed. This method was

erate useful statistics on the hardware requirements. The results optimized to use the G matrix for computing the value but is

in Table III were obtained by synthesizing only the LDPC en- identical to the parallel RU method after solving the equation

coder without serial to parallel conversions which are required for .

for implementation due to the limited pin count. The timing One of the main points to observe from Table IV is the sig-

analysis was performed with Xilinx Timing Analyzer on the im- nificant reduction in storage overhead (10% of Sequential G)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:24:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4092

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2009
TABLE IV ASIC IMPLEMENTATION COMPARISON

for the Hybrid Method by only storing the lower triangular T cycles per codeword. While this paper targeted a previous gener-

matrix. This is an extremely important result because instead of ation FPGA, this design requires a significant number of cycles

accessing (reading) 5 1723 bits per cycle we only read 5 324 and therefore is incompatible with the high speed implementa-

bits per cycle. Therefore, one can expect a 82% power savings tion requirement for 10GBase-T Ethernet.

(18% of prior power consumption) simply by reducing the ROM In [17], Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes were considered. This al-

size. Further power savings can be achieved through pipelining lowed the researchers to achieve performance over 10 Gbit/s.

[26]. Overall the hybrid LDPC code encoder achieves a decrease This paper did not include detailed synthesis results but it is sim-

in all aspects except XOR logic gate counts compared with the G ilar to the Fewer et al. code discussed previously.

matrix method. Another interesting point is that the total number

of gates (XOR, AND, and OR gates) has been decreased to 74% of

VI. CONCLUSION

sequential G matrix method. Finally the critical path is similar for both the sequential G and hybrid encoder methods with the hybrid encoder method achieving a slightly shorter critical path.
As for the ROM implementations, we are suggesting using shift registers for speed due to the sequential access required for the encoder design. While this will increase the power consumption it will minimize the critical path by allowing a static CMOS implementation of the ROM. If the critical path is not constrained then a dynamic CMOS implementation of a PLA network is possible for the ROM.
Generating meaningful ASIC implementation results will require a proper design flow for a 65-90 nm standard cell library.

This paper has presented a low-complexity Hybrid LDPC code encoder for IEEE 802.3an (10GBase-T) Ethernet. Unlike the prior LDPC encoder methodologies, our method is generic and will work with any LDPC code that can be reformulated into an approximate lower triangular form through row (or the less preferred column) swapping.
We have investigated several methods for implementing the ROM blocks such as programmed logic array (PLA) like methods and shift register methods. We found that the shift register method is best for FPGAs and ASICs when there is a higher level of parallelism because it makes use of nearest neighbor communication whereas the NAND-NOR methods

C. Comparison to Published Works

based on precharging work best for sequential ASIC designs. We investigated the implementation characteristics of mul-

The encoder design for Fewer et al., requires 614 slices with tiple LDPC code encoders on a FPGA. We found that the area

11 BlockRAMS for FPGA implementation or 17-k ASIC gates requirements for a fully parallel design were between 4 and

[15]. They reported a maximum clock frequency of 278 MHz. 6 times larger than a fully parallel Hybrid/RU design and 2

Our design targets a different FPGA therefore the implemen- and 3 times larger than an L-parallel design based on our Hy-

tation results are not comparable. The 802.3an design uses a brid LDPC code encoder method. Similarly, we found that the

LDPC code therefore the perfor- memory requirements for the G matrix multiplication technique

mance of the Fewer et al. architecture should be closer to their exceeded the requirements for our Hybrid LDPC code encoder.

rate 0.75 design given as 3.34 Gbps throughput. Analyzing their We further investigated the characteristics of multiple LDPC

design it appears to require 575 cycles per codeword. This is sig- code encoders for application specific integrated circuit (ASIC)

nificantly slower than our sequential design which only requires implementations. We found that the Hybrid LDPC code en-

. Their estimate on the ASIC gates is higher coder achieves significant decreases in logic (74%) and storage

than our sequential design but lower than the parallel design. (81%) complexity while minimizing the critical path ( 10%).

Additionally, their simulation does not include results for BER Although we were unable to obtain power consumption results

less than which makes it difficult to compare their code’s for a 65–90 nm process we can make use of the analytical power

performance with the 10GBase-T LDPC code.

consumption models developed for our ROM to estimate the

The encoder design for Lee et al., requires 9513 edges, 1065 power consumption reduction to be 82% when using our Hy-

slices, 18 Block RAMS, and obtained a latency of 0.235 ms brid LDPC code encoder.

for a rate 2/3 code with block length of 2000 bits on a Xilinx After analyzing the FPGA and ASIC implementation char-

Virtex-II XC2V4000-6 FPGA [16]. This design is highly mod- acteristics, the Hybrid designs were compared with another

ular and reconfigurable and it can support Irregular and Regular encoder implementation. It was found that for FPGA and ASIC

LDPC codes using the RU methodology. Analyzing their design implementation the 10GBase-T LDPC code requires fewer

it appears to require (125 MHz 0.235 ms/codeword) 29375 clock cycles for similar area requirements.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:24:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

COHEN AND PARHI: A LOW-COMPLEXITY HYBRID LDPC CODE ENCODER

4093

Although more complicated LDPC encoder designs exist, it is not necessary to be constrained to their limitations. By using the best parts from two well-known methods on the RS (2048, 1723) LDPC code we have achieved a new Hybrid LDPC encoder which outperforms existing known methods (G matrix multiplication and the RU method) in terms of storage, area, critical path, and power consumption. We believe this new architecture may be extremely useful to other codes besides the published RS (2048, 1723) LDPC code for 10-Gigabit Ethernet but this requires further study. Some LDPC codes will benefit more from the proposed reformulation while others will benefit less. Exploring specific properties of codes that lend to better reformulations and implementations of encoders with low complexity is a topic that requires further study. Also exploring the effects of row and column swapping on decoder implementation is a topic that requires further study.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was carried out while the author was with Leanics Corporation, MN. The authors would like to thank the reviewers and the Associate Editor for their assistance with improving this paper by their valuable feedback on our manuscript.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[3] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dissertation no. 440, Dept. Elect. Eng., Linkoping Univ., Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[4] IEEE Standard for Information technology-Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems-Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Specific Requirements Part 3: Carrier Sense Multiple Access With Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications, IEEE Std 802.3an-2006 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.3-2005), 2006 [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org
[5] Draft Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and information exchange between systems-Local and metropolitan area networks-Specific requirements—Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications: Amendment 4: Enhancements for Higher Throughput, IEEE Unapproved Draft Std P802.11n_D3.00, Sep. 2007 [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org
[6] Unapproved Draft Amendment to IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems-Amendment for Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands (Amendment and Corrigendum to IEEE Std. 802.16-2004), IEEE Std P802.16e/D9, 2005 [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[8] M. Shaqfeh and N. Goertz, “Systematic modification of parity-check matrices for efficient encoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2007, pp. 945–950.
[9] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Encoders for block-circulant LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT’05), Sep. 2005, pp. 2300–2304.
[10] Z. Cai, J. Hao, P. H. Tan, S. Sun, and P. S. Chin, “Efficient encoding of IEEE 802.11n LDPC codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 42, no. 25, pp. 1471–1472, 2006.

[11] S. Kopparthi and D. M. Gruenbacher, “Implementation of a flexible

encoder for structured low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE

Pacific Rim Conf. Commun., Comput. Signal Process. (PacRim), Aug.

2007, pp. 438–441.

[12] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propa-

gation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans.

Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002 [Online]. Available:

http://ieeexplore.ieee.org

[13] J. Heo, “Analysis of scaling soft information on low density parity

check code,” Electron. Lett., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 219–220, Jan. 2003

[Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org

[14] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum-product and the

min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in

Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. (GLOBECOM) Conf., 2001, vol. 2,

pp. 1021–1025 [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org

[15] C. P. Fewer, M. F. Flanagan, and A. D. Fagan, “A versatile variable rate

LDPC codec architecture,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.—I: Reg. Papers,

vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 2240–2251, Oct. 2007.

[16] D.-U. Lee, W. Luk, C. Wang, C. Jones, M. Smith, and J. Villasenor, “A

flexible hardware encoder for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc.

12th Ann. IEEE Symp. Field-Programm. Custom Computing Mach.

(FCCM), Apr. 2004, pp. 101–111.

[17] Z. He, S. Roy, and P. Fortier, “Encoder architecture with throughput

over 10 Gbit/sec for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2006 IEEE

Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS’06), 2006, pp. 3269–3272.

[18] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Power reduction

techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43,

no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008 [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.

ieee.org

[19] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Block-Interlaced

LDPC decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” IEEE Trans.

Circuits Syst. II: Expr. Briefs, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 74–78, Jan. 2008.

[20] S. K. Gupta, J. Tellado, S. Begur, F. Yang, M. A. Inerfield, D. Dabiri,

J. Dring, S. Goel, K. Muthukumaraswamy, F. McCarthy, G. Golden,

J. Wu, S. Arno, and S. Kasturia, “10GBase-T for 10Gb/s Full Duplex

Ethernet LAN Transmission over Structured Copper Cabling,” in Proc.

2008 IEEE Radio Frequency Integr. Circuits Symp. (RFIC), Jun. 2008,

mm pp. 203–206 [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.ieee.org

[21] X.-Y. Shih, C.-Z. Zhan, C.-H. Lin, and A.-Y. Wu, “An 8.29

52

m mW Multi-Mode LDPC Decoder Design for Mobile WiMAX System
in 0.13  CMOS Process,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43,

no. 3, pp. 672–683, Mar. 2008 [Online]. Available: http://ieeexplore.

ieee.org

[22] C.-H. Liu, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Hsu,

and S.-J. Jou, “An LDPC Decoder Chip Based on Self-Routing Net-

work for IEEE 802.16e Applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits,

vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 684–694, Mar. 2008 [Online]. Available: http://iee-

explore.ieee.org

[23] G. C. Clark, Jr. and J. B. Cain, “Error-Correction Coding for Digital

Communications,” in ser. Applications of Communications Theory, R.

W. Lucky, Ed. New York: Plenum, 1981.

[24] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “Joint (3,k)-regular LDPC code and de-

coder/encoder design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 4, pp.

1065–1079, Apr. 2004.

[25] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of low-

density parity-check codes constructed based on reed-solomon codes

with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp.

317–319, Jul. 2003.

[26] K. K. Parhi, VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems: Design and Im-

plementation. New York: Wiley, 1999.

[27] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Joint code-encoder-decoder design for LDPC

coding system VLSI implementation,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Circuits Syst.

(ISCAS’04), May 2004, vol. 2, pp. 389–392.

[28] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding

system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst.—I: Reg. Papers,

vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.

[29] J. M. Rabaey, Digital Integrated Circuits: A Design Perspective. En-

glewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1996.

[30] T. Hawkins, Verilog 802.3an LDPC Encoder 2007 [Online].

Available:

http://www.opencores.org/projects.cgi/web/ldpc_en-

coder_802_{3}an/overview

[31] A. E. Cohen and K. K. Parhi, “Low-complexity hybrid LDPC code en-

coder,” U.S. Patent Application Publication 20070033485, Feb. 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:24:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4094

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 57, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2009

Aaron E. Cohen (M’05) received the B.S. degree in computer engineering from the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign, in 2002. He received the M.S.E.E. degree from the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities, in 2004 and the Ph.D. degree in 2007.
Currently, he is Project Manager at Leanics Corporation, Minneapolis. In 2005, he was a Research and Development Intern there working on 10–Gigabit Ethernet. Beginning in 2006, he became Project Manager and Senior Research and Development Engineer of the SBIR contract N06-086: Tactical Secure Voice/ Variable Data Rate Inter Working Function which focuses on developing novel solutions to secure Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). In 2003, he worked part-time as a Research and Development Intern for Medical Graphics Corporation, which is a medical device company located in Saint Paul, MN. His current research interests include security, voice over Internet protocol (VoIP), design of algorithms, VLSI architectures, and circuits for cryptography and communication systems, with emphasis on error-correcting coding, modular arithmetic, and finite field arithmetic.
Keshab K. Parhi (S’85–M’88–SM’91–F’96) received the B.Tech., M.S.E.E., and Ph.D. degrees from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, and the University of California at Berkeley, in 1982, 1984, and 1988, respectively.
He has been with the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, since 1988, where he is currently Distinguished McKnight University Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering. His research addresses VLSI architecture design

and implementation of physical layer aspects of broadband communications systems, error control coders and cryptography architectures, high-speed transceivers, and ultrawideband systems. He is also currently working on intelligent classification of biomedical signals and images, for applications such as seizure prediction, lung sound analysis, and diabetic retinopathy screening. He has published more than 450 papers, has authored the text book VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems (New York: Wiley, 1999) and coedited the reference book Digital Signal Processing for Multimedia Systems (New York: Marcel-Dekker, 1999).
Dr. Parhi is the recipient of numerous awards including the 2004 F.E. Terman award by the American Society of Engineering Education, the 2003 IEEE Kiyo Tomiyasu Technical Field Award, the 2001 IEEE W.R.G. Baker prize paper award, and a Golden Jubilee award from the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society in 1999. He has served on the editorial boards of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I AND II, VLSI SYSTEMS, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS, and Signal Processing Magazine, and served as the Editor-in-Chief of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I (2004-2005 term), and currently serves on the Editorial Board of the JOURNAL OF VLSI SIGNAL PROCESSING. He has served as Technical Program Co-Chair of the 1995 IEEE VLSI Signal Processing workshop and the 1996 ASAP conference, and as the General Chair of the 2002 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems. He was a Distinguished Lecturer for the IEEE Circuits and Systems society during 1996-1998. He was an elected member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Circuits and Systems society from 2005 to 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:24:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

