Reduced Complexity-and-Latency Variable-to-Check Residual Belief Propagation Decoding Algorithms for LDPC Codes

Jung-Hyun KIM†, Hong-Yeop SONG†
† Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea E-mail: †{jh.kim06,hysong}@yonsei.ac.kr

Abstract This paper proposes some new improved versions of node-wise VCRBP algorithm, called forcedconvergence node-wise VCRBP and sign-based node-wise VCRBP, both of which significantly reduce the decoding complexity and latency, with only negligible deterioration in error correcting performance. key words: LDPC codes, fast convergence decoding, dynamic scheduled decoder, RBP algorithm.
1. Introduction
Belief propagation (BP) algorithm for low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes [1] has received significantly attention, due to its near shannon-limit error correcting performance with reasonable complexity. Standard BP algorithm needs several tens or hundreds of iterations for the decoding process to convergence, which is not desirable because of high decoding delay. For that reason, scheduled BP algorithm was considered in earlier research. The most typical schemes are shuffled BP (SBP) [2] and layered BP (LBP) [3]. Both of them converge faster than standard BP.
Recently, a novel dynamic scheduled BP algorithm, named Residual Belief Propagation (RBP), was introduced in [4] and inspired several dynamic scheduled BP decoding schemes for LDPC codes, RBP decoding schemes [5], [6] and VCRBP decoding schemes [7], [8]. RBP decoding yields better error correcting performance and faster convergence than non-dynamic scheduled BP decoding. However, RBP decoding has some margin of improvement both in error correcting performance and in decoding complexity. The authors propose VCRBP decoding in [7] and [8] for advancing RBP decoding. VCRBP decoding reduces decoding complexity by removing additional computation and wasteful ordering. Moreover, VCRBP decoding improves error correcting performance by using variable-to-check message for calculating residual instead of check-to-variable message in RBP decoding. NVCRBP decoding presented in [8] has very close error correcting performance to VCRBP decoding with lower complexity. However, every BP decoding with RBP concept, including NVCRBP decoding, has higher complexity and latency per iteration than standard BP decoding because of calculating and ordering residuals.
In this paper, we propose reduced complexity and latency schemes of NVCRBP decoding, named forced convergence NVCRBP (FC-NVCRBP) and sign-based NVCRBP (S-NVCRBP) decoding. FC-NVCRBP decoding reduces the complexity and latency by skipping updating of convergent messages. S-NVCRBP decoding reduces the complexity and latency by using a new ordering measure based on the change of sign of message. We provide experimental ev-

idences that FC-NVCRBP and S-NVCRBP decoding have lower complexity and latency than NVCRBP decoding with very close error correcting performance.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present NVCRBP decoding for LDPC codes. In Section III, we propose reduced complexity and latency versions of NVCRBP decoding, FC-NVCRBP and S-NVCRBP decoding. Simulation results of all the different scheduling schemes are compared and discussed in section IV. Section V delivers the conclusions.
2. Node-wise Variable-to-Check Residual Belief Propagation For LDPC Codes
2.1 Dual-Min-Sum Decoding for LDPC Codes
Standard log-likelihood ratios (LLR) BP decoding for LDPC codes is achieved by exchange of messages between variable nodes and check nodes. For any check node ci and variable node vj that are neighbors, two message generating functions are defined as [1]:

mvj →ci =

mca→vj + Cvj ,

ca∈N(vj )\ci⎛

mci→vj = 2 arctanh ⎝

tanh

vb ∈N(ci )\vj

mvb →ci 2

(1) ⎞ ⎠,
(2)

where yj is the received signal and the channel infor-

mation of vj

is given as Cvj

=

log

(

p(yj p(yj

|vj |vj

=0) =1)

).

In the standard LLR BP algorithm, calculating check-

to-variable message is the most computationally extensive

part. So, we use dual-min-sum algorithm [12] to reduce the

complexity. The equation (2) can be replaced by:

mci→vj = f (mmin, mm ∗ in)

sign(mvb→ci ),

vb ∈N(ci )\vj

(3)

where f (mmin, mm ∗ in) =

mmin − α mmin

if m∗min − mmin < 2, otherwise,

mmin

=

min
vb ∈N(ci )\vj

|mvb→ci |,

978-1-4244-4378-9/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

76

Proceedings of IWSDA’09

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

vmin

=

arg

min
vb ∈N(ci )\vj

|mvb→ci |,

m∗min

=

vb∗

min
∈N(ci )\(vj

,vmin

)

|mvb∗

→ci

|.

The constant α can be selected to maximize the performance gains in the region of interest with respect to bit error rate (BER) or signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) [13]. By using a proper value of α, we can achieve a comparable performance with standard LLR BP algorithm as well as reduce the complexity in the interest region.
In the rest of this paper, we use the dual-min-sum algorithm for simulations of all the decoding schemes instead of standard LLR BP algorithm.

2.2 Node-wise VCRBP for LDPC Codes
RBP is an informed dynamic scheduling strategy that updates the message with largest residual first. For a message mk, the residual is defined as [4], [5]:

r(mk) = |m∗k − mk|,

(4)

where mk∗ is a newly computed mk by some update function. A message having a large residual would be located in a
part of the graph that hasn’t converged yet. Therefore, propagating the message first will speed up the process [5].
RBP was proposed for general serial message passing, not specifically for LDPC decoding. Several dynamic decoding algorithms inspired by RBP were presented in [5], [6], [7], and [8]. VCRBP decoding has the best performance and NVCRBP decoding has very close performance with lower complexity compared with VCRBP decoding [8]. So, we consider only NVCRBP decoding in this paper. Detailed procedure of NVCRBP decoding is presented in Algorithm 1.

Algorithm 1 NVCRBP decoding for LDPC codes [7]

1: Initialize all mc→v = 0 and all mvn→c = Cn

2: Find the largest r(mv→c)

3: Let mvi→cj be chosen

4: for every ck ∈ N(vi) do

5:

Set r(mvi→ck ) = 0

6: for every va ∈ N(ck)\vi do

7:

Generate and propagate mck→va

8:

for every cb ∈ N(va)\cj do

9:

Generate and propagate mva→cb

10:

Compute r(mva→cb )

11: end for

12: end for

13: end for

14: if Stopping rule is not satisfied then

15: Go back to line 2;

16: end if

NVCRBP decoding simultaneously propagates all the variable-to-check messages corresponding to the chosen

1

2

i

a

a

1

2

i

a

a

1

2

jk

k

1

2

3

j

b

b

b

Fig. 1: The procedure of NVCRBP decoding for LDPC codes

variable node instead of only a variable-to-check message corresponding to the chosen edge in VCRBP decoding. NVCRBP decoding is similar to SBP decoding. The main difference between SBP and NVCRBP decoding is that SBP decoding updates variable nodes sequentially according to a predetermined schedule while NVCRBP decoding selects next update variable node based on residual values. The procedure of NVCRBP is described in Figure 1.
2.3 Decoding Complexity and Latency
We compared error correcting performances of various decoding schemes with only same number of iterations in [7] and [8]. However, RBP and VCRBP decoding schemes have a higher complexity per iteration than standard BP decoding. So, we also analyze and simulate error correcting performances of BP, NRBP and NVCRBP decoding with real same decoding complexity. Table 1 shows their approximate decoding complexities in one iteration. Each brief numerical expression denotes the number of computing mc→v during one iteration. Here, dv is the average degree of variable nodes and dc is the average degree of check nodes. The result is reasonable because computing mc→v takes almost part in decoding complexity of LDPC codes. Figure 2 shows the performance of BP, NRBP and NVCRBP decoding with approximately same decoding complexity according to Table 1. We can see the fact that NRBP decoding does not guarantee better performance than BP decoding with real same decoding complexity even though it does with same number of iterations. However, NVCRBP decoding has significantly better performance with same decoding complexity as well as same number of iterations.
3. Reduced Complexity and Latency NVCRBP Strategies
3.1 Forced Convergence NVCRBP Decoding for LDPC Codes
Forced convergence takes another approach to reduce decoding complexity by exploiting the fact that a large number of variable nodes converge to a strong belief after a very few iterations, i.e., these bits have already been decoded reliably and we can skip updating their messages in subsequent iterations. This fact is already considered in [9], [10], and [11]. However, the authors used the magnitude of messages to determine whether messages converge or not and they fixed bits in subsequence iterations. Because of that reason, if

77
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table 1: Approximation of decoding complexity

BP

NRBP

NVCRBP

The number of computing an mc→v in one iteration The number of maximum iterations × The number of computing an mc→v
in one iteration = Approximate decoding complexity (in Fig. 2)

1

(dv − 1)(dc − 1) + 1

dc − 1

100 × 1 8 × ((3.17 − 1)(6.33 − 1) + 1) 19 × (6.33 − 1)

= 100

100

101

Frame Error Rate − IEEE 802.16e(576)(1/2) 100 10−1 10−2

performance gain compared with non-dynamic scheduling methods. However, calculating and ordering of all the residuals in these algorithms are time-consuming part. To reduce the complexity and latency, we propose a new dynamic scheduling scheme named sign-based NVCRBP (SNVCRBP) decoding. For simplifying the algorithm, we define a new measure s(·) as follows:

10−3

10−4

NRBP (iter.8)

BP(iter.100)

10−5

NVCRBP (iter.19)

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Eb/No (dB)

Fig. 2: FER performance comparison of BP, NRBP and NVCRBP decoding using IEEE 802.16e block length-576 rate-1/2 code with maximum 100, 8, and 19 iterations, separately

fixed bits are in error, the decoding of overall codeword gets serious negative effect. So, we propose the residual of messages as the decision measure of convergence. If a residual of message is smaller than rth, we can assume that the message has been converged and skip updating the message only in the current iteration but not in any subsequent iterations. (Here, rth is an adaptive constant value.) Moreover, we can reduce the latency as well as the complexity by excepting messages has a smaller residual value than rth on the candidates.
Since rth is an experimental value, it is not easy to estimate how much rth should be to achieve the goal performance. Therefore, we also suggest an approximate version of FC-NVCRBP decoding as following. Numerical simulation results show that many messages have very small residuals through iterations, which contribute little to overall decoding convergence. Because of that reason, we can achieve the goal performance with lower decoding complexity by using only a part of the whole messages which has enough large residuals. In addition, we can control the percentage of using messages according to the number of iterations.
3.2 Sign-based NVCRBP Decoding for LDPC Codes
NVCRBP and FC-NVCRBP decoding have remarkable

s(mv→c) = sign(mv∗→c) × sign(mv→c).

(5)

where if mv→c has a positive value then let sign(mv→c) = 1, otherwise if mv→c has a negative value then let sign(mv→c) = −1.
If s(·) = −1 at an edge, it means that the sign of the message reverses after update at the edge. If s(·) = 1 at an edge, it means that the sign of the message does not reverse after updating at the edge. S-NVCRBP decoding chooses a node including an edge with a negative value of s(·) for update. This is reasonable because sign reverse of a message represents large amount of change of residual value with high reliability. If no edge has a negative value of s(·), S-NVCRBP decoding will choose a node based on predetermined order. Therefore, every node will be chosen only once during one iteration. As the predetermined order, we use decreasing order of variable node degree because SBP decoding has a very good performance with that ordering. As a result, S-NVCRBP decoding does not need to calculate all residual values as well as to compare all residual values each other. Therefore, S-NVCRBP decoding maintains the merit of NVCRBP decoding while it reduces decoding complexity and latency.

4. Simulation Results
QC-LDPC codes designed in IEEE 802.16e standard [14] is used for all the simulations on AWGN. The code lengths are 576, 1152, 2304, and the code rates are 1/2 and 3/4. We show only the result of the length 576 and the rate 1/2 because all the codes have similiar trends. For the simulation of FC-NVCRBP algorithm, we took the approximate version of FC-NVCRBP mensioned earlier and used a half of whole nodes per iteration.
In Figure 3, FC-NVCRBP decoding outperforms NRBP decoding as well as standard BP decoding with the complexity and latency less than half of NVCRBP’s. SNVCRBP decoding also has very close performance with remarkable diminishing the complexity and latency compared to NVCRBP decoding.
We also checked the performances of all these codes

78
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Frame Error Rate − IEEE 802.16e(576)(1/2) 100

10−1

10−2

10−3

BP

10−4

LBP NRBP

FC−NVCRBP

S−NVCRBP

10−5

NVCRBP

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

Eb/No (dB)

Fig. 3: FER performance comparison of BP, LBP, NRBP, FC-NVCRBP(1/2), S-NVCRBP, and NVCRBP decoding using IEEE 802.16e block length-576 rate-1/2 code with at most 8 iterations

up to 50 iterations at 2.5dB. Proposed FC-NVCRBP and SNVCRBP decoding maintain the performance in the long run of iterations as well as in the early stage of iterations.
5. Conclusions
We propose FC-NVCRBP and S-NVCRBP decoding for reducing decoding complexity and latency of NVCRBP decoding. Simulation results show that proposed schemes offer good performance versus complexity and latency trade-offs. FC-NVCRBP and S-NVCRBP decoding guarantee very close error correcting performance with significantly lower decoding complexity and latency compared with NVCRBP decoding in only 8 iterations as well as sufficiently many iterations. As a result, we expect that FC-NVCRBP and SNVCRBP decoding would be very useful for speed up decoding as an improved practical technique.
Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (KOSEF) grant funded by the Korea goverment (MEST) (no. R01-2008-000-20578-0).
References
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, ”Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” IEEE Trans. on Comm., 53:209.213, February, 2005.
[3] M. Rovini, F. Rossi, P. Ciao, N. LInsalata, and L. Fanucci, ”Layered Decoding of Non-Layered LDPC Codes,” In Proc. 9th EUROMICRO Conference on Digital System Design, pages 537. 544, August, 2006.
[4] G. Elidan, I. McGraw, and D. Koller, ”Residual belief propagation: informed scheduling for asynchronous

message passing,” In Proc. 22nd Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence, MIT, Cambridge, MA, July, 2006. [5] A. I. Vila Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, ”Informed Dynamic Scheduling for Belief-Propagation Decoding of LDPC Codes,” In Proc. IEEE ICC 2007, Glasgow, Scotland, June, 2007. [6] Andres I Casado, Miguel Griot, Richard D Wesel, ”Improving LDPC Decoders via Informed Dynamic Scheduling,” IEEE Information Theory Workshop 2007, Lake Tahoe, CA, September, 2007. [7] Jung-Hyun Kim, Mi-Young Nam, and Hong-Yeop Song, ”Variable-to-Check Residual Belief Propagation for LDPC Codes,” IEE Electronic Letters, vol.45, no. 2, pp. 117-118, January, 2009. [8] Jung-Hyun Kim, Mi-Young Nam and Hong-Yeop Song, ”Variable-to-Check Residual Belief Propagation for Informed Dynamic Scheduling of LDPC Codes,” ISITA2008, The Langham Hotel, Auckland, New Zealand, December 7-10, 2008. [9] E. Zimmermann, P. Pattisapu, P. K. Bora, and G. Fettweis, ”Reduced Complexity LDPC Decoding using Forced Convergence,” in Proceedings of the 7th International Symposium on Wireless Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC04), Abano Terme, Italy, pp. 12-15, September, 2004. [10] E. Zimmermann, W. Rave, and G. Fettweis, ”Forced Convergence Decoding of LDPC Codes - EXIT Chart Analysis and Combination with Node Complexity Reduction Techniques,” in Proceedings of the 11th European Wireless Conference (EW’2005), Nicosia, Cyprus, pp. 11-13, April, 2005. [11] E. Zimmermann, P. Pattisapu, and G. Fettweis, ”BitFlipping Post-Processing for Forced Convergence Decoding of LDPC Codes,” in Proceedings of the 13th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO’05), Antalya, Turkey, pp. 04-08, September, 2005. [12] J.Li and X.D. Zhang, ”Reduced-complexity belief propagating decoding for low-density parity-check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 220-222, January, 2008. [13] Eleftheriou, E., Mittelholzer, T., and Dholakia, A., ”Reduced-complexity decoding algorithm for lowdensity parity-check codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 102-104, January, 2001. [14] IEEE C802.16e-05/0066r3,”LDPC coding for OFDMA PHY”.

79
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:22:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

