A Flexible Architecture for Multi-Standard LDPC
Decoders
Shuangqu Huang, Bo Xiang, Bei Huang, Yun Chen*, Member, IEEE and Xiaoyang Zeng, Member, IEEE

Abstract - Since Low-Density Parity-Check codes have nearcapacity decoding performance and very high decoding throughput, they have been employed as FEC coding scheme in many transmission standards for wireless communication, such as IEEE 802.22n, IEEE 802.16e, DVB-S2, and DTMB. This trend triggers the need for so-called multi-standard LDPC decoders. In this paper, a flexible architecture that supports multiple code rates, variable block sizes and is code independent for block-LDPC codes is proposed, based on rearranged TPMP algorithm,. By implementing a dynamically reconfigurable RPP U, our proposed architecture can be configured into row update or column update mode by time-division multiplexing. Consequently, the decoder achieves a high area and power efficiency. To verify our proposed architecture, a novel LDPC decoder which supports IEEE802.16e standard has been implemented. The results on a 0.18 um CMOS process show that the decoder occupies an area of approximately 13.7 mm2 and runs correctly at an maximum operating frequency of110 MHz, resulting in 98 Mbps decoding throughput}.
Index Terms - LDPC codes, TPMP, multi-standard, WiMAX.
I. INTRODUCTION
During the last decade, we have witnessed appearances of transmission standards for wireless communication, such as IEEE 802.11n, IEEE 802.16e, DVB-S2, DTMB, CMMB etc. Consequently, a single user terminal will be capable of receiving signals of multiple different transmission standards has become an important trend. Meanwhile, most of these transmission standards employ Low-Density Parity-Check codes [1] as Forward Error Correction (FEC) coding scheme for their excellent error-correcting performance and very high decoding throughput. This triggers the need of so-called multi-standard LDPC decoders.
Almost all of the research on LDPC decoder design so far has focused on one particular transmission standard, in which specific optimization are made to improve the decoder performance. Besides, most of the existing LDPC decoders have implemented on a partially parallel architecture. For example, decoders in [3] take advantage of inherent parallelism in the decoding algorithm and achieve high throughput. However, the structure of implemented decoder is code dependent and can only support a class of LDPC codes
IThis work was supported by the funding of the State Key Lab of ASIC & System under grant No. 20080202.
Shuangqu Huang is with the State Key Lab. of ASIC and System, Department of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Room 220, Rd. Zhangheng, Shanghai 201203, China (phone: 8621-51355194; fax: 862151355234; e-mail: 072052014@fudan.edu.cn).
Bo Xiang, Bei Huang, Yun Chen, and Xiaoyang Zeng are with the State Key Lab. of ASIC and System, Department of Microelectronics, Fudan University, Shanghai, China (e-mail: bxiang@fudan.edu.cn; 082052028@fudan.edu.cn; chenyun@fudan.edu.cn; xyzeng@fudan.edu.cn).

such as QC-LDPC codes. In order to design an architecture that is code independent, decoders in [4][5] have the moderate throughput requirements and enable a flexible LDPC decoder implementation. However, these architectures are not area efficient and the throughputs are less than architectures optimized for specific codes. In this paper, we present a flexible architecture targeting multi-standard LDPC decoder implementation, which is not dependent of the structure of block-LDPC codes. For improving area and power efficiency, we present a dynamically reconfigurable RPPA which is processing sequentially with a six-stage pipeline.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II first gives a brief overview of LDPC codes and its decoding algorithm, and then mainly addresses a rearranged TPMP algorithm. Section III proposes a flexible multi-standard LDPC decoder hardware architecture and its primary processing unit RPPA. Section IV shows the FPGA synthesis and VLSI implementation results of the proposed LDPC decoder. Finally, some concluding remarks are given in Section V.

II. LPDC CODES AND DECODING ALGORITHM
Low-Density Parity-Check codes are a class of linear block code defined by a M X N parity check matrix as shown in Fig. l(a), where M represents the number of LDPC check bits and N represents the number of LDPC codeword bits. The parity check matrix can be represented by a bipartite graph called

1 1 1 0 0 0 i o r c,
1 0 0 0 1 1 0 1 c1
o 1 0 1 1 0 1 0 c2 o 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 c3

Check Nodes

Variable Nodes

n(a) MX N seed matrix

/T[]" /_1(-5-)1

(b) Tanner graph

" Z,

~ 1 -. 1 ~:1 fu]:1 ..::': .., _--------- ~ ~-1-n-:1o-11I -1-m--1I41 1-n--z-1111----1:1 111-~ ~--1 :-111 t~ ~--1 :-1 11-1t[Q -m-1-,~ 1 1-f~,~I ''" --

l~z~1 _-

. ----iIQ·;----irz;r~~r----ifuJi~=:;

----J:-~~~J:-[-Q--j:-[~Q~::l!-~~l----l!~~i---- LJ"-',, I

1 fll21 nnu

:rQ::~

1 fTI41

11n15

"" ""

=

l]"'',, +' ,[]" ',',

I

t

I

I

I

I

I

'

,

,

,

(c) zM X zN Parity Check Matrix

(d) two superimposed sub-matrix

Fig. 1. Parity check matrix and its representation

Tanner graph as shown in Fig. l(b). There are two types of nodes in the Tanner graph, called check nodes and variable nodes. Each of the check nodes em (m = 1,.·· ,M) is connected

978-1-4244-3870-9/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

493 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:30:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

to variable nodes b; (n = 1,··· ,N), where elements of each row
in the parity check matrix are one.
A. Block-LDPC codes
The complexity of a fully parallel decoder based on parity check matrix in Fig. l(a) grows linearly with the block size and is impractical for long LDPC codes. To balance the implementation complexity and the decoding throughput, a block-LDPC code was proposed recently in most of modern wireless communication systems including but not limited to IEEE 802.11 n, IEEE 802.16e, DVB-S2, DTMB and CMMB.
As shown in Fig. l(c), for block-LDPC codes the parity check matrix is constructed from a M X N seed matrix from
Fig. l(a) by replacing each '1' in the seed matrix with azXz cyclic-shifted identity In with an offset's' and each '0' in the
seed matrix with a zXz zero matrix, where z is an expansion factor. We can call this kind of codes structured block-LDPC codes including QC-LDPC, AA-LDPC, etc .. Correspondingly, there are another kind of block-LDPC codes called unstructured block-LDPC codes including IRA-LDPC, HSLDPC, etc. that extensively exists in DVB-S2, CMMB and other communication standards, featuring high code rates and excellent performance. Same as the structured block-LDPC codes, most of the sub-matrices in unstructured block-LDPC codes are zero matrices or cyclic-shifted matrices, but there are several superimposed cyclic-shifted identity matrices as shown in Fig. 1(d). These special sub-matrices in unstructured block-LDPC codes will influence the decoding algorithm selection and the structure of LDPC decoder architecture.
B. Decoding Algorithm
The most typical LDPC decoding algorithm, known as Gallager's Two Phase Message Passing (TPMP) algorithm [1], passes messages along the edges of the Tanner graph in multiple rounds of updates between the two classes of nodes in Fig. l(b). Updating the nodes can be done with a canonical, two-phase scheduling: In the first phase all check nodes are updated, in the second phase all variable nodes respectively. In recent years, Turbo Decoding Message Passing (TDMP) [6] has been proposed for decoding LDPC codes. Unlike the TPMP, after the check nodes updating phase of TDMP is finished for one row-block, the messages are immediately used to update the variable nodes, whose results are then provided for updating the next row-block. Unfortunately, TDMP algorithm will suffer from data-collision for their Layered decoding flow when updating superimposed cyclicshifted identity matrix in unstructured block-LDPC although it has high speed of decoding convergence.
In order to efficiently decode any block-LDPC codes, we adopt a rearranged TPMP decoding algorithm, which is described in Algorithm 1. In the description of the algorithm, M(n) is the set of the neighboring check nodes for variable node n, N(m) is the set of the neighboring variable nodes for check node m, and N(m) \ n is the set N(m) with variable
node n excluded. For the /h iteration, In, Sh, R~n and Emn

denote the intrinsic message of variable node n, the posterior message of variable node n, extrinsic message from check node m to variable node n and priori message, respectively. The NMS denotes the Normalized Min-Sum algorithm.
Algorithm 1: Rearranged TPMP + NMS
Initialization: S~ = In, R~n = 0
Iteration: for i = 1 to T and No Convergence do for all check nodes Cm , m E {I, ..., M} do
E;;,~ = S~-l - R~~l R~n = NMSn'EM(m)\n (E;;,~,)
end for all variable nodes Vn , n E {I, ..., N} do
S~ = In + L mEM(n)R~n
end end Hard Decisions
III. VLSI ARCHITECTURE
A. Proposed Architecture
To balance the tradeoff between design complexity and decoding throughput, the best strategy is to have a partially parallel architecture design. This involves the creation 'z' parallel processing units in array. Fig. 2 shows the block diagram of proposed architecture, which is composed of four parts: 1) Central Controller, 2) memory banks including DI-
s. Mem, In -Mem, -Mem and Rev -Mem, 3) Parity Check and
Output, 4) RPPUs.

CFG

E:

Interface ~

23

Mem ~~""";';"'----t CtrlGen
Q)
"2
Eo
U RPPU Ctrl

Output Ctrl
Fig. 2. The proposed LDPC decoder architecture
A SIMD-based architecture has a control unit and a parallel processing unit array as proposed in paper [5]. Based on this design methodology, there are a Central Controller and 'z' parallel RPPUs constitute the main parts of our proposed architecture. The Central Controller, which generates the control signals of all other parts, has an inner finite state machine. The Parity Check and Output block achieves hard decision, parity check and data output operations. There are four memory banks: DI-Mem, which stores the decoding

494
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:30:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

instructions and the structure information from block-LDPC codes, will be addressed in Section III. B. The In -Mem, S; Mem and Rev -Mem, which are composed of many blocks of
memory, store In, Sh and R~n messages, respectively. The
RPPUs will be presented in Section III. C.

B. Decoding Instructions
The inner finite state machine of Central Controller has 12 states, i.e., standby, data configuration, a set of row update states, a set of column update states. To implement an architecture which is not being code dependent, we extract these states from the structure of block-LDPC codes and store them in DI-Mem as decoding instructions as presented in Table I. The Central Controller regulates all other parts operating in order based on these decoding instructions fetched from DI-Mem when decoding.
TABLE I
DECODING INSTRUCTIONS

Instruction
RUS CNUS CNU CNUO RUO CUS VNUS VNU VNUO CUO CFGP STDBY

description
Row Update Start Check Nodes Update Start
Check Nodes Update Check Nodes Update Over
Row Update Over Column Update Start Variable Nodes Update Start Variable Nodes Update Variable Nodes Update Over Column Update Over ConFiGure Parameter
STanDBY

C. Reconjigurable Pipelined Processing Unit
As depicted in Section II. B, the rearranged TPMP algorithm are divided into two decoding phase: row update (check nodes update) phase and column update (variable nodes update) phase, which correspond to check nodes processing units (CPUs) and variable nodes processing units (VPUs) respectively. At row update phase of iteration, the CPUs first receive the posterior messages and the compressed extrinsic messages of last iteration from Sn -Mem and RevMem. After executing the data recovery, data shift, addition and minimum search operations, CPUs pass the updated compressed extrinsic messages back to Rev -Mem. At column update phase, the VPUs first receive the updated compressed extrinsic messages and the intrinsic messages from Rev -Mem and In -Mem. After executing the data recovery, data shift and addition operations, VPUs pass the updated posterior messages back to Sn -Mem.
As presented above, there are four basic arithmetic units in CPU and VPU: 1) Data Recovery Unit (DRU), which recovers the extrinsic message from the compressed messages (minimum, 2nd-minimum, index, sign) stored in Rev -Mem, 2) Reconfigurable Cyclic Shifter (RCS), which right-shifts 'z' messages cyclically with an offset's' of sub-matrix in blockLDPC codes, 3) Finite Addition Unit (FAU), which achieves the addition operation with overflow control, 4) Minimum

Search

Unit

(MSU),

which

searches

out

the

minimum,

2n

d _

minimum, the position of minimum and the sign of the

updated extrinsic message.

Reconfigurable Cyclic Shifter

s'

Fig. 3. The proposed architecture of RPPU
In order to increase the hardware utilization, a Reconfigurable Pipelined Processor Unit (RPPU) has been proposed, which can be dynamically configured into row update mode or column update mode according to different updating phase, corresponding to CPU or VPU. As presented in Fig. 3, a RPPU is composed ofRCS, DRU, FAU, MSU and three 2-to-1 MUXs. The RPPU can be configured by these three 2-to-1 MUXs with time-division multiplexing. The row update mode and column update mode of RPPA are shown in Fig. 4(a) and Fig. 4(b).

~ Reconfigurable Cyclic Shifter

E

I

~

lS:I

I
t/)==

D!
D~ta-ReCOVery-U~it

(a) The row update mode

(b) The column update mode Fig. 4. The row and column update mode of RPPA
Since the RPPU processes row update and column update

495 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:30:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

sequentially, only single-port memories are needed for I n Mem, Sn -Mem and Rev -Mem in our proposed architecture instead of dual-port memories. All of these merits above will result in much efficiency for area and power.
In addition, to reduce the critical path of the RPPA, a sixstage pipeline structure is adopted including reading from memories stage and writing into memories stage. As a result, the decoding throughput is increased to a certain extent to meet the demands of system.

IV. RESULTS AND COMPARISON
To verify our proposed architecture, a novel LDPC decoder which supports IEEE 802.16e standard has been implemented on a Altera Stratix II (EP2SI80FI020C3) FPGA. As shown in Table 2, our proposed decoder could achieve a throughput of 56.6 Mbps when decoding a rate-I/2 2304-bit LDPC code at 73 MHz and 15 iterations.
TABLE II FPGA IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

Parameters
Block Size Code Rate Sub-Matrix Size Throughput/Mbps Freq uency /MHz ALUs Registers Memory Size/bits DSPs

Proposed
576:96:2304 1/2, 2/3A, 2/3B, 3/4A, 3/4B, 5/6
24:4:96 56.6 73
40,138 15,594 76,032
o

TABLE III COMPARISONS OF LDPC DECODERS

Parameters
Algorithm Block Size Code Rate Sub-Matrix Size Parity Check Matrix Area/mm2 Memory Size/bits NMC Maximum Frequency Throughput/Mbps @Fre./MHz, Iter. CMOS Technology

Proposed

[2]

[7]

TPMP,NMS TPMP,NMS TPMP,NMS

576:96:2304

1/2, 2/3A, 2/3B, 3/4A, 3/4B, 5/6

24:4:96

Block-LDPC QC-LDPC

QC-LDPC

13.7

8.29

6.25

76,032

89,856

5.5

6.5

110

83.3

150

98@110, 15 60 @83.3, 8 105@150,20

180nm, l.8V 130nm,I.2V 90nm, l.OV

Fig. 5 shows the VLSI layout view of the LDPC decoder. Table 3 compares this decoder with the state-of-the art LDPC decoders of [2] and [7].

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have proposed a multi-standard decoder architecture which supports multiple code rates, variable block sizes and is code independent of block-LDPC codes based on a rearranged TPMP decoding algorithm. By implementing a dynamically reconfigurable RPPA, our proposed decoder features high hardware utilization, high memory and power efficiency. This novel architecture has been implemented on a decoder which supports IEEE 802.16e standard, and can be applied to other multi-standard LDPC decoder scheme.

This LDPC decoder has also been synthesized on a SMIC

O.I8um I.8V 6-metal layer CMOS technology. The VLSI

implementation results show that the proposed decoder

occupies an area of 13.7 mrrr' and achieves a maximum

decoding throughput of 98Mbps at an operating frequency of

110 MHz with maximum 15 iterations.

To compare the efficiency of memory capacity, we give a

normalized parameter as Normalized Memory Capacity

(NMC) , which is defined in (1). Nmb, N; and L denote the total memory size, the number of quantization bits and block

size, respectively.

NMC=_mN_b_

(1)

t.-:»,

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, "Low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] X.-Y. Shih, C.-Z. Zhan, C.-H. Lin, and A.-Y. Wu, "An 8.29mm 2 52-mW Multi-mode LDPC Decoder Design for Mobile Wi MAX System in 0.13 urn CMOS Process," IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 672-683, Mar. 2008.
[3] Y. Sun and 1. R. Cavallaro, "A low-power I-Gbps reconfigurable LDPC decoder design for multiple 4G wireless standards," in IEEE International SOC Conference, Sep. 2008, pp. 367-370.
[4] S. M. E. Hosseini, K. S. Chan and W. L. Goh, "A reconfigurable FPGA implementation of an LDPC decoder for unstructured codes," in 2nd International Conference on Signals, Circuit and Systems, Nov. 2008, pp.I-6.
[5] R. Priewasser, M. Huemer and B. Bougard, "Trade-off of decoding algorithm and architectures for multi-standard LDPC decoder," in 2008 Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, Oct. 2008, pp. 8893.
[6] M. Mansour, "A Turbo-Decoding Message-Passing Algorithm for Sparse Parity-Check Codes," IEEE Trans. On Signal Processing, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4376-4392, Nov. 2006.
[7] C.-H. Liu, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Hsu, S.-1. Jou, "An LDPC Decoder Chip Based on Self-Routing Network for IEEE 802.16e Applications," IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuit, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 684-694, Mar. 2008.

i

I

I

, I I...,L :tIl LILli' I I I I

Fig. 5. VLSI layout view of the proposed LDPC decoder

496
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:30:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

