IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 45, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2009

3699

Construction of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes and the Performance on the PR4-Equalized MRC Channel
Xingcheng Liu, Weibo Zhang, and Zhiyong Fan
Department of Electronic and Communications Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510275, China
In this paper, we constructed a type of parity-check matrices of QC-LDPC codes based on the progressive edge-growth (PEG) algorithm with suggested unreliable factors incorporated. The proposed algorithm can eliminate short cycles efficiently and gain low errorfloors. With this method, we can avoid the unreliable information transferred in decoding as far as possible. The proposed QC-LDPC codes are hardware-friendly due to the benefit from the quasi-cyclic structure of such codes. Simulation results demonstrate that the codes constructed with the proposed algorithm have better performance than those constructed with the PEG algorithm over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and the PR4-equalized magnetic recording channel (MRC).
Index Terms—Bit error rate (BER), MRC channel, progressive edge-growth (PEG), quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, Tanner graph.

I. INTRODUCTION

L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were originally proposed by Gallager [1] in 1962, and rediscovered by Mackay and Neal [2] in 1996. LDPC codes are a class of Shannon-limit approaching codes when decoding with soft-decision belief propagation algorithms. LDPC codes have got wide applications in information transmission and in magnetic recording due to their superior performance.
LDPC codes constructed with random construction methods, progressive edge-growth (PEG) for example, require a large amount of memory to store parity-check matrices when the length of codes employed is very long. The positions of 1’s in the parity check matrix constructed with the PEG algorithm are fully random, which incurs a high complexity for Very Large Scale Integrated circuits (VLSI) implementation. But structured LDPC codes can reduce the complexity of encoders and decoders, which makes the hardware implementation easily.
It is known that quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes can reduce the complexity of encoding and decoding, and lower the memory space occupation [3]. However, the code word length and code rate can not be determined flexibly because there are restrictions in the corresponding design rules of the parity-check matrix [4]. What is worse, the error-correction performance of the QC-LDPC code is not comparable to that of the randomly constructed ones, especially when the code rate is high.
The random QC-LDPC codes proposed by Li et al. [5] have good performance over the AWGN channel while our further simulation results showed that such codes were inferior to the PEG codes over the magnetic recording channel. Considering the error-correction performance, complexity of encoding and decoding, difficulty in hardware implementation and scalability of parameters choice, an efficient algorithm for constructing QC-LDPC codes with flexible code lengths and code rates is proposed.
Manuscript received March 04, 2009; revised April 10, 2009 and April 25, 2009. Current version published September 18, 2009. Corresponding author: X. Liu (e-mail: isslxc@mail.sysu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2009.2023422

Fig. 1. Relationship between the parity-check matrix and the Tanner graph. (a) The parity-check matrix. (b) The Tanner graph.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The main idea of the original PEG algorithm and the QC-LDPC code is introduced in Sections II. The progressed construction method of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on the PEG algorithm is introduced in Section III. Our simulation results are presented in Section IV, while the conclusions are drawn in Section V.

II. LDPC CODES, PEG ALGORITHM, AND QC-LDPC CODES

A. LDPC Codes

LDPC codes can be represented by bipartite graphs [6]. The

corresponding relation between the parity-check matrix and

the Tanner graph can be shown in Fig. 1 as an example. The

matrix of dimension

has check nodes and symbol

nodes in the Tanner graph.

A bipartite graph is denoted as a set consisting of nodes

and edges , where includes symbol nodes and check nodes,

is a set of check nodes

, and

is a set of symbol nodes

[6]. The set, , is composed of edges between check nodes and

symbol nodes. If

, where is the element of the th row

and the th column in parity-check matrix , there is an edge

placed between check node and symbol node . The connected

edges from node to node are defined as a path. The number of

edges in a path is called the length of this path. A closed path in

the Tanner graph is called a cycle. As shown in Fig. 1, the dashed

line forms a cycle of length 6. Cycles, especially short ones,

degrade the performance of LDPC decoders because the cycles

affect the independence of the extrinsic information exchange

in iterative decoding. Hence, the LDPC codes with large girth

are desired. The girth of a Tanner graph is the length of the

0018-9464/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:18:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3700

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 45, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2009

shortest cycle in the graph. An extrinsic check node of a symbol node set is the one that is only connected to this symbol node set once [7]. The extrinsic message degree (EMD) of a symbol node set is defined as the number of extrinsic check nodes of this symbol node set. Based on this definition, the EMD of a cycle is the EMD of a symbol node set, where the symbol node set is composed of the symbol nodes participating in the cycle.

been discussed above, it is known that the parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC code can be obtained easily if all the crit-
ical columns are specified. The next issue is how to determine the critical columns of matrix . In the following, we will propose an algorithm for constructing QC-LDPC codes with low error-floors.

B. PEG Algorithm
The PEG algorithm, proposed by Hu et al. [6], is a wellknown random construction method of LDPC codes. In this algorithm, the neighborhood of the symbol node within depth is defined as , which is composed of all check nodes reached by a subgraph spreading from symbol node within depth . The check nodes that can not be accessed within levels make up of a complementary set of check nodes, , where

III. PROPOSED QC-LDPC CODES
The construction with the proposed algorithm can be divided into four steps. First, the candidate check node set is searched based on the PEG algorithm. Then in step 2, some measurements are taken to guarantee a large girth and reduce short cycles in the parity-check matrix. In step 3, the cycles with the maximum EMD in the current graph are obtained. Finally in step 4, the transferring of unreliable information is tried to be avoided. In the proposed algorithm, the cyclic-shift identity ma-

. When constructing an LDPC parity-check ma- trix and the full-zero matrix of dimension

are used as the

trix with the PEG algorithm, we expand the tree originating from sub-matrix of parity-check matrix to avoid creating the cycle set

symbol node up to depth under the current graph. When [9] inside the sub-matrix. For this reason, any check nodes in the

and

, or the cardinality of stops in- set

should not

creasing but is smaller than the number of check nodes, it is be connected to if there has been an edge between and

necessary to select the check node with the lowest degree from when adding an edge to . Here, the set is called the limit

the set . In brief, the PEG algorithm implementation tries to check node set.

optimize the girth during the edge growth.

For any critical column (symbol node) , steps 1–4 are executed to select check nodes to connect to . Here are the details

C. Parity-Check Matrix of QC-LDPC
The characteristics of parity-check matrices constructed with random construction methods make it difficult to be implemented with hardware. To alleviate the problem, the quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) code that can be easily implemented with hardware is the preferable one. The parity-check matrix of the QC-LDPC code [8] can be constructed in the form of the following:

of the algorithm.

Step 1: When adding the first edge, the check node with

the lowest degree in current graph is found, and it is connected

to [10]. For other edges, the tree originating from symbol

node up to depth is expanded under the current graph. If the

cardinality of

stops increasing but is smaller than the

total number of the check nodes, check node is selected from

the set

randomly. If

but

,

the check node set

is denoted as .

When any choice of from is valid, a judicious selection

of is crucial to achieving code words with as few short cycles

...

...

...

as possible. Before moving to step 2, the principle of this step is to be clarified by examples.
Fig. 2(a) shows that symbol node has only three candidate

where and are two positive integers with

nodes ; the sub-ma- a

and at depth . Anyone of them will create -cycle when it connects to symbol node . There

trix, , is the circulant permutation matrix obtained through is a path with length between and , length be-

cyclically shifting each column of the circulant matrix by

tween and , length between and , where

times, here is an

square matrix,

, and

. If is connected with and put

. Each column of

can as the current edge as shown in Fig. 2(b), the next edge of

be obtained by cyclic-shifting the previous column above it, and will be connected with , and adding the latter edge between

the first column is the one by cyclic-shifting the last column. For and will create a

-cycle. However, when is con-

this reason, the sub-matrix can be determined uniquely by any nected with and put as the current edge as shown in Fig. 2(c),

column of it. Denote the first column in the sub-matrix as the the next edge of will definitely decrease the girth of the cur-

critical column, the other columns of the sub-matrix as the rela- rent graph since is empty. This example illuminates that the

tive columns. Once the critical column is specified, the sub-ma- future edge selections vary in accordance with the current edge

trix is also determined. In the parity-check matrix , the th selections, which has different influences on the girth.

column can be denoted as the critical column of since the In Fig. 2(d), there are two candidate nodes and , both

column is composed of the critical columns of sub-matrixes, of which will create 6-cycles when connecting with . How-

here,

is an integer between 0 and , and ever, the choice of connecting with will form only one

is the dimension of the sub-matrix. Similarly, the other columns 6-cycle, while the choice of connecting with will lead to

of matrix are denoted as the relative columns. From what has two 6-cycles. As has been discussed, the number of such cycles

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:18:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: CONSTRUCTION OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES AND THE PERFORMANCE ON THE PR4-EQUALIZED MRC CHANNEL

3701

Fig. 3. Performance of the proposed QC-LDPC (1008, 504) code over AWGN.

C C Fig. 2. Examples to illustrate the principle of step 2. (a) s has three candidate
check nodes, (b) s connected with , (c) s connected with , and (d) s has two candidate check nodes.

of a node is. In our algorithm, the value of a node is defined

as

, where, is the number of cycles in which

the node participates, is the length of the th cycle. Similarly,

is defined as the unreliable factor of a cycle, where is the

sum of of the nodes in this cycle.

Step 4: For each check node in , enumerate its paths to ,

which can be easily obtained from step 3. The check nodes that

form the cycles with the smallest unreliable factor are denoted

as . Finally, the check node connected to can be selected

from the randomly.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

can be different even if each candidate nodes create cycles with In our simulation, two groups of

LDPC codes, (1008,

the same length.

504) and (4608, 4096), are constructed, where is the length of

Step 2: For each check node in , its influence on the cycle the code words and

is the length of the information

length and the number of short cycles on the future edge growths bits. For these two codes, the Tanner graph is generated with a

is considered. (To make the search computationally feasible, we uniform symbol node degree

. To make the comparison

only consider the influence on the next edge adding.) We can fair, the code words are constructed with the same parameters.

try every possible edge to as the temporary current edge, Simulations are carried out with the BPSK modulation over

and then attempt to add the temporary next edge to . Using the AWGN channel and PR4-equalized magnetic recording

back-tracking and recursion, we can store the number and length channel [11], [12]. For encoding of LDPC codes, the Gaussian

of cycles resulted from every temporary current edge and next elimination is employed to yield the generator matrix while the

edge. Based on the information stored, the check nodes creating sum-product algorithm is adopted for the iterative decoding.

the largest girth and least cycles will be selected to form a check The maximum number of iterations for decoders is set to 80.

node set, which is denoted as .

To make the statistics credible, each BER was counted by

Step 3: In this step, we make an analysis of EMD when cycle collecting at least 10 error blocks.

forming is inevitable. For each check node in , we find all Fig. 3 compares the BER/FER performance of the proposed

paths to and denote all the symbol nodes of the cycle paths QC-LDPC code to that of the QC-random code [5] and the orig-

as symbol nodes set. Then we compare the EMD of the cycles inal PEG code [6]. The proposed QC-LDPC code is constructed

created by the distinct check node connected to since the with the circulant size 56 56 (i.e., 56). In this figure, the

EMD can be calculated by enumerating the check nodes that are proposed codes behave excellently. In the high SNR region, the

uniquely connected to the symbol nodes set. The check nodes proposed codes gain about 0.1 dB compared with the LDPC

that generate the cycles with maximum EMD are selected from codes constructed with the random PEG algorithm while they

to form a check node set, which is denoted as .

also lower the error-floors significantly.

As for step 4, an unreliable factor, , is defined to measure Figs. 4 and 5 show the BER/FER performance of the LDPC

the reliability of information of a node. The value of a node is codes with

, and

with the BPSK

related to the number of cycles in which the node participates, modulation over the PR4-equalized magnetic recording channel

and to the length of these cycles. For a node in a cycle, it is clear with user density

and

, respectively. As

that the value will increase as the length of the cycle decreases. shown in the figures, the proposed codes have better perfor-

The larger the value is, the less reliability of the information mance than those constructed with the random PEG algorithm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:18:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3702

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 45, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2009

and saves memory space due to the quasi-cyclicity of the parity-check matrices in structure. By increasing the girth, decreasing the number of cycles in , and optimizing the selection of check nodes, the proposed algorithm lowers the error-floors significantly and has better performance than the PEG algorithm. The idea of optimizing the node selections in the proposed algorithm can be applied to other QC-LDPC code constructions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

= 2 0 Fig. 4. Performance of the proposed QC-LDPC (4608, 4096) code over PR4-

equalized magnetic recording channel with user density S

:.

= 2 5 Fig. 5. Performance of the proposed QC-LDPC (4608, 4096) code over PR4-

equalized magnetic recording channel with user density S

:.

[6] and the random QC-LDPC algorithm [5] over the magnetic recording channel. Furthermore, the proposed algorithm is superior over the traditional PEG algorithm in terms of hardware implementation.
V. CONCLUSION
The LDPC codes generated with random construction methods such as the PEG algorithm have random structures, which leads to high complexity in encoding implementation with hardware. The proposed algorithm alleviates this problem

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 60673086, 60711140419). The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their constructive opinions in improving this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[4] L. Lan, Y.-Y. Tai, S. Lin, B. Memari, and B. Honary, “New constructions of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on special classes of BIBD’s for the AWGN and binary erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 39–48, Jan. 2008.
[5] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems and Computers, Monterey, CA, Nov. 7–10, 2004, vol. 2, pp. 1990–1994.
[6] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[7] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comm., Alaska, May 2003, vol. 5, pp. 3125–3129.
[8] S. Myung and K. Yang, “A combining method of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes by the Chinese remainder theorem,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 823–825, Sep. 2005.
[9] E. Sharon and S. Litsyn, “Constructing LDPC codes by error minimization progressive edge growth,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 359–368, Mar. 2008.
[10] Y.-K. Lin, C.-L. Chen, Y.-C. Liao, and H.-C. Chang, “Structured LDPC codes with low error floor based on PEG Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Syst., Seattle, WA, May 2008, pp. 1846–1849.
[11] H. K. Thapar and A. M. Patel, “A class of partial response systems for increasing storage density in magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 3666–3668, Sep. 1987.
[12] W.-E. Ryan, “Optimal code rates for concatenated codes on a PR4equalized magnetic recording channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, no. 6, pp. 4044–4049, Nov. 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:18:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

