TSINGHUA SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY ISSNll1007-0214ll02/18llpp556-560 Volume 14, Number 5, October 2009

Multistep Linear Programming Approaches for Decoding Low-Density Parity-Check Codes*

LIU Haiyang (刘海洋)**, MA Lianrong (马连荣)†, CHEN Jie (陈 杰)
Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100029, China; † Department of Mathematical Sciences, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Abstract: The problem of improving the performance of linear programming (LP) decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is considered in this paper. A multistep linear programming (MLP) algorithm was developed for decoding LDPC codes that includes a slight increase in computational complexity. The MLP decoder adaptively adds new constraints which are compatible with a selected check node to refine the results when an error is reported by the original LP decoder. The MLP decoder result is shown to have the maximum-likelihood (ML) certificate property. Simulations with moderate block length LDPC codes suggest that the MLP decoder gives better performance than both the original LP decoder and the conventional sum-product (SP) decoder.
Key words: low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes; linear programming (LP); LP decoding; pseudocodeword; maximum-likelihood (ML) certificate property

Introduction
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, a class of graphical codes first introduced by Gallager[1] in the early 1960s, have drawn much interest in the past few years. Long block length LDPC codes are capacity-approaching when used with message passing iterative decoding algorithms such as the sum-product (SP) algorithm[2,3]. However, these decoding algorithms may give poor results for moderate or short block length LDPC codes. Recently, Feldman et al.[4,5] proposed a class of algorithms for decoding LDPC codes based on linear programming called linear programming (LP) decoding. LP decoding is a relaxation of the maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding problem. Precisely speaking, the solution of an LP decoder has the
Received: 2008-06-02; revised: 2009-04-28
* Supported by the National Key Basic Research and Development
(973) Program of China (No. 2009CB320300)
** To whom correspondence should be addressed.
E-mail: liuhaiyang@ime.ac.cn; Tel: 86-10-82995607

ML certificate property, i.e., the solution is either an ML codeword or a nonintegral pseudocodeword. When the decoder outputs a nonintegral pseudocodeword, the decoder immediately declares a decoding failure. This certificate makes it easier to analyze the LP decoder than the output of the message passing iterative decoder. Theoretical comparisons of the LP decoder performance with that of the SP decoder[4-6] suggest that the LP decoder is comparable to the SP decoder. Moreover, LP problems can be efficiently solved using a variety of techniques, such as the simplex method or the interior point method. Therefore, LP decoding may be a valuable alternative to message passing iterative decoding algorithms.
In practice, however, it is found that the LP decoder performance is slightly inferior to that of the SP decoder for some LDPC codes[4,7], especially when the noise level is high. On the other hand, the ML certificate property of the LP decoding means that the result of an LP decoder can be refined by tightening the relaxation limit when a decoding failure is reported. Therefore, the LP decoder performance can be

LIU Haiyang (刘海洋) et al.：Multistep Linear Programming Approaches for Decoding Low-Density …

557

improved, which is the motivation for this work. This paper presents a multistep LP (MLP) decoding
algorithm that includes a slight increase in the computational complexity over the LP decoding algorithm. The MLP algorithm adaptively adds new constraints which are compatible with a selected check node to the original LP decoder when an error is reported. The MLP decoder result is shown to also have the ML certificate property. A criterion is then given for choosing the check node. Computer simulations with moderate block length LDPC codes show that the MLP decoder gives better performance than both the original LP decoder and the SP decoder.
1 Preliminaries
This section describes LDPC codes, Tanner graphs, and LP decoding of a binary linear code, which will be used in subsequent sections.
1.1 LDPC code and Tanner graph
Let C be an [n, k] binary linear code specified by an m × n parity-check matrix H = [hji ] . The rate of C is at least 1−m/n, with equality if and only if H has full rank. Of interest in this paper are (ρ,γ ) - LDPC codes,
which have a parity-check matrix H where all columns have weight ρ and all rows have weight γ . (Both ρ and γ remain bounded independently of the code
length n.) In addition, no two columns (or two rows) of H have more than one component 1 in common.
An equivalent but more convenient representation of the code C can be given in terms of its Tanner graph (or factor graph)[8], which is defined as follows. Let I ={1,...,n} and J ={1,...,m} be the indices for the
columns and rows of the matrix H. The Tanner graph G is a bipartite graph consisting of a set of variable nodes V ={vi|i ∈ I} and a set of check nodes C= {cj | j∈J} . The i-th variable node is connected to the j-th check node if and only if hji ≠ 0 . The neighborhood of a check node cj , denoted by N (cj ) , is the set of variable nodes that are incident to cj in G. Similarly, the neighborhood of a variable node vi , denoted by M (vi ) , is the set of check nodes that are incident to vi in G. We use N ( j) to denote the set of indices i such that vi ∈ N (cj ) and M (i) to denote

the set of indices j such that cj ∈ M (vi ) . It is not difficult to see that the Tanner graph of a (ρ,γ ) -LDPC code has | M (i) | = ρ for all i ∈ I and | N ( j) | = γ for all j ∈ J . We say a check node cj is compatible if
there is an even number of variable nodes in its neighborhood N (cj ) having value 1. Clearly, a
codeword x in an LDPC code C represented by Tanner graph G is a binary assignment to the variable nodes of G such that all check nodes are compatible.

1.2 LP relaxation of the ML decoding

This section describes the ML decoding of any binary linear code and its LP relaxation[4,5]. Consider a binary linear code C of block length n. If a codeword x ∈C

is transmitted through a memoryless binary-input out-

put-symmetric channel and r is the received vector, the

ML codeword is the solution xML of the following minimization problem[4],

min γ T x

(1)

x∈C

where γ is the vector of log-likelihood ratios defined

as

γi

=

log

⎡ ⎢ ⎣

Pr(ri Pr(ri

| xi | xi

= =

0) 1)

⎤ ⎥ ⎦

,

i∈I

(2)

Optimization theory gives that γ i can be interpreted as the cost of decoding xi = 1 . Since the cost function

in Problem (1) is linear, it is essentially equivalent to

min γ T x

(3)

x∈conv(C )

where conv(C) denotes the convex hull of C when C

is embedded in n . (Problems (1) and (3) are essentially equivalent because if there is a unique ML codeword, then the two minimization problems yield the same solution. However, when there are multiple ML codewords, the optimum set of Problem (3) is the convex hull of the optimum set of Problem (1). When using soft-decisions, Problem (1) seldom has multiple optima. The following discussion assumes that the minimization problems in Problems (1) and (3) have unique optimum.)
Since Problems (1) or (3) are practically intractable, Feldman et al.[4,5] proposed an approximation of this problem. The code C can be written as the intersection of m local codes C j ( j = 1, 2,..., m) of length n, where

C j contains all the codewords that satisfy the j-th

558

Tsinghua Science and Technology, October 2009, 14(5): 556-560

check node cj . Then, a less complex polytope P for

LP decoding is specified as the intersection of

conv (C j ) , i.e.,

∩m
P = conv (C j )

(4)

j =1

(It is interesting to note that the same polytope was also introduced by Vontobel and Koetter[6] as the fundamental polytope in the analysis of the message passing iterative decoder.)
Therefore, the LP relaxation of ML decoding can be formed as:
min γT x (5)
s.t. x ∈ P

The polytope P can be described either by a set of

inequalities or by a convex combination of its vertices. This paper will use an explicit description[5]. First, we

enforce

0 - xi -1 , for all i ∈ I

(6)

Then, for every j ∈ J , for all subsets V ⊆ N ( j)

such that | V | is odd,

∑ xi − ∑ xi - | V | −1

(7)

i∈V

i∈N ( j)\V

The following definition is needed to establish the
results. Definition 1[5] A polytope Q is proper for C if the
set of integral points in Q is the code C, i.e., Q ∩{0,1}n = C .

The following two lemmas hold. Lemma 1[5] The polytope P in Eq. (4) is proper for code C. Lemma 2[5] Every codeword in code C corresponds to a vertex of P. Note that the converse of Lemma 2 (i.e., every vertex of P is a codeword) may not hold in general, since the polytope P could have fractional vertices. A fundamental fact of linear programming is that the optimum of an LP problem can always be found at a vertex of the polytope P[9]. Hence, in LP decoding, vertices take on the role of pseudocodewords, the set of possible results that make the decoder sub-optimal. Definition 2[5] Every vertex of polytope P is defined as a pseudocodeword of the LP decoder. Remark 1 From Lemma 2 and Definition 2, any codeword is a pseudocodeword. Moreover, the set of codewords is a property of the code itself, whereas the set of pseudocodewords is dependent on the specific

LP decoder. When the optimum xLP of the LP Problem (5) is at
an integer vertex, it must be the solution of Problem (1), so it is an ML codeword. In contrast, if the optimum of Problem (5) is a fractional pseudocodeword, i.e., some components of xLP are non-integral, then
the decoder detects an error. This is then the ML certificate of the LP decoder.
Lemma 3[5] An LP decoder using a proper polytope has the ML certificate property that if the decoder outputs a codeword, it is the ML codeword.
The ML certificate of an LP decoder makes it easier to theoretically analyze the LP decoder than the conventional SP decoder[4-6].

2 Multistep LP Decoding Algorithm

In practice, the ML certificate property of the LP decoder is used to refine the result by tightening the relaxation when the decoder has converged to a fractional pseudocodeword vertex, which is the basis for this work. This section describes the MLP decoding algorithm, which adaptively adds new constraints that are compatible with the selected check node to the original LP decoder when an error is reported.
2.1 MLP decoding algorithm

The MLP algorithm starts by solving the original LP

decoding Problem (5). If the result yields an integral

codeword, the algorithm terminates. Otherwise, the algorithm chooses one check node cj of degree γ

with

C

− j

used

to

denote

the

set

of

all

configurations

that

satisfy

c j. In

other

words,

C

− j

is

the

restriction

of

the code C j to the coordinates in N ( j) . It is easy to

check

that

C

− j

is

a

[γ ,γ

− 1]

single

parity-check

code.

For

a

particular

codeword

(ci1 , ci2 ,..., ciγ

)

∈

C

− j

,

ik

∈

N ( j), k = 1, 2,...,γ , an LP problem is formed as:

min γ T x

s.t. x ∈ P,

(8)

xi1 = ci1 , xi2 = ci2 ,..., xiγ = ciγ

The feasible region of the LP Problem (8) is the polytope P′ , which is the intersection of the polytope P and the hyperplanes xik = cik (ik ∈ N ( j)) . Thus, the
polytope P′ is a subset of the polytope P.

LIU Haiyang (刘海洋) et al.：Multistep Linear Programming Approaches for Decoding Low-Density …

559

Lemma 4 The vertex set of P′ is a subset of the vertex set of P.
Proof The Lemma is proven for a special case where the polytope P is intersected by one hyperplane xik = 1 . The general case can be obtained inductively. Suppose x is a vertex of P′ but not the vertex of P. There must exist two distinct points y and z in P and t ∈ (0,1) , such that x = ty + (1 − t)z holds. Therefore,

xik = tyik + (1 − t)zik = 1 . Since y ∈ P , then yik is no

more than 1. If yik < 1 , then zik > 1, which is a con-

tradiction of the fact z ∈ P . Hence, yik = zik = 1.

Therefore, points y and z are also in P′ , which means

that x is the convex combination of two distinct points

in P′ . This contradicts the fact that x is a vertex of

P′ .

□

A (ρ,γ ) -LDPC code has 2γ −1 possible LP prob-

lems in the form of Eq. (8) for a particular check node

cj . Use GLP to denote this group of LPs. Then, define

the union set of vertices of these 2γ −1 LPs as V. The optimum of any of these 2γ −1 LPs can be found at

one vertex in V. The following theorem states that the solution of by solving these 2γ −1 LPs may give the

ML codeword.

Theorem 1 The optimum x of one LP problem in

GLP must be the ML codeword if and only if the fol-

lowing two conditions are satisfied: (1) The optimum

consists only of integers; (2) The corresponding objec-

tive value of the optimum is less than or equal to that

of the optima of all other LP problems in GLP.

Proof The necessity must hold, so only the suffi-

ciency is considered. Since x consists only of integers,

then x, from Lemma 4, is a codeword in C. Suppose x

is not the ML codeword, then its objective value z must

be larger than the objective value zML of the ML

codeword xML. However, since at least one of the LP

problems in GLP contains xML as a feasible point,

there must exist at least one LP problem in GLP whose

objective value z′ is not larger than zML. Therefore,

z > zML . z′ , which contradicts the second assertion

z - z′ . Hence, the sufficiency holds.

□

Remark 2 If the original LP decoder in Eq. (5) fails to find the ML codeword, then solve the 2γ −1 LPs in Eq. (8) and use xMLP to denote the optimum
whose objective value is the smallest in the group GLP. If xMLP consists only of integers, then it is the ML

codeword. Otherwise, xMLP is a non-integral pseudocodeword. Therefore, the result xMLP has the ML certificate property.
2.2 Criterion for adding new constraints

In practice, one check node cj must be chosen to

form the 2γ −1 LPs to use the MLP decoder when an

error is reported by the original LP decoder. A natural,

heuristic method was developed to choose the check node. Define M as the set of code bit indices i ∈ I

such that the i-th component of xLP is not an integer.

Then, choose the j-th check node such that the number of elements that are contained in both N ( j) and M is

the maximum. Define this check node as j*, i.e.,

j* = arg max | N ( j) ∩ M |

(9)

j

(If there are two or more maxima, randomly choose

one of them.)

The MLP decoding algorithm is as follows.
(1) Run the LP decoder in Eq. (5). If the optimum xLP is an

integral codeword, output it and terminate. Otherwise go to Step

2. (2) Obtain the set M from xLP . (3) Obtain the check node j* according to Eq. (9).

(4) Form the group of 2γ −1 possible LP problems (GLP) in

the form of Eq. (8). (5) Solve these 2γ −1 LPs and find the optimum xMLP with

the smallest objective value in GLP. (6) If xMLP is an integral codeword, output it; otherwise

output an error. Terminate.

Remark 3 The analysis in Section 2.2 showed that

the solution of the MLP decoding algorithm has the

ML certificate property. Moreover, the performance of

the MLP decoder is not worse than that of the original

LP decoder. The MLP decoder has to solve 2γ −1 + 1 LP prob-

lems in the worst case. Thus, compared with the origi-

nal LP decoder, the computational complexity increase

in the MLP decoder is not large, especially for LDPC

codes.

3 Simulation Results and Analysis

The decoding performance of the MLP algorithm was evaluated using computer simulations for an LDPC code on an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The test code is a (3,6)-LDPC code (code

560

Tsinghua Science and Technology, October 2009, 14(5): 556-560

96.33.966 in Ref. [10]) with block length 96 and code rate 1/2.
Figure 1 shows the word error rate (WER) versus Eb /N0 for the LP, SP, and MLP decoders, respectively. The maximum number of iterations in the SP decoder is set to 50.

certificate property. A criterion is given for choosing the appropriate check node. Simulations with a moderate block length LDPC code show that the MLP decoder gives better performance than the original LP decoder and the SP decoder.
When the MLP decoder fails to find the ML codeword, the relaxation can be tightened by adding more constraints that are compatible configurations of other check nodes. Future work will investigate how to choose these check nodes in order to give a good tradeoff between the performance and the complexity.
Acknowledgements

The authors thank Dr. Lu Ju for his comments that helped improve the quality of the paper.
References

Fig. 1 WER performance for a (3, 6)-LDPC code with length 96
The results show that the LP and SP decoders have similar performances. In the low SNR region, the LP decoder performance is somewhat inferior to that of the SP decoder. As the SNR increases, the performances of the LP and SP decoders are very similar for SNR is larger than a threshold, which in this case was about 3.7 dB.
Figure 1 also shows that that the MLP decoder outperforms both the SP and LP decoders. For example, at WER = 1×10−2 , the MLP decoder gives an approximate 0.2 dB gain compared with the LP and SP decoders. Therefore, if the bits in the check node whose neighborhood has the most non-integral pseudocodewords are locally compatible, then the decoding performance will be better.
4 Conclusions and Future Work
An MLP decoder was developed to improve the LP decoding of LDPC codes. The MLP decoder adaptively adds new constraints which are compatible with a selected check node to the original LP decoder to refine the results when an error is reported by the original LP decoder. The MLP decoder also has the ML

[1] Gallager R G. Low density parity check codes. IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, 1962, 1(8): 21-28.
[2] Richardson T J, Shokrollahi M A, Urbanke R L. Design of capacity-approaching irregular codes. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 2001, 47(2): 619-637.
[3] Richardson T J, Urbanke R L. The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 2001, 47(2): 599-618.
[4] Feldman J, Wainwright M J, Karger D R. Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 2005, 51(3): 954-972.
[5] Feldman J. Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming [Dissertation]. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2003.
[6] Vontobel P O, Koetter R. On the relationship between linear programming decoding and min-sum algorithm decoding. In: Proc. Inter. Symp. Inform. Theory and Applications. Parma, Italy, 2004.
[7] Yang K, Feldman J, Wang X D. Nonlinear programming approaches to decoding low-density parity-check codes. IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., 2006, 24(8): 1603-1613.
[8] Tanner R M. A recursive approach to low complexity codes. IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 1981, 27: 533-547.
[9] Bertsimas D, Tsitsiklis J N. Introduction to Linear Optimization. Belmont, MA, USA: Athena Scientific, 1997.
[10] Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes. http://www.inference. phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html, 2005.

