BIDIRECTIONAL INTERLEAVERS FOR LDPC DECODERS USING TRANSMISSION GATES
Kevin Cushon, Warren J. Gross, and Shie Mannor
McGill University Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Montreal, Quebec, Canada Email: kevin.cushon@mail.mcgill.ca.warren.gross@mcgill.ca.shie.mannor@mcgill.ca

ABSTRACT
Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes are used for forward error correction in several state-of-the-art and upcoming communications standards. This paper presents a new interleaver architecture for LDPC decoders, especially suitable for multi-mode codes such as IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) and IEEE 802.11n (Wi-Fi), that utilizes a bidirectional datapath and shuffle network composed of transmission gates. An implementation of this architecture for IEEE 802.11n achieves 28% area reduction and similar throughput compared to a unidirectional reference design.
Index Terms- Parallel architectures, error correction coding, decoding, very-large-scale integration
1. INTRODUCTION
In recent years, low-density parity check (LDPC) codes have attracted a great deal of interest in various applications, in large part due to their powerful error correction capabilities [1]. In particular, their ability to achieve near-Shannon limit performance in communications systems has led to their inclusion in several recent and upcoming standards, such as DVB-S2 [2], IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) [3], and IEEE 802.11n (Wi-Fi) [4].
The LDPC decoding process generally consists of iterative message passing between hundreds to thousands of variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes (CNs). The greatest implementation challenge for a decoder is the communication structure necessary to support this message passing. Straightforward fully parallel architectures require thousands of interconnections, leading to high wire overhead, congested routing networks, and high implementation cost [5]. Furthermore, many modern communication standards, like the three mentioned above, require decoders with the flexibility to adopt multiple codeword block lengths and code rates.
Modern LDPC code definitions take implementation difficulties into consideration through the use of architectureaware or quasi-cyclic (QC) codes, in which the parity-check matrix H is defined in terms of sub-blocks of permutation matrices. This greatly reduces wire overhead by providing

a simple, regular routing framework [6]. These codes allow decoder designers to further simplify the routing problem through size-performance trade-offs with partially parallel architectures [7]. Analysis in [8] shows that partially parallel architectures give several times more throughput per unit area than the equivalent fully parallel decoder.
Stochastic decoding, on the other hand, shows the potential to offer improved performance and reduced power consumption compared to decoders based on the sum-product or min-sum algorithms, with similar BER and throughput performance [9][10]. In stochastic decoding, decisions are based on the statistical properties of serial bitstreams - specifically, the relative frequency of Os and Is - rather than multi-bit loglikelihood ratios. Inter-node messages are only a single bit in width, making fully parallel decoding much more practical than with conventional decoders. However, the inter-node routing problem for these highly parallel architectures is severe, especially for multi-mode codes.
The architecture proposed in this paper aims to solve that problem by using tristate buffers and a bidirectional shuffle network architecture based on transmission gates. Both types of inter-node messages are transferred over the same wires, and through the same shuffle networks, on alternating clock cycles. Because this design halves the required number of shufflers and wires in the interconnection framework, the full advantages are realized in highly parallel decoder architectures. Thus, fully parallel decoders, such as those based on the stochastic [10] and bit-wise min-sum decoding algorithms [11], are the most well suited to this interleaver design. However, the bidirectional switch design is equally applicable to generic interleavers, and could be beneficial in any decoder design suffering from interleaver routing congestion.
The rest of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 offers a brief overview of the interleaving problem in LDPC decoders, and describes the function served by our proposed architecture. Section 3 describes our design in greater detail. Section 4 contains implementation results and a discussion of future work possibilities. Finally, concluding remarks are presented in Section 5.

978-1-4244-4335-2/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

232

SiPS 2009

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

" 16 17 22 2' s 3

•2 7

25 12 12 3 3 26 6 21

15 22

26 15

2

21

10

•

16

00

2 5 18 26 16 22 23 s

0

• • 8 23 11

00

• 7 0 1 17

73

3 23

16

21

0

00

2' 5 26 7 1

15 2' 15

8

13

13

11

00

" " " 2 2

2. 1 15

21

2

2.

3

21

0

Fig. 1. Model parity-check matrix Hbm for the IEEE 802.11n
(648, 162) (rate ~) code with sub-block size z = 27.

Variable Nodes

Check Nodes

Fig. 3. The bidirectional architecture used in this paper.

Fig. 2. Canonical LDPC decoder architecture.
2. LDPC INTERLEAVING
An LDPC code is characterized by a sparse parity-check ma-
trix H with dimensions M x N ; Hm ,n = 1 if codeword bit m
is involved in parity-check equation n, and 0 otherwise. It is common to describe LDPC codes by a Tanner graph, which shows the two sets of nodes with edges connecting them in accordance with the parity constraints specified in H . For each decoding cycle, two messages pass along each edge in this graph : the VN-to-CN messages and the CN-to-VN messages. The VNs store and update the bits of the codeword, while the CNs perform the parity checks on the bits input to them, then send the results back out to the VNs. The precise functions of the VNs and CNs depend on the decoding algorithm, of which there are several.
Let us consider quasi -cyclic (QC) LDPC codes, a type of architecture-aware code in which H is specified in terms of blocks of smaller permutation matrices. The permutation matrices used are circular right shifts of the identity matrix. For this type of code , the parity check matrix H can be compactly represented as a model matrix Hbm , in which each element
Pi,j represents a sub-matrix with dimensions z x z , where z
is referred to as the sub-block size. A blank in P i ,j represents a null sub-matrix, while a non-negative value P i ,j ~ 0 represents an identity matrix circularly shifted P i,j positions to the right. H bm can thus be directly expanded to H . Fig. I shows an example of a model matrix, representing the IEEE 802.11n
(648, 162) (rate ~) code with sub-block size z = 27. IEEE
802.16e uses very similar codes. A very simplified architecture for an LDPC decoder is
shown in Fig . 2. Each variable node (VN) sends out messages to the check nodes (CN), with the shuffler implementing the required interconnections. The CNs then gene rate the parity

check result and send it back through another shuffler, which reverses the shift performed by the first shuffler, thus sending the CN messages back to the originating VNs. This basic architecture has undergone several modifications and improvements while maintaining the same basic functionality, such as with split-row decoding [12] and broadcasting [13].
In a QC decoder, the VNs and CNs are divided into subblocks, and all node interconnections consist solely of circular shifts local to the sub-block. Support for multiple codes (or, in a partially parallel design, multiple rows of the same code) is accomplished through the use of shuffle networks. These shuffle networks connect their inputs and outputs together in multiple combinations depending on a selection input. In the context of QC codes, these combinations consist of a range of circular shifts, which additionally may be around multi ple block lengths. Hence, they are sometimes referred to as switch networks or circular shift networks .
Our bidirectional architecture, shown in Fig. 3, does not require the second set of shifters on the CN-to -VN path or the accompanying wiring. Instead, the internode-messages are driven over the same wires using tristate buffers. The shufflers, which would ordinarily be implemented using standard CMOS muxes in the unidirectional design, are implemented using one-hot transmission gate muxes. This design requires 2 clock cycles to complete a decoding cycle , since the VNto-CN and CN-to- VN message transfers can't take place at the same time. On the first clock of each decoding cycle, the VN-to-CN transfer occurs, and the result of the parity check is stored in flip-flops at the CNs . On the next clock cycle , the CN-to- VN transfer is driven back through the shufflers.
The same mux selection vector is used for both cycles. Fig. 4 illustrates a 3-bit circular shift network made of transmission gates , which can shift 0 or 1 bits to the left. When driven in "reverse" (CN-to- VN), the reverse of the shift performed in the "forward" (VN-to-CN) direction is applied. An alternative explanation is that since a transmission gate is logically equivalent to a switch, the shuffler connects the appropriate VNs and CNs together on a single bus wire.
Although this interleaver architecture can be used with any LDPC decoder, we chose to implement it for a stochas tic decoder of the IEEE 802.11 n codes for several reasons. The main reason is that this design is most advantageous for highly parallel decoders implementing multi-mode codes,

233
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

a[2]

all]

alO]

3. SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE

all]

a[O]

a[2]

a[2]

all]

alO]

all]

a[O]

a12]

Fig. 4. A circular shift network composed of transmission gates performs both the forward and reverse circular shift, depending on which direction the signal is driven.

x. -~--I
Fig. 5. Schematic of a check node with n bits.
since the most shufflers and wires will be saved. Stochastic decoders, besides being practical to implement in fully parallel by virtue of their single-bit-width messages [10], also have very simple check nodes; the complete check node function for a given bit is the XOR of every other bit. This is equivalent to the sign update function seen in the check nodes of other LDPC decoding algorithms, including the sum-product and min-sum algorithms. A schematic for this function is shown in Fig. 5.
IEEE 802.11n was chosen for the code because it is a high profile multi-mode code, with a size and complexity suitable
for our architecture. It has 3 codeword block lengths (n =
648, 1296, or 1944) and 4 rates for each length (R = ~, ~, ~, or ~) , for a total of 12 modes .
Previous research in LDPC interleaving has been focused mainly on partially parallel or block serial architectures. Since these designs require circular shift networks supporting a large number of shifts and sub-block sizes, they are typically based on the well-known Benes network, as in [14], or barrel shifters, as in [15] and [16]. These are unsuitable for highly parallel decoders, which require a larger number of less generalized shifters. Furthermore, these designs do not address the routing congestion problem that occurs in highly parallel decoders.

Our system implementation is divided into 12 separate row processors, so called because they each implement one row of H bm . This the minimum necessary to fully implement the
IEEE 802.11 n codes , as the rate R = ~ codes require 12
check node blocks. Each of these row processors is multimode and implements rows belonging to between 3 and 12 codes. Row 12 in our design implements the bottom rows from all 12 codes, while row 1 implements only the top rows
of the 3 R = ~ codes. The reason for this bottom-up superpo-
sition is to take advantage of commonalities in the right-hand side parity check portion of the Hbm matrices (referring back to Fig . 1, notice the dual-diagonal of zero entries on the right hand side - this structure is common to all 12 codes, so a bottom-up superposition completely eliminates the need for shufflers in that region).
Since each row processor is in parallel with and indepen dent from the others , this section will focus on describing in detail the architecture of a single generalized row processor.
A block-level row processor schematic is shown in Figs. 6 and 7. Fig. 6 shows the VN-to-CN (forward) operation, while Fig . 7 illustrates the CN-to- VN (backward) operation.
Before decoding begins, the decoder controller must select one of the 12 supported modes using the set input. This selection signal sets the code used in the interleaver. It controls both the input muxes and the transmission gate shuffle networks.
The interleaver cycle begins with the en-fwd signal being set to logic 1, and the VN blocks transmitting their messages into the input at the left side of Fig 6. Because not all VN blocks connected to the row processor necessarily contribute to the parity check in every mode, there must be a way to disable the VNs in question or prevent them from affecting the result. In a stochastic decoder, this can be accomplished by setting these bits to O. This task is performed by the input muxes.
The width of the datapath originating at each VN block
is equal to the sub-block size z of the current code, which
can be 27, 54, or 81. Since each block is re-used in multi ple modes, it must be able to support the sub-block size of the largest code it is used in. When a shorter code is active, the upper bits of each sub-block are disabled, along with the corresponding drivers and check nodes . The number of VN blocks contributing to each row processor is equal to the maximum row weight of the codes it implements. In this system, this number ranges between 10 and 22.
Next, the data flows through the VN-to-CN (forward) tristate drivers. Since en-fwd is set, the buffers are on and the data is driven onto the internal bus into the shuffle networks. The shuffle networks are circular shifters composed of transmission gates, in the same form as in Fig . 4. The shuffled data is then input to the XNOR tree. The XNOR output constitutes the (inverted) parity result, which must now be un-shuffled

234
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Inputs from VN Block 0
Outputs to VN Block 0

Backward (CN-VN) Drivers

Fig. 6. Top level block diagram of our bidirectional system, in VN-to-CN (forward) operation with the data flow highlighted .
sel

Inputs from

VN Block 0

FF

Outputs to

VN Block 0

Backward (CN-VN) Drivers

Fig. 7. Top level block diagram of our bidirectional system, in CN-to-VN (reverse) operation with the data flow highlighted.

and output back to the VNs. The result is stored in a register of width equal to the largest sub-block size supported by
the row. In this design, this width is Zmax = 81 for all row
processors .
On the next clock cycle, en.fwd is cleared and the CNto-VN (reverse) path is activated as shown in Fig. 7. The parity result passes from the register into the CN-to-VN tristate driver bank, and from there into the "back" end of the shuffle networks. In order to ensure a high clock frequency, each wire on the bus is driven by a dedicated inverter. The shuffle networks perform the inverse of the shifts that they performed on the previous cycle, after which the data carries on to the 2-input XOR intrinsic bit filters. As shown in Fig. 5, the final step in the check node computation is to take the XOR of the overall parity result with the bit that originated from each VN. The original bit is provided by the VNs themselves, which have been holding their state over the last clock cycle. These results serve as the interleaver output and are sent back to the VNs.
The internal structure of the transmission gate shuffle networks is essentially as shown in Fig. 4. Transmission gates with one-hot decoding connect every combination of frontand back-side wires needed to implement the required circular shifts. Redundant gates are merged, while unnecessa ry

ones (those connecting wires that do not connect to any other transmission gates) are optimized out. The decoders themselves take set as input and produce the one-hot control signals. The complementary signals are not required because our transmission gate standard cell includes an inverter.
4. IMPLEMENTATION
We synthesized the bidirectional interleaver system as described using the STMicro 90nm CMOS design kit and standard cell library. In order to quantify improvements over the equivalent unidirectional interleaver, we also synthesized a reference system with seperate VN-to-CN and CN-to-VN shuffle networks as per the architecture shown in Fig. 2. The reference system uses standard CMOS muxes to implement the shuffle networks. It also does not have sequential elements and thus completes one decoding cycle per clock cycle. Otherwise it is equivalent to the bidirectional system - both use the same set input and interface to the VNs. Both systems constitute a complete implementation of the interleaver and check nodes for a complete stochastic LDPC decoder.
Synthesis results for both systems are summarized in Table 1. The bidirectional system is 28% smaller overall than the reference system for an equal throughput in terms of

235
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table 1 Synthesis results

Bidir. system Reference system

Input

Cell area (pm 2 ) 7.63 x 105

1.06 X 106

Gate equiv.

144.2 k

199.7 k

f clk

729 MHz

364 MHz

Clocks per DC

2

1

DCs per second 3.64 x 108

3.64 X 108

.

~~

o

0

Table 2. Logic utilization

Cell type

Area (pm 2 )

Transmission gates 1.86 x 105

Tristates

2.08 x 105

Flip-flops

2.47 x 104

All other logic

3.44 x 105

decoding cycles (DCs) per second. The area savings arises mainly from the elimination of the second shuffle network. The transmission gate mux architecture does not actually result in any savings compared to standard CMOS muxes, due to the need for additional decoding logic.
The clock frequency of the bidirectional system was targetted to exactly double that of the reference system in order to compare area for equal throughputs. The frequency of the reference system is purely nominal; naturally additional area and speed tradeoffs can be made in both systems.
The cell area utilized by each category of logic for the bidirectional interleaver is shown in Table 2. Sequential elements account for only 3.3% of the total area. The shuffle network, and the tristates that drive it, account for more than half the total area. Note that the area figure for the transmission gates includes the inverters used to generate the complementary control signals. The remainder is made up of CMOS combinational logic.
The interleaver portion of the bidirectional system - consisting of the transmission gate shuffle networks, the decoders for the transmission gates, and the tristate drivers - has a total area of 3.98 x 105 pm2 , or 75.2k equivalent gates. In the reference system, the interleaver logic occupies an area of 7.20 x 105pm2 , or 136.2k equivalent gates, giving an area reduction of 45%. The remainder of the size difference is accounted for by the flip-flops in the bidirectional system.
Timing in the bidirectional system was determined using a combination of static timing analysis and HSPICE simulations. For these simulations, the critical path and wire loading were extracted from the synthesis result and used to create a model circuit as shown in Fig. 8. The peripheral CMOS logic gates and slewing on the input signal were all imported from synthesis into this SPICE model. The effects of switching transients on the transmission gates are ignored because

Fig. 8. SPICE circuit used to determine timing.
the selection inputs are constant during decoding. Net resistances are ignored because they are negligible compared to the equivalent ohmic resistance of the active transmission gate [17].
The propagation delay through this path - from the input of one of the drivers, through the transmission gate, to the output of the opposite layer of static CMOS - was then measured, and the worst-case delay substituted back into the static timing result. This model circuit was also used to determine the strengths of the tristate drivers, with stronger drivers being assigned to the most heavily loaded paths. As expected , the critical path is on the "forward" path due to the extra levels of logic in the XNOR tree.
It should be noted that the bidirectional and reference systems are both capable of throughput several times greater than required for IEEE 802.11n. At the maximum net bit rate of 600 megabits per second and codeword size of 1944 bits, both systems can support an average of over 1000 DCs per codeword. Contemporary stochastic decoders require only a few hundred DCs to converge with highly similar QC-LDPC codes [10]. The respective maximum speeds of each system prove that the bidirectional interleaver does not incur any performance penalty relative to the reference system.
One disadvantage of the bidirectional interleaver is that it cannot be pipelined to increase throughput. As shown in [1OJ, stochastic LDPC decoders are tolerant of multiple clock cycle delays in the inter-node message passing . The unidirectional architecture could therefore achieve higher throughput via pipelining. However, this would require an additional flipflop for each variable and check node and thus incur a significant increase in area. Thus, the main advantage of this design is the reduction in area and routing , as this reduction cannot be matched by partially parallel architectures without sacrificing a disproportionate amount of throughput. The primary reason for this is the shuffle networks in a partially parallel system must support more shuffle combinations, and no significant area savings occur until the architecture has been largely serialized. Furthermore, partially parallel systems incur extra overhead due to the additional memory and logic required to handle intermediate results.
Based on performance results for stochastic decoding in

236
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[10], a complete decoder making use of this interleaver would have decoding losses of approximately 0.25 and 0.5 dB from the floating-point sum-product algorithm with 16 and 32 iterations, respectively, and similar error floor behaviour. It should also be noted that this interleaver design can also be used in decoders other than stochastic types. In particular, it can easily be modified for use in the bit-serial min-sum algorithm [11].
Future work on this design will include post place-androute analysis and power characterization. We expect the placed and routed interleaver to be further reduced in size relative to the reference system, as the reduction in routing will permit higher density.

5. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a bidirectional interleaver architecture for LDPC decoders. We synthesized a fully parallel interleaver, including check nodes, for a stochastic LDPC decoder, implementing the 12 codes specified in the IEEE 802.11n draft standard. Due to the reduced amount of shuffling and interconnect framework required in our design, our system is significantly smaller than the equivalent interleaver implemented in unidirectional CMOS logic. The complete system is 28% smaller than the reference system and achieves equivalent throughput.

6. REFERENCES

[1] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal, "Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes ," Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645-, 29 Aug 1996.

[2] "DVB-S2 Standard," March 2005.

http://www.dvb.org,

[3] "IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks (IEEE 802.16e )," h t t P : //standards.ieee.org/getieee802/ download/802 .16e-2005 .pdf, 28 Feb. 2006.

[4] "IEEE 802.11n Draft Specification," h t t P : / / www . ieee802.org/.

[5] A.J. Blanksby and C.J. Howland, "A 690-mW 1Gb/s 1024-b, rate-l/2 low-density parity-check code decoder," Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404-412, Mar 2002.

[6] M.M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, "Architecture-aware low-density parity-check codes," Circuits and Systems, 2003. ISCAS '03. Proceedings ofthe 2003 International Symposium on, vol. 2, pp. 11-57-11-60 vol.2, 25-28 May 2003.

[7] T. Brack, F. Kienle, and N. Wehn, "Disclosing the LDPC code decoder design space," Design, Automation and Test in Europe, 2006. DATE '06. Proceedings, vol. 1, pp. 6 pp.-, 6-10 March 2006.
[8] Predrag Radosavljevic, Alexandre de Baynast, Marjan Karkooti, and Joseph R. Cavallaro, "Multi-Rate HighThroughput LDPC Decoder: Tradeoff Analysis Between Decoding Throughput and Area," Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, 2006 IEEE 17th International Symposium on, pp. 1-5, Sept. 2006.
[9] V.C. Gaudet and A.C. Rapley, "Iterative decoding using stochastic computation," Electronics Letters, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 299-301, Feb 2003.
[10] S. Sharifi Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, "Fully Parallel Stochastic LDPC Decoders," IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 56925703, Nov. 2008.
[11] A. Darabiha, A.C. Carusone, and F.R. Kschischang, "A 3.3-Gbps Bit-Serial Block-Interlaced Min-Sum LDPC Decoder in 0.13-m CMOS," in Custom Integrated Circuits Conference, 2007. CICC '07. IEEE, Sept. 2007, pp. 459-462.
[12] T. Mohsenin and B.M. Baas, "Split-Row: A Reduced Complexity, High Throughput LDPC Decoder Architecture," Computer Design, 2006. ICCD 2006. International Conference on, pp. 320-325, 1-4 Oct. 2007.
[13] A. Darabiha, A.C. Carusone, and F.R. Kschischang, "Block-Interlaced LDPC Decoders With Reduced Interconnect Complexity," Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 74-78, Jan. 2008.
[14] J. Lin, Z. Wang, L. Li, J. Sha, and M. Gao, "Efficient Shuffle Network Architecture and Application for WiMAX LDPC Decoders," Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 215-219, March 2009.
[15] Chih-Hao Liu, Chien-Ching Lin, Hsie-Chia Chang, Chen-Yi Lee, and Yarsun Hsua, "Multi-mode message passing switch networks applied for QC-LDPC decoder," May 2008, pp. 752-755.
[16] M. Rovini, G. Gentile, and L. Fanucci, "Multi-size circular shifting networks for decoders of structured LDPC codes," Electronics Letters, vol. 43, no. 17, pp. 938-940, August 16 2007.
[17] V. Eisele, B. Hoppe, and O. Kiehl, "Transmission gate delay models for circuit optimization," Mar 1990, pp. 558-562.

237
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:26:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

