2009 IEEE Information Theory Workshop

Continuous-Time Matched Filtering and Decoding without Synchronization
Murthy V. R. S. Devarakonda, Hans-Andrea Loeliger Dept. of Information Technology and Electrical Engineering,
ETH Zurich, CH-8092 ZuВЁrich, Switzerland. Email: devarakonda, loeliger @isi.ee.ethz.ch

AbstractвҖ”Standard communication receivers need to establish both symbol synchronization and frame synchronization before error correction can take place. In this paper, we present a coded multi-tone packet transmission format in which synchronization is moved past decoding (and thus effectively eliminated). We also present the concept of an input-tracking decoder, which is required in such a scheme. An example of an input-tracking decoder for LDPC codes is presented and some preliminary simulation results are given.

receiver observation window packet transmission
optimum sampling time,
Fig. 1. Message reception in a finite observation window.

I. INTRODUCTION
Establishing and maintaining symbol synchronization and frame synchronization is an important function in a communication receiver. In all standard communication schemes, these synchronizations must be achieved before decoding (error correction) can take place. In this paper, we point out that synchronization can be moved from the beginning to the end of the processing chainвҖ”in particular, past the error correcting decoder. The main motivation for this research is to identify opportunities for simplified hardware in the receiver, including, in particular, matched filtering and decoding with analog circuits.
Specifically, we propose a multi-tone modulation format that allows continuous-time matched filtering (without symbol synchronization) to produce continuous-time symbol likelihoods. In such a receiver, the decoder operates on a continuously changing input. Standard iterative decoders do not perform well in this mode of operation as they tend to вҖңlockвҖқ to the decoded codeword, and need to be reset for every new input. We therefore introduce the concept of an input-tracking decoder and we propose such a decoder for LDPC codes.
The paper is structured as follows. The multi-tone transmission scheme is described in Section II. The concept of an input-tracking decoder is discussed in Section III. In Sections IV and V, we propose an input-tracking decoder for LDPC codes. Some simulation results are given in Section VI.
II. MULTI-TONE SIGNALING AND NONCOHERENT MATCHED FILTERING
We describe a coded multi-tone modulation format that is suitable for the purpose of this paper. The transmitter wishes to send a single encoded message/packet to the receiver. We assume that the receiver does not know the arrival time exactly, but it knows the time window in which the packet will arrive, see Fig. 1.

The considered system is shown in Fig. 2. Let

ВҙГңВҪ

ГңГ’Вө

В·ВҪ ВҪ Г’ be the binary codeword that is

to be transmitted. The transmitted signal is

Г’

Г—trВҙГҳВө

Г—tr ВҙГҳ Вө

(1)

ВҪ

with

Вҙ

Г—tr ВҙГҳВө

Re Г—A ВҙГҳВө if Гң В·ВҪ

Re Г—B ВҙГҳВө if Гң

ВҪ

(2)

and is a delay unknown to the receiver. The signals
Г— ВҙГҳВө are chosen such that the corresponding matched filters
Г— ВҙГҳВө Г— Вҙ ГҳВө and Г— ВҙГҳВө Г— Вҙ ГҳВө are impulse

responses of causal time-invariant linear systems. The simplest

such example is

Г—

В» Вҙ В«Гҳ
ВҙГҳВө

Вј

Гҳ for Гҳ Вј for Гҳ Вј

(3)

with real parameters В« Вј and

Вј. (The discontinuity

at Гҳ Вј can be suppressed at the expense of a higher system

order. However, bandwidth is not a concern in this paper.) The
frequencies Гӣ are chosen such that the different signals Г—

are approximately orthogonal. Note that the transmitted signal
(1) ends at time Гҳ .

We assume an AWGN channel with independent unknown

phase rotations in each component signal. The receiver passes

the received signal, Г–ВҙГҳВө, through a bank of ВҫГ’ free-running

second-order filters, one for each

Вҫ and each ВҪ Г’

as shown in figure 2. The matched filter outputs can then be
combined to obtain the log-likelihood ratio, Г„ ВҙГҳВө, of each

transmitted bit:

В» ГҖГҖ Г„ ВҙГҳВө

Г”ВҙГ–ВҙГҳВө ГҗГ“ Г”ВҙГ–ВҙГҳВө

AВө BВө

(4)

978-1A-4ut2ho4ri4ze-d4l9ic8en3s-e5d /u0se9l/im$i2te5d.t0o:0YoВ©ns2ei0U0ni9v. IDEoEwnEloaded on J1u3n9e 24,2026 at 07:33:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ГҖ ГҖ where A B represent the hypotheses that either Г—A ВҙГҳВө
or Г—B ВҙГҳВө was transmitted, respectively, for bit Гң . At the

optimal sampling point Гҳ

(which the receiver does not

know), we have Г„ Вҙ Вө, the log-likelihood ratio for the fully

received signal Г–ВҙГҳВө. The continous-time output of the matched

filters can then be fed into an Input-Tracking Decoder for error

correction.

Г„ВҪВҙ ВөВЎ

Г‘ Г‘ В№ Г— ВҪВҙГҳВө
В№ ГҠ Г— ВҪВҙГҳВө

В№

В№ Г— ВҪВҙГҳВө В№ В№ Г— ВҪВҙГҳВө

Г„Г’ВҙВЎВө

В№ Г— Г’ВҙГҳВө В№ Г— Г’ВҙГҳВө

AWGN

В№В№ (see Note)

Г— Г’ВҙГҳВө Г— Г’ВҙГҳВө

Encoder

Input Tracking Decoder

Word In

Word Out Reliability

Fig. 2. System overview (Note: channel may also add arbitrary phase rotations in each subchannel).

Using conventional envelope detection [5], we can obtain

an approximation for the bit LLRs of the proposed channel

as,

Г„ ВҙГҳВө

ВҫВ¬
В¬ В¬
В¬ ГҶВј

Гҳ
Г–Вҙ ВөГ—
Вј

В¬

ВҙВө

В¬ В¬ В¬

ВҫВ¬
В¬ В¬
В¬ ГҶВј

Гҳ
Г–Вҙ ВөГ—
Вј

В¬

ВҙВө

В¬ В¬ В¬

(5)

Alternatively, likelihoods can be computed in filter form, cf. [3]. Figure 3 shows a factor graph of a discrete-time state space model with a termination constraint. Log-likelihoods computed from this have the general form,

ГҗГ“ Г”ВҙГ–ВҪ Г–Вҫ Г– Вө ГҗГ“ Г”ВҙГ–ВҪ Г–Вҫ Г– ГҖВө

В· ГҗГ“

ГҠ Г—ГҠ
Г—

ГӢ

ВҙГ— Вө ВҙГ— Вө ГӢ ВҙГ— Вө Г—

Г—

(6)

The first term on the right side is the log-likelihood of the unconstrained state space model (i.e., without the factor ), whereas the second term arises from imposing a constraint on the state ГӢ at time . For general signal pulses and channel models this method preserves the structure of the receiver with the key difference being only in the computation of the second term. For example, by choosing
appropriate functions for ВҙГ— Вө, we can obtain likelihoods for a
completely known signal (equivalent to matched filter) or for a signal received with unknown phase (non-coherent detector). (Details of this approach will be provided elsewhere).
The continuous-time equivalent of eq. (6) can be derived for the pulses in eq. (3) and has the general form,

Г„ ВҙГҳВө

Гҳ ВҙВҫГ–Вҙ Вө ГқA Вҙ Вө ГқB Вҙ ВөВө ВҙГқA Вҙ Вө ГқB Вҙ ВөВө

ВҪ

ГҶВј

В· extra term from the termination constraint,

(7)

where ГқA and ГқB are the least squares estimates of the signals for the two hypotheses and are obtained from stable second order filters.

ГӢВҪ

ГӢ

Г–

Г”Г”Г”Г”
Г– В·ВҪ

ГӢ ВҙГ— Вө
ГӢ
Г–

Fig. 3. Factor graph of a state space model with a termination constraint.

It must be emphasized that we require Г„ ВҙГҳВө in continuous-time.
In a joint detection and decoding scenario, continuously varying likelihoods place some restrictions on channels on which this system can be used. This aspect is discussed in sec. III. Furthermore, all the bit likelihoods are required to be input simultaneously to a decoder. This is achieved by the choice of the multi-tone signaling scheme.

III. INPUT-TRACKING DECODING

In Fig. 2, note that the LLRs are not sampled at optimum bit

timing as in conventional receivers, but are fed continuously to the

decoder. Such an input-tracking decoder can be ideally viewed as

making continuous decoding attempts and producing decoded words

for every given input. Any practical decoder has a finite delay and

the decoded output may not make sense for randomly varying inputs.

Hence we consider the following practical definition of an input-

tracking decoder:

вҖқA decoder is input-tracking if its response to an input that is
constant after time Гҳ Вј becomes eventually independent of the state of the decoder at time Гҳ Вј.вҖқ

In some current decoder architectures input-tracking ability is

already present. For example, on cycle-free graphs, existing analog

decoders work fine and can track slowly varying inputs. Here are a

few more examples:

Example 1: A trellis based analog or digital decoder implemented

with either the Viterbi or the BCJR algorithm is an input-tracking

decoder.

Example 2: A rolled-out version of a message passing decoder on

a graph with loops. The decoder has as many sections as the number

of iterations chosen, with the output of one iteration fed as input

to the next. A digital version of this may be implemented with a

pipelined architecture and has a delay proportional to the number of

sections. Though not a practical design if the number of sections is

large, such a decoder may be viewed as an input-tracking decoder.

Example 3: A decoder as proposed in section IV. Figure 4

illustrates the decoder output for a 3-bit parity check, with constant

inputs: Г„ВҪ

Г„Вҫ

Г„Вҝ

. The decoder state was

initialized to a randomly chosen value. Note that at steady state is
reached, bit-Вҫ (Г„Вҫ) which is in error, gets corrected (at output Вҫ).

5

State Variables

0

ВҪ

Вҫ Вҝ

вҲ’5

time

Fig. 4. Evolution of the state variables, , of the input-tracking decoder in section IV.

On the contrary, current analog LDPC decoders are not inputtracking and require a reset, for every new input, in order to obtain a uniform distribution for the internal messages. An input-tracking decoder eliminates not only the sample-and-hold interface to the demodulator, but also the reset circuitry in analog versions.
The nature of the expected value Г„ ВҙГҳВөв„„ has a strong influence on the type of decoders presented in this paper. We require Г„ ВҙГҳВөв„„

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u4n0e 24,2026 at 07:33:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

to be smoothly varying during a symbol period for the joint detection and decoding to be effective. For coherent detection, the input LLRs have strong correlations with the signal frequencies; inputs swing between positive and negative values many times requiring unreasonably fast response times from the decoder. LLRs computed from unconstrained state space models are monotonic and are perhaps best suited for input-tracking decoders. In the non-coherent case as well, we obtain smoothly varying LLRs. The system proposed in this paper is based on the non-coherent model.

IV. AN INPUT-TRACKING ITERATIVE DECODER FOR

LDPC CODES

Consider an input-tracking decoder with Г„ ВҙГҳВө as inputs and ВҙГҳВө

Вҫ as outputs. We specify the decoder as a set of first-order differential

equations with

ВҪВҫ

Г’ ГҒГҠГ’ as the state vector. A

discrete-time iterative decoder can be readily obtained from this, if

required. In order to be input-tracking, the decoder must have a stable

steady state when the inputs are held constant and must be able to

track slowly varying inputs. Such a differential system will be non-

linear and is difficult to synthesize. We propose a preliminary solution

to this problem as follows. We specify a decoder in two stages. First,

we construct a decoder that works without any inputs. We do this by

placing some restrictions on the choices of decoding functions. Next

we convert this decoder into an input-tracking decoder.

Consider a decoder for autonomous mode of operation, i.e.,
without an input. In this mode, we initialize ВҙВјВө Г„ ВҙВјВө ВҪ Вҫ Г’, and let the decoder evolve as per the differential equation,

ВҙГҳВө ВҜВЁВҙ Вө ВҙГҳВө

(8)

where ВҜ Вј and ВЁВҙ Вө is a vector function of the decoder state ВҙГҳВө. We construct the functions ВЁ such that they satisfy a few key

properties:

[P.1] [P.2]

At At

the any

fixed fixed

point, point,

ВЈ, all the ВЈвҖҷs are
hard decision on

ВЈeqguivael sina

magnitude. codeword.

[P.3]

The decoder conserves the ВҪ
That is, it conserves a cost

nfuonrmctioofn,anГҲerГ’roВҪr

corrected word. Гңc , whenever

the hard decision word, Гң
, obtained from , happens to be a

codeword. For codes over В·ВҪ ВҪ , this amounts to simply

preserving the norm, ВҪ, of the corrected word. This property

ensures that the decoded state is only as strong as the input.

These properties play an important role in the choice of ВЁ. We provide the details for constructing ВЁ for a given binary code in the

next section.

We turn the autonomous decoder into one that tracks an input,
Г„ВҙГҳВө, with an additional term,

ВҙГҳВө 
 Вҙ ВҙГҳВө В· Г„ВҙГҳВөВө В· ВҜВЁВҙ Вө ВҙГҳВө

(9)

Eq (9) has two parts. ВЁВҙ Вө implements the basic autonomous de-

coding rate at

wfuhnicchtioГ„nВҙ,ГҳwВө hisercehaasrge
disinatoctohnestsatnattecoВҙeГҳffiВө.cPiernotptehratyt

decides the [P.3] above

ensures that, at the fixed point (for a constant input), we have,

ВЈВҪ

Г’ Гңc ВЈ

Г’
ГңcГ„

(10)

ВҪ

ВҪ

Unlike in the autonomous case, the state variables of the decoder with
input are not all equal in magnitude at a fixed point. We use ВҪ as
a reliability measure to make a decoder decision. The monotonously
increasing output of a matched filter is advantageous for the decoder, if the decoding speed, ВҜ, is made much larger than the rate of
charging, 
, (typically an order of magnitude). In such case, the
decoded value can be read-off (almost) instantly at the output of the
decoder, when ВҪ reaches its peak within the observation window,
cf. Figure 1.

V. DESCRIPTION OF THE AUTONOMOUS DECODERS
We start with the basic decoders for a repeat code and a 3-bit parity check and provide a method to use them for bigger codes. For each decoder, we state the vector field as a matrix. The main results of the decoders are stated and proofs are omitted in this paper.
The decoders work by sharing the LLRs вҖ“ state variables, вҖ“ among each other so that the incorrect LLRs get corrected eventually. Once a correction is achieved, the iterations may be stopped in principle. However, if they are allowed to continue, the decoder reaches a fixed point by equalizing the вҖҷs in magnitude, cf. properties [P.1 вҖ“ P.3] from section IV.

A. An Iterative Decoder for a Repeat Code

Consider the 2 bit repeat code

ВҙВҪ ВҪВө Вҙ ВҪ ВҪВө . We choose,

ВЁ

ВҪВҪ ВҪВҪ

The two eigenvectors of ВҜВЁ are ВҙВҪ ВҪВөГҢ with eigenvalue Вј and ВҙВҪ ВҪВөГҢ with eigenvalue ВҫВҜ. It follows that,

Гҗ
Гҳ

Г‘ВҪВҙ

ВҪВҙГҳВө

ВҫВҙГҳВөВө Вј

In particular,

ВҪВҙВҪВө ВҫВҪВҙ ВҪВҙВјВө В· ВҫВҙВјВөВө

ВҪ Вҫ

ГҗГ“

Г”ВҙГ– ГңВҪ Г”ВҙГ– ГңВҪ

ВҪ ГңВҫ ВҪ ГңВҫ

ВҪВө ВҪВө

ВҪ ВҪ We
the

can read sign of

off
ВҪВҙ

the
ВөВҙ

maximum
ВҫВҙ ВөВө.

likelihood Note also

estimate that the

of ВҙГңВҪ ГңВҫВө
sum of the

from state

variables is conserved:

ВҪВҙГҳВө В· ВҫВҙГҳВө ВҪВҙВјВө В· ВҫВҙВјВө

Гҳ

Generalization of the decoder to a repeat code of length Г’,

ВҙВҪ ВҪ ВҪВө Вҙ ВҪ ВҪ

ВҪВө , is straightforward:

Вҫ ВҙГ’ ВҪВө ВҪ ВҪ ВҙГ’ ВҪВө

ВЁ

...

ВҪ

ВҪ

ВҪВҝ ВҪ ВҙГ’ ВҪВө

The conservative property can be generalized as

ВҙГҳВө ВҪ ВҙВјВө ВҪ

(11)

B. An Iterative Decoder for a Parity Check Code

Consider

the

3-bit

parity

check

code

ВҙВҪ ВҪ ВҪВө ВҙВҪ ВҪ ВҪВө Вҙ ВҪ ВҪ ВҪВө Вҙ ВҪ ВҪ ВҪВө . We choose,

Вҫ ВӯВҫ ВӯВҝ

Вҝ

ВҫВҝ

ВЁ

Вҝ ВӯВҝ ВӯВҪ ВҪ

(12)

Вҫ

ВҪ ВӯВҪ ВӯВҫ

The coefficients,

ВҙГҳВө , are odd functions of and

Вӯ Вӯ ВҙГҳВө

ВҙГҳВө are their absolute values required for stable

dynamics. (The time indices for these coefficients are omitted to

improve readability). In the above function, the contributions between

any pair of appears as

variables
ВӯВҝ ВҪВҙГҳВө

appears as
В· Вҝ ВҫВҙГҳВө.

follows: contribution These terms help to

to ВҪ
make

from Вҫ,
an error

correction while simultaneously equalizing the вҖҷs in magnitudes.

The decoder performs maximum likelihood decoding. For any

initial value, the system converges to a fixed point and the fixed

points correspond to the ML codeword.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u4n1e 24,2026 at 07:33:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Theorem 1. The parity-check decoder of Eq (12) has the following

properties:

a. Error Correction: Without loss of generality assume a relative

ordering of the magnitudes of
error. This implies that bits Вҫ

Г„вҖҷs:
and Вҝ

ВҪВҫ
correspond

to

Вҝ where bit ВҪ is in
the ML codeword:

ГңВҙ ВҫВө ГңВҫML and ГңВҙ ВҝВө ГңMВҝ L. For a suitable choice of , the

system evolves until it corrects the error in ВҪ, i.e., it implements

Вҫ WagnerвҖҷs rule (вҖқflip the weakest bitвҖқ).

b. Norm Conservation:
conserves the ВҪ norm;

If ГңВҙ ВҙГҳВө ВҪ

ВҙГҳВјВөВө

Гңc
ВҙГҳВјВө ВҪ

, then the decoder
Гҳ ГҳВј, cf. property

Вҫ s[PyВҫВЈ.s3cdt].e..mFLioxeceВҝvВЈkdo.plIvInofeisnatnssd:ucAChnoВјytnhtvfiahetxerengdeГҳtnhpceoei:dnГҳetI,ВјcfoГңВЈdГң,ВҙeВҙdoВҙfВҙГҳwГҳtВөВјhoВөВөerВөdsyГңsВҙГңtecГңmВЈ,cВөi.sieas.t,iastfihc, eoetsdhseeywnsВҪВЈotetrhmde.

locks-in to the codeword. In particular, the system converges to the

fixed point,

ВҙВҪВө

ВҙГң
ВөГҢ ВҙГҳВјВө Вҝ

(13)

Вҫ

The decoder belongs to the class of non-expansive iterative maps.
The dynamics of the decoder are smooth, i.e., without oscillations,
as it has a symmetric ВЁ with real eigenvalues. In lock-in state, the
decoded codeword is an eigenvector of the system.

C. Decoders for Bigger Codes
The two decoders described above can be combined to perform as decoders for larger codes. Consider the code whose factor graph [2] is shown in Fig 5. We obtain the differential equations for each
variable as follows: ВҪВҙГҳВө and ВҫВҙГҳВө are obtained for the parity check among the variables ВҙВҪ Вҫ ВҝВө just as in Eq (12). ВҙГҳВө and ВҙГҳВө are obtained similarly. As for ВҝВҙГҳВө, we sum up the contributions from
both parity checks:
ВҝВҙГҳВө ВҜ Вҙ ВҙВӯВҪ В· ВӯВҫВө ВҝВҙГҳВө В· ВҪ ВҫВҙГҳВө В· Вҫ ВҪВҙГҳВөВө В· ВҜ Вҙ ВҙВӯ В· Вӯ Вө ВҝВҙГҳВө В· ВҙГҳВө В· ВҙГҳВөВө
Decoders for large LDPC codes can be constructed with this recipe. Such decoders satisfy the conservative property [P.3]. In section VI we compare the performance of this method with the standard sumproduct decoder.

ВЁ

ВЁ

for the exended Hamming code. The new decoder is comparatively

more sensitive but improves with redundant parity checks.

ВҫВј ВҪ ВҪ Вј Вј ВҪ Вј ВҪВҝ

ГҖ

ВҪВјВҪВјВјВјВҪВҪ ВҪВҪВјВҪВјВјВјВҪ

(14)

ВҪВјВјВҪВҪВјВҪВј

BER

100

EH844 ML

10вҲ’1

EH844 AD EH844 SPM

EH844 RDAD

EH844 RDSPM

LDPC4000 AD

LDPC4000 SPM

10вҲ’2

LDPC204 AD

LDPC204 SPM

10вҲ’3

10вҲ’4

10вҲ’5

EHВҙ Вө

10вҲ’6

Вҙ ВјВјВј Вө

ГҹГһ

10вҲ’7

ВҙВҫВј Вҝ Вө ГҹГһ

10вҲ’8

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

SNR, dB

Fig. 6. BER plots for the autonomous decoders (-AD) compared with standard sum-product message passing (-SPM) decoders. Also shown for extended Hamming code are an ML decoder, and both versions with redundant parity checks (-RDAD and -RDSPM).

100 10вҲ’1 10вҲ’2 10вҲ’3 10вҲ’4

BER

10вҲ’5

ВҪ

Вҫ

Вҝ

Fig. 5. Example: factor graph of a 5-bit code.

10вҲ’6
EH844 JDD ML EH844 JDD ITD

10вҲ’7

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

SNR, dB

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS

Figure 6 shows the BER plots of the autonomous decoders for

three different codes - an extended Вҙ

Вө Hamming code with

parity check matrix as in Eq (14), two regular LDPC codes from

[4]: an n=204, (3,6) code and an n=4000, (4,8) code. The decoder

is initialized with channel outputs and is allowed to run until
convergence. At a BER of ВҪВј , the decoder performs, respectively, Вј dB, ВҪ dB and ВҪdB poorer than the standard sum product messge passing decoder with Вҫ Вј iterations. The plot also shows the BER

for extended Hamming code with redundant rows added to the parity

matrix. The performance of both the autonomous decoder and the

standard sum-product decoder are very close to the ML performance

Fig. 7. BER Plots for the joint receiver for extended Hamming code compared with the version with repeated ML decoding attempts.
Fig. 7 shows the BER plot of the joint receiver for the multi-tone system of Fig. 2 for the extended Hamming code, with the pulse transmission scheme as per Fig. 1. The decoder operates continuously with the matched filters and the receiver choses a word with the highest reliability within a known window. The decoder state is not reset in between messages. We compare the performance of this with a receiver which makes ML decoding attempts at every instance and picks a codeword with the highest likelihood. The joint input-tracking receiver performs close to the ML version.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u4n2e 24,2026 at 07:33:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4 (a)
3 2 1 0 1
(b)

REFERENCES
[1] H.-A. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, and F. TarkoВЁy, вҖңProbability propagation and decoding in analog VLSI,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 837вҖ“843, Feb. 2001.
[2] H.-A. Loeliger, вҖңAn introduction to factor graphsвҖқ, IEEE Signal Proc. Mag., pp. 28-41, Jan. 2004.
[3] H.-A. Loeliger, L. Bolliger, S. Korl, C. Reller, вҖңLocalizing, forgetting, and likelihood filtering in state space modelsвҖқ, 2009 Information Theory & Applications Workshop, UCSD, La Jolla, CA, Feb. 8-13, 2009.
[4] D.J.C. MacKay, вҖңEncyclopedia of Sparse Graph CodesвҖқ, http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[5] John G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 4th ed., McGraw-Hill, 2001.

0 2
1 (c)
0
вҲ’1
вҲ’2 1
(d)
0.5
0
вҲ’0.5
вҲ’1

time

Fig. 8. Plots of the decoder for the extended Hamming code. Active message
transmission time is indicated by the dotted box. (a) reliability ВҪ, (b)
codeword status ( ВҪ, if is a valid codeword), (c) decoder inputs Г„ ВҙГҳВө, and (d) outputs ВҙГҳВө.

Figure 8 shows some plots of the decoder in an observation
window. Figure 8(a) is a plot of the reliability information, ВҙГҳВө ВҪ,
produced by the decoder. We notice that at about the ideal decision time the reliability reaches its peak. We can make hard decisions on
the continuous output of the decoder, ВҙГҳВө and check whether the
decoded word is a valid codeword or not. Figure 8(b) is a plot of the codeword status in continuous time. Note that a valid codeword was produced a little before the decision time. Since the transmit pulse has no energy beyond this time, the decoder stays locked to the decoded word until the decoder state is fully dissipated and is dominated by noise once again. This can be seen in Figure 8(b) where the codeword status is held constant beyond the decision time. Figure 8(b) and (d) show the bit LLRs respectively at the input and output of the decoder. The inputs follow noise, whereas the decoded outputs open up towards the end of the pulse.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this somewhat preliminary study, we have addressed the question if symbol synchronization and frame synchronization can be moved from the beginning to the end of the processing chain in a receiver. The main motivation for this research is to identify opportunities for simplified hardware in the receiver, including, in particular, matched filtering and decoding with analog circuits. To this end, we described a coded multi-tone system with the required properties. We also introduced the concept of an input-tracking decoder, which is required in such a scheme. We proposed a specific input-tracking decoder for LDPC codes and gave some simulation results for it. These results look good for a simple Hamming code, but they are not entirely satisfactory for larger LDPC codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u4n3e 24,2026 at 07:33:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

