Fast Identification of Error-Prone Patterns for LDPC Codes under Message Passing Decoding

Jing Lei WINLAB, Rutgers University North Brunswick, New Jersey 08902, USA Email: michelle@winlab.rutgers.edu

Wen Gao Thomson Corporate Research Princeton, New Jersey 08540, USA Email: wen.gao@thomson.net

Abstract—Although density evolution accurately predicts the asymptotic performance of LDPC codes, it provides limited information for codes of short or moderate block length. For this reason, combinatorial methods have been employed to analyze the performance of finitelength LDPC codes under message passing decoding. The error floor phenomenon is a key issue of finite-length effects, which is caused largely by poorly connected subgraphs residing in the LPDC codes structure. Because of the unequal noise immunity of different bit levels, error floors become more pronounced for LDPC-coded high-order modulation. Nevertheless, the enumeration of error-prone patterns that lead to error floors has been proven to be NP-hard, which motivates us to find substitute metrics with manageable complexity. Considering trapping sets always comprise loops of low extrinsic message degree (EMD) and the connectivity of a loop with the residual graph can be characterized by its approximate EMD (ACE), in this paper we propose a fast method to identify loops with low ACE for a given code. In light of this, the vulnerable variable nodes residing on low-ACE loops are judiciously mapped to bit levels benefitting from stronger error protection. As a result, the error floor can be significantly improved at the cost of a minor increase of hardware complexity.
I. INTRODUCTION
In contrast to density evolution, which accurately predicts the “waterfall” thresholds of LDPC ensembles assuming an infinite block length, the error floor analysis for a given code targets a finitelength phenomena and boils down to a combinatorial problem [1]. For an maximum-likelihood (ML) decoder, the error floor of LDPC codes is incurred uniquely by low-weight codewords. However, for an iterative decoder operating on codes with loops, the error floor does not typically arise from low-weight codewords, but from poorly connected subgraphs residing in the LPDC codes structure, which are commonly known as “trapping sets”, “stopping sets” and “nearcodewords” [2]. Throughout this work, we will use the terminology “trapping sets”, which is introduced by Richardson in [3]. Roughly speaking, the trapping sets comprise variable nodes (VND’s) whose hard decisions remain unchanged at the decoder output after a finite number of iterations. It is worth noting that small-size trapping sets are not necessarily low-distance error events [3]. In other words, it is possible for an erased trapping set to be decoded successfully by an ML decoder. Richardson [3] noted that for a regular (3, 6) Gallager code transmitted over a BEC channel, the trapping set contributes at least 98% to the error floor. In addition, the authors of [4] have observed that the trapping sets are the dominant failure mechanism for a bit-interleaved LDPC-coded modulation system under message passing decoding. Although it is desirable to learn the full distribution or the dominant pattern [4] of trapping sets, the enumeration of such error-prone patterns has been proved to be NP-hard [5]. Therefore, we have to resort to substitute metrics for trapping sets, which are computationally tractable. It has been recognized by Tian and et al [6] that a non-trivial trapping set always consists of loops whereas a loop not necessarily leads to a trapping set. Actually, the largest “threat”

comes from those isolated loops lacking sufficient communication (connectivity) with the rest of the graph. To identify those loops with higher tendency to become trapping sets, they introduce a metric called approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE).
On the other hand, we note that the LDPC code ensembles optimized for BPSK or QPSK not necessarily work well for M -ary modulation (M > 4), which is attributed to unequal noise immunity inherent to different bit levels (e.g., MSB is better protected than LSB) of a high-order constellation [7] [8]. So far, the majority of code design tools, including density evolution [9] and EXIT chart [10], assume channel symmetry, which is true for binary modulation. Nevertheless, this assumption does not hold naturally for a graylabeled high-order constellation, and a rigorous design should take into account the channel asymmetry [11]. However, the code design is beyond the scope of this paper. In the following we assume the LDPC code is given and our goal is to design a bit interleaver to balance the unequal bit reliability between irregular LDPC codes and high-order modulations. The block diagram for a bit-interleaved LDPC-coded MQAM system over AWGN channel is shown in Fig.1.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the relationship between the error floor of a LDPC code and the loops in its tanner graph. Section III investigates the detrimental loop structures leading to error floors and proposes a dynamic programming approach to identify these detrimental loops, which not only generalizes but also simplifies the Viterbi-like ACE detection algorithms given in [6]. Based on the reliability difference of coded bits, Section V studies the design of bit interleaver for spectrally-efficient modulation. Section VI presents the numerical results. Section VII concludes this paper.
II. LOOPS AND ERROR FLOOR
Given a LDPC code, the configuration of its trapping sets strongly depends on the loop structure of its bipartite graph [12]. Generally, a trapping set consists of multiple loops but a loop not necessarily leads to a trapping set [6]. The bipartite graph of finite-length LDPC codes without any singly connected nodes is not tree-like and cannot avoid the formation of loops. If loops exist and the shortest loop has length 2κ, neighbors of a variable node are not independent, and the message-passing decoding loses its optimality as an ML-decoder when the number of iterations exceeds (κ − 1). Intuitively, the value of an incorrect bit in a loop will propagate back and forth to itself, effectively enhancing its misleading belief and resisting the error correction efforts from its “neighbors”. With larger loops, such kind of negative effect on the decoder’s error correcting performance will be “diluted” and become less critical. On the other hand, loops are not necessarily a bad thing since capacity-approaching codes always need loops in their construction to guarantee a large minimum Hamming distance [13]. In light of this, not all loops are equally detrimental in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonse9i U78ni-v1.-D4o2w4n4lo-2a3de2d4-o8n/J0u8n/e$2254,.200026©a2t 0060:835I:E18EUET. C from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE "GLOBECOM" 2008 proceedings.

Source Sink

Binary LDPC Encoder

Bit Interl eaver

Binary LDPC Decoder

Bit De-interleaver

M-QAM Modulator

AWGN Channel

M-QAM Demodulator

Fig. 1. System Model of LDPC Coded Bit-Interleaved QAM Modulation

terms of decoding failure. Conventional loop conditioning techniques only address girth, the loop of shortest length[14]. Nevertheless, it has been observed that in addition to the length of a loop, its “connectivity” with the residual graph also plays significant roles in the error floor performance. Roughly speaking, it is those short loops with low extrinsic message degree (EMD) [6] or poor connectivity that need to be treated judiciously since they will lead to decoding failures of an iterative decoder with high probability. For this reason, authors of [6] and [15] adopted a two-dimension array (T, α) to characterize the connectivity of a length-2T loop 1. Furthermore, the EMD can be simplified and approximated by ACE defined as

T

α = (dvi − 2),

(1)

i=1

where dvi denotes the degree of variable node vi on this loop, and the ACE of any check node is assumed to be zero.

III. IDENTIFYING VARIABLE NODES RESIDING ON SHORT LOOPS

A. Expanded Incidence Matrix

Girth removal for LDPC codes was discussed in [14]. In that paper, the authors hypothesized that the contribution of loops to error floor depends on the girth size and ignored the impact of graph connectivity, which is incomplete as seen from Section II of this paper and the references therein. Besides, there is a fault in the proof in that it ignores the degree-1 nodes that also contribute to the path accumulation, although they cannot form loops. However, the proportion of degree-1 VNDs should be kept small in a practical code structure since a good design should guarantee the reliability of the coded bits by enforcing “cross examination” through different check nodes (CND’s). Therefore, we can simply delete the columns corresponding to degree-1 nodes in the parity check matrix H prior to loop identification.
Without loss of generality, we assume H is a size M by N binary matrix free of degree-1 VND. To begin with, we expand H into the size L = M + N incidence matrix of M CNDs {vi}M i=1 plus N VNDs {vj }jL=M+1, i.e.

A=

0H Ht 0

,

(2)

where K = N − M , the superscript [·]t denotes matrix transpose, and the (i, j)−entry of A is given by

aij =

1, 0,

if vi is connected to vj otherwise .

(3)

Due to the bipartite property of H, its diagonal is all zero, i.e. aii ≡ 0. Applying multiplication to (2) yields

A2 =

HHt 0 0 HtH

(4)

1The length of any single loop in a bipartite graph must be even.

and

A3 =

0

HHtH

HtHHt

0

.

(5)

For the convenience of statement, we define A2 = [bij] and A3 = [cij], and their (i, j)−entries are given by

L

bij =

ail alj

(6)

l=1

and LL

cij =

ailalqaqj ,

(7)

l=1 q=1

respectively. With regard to loop length 2T , it was observed by Mackay, Richardson [3] and et al that the loops which dominate the error floor performance concentrate on length with 2 ≤ T ≤ 3. In the following, we shall outline the methodology for short loops identification in three lemmas.

B. Loop-Residing Variable Nodes

Lemma 1 Two VNDs vi and vj belong to the same length-4 loop iff bij ≥ 2 in sub-matrix HtH .
Proof : Any loop of length 4 should consist of two distinct CNDs and two distinct VNDs. We choose to investigate the submatrix HtH in A2, which are associated with the variable node group {vl}Ll=M+1. Due to the symmetry of HtH, it is sufficient to investigate its upper
(or lower) triangular section only. By definition, the value of bij
denotes the number of distinct length-2 paths from vi to vj [14].
Therefore, a necessary and sufficient condition for a length-4 loop
passing VNDs vi and vj is the existence of more than one length-2 paths between the peers 2 vi and vj, i.e. bij ≥ 2, ∀(M + 1) ≤ i ≤ L, (i + 1) ≤ j ≤ L.
Lemma 2 Variable node vi and check node vj are directly opposite to each other on a length-6 loop iff (cij − aij Lq=1(aiq + ajq)) ≥ 2 in the sub-matrix HHtH of A3 .
Proof : A necessary condition for a length-6 loop occurring
between variable node vi and check node vj is the existence of
more than one length-3 paths. However, it can be found from
Eq. (7) that the undirected paths of length-3 from vi to vj also include two backtracking hops, i.e. vi −→ vq −→ vi −→ vj provided aiq = aij = 1 and vi −→ vj −→ vq −→ vj provided ajq = aij = 1. The backtracking hops are counted into cij, but they
cannot comprise a valid length-6 loop. Since their contribution to cij is summarized by aij qL=1(aiq + ajq), once it is removed from cij , the surplus indicates the number of distinct and valid paths existing between partners vi and vj 3.
Define HHt = Λ and HtH = Γ, by induction we have

A2k =

Λk 0 0 Γk

,

(8a)

A2k+1 =

0 HΓk ΓkHt 0

.

(8b)

Therefore, for the purpose of loop identification, it is unnecessary
to manipulate with the whole matrix A, since the adjacency information is fully incorporated into the submatrices Λk, Γk and ΓkH.

2We say two variables nodes or two CNDs are “peers” when they are opposite to each other on a loop of bipartite graph, whose length is multiple of 4.
3We say one variable node and one check node are “partners” when they are opposite to each other on a loop of bipartite graph, whose length is not dividable by 4.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonse9i U78ni-v1.-D4o2w4n4lo-2a3de2d4-o8n/J0u8n/e$2254,.200026©a2t 0060:835I:E18EUET. C from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE "GLOBECOM" 2008 proceedings.

Considering this, Theorem 2 of [14] can be simplified and restated
by the following Lemma :
Lemma 3 In a bipartite graph with girth 2k (k ≥ 4), node vi and node vj are directly opposite to each other on a loop of length 2k iff λij ≥ 2 and γij = 0, where Ak = [λij ] and Ak−2 = [γij ] .

CND1

VND1

CND2

IV. DETECTING LOOP ACE
Lemmas 1-3 provide a simple means for identifying whether a VND resides on the short loop of given length. Actually, a VND may be shared by several short loops with different ACE. Heuristically, it is the loop with the minimum ACE that most likely cause decoding failures. Since the loop ACE defined in (1) is determined by all the participating VNDs, we need to detect all the VND loop members. Using lemmas 1-3 alone are not sufficient for this goal since they only provides partial solution to this problem. Therefore, we will introduce two supplementary algorithms in the following. Algorithm 1 is an algebraic method based on the use of adjacency matrix A, which can find the ACE of all loops passing a given VND. In contrast, Algorithm 2 is an approach based on dynamic programming, which is more convenient when we are only interested in the minimum loop-ACE of a VND. Without loss of generality, we assume the loop length is 6 in the following. The extension to other loop length follows directly.

A. Algorithm 1: ACE Detection via Adjacency Matrix

Since low-degree VNDs induce low EMD, they exhibit stronger tendency to form detrimental loopy structure [6]. In other words, for loops of the same length, those pass VNDs of lower degree are more likely to get involved into trapping sets. Therefore, an efficient search for low-ACE loops should start with VNDs of low degree. The authors of [6] proposed a loop ACE detection algorithm by expanding a support tree from the full set of VNDs. Despite the theoretical elegance, its computation burden is intensive, especially when a check node of high degree (> 10) is encountered. To overcome this problem, in this paper we propose a different approach based on the “side information” obtained from matrix A. Particularly, we avoid the complexity of [6] by focusing on the subset of VNDs whose loop-forming candidacy are proved by Lemmas 1-3.
To illustrate, let us consider the length-6 loop shown in Fig. 2. Without loss of generality, assuming variable node “V N D1” is of degree 2, and the two neighbors of V N D1 are denoted by “CN D1” and ”CN D2”, respectively; moreover, assuming we have verified via Lemma 2 that there exists a length-6 loop between “V N D1” and its partner “CN D3”. Then, our task boils down to find the identities of the two anonymous neighbors of “CN D3”, namely “V N D2” and ”V N D3”, with respect to loop . For the convenience of statement, in the following we will denote CN Dl and V N Dm by vIl and vJm , respectively.
It can be seen from Fig. 2 that the necessary condition for loop to pass three CNDs {vJl }l3=1 is that there exists a length-2 path between vJ3 and vJk , k = 1, 2 (J1 = J2), i.e.

aJ2Il = 1,

l = 1, 3

(9a)

aJ3In = 1, n = 2, 3.

(9b)

Therefore, the algorithm for identifying low-ACE length-6 loops can be summarized as follows:
1) Start with low-degree variable node vα and employ Lemma 2 to find its check node “partners” {vβ}, which are three hops away on some length-6 loops.
2) Collect the neighbors of vα into a set {vγ }.

VND2

VND3

CND3

Fig. 2.

A Length-6 Loop with Four Known Members

{V N D1, CN D1, CN D2, CN D3} and Two Anonymous Members

{V N D2, V N D3}. V N D1 is connected to CN D1 and CN D2. CN D3

is known to be a partner of V N D1. The goal is to find the identity of two

other unknown, loop-residing neighbors of CN D3

3) Randomly choose a pair of elements, {vγ1 , vγ2 }, from {vγ } without replacement, and check if there exists a length-2 path reaching check node vβ. If yes, put vβ into set {vη} and go to the next step. Otherwise, switch to another pair {vγ1 , vγ2 } in {vγ} and repeat Step 3 until all the possible combinations have been exhausted.
4) Check if there exists a low-degree variable node vμ, which is a neighbor of both vβ and vγ1 . If yes, go to the next step. Otherwise, go back to Step 3.
5) Check if there exists a low-degree variable node vτ , which is a neighbor for both vβ and vγ2 . If yes, go to the next step. Otherwise, go back to Step 3.
6) The nodes given by {vα, vγ1 , vμ, vη, vτ , vγ2 } forms a low-ACE length-6 loop.
B. Algorithm 2: ACE Detection via Dynamic Programming
A Viterbi-like algorithm for ACE detection is presented in [6], which assumes the LDPC codes are free of degree-1 nodes. For the sake of simplicity, their choice of root nodes for the “search tree” are limited to those of low degree. In this paper, we extend the work in [6] and propose a generalized and faster ACE detection algorithm based on dynamic programming, which exhausts candidate root nodes of all degree types but has less complexity because of the candidacy information given by Lemma 2. Using Lemma 2, we can fully identify the loop-residing VNDs on loops of length 6. Therefore, rather than spanning the search tree exhaustively from each VND or select a low-degree subset in an ad hoc way [6], we can start from those roots whose candidacies have been confirmed by Lemma 2. Also, we recognize that it is not necessary to assume the “absence of degree-1 variable nodes” since they cannot reside on any loop 4
Define pV ND(t, Vi) as the path length to VND Vi on trellis tier t and pCND(t, Cj) as the path length to CND Cj on trellis tier t. The proposed ACE detection algorithm can be described as follows assuming the loop length is 2k :
1) Initialization Set pV ND(t, V ) = ∞ and pCND(t, C) = ∞ for 1 ≤ t ≤ (k + 1) .
2) Root Selection
• Identify the candidate root V0 and set pV ND(1, V0) = dV0 − 2;
4For consistency, we can either delete the weight-1 columns from the parity check matrix, or “magnify” the degree from 1 to a large number large so that the corresponding VNDs will perish before entering a premature survival path.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonse9i U78ni-v1.-D4o2w4n4lo-2a3de2d4-o8n/J0u8n/e$2254,.200026©a2t 0060:835I:E18EUET. C from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE "GLOBECOM" 2008 proceedings.

• For all Cj adjacent to V0, set pCND(1, Vj ) = dV0 − 2 .
3) Survival Path Selection for 2 ≤ t ≤ (k + 1)
• For each Cj satisfying pCND(t − 1, Cj) < ∞, find the VNDs {Vl} adjacent to Cj except for the one that reaches Cj in tier (t − 1) ;
• Set pV ND(t, Vl) = min(pV ND(t, Vl), pCND(t−1, Cj )+ dVl − 2) ;
• For each Vl satisfying pV ND(t, Vl) < ∞, find the CNDs {Cq} adjacent to Vl except for the one that reaches Vl in tier t ;
• Set pCND(t, Cq) = min(pCND(t, Cq), pV ND(t, Vl)) • t ← t+1.
4) Loop Closing
• For each Cp satisfying pCND(k, Cp) < ∞, find if VND V0 is adjacent to Cp.
• If yes, pV ND(k + 1, V0) = min(pV ND(k + 1, V0), pCND(k, Cp)).
5) Output V0 = pV ND(k + 1, V0) as the minimum loop ACE for V0.

V. DESIGN OF BIT INTERLEAVER
Assuming m coded bits {cλ}m λ=1 are gathered in a group and mapped to an M = 2m-ary QAM symbol {xl}M l=1. It is well known that binary reflected gray coding (BRGC) is the optimal labeling scheme for square-QAM modulation when non-iterative demodulation is employed [16]. For AWGN channel, the received symbol sample is given by

yl = xl + ,

(10)

where l is the symbol index, is the sample of circularly symmetric complex Gaussian noise with double-sided spectral density N0/2, and the average symbol energy for xl is Es. Unlike BPSK or QPSK, the bitwise capacity for high-order modulation (M > 4) is no longer a constant due to the difference of noise immunity exhibited by different bit levels [17]. Fig. 3 shows the bitwise capacity of 256QAM modulation labeled by BRGC. Because of the symmetry of in-phase and quadrature branch, there are (log2 256)/2 distinctive bit levels, of which the MSB carries the highest capacity whereas LSB has the lowest capacity. As a consequence, MSB enjoys higher protection against errors than the other bit levels. This enlightens us to adapt the interleaver design to the unequal bit reliability existing in both channel coding and modulation. Particularly, we choose to

Capacity [Bits / Channel Symbol]

1 Level I (MSB)

0.9

Level II

Level III

0.8

Level IV (LSB)

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

−5

0

5

10

15

20

Es/N0 [dB]

allocate the VNDs on a low-ACE loop to bit levels with better protection. The major steps of interleaver design can be sketched as follows :
1) Target Selection Identify VNDs on length-4 and length-6 loops with low ACE by comparing their loop ACE with a threshold χ, which is a design parameter depending on code structure and modulation order.
2) Queuing by Vulnerability Order all the target VNDs in a queue according to their loop ACE and their own degrees. For example, if there are A + B target VNDs, among which A VNDs has minimum loop ACE α and B VNDs has minimum loop ACE β and α < β. According to the rule of queuing, the A VNDs with minimum ACE α will be put in front of the B VNDs. Moreover, among the A positions heading the queue, those VNDs with lower degree are placed in front of their counterparts with higher degree.
3) Bit Mapping Based on Vulnerability The more “vulnerable” bits that are in the front of the queue will receive higher priority in being mapped to the bit levels benefiting from better protection. Accordingly, those nodes with higher ACE are mapped to less reliable bit levels depending on their queuing order.
VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS
A. Loop Structure of DVB-S2 Codes
Using Lemmas 1-3 we have examined the existence of short loops (length 4 and 6) in the DVB-S2 LDPC codes family of length 64800 [18]. It turns out that all of them are free of length-4 loops, which is a favorable thing since VNDs on a larger loop have more chances to obtain helpful “extrinsic message” from their neighbors beyond this loop. As a result, the noise propagating effects leading to decoding failures are more easier to get “diluted”. In addition, the codes of rate 1/4 and 1/3 are free of length-6 loops, while the other rates have girth 6.
B. Bit-Interleaving for DVB-S2 LDPC-Coded 1024-QAM
To examine the impacts of bit interleaving on the error floor of LDPC-coded high-order modulation, we compare the bit-error-rate (BER) under three different interleaving strategies, assuming the same LDPC code, same modulator (QAM-1024) and same labeling scheme (BRGC) are used.
1) No Interleaving The coded bits {vi}i6=48100 are grouped into batches of 10 bits in their natural order, and each batch is mapped to a QAM-1024 symbol. Take the first batch {vi}1i=0 1 for example. The first half {vi}5i=1 is mapped to the in-phase branch and the second half {vi}1i=0 6 is mapped to the quadrature branch.
2) Block Interleaving The coded bits are arranged into a matrix of size 12960 × 5, in which the m-th entry on the l−th column corresponds to the coded bit indexed by 12960 × (l − 1) + m. To map to the j-th QAM symbol, we take row 2j − 1 and 2j from the matrix, which are mapped to the I and Q branches, respectively. This strategy is designed for terrestrial channels rather than cable channels.
3) Interleaving Proposed in Section V

Fig. 3. Bitwise Capacity for a 256-QAM Modulated System as a Function

To illustrate, Fig. 4 shows the error performance corresponding to

of SNR.

the three interleaving strategies above. We choose rate 2/5 because it

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonse9i U78ni-v1.-D4o2w4n4lo-2a3de2d4-o8n/J0u8n/e$2254,.200026©a2t 0060:835I:E18EUET. C from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE "GLOBECOM" 2008 proceedings.

DVBS2 LDPC Code Rate of 2by5

No interleaving

Block Interleaving

10−1

Proposed

100 10−1

10−2

10−2

10−3

10−3

BER
BER

10−4

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

16.5

17

17.5

18

18.5

19

Es/N0 [dB]

Fig. 4. Comparison of Coded BER for DVB-S2 LDPC Code of Rate 2/5

has the highest percentage (60%) of degree 2 VNDs, which are more likely to form short loops. It can be seen from this figure that the error floor performance of the proposed bit interleaver outperforms both “no interleaving” and “block interleaving”. Compared with the benchmark performance of “no interleaving”, we can also see an improvement in the waterfall region, which is due to the selective treatment of low-ACE loops prone for decoding failures under message passing decoding, which contribute to both the low and high SNR regimes. Nevertheless, we recognize that in order to improve both the decoding threshold as well as the error floor for bit-interleaved LDPC-coded (high-order) modulation, a comprehensive interleaver design should also take into account the degree distributions. To this end, we propose to formulate the interleaver design as a constrained optimization problem, where the objective function is given by the decoding threshold and the optimizers are the degree profiles of the bit interleaver. The detail of this approach can be found in [19]. To illustrate the efficacy of this bit interleaving for LDPC-coded highorder modulation, we have designed the bit interleavers for DVB-S2 LDPC-coded 1024-QAM modulation over AWGN channels for code rates R ∈ {1/2, 3/5, 2/3, 3/4}. We compare the error performance of the proposed bit interleavers against that of the random interleaving approach in Fig. 5. It can be observed from these figures that the error performance in both the waterfall and the error floor regions can be significantly improved via the proposed bit interleavers. Assume the decoding threshold MP is approximated by the minimum Es/N0 that makes the BER of information bits lower than 10−7. Compared to random bit interleaving, the proposed scheme can shrink the gap to the Shannon limit in percentage ranging from 28% to 44%.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we investigated the identification of loopy structures in the bipartite graph of LDPC codes using expanded adjacency matrix. The information about loop length is useful in predicting the accuracy of density evolution. Moreover, the minimum loop ACE can be used as a simple substitute for trapping sets, whose enumeration is desirable for error floor analysis but the complexity is NP-hard. Following the heuristic that the low-degree variable nodes residing on low-ACE loops are more likely to form trapping sets and hence are more vulnerable to noise, we studied the design of bit interleavers for LDPC-coded high-order modulation. Using the LDPC codes specified in DVB-S2 standards as our prototype, we have demonstrated the efficacy of the proposed bit interleaving scheme for spectrally-efficient modulation over AWGN channel.

10−5

10−6

R=1/2, Random R=1/2, Proposed R=3/5, Random

R=3/5, Proposed

10−7

R=2/3, Random R=2/3, Proposed

R=3/4, Random

10−8

R=3/4, Proposed

16

17

18

19

20

21

22

23

24

25

26

Es/N0 [dB]

Fig. 5. Error Performance of Proposed Bit Interleavers Compared with Random Interleaving

REFERENCES
[1] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Further analysis of finite-length scaling for iteratively decoded ldpc ensembles,” Proc. of IEEE ISIT, 2004.
[2] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 1570–1579, 2002.
[3] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of ldpc codes,” 41-st Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, 2003.
[4] A. Ramamoorthy and N. Varnica, “Error floors of ldpc coded bicm,” Proc. of IEEE ICC, pp. 839–844, 2007.
[5] K. M. Krishnan and P. Shankar, “Computing the stopping distance of a tanner graph is np-hard,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 2278–2280, 2007.
[6] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular ldpc code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, pp. 1242–1247.
[7] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, L. B. Milstein, and D. Pfister, “Capacityapproaching bandwidth-efficient coded modulaiton schemes based on low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 1016– 1020, 2003.
[8] H. Sankar, N. Sindhushayana, and K. R. Narayanan, “Design of lowdensity parity check codes for high order constellations,” Proc. of IEEE GLOBECOM, 2004.
[9] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 619–637, 2001.
[10] A. A. E. Sharon and S. Litsyn, “Analysis of low-density parity-check codes based on exit functions,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, pp. 1407– 1414, Aug. 2006.
[11] C. C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Density evolution for asymmetric memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 4216– 4236, Dec. 2005.
[12] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 533–547, 1981.
[13] T. Etzion and A. Trachtenberg, “Which codes have cycle-free tanner graphs ?” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 2173–2181, 1999.
[14] J. A. McGowan and R. C. Williamson, “Loop removal from ldpc codes,” Proc. of IEEE Information Theory Workshop, pp. 230–233, 2003.
[15] D. Vukobratovic, A. Djurendic, and V. Senk, “Ace spectrum of ldpc codes and generalized ace design,” Proc. of IEEE ICC, pp. 665–670, 2007.
[16] E. Agrell, J. Lassing, E. G. Strm, and T. Ottosson, “Gray coding for multilevel constellations in gaussian noise,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 224–235, 2007.
[17] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 927–946, Mar. 1998.
[18] “DVB-S2 standards,” ETSI EN 302 307, 2006. [19] J. Lei and W. Gao, “Matching graph connectivity of ldpc codes to high-
order modulation by bit interleaving,” submitted to Allerton 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonse9i U78ni-v1.-D4o2w4n4lo-2a3de2d4-o8n/J0u8n/e$2254,.200026©a2t 0060:835I:E18EUET. C from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5

This full text paper was peer reviewed at the direction of IEEE Communications Society subject matter experts for publication in the IEEE "GLOBECOM" 2008 proceedings.

