3628

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, DECEMBER 2008

Efficient Implementation of Low-Density
Parity-Check Convolutional Code Encoders
With Built-In Termination
Zhengang Chen, Student Member, IEEE, Tyler L. Brandon, Stephen Bates, Senior Member, IEEE, Duncan G. Elliott, Member, IEEE, and Bruce F. Cockburn, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Low-density parity-check convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs) have demonstrated comparable error-correcting performance to LDPC block codes (LDPC-BCs). However, the LDPC-CC encoder requires termination when applied to finite-length data frames to ensure that the trailing information bits are fully protected. In this paper, the LDPC-CC encoder design is investigated, and a novel termination scheme is proposed. Starting from any encoder state, the proposed scheme is capable of generating a termination sequence in hardware without padding, thus minimizing the rate loss due to termination. A high-speed architecture for LDPC-CC encoders with built-in termination is proposed. Synthesis results for LDPC-CCs of code memory size up to 512 demonstrate maximum encoding throughputs of around 1 Gb/s for a 90-nm CMOS technology. The implementation cost for such encoders is shown to be reasonably low for average-sized LDPC-CCs.
Index Terms—Application-specific integrated circuits (ASICs), convolutional codes, error correction coding, high-speed integrated circuits, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, trellis termination.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, first proposed in the early 1960s [1] and then rediscovered in the mid1990s [2], have already attracted much research interest and are now entering emerging communication standards such as IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T), IEEE 802.16e, and DVB-S2. LDPC codes, in their original form, are block codes, where the input data sequence has to be segmented into fixed-size blocks to be encoded and decoded. LDPC convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs) are a variation of LDPC codes. They were first proposed as time-varying convolutional codes defined by a low-density parity-check matrix [3]. With the belief propagation decoding algorithm [4], LDPC-CCs can achieve comparable capacity-approaching performance to LDPC block codes (LDPC-BCs). Moreover, the code memory of LDPC-CCs
Manuscript received July 6, 2007; revised March 21, 2008. First published May 20, 2008; current version published December 12, 2008. This work was supported in part by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada and by the Semiconductor Research Corporation under Grant 1170.001. This paper was presented in part at IEEE GLOBECOM, San Francisco, CA, November 2006. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor A.-Y. Wu.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada T6G 2V4 (e-mail: zgchen@ece.ualberta.ca; brandon@ece.ualberta.ca; sbates@ece.ualberta.ca; elliott@ece.ualberta.ca; cockburn@ece.ualberta.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2008.925813

is much smaller than the block length of LDPC-BCs [3] with the same performance. In [5], it was shown for a certain ensemble of time-varying LDPC-CCs that the free distance increases linearly with the code memory. LDPC-CCs can operate over arbitrary lengths of data, and data streams can be continuously encoded and decoded. This avoids the requirement to segment data sequences into blocks and makes LDPC-CCs suitable candidates for streaming applications as well as packet-based communication systems with variable-length data frames (e.g., Ethernet). Due to these features, LDPC-CCs are attracting increasing attention to both their theoretical and implementation aspects [6]–[10]. A detailed comparison of code performance and decoding complexity between LDPC-CCs and LDPC-BCs can be found in [11]. Both application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) and field-programmable gate array implementations of LDPC-CC decoders have been reported [12], [13]. Compared to LDPC-BCs, one major disadvantage of LDPC-CCs is that the coded sequence needs to be properly terminated when applied to finite-length data frames [14]. In this paper, we investigate the encoder design for LDPC-CCs, with built-in hardware that generates appropriate bits for termination.
The encoding problem for LDPC-BCs has been studied since LDPC codes became a potential rival to turbo codes [15] in the 1990s. Although LDPC-BCs appear to have an encoding complexity that is quadratic in the block length, it has been shown that linear-time encoding is achievable by making the parity-check matrix “approximate triangular” [16], [17]. Some other algebraically constructed LDPC-BCs, such as quasi-cyclic codes, also have linear encoding complexity [18]. These methods all involve constructing the code generator matrix. In contrast, LDPC-CCs can be encoded directly from the parity-check matrix, which is already triangular and sparse. Consequently, LDPC-CCs are linear-time encodable, as shown in [3].
In packet-based systems, the data bits are organized and transmitted in frames. To apply convolutional codes to finite-length data frames, the encoder has to terminate in a proper manner. Termination (also known as encoder termination or trellis termination [19]) is a problem seen in convolutional codes. Termination means generating tail bits which drive the encoder to a known state, usually the all-zero state, once the end of the frame has been reached. Without correct termination, simply stopping the encoder at the end of the frame leads to less protection for the trailing bits of the frame. Termination causes a slight loss in code rate. An alternative to termination is tail biting, where the

1549-8328/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF LDPC-CC ENCODERS WITH BUILT-IN TERMINATION

3629

encoder is forced to start and end at the same state [20]. This results in a circular trellis. Tail biting does not need tail bits and thus causes zero rate loss. For conventional convolutional codes, tail biting requires a modified decoding algorithm with higher complexity [20], [21]. For LDPC-CCs, a proper way of terminating the encoder is also necessary, but the problem is quite different from and much more difficult than that of a convolutional code encoder [14]. The implementation of termination in hardware is rather complex. A circuit implementation capable of terminating the LDPC-CC encoder was shown in [22]. However, for complexity reasons, this implementation can only terminate the LDPC-CC encoder starting from a predetermined phase (the phase is defined in Section II-B). Padding is required when the encoder ends a frame at a different phase.
In this paper, we propose a new termination scheme capable of terminating LDPC-CC encoders from all possible states of any phase. Compared to [22], the proposed scheme does not need padding to reach a specific phase, thus reducing the rate loss. It also has lower implementation complexity. Based on the new termination scheme, a high-speed low-latency ASIC architecture for LDPC-CC encoders with built-in termination circuitry is proposed. Two rate-1/2 LDPC-CCs, with code memory sizes of 128 and 512, are implemented and synthesized for a 90-nm CMOS process. Synthesis results show that the proposed encoder architecture achieves gigabit-per-second throughputs. Comparisons between encoders with and without termination show that adding built-in termination increases the encoder area by approximately two and six times, respectively, for the two implemented codes. In practical LDPC-CC encoders, the implementation cost is dominated by built-in termination, which is an essential part in dealing with finite-length frames. However, the encoder with termination is still much smaller than a corresponding decoder for LDPC-CCs of average size (code memory less than 1000). Both the area and throughput results are improved substantially over the design in [22].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we give an overview of LDPC-CCs and the encoder structure. The problem of termination and its solution are discussed in Section III. In Section IV, the all-phase termination scheme is proposed and analyzed. Section V presents the proposed encoder architecture with all-phase termination and details the steps for generating the termination circuitry. Synthesis results are also provided in this section. Conclusions are given in Section VI.

II. LDPC-CC OVERVIEW

A. Code Definition

An LDPC-CC is defined by an infinite parity-check matrix .

For convenience, and to conform with the notation in [3], we use

the transposed form (known as the syndrome former). The

code is defined as the null space of , i.e., the set

, where denotes infinite-length row vectors. Here, we only

consider binary codes, and hence, only 0 and 1 define on the

Galois field GF(2) can be elements of and . The infi-

nite parity-check matrix of a rate

LDPC-CC can

be written as see equation (1) at the bottom of the page The

submatrices

are of size

.

Each individual time index specifies a column in , corre-

sponding to

parity-check equations. For practical codes,

the parity-check equations are periodically time-varying. Sup-

pose the period is , then

for any valid

and . When

, the code is a time-invariant LDPC-CC,

whose free distance does not increase linearly with the code

memory [23]. In this paper, we study design problems for gen-

eral time-varying LDPC-CCs.

An important parameter of the code is the (syndrome former)

memory , which determines the maximum number of pre-

vious bits that are involved in encoding the current bit. To differ-

entiate this definition from the term “memory” used in circuits,

we will call the code memory. Obviously the code memory

has to be a finite number, otherwise, infinite memory is required

to encode/decode. A regular LDPC-CC with uniform column

weight (check-node degree) and row weight (variable node

degree) in is referred to as an

LDPC-CC.

B. LDPC-CC Encoder

LDPC-CCs can be directly encoded from the syndrome

former provided the submatrix

is full rank for all possible

’s. Consider rate-1/2 codes where

and

. The infi-

nite codeword can be written as

,

where is a subvector of size 1 2:

, and

denotes an information bit and denotes a parity bit.

The constituent submatrices of are

and

(2)

...

...

...

...

...

(1)

...

...

...

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3630

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, DECEMBER 2008

m ; ; Fig. 1. Rate-1/2 ( 3 6) LDPC-CC encoder without termination.

where

for all ’s. From the code definition, we obtain

the following encoding equation for rate-1/2 systematic LDPC-

CCs:

(3)

This is the original encoding equation described in [3]. The co-

efficients

and

in (3) are time-varying with period

. To address this periodicity in the analysis and in the imple-

mentation, a phase parameter is introduced. At time , the co-

efficients in (3) are determined by the phase

,

assuming that the encoder always starts from phase 0 at time

. Due to the sparsity (i.e., low density) of , only a few

of the coefficients are nonzero.

Fig. 2. Parity-check matrix of the (5,2(3),5) LDPC-CC from [3]. The period
Tis = 4. The time indexes and the phase signal values corresponding to the H parity-check equations (columns in ) are also indicated. On the right are the
corresponding bits in the codeword vector.

Fig. 1 shows the systematic encoder architecture for a rate-1/2

LDPC-CC. Not shown is a mod- counter that produces the phase signal . The encoder is a finite-state machine (FSM). The encoder state is defined as the set comprising

TABLE I ENCODER OPERATIONS FOR THE (5,2(3),5) LDPC-CC AS DEFINED BY THE
PARITY-CHECK MATRIX IN FIG. 2

the last information bits

, the last

parity bits

, and the phase .

In Fig. 1, the phase controls the selection of five inputs to

the XOR logic from the delay elements (state bits) and the

current information bit .

In the previous discussion, the input bit sequence starts from

time . One implicit but natural assumption is that all pre-

vious bits are zeros. This implies that, in Fig. 1, the delay ele-

ments are initialized to all-zero. Note that the state bits of

the encoder can be all-zero with the phase taking any value

between 0 and

. Thus, there is a total of all-zero states

with different phases. However, once any of these all-zero

states is reached, a zero input will always lead to another all-zero

state, which means that they are self-perpetuating. Thus, the

different all-zero states have the same effect in the discussion of

termination, and any encoder state with only zeros in the delay

elements will be called an “all-zero state” henceforth.

matrix in (1) because the encoder starts from the all-zero

state, and all bits prior to

are assumed to be zero. To

get the encoding equations for all phases, we need to look

at columns in Fig. 2 with the full height

.

For LDPC-CCs, we use relative positions in the time axis to

denote the parity-check relations (i.e., check-node connec-

tions). For instance, at

, we have

. Referring

to the corresponding codeword vector to the right of

(from

to ), we obtain the encoding equation for

.

Similarly, we can obtain the encoder operations for all phases,

C. Simple LDPC-CC

as shown in Table I. Note that this simple code is for illustration

We use a simple LDPC-CC as an example to demonstrate the purposes only.

encoder design process throughout this paper. This LDPC-CC is a (5,2(3),5) semiregular rate-1/2 LDPC-CC that appeared

III. LDPC-CC ENCODER TERMINATION

in [3]. According to the

nomenclature defined in In most real-world applications, a data frame has a start and

Section II-A, this code has the following parameters: code an end. To apply LDPC-CCs to a finite-length frame, the en-

memory

, variable-node degree

or 3, and coder/decoder has to start and end a frame properly. Using ter-

check-node degree

. In addition, this LDPC-CC has a mination, the encoder starts from the all-zero state and ends at

period of

. The parity-check matrix is shown in Fig. 2 the all-zero state. Correspondingly, the pipelined LDPC-CC de-

as a semi-infinite matrix, which is equivalent to the infinite coder ([9], [10]) initializes all the log-likelihood ratios (LLRs)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF LDPC-CC ENCODERS WITH BUILT-IN TERMINATION

3631

in the decoder FIFO delay lines to infinity, representing deterministic zero bits. After channel LLRs of the encoded frame with termination are pushed into the decoder, infinite LLRs must be generated at the decoder input to finish decoding. For details regarding the LDPC-CC decoder architecture and the necessity of termination in LDPC-CCs, please refer to [3] and [14]. Worthy to note here are possible alternatives to the termination approach. Tail biting is known as an alternative to termination. It makes the encoder start and end at the same state, not necessarily the all-zero state. Recently, tailing-biting LDPC-CCs have been proposed in [24]. However, with tail-biting LDPC-CCs, the data input is encoded as a block rather than continuously. In addition, the encoding complexity is quadratic in the frame length, which is much larger than . Another possible alternative is using guard intervals between frames, but it causes too much rate loss, as shown in Appendix A.

A. Problem Definition and Solution

Consider systematic rate-1/2 codes as an example of

the termination problem. Suppose the length of the input

information bit frame is . The encoded frame is then

. At time

, the

last bit of has been sent to the encoder, and the tail bits for

termination start to be fed to the input of the encoder. Although

the tail bits are not necessarily all zeros, the encoder is expected

to reach the all-zero state in finite time, preferably as fast as

possible to minimize the rate loss. At some point during the

termination process, the systematic encoder must reach a par-

tial-zero state, where a zero information bit input will always

generate a zero parity bit output.1 From this partial-zero state,

at most input bits are needed to flush the encoder to the

all-zero state. These zero bits do not need to be transmitted

because they are deterministic zeros. Based on this fact, the

flushing zeros need not be counted in calculating the rate loss

due to termination.

We define the uncoded termination sequence as

, where is the number of un-

coded tail bits required to reach a partial-zero state, called the

termination length. These bits do not contain any user infor-

mation and will be called termination bits. The termination

bits are chosen to drive the encoder to a partial-zero state.

Meanwhile, the encoder generates the corresponding parity

bits:

, which will be called

termination parity bits. The encoded termination sequence

can be written as

, where

and

for

. From the

code definition, we have

(4)

is the coded termination sequence that brings the encoder

to a partial-zero state, and

is the zero vector that flushes

the encoder to the all-zero state. Equation (4) can be rewritten

as follows by partitioning the matrix into submatrices:

(5)

Equation (5) implies that

, which follows

the code definition. From (5), it follows that

(6)

where and (the size subscripts are omitted for easy nota-

tion) are suitably chosen submatrices from

[14].

Both and are determined by the starting phase of

the termination sequence and the termination length . For ex-

ample, starts from the

th column and the

th

row of

, and the corresponding phase is .

The right-hand side of (6) seems to depend on the entire coded

frame . Only the last bits of , i.e., the ending state vector

of the encoder, are relevant because all but the last rows of

are zeros. Let

be the ending state vector, and then

,

where comprises the last rows of .

The termination sequence (before or after encoding) is ob-

tained by solving (6) for . We can obtain a more familiar linear

equation in a column vector form by taking the transpose

(7)

where

and

. The size of

is

. When the number of constraints is no greater

than the number of unknowns (i.e.,

, which matches

with the tail length requirement in convolutional code termina-

tion) and

is full rank (having rank

), this equation

has one or more solutions [25]. Here, we assume that there exists

at least one solution to (7) for phase

and termination

length , and then

(8)

In this solution, the termination sequence is determined by the

ending state vector and the matrix

, which

is called the termination matrix and is also dependent on the

phase and the termination length . Once the equations are

solved, the termination matrix

can be saved and used in

the implementation. This is the method employed in [14] to find

the right termination sequence. Although only rate-1/2 codes are

discussed in this section, the solution can be easily extended to

LDPC-CCs of general rate , as verified in Section IV-B.

where to

denotes the syndrome former from

B. Termination of the (5,2 (3),5) LDPC-CC and Discussion

, taken from the definition in (1). In(4), Consider the termination problem for the (5,2(3),5)

1This can be easily proved: To reach and maintain the all-zero state (i.e., to achieve termination), the input bits to the encoder have to be all-zero from some point on (see Fig. 1). If no partial-zero state is reached, then no all-zero state will be reached because the zero input information bits will generate a nonzero parity bit every now and then.

LDPC-CC. Due to the condition

, the termination

length can be set to

. For the moment, assume that

the encoder is at the first phase

when the termination

starts, i.e.,

. Then, we need to find and to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3632

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, DECEMBER 2008

Fig. 4. Padding bits need to be added between the data frame and the termination sequence to reach a fixed phase for single-phase termination. Parity bits are not shown in the figure, and the termination sequence is generated by a single-phase termination circuitry.

D P Fig. 3. Example showing how to find the and submatrices in the parity-

= 0 = 5 check matrices for the (5,2(3),5) LDPC-CC. In this case, 

and L .

D P B Note that, in (5),

is below (part of

D = 0 from  due to the periodicity.

). Here, we simply locate

derive the termination matrix . From (5) and Fig. 2, we can

find these two matrices, as shown in Fig. 3.

In this case, the matrix is a square matrix, and it happens

to be full rank. Therefore, it has a unique inverse . Based

on (8), we obtain the following termination matrix for

and

:

are relaxed. When

,

has rank

for all

possible phases, and one or more solutions exist for all phases.

To guarantee that the encoder terminates from all states with

, termination matrices for all phases have to be stored.

In general, there is a total of termination matrices of size

for a fixed . As these matrices are generally

not sparse and both and are usually close to for a typ-

ical time-varying LDPC-CC, the storage requirement becomes

, which is too large for building practical LDPC-CC

encoders.

On the other hand, if only one phase is chosen to be the

starting phase of termination, only a single termination matrix

needs to be saved. Since the data frame can end at any phase,

padding then becomes necessary to reach a specific phase

(phase 0 in this example) before the termination starts, which

will further reduce the effective code rate (shown in Fig. 4).

This is the circuit design approach used in [22]. In this paper,

we call this compromise single-phase termination. Another

issue for the single-phase termination implementation is that it

requires extra storage elements to save the ending state vector.

In the LDPC-CC encoder shown in Fig. 1, even a single input

bit change will change the encoder state. To generate the whole

termination sequence from (8), either the ending state vector

or the termination sequence needs to be saved before the

encoder state changes. In either case, at least extra storage

elements are required and lead to higher implementation cost.

(9)

IV. LDPC-CC ENCODER WITH ALL-PHASE TERMINATION

A. New Termination Approach

An LDPC-CC encoder capable of termination at any phase

without padding is desirable because it would eliminate the rate

loss caused by padding. It was proved in [23] that almost all

With found, whenever the encoder needs to be terminated the

rate-1/2 regular LDPC-CCs can be terminated

from phase

, the corresponding termination sequence with a tail length of no greater than

. We make the

can be obtained by multiplying with a column vector con- assumption that all of the LDPC-CCs of interest can be termi-

taining the last

bits of the encoded data frame, i.e., nated at any phase with a finite termination length (i.e., the

the ending state vector of the encoder.

linear system defined by (7) is consistent for all phases), based

The procedure of finding a termination sequence seems on the conclusion in [23] and the following two reasons.

straightforward mathematically, but it may lead to a few unde- 1) If the code can be terminated at one phase, it can also be

sirable problems in implementation. One difficulty comes from

terminated at any other phase through padding, i.e., at the

the time-varying nature of the encoder. With

, termina-

cost of a larger termination length. It is very unlikely that

tion is always possible at

. However, at

and

,

the system is unsolvable for all phases.

there may be no solution to (7) because and are not 2) If there indeed exists an LDPC-CC that cannot be ter-

full rank, so must be increased to make termination possible

minated at any phase with any finite termination length,

from all encoder states at any phase. By increasing by 1, one

we can simply construct another LDPC-CC which can be

additional degree of freedom is introduced, and the constraints

terminated.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF LDPC-CC ENCODERS WITH BUILT-IN TERMINATION

3633

Fig. 5. Termination path through the code trellis using all-phase termination. Circles represent the all-zero state, empty squares represent partial-zero states, and black filled squares represent arbitrary states.

All of the LDPC-CCs used in this paper can be terminated at termination bits are needed and get the first of them. This will

any phase by simply choosing to be slightly larger than : not be a problem if the correct path is unique for all the phases,

,

, as will be shown in Sections IV-B and which naturally forces each state transition to stay on the correct

V-D.

path and thus ensures that the trellis will definitely return to a

As the LDPC-CC encoder is also an FSM, an LDPC-CC can partial-zero state in no more than transitions.

be categorized as a trellis code from the encoding point of view. However, the unique path condition is generally not true. In

The trellis starts from the all-zero state, and termination is sup- (7), the system matrix

is of size

. The ter-

posed to bring it back to the all-zero state (through a partial-zero mination length may need to be chosen to be larger than

state). The single-phase termination solution

cor- to make (7) solvable for all possible phases. Thus, in (7), the

responds to a path in the trellis starting from state and ending number of constraints

is usually smaller than the number

at a partial-zero state.

of variables . When the system is solvable for all possible

Instead of preserving the entire ending state vector, gen- states, must be full rank for all phases, i.e.,

erating the termination bits, and then feeding them to the

. To solve (7), standard Gaussian elimination is used.

encoder, we can perform the process progressively. Given As the rank of is known, Gaussian elimination will lead to

the ending state of the encoder , the first termination bit basic variables and

free variables in the reduced row-ech-

is obtained from (8) using

, the first elon form of , leading to a total of

solutions

row of

, and is then fed to the encoder. After the first to (7)[25]. Thus, there are

paths of length from state

termination parity bit

is generated and the encoder to a partial-zero state. Given this fact, the worst possible case in

state is updated, the second termination bit

is all-phase termination is that one of the solutions to (7) is used

again obtained from (8), with a different state vector

, for the current state transition, but it detours from the path cal-

at a different phase

and, thus, with the first row culated from the previous state, and this detour happens repeat-

of a different termination matrix

. This approach edly so that we are always at most

steps away from a par-

generates termination bits on demand until the termination tial-zero state but can never reach it. We can avoid this problem

length is reached. Therefore, no extra storage is required to by setting all the free variables to zero in solving (7) (or, equiva-

save the encoder state vector at the end of the frame. In the state lently, finding the inverse of ). In this way, no detour from the

trellis, each termination bit fed to the encoder causes one state original -step path will happen, and the all-phase termination

transition. After each state transition, the next termination bit is will always reach a partial-zero state in no more than steps.

recalculated based on the updated state. We call this approach The proof is given in Appendix B.

all-phase termination. All-phase termination also forms a As an independent check on the theoretical proof, we also ver-

termination path through the code trellis, as shown in Fig. 5. ified the correctness of all-phase termination with software. The

proposed all-phase termination scheme was verified on eight

B. Correctness of All-Phase Termination

LDPC-CCs with the code memory size ranging from 128 to 2048 and the code rate ranging from 1/2 to 5/6. The codes

Before applying all-phase termination to the encoder design, were constructed using the algorithms described in [3] and [26].

we need to make sure that it generates the correct termination The termination length was chosen to be just large enough to

sequence of length . In all-phase termination, the termination make the linear system defined by (7) consistent for every phase.

bit is still generated based on (7) and (8). What is different from The choice of is code dependent, but for all of the codes sim-

single-phase termination is that the matrices and and the ulated, is less than 5% larger than (except the (5,2(3),5)

state vector are changing with each state transition. The termi- LDPC-CC used as a toy example). The termination matrices are

nation bit calculation from (8) is based on the assumption of a generated by using Gaussian–Jordan (G–J) elimination with all

fixed termination length . Therefore, in all-phase termination, the free variables set to zero, and only the first row of each ter-

each state transition in the trellis guarantees that a path starting mination matrix is saved. It is not possible to verify termination

with this transition can reach a partial-zero state in no more than from all possible states because the number of encoder states

steps. In each step of all-phase termination, we assume that grows exponentially with . With being at least around

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3634

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, DECEMBER 2008

m ; ; Fig. 7. Rate-1/2 ( 3 6) LDPC-CC encoder with all-phase termination.

length 1024 is also included for comparison as it has comparable

error-correcting performance [14]. Note that the LDPC-CC with

all-phase termination has a higher effective code rate compared

with the LDPC-BC for most of the data frame lengths. The con-

trary is true only when the coded frame length is equal to or

slightly smaller than the block length of the LDPC-BC.

Fig. 6. Effective code rate for variable-length frames with rate-1/2 codes.

Although LDPC-CCs have an advantage in handling variable-length frames, very large code memory should be avoided

due to the severe rate loss from termination. As LDPC-CCs

100 for LDPC-CCs of practical interest, the state number is pro- can achieve comparable performance to LDPC-BCs with the hibitively high. Instead of traversing all the states, we used the code memory much less than the block length [3], [11], the following procedure, based on (4), to probabilistically verify the LDPC-CCs that we use usually have below 1000.

all-phase termination for rate- codes.

1) Generate a random length data frame comprised of random V. LDPC-CC ENCODER ARCHITECTURE WITH ALL-PHASE

0s and 1s.

TERMINATION

2) Encode this data frame. 3) Generate the termination bits and feed them to the en- A. LDPC-CC Encoder With Termination

coder, using the all-phase termination method described in

Section IV-A.

4) Drive

more 0s to the encoder input, and check the

corresponding output parity bits. This is the step of flushing

the encoder. If all the

parity bits are zero,

correct termination is verified, and we go back to step 1).

Otherwise, a termination failure is recorded.

For all the codes tested, more than one million frames were

used, and no failures were observed with all-phase termination.

With all-phase termination, once the equations are

solved, only the first row of each termination matrix

(

) needs to be stored in the im-

plementation for rate-1/2 LDPC-CCs. Starting from whatever

phase the encoder is left at after encoding the user information,

the termination bits can be generated on demand while being

fed to the encoder input. Such an encoder with termination is

shown in Fig. 7. Conceptually, the termination circuit comprises

a multiplexer, which selects a number of bits from the

C. Rate Loss Due to Termination

state bits, and an XOR tree that outputs the next termination bit. Note that the termination bits are generated internally, and

The bit error rate (BER) performance of LDPC-CCs with ter- the termination parity bits are still generated by the encoder in

mination was addressed in [11] and [14]. While assuring good the same fashion as when encoding the data frame. The storage

performance near the end of a frame, the encoded termination requirement for the termination matrices is

for

sequence is transmitted and causes a rate loss, depending on the rate- codes (interestingly not dependent on ), making the

length of the data frame [11], [14]: The larger the data frame, the space complexity of termination

. For pure LDPC-CC

smaller the rate loss. Note that an LDPC-CC coded frame with encoding itself, the complexity is

because the parity-

termination experiences better error protection at both the begin- check matrix is sparse. The termination matrix is not sparse.

ning and the end of the frame due to the participation of deter- For example, the density of 1s for the simulated LDPC-CCs is

ministic zeros in decoding [14]. For example, at

dB, nearly 50%.

this enhanced error protection benefits around

bits at two The LDPC-CC encoder with all-phase termination shown in

ends of the frame for 50 decoding iterations ([14, Fig. 5]), which Fig. 7 reveals the complexity of a practical LDPC-CC encoder.

slightly improves the performance but is negligible for large An LDPC-CC is both a special kind of convolutional code

frames. Compared with single-phase termination with padding, and an LDPC code. It has capacity-approaching performance

all-phase termination minimizes the rate loss because the termi- owing to the LDPC decoding. On the other hand, the encoding

nation length is very close to for all phases. Fig. 6 shows looks very much like a convolutional code [see (3)]. For a

the effective rate of the same (128,3,6) LDPC-CC with these two practical LDPC-CC encoder, however, termination has to be

termination methods applied to data frames of different lengths. included, and the all-phase termination approach resembles a

Without any padding, all-phase termination has an advantage generic LDPC encoder in that both need to find the inverse

when handling variable-length frames. An LDPC-BC of block of the parity-check matrix in some way. Without introducing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF LDPC-CC ENCODERS WITH BUILT-IN TERMINATION

3635

structures or other techniques in the code construction, a general time-varying LDPC-CC encoder has a practical encoding

TABLE II TERMINATION BIT GENERATION OPERATIONS FOR THE (5,2(3),5) LDPC-CC

complexity of

. In cases of general time-varying

LDPC-CCs, the period is close to and leads to quadratic

complexity. It is therefore not advisable to use LDPC-CCs

with very large . Fortunately, LDPC-CCs can achieve good

performance with only moderate

, and our im-

plementation results in the next few sections show that the

encoder cost is reasonably low. Based on the earlier discussion, certainly, we can expect that a time-invariant LDPC-CC
has linear complexity in encoding with termination, but the error correction performance will be compromised. On the other hand, LDPC-CCs with small can be constructed to reduce the complexity of termination, and the design approach we present in Sections V-B–D still applies.

where is an

identity matrix, is the

reduced row-echelon form of

after the G–J elimination,

and is the right part of the augmented matrix after the G–J

elimination. If

is a square matrix, i.e.,

, then

is an identity matrix and is the unique inverse of . If

, then contains

columns corresponding

to free variables (see (12) in Appendix B). To ensure that all the

B. Preprocessing: Generating the Encoding and Termination Connections
Given an LDPC-CC defined by a parity-check matrix , to build the encoding circuit as well as the termination circuit, as shown in Fig. 7, the time-varying connections between the delay elements (state bits) and the two XOR gates have to be found first. This is equivalent to finding the combinational logic of the two multiplexers in Fig. 7. The encoding connections can be determined directly through the parity-check matrix, as shown in Table I. Here, we present the steps for generating the termination connections in all-phase termination for rate-1/2 LDPC-CCs, using the (5,2(3),5) code as an example. This preprocessing pro-

free variables are set to zero, we insert

rows of zeros

to the corresponding locations of , and get a

matrix, which is the right inverse of : .

We also obtain

for all phases from . For the

(5,2(3),5) code, Fig. 3 shows an example for

and

.

Based on (8), we get the termination matrix by multiplication:

. For the (5,2(3),5) code with

, four

12 10 termination matrices (

, and ) are

generated.

3) Step 3: Generate the Termination Connections: The first

row of each termination matrix is taken and combined to form

the all-phase termination matrix . The matrix specifies the

time-varying connections between the encoder state bits and the

cedure is done with software and only needs to be performed XOR gate, shown at the left side of Fig. 7, that generates a termi-

once for each code.

nation bit at every phase. For the (5,2(3),5) code, the all-phase

1) Step 1: Determine the Termination Length : The termi- termination matrix acquired through these steps is

nation length has to be large enough to make (7) solvable at all

phases. The minimum possible value of is . The following

simple algorithm is used to determine .

1) Initialize :

.

2) Obtain

from the infinite syn-

drome former . For the (5,2(3),5) code, Fig. 3 is an

(11)

example with

and

. The common size of

these matrices is

. Check the rank of

these matrices. If all of them have rank

, i.e., full

rank, stop the search and choose the current value of .

Otherwise, go to 3).

3) Increase by 1:

. Then, go to 2).

For the (5,2(3),5) code, when

, is not full rank

In each row of , the 1s represent the state bits to be XOR-ed at each phase. In each column of , the 1s represent the connections from each state bit to the XOR gate at different phases. The columns from left to right correspond to these state bits, respectively:
. The termination bit generation equations based on this matrix are given in Table II. The all-phase termination

at phases 2 and 3. However, when is increased to

, matrix is of size

, totally independent of , which

, , , and all have rank equaling

, also reflects the code’s periodicity in termination. Note that two

i.e., full rank. Therefore, is chosen to be 6.

columns in are all-zero, indicating that corresponding state

2) Step 2: Find Termination Matrices for All the Phases: For bits (

) are always irrelevant in generating ter-

each phase

, use the following proce- mination bits.

dure to generate the termination matrix : Usually,

is

a nonsquare matrix, and the inverse of

referred to in (8) is C. High-Speed LDPC-CC Encoder Architecture With Built-In

actually the right inverse (a one-sided inverse). We find this in- Termination

verse using G–J elimination. For a given , apply G–J elim- The encoder shown in Fig. 7 uses two phase-controlled mul-

ination to the following augmented matrix:

tiplexers due to the time-varying connections between the delay

elements and the two XOR gates. When becomes large, these

multiplexers also grow in size, and they tend to cause a long crit-

(10) ical path [27].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3636

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, DECEMBER 2008

m ; ; Fig. 8. Encoder architecture for rate-1/2( 3 6) regular LDPC-CCs with all-phase termination.

To implement a high-speed LDPC-CC encoder with built-in termination, the new architecture shown in Fig. 8 is proposed. A termination control signal switches the circuit between encoding mode and termination mode. Phase masks are used to

TABLE III AREA AND TIMING PERFORMANCE OF TWO RATE-1/2 (3,6) REGULAR
LDPC-CC ENCODERS WITH AND WITHOUT TERMINATION FOR A 90-NM CMOS PROCESS

control the connections from the encoder state bits to the XOR

gates. The phase masks are implemented with combinational

logic. The XOR gate for encoding, shown at the right side of

Fig. 7, can be replaced by a pipelinedXOR tree. The inputs to

this XOR tree include all the encoder state bits controlled by the

encoding phase masks. To effectively generate the phase masks,

we use a one-hot encoded shift register FSM to generate

phase signals, of which only one is nonzero at each clock cycle.

The termination circuit is basically the same as the encoding

circuit but with different phase mask control logic. The termi-

nation phase masks are generated based on , using OR gates

(as shown in Fig. 8). Each phase mask controls one state bit and

is the output of an OR gate. The inputs of each OR gate are those

one-hot encoded phase signals that correspond to 1s in the spe-

cific column of which corresponds to the current state bit.

Take the (5,2(3),5) LDPC-CC for example. In (11), the second

column represents the state bit

, and for termination, the

phase mask should be “on” for phases 1 and 2. Thus, the OR gate

inputs for the phase mask of

are and .

and a (512,3,6) LDPC-CC. The periods of these two codes

are 129 and 513, respectively. The (128,3,6) code is the same

as the one used in [22]. The (512,3,6) code can reach a BER

of

at

dB, which is comparable to the

performance of a (3,6) regular LDPC-BC with a block length

of around 8000–10 000. The preprocessing step is performed,

as described in Section V-B for both codes, and takes less than

1 h for either code with a C program. The termination lengths

determined in the preprocessing phase for these two codes

are 134 and 530, respectively. The encoder architecture based

on Fig. 8 is implemented and synthesized for an STM 90-nm

D. Synthesis Results

CMOS process. Three pipeline stages are used for the XOR tree in the (128,3,6) encoder, and nine pipeline stages are used for

Using the proposed algorithm and architecture, we designed the (512,3,6) code. Standard cell synthesis results are shown in

encoders with built-in termination for a (128,3,6) LDPC-CC Table III.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF LDPC-CC ENCODERS WITH BUILT-IN TERMINATION

3637

As expected, adding built-in termination circuitry to the en-

coder increases the area. For the (128,3,6) code, the area is

increased by approximately 1.8 times. For the (512,3,6) code,

the increase jumps to 6.4 times. This is due to the intrinsically

quadratic complexity of termination when

. How-

ever, even with termination, the encoder area is still significantly

lower than the decoder area and only takes a very small portion

of the overall codec. For example, on the same 90-nm CMOS

process, a single decoding processor for the (128,3,6) LDPC-CC

takes about thrice the area of the encoder with built-in termina-

tion [28]. For LDPC-CC codec implementation with multiple

decoding processors, the encoder portion is even less. The en-

coding latency of LDPC-CCs is very low, primarily dependent

on the number of pipeline stages. This is one of the advantages

of the continuous encoding of LDPC-CCs.

Compared to the results reported in [22] using single-phase

termination, the proposed architecture can reach higher clock

frequency (1.2 GHz versus 189 MHz) at reduced complexity

(half the number of state bits, implemented as registers). In [22],

the implementation of termination led to around seven times

cost increase for the (128,3,6) code. The single-phase termi-

nation design would lead to very costly encoder design for the

(512,3,6) LDPC-CC. In addition, no padding is required in the

new encoder architecture, improving the effective code rate.

For LDPC-BCs, there have been limited results reported on

the encoder implementation compared with that on decoder im-

plementations. Recently, an LDPC-BC encoder for a rate-7/8

code with block length of 8158 was implemented on a TSMC

0.25- m CMOS process [29]. It was a quasi-cyclic LDPC en-

coder with a highly optimized parallel architecture. The die size

is 6.578 mm 5.2 mm, and the data throughput is 860 Mb/s with

a clock frequency of 54 MHz. Although it is not possible to com-

pare the performance of this LDPC-BC to that of the (512,3,6)

LDPC-CC used in our implementation due to the obvious rate

difference, it was noted earlier that the (512,3,6) LDPC-CC

has comparable performance to rate-1/2 regular LDPC-BCs of

block length around 8000–10 000, and we make the following

few comparisons and discussions based on available results in

[29] and the rightmost column of Table III.

1) The proposed LDPC-CC encoder architecture is purely

serial, while the LDPC-BC encoder in [29] is a parallel

design. To achieve the same throughput, the LDPC-CC

encoder requires higher clock frequency. Encoding a

8158-bit frame takes 511 clock cycles in [29], which will

take the (512,3,6) LDPC-CC encoder around 5000 clock

cycles (including termination). The rate difference is a

significant factor here. For instance, a rate-7/8 LDPC-CC

encoder can generate 8 coded bits per clock cycle.

2) The parallel LDPC-BC encoder architecture in [29] ex-

ploits the quasi-cyclic structure of the LDPC-BC. It has

been shown in [30] that a general time-varying LDPC-CC

encoder can be parallelized. However, with built-in termi-

nation, LDPC-CC encoder parallelization is not so straight-

forward without altering the code itself.

3) The design in [29] was interconnect limited, and the cell

area took about 25% of the core area. As it used a 0.25- m

technology, by rough scaling based on the feature size, the

cell area that it would require in a 90-nm technology is

around 1.11 mm . Considering that the design in [29] contains another short-code encoder, a single LDPC-BC encoder of block length of 8158 would consume somewhat less area. If we take half, the encoder would cost around 0.55 mm , which is almost equal to the area of the (512,3,6) LDPC-CC encoder in this paper. Note that custom design was used in [29], and the results in Table III are based on standard cell design. 4) The total transistor count is not significantly different for the two implementations (420 K versus 350 K) either. The aforementioned comparison is certainly imperfect due to differences in code rate, architecture, CMOS technology, etc. For instance, a rate difference influences the encoder cost. A rate-1/2 LDPC-BC of the same block length would use more transistors at the same throughput simply because more parity bits need to be calculated in the same block. However, comparison to state-of-the-art LDPC-BC encoder implementations indicates that practical LDPC-CC encoders with built-in termination have reasonable low cost for codes of short-to-medium code memory sizes.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The encoder design problem of LDPC-CCs was investigated in this paper. We proposed an efficient all-phase termination scheme capable of terminating the LDPC-CC encoder from states of any possible state. A high-speed LDPC-CC encoder architecture with built-in termination was presented based on all-phase termination. Synthesis results have shown substantial improvements in both area and speed over the single-phase termination approach in [22]. In addition, the rate loss is minimized by eliminating padding. Although an LDPC-CC encoder without termination is very easy to implement and takes very little area, our results indicate that a practical LDPC-CC encoder with built-in termination costs a few times more in area. However, due to the relatively small code memory of LDPC-CCs, the encoder with built-in termination is still significantly smaller than the corresponding decoder for average-sized codes. For short-to-medium-sized codes, the proposed architecture can achieve maximum data throughputs of around 1 Gb/s.
The proposed design involves the problem of solving linear equations defined over GF (2), which may be relevant to other design problems where finding an inverse matrix is necessary. Future work directions include encoder parallelization with built-in termination by introducing structures in the code construction, and using the partial syndrome former encoder with all-phase termination for low-cost implementation of higher rate LDPC-CCs [27].2
APPENDIX I USING GUARD INTERVALS INSTEAD OF TERMINATION
A possible alternative to termination is to use guard intervals, i.e., appending arbitrary tail bits to the data frame, encoding the data frame together with guard bits, and transmitting them. The receiver then decodes this expanded frame without termination
m m 2The encoding throughput is dependent on the frame length. Assuming that
the frame length is much larger than , e.g., 10 , the encoding throughput is still around 1 Gb/s.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3638

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, DECEMBER 2008

and simply throws away the guard bits. In this way, termina-

tion-related circuits are not needed in either the encoder or the

decoder. However, this approach will lead to a much larger rate

loss because the guard bits at the end of the expanded frame

are still much less protected, and the errors affecting them will

propagate to data bits during iterative decoding. Suppose the de-

coder has processors (iterations). To avoid error propagation

and make sure that there is no performance loss, theoretically,

guard bits are required to shield the data frame. For the

(128,3,6) LDPC-CC and 50 iterations (processors), the number

of guard bits required can be as large as

.

At high SNRs, the actual number of guard bits required can be

much less. [14, Fig. 5] shows that more than 500 bits at the end

of a 2560-bit frame suffer higher-than-normal error rates for the

(128,3,6) LDPC-CC decoder with 50 processors at

dB. To offset this weakness, more than 500 guard bits are

needed, i.e., the length of the guard interval is about , ,

200which is still much larger than the tail length of termina-

tion (approximately ). As noted in Section IV-C, LDPC-CC

encoded frames with termination have enhanced error protec-

tion at the end of the frame. Compared to termination, using a

guard interval is wasteful in terms of power consumption and

does not produce a better BER performance. Therefore, using

guard intervals without termination is not considered a practical

solution.

APPENDIX II PROOF OF THE ALL-PHASE TERMINATION

The standard algorithm for solving (7) or calculating the in-

verse of is Gaussian elimination. The GF (2) linear system

defined by in (7) has

constraints and variables.

It is nonhomogeneous because the right-hand side of (7) is not

a zero vector. The assumption made in Section IV-A is that the

system is consistent and has more than one solution. The re-

duced row-echelon form of after Gaussian elimination looks

like

... ... ... ... ... ... ... (12)

where the 1s are pivots and correspond to basic variables. The

columns with ’s correspond to free variables (i.e., can be

0 or 1) [25]. Note that the reduced row-echelon form of

is unique [25]. There are basic variables and

free

variables, assuming that the rank of is (

in

all-phase termination). The general solution of (7) can be written

as

(13)

where is a particular solution,

are free variables,

and are binary coefficient vectors of free variables corre-

sponding to the columns in (12)[25]. Free variables can be set

to either 0 or 1, resulting in different solutions. In such a binary

system, there are exactly

solutions corresponding to the

same number of termination paths in the trellis. In all-phase

termination, when we solve for the first termination bit at

the ending state , there can be

termination paths of

length on the trellis, although the remaining

bits are

not yet solved. These paths are altogether called the original

paths. A detour happens if the solution of (7) results in a state

transition that is not on the original paths. For example, if the

original paths show that can only be 0 (certainly not a free

variable), but when calculating the second termination bit from

state

:

,

a detour happens. We will prove that a detour will not happen

if the free variables are always set to zero when solving (7)

through Gaussian elimination.

A branch happens in the termination paths if the solution for

a termination bit can be either 0 or 1. Branching happens at

if and only if

is either a free variable in (12) or

is associated with one or more free variables in (13):

. Suppose the termination starts from the

state , and the first transition on the termination path leads

it to the state

. From

, we need to solve (7) with

. Consider the following two cases depending

on the original paths starting from .

1) If the original paths branch at

, then

and

will both lead to a state transition remaining on

the original paths, because can be either 0 or 1 on the

original paths. No detour can happen.

2) If the original paths do not branch at

, assume

that only the input

follows the

original path. The linear system at this moment is defined

by

, and the unknown vector starts from

and ends at

, while the original paths in the same

time span starts with and ends at

. Assume

that there are in total original paths or solutions to the

termination equation from the state . These original

paths must all end at partial-zero states after steps from

, i.e.,

must be a partial-zero state and

and

must be both zero. For the current

termination equation starting from

and defined by

, the original paths are a subset of solutions

with

because a zero input to the encoder at a partial-zero state

leads to another partial-zero state. As shown in Fig. 9, if a

detour happens, i.e.,

, an additional set

of solutions (paths) emerges (only one is shown in the

figure), which are called the detour paths. Looking at the

original paths and the detour paths combined, we see that

can be either or , which implies the following two

possibilities.

a)

is a free variable in the termination equa-

tion defined by

. This possibility can

be eliminated because the original paths can be

obtained by solving

while forcing

.

If

is itself a free variable, would be able

to take either 0 or 1 on the original paths, which

conflicts with the assumption that the original paths

do not branch at

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHEN et al.: EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF LDPC-CC ENCODERS WITH BUILT-IN TERMINATION

3639

Fig. 9. Possible detouring on the termination path. If x(2) = , the solution at the second step of termination (dotted lines) detours from the original path (solid
path). Circles represent the all-zero state, empty squares represent partial-zero states, and black filled squares represent arbitrary states.

b) As the previous possibility is excluded,

is not

a free variable, and then, it must be associated with

one or more free variables [see the general solution

(13)]. It follows that the free variables associated with

must be

or

or both of

them. This can be proved in the same way as in a):

If

is associated with any free variable

, then must be asso-

ciated with the free variable

, and the original

paths would branch at

.

From the aforesaid analysis, we have the following gen-

eral solution for :

, where is considered a particular solution.

For the detour from

to happen, at least one of

and

must be a free variable, and the

corresponding weight ( or ) must be 1. At this point,

it is clear that by setting all free variables to zero, we have

, and no detour will happen at

.

The proof can be directly extended to all the state transitions

following

in the all-phase termination. It is now proved

that the all-phase termination will always reach a partial-zero

state in no more than state transitions. A similar proof can be

given for the partial syndrome LDPC-CC encoder introduced in

[31], which means that all-phase termination can also be applied

to partial syndrome encoders.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. K. Zigangirov and Dr. D. J. Costello Jr. for the discussions on LDPC-CCs and for supplying some of the LDPC-CCs used in this paper, including the (128,3,6) and (512,3,6) codes.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] A. Jiménez-Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[4] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[5] A. Sridharan, D. Truhachev, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, Jr, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Distance bounds for an ensemble of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4537–4555, Dec. 2007.
[6] K. Engdahl and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the theory of low-density convolutional codes—I,” Probl. Pereda. Inf., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 12–28, Oct.1/2"Dec. 1999.
[7] M. Lentmaier, D. Truhachev, and K. S. Zigangirov, “On the theory of low-density convolutional codes—II,” Probl. Pereda. Inf., vol. 37, pp. 15–35, Oct.1/2"Dec. 2001.
[8] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[9] S. Bates and G. Block, “A memory based architecture for low-density parity-check convolutional decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Kobe, Japan, May 2005.
[10] R. Swamy, S. Bates, and T. L. Brandon, “Architectures for ASIC implementations of low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Kobe, Japan, May 2005.
[11] D. J. Costello, Jr, A. E. Pusane, S. Bates, and K. S. Zigangirov, “A comparison between LDPC block and convolutional codes,” in Proc. Inform. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2006.
[12] R. Swamy, S. Bates, T. L. Brandon, B. F. Cockburn, D. G. Elliott, J. C. Koob, and Z. Chen, “Design and test of a 175-Mb/s, rate-1/2 (128,3,6) low-density parity-check convolutional code encoder and decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2245–2256, Oct. 2007.
[13] S. Bates, L. Gunthorpe, A. E. Pusane, Z. Chen, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “Decoders for low-density parity-check convolutional codes with large memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Kos, Greece, May 2006.
[14] Z. Chen, S. Bates, and X. Dong, “Low-density parity-check convolutional codes applied to packet based communication systems,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., St. Louis, MO, 2005, vol. 3, pp. 1250–1254.
[15] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes (1),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[16] D. J. C. MacKay and S. T. Wilson, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[17] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[18] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[19] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr, Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[20] H. H. Ma and J. K. Wolf, “On tail biting convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-34, no. 2, pp. 104–111, Feb. 1986.
[21] J. B. Anderson and S. M. Hladik, “Tailbiting MAP decoders,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 297–302, Feb. 1998.
[22] S. Bates, D. G. Elliott, and R. Swamy, “Termination sequence generation circuits for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 1909–1917, Sep. 2006.
[23] A. Sridharan, “Design and analysis of LDPC convolutional codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3640

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 11, DECEMBER 2008

[24] M. B. Tavares, K. S. Zigangirov, and G. P. Fettweis, “Tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1047–1051.
[25] C. D. Meyer, Matrix Analysis and Applied Linear Algebra. Philadelphia, PA: SIAM, 2001.
[26] Z. Chen and S. Bates, “Construction of low-density parity-check convolutional codes through progressive edge-growth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1058–1060, Dec. 2005.
[27] Z. Chen, R. Swamy, and S. Bates, “A new encoder implementation for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst., Montreal, QC, Canada, Aug. 2007, pp. 883–886.
[28] T. Brandon, J. Koob, L. v. d. Berg, Z. Chen, A. Alimohammad, R. Swamy, J. Klaus, S. Bates, V. C. Gaudet, B. F. Cockburn, and D. G. Elliott, “A 600-Mb/s encoder and decoder for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Seattle, WA, May 2008, pp. 3090–3093.
[29] L. Miles, J. W. Gambles, G. K. Maki, W. E. Ryan, and S. R. Whitaker, “An 860-Mb/s (8158,7136) low-density parity-check encoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 1686–1691, Aug. 2006.
[30] S. Bates and R. Swamy, “Parallel encoders for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Kos, Greece, May 2006.
[31] A. E. Pusane, A. J. Felström, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
Zhengang Chen (S’01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada.
His research interests include error control coding, communication systems, digital application-specific integrated circuit design, and pattern recognition. He is currently working on VLSI architectures for advanced channel coding schemes such as low-density parity-check codes.
Tyler L. Brandon received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 1999 and 2003, respectively, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering and toward research in the areas of application-specific integrated circuit architectures for logarithmic-based processing, parallel computing architectures, and low-density parity-check codes.
He is the holder of five patents in the areas of homogeneous 3-D integrated circuit design, multilevel hybrid ROM and SRAMROM, and IC circuit design.

Stephen Bates (S’94–M’03–SM’06) received the Ph.D. degree from Edinburgh University, Scotland, U.K., in 1997.
He was then with Massana, an Irish fabless semiconductor company specializing in high-speed Ethernet transceiver design. Since 2003, he has been with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, as an Assistant Professor. His research interests include circuits and systems for high-speed wireline communication protocols, circuits for advanced forward error correction schemes, and the use of reconfigurable logic to solve problems related to communications and bioinformatics.
Duncan G. Elliott (M’97) received the B.A.Sc. degree in engineering science and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
Previously, he was with Nortel, working in data communications; with MOSAID Technologies as a DRAM Designer; and with IBM Microelectronics as a Contractor in application-specific memory design. He spent his last sabbatical at the MIT Microsystems Technology Laboratories. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. His research interests include logic-enhanced memories, computer architecture, 3-D IC architecture, high-speed circuits, and microfluidic systems. Prof. Elliott was the recipient of the Colton Medal in microelectronics in 2001 for his work on computational RAM, which has been commercialized. He is a member of the IEEE Solid-State Circuits Society, the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society, the IEEE Computer Society, the IEEE Communications Society, and the Association for Computing Machinery.
Bruce F. Cockburn (S’86–M’95) received the B.Sc. degree in engineering physics from Queen’s University, Kingston, ON, Canada, in 1981 and the M.Math. and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, in 1985 and 1990, respectively. His Ph.D. thesis considered the design and analysis of provably optimal test algorithms for classes of faults in semiconductor memories.
From 1981 to 1983, he was a Test Engineer and a Software Designer with Mitel Corporation, Kanata, ON. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. His research interests include VLSI design and test, parallel signal processing algorithms and architectures, iterative decoder architectures, and high-performance fading channel simulators. Dr. Cockburn is a Registered Professional Engineer in the Province of Alberta, Canada. He is a member of the IEEE Computer Society, the IEEE Communications Society, the IEEE Solid-State Circuits Society, the IEEE Signal Processing Society, and the Association for Computing Machinery.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

