Secure Key Distribution for Wireless Sensor Networks
Reihaneh Safavi-Naini University of Calgary, Canada
Abstract – A Wireless Sensor Network (WSN) consists of a large number of small sensor nodes that collect data and send it to a base station, with the help of other nodes. Securing unattended WSNs is a challenging task as networks can be subjected not only to the traditional attacks on wireless networks including eavesdropping and jamming, but also new attacks due to physical insecurity of the nodes. Providing security is particularly challenging because sensor nodes have limited computational resources and so new security mechanisms must be carefully designed. To secure communication between two nodes, a shared cryptographic key between the two nodes must be established. Random key pre-distribution systems provide an efficient approach to key establishment in such networks that guarantee security against passive adversaries. We revisit these systems and show how to design systems with security guarantee against powerful adversaries that can not only eavesdrop the communication but also capture a subset of nodes.
Design, Implementation and Applications of LowComplexity LDPC Codes
B. Honary, B. M. Heravi, S. Kariyawasam, N. Pandya Department of Communication Systems, Lancaster University
InfoLab21, Lancaster, LA1 4WA, UK
Emails: {b.honary, b.momahedheravi, kariyawa, n.pandya}@lancaster.ac.uk
Abstract – Structured LDPC codes enable low-complexity decoding as well as efficient implementation of encoder reducing the complexity downto the order of the number of paritycheck bits. Construction of structured LDPC codes is based on combinatorial approaches such as Balanced-Incomplete Block-Design (BIBD) and Finite Fields to design quasi-cyclic LDPC (QCLDPC) codes. Well designed QC-LDPC codes can perform as well as randomly constructed LDPC codes with iterative decoding based on belief propagation in terms of bit-error probability. It has been shown that QC-LDPC codes can achieve lower error floor than randomly constructed LDPC codes. Within this work, the design of Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for a range of practical applications is discussed which includes construction of variable-rate large-block-length LDPC codes for DVBS2 and DVB-T2 applications and adaptive short-block-length LDPC codes for HF applications. Moreover, efficient implementation of QC-LDPC decoder/encoder for FPGA devices which reduces memory requirements is presented.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:36:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

