Proceedings of 11th International Conference on Computer and Information Technology (ICCIT 2008) 25-27 December, 2008, Khulna, Bangladesh
New Methodologies for High Level Modeling and Synthesis of Low Density Parity Check Decoders
Syed Mahfuzul Aziz and Sunil Sharma
School of Electrical & Information Engineering, University of South Australia Mawson Lakes, SA 5095, Australia

Abstract —Low density parity check (LDPC) codes are the error-correcting codes which offer huge advantages in terms of coding gain, throughput and power dissipation. Error correction algorithms are often implemented in hardware in order to ensure fast processing. The hardware implementation of LDPC decoders using traditional hardware description language (HDL) based approach is a complex and time consuming task. This paper investigates new high level approaches to design and synthesis of LDPC decoders using a combination of high level modelling tools. It compares the high level design approaches to traditional HDL-based approach. The results presented in this paper provide some useful insight into the high level design approaches, their efficiencies and possible future directions with a view to develop an efficient design and modelling framework for hardware implementation of complex LDPC decoders.
Index Terms – Error correction coding, digital systems, digital communication, logic design, FPGA.
I. INTRODUCTION
Transaction of information through a practical communication system is not free form noise. Information may rather be corrupted in transit by noise in the channel [1]. Therefore it is of paramount importance for communication systems to have adequate means for the detection and correction of errors in the information received over communication channels. Turbo codes and LDPC (low density parity check) codes are most commonly used for error detection and correction nowadays [2]. Both of these codes provide coding gains [3] close to Shannon’s limit [4]. LDPC codes however outperform turbo codes in terms of coding gain for large SNR [5, 6]. LDPC code of length 1 million with a coding rate (ratio of information bits to the sum of information and parity bits) of 0.5 and BER of 10-6 provides a capacity which is only 0.13db from Shannon’s limit [5]. Further advantages of using LDPC codes are given in [7]. These include less computational complexity as compared to turbo codes, ability to pipeline the decoder to reduce delay at the cost of registers and some latency, and less number of iterations than turbo codes. Increased number of iterations reduces the throughput and increases power dissipation [5, 8]. The studies conducted in [7] and [8] indicate that lesser number of iterations in LDPC codes helps achieving higher throughput and decreases power

dissipation. Another factor which contributes in increasing the throughput of LDPC decoder is the degree of parallelism which is adjustable [9]. Another reason of using LDPC codes is that it is relatively easier to implement than turbo codes [10].
Despite all these advantages of LDPC codes the random parity check matrix makes the wiring between variable and check nodes complex, especially for large matrices. This leads to increased routing congestion in the decoder. Eventually the size of the LDPC decoder increases and speed decreases [11]. Complexity of practical implementation makes high throughput very difficult to achieve [12, 13]. Moreover, designing LDPC decoders in VHDL (Very high speed integrated circuit Hardware Description Language) becomes a cumbersome task when the size of the design increases. Huge amount of time and effort are required to model such large designs in VHDL [14]. It results in decrease in productivity. It becomes a nightmare for the designer to write VHDL code for thousands of connections and to make the changes required. Therefore, hardware implementation of LDPC decoder still remains a challenge.
This paper examines high level modelling and synthesis techniques of LDPC decoders using emerging industry tools. It compares the high level approaches with traditional hardware description language based approaches in terms of modelling complexity, efforts and time. It also compares the results obtained for a representative LDPC decoder design using the high level approaches and using a traditional HDL based approach.
II. DESIGN APPROACH
This paper investigates a new high-level modelling and synthesis methodology for LDPC decoder using state of the art tools. As opposed to using only hand written VHDL codes for the entire design, this research examines high level design methods using Simulink, involving a combination of blocks designed with predefined library components and with embedded Matlab codes. A VHDL (VHSIC Hardware Description Language) code is generated automatically from the high level Simulink model using Mathwork’s Simulink HDL coder (version 1.2). The entire design process is captured in Fig. 1.

1-4244-2136-7/08/$20.00 ©2008 IEEE

276

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Simulink library blocks
Simulation in Simulink

MATLAB Programs
Simulation in MATLAB

VHDL Programs
Simulation in Quartus/Xilinx

Simulink HDL Coder (Automatic Code Generation)
HDL Code
Simulation, Analysis & Synthesis

Implementation on FPGA

Fig. 1. Proposed design flow.
Simulink HDL coder gives the flexibility of integrating different design approaches, namely Matlab programs, Simulink models and VHDL codes. Simulink and Matlab programs provide a much higher level of abstraction than VHDL. Therefore our design approach utilizes as many Simulink library blocks and Matlab blocks as possible to design various modules of the decoder provided these modules can be successfully processed by the HDL coder for automatic generation of VHDL codes. All the modules are then integrated in a top level Simulink model to produce the overall decoder model. VHDL code is generated automatically using Simulink HDL coder along with an optional test bench. This test bench can be used in ModelSim (a HDL simulator) to check correctness of the design. The auto-generated VHDL code can also be used in Altera’s Quartus II or Xilinx ISE (Integrated Software Environment) for synthesis and implementation on desired FPGA (Field Programmable Gate Array). Automatic HDL code generation will lead to reduction in design efforts thereby increasing design productivity.
III. OVERVIEW OF LDPC CODES AND DECODING ALGORITHM
Low density parity check (LDPC) codes are a class of linear block codes which are used for error detection and correction [15]. LDPC codes were first discovered by Gallager in 1962. In 1981, Tanner worked on LDPC codes and came up with important tanner graphs or bipartite graphs [16]. LDPC codes could not be implemented at the time of invention because the technology was not advanced, though they were studied again after almost three decades because they are more advantageous than any other error-correcting codes. LDPC codes are

extensively used in standards such as 10Gigabit Ethernet (10GBaseT) & digital video broadcasting (DVB-S2) [17].
There are different algorithms which could be used for decoding purposes. We used the min-sum decoding algorithm [12], which is a special case of sum-product algorithm [16]. Sum-product algorithm reduces the computational complexity and makes the decoder numerically stable [16]. Assume that the messages from the host communication system are represented by I and are passed on to the decoder for error correction. The LDPC decoder consists of a number of variable nodes (v) and check nodes (c). The operation of the min-sum algorithm can be summarised as follows [12]:
A. Variable Node Operation
A variable node performs the operation given in equation (1) and passes the outputs to check nodes.

∑ Lcv =

Rmv + Iv

(1)

m∈M (v)\c

where, Iv is the input to variable mode v, also known as Log Likelihood ratio (LLR), Lcv is the output of variable node v going to check node c, M(v)\c denotes the set of check nodes connected to variable node v excluding the check node c, Rmv is the output of check nodes going to variable node v.
B. Check Node Operation
A check node receives messages from variable nodes and performs the operation given by equation (2):

∏ Rcv =

sign( Lcv

)× min n∈N (c)\v

|

Lcv

|

(2)

n∈N (c)\v

where, Rcv is the output of check node c going to variable node v.
C. Parity Check
Every check node also checks whether the parity condition is satisfied by looking at the sign of the messages coming from the variable nodes. Until all the parity checks from all the check nodes are satisfied the messages are sent back to variable nodes and the variable nodes do the operation specified in part (A), otherwise the decoder stops the process.
Min-sum decoding algorithm uses soft decision. However, hard decision is taken on the new LLR (Iv). If the new LLR is negative then the output bit would be a 1 otherwise a 0. Interested readers can find the details of the sum-product and min-sum decoder algorithms in [16].

277 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IV. REPRESENTATIVE DECODER DESIGNS
LDPC codes can be represented by an M x N sparse matrix, usually called H matrix. The H matrix contains mostly zeros and a small number of 1s [9]. It can also be represented by a graph called bipartite or tanner graph. Tanner graphs contain variable and check nodes. The decoder prototype designed in this research is based on the matrix shown in Fig. 2. It is a very small matrix compared to the real matrices. This 10x5 matrix can be transformed into a tanner graph having 10 variable nodes and 5 check nodes as is shown in Fig. 3.

1111011000 0011111100 0101010111 1010100111 1100101011

Fig. 2. A 10x5 sparse matrix.

The signals go from the variable nodes to the check nodes and from the check nodes back to variable nodes. Typically different sets of wires are used for the signals going from variable nodes to check nodes and vice versa. The process is iterative and goes until all the parity checks are satisfied. The messages in our prototype designs are 4bit long.

V1

V2
C1 V3

V4

C2

V5 C3
V6

V7

C4

V8 C5
V9 V10

Fig. 3. Tanner graph.

A. Design 1

The approach taken in the first decoder design was to use a combination of embedded Matlab blocks and Simulink library blocks. No handwritten VHDL blocks were used. A generic Simulink model was first developed for each of a variable node and a check node.
Variable node design in Simulink: The variable node, shown in Fig. 4, has been designed in Simulink using the basic add and subtract blocks from Simulink library. The

control block controls the operation of the variable node. This block has been coded in Matlab and incorporated in the Simulink model of the variable node as an embedded Matlab block. The variable node has four inputs, the first three come from various check nodes and the fourth one is the raw LLR, which is an external input supplied by the host communication system. It performs the operation given in equation (1) and passes the outputs to the check nodes to which it is connected. VHDL code can be generated automatically from this Simulink model, which can then be synthesized for a target FPGA.
Check node design in Simulink: The check node has been designed in the same way as the variable node. The Simulink model of the check node is shown in Fig. 5. It uses some of the blocks from Simulink library (absolute and bitwise XOR) and others are the embedded Matlab blocks. The check node finds the minimum of all the inputs and performs the parity checks. It contains a control block, which controls its operation.
10x5 LDPC decoder: An LDPC decoder with 10 variable and 5 check nodes has been designed using instances of the variable and check node components described above. The various nodes are interconnected in a way that corresponds to the tanner graph of Fig. 3.
B. Design 2
Design 2 uses a combination of embedded Matlab blocks, Simulink library blocks and VHDL/Link for ModelSim blocks. ‘Link for ModelSim’ is a utility that enables modules coded in VHDL to be embedded in Simulink models. Design 2 is different from the first design in that it uses serial communication of messages between variable and check nodes. This is achieved using SIPO (serial-in-parallel-out) and PISO (parallel-in-serialout) registers at each input and output port in all the nodes. This greatly simplifies the interconnections by reducing the number of wires four times at the cost of some extra registers. The variable and check node components are same and are connected in the same way as in Design 1. The PISO and SIPO components are coded in VHDL and are used in the Simulink model with the help of the ‘Link for ModelSim’ utility (to link the VHDL blocks with ModelSim for simulation and code generation purposes). The way PISO and SIPO are used in a variable node is shown in Fig. 6. Check nodes have been modified in exactly the same manner. The inputs and outputs of all the variable and check nodes are now 1-bit long. The effects of using a VHDL block in a Simulink design are discussed in the next section. The HDL coder does not generate the VHDL code of the Link for ModelSim blocks. The VHDL code for these blocks needs to be added before synthesizing the code.

278 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with the convergence result of a functionally equivalent decoder shown in Fig. 8, designed using Matlab code.

Fig. 4. Variable node design in Simulink.

Fig. 7. Spread of the number of iterations for Design 2 obtained from VHDL testbench.

Fig. 5. Check node design in Simulink.

SIPO1 SIPO2

Variable Node

PISO1 PISO2

New
Variable Node with
SIPO & PISO

SIPO3

PISO3

Fig. 6. A variable node with PISO and SIPO.
V. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
A. Convergence
The convergence characteristics of the LDPC decoders presented in this paper have been tested using VHDL testbench and compared with that of a Matlab code for a functionally equivalent decoder. For this purpose the VHDL code automatically generated from the Simulink models were used. Fig. 7 shows the spread of the number of iterations for Design 2 by using plots of (mean number of iterations + standard deviation) and (mean number of iterations • standard deviation) versus SNR. It is clear that convergence is achieved in 6 iterations. This is consistent

Fig. 8. Spread of the number of iterations for a functionally equivalent Matlab code.

B. Synthesis

Synthesis results for the high-level designs are given below and are compared with their ‘VHDL only’ counterparts. The results were obtained using Altera’s Quartus II software with Cyclone II EP2C70F672C6 as the target device. Table 1 compares the resources used by Design 1 and its speed with a similar decoder designed using VHDL. Our design uses 2.1% of the FPGA’s logical elements, only 120 registers and has a maximum frequency of 42.96MHz. Clearly this Simulink design uses much less resources and is faster than the VHDL design. Similar observations are made from Table 2, which compares our Design 2 with the VHDL only design. Design 2 uses 3.5% of the logic elements, which is slightly higher than the amount used by the VHDL design (2.8%). However, our Design 2 uses nearly half the number of registers used by the VHDL design and still achieves nearly the same maximum frequency (Fmax). Furthermore, our high level designs require much less effort and time as opposed to writing everything in VHDL.

TABLE I

DESIGN 1 COMPARED WITH VHDL COUNTERPART

Design 1

VHDL only

Logical elements

1432 (2.1%)

1492 (2.2%)

Combinational functions 1432 (2.1%)

1492 (2.2%)

Total registers

120 (0.2%)

686 (1%)

Maximum frequency

42.96MHz

37.3 MHz

279 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II

DESIGN 2 COMPARED WITH VHDL COUNTERPART

Design 2

VHDL only

Logical elements

2416(3.5%)

1916 (2.8%)

Combinational functions 2416 (3.5%)

1916 (2.8%)

Total registers

480 (0.7%)

881 (1.3%)

Maximum frequency

67.20MHz

67.72MHz

C. Behavioural Simulation
Fig. 9 shows the functional simulation result for Design 2. A set of raw LLRs (6, 6, 2, 4, 7, 4, -2, 6, 4, 7) are applied to the variable nodes. The signals end_o_vn & end_o_cn are the control signals. The parity becomes 1 in the third iteration when all the parity checks are satisfied and the decoder stops the iterations. The corrected LLRs output by the variable nodes are 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, 7, -8, 4, 5, 7.

Fig. 9. Simulation results of Decoder Design 2.
D. Analysis of the High Level Design Methods
The high-level design methodologies presented in this paper reduces design complexity, design effort and time. For example, to design the variable and check nodes of Figures 1 and 2 completely in VHDL a designer has to write behaviours of quite a few modules in VHDL and manually do the port mapping for the top level design. As the design gets larger and larger it becomes very difficult to code everything in VHDL. It not only takes huge effort and time, managing complex designs and reusing the designs are often quite difficult. A great deal of expertise and experience in VHDL is also required. For a large LDPC decoder with hundreds of nodes, the interconnections among the variable and check nodes could easily become a designer’s nightmare if the entire design has to be coded in VHDL. An alternative, intuitive and highly productive design method has been a long standing desire of the engineers engaged in LDPC designs.

The high level methodology we have presented in this paper offers a very attractive alternative. The designs can be done intuitively in Simulink using predefined Simulink library blocks and blocks made form high-level Matlab code. The design complexity, effort and time are reduced drastically because the need for manually writing complex VHDL code is almost eliminated. Design reuse requires much less effort because changes are made either at block level in Simulink or in high-level Matlab code. In addition Matlab is a software programming language used much more widely than hardware description languages like VHDL and Verilog. Therefore designers without specific skills in hardware languages are able to design complex digital systems without much problem. Even software engineers and algorithm developers are able to quickly implement and test their high level designs due to the automatic conversion of Simulink models to HDL. This will surely offer great flexibility and efficiency in the design and reuse of complex LPDC decoders. There are some other benefits of the high level design methodology: • Different parts of the model can be enveloped using the
‘create subsystem’ property of Simulink. It reduces the design complexity for large designs. • User created Simulink library blocks provide great flexibility because the revisions made to the user defined library seamlessly propagate through the entire model. The design methodology we have presented however requires the use of some emerging design tools and library functions, such as Simulink hardware library and embedded Matlab blocks, Link for ModelSim and HDL Coder tools. Because these are very recent developments the library of Simulink blocks supporting various functions a designer needs to implement a design is very limited at the present time. Similarly the capability of HDL Coder is limited to conversion of a few commonly used Simulink blocks and a few embedded Matlab blocks. Some of the specific limitations are discussed below.
E. Current Limitations
Some common blocks in the Simulink library are not currently supported by the HDL Coder for automatic generation of VHDL code, e.g. flip-flops. Although we could build the PISO and SIPO registers easily in Simulink using the flip flops from its library the registers were not converted to VHDL by the HDL Coder. A careful selection of supported Matlab functions and Simulink library blocks may help addressing this type of problems, but not necessarily always. Some other limitations we experienced are listed below: • Multiple instances of some modules (components) are
used in the LDPC decoder, and in fact in most modular designs utilising a hierarchical design methodology. For example, in our LDPC decoder multiple instances of the check and variable nodes, and PISO and SIPO registers

280 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

are used. The HDL Coder dumps the full behaviour of each component as many times as it is instantiated in the design. This produces redundant instances of component behaviour in the generated VHDL code. It is necessary for the designer to edit the auto-generated code. • There are some functions which are supported by the HDL Coder, but it produces the output in a particular data type. For example, the sign function of Matlab gives output only in 8-bit integer (int8) format. It is not possible to change these default data types in the current version. The only option is to manually edit the autogenerated HDL code. • Link for ModelSim: This utility enables blocks designed in VHDL to be included in Simulink models. However the ports of the blocks that use Link for ModelSim get interchanged while simulating in Simulink. HDL code cannot be generated for the Simulink model in this situation. The code can be generated only after correcting the design. This makes the design process difficult and time consuming. The other drawback of blocks utilising Link for ModelSim is that these blocks may make changes in the auto-generated code. In case of the LDPC decoder these blocks changed the signals of type signed to unsigned. Once again this requires manually editing the auto-generated VHDL code.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper a new high-level intuitive design methodology based on Simulink for modelling and synthesis of complex LDPC decoders has been presented. It utilises the higher level of abstraction offered by the Simulink modelling environment. The complete modelling, simulation and synthesis process utilises a combination of emerging design tools and associated library functions. These include the Simulink HDL Coder and ‘Link for ModelSim’ tools, and embedded Matlab and Simulink hardware library blocks. Two versions of 10x5 LDPC decoders have been designed, simulated and successfully synthesised to an Altera FPGA device. The high level design methodology offer great advantages in terms of design complexity, effort and time compared to a HDL-only design method. Designs completed using the new methodology used less FPGA resources and achieved better or similar performance level (Fmax) to those of HDL-only designs. We therefore envisage that with further enrichment of the Simulink Library blocks, and enhancements of HDL Coder and Link for ModelSim tools, design methodologies similar to the one presented in this paper will replace tedious HDL-based design approach. This will pave the way for cost effective design and reuse of a new generation of complex high performance LDC decoders.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors wish to acknowledge Mr Pham Minh Duc and Prof Bill Cowley of UniSA for model optimization and for the very useful suggestions/feedback respectively.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, Monogram, Cambridge Mass, 1963.
[2] S. Johnson, Introducing Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, Australia: University of Newcastle, 2006.
[3] S. Lin, D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, New Jersey: Prentice Hall, 2004.
[4] B. Reiffen, “Sequential Decoding for Discrete Input Memoryless Channels,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 208-220, April 1962.
[5] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690- mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, 2002.
[6] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.
[7] J. Nguyen, B. Nikolic and E. Yeo, “Design of a low density parity check iterative decoder,” EECS, College of Engineering, University of California, Berkley, 2002.
[8] S. Hong and W. Stark, “Design and implementation of alow complexity VLSI turbo-code decoder architecture for low energy mobile wireless communications,” J. VLSI Signal Processing, vol. 24, pp. 43-57, 2000.
[9] M. Karkooti, P. Radosavljevic and J. R. Cavallaro, “Configurable, High Throughput, Irregular LDPC Decoder Architecture: Tradeoff Analysis and Implementation,” Proc. Int. Conf. Application Specific Systems, Architectures and Processors, pp. 360-367, Sept. 2006.
[10] Y. Lei, L. Hui, R. C. J. Shi, “Code Construction and FPGA Implementation of a low-error-floor multi-rate low-density Parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits & Systems I, vol. 53, pp. 892-904, April 2006.
[11] A. Darabiha, C. A. Carusone, R. F. Kschischang and E. S. Rogers, “Multi_Gbit/sec Low Density Parity Check Decoders with Reduced Interconnect Complexity,” IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits & Systems, vol. 5, pp. 5194-5197, 2005.
[12] J. Sha, M. Gao, Z. Zhang, Li Li and Z. Wang, “An FPGA implementation of array LDPC decoder,” IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circ. & Systems, pp. 1675-1678, December 2006.
[13]Mauro Cocco, “A scalable architecture of LDPC Decoding,” Proc. Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conf., vol. 3, pp. 88-93, Feb. 2004.
[14] J. A. Wicks, J. R. Armstrong, “Efficiency ratings for VHDL behavioral models,” IEEE Proc. Southeasrcon’98, pp. 401404, April 1998.
[15] M. Eroz, F.W. Sun and L.N. Lee, “DVB-S2 low density parity check codes with near Shannon limit performance,” Int. J. Satellite Communications and Networking, pp. 269279, 2004.
[16] W. E. Ryan, An Introduction to LDPC Codes, USA: The University of Arizona, 2003.
[17] T. Mohsenin and B. M. Baas, “Split-Row: A reduced complexity, high throughput LDPC decoder architecture,” Int. Conf. on Computer Design, ICCD 2006, San Jose, CA, pp. 220-225, 1-4 Oct 2007.

281 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:29:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

