5396

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2008

Adaptive Methods for Linear Programming Decoding
Mohammad H. Taghavi N. and Paul H. Siegel, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Detectability of failures of linear programming (LP) decoding and the potential for improvement by adding new constraints motivate the use of an adaptive approach in selecting the constraints for the underlying LP problem. In this paper, we make a first step in studying this method, and show that by starting from a simple LP problem and adaptively adding the necessary constraints, the complexity of LP decoding can be significantly reduced. In particular, we observe that with adaptive LP decoding, the sizes of the LP problems that need to be solved become practically independent of the density of the parity-check matrix. We further show that adaptively adding extra constraints, such as constraints based on redundant parity checks, can provide large gains in the performance.
Index Terms—Cutting planes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, linear programming (LP), LP decoding, message passing, maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding, pseudocodewords.
I. INTRODUCTION
L INEAR programming (LP) decoding, as an approximation to maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding, was proposed by Feldman, Wainwright, and Karger [1]. Many observations suggest similarities between the performance of LP and iterative message-passing decoding methods. For example, we know that the existence of low-weight pseudocodewords degrades the performance of both types of decoders [1]–[3]. Moreover, the sum–product message-passing algorithm can be interpreted as a minimization of a nonlinear function, known as Bethe free energy, over the same feasible region as LP decoding [4], [5]. Therefore, it is reasonable to try to exploit the simpler geometrical structure of LP decoding to make predictions about the performance of message-passing decoding algorithms.
On the other hand, there are differences between these two decoding approaches. For instance, given a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, we know that adding redundant parity checks that are satisfied by all the codewords cannot degrade the performance of LP decoding, while with message-passing algorithms, these parity checks may have a negative effect by introducing short cycles in the corresponding Tanner graph. This property of LP decoding allows performance improvement by tightening the relaxation. Another
Manuscript received March 24, 2007; revised May 20, 2008. Current version published November 21, 2008. This work was supported by the Center for Magnetic Recording Research at University of California, San Diego and from the National Science Foundation under Grants CCF-0514859 and CCF-0829865. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Seattle, WA, July 2006.
M. H. Taghavi N. was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0401 USA. He is now with Qualcomm Inc., San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: mtaghavi@ucsd.edu).
P. H. Siegel is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, and the Center for Magnetic Recording Research, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0401 USA (e-mail: psiegel@ucsd.edu).
Communicated by H.-A. Loeliger, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2008.2006384

characteristic of LP decoding—the ML certificate property—is

that its failure to find an ML codeword is always detectable.

More specifically, the decoder always gives either an ML

codeword or a nonintegral pseudocodeword as the solution.

These two properties motivate the use of an adaptive cut-

ting-plane approach in LP decoding which can be summarized

as follows: Given a set of constraints that describe a code, start

the LP decoding with a few of them, then sequentially and adap-

tively add more of the constraints to the problem until either an

ML codeword is found or no further “useful” constraint exists.

The goal of this paper is to explore the potential of this idea for

improving the performance of LP decoding.

In the original formulation of LP decoding, the number of

constraints per check node is exponential in the check node de-

grees. While for LDPC codes this number is independent of the

code length , even for small check degrees this could result

in a very large linear program. Furthermore, for high-density

codes, where the degrees grow with , the size of the LP de-

coding problem will be exponential in . In [1], Feldman et al.

provide an alternative equivalent representation of the LP relax-

ation, where the total number of constraints is

for codes

of high check node degrees. However, for practical purposes,

this formulation is still not very feasible.

In this paper, we show that by incorporating adaptivity into

the LP decoding procedure, we can achieve with a small number

of constraints the same error-rate performance as that obtained

when standard LP decoding is applied to a relaxation defined by

a much larger number of constraints. In particular, we observe

that the proposed adaptive LP decoding method generally con-

verges with a (small) constant number of constraints per check

node that does not appear to be dependent upon the underlying

code’s degree distribution. This property makes it feasible to

apply adaptive LP decoding to graph codes of arbitrary degree

distribution, and reduces the decoding time by orders of magni-

tude relative to the standard implementation, even for relatively

small check node degrees. Recently, Draper, Yedidia, and Wang

[6] used this algorithm in a mixed-integer optimization setting

for ML decoding of moderate-sized LDPC codes.

In related work, Chertkov and Stepanov [7], and Yang, Wang,

and Feldman [8], independently proposed a new representation

of the LP decoding problem, where each high-degree check

node is decomposed into a number of degree- check nodes and

some auxiliary variable nodes. Using this scheme, the number

of variables and constraints of the LP grows linearly with the

check degrees, and how the overall decoding complexity scales

will depend on the underlying LP solver. A different line of work

in this direction has been to apply iterative methods based on

message-passing, instead of general LP solvers, to perform the

optimization for LP decoding. An important result in this area is

the tree-reweighted message-passing algorithm by Wainwright,

Jaakkola, and Willsky [5]. Furthermore, Vontobel and Koetter

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI N. AND SIEGEL: ADAPTIVE METHODS FOR LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

5397

proposed an approximation to LP decoding by applying an iterative min-sum algorithm-type technique to the dual of the LP decoding problem [9].
In the second part of this paper, we show how the cuttingplane concept can be used to improve the error-rate performance of LP decoding. In this scheme, once the adaptive LP decoding fails to find an integral (i.e., the ML) codeword, we iteratively search for and add a number of cuts, i.e., new constraints that cut the current nonintegral solution from the feasible space, and then we solve the new LP problem. While there is a wide range of general-purpose techniques for finding cutting planes, in this work we focus on cuts that are obtained based on redundant parity checks. We present some results on the properties of these cuts, and demonstrate how considerable gains can be obtained by using this technique. Other approaches toward improving the performance of LP decoding include facet guessing, proposed by Dimakis and Wainwright [10], and the application of loop calculus, suggested by Chertkov and Chernyak [11].
Along the way, we prove several general properties of LP relaxations of ML decoding that shed light upon the performance of LP and iterative decoding algorithms.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we review Feldman et al.’s LP decoding. In Section III, we introduce and analyze the adaptive LP decoding algorithm to solve the original LP problem more efficiently. In Section IV, we study how adaptively imposing additional constraints can improve the LP decoder performance. Section V concludes the paper.

II. LP RELAXATION OF ML DECODING

Consider a binary linear code of length . If a codeword

is transmitted through a memoryless binary-input output-

symmetric (MBIOS) channel, the ML codeword given the re-

ceived vector

is the solution to the optimization problem

minimize

subject to

(1)

where is the vector of log-likelihood ratios defined as

(2)

check nodes and variable nodes with their respective index sets

and

.) Then, for

, the

LP formulation includes all of the following constraints:

s. t. is odd

(3)

We refer to the constraints of this form as parity inequalities.

If the variables are zeros and ones, these constraints will be

equivalent to the original binary parity-check constraints. To see

this, note that if is a subset of , with odd, and the

corresponding parity inequality fails to hold, then all variable

nodes in must have the value , while those in

must

have the value . This implies that the corresponding vector

does not satisfy parity check . Conversely, if parity check fails

to hold, there must be a subset of variable nodes

of

odd size such that all nodes in have the value and all those

in

have the value . Clearly, the corresponding parity

inequality would be violated. Now, given this equivalence, we

relax the LP problem by replacing each binary constraint

by a box constraint

.

III. ADAPTIVE LP DECODING

As any odd-sized subset of the neighborhood

of a

check node introduces a unique parity inequality, there are

constraints corresponding to each check node of degree

in the original formulation of LP decoding. Therefore, the

total number of constraints, and hence the complexity of the

problem, is exponential in terms of the maximum check node

degree . This becomes more significant in a high-density

code where increases with the code length . As discussed

earlier, Feldman et al. proposed an equivalent formulation that

has a problem size of

, although for low-density codes it

has a problem size larger than the original formulation.1

In this section, we show that the LP relaxation explained in

Section II has some properties that allow us to solve the op-

timization problem by using a much smaller number of con-

straints.

A. Properties of the Relaxation Constraints Definition 1: Given a constraint of the form

As an approximation to ML decoding, Feldman et al. proposed

(4)

a relaxed version of this problem by first considering the convex and a vector hull of the local codewords defined by each row of the parity-

, we call (4) an active constraint at if

check matrix, and then intersecting them to obtain what Koetter

(5)

et al. [3] called the fundamental polytope, . This polytope has a number of integral and nonintegral vertices, but the integral and a violated constraint or, equivalently, a cut at if

vertices exactly correspond to the codewords of . Therefore, the LP relaxation has the ML certificate property, i.e., whenever

(6)

LP decoding gives an integral solution, it is guaranteed to be an A constraint that generates a cut at point

corre-

ML codeword.

sponds to a subset

of odd cardinality such that

In Feldman et al.’s formulation of the decoding problem, con-

straints are derived from a parity-check matrix as follows. For

(7)

each row

of the parity-check matrix, define the

neighborhood set

of the corresponding

check node in the Tanner graph to be the variable nodes that

are directly connected to it. (For convenience, we often identify

1More recently, an alternative polytope was proposed in [7] and [8] with a number of variables and constraints that grows linearly with the code length and the maximum check node degree.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5398

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2008

This condition implies that (8)
and (9)

The following theorem reveals the special property of the relaxed parity inequalities (3) that at most one of the constraints introduced by each check node can be a cut.

Theorem 1: If at any given point

, one of the parity

inequalities introduced by a check node is a cut, the rest of the

parity inequalities from this check node are satisfied with strict

inequality.

Proof: For a check node , we first rewrite (3) as

s. t. is odd

(10)

Let

denote the vector composed of the elements of with

indices in , and by the indicator vector of the subset

of , i.e., a vector of length with the th element being

if

, and otherwise. Then, since

, (10) will

be equivalent to

s. t. is odd (11)

an efficient way to find the unique cut generated by this check node at , if a cut exists.

Algorithm 1:

Step 1: Set

and

.

Step 2: Check the constraint (3). If it is violated, we have

found the cut. Exit.

Step 3: Set

. If

, move and (the

two largest members of ) from to .

Step 4: If

and (8) is satisfied, go to Step 2; other-

wise, the check node does not provide a cut at .

Regarding Step 4, note that equals the cardinality of the

set

, and hence it should remain less than or equal

to

. In addition, the failure of condition (8), a necessary

condition for having a cut, provides a definitive termination cri-

terion for Algorithm 1. For, if at some iteration the condition

fails to hold for the set , i.e.,

, it would

necessarily fail for the set considered at any subsequent iter-

ation.

If redundant calculations are avoided in calculating the sums

in (3), this algorithm can find the cut generated by the check

node, if it exists, in

time, where

is the

degree of the check node. Repeating the procedure for each

check node, and incurring

complexity for sorting

, the time required to find all the cuts at point becomes

.2

where

is the -distance between

and .

Consider a check node with neighborhood

and two distinct subsets

and

of odd sizes and , respectively, such that

introduces a cut at point . This means that the -distance

between

and is less than . In addition, since

and are indicator vectors of two distinct odd subsets, their

-distance should be at least . Hence, using the triangle

inequality, we will have

B. The Adaptive Procedure
The fundamental polytope for a parity-check code is defined by a large number of constraints (hyperplanes), and a linear programming solver finds the vertex (pseudocodeword) of this polytope that minimizes the objective function. For example, the Simplex algorithm starts from an initial vertex and visits different vertices of the polytope by traveling along the edges, which is called pivoting, until it finds the optimum vertex. The time required to find the solution equals the product of the number of vertices that have been visited and the average

processing time at each pivot step, and these, in turn, are deter-

mined by the number and properties of constraints and variables

(12) in the problem. If we can reduce the size of the problem without changing the optimum vertex, the amount of processing at

Therefore,

, which means that the parity

inequality introduced by is satisfied with strict inequality.

Given an

linear code with

parity checks,

a natural question is how we can find all the cuts defined by the

LP relaxation at any given point

. Referring to (9),

we see that for any check node and any odd-sized subset of

its neighborhood

that introduces a cut, the variable nodes

in have the largest values among all of the nodes in .

Therefore, sorting the elements of can simplify the process of

searching for a cut. This observation is reflected in Algorithm 1

below.

Consider a check node with neighborhood . Without

loss of generality, assume that variable nodes in

have in-

dices

, and that their values are sorted, such that

each pivot, which usually involves matrix computations, will decrease significantly. Furthermore, reducing the number of vertices that are visited in the intermediate iterations can reduce the complexity of the algorithm. In the adaptive LP decoding scheme, we implement this idea using a cutting-plane approach. We run the LP solver with a minimal number of constraints to ensure boundedness of the solution, and depending on the LP solution, we add only the “useful constraints” that cut the current solution from the feasible region. This procedure is repeated until no further cut exists, which means that the solution is a vertex of the fundamental polytope.
2For LDPC codes, it is better to sort the neighbors of each check node separately, so the total complexity becomes
O(md + md d log ) = O(md d log ):

. The following algorithm provides

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI N. AND SIEGEL: ADAPTIVE METHODS FOR LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

5399

To start the procedure, we need at least constraints to de-

termine a vertex that can become the solution of the first it-

eration. Recalling the box constraints

, we add

for each exactly one of the inequalities implied by these con-

straints. The choice depends upon whether increasing leads

to an increase or decrease in the objective function, to ensure

that the solution to the initial LP is bounded. Specifically, for

each

, we introduce the initial constraint

if if

(13)

In the Simplex algorithm, since the next solution will usually be close to the current solution, the number of iterations (pivots), and therefore, the overall running time, is expected to decrease. However, each of these warm starts is a basic infeasible point for the subsequent problem, since it will not satisfy the newly added constraints. As a result, a primal–dual implementation of the Simplex method will first take a few steps to move back into the feasible region. In Subsection III-D, we will discuss in more detail the effect of using warm starts on the speed of the algorithm.

Note that the optimum (and only) vertex satisfying this initial problem corresponds to the result of an (uncoded) bit-wise, hard decision based on the received vector.
The following algorithm describes the adaptive LP decoding procedure.

Algorithm 2:

Step 1: Form the initial problem with the constraints from

(13); set

.

Step 2: Run the LP solver to obtain the current solution .

Step 3: If any of the box constraints are violated at , add

them to the problem and go to Step 2.

Step 4: If one or more of the parity inequalities are violated

at , add them to the problem, set

, and

go to Step 2; else, we have found the solution.

Although in Step 3 of the algorithm we search the box constraints for cuts, in practice we have never observed a case where a box constraint is violated throughout the algorithm. We conjecture that by initially including only one inequality from the box constraints of each variable according to (13), there is no need to check for any violated box constraints in Step 3 of Algorithm 2.3 Hence, through the rest of this section, an “iteration” of Algorithm 2 will refer to an execution of Step 4.

C. A Bound on the Complexity
Theorem 2: The adaptive algorithm (Algorithm 2) converges after at most iterations.
Proof: The solution produced by the algorithm is a vertex of the feasible space determined by the initial constraints along with those added by the successive iterations of the cutfinding procedure. Therefore, we can find such constraints

that are linearly independent and whose corresponding hyper-

planes uniquely determine this vertex. This means that if we set

up an LP problem with only those constraints, the optimum

point will be . Now, consider the th intermediate solution,

, that is cut from the feasible space at the end of the th itera-

tion of Algorithm 2. At least one of the constraints,

,

should be violated by ; otherwise, since has a lower cost

than

would be the solution of the LP with these con-

straints. But we know that the cuts added at the th iteration are

all the possible constraints that are violated at . Consequently,

at least one of the cuts added at each iteration should be among

; hence, the number of iterations is at

most .

Lemma 1: If no cut is found after any iteration of Algorithm 2, the current solution represents the solution of the standard LP decoding problem incorporating all of the relaxation constraints given in Section II.
Proof: At any intermediate step of the algorithm, the space of feasible points with respect to the current constraints contains the fundamental polytope , as these constraints are all among the original constraints used to define . If at any iteration, no cut is found, we conclude that all the original constraints given by (3) are satisfied by the current solution , which means that this point is in . Hence, since has the lowest cost in a space that contains , it is also the optimum point in .
To further speed up the algorithm, we can use a “warm start” after adding a number of constraints at each iteration. In other words, since the intermediate solutions of the adaptive algorithm converge to the solution of the original LP problem, we can use the solution of each iteration as a starting point for the next iteration. While there are warm start strategies for both the Simplex and interior-point algorithms, using warm starts has been observed to be more effective for the Simplex algorithm [12].

Remark 1: The adaptive procedure and convergence result can be generalized to any LP problem defined by a fixed set of constraints. In general, however, there may not be an analog of Theorem 1 to facilitate the search for cut constraints.

Remark 2: If, for a given code of length , the adaptive al-

gorithm converges with at most

final parity inequalities,

then each pseudocodeword of this LP relaxation should have at

least

integer elements. To see this, note that each pseu-

docodeword corresponds to the intersection of at least active

constraints. If the problem has at most parity inequalities, then

at least constraints of the form

or

should be

active at each pseudocodeword, which means that at least

positions of the pseudocodeword are integer-valued.

Corollary 1: The final application of the LP solver in the

adaptive decoding algorithm uses at most

constraints.

Proof: There are box constraints, and, according to

Theorem 1, at each iteration no more than new parity in-

equalities are added. Since there are at most iterations, the

final number of constraints is at most

.

3Note added in proof: Indeed, in a recent work to be published, we have been

For very low-density codes, where

, the above

able to establish a proof of this conjecture.

bound does not imply a complexity improvement over the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2008

= 360 = Fig. 1. The average and maximum number of parity inequalities used versus check node degree d , for fixed length n

and rate R .

original formulation of LP decoding. However, for high-den- generated, but fixed, regular LDPC code, with its -cycles re-

sity codes of fixed rate, as the code length and the number of moved.

parity checks increase proportionately, this bound guarantees In the first scenario, we studied the effect of changing the

convergence with

constraints, whereas the standard LP check node degree from to while keeping the code

relaxation requires a number of constraints that is exponential length at

and the rate at

. The average (resp.,

in , and the high-density code polytope representation given maximum) number of iterations required to converge started

in [1, Appendix II] involves

variables and constraints.4 from around 14.5 (resp., 30) for the

code, and decreased

Moreover, Theorem 2 does not make use of the properties of monotonically down to 5.9 (resp., 9) for the

code. The

the decoding problem, in particular, its sparsity. Therefore, average and maximum number of parity inequalities used in

especially in the case of low-density codes, we do not expect the final iteration of the algorithm are plotted in Fig. 1. We

this bound to be tight.

see that both the average and the maximum values are almost

constant, and remain below for all the values of . The

D. Numerical Results

only exception to this was the first point, corresponding to the code, which, on average, has a number of parity inequal-

To empirically investigate the complexity reduction due to ities significantly smaller, and a number of iterations signifi-

the adaptive approach for LP decoding, we performed simula- cantly larger than those of the other codes. For comparison,

tions over random regular LDPC codes of various lengths, de- the total number of parity inequalities required in the standard

grees, and rates on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) representation of the LP decoding problem in the high-density

channel. In all the simulations in this paper, the signal-to-noise code polytope representation of Feldman et al. [1], as well as

ratio (SNR) is defined as the ratio of the variance of the trans- in the polytope representation of Chertkov–Stepanov (CS) [7]

mitted discrete-time signal to the variance of the noise sample. and Yang–Wang–Feldman (YWF) [8], are also included in the

We first demonstrate the simulation results for adaptive LP figure. The decrease in the number of required constraints trans-

decoding at the low-SNR value of 1.0 dB, since in the high- lates to a significant advantage for the adaptive algorithm in

SNR regime the received vector is likely to be close to a code- terms of the running time.

word, in which case the algorithm may converge more rapidly, In the second case, we studied random -regular codes

rather than demonstrating its worst case behavior. Afterwards, of lengths

to

. For all values of , the av-

we study how the behavior of this decoder changes as the SNR erage (resp., maximum) number of required iterations remained

grows.

between 5 and 11 (resp., 10 and 16). The average and max-

1) Low-SNR Regime: For each point in the following figures, imum number of parity inequalities used in the final iteration

400 codeword transmissions were simulated, using a randomly are plotted versus in Fig. 2. We observe that the number of

( ) 4This O n bound is comparable to the recent results in [7] and [8], where a ( ) formulation was proposed for LP decoding requiring only O n variables and
constraints for high-density codes.

parity inequalities is generally between and . In the third experiment, we investigated the effect of the rate
of the code on the performance of the algorithm. Fig. 3 shows

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI N. AND SIEGEL: ADAPTIVE METHODS FOR LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

5401

= = 6 Fig. 2. The average and maximum number of parity inequalities used versus block length n, for fixed rate R

and check node degree d

.

= 120 = 3 Fig. 3. The average and maximum number of parity inequalities used versus the number of parity checks m, for n

and d .

the average and maximum number of parity inequalities used in this different behavior at a lower error rate is consistent with the

the final iteration where the block length is

and the observation that a successful decoding typically requires fewer

number of parity checks , increases from to . The vari- iterations, and as a result, fewer constraints, than a decoding re-

able node degree is fixed at

. We see that the average and sulting in a fractional output.

maximum number of parity inequalities used are, respectively, Finally, in Fig. 4, we compare the average decoding time of

in the ranges

to

and

to

for most values different algorithms at the low SNR of 1.0 dB. It is impor-

of . There is a relatively large drop in the average number tant to note that the running times of the LP-based techniques

for

with respect to the linear curve. This can be ex- strongly depend on the underlying LP solver. In this work, we

plained by the fact that at this value of , which corresponds have used the Simplex algorithm implementation of the open-

to a -regular code, the rate of failure of LP decoding was source GNU Linear Programming Kit (GLPK [13]) for solving

less than at 1.0 dB, whereas for all the other values of , the LPs. The numerical results demonstrate that the adaptive al-

this rate was close to . As we will see later in this subsection, gorithm significantly reduces the gap between the speed of stan-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2008

0 Fig. 4. The average decoding time versus the length of the code for (3; 6)-regular LDPC codes (dashed lines) and (4; 8)-regular LDPC codes (solid lines) at
SNR = 1.0 dB.

dard LP decoding and that of the sum–product message-passing per check node used in this algorithm, do not appear to change

algorithm. Comparing the results for the -regular codes significantly with the parameters of the code, such as length

(dot-dashed lines) and the -regular codes (solid lines) fur- and density. It would be interesting to investigate whether this

ther shows that while the decoding time for the standard LP in- observation can be confirmed by an analytic proof.

creases very rapidly with the check node degree of the code, the 2) Behavior as a Function of SNR: Here we present simu-

adaptive technique is not significantly affected by the change in lations for adaptive LP decoding at different SNR levels. These

the check node degree.

experiments were performed for a randomly generated -

Other simulations we performed indicate that the decoding regular LDPC code of length , with its -cycles removed. At

time of the adaptive algorithm does not change significantly each SNR value, we simulated 2400 codeword transmissions.

even if the code has a high-density parity-check matrix. This In Figs. 5 and 6, the number of adaptive LP decoding it-

result can be explained by two factors. First, Fig. 1 shows that erations and the number of parity inequalities in the final it-

the number of parity inequalities used in the algorithm does not eration are plotted, respectively. The maximum and minimum

change substantially with the check node degree of the code. values observed among the 2400 trials at each SNR are also in-

Second, while having a smaller check degree makes the ma- cluded in the figures (solid lines marked with triangles). In addi-

trix of constraints sparser, the LP solver that we are using does tion, we have plotted 95% confidence intervals in these figures

not benefit from this sparsity. A similar behavior was also ob- (dot-dashed lines). The boundaries for each of these confidence

served when we tried both the Simplex and interior-point imple- intervals are defined such that the right and left tails of the

mentations of a commercial LP solver, MOSEK [14], instead data histogram outside the interval each contain 2.5% of the

of GLPK. Therefore, an interesting question for future inves- population.

tigation is whether, by designing a special LP solver that can As we observe in Figs. 5 and 6, in the region where the SNR

effectively take advantage of the sparsity of this problem, the values are larger than the threshold of belief propagation (BP)

time complexities of the LP-based techniques can become even decoding for the ensemble of -regular LDPC codes, which

closer to those of the message-passing techniques.

is equal to 1.11 dB, the average numbers of iterations and con-

Fig. 4 also shows the average decoding time when warm starts straints both decrease monotonically with SNR. This means

are used in the iterations of the adaptive decoding algorithm. that, similar to the BP decoder, the complexity of adaptive LP

We can see that warm starts slightly decrease the slope of the decoding decreases, on average, as the SNR increases beyond

decoding-time curve when plotted against the logarithm of the the threshold.

block length. This translates into approximately a factor of

An interesting observation that we can make about both of

improvement in the decoding time at a block length of . these two figures is that the confidence intervals of the observed

In all our simulations, we have observed that the adaptive LP values are widest at an SNR in the range of 1 to 2 dB. To investi-

decoding algorithm performs much faster than is guaranteed by gate this phenomenon, in Fig. 7, we have plotted the histogram

Theorem 2. In particular, the average number of iterations of of the number of parity inequalities in the last iteration of adap-

Algorithm 2, as well as the average number of parity inequalities tive LP decoding at the SNR values of 0, 1.5, and 3 dB, which

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI N. AND SIEGEL: ADAPTIVE METHODS FOR LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

5403

Fig. 5. The number of adaptive LP decoding iterations versus SNR for a (3; 6)-regular LDPC codes of length 240, with 2400 trials at each SNR. The solid line is the average number of iterations, the marked lines are the maximum and minimum values observed, and the dot-dashed lines indicate the 95% confidence interval.

Fig. 6. The number of parity inequalities at the last iteration of adaptive LP decoding versus SNR for a (3; 6)-regular LDPC code of length 240, with 2400 trials at each SNR. The solid line is the average number of iterations, the marked lines are the maximum and minimum values observed, and the dot-dashed lines indicate the 95% confidence interval.

correspond to word error rate (WER) values of

ishes. These observations lead us to the natural conclusion that

and

, respectively. At SNR 0 dB, where the decoder the complexity of adaptive LP decoding is much lower when it

almost always outputs a fractional pseudocodeword, the values succeeds to find an integral (i.e., the ML) codeword.

are concentrated around . However, at SNR 1.5 dB, where the decoding succeeds about half the time, there are two dis-

IV. GENERATING CUTS TO IMPROVE THE PERFORMANCE

tinct segments of roughly the same total mass in the histogram, The complexity reduction obtained by adaptive LP decoding

which results in a wide confidence interval. Finally, at SNR 3 inspires further use of cutting-plane techniques to improve the

dB, where the decoder is successful most of the time, the peak error-rate performance of the algorithm. Specifically, when LP

around seen in the two previous histograms almost van- with all the original constraints gives a nonintegral solution, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5404

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2008

Fig. 7. The histogram of the number of parity inequalities at the last iteration of LP decoding at the SNR values of 0, 1.5, and 3.0 dB, each over a total population of 2400 samples.

try to cut the current solution, while keeping all the possible RPC cut. Since each row of the parity-check matrix is a code-

integral solutions (codewords) feasible.

word from the dual code, adding an RPC is equivalent to in-

The new cuts can be chosen from a pool of constraints cluding another dual codeword in the parity-check matrix. The

describing a relaxation of the ML decoding problem which is simple structure of RPCs makes them an interesting choice for

tighter than the original relaxation defining the fundamental generating cuts. There are examples, such as the dual code of

polytope. In this sense, this technique is similar in concept to the the

Hamming code, where even the relaxation obtained

adaptive LP decoding presented in the previous section, with by adding all the possible RPC constraints (i.e., all dual code-

the difference that here there are more constraints to choose words) does not guarantee convergence to a codeword. In other

from. The effectiveness of this method depends on how closely words, it is possible to obtain a nonintegral solution for which

the new relaxation approximates the ML decoding problem, there is no RPC cut.

and how efficiently we can search for those constraints that Kashyap [17] used the theory of matroids to show that for a

introduce cuts. Feldman et al. [1] have mentioned some ways to certain class of codes, called geometrically perfect codes, the

tighten the relaxation of the ML decoding problem, including LP relaxation of ML decoding is exact if all the dual code-

the addition of parity inequalities associated to redundant parity words are included in the parity-check matrix. Furthermore,

checks (RPC) and the use of lift-and-project methods. (For more although solving this relaxation by LP has exponential com-

on lift-and-project techniques, see [15] and references therein.) plexity, Kashyap showed that geometrically perfect codes can

Gomory’s algorithm [16] is another well-known technique indeed be ML-decoded in polynomial time using a combina-

for solving general integer optimization problems, although it torial algorithm. He also showed that, unfortunately, geomet-

suffers from slow convergence. Each of these methods can be rically perfect codes are not asymptotically good. Hence, an

applied adaptively in the context of cutting-plane techniques. In important question that requires further study is how close we

this work, we focus on cutting-plane algorithms that use RPC can get to the ML decoding of asymptotically good codes by

cuts.

adding all possible RPCs to the LP decoder. Also, finding ef-

An RPC is obtained by modulo- addition of some of the ficient methods to search for RPC cuts for a given nonintegral

rows of the parity-check matrix, and this new check introduces solution remains an open problem. On the other hand, as ob-

a number of constraints that may include a cut, which we call an served in simulation results, RPC cuts are generally strong, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI N. AND SIEGEL: ADAPTIVE METHODS FOR LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

5405

finding a reasonable number of them often makes the resulting LP relaxation tight enough to converge to an integer-valued solution. In the following subsection, we propose and study some ideas for finding RPC cuts.

A. Finding Redundant Parity-Check Cuts

As mentioned before, there is an exponential number of RPCs that can be added, and in general, most of them do not introduce cuts. Hence, we need to find the cut-inducing RPCs efficiently by exploiting the special structure of the decoding problem. In particular, we will now demonstrate that cycles in the Tanner graph of the parity-check matrix have an important role in determining whether an RPC generates a cut. We start with some useful definitions.

Definition 2: Given a current nonintegral solution of the

relaxed LP problem, the subset

of check

nodes is called a cut-generating collection if the RPC defined

by modulo- addition of the parity checks corresponding to

introduces a cut. If no proper subset of other than itself has

this property, we call it a minimal cut-generating collection.

Definition 3: Given a pseudocodeword , consider the set of variable nodes in the Tanner graph of the parity-check matrix whose corresponding elements in have fractional values. Let
be the subgraph made up of these variable nodes, the check nodes directly connected to them, and all the edges that connect them. We call the fractional subgraph and any cycle in a fractional cycle at .

1) Role of Fractional Cycles: Theorem 3 below makes clear the relevance of the concept of fractional cycles to the search for cut-generating RPCs. Its proof makes use of the following lemma.

Lemma 2: Suppose that and are two parity checks

whose corresponding parity inequalities are satisfied by the cur-

rent solution . Then,

, the modulo- combination

of these checks, can generate a cut only if the neighborhoods

of and have at least two fractional-valued variable nodes

in common.

Proof: See Appendix A.

Theorem 3: Let be a point satisfying all the parity inequal-

ities induced by the check nodes in the Tanner graph, and let

be a collection of check nodes. If is a cut-generating col-

lection at , then there exists a fractional cycle such that all the

check nodes on it belong to .

Proof: We first consider the case where is a minimal

cut-generating collection. Note that any cut-generating collec-

tion must contain at least two check nodes, since no single check

node generates a cut. Pick an arbitrary check node in . We

make an RPC by linearly combining the parity checks in

. According to Lemma 2 and the minimality of , there

must be at least two fractional-valued variable nodes that are

involved in both and . Since the set of variable nodes in-

volved in is a subset of the union of the neighborhoods of

the check nodes in

, if follows that shares at least two

fractional-valued neighbors with these check nodes. Let be

the subgraph of the Tanner graph consisting of the check nodes

in , their neighboring variable nodes, and the edges that connect them. Applying the above reasoning to every check node
in , we conclude that each check node in the collection is connected to at least two fractional-valued variable nodes of degree at least within the subgraph . Therefore, if we further remove all the integer-valued variable nodes, as well as all the fractional-valued variable nodes of degree less than from
, we will be left with a number of check nodes and (fractional-valued) variable nodes that each have degree at least . A simple counting of edges will show that such a graph, which is a subset of and the original Tanner graph, must contain a fractional cycle.
If is not a minimal cut-generating collection, then it must contain a minimal cut-generating collection . To see this, observe that there must be a check node in whose removal leaves a cut-generating collection of check nodes. Iteration of this check node-removal process must terminate in a nonempty minimal cut-generating collection containing at least two check nodes. The subgraph corresponding to is contained in the subgraph corresponding to , so a discussion similar to that above proves that , and therefore, , contain fractional cycle.

Remark 3: In a related result, Vontobel and Koetter showed in [3] that adding a redundant parity check to the code representation by combining a set of rows in the parity-check matrix
can possibly modify the fundamental polytope only if the Tanner graph corresponding to this set of rows contains a cycle. Here, Theorem 3 makes a stronger claim, in the sense that it requires the existence of a cycle over fractional-valued nodes, and not just any cycle. In another work, Chertkov and Chernyak in [11] studied the role that the cycles in the Tanner graph play in the performance of both BP and LP decoding, and proposed a heuristic method for improving LP decoding by characterizing the “most relevant” cycles. Their approach was based on modifying the likelihood values of the bits, rather than modifying the constraints as we propose here.

2) Existence of Fractional Cycles: In Theorem 4 below, we show that a fractional cycle always exists for any noninteger pseudocodeword.5

Lemma 3: At any point in the fundamental polytope of LP decoding, no check node of the corresponding Tanner graph is connected to exactly one fractional variable node.
Proof: See Appendix B.

We can represent the fractional subgraph corresponding to

the pseudocodeword by a disjoint union of connected com-

ponents (or briefly, components)

, for some

.

Theorem 4: Let

be a fractional pseudocodeword

of LP decoding for a code represented by Tanner graph , and

let denote the fractional subgraph corresponding to . Then

each component

, of contains a cycle.

Proof: Since is a vertex of the fundamental polytope, it

should be the unique solution to the system of equations formed

5However, it should be emphasized that not every RPC constraint obtained from a fractional cycle generates a cut.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5406

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2008

by turning the active parity inequalities and box constraints at

into equations. Consider a component of the fractional sub-

graph, containing (fractional) variable nodes. Clearly, none

of the box constraints corresponding to these variable nodes

are active at . Hence, there should be linearly independent

active parity inequalities, introduced by the check nodes in ,

that uniquely determine the values corresponding to the variable

nodes in in terms of the rest of the variables. Let us denote

by

the subgraph obtained by removing all the check

nodes in which do not introduce any active parity inequality

at , and all the edges connected to them.

A consequence of Lemma 1 is that, if a parity inequality

given by a check node is active at vertex , the rest of the

parity inequalities introduced by check node are not necessary

to define vertex , since they cannot be violated at any point

where is active. Hence, to uniquely determine the

values of the variable nodes in , it is sufficient to consider

only one active constraint given by each check node in . We

conclude that, in order to have enough equations, the number

of check nodes in , denoted by , cannot be smaller than .

According to Lemma 3, each of these check nodes should be

connected to at least two variable nodes in . Therefore, the

number of edges in is at least , while the total number of

nodes in this subgraph is

. This means that cannot

be a tree or a forest, since it contains at least as many edges as

nodes. Consequently, , and hence, , contain a cycle.

3) Randomized Algorithm for Finding RPC Cuts: The pre-

ceding results motivate the following algorithm to search for

RPC cuts.

Algorithm 3: Step 1: Given an LP decoding solution and the original
Tanner graph of the code, prune the graph by removing all the variable nodes with integer values. Step 2: Starting from an arbitrary check node, randomly walk through the pruned graph until a cycle is found. Step 3: Create an RPC by combining the rows of the paritycheck matrix corresponding to the check nodes in the cycle. Step 4: If this RPC introduces a cut, add this cut to the set of constraints in the LP relaxation, and exit; otherwise go to Step 2.

When the fractional subgraph contains many cycles and it is feasible to check only a small fraction of them, the randomized method described above can efficiently find cycles. However, when the cycles are few in number, this algorithm may actually check a number of cycles several times, while skipping some others. In this case, a structured search, such as one based on the depth-first search (DFS) technique, can be used to find all the simple cycles in the fractional subgraph. We can then check to see if any of them introduces an RPC cut. However, to guarantee that all the potential cut-generating RPCs are checked, one will still need to modify this search to include complex cycles, i.e., clusters of cycles which share some edges.
As shown above, by exploiting some of the properties of the linear code LP decoding problem, one can expedite the search

for RPC cuts. However, there remains a need for more efficient methods of finding RPC cuts.

B. Complexity Considerations

There are a number of parameters that determine the com-

plexity of the adaptive algorithm with RPC cuts, including

the number of iterations of Algorithm 3 to find a cut, the total

number of cuts that are needed to obtain an integer solution,

and the time taken by each run of the LP solver after adding a

cut. In particular, we have observed empirically that a number

of cuts less than the length of the code is often enough to ensure

convergence to the ML codeword. By using each solution of

the LP as a warm start for the next iteration after adding further

cuts, the time that each LP takes can be significantly reduced.

For example, for a -regular code of length with RPC

cuts, although as many as 70 LP problems may have to be

solved for a successful decoding, the total time that is spent on

these LP problems is no more than 10 times that of solving the

standard problem (with no RPC cuts). Moreover, if we allow

more than one cut to be added per iteration, the number of these

iterations can be further reduced.

Since Algorithm 3 involves a random search, there is no guar-

antee that it will find a cut (if one exists) in a finite number of it-

erations. In particular, we have observed cases where, even after

a large number of iterations, no cut was found, while a number

of RPCs were visited repeatedly. This could mean that either no

RPC cut exists for these cases, or the cuts have a structure that

makes them unlikely to be selected by our random search algo-

rithm.

In order to control the complexity, we can impose a limit,

, on the number of iterations of the search, and if no cut is

found after

trials, we declare failure. By changing ,

we can trade complexity for performance. Alternatively, we can

put a limit, , on the total time that is spent on the decoding

process. In order to find a proper value for this maximum, we ran

the algorithm with a very large value of

and measured the

total decoding time for the cases where the algorithm was suc-

cessful in finding the ML solution. Based on these observations,

we found that 10 times the worst case running time of the adap-

tive LP decoding algorithm of Section III serves as a suitable

value for .

C. Numerical Results

To demonstrate the performance improvement achieved by

using the RPC-based cutting-plane technique, we present sim-

ulation results for random -regular LDPC codes on the

AWGN channel. We consider codes of length 32, 100, and 240

bits, and in each case, we count about 200 failures to estimate

the WER.

In Fig. 8, for the length- code, we plot the WER versus

SNR for different values of

, demonstrating the tradeoff

between performance and complexity. As in the previous sec-

tion, the SNR is defined as the ratio of the variance of the trans-

mitted discrete-time signal to the variance of the noise sample.

For purposes of comparison, the WER of LP decoding with

no RPC cut, as well as a lower bound on the WER of the ML

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI N. AND SIEGEL: ADAPTIVE METHODS FOR LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

5407

Fig. 8. WER of RPC-based cutting-plane LP versus SNR for different values of C .

decoder, have been included in the figure. In order to obtain the ML lower bound, we counted the number of times that the RPC-based cutting-plane LP algorithm, using a large value of
, converged to a codeword other than the transmitted codeword, and then divided that by the total number of transmitted codewords. Due to the ML certificate property of LP decoding, we know that ML decoding would fail in those cases, as well. On the other hand, ML decoding may also fail in some of the cases where LP decoding does not converge to an integral solution. Therefore, this estimate gives a lower bound on the WER of ML decoding.
However, for codes of length greater than , in almost all instances where the ML decoder had an error, an RPC-based LP decoder also failed to provide an integral (i.e., ML) solution. Therefore, it was not possible to obtain an estimate of the performance of the ML decoder using the above technique. Therefore, as an alternative, we used the performance of the Box-and-Match soft decision decoding algorithm (BMA) developed by Valembois and Fossorier [18] as an approximation of the ML decoder performance. For the codes that we consider, the error probability of BMA is guaranteed to be within a factor
of that of ML decoding. In Figs. 9–11, the performance of LP decoding with RPC cuts is compared to that of standard LP decoding, sum–product decoding, and also the BMA (for the first two figures). Each figure corresponds to a fixed block length, and in all three cases sum–product decoding had 100 iterations. In these scenarios, instead of enforcing a limit on the iterations, we allow each decoding to take at most 10 times the average time required by the Adaptive LP decoder of Section III. The curves show that, as the SNR increases, the proposed method outperforms the LP and the SPA, and significantly closes the gap to the ML decoder performance. However, one can see that, as the code length increases,

the relative improvement provided by RPC cuts becomes less pronounced. This may be due to the fact that, for larger code lengths, the Tanner graph becomes more tree-like, and therefore the negative effect of cycles on LP and message-passing decoding techniques becomes less important, especially at low SNR.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied the potential for improving LP decoding, both in complexity and performance, by using an adaptive approach. Key to this approach is the ML certificate property of LP decoders, that is, the ability to detect the failure to find the ML codeword. This property is shared by message-passing decoding algorithms only in specific circumstances, such as on the erasure channel. The ML certificate property makes it possible to selectively and adaptively add only those constraints that are “useful,” depending on the current status of the LP decoding process.
Using a cutting-plane approach, we proposed an adaptive LP decoding algorithm with decoding complexity that is independent of the code degree distributions, making it possible to apply LP decoding to parity-check codes of arbitrary densities. However, since general-purpose LP solvers are used at each iteration, the complexity is still a super-linear function of the block length, as opposed to a linear function as achieved by the message-passing decoder. It remains an open question whether special LP solvers for decoding of LDPC codes might take advantage of the sparsity of the constraints and other properties of the LP decoding problem to provide linear complexity.
In the second part of the paper, we explored the application of cutting-plane techniques for improving the error rate of LP decoding. We showed that redundant parity checks provide strong cuts, even though they may not guarantee ML performance. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5408

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2008

Fig. 9. WER of RPC-based cutting-plane LP versus SNR for length 32 and maximum decoding time 10 times that of LP decoding.

Fig. 10. WER of RPC-based cutting-plane LP versus SNR for length 100 and maximum decoding time 10 times that of the LP decoding.

results indicate that it would be worthwhile to find more effi-

APPENDIX A

cient ways to search for strong RPC cuts by exploiting their

PROOF OF LEMMA 2

properties, as well as to determine specific classes of asymp-

totically good codes for which RPC cuts are particularly effec-

Proof: Let

, and denote the sets of variable nodes

tive. It would also be interesting to investigate the effectiveness in the neighborhoods of , and , respectively, and define

of cuts generated by other techniques, such as lift-and-project

. Hence, we will have

. We can

cuts, Gomory cuts, or cuts specially designed for this decoding write as a union of disjoint sets

, and , which

application.

respectively, represent the members of whose values in are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAGHAVI N. AND SIEGEL: ADAPTIVE METHODS FOR LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

5409

Fig. 11. WER of RPC-based cutting-plane LP versus SNR for length 240 and maximum decoding time 10 times that of the LP decoding.

equal to , equal to , or lie in the range . In order to prove

the lemma, it is enough to show that

.

Parity check generates a cut, hence there is an odd-sized

subset

of its neighborhood for which we can write

Now, starting from (14) and (15), and using the fact that , we have

(14)

Since and have no common member in , we can write

(15)

where

and

are disjoint, and exactly

one of them has odd size. Since and do not generate cuts,

all the constraints they introduce should be satisfied by . Now

consider the two sets

and

. As is disjoint

from both and , and exactly one of and is odd-sized,

we further conclude that exactly one of

and

is odd-sized, as well. Without loss of generality, assume that

is odd and

is even.

We proceed by dividing the problem into two cases, corre-

sponding to whether

is even or odd.

Case 1 (

Is Even): Noting that

is

odd, consider the following parity inequality given by :

(18) where for the last inequality we used (17). Since
, (18) yields (19)

Hence, is a nonempty set, and since it is even in size, we

must have

.

Case 2 (

Is Odd): We start by writing two parity in-

equalities induced by and , which are, by assumption, sat-

isfied at . For we write

(20) and for

Since

and

plify (16) as

(16)

(21)

, we can sim- By adding (20) and (21), we obtain after some cancellation

(17)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(22)

5410

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2008

Note that

Fossorier for providing the numerical results for the Box-and-
Match algorithm. (23)

Now, (14) can be rewritten as

(24)

Combining (24) and (22) yields

(25)

and we conclude that

.

APPENDIX B PROOF OF LEMMA 3

By Contradiction: Assume, to the contrary, that at a point

, some check node

is connected to

exactly one fractional variable node,

, with the

corresponding value

. We show that one of the

parity inequalities in (3) introduced by the check node must

be violated at , contradicting the assumption that

.

Let denote the set of integral neighbors of the check node

with value . We consider two cases for the cardinality of .

Case 1 ( Is Odd): Setting

, we find that

(26)

Case 2 ( Is Even): Setting case that

, we find in this (27)

Consequently, in both cases, the check node introduces a violation of a parity inequality (3).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful suggestions. The authors also acknowledge Marc

REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[2] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On the relationship between linear programming decoding and min-sum algorithm decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory and Its Applications, Parma, Italy, Oct. 2004, pp. 991–996.
[3] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, submitted for publication.
[4] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, Understanding Belief Propagation and Its Generalizations, Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs., Tech. Rep. TR2001-22, Jan. 2002.
[5] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “MAP estimation via agreement on trees: Message-passing and linear programming,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3697–3717, Nov. 2005.
[6] S. C. Draper, J. S. Yedidia, and Y. Wang, “ML decoding via mixedinteger adaptive linear programming,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1656–1660.
[7] M. Chertkov and M. Stepanov, “Pseudo-codeword landscape,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1546–1550.
[8] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “Cascaded formulation of the fundamental polytope of general linear block codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Nice, France, June 2007, pp. 1361–1365.
[9] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” Europ. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 5, pp. 509–517, Aug. 2007.
[10] A. Dimakis and M. Wainwright, “Guessing facets: Polytope structure and improved LP decoder,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1369–1373.
[11] M. Chertkov and V. Chernyak, “Loop calculus helps to improve belief propagation and linear programming decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Sep. 2006, pp. 31–40.
[12] J. Nocedal and S. J. Wright, Numerical Optimization.. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[13] GNU Linear Programming Kit, [Online]. Available: http://www.gnu. org/software/glpk
[14] MOSEK Optimization Software, [Online]. Available: http://www. mosek.com
[15] M. Laurent, “A comparison of the Sherali-Adams, Lovász-Schrijver and Lasserre relaxations for 0–1 programming,” Math. of Oper. Res., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 470–496, 2003.
[16] R. Gomory, An Algorithm for Integer Solutions to Linear Programs, Princeton IBM Mathematical Res. Rep., 1, Nov. 1958.
[17] N. Kashyap, “A decomposition theory for binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 3035–3058, Jul. 2008.
[18] A. Valembois and M. Fossorier, “Box and match techniques applied to soft decision decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 5, pp. 796–810, May 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:35:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

