4784

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2008

Concatenated Low-Density Parity-Check and BCH Coding System for Magnetic Recording Read Channel With 4 kB Sector Format
Ningde Xie1, Wei Xu1, Tong Zhang1, Erich F. Haratsch2, and Jaekyun Moon3
ECSE Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA LSI Corporation, Allentown, PA 18109 USA
ECE Department, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA
In this paper, we examine the potential of applying concatenated low-density parity-check (LDPC) and Bose–Chaudhuri– Hocquenghem (BCH) coding for magnetic recording read channel with a 4 kB sector format. One key observation for such concatenated coding systems is that the overall error correction capability can be improved by exploiting the iteration-by-iteration bit error number oscillation behavior in case of inner LDPC code decoding failures. Moreover, assisted by field programmable gate array (FPGA)-based
simulation platforms, empirical error-correcting performance analysis can reach a very low sector error rate (e.g., 10 10 and
below), which is almost infeasible for LDPC-only coding systems. Finally, concatenated coding can further reduce the silicon cost. By implementing a high-speed FPGA-based perpendicular recording read channel simulator, we investigate a 4 kB rate-15/16 concatenated coding system with a 512-byte rate-19/20 inner LDPC code and an outer 4 kB BCH code. We apply a decoding strategy that can fully
utilize the bit error number oscillation behavior of inner LDPC code decoding, and show that its sector error rate drops down to 10 11.
For the purpose of comparison, we use the FPGA-based simulator to empirically observe the performance of 4 kB rate-15/16 LDPC
and Reed-Solomon (RS) codes down to 10 7–10 8. Finally, we estimate the silicon cost of this concatenated coding system at 65 nm
node, and compare it with that of the RS-only and LDPC-only coding systems.
Index Terms—Application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC), BCH, concatenated, field programmable gate array (FPGA), low-density parity-check (LDPC).

I. INTRODUCTION

AS THE conventional longitudinal recording was approaching its superparamagnetic limit [1], the new

perpendicular recording technology has been quickly adopted

by the industry as a promising vehicle to keep the historical

areal density growth rate and approach the Tbit/in areal density

limit [2], [3]. It has been well recognized that achieving this

promised recording density limit at reasonable cost demands

innovative signal processing and error correction coding system

design solutions [4]–[6]. Noticeably, there has been a great

interest in replacing Reed-Solomon (RS) codes with low-den-

sity parity-check (LDPC) codes in magnetic recording channel.

Meanwhile, to facilitate the development of more powerful

error correction code (ECC), International Disk Drive, Equip-

ment, and Materials Association (IDEMA) recently announced

a recommendation to replace the 30-year-old 512-byte sector

format with a new 4 kB sector format [7].

This work concerns the use of LDPC codes for the perpen-

dicular recording channel with a 4 kB sector format. Due to

the lack of accurate analytical methods, it remains a challenge

to predict the error-correcting performance of LDPC codes in

magnetic recording channel at very low sector error rates (SER)

(e.g.,

and below). Using high-speed hardware simulators

based on FPGA (field programmable gate array) devices, recent

work [8]–[13] has empirically investigated the performance of

LDPC codes. In particular, the authors of [12] developed a sim-

ulation-assisted method to estimate the LDPC decoding perfor-

mance down to

and lower under ideal PR channel with

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2008.2004380
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.

AWGN noise only, which has been empirically verified down to

the SER of

using FPGA-based simulation. Even with the

help of FPGA-based simulators, prior work could only empiri-

cally reach the SER down to – for the 512-byte sector

format, which is still several orders of magnitudes away from the

desired SER in practice. Clearly, it would be more difficult to in-

vestigate the LDPC codes for the 4 kB sector format. As a result,

the applicability of LDPC-only ECC coding solutions for mag-

netic recording channel still largely remains an open question.

Targeting the magnetic recording channel with the 4 kB sector

format, this work focuses on concatenated coding with LDPC as

the inner code and Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) as

the outer code, instead of LDPC-only coding, because of three

main motivations. 1) As we will show later, LDPC code de-

coding failures tend to exhibit a certain degree of oscillations

in terms of bit error number from one decoding iteration to

the next. Such iteration-by-iteration bit error number oscillation

can be leveraged by the outer BCH code to improve the overall

error-correcting capability when concatenated coding systems

are being used. 2) Such a concatenated coding strategy makes

it possible to apply FPGA-based high-speed simulators to esti-

mate the error-correcting performance down to very low SER

(e.g.,

and below) at a reasonably high credibility. 3) The

silicon implementation cost of a concatenated coding system

can be lower than that of a competing LDPC-only or RS-only

coding system. The above stated features will be later demon-

strated by a case study.

This paper presents a concatenated LDPC and BCH coding

system design approach that fully exploits the inner LDPC code

decoding oscillation behavior. To facilitate error-correcting

performance estimation, we implemented an FPGA-based

simulator that consists of an LDPC encoder, a perpendicular

channel with media jitter and AWGN noises, an equalizer

and noise predictor, a soft-output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA)

detector, and an LDPC decoder. Assisted by this FPGA-based

0018-9464/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIE et al.: CONCATENATED LOW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK AND BCH CODING SYSTEM

4785

Fig. 1. FPGA-based simulation platform structure.

simulator, we demonstrate the proposed design strategy using

a 4 kB rate-15/16 concatenated coding system with a 512-byte

rate-19/20 inner LDPC code and an outer 4 kB BCH code.

Based upon extensive empirical FPGA simulation results, esti-

mation of SER down to

can be realized with a reasonably

high credibility. This FPGA-based simulator is also used to

empirically evaluate the performance of 4 kB rate-15/16 LDPC

and RS codes down to – for the purpose of compar-

ison. Finally, based on application-specific integrated circuit

(ASIC) design at 65 nm CMOS technology node, we evaluate

the silicon cost of this concatenated coding system, which is

further compared with that of the competing LDPC-only and

RS-only coding systems.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows.

Section II describes the perpendicular recording read channel

FPGA-based simulator used in this work. Section III presents

the proposed concatenated LDPC and BCH coding system

design strategy, and a case study using an inner 512-byte LDPC

code for the 4 kB sector format is presented in Section IV.

Conclusions are drawn in Section V.

we employ the quantized version of the Box-Muller method

[14]. It generates a random sample with Gaussian distribution

(zero mean and standard deviation

) using two random

samples and uniformly distributed between [0, 1] as

follows:

where

An array of 64-bit linear feedback shift registers is used to gen-

erate the random samples and . The functions

and

are implemented using look-up tables. The random sam-

ples with the

distribution are scaled to generate the

noises according to the following SNR definition [15]:

II. FPGA-BASED SIMULATION PLATFORM
To facilitate the study in this work, we implemented an FPGA-based simulator using one Altera Stratix-II 180 FPGA device that contains 186 576 equivalent 4-input look-up tables (LUTs) and 9 Mb of on-chip memory. Fig. 1 shows the overall structure of this simulator. It models the perpendicular recording channel as

where the signal energy is in the “dibit” response and the noise reflects the first-order jitter model.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, the read channel signal equalization/ detection is realized by a 10-tap equalizer, a 3-tap noise predictor, and an SOVA detector that uses a two-step detector structure [16]. This simulation platform supports quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes. The parity check matrix of a QC-LDPC code can be written as

where

...

and the media jitter noise is modeled as a Gaussian variable

. The parameter

is defined as the pulse width of where each submatrix is a circulant matrix in which each

the derivative of at half of its peak amplitude. We precom- row is a cyclic shift of the row above. The QC-LDPC encoder

pute 256 samples of , which are stored in FPGA to facilitate is designed using the approach proposed in [17], and the

the realization of

.

QC-LDPC decoder realizes the min-sum decoding algorithm

As illustrated in Fig. 1, the output of perpendicular recording and employs the decoder architecture presented in [18]. The

channel is further disturbed by additive white Gaussian noise finite word-length configurations of this simulation platform

(AWGN)

. To generate jitter noise and AWGN, are outlined as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4786

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2008

TABLE I OSCILLATION OF BIT ERROR NUMBER IN LDPC DECODING

TABLE II

STATISTICS OF THE OCCURRENCE OF DIFFERENT MINIMUM BIT ERROR

P P NUMBERS FOR THE ESTIMATION OF

UNDER TWO DIFFERENT

III. CONCATENATED LDPC AND BCH CODING SYSTEM

A concatenated LDPC and BCH coding system has a BCH

code as the outer code and an LDPC code as the inner code, i.e.,

one sector of user data is first encoded by the outer BCH code

encoder, then the BCH codeword is partitioned into equal-

sized segments, and each segment is encoded by the inner LDPC

code encoder. Let

and

denote the code rate of

the inner LDPC code and outer BCH code, respectively, the

overall code rate

. If all the inner

LDPC codewords are successfully decoded, we do not need to

execute the outer BCH code decoding. Because of the possible

LDPC code mis-correction (i.e., the LDPC decoding converges

to a valid but wrong codeword), the outer BCH code may still

be used to perform error detection in practice. In case of inner

LDPC code decoding failure(s), we propose a simple but ef-

fective trial-and-error procedure to exploit the bit error number

oscillation behavior in the presence of LDPC decoding failure

to improve the overall error-correcting performance. The basic

idea is that, for each LDPC code decoding failure, we use the

hard decisions at different inner LDPC decoding iterations as

the input to the successive BCH code decoder until the BCH

code decoder succeeds or all the LDPC code decoding hard de-

cisions have been exhausted. Let denote the maximum itera-

tion number of LDPC code decoding, and denote the number

of LDPC code decoding failures in one BCH codeword, we have

for

For the 1-st LDPC decoding failure, use the hard decision of its th iteration as the decoding output.

for

For the 2-nd LDPC decoding failure, use the hard decision of its th iteration as the decoding output.
...

for

For the mth LDPC decoding failure, use the

hard decision of its th iteration as the

1) The outputs of the perpendicular channel, AWGN generator, equalizer, and noise predictor use 6 bits.

decoding output. if BCH decoding succeeds then

2) The path metric and soft output of the SOVA detector use 9 bits and 3 bits, respectively.
3) The internal LDPC decoding messages use 3 bits.

break; else

Using this simulation platform, we observed significant oscillation of bit error number from one decoding iteration to the next in case of LDPC code decoding failures. This is illustrated

continue; endif

in the following example. We constructed a regular rate-19/20

QC-LDPC code for 512-byte sectors, where the column weight

of QC-LDPC code parity check matrix is 3. We set the equal-

ization target as

and set the media jitter noise con-

tribute 90% of the total noise power. At the SER of

end ...
end

and

, we captured two LDPC decoding failures and end

present the corresponding bit error numbers at each decoding

iteration in Table I. Using this FPGA-based simulator, we cap- Let denote the inner LDPC code decoding failure prob-

tured many LDPC code decoding failures, all of which have the ability, and

denote the probability that, once the LDPC

similar bit error number oscillation.

code decoding fails, the minimum bit error number among all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIE et al.: CONCATENATED LOW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK AND BCH CODING SYSTEM
TABLE III ASIC DESIGN RESULTS AT 65 NM NODE

4787

the LDPC code decoding iterations equals to . Let denote the the circulant matrices have a column weight of 1 and are con-

error correction capability of the BCH code, the overall SER of structed randomly subject to the 4-cycle free constraint. Since

the concatenated coding system can be estimated as

parity check matrix has two redundant rows, we denote the inner

LDPC code as rate-19/20 (4380, 4163). Each BCH codeword

is partitioned into

equal-sized segments, and each seg-

(1) ment is encoded by the inner LDPC code encoder. Therefore, the codeword length of the BCH code is

where

bits. Given the overall code rate of formation length is

, we have that the inbits. Clearly,

the outer BCH code should be constructed over

, and

its maximum correctable error number is lower bounded by

. By setting

for the worst-

case scenario, we have that the outer BCH code is a (33 304,

In spite of the above simple formulation, there are no existing

accurate analytical methods that can estimate the values of

and

for LDPC code decoding under magnetic recording

channel. Hence, we have to empirically estimate and

through extensive simulations. Nevertheless, due to the very low

SER requirements in magnetic recording, computer-based sim-

ulation is far less sufficient and dedicated high-speed simulators

are necessary in this context.

Targeting a 4 kB sector format in magnetic recording, com-

pared with LDPC-only ECC solutions, such a concatenated

coding system design strategy makes it much more feasible to

apply FPGA-based high-speed simulators to empirically esti-

mate the error-correcting performance down to very low SERs

(e.g.,

and below). Although FPGA-based simulations

have been used to evaluate the performance of LDPC-only ECC

solutions, it can hardly reach sufficiently low SER for such a

long sector length within a reasonable amount of simulation

time. For example, suppose we use a simulator that can achieve

even up to a 500 Mbps simulation throughput. To evaluate the

SER down to

with 4 kB sector format, we need roughly

80 days, assuming we must capture about 10 LDPC decoding

failures to estimate the SER. The concatenated coding system

may demand much less simulation for two reasons. 1) The

smaller inner LDPC codeword length directly contributes to the

reduced simulation time, and more importantly, 2) empirical

estimation of and demands much less simulations than

trying to explicitly simulate the overall system SER.

32 850, 28) binary BCH code (note that we use

format

to represent a linear block code, where denotes the codeword

length, denotes the information length and denotes the max-

imum number of correctable errors). The maximum number of

LDPC decoding iterations is set to 8. For the FPGA-based simu-

lator, we fix the channel bit density, which is defined as the ratio

PW50/T, as 2.3, and the total noise consists of 90% media jitter

noise and 10% AWGN.

As pointed out in Section III, to estimate the SER of the con-

catenated coding system, we apply the FPGA-based simulator to

empirically estimate the inner LDPC code decoding failure rate

and the minimum bit error number probability in case of

inner LDPC code decoding failures. Table II and Fig. 2 show the

statistics of the occurrence of different minimum bit error num-

bers among all the inner LDPC code decoding iterations under

two different inner LDPC code decoding failure rates. We note

that, in all the simulations, the LDPC decoder output is always

compared against with the true transmitted data, instead of re-

lying on the parity check operation to check the convergence

of decoding. Therefore, whether miscorrection occurs or not is

irrelevant in this context and does not affect the results at all.

Based on these empirically obtained statistic data, for the case

of

, it is reasonable to conjecture that

and

are on the order of

to

are on the

order of

to

are on the order of , and

is on the order of .

Based on the above discussion, we may estimate the overall

SER of this concatenated coding system when the inner LDPC

IV. CASE STUDY
In this work, we apply the FPGA-based simulator described in Section II to demonstrate the above presented concatenated

code failure rate

. According to (1), we first

evaluate the overall SER when

(i.e., only one out of the

inner LDPC codeword decodings fails) as

coding systems. In particular, we consider a rate-15/16 4 kB

concatenated coding system with the following configurations.

The parity check matrix of the inner LDPC code contains an

(2)

array of 3 60 circulant matrices with size of 73, where all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4788

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 44, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2008

Fig. 2. Histogram representation of the data listed in Table II.

where order of

and

, and we have that

. For

, we have

is on the Fig. 3. SER performance comparison.

out that, if turbo equalization strategy (i.e., iterative detection (3) and LDPC decoding) is being used, the performance of those

where

LDPC-based schemes may be largely improved and potentially surpass RS code at increased silicon cost. A straightforward

realization of turbo equalization with global iterations may

simply duplicate the detection/decoding datapath by times. If

we enable the use of decoding convergence check in LDPC de-

coding, the number of global iterations may change from one

sector to the next. Such run-time variation of the number of Based on the data listed in Table II and the above conjectured global iterations may be potentially leveraged to reduce the sil-

for

, we have that

is on the order of icon cost, which certainly deserves further investigation. Even

. Clearly,

will drop sharply for

, hence we without using the turbo equalization, as discussed in the fol-

can conclude that the overall SER of the concatenated coding lowing, the proposed BCH-LDPC concatenated coding system

system is on the order of

(i.e., dominated by the case has less silicon cost than that of RS-only coding system, which

when only one LDPC codeword decoding fails).

may still make this concatenation option preferable in certain

For the purpose of comparison, we further configured circumstances.

the FPGA-based simulator to investigate the performance We further carried out ASIC design at 65 nm CMOS tech-

when using LDPC-only and RS-only coding systems. This nology node in order to evaluate the silicon cost. With the RTL-

FPGA-based simulator can support the use of a regular level design entry using Verilog, we use Synopsys tool set and

rate-15/16 (32 768, 30 720) QC-LDPC code with the parity 65 nm CMOS standard cell library. The target read channel

check matrix column weight of 4. The code parity check data rate is set to 1 Gbps. Following the min-sum LDPC de-

matrix contains an array of 2 32 circulant matrices, where coder architecture presented in [18], we designed decoders for

all the circulant matrices have a column weight of 2 and are the rate-19/20 512-byte inner LDPC code and the rate-15/16 4

constructed randomly subject to the 4-cycle free constraint. kB LDPC code. Notice that, due to the low inner LDPC code

This FPGA-based simulator can also support the use of a 4 decoding failure rate, the trial-and-error concatenated code de-

kB rate-15/16 (2914, 2731, 91) RS code over

. We coding can be readily handled by the hard disk controller. Hence

also considered the scenario that the proposed trial-and-error we may not need to modify the inner LDPC code decoder in the

decoding strategy is not being used in the BCH-LDPC concate- read channel to support such trial-and-error decoding process.

nated coding system. Finally, in order to further verify the SER Following the architecture presented in [16], we designed an

estimation results, Monte-Carlo simulations of the BCH-LDPC SOVA detector. To support the pipelining between the detector

concatenated coding system with and without trial-and-error and decoder, an SRAM-based buffer should be used in between.

decoding strategy are also obtained using the FPGA-based For the design of BCH and RS code decoders, we assume the use

simulator.

of Berlekamp-Massey algorithm with the architecture as pre-

Fig. 3 shows all the calculated and simulated SER results. sented in [19]. Notice that the detector used in RS-only system

It is clear that, under the 4 kB sector format, RS code has the is a Viterbi detector that is much simpler than its SOVA coun-

best error-correcting performance (e.g., about 0.7 dB gain over terpart. The ASIC design results are summarized in Table III,

this proposed BCH-LDPC concatenation). It should be pointed which suggests that the concatenated coding system can have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIE et al.: CONCATENATED LOW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK AND BCH CODING SYSTEM

4789

less silicon cost compared with LDPC-only and RS-only coding systems.

V. CONCLUSION

This paper addressed a concatenated LDPC and BCH coding

system design for magnetic recording read channel with a 4 kB

sector format. Aiming to leverage the observed iteration-by-iter-

ation bit error number oscillation behavior in case of LDPC code

decoding failure, we propose a simple trial-and-error decoding

strategy to improve the overall error correction capability. By

implementing an FPGA-based read channel simulator, we have

further demonstrated the ability to estimate the SER perfor-

mance of such concatenated coding systems down to

. Fi-

nally, we evaluated the silicon cost advantage over other com-

peting coding systems. This work suggests that such concate-

nated coding systems can be an attractive alternative in mag-

netic recording, which exploits the advantage of LDPC codes

while circumventing the error floor concern. Future research is

directed to investigating how the turbo equalization can be ap-

plied to reduce the coding gain gap with or even surpass the RS

codes, and how the error-correcting performance comparison of

these competing coding strategies will be impacted if burst de-

fects are further taken into account.

REFERENCES
[1] M. H. Kryder, “Magnetic recording beyond the superparamagnetic limit,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Magnetics Conf., Apr. 2005, p. 575.
[2] H. N. Bertram and M. Williams, “SNR and density limit estimates: A comparison of longitudinal and perpendicular recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 4–9, Jan. 2000.
[3] M. Mallary, A. Torabi, and M. Benakli, “One terabit per square inch perpendicular recording conceptual design,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1719–1724, Jul. 2002.
[4] R. Wood, Y. Sonobe, Z. Jin, and B. Wilson, “Perpendicular recording: The promise and the problems,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 235, pp. 1–9, Oct. 2001.
[5] E. M. Kurtas, M. F. Erden, and X. Yang, “Future read channel technologies and challenges for high density data storage applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Mar. 2005, pp. v/737–w740.

[6] E. F. Haratsch and Z. A. Keirn, “Digital signal processing in read channels,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integrated Circuits Conf., Sep. 2005, pp. 683–690.
[7] A New 4096 Bytes Sector Length Standard, The International Disk Drive Equipment and Materials Association (IDEMA).
[8] L. Sun, H. Song, and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Error floor investigation and girth optimization for certain types of low-density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing, Mar. 2005, pp. 1101–1104.
[9] L. Sun, H. Song, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and Z. Keirn, “Field-programmable gate-array-based investigation of the error floor of low-density parity check codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 2983–2985, Oct. 2005.
[10] X. Hu and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Evaluation of low-density paritycheck codes on perpendicular magnetic recording model,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 2, pp. 727–732, Feb. 2007.
[11] S. Jeon, X. Hu, L. Sun, and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Performance evaluation of partial response targets for perpendicular recording using field programmable gate arrays,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 2259–2261, Jun. 2007.
[12] X. Hu, B. V. K. V. Kumar, Z. Li, and R. Barndt, “Error floor estimation of long LDPC codes on partial response channels,” in Proc. Global Telecommunications Conf. (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2007, pp. 259–264.
[13] H. Zhong, T. Zhang, and E. F. Haratsch, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the magnetic recording channel: Code design and VLSI implementation,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 1118–1123, Mar. 2007.
[14] E. W. Weisstein, Box-Mutter Transformation, From MathWorld—A Wolfram Web Resource [Online]. Available: http://mathworld.wolfram.com/Box-MullerTransformation.html
[15] J. Moon, “SNR definition for magnetic recording channels with transition noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, pp. 3881–3883, Sep. 2000.
[16] E. Yeo et al., “A 500 Mb/s soft-output Viterbi decoder,” IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 38, pp. 1234–1241, Jul. 2003.
[17] Z. Li, L. Chen, S. Lin, W. Fong, and P.-S. Yeh, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[18] H. Zhong, W. Xu, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Area-efficient min-sum decoder design for high-rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes in magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 4117–4122, Dec. 2007.
[19] D. V. Sarwate and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-speed architecture for ReedSolomon decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integ. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 641–655, Oct. 2001.
Manuscript received April 08, 2008; revised August 04, 2008. Current version published January 08, 2009. Corresponding author: N. Xie (e-mail: xien@rpi. edu).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:28:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

