An IP Generator for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Convolutional Code Decoders

Chun-Hao Liao, Jun-Wei Lin, Yen-Shuo Chang, Ching-Hao Yu, Chun-Hao Liu, and Tzi-Dar Chiueh
Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering and Department of Electrical Engineering National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 10617 chiueh@cc.ee.ntu.edu.tw

Abstract— In this paper, the design and implementation of a high performance soft LDPC-CC decoder IP generator is presented. The proposed design is based on quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check matrices. These matrices not only simplify decoder design but also require less memory storage. A special digital processor is proposed to reduce the critical path and enhance the throughput. In addition, we have designed an IP generator and associated user interface that can take specifications of three parameters: iteration number, memory length, and code rate. With this generator, high-performance LDPC-CC decoders conforming to the user’s specifications can be generated effortlessly.

matrix and its advantages. Our IP architecture for LDPC-CC Decoder will be described in section III. A brief introduction of our proposed IP generator is given in section IV. Some issues about verification are

I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have recently enjoyed extensive popularity owing to their powerful error-correcting capability, which is very close to the Shannon limit. LDPC block codes (LDPC-BCs) were first introduced by Gallager [1] in early 1960’s and resurrected by MacKay [2] in 1995. Later in 1999, Felström and Zigangirov [3] proposed the LDPC convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs) based on the block code. Comparing with the LDPC-BCs, LDPC-CCs have many advantages [3]. At first, they perform better then the block codes of the same length. Secondly, it’s easier to implement the encoder and decoder for LDPC-CCs. Generally speaking, the encoder of the LDPC-BCs needs to be specially designed, and one good example is the sophisticated LDPC-BC encoder for IEEE 802.16e standard [4]. On the other hand, the encoder for LDPC-CCs can be simply implemented using the conventional convolutional encoder with time varying coefficients. Moreover, transmitted data encoded by LDPC-BCs suffers from the inherent block-based feature. Data bits are partitioned into frames with a fixed and large number of bits, often entailing large overhead when small chunks of data are to be transmitted. LDPC-CCs, on the other hand, have no such limitations and therefore are more suitable for the two-way interactive transition, e.g. internet chat.
In light of LDPC-CCs’ imminent application to all sorts of wireless and wireline communications, this paper introduces the design and implementation of a decoder intellectual property (IP) generator for soft LDPC-CC using quasi-cyclic (QC) parity-check matrices. The proposed IP generator can help the users quickly generate not only the RTL design of desired LDPC-CC decoders but also the synthesis and physical design script so that the users can conveniently utilize the designed LDPC-CC decoders. Essential parameters, such as number of iteration, memory length, and code rate, can all be flexibly adjusted through a friendly user interface. Moreover, this IP is verified by many IP verification tools and compatible with the AMBA AHB interface.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II gives an introduction to the adopted quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check

Figure 1. Constructing the proposed QC LDPC-CC matrix
discussed in Section V. We will show that simulation results of our IP with respect to three adjustable parameters – iteration, memory length, and code rate in section VI. Section VII concludes this paper.
II. LDPC-CC DECODER
In this section, we will introduce the adopted quasi-cyclic parity-check matrix in detail, and we will discuss the advantage of this scheme.
The generated decoders will adopt the well-known min-sum algorithm to implement the proposed LDPD-CC decoder. The advantage of the min-sum algorithm is that all of the operations of the decoding can be simplified to simple additions and comparisons, making decoder implementation easier; albeit with some performance degradation. The detail operation of the LDPC-CC decoding can be found in [3], and we will not discuss issue this further.
A. Proposed quasi-cyclic parity-check matrix
Following the notation in [3], let us consider an (M, J, K) parity-check matrix where M stands for the memory length, J represents the row weight, and K is the column weight. We further define the code rate of the LDPC-CC code as R, the number of iterations as T, and let N be M/J. Referring to Figure 1, we will then introduce how to construct the quasi-cyclic parity-check matrix:
1) Refering to Figure 1(a), we first construct a square matrix G that consists of J×J identity matrices, and each identity matrix is N×N, and the G is therefore M×M.

978-1-4244-2342-2/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE.

1652

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:37:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 2. Constructing a (10, 2, 4) QC matrix

a

2)
∈ {1,

Refering 2, …, J},

to Figure
b∈ {1, 2,

1(b), for each …, J} and a ≠

identity matrix b, we cyclically

Iab where right-shift

all rows integers

ainnditsabby∈s{ab1c,o2l,u…mn, sN, -w1}h.ere

sab

are

properly

chosen

positive

3) Refering to Figure 1(c), we cut the low-left part of the M×M matrix in (b) along the diagnal and paste it onto the right of the remaining matrix to construct a parallelogram-shaped matrix L.

4) According to the code rate R, repeat the step 1), 2) and 3) to generate 1/(1-R)-1 more matrices with diffent sab. Note that R = J/K, and in the proposed decoder, we always let R equal to (n-1)/n where n is a postive integer.

5) Interlace row of the resulting matrices to obtain the convolutional parity-check matrix H.

6) The convolutional parity check matrix is actually expanded indefinitely in the vertical direction. Such matrix can be attained by repeating the H matrix along its diagonal direction.

To be more specific, we illustrate an example showing how a (10, 2, 4) quasi-cyclic parity-check matrix can be constructed in Fig. 2.

B. Advantages of the Adopted matrix
The QC parity check matrix can significantly reduce the complexity of associated LDPC-CC decoders. From the perspective of hardware design, using the proposed matrix has following advantages.

1) Reduced storage for H

As mentioned above, the whole parity-check matrix can be described by only a few integers. In other words, the decoder only needs to store some parameters and all the addressing between the memory and processor can thus derive from them. It is no longer needed to build the complete parity-check matrix into the decoder. Furthermore, a LDPC-BC code with similar error-correcting capability as such a LDPC-CC code often has a parity check matrix with size tens of times larger.

2) Shared address

The proposed parity check matrix has a desirable property: the

Figure 3. Top view of LDPC-CC decoder IP
period in the vertical direction is R times that of the horizontal direction. On the other hand, conventional LDPC-CC matrix does not necessarily have this property. We will show later that with this property all processors in the decoder can then share the same address all the time when they access the memory storing intermediate values during the decoding process.
III. LDPC-CC DECODER IP ARCHITECTURE
In this section, we describe the architecture for the LDPC-CC decoder IP. The decoder design is implemented as a soft IP which uses AMBA AHB (Advanced High-performance Bus) [5] as its interface. The top view of the design is shown in Figure 3 and the detail of each part is given in the following.
A. Address control
The address control circuit calculates the address offset for each processor where to read data from the memory corresponding to the position of ‘1’s in the parity-check matrix. We design an in-place storage such that a write address is always the same as the previous read address and thus only read address needs be calculated. For an (M, J, K) LDPC-CC decoder, based on the regularity of our parity-check matrix design, all addresses can be calculated from K(J-1) parameters. As a result, only K(J-1) numbers need to be stored instead of whole position of ‘1’s in the matrix where MK numbers are needed. When M is large (and it is usually the case), a lot of storage is saved. J equal to 3 and K equal to 3/R are implemented in this work. Note that based on the parity-check matrix generated in Section II, only one address control circuit is needed for all digital processors to be mentioned later.
B. Log Likelihood Ratio (LLR) storage
In order to reduce the complexity and save gate counts, a memory-based architecture is used in our work. With limited memory I/O bandwidth, we can get all data needed for each step in one clock cycle based on the matrix design. To achieve this, for a (M, J, K) decoder, K dual-port SRAMs are used to store the P and Q values and K/J single-port SRAMs are used to store the L values, where P is the information of the check node and thus the input of the horizontal step, Q represents the information of the variable node and thus the input of the vertical step, and finally L is the LLR of the received bit. Our design guarantee that each P and Q values come from different SRAMs such that vertical and horizontal steps can complete in one cycle. Comparing to a previous work [6] where three clock cycles are needed for vertical step, 67% saving is achieved and the balance of two steps simplifies the decoder scheduling design. The size of a dual-port SRAM or a single-port SRAM is MKT.

1653
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:37:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a)

(b)

Figure 4. (a) Sign bit circuit (b) Minimum circuit for vertical step

C. Digital Processor
Digital processor carries out the horizontal and vertical steps. For each step, the processors read LLR from the memory and store the result back using the same address in the next clock cycle. In a vertical step, we need to find the minimum for each input except itself and the output sign bit should be the XOR result of the signs of all other inputs. To save the number of XOR gates, we integrate all XOR operations into one circuit instead of building many identical many-input XOR gates. In other words, we first XOR all sign bits then each output is obtained by one more XOR operation with the corresponding input sign, as illustrated in Figure 4(a). To find the minimum among all inputs less the current input, we share the comparators as much as possible. Take the following example: when J = 3, R = 1/2, six inputs need to be considered and we need to find minimum among five of them for each of the six outputs. Direct implementation needs 6 × 4 = 24 comparators. In the implementation shown in Figure 4(b), we first use three comparators to get S12, S34, S56 (S12 stands for the smaller one of Q1 Q2), then another three comparators to get S1234, S1256, S3456. Finally, we can get R1 by comparing Q2 and S3456, and R2 through R6 can be obtained similarly. Overall, only 12 comparators are needed, a 50% saving. In a horizontal step, in order to slow down signal saturation, we multiply the horizontal step outputs by a scale factor before write-back [7]. To simplify hardware implementation, we choose 0.75 as the scale factor in our work such that only one adder is needed.

D. AMBA AHB wrapper
AMBA AHB wrapper is the interface of the proposed LDPC-CC decoder IP. To make it easy for the design to be integrated into most SoC, we design the interface based on AMBA 2.0 standard. A slave IP is implemented in our work. Since embedded memories are included in our IP, regular memory read/write operations suffice and no sophisticated memory control is necessary.

(a)

(b)

Figure 5. IP Generator GUI: (a) Performance evaluation window (b) decoder specification/generation window.

IV. IP GENERATOR
In this section, a brief introduction to the proposed IP generator is given. There are many parameters needed in generating an LDPC-CC decoder. Therefore, for usability, we have provided automatic generation of all files needed to use and verify the IP with specified parameters. The choices of each parameter that were provided include:
Code rate (R): 1/2, 2/3, 3/4 Memory length (M): 192, 384, 768, 1536 Iteration count (T): 10, 15, 20
In summary, there are 36 different specifications that can be generated by this IP generator. To be more user friendly, the generator has two windows: performance evaluation window and IP generation window.
A. Decoder Performance Evaluation Window
This window is depicted in Figure 5(a). It is designed with a view to allowing the user to easily evaluate the performance of decoders with prescribed parameters. By indicating the range of some parameters at the left-hand side of the window, all performance curves of decoders with parameters within the selected ranges are illustrated at the right half of the window.
B. Decoder IP Generation Window
This window, containing four steps, is depicted in Figure 5(b). To make the interface easy to use, clear instruction for each step is also specifically indicated on the window. The four steps for generating an LDPC-CC decoder are
Step1: Select decoder parameters and the performance curve is automatically shown under the selection.
Step2: Select the directory to store all the generated files.
Step3: Select the files that the user wants to generate. In addition to the RTL code, the IP generator can also provide C++ functional model, testbench and test pattern, high-level synthesis script, automatic place and route script, and related files for AMBA VIP protocol verification platform. With these files, the user can verify generated IPs effortlessly.
Step 4: Define the memory module’s name and the length of the test pattern.
Finally click the Generate button, and all specified files for the requested LDPC-CC decoder are generated automatically.
V. VERIFICATION STRATEGY
Verification is particularly important for an IP design. Not only the functional correctness but also AMBA AHB protocol should be verified. The RTL codes generated are verified functionally by comparing the decoding result to the fixed-point simulation output of the C model. Although a soft IP is given in our work, we also run through the ASIC flow to verify our IP with pre- and post-layout gate level simulation. The code coverage of our testbench is measured by TransEDA Verification Navigator and for all combinations, and more than 95% coverage is achieved including statement, branch, condition and toggle coverage. Our IP also passed a set of IP qualification rules (IPQ) using nLint. To verify the AMBA AHB protocol comparability of the decoder IP, Synopsys VIP and EASY platform is used and no error is found during test. Furthermore, we implement the proposed IP on FPGA and run emulation on an ARM platform board to verify its design correctness.

1654
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:37:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS
The proposed LDPC-CC IP generator provides three parameters for users to choose for a suitable LDPC-CC decoder according to their specific requirements. For example, if the transmission rate is the utmost concern, then high code rate LDPC-CC decoder can be chosen. On the other hand, if hardware complexity is critical, fewer number of iterations and/or less memory length LDPC-CC decoder will be a reasonable choice. Figure 6, 7, and 8 show that simulation results with respect to three adjustable parameters – iteration number, memory length, and code rate, respectively. In Figure 6, an LDPC-CC decoder that N = 512 (M=1536) and R = 1/2 is simulated with different number of iterations. The performance is greatly enhanced as iteration number increases. In addition, memory length is another parameter that can greatly influence decoding performance. In Figure 7, bit error rate performances versus signal to noise ratio with different memory lengths are depicted, where 20 iterations are simulated and R = 1/2. Note that one can choose an LDPC-CC decoder with shorter memory length but more iterations to achieve the same level of performance as another decoder with longer memory length and fewer iterations. Moreover, LDPC-CC decoders with different code rates are simulated. Figure 8 illustrates the simulated bit error rate performance with different code rates when other paramaters are fixed with N = 512 (M=1536) and 20 iterations. Note that different code rate can be chosen according to the channel status. High code rate decoder can be used in high SNR environment while low code rate decoder is suitable for low SNR environment.
To further investigate the performance of the proposed decoder IP, a decoder with N=512 (M=1536), R=1/2, and I=20 is compared with the decoder in [3] and the results are illustrated in Figure 9. In [3], the number of “1”s of its parity-check matrix is fewer, while the memory length is longer. The overall hardware complexity is higher then generated decoder used in Figure 9. In other words, one can use our generator to achieve an LDPC-CC decoder with better performance and lower complexity than the one in [3].
Figure 6. Performance with different numbers of iterations
Figure 7. Performance with different memory lengths

Figure 8. Decoder performance with different code rates
Figure 9. Performance comparison with [3]
VII. CONCLUSION
We implemented a automatic IP generator for a type of high-performance LDPC-CC decoder based on quasi-cyclic (QC) parity-check matrices, which not only simplify the design and implementation but also reduce the memory storage of parity-check matrix. To reduce critical path and enhance the throughput, a special digital processor is designed for vertical and horizontal step computations. The generator can generate one such LDPC-CC decoder with different memory length, iteration number, and code rate using a friendly user interface, through which these three parameters can be specified. Simulation results indicate that the generated LDPC-CC decoder IP can work under various parameter settings and have very competitive error-correction performance.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Information Theory, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Cryptography and Coding, 5th IMA Conf., C. Boyd, Ed., Lecture Notes on Computer Science, pp. 100-111, Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1995.
[3] A. J. Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181-2191, September 1999.
[4] http://www.ieee802.org/16/tge/ [5] AMBA Specification Rev2.0,
http://www.arm.com/products/solutions/AMBA_Spec.html [6] S. Bates and G. Block, “A memory-based architecture for FPGA
implementations of low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” in Proceedings of IEEE Symposium on Circuits and Systems, vol. 1, pp 336-339, 23-26 May 2005. [7] Jun Heo and Keith M. Chugg, “Optimization of scaling soft information in iterative decoding via density evolution methods,” IEEE Trans. on Comm., vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 957-961, June 2005.

1655
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:37:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

