Efficient Decoder Design for High-Throughput LDPC Decoding

Zhiqiang Cui1, Zhongfeng Wang1, Xinmiao Zhang2, and Qingwei Jia3

1Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331, USA 2Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA
3Hitachi Asia Ltd, Singapore

Abstract—In this paper, a matrix permutation scheme is proposed to convert a generic QC-LDPC code to a shift-structured LDPC code. Thus, efficient VLSI architectures can be developed to achieve very high decoding throughput with low hardware complexity. Furthermore, novel implementation schemes for min-sum algorithm based column-layered decoding are presented. The proposed approaches provide very efficient ways for high-speed decoder design of generic QC-LDPC codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
The requirements of high speed applications for low-density parity-check (LDPC) [1] decoding have posed many challenges to LDPC decoder design. First, to achieve very high decoding throughput, very large decoding parallelism is needed and a large number of messages are transferred among computation units through complex switching network [2]. Quasi-Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes are well-suited for VLSI implementation because of the regularity in their paritycheck matrix. Conventionally, the switching network of a QCLDPC decoder is implemented with a barrel shifter array. A barrel shifter is a multi-stage switching network. For an Ninput N-output barrel shifter, it usually requires at least log2 N stages of 2-to-1 multiplexers. When N is large, the barrel shifter array consumes a significant amount of silicon area and power. Second, LDPC codes are decoded using iterative decoding approaches. To increase decoding throughput, reducing decoding iterations is desired. However, insufficient number of decoding iterations inevitably causes performance loss for LDPC decoding.
In [3], the shift property of the cyclic sub-matrices of a quasi-cyclic parity-check matrix was explored for high-speed LDPC decoder design. However, the design requires each submatrix in converted parity-check matrix to be a permutation matrix. Thus it is only suitable for a certain class of QC-LDPC codes. In general, the restructured sub-matrices are not permutation matrices. In other words some rows in each submatrix contain multiple 1-entries. It will cause significant logic delay in computation units. In this work, an optimized matrix permutation scheme is proposed to minimize the maximum number of 1-components in each row of the converted submatrices. For the shift-structured LDPC codes, column-layered decoding is well suited for high speed decoder design because of its fast convergence speed. To reduce the implementation complexity and the logic delay in computation core, efficient implementation schemes for min-sum algorithm [8] based column-layered decoding are proposed.
II. PERMUTATION OF PARITY-CHECK MATRIX
A. Converting a Quasi-Cyclic Matrix to a Shift Matrix
The parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC code, Hqc , is an
array of circulant sub-matrices. Assume Hqc has R block

rows and C block columns. Each sub-matrix has a dimension of p × p . Let lij represent the column i of block column j,

The column lij+1 can be obtained by one-step shifting of column lij . If only one column from each block column of

Hqc is picked and the C columns are grouped together to

form a new block column, H1s = [ li00 li11 … liCC−−11 ; li00 +1 li11+1 …

liCC−−11+1 ; li00 + p−1 li11+ p−1 … liCC−−11+ p−1 ] forms a shift-structured matrix. Here a mod p operation is omitted from all subscripts

to make the expressions concise and semi-colons are used to

separate two block columns. In H1s , i0 , i1 … iC −1 are integers in the set {0, 1,… p-1}. Taking any integer b, by grouping

every evenly spaced b block columns of H1s together, another

quasi-cyclic shift matrix,

H

b s

,

can

be

constructed.

To take the

advantage of the regularity in shift-structured matrix Hbs , the

corresponding soft messages are processed column by

column. Thus, recursive check-to-variable node units (CNUs)

are needed. For a recursive CNU, the more number of inputs,

the longer logic delay for arithmetic computation. For VLSI

design, it is desired to limit the input to each CNU to 1 or a

very small number. However, it is not guaranteed for the shift

matrix converted from a generic QC-LDPC code. In fact, it is

quite common to have more than two 1-components per row

in a block column with above direct matrix permutation.

B. Optimized Matrix Permutation

In this work, an optimized matrix permutation method is

proposed to minimize the maximum row weight per block-

column of

H

b s

in order to minimize the CNU complexity and

reduce the data path delay. Because of the shift structure of

H

b s

,

the

choice

of

the

C

starting

columns

(i.e.,

the

values

of

i0 , i1 … iC −1 ) determines the 1-component locations of the

first block column and hence to all block columns of Hbs .

Thus, in the latter discussion, we only consider the matrix

structure of the first block column of Hbs instead of the whole

H

b s

.

Let

d max

refer to the maximum row weight of first

block column of Hbs . Similarly, let dmax,r denote the

maximum row weight of the submatrix in the rth block row.

For the block column j of Hqc , let us label its column vectors

as

v0j ,

v1j

,…

v

j p

−1

starting

from

the

column vector that has

a

978-1-4244-2342-2/08/$25.00 ©2008 IEEE.

1640

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:29:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1-component in the first row. The meaning of defined labels

is further clarified in Fig. 1a.

l00 l10 l20 l30 v30 v00 v10 v20

l01 l11 l21 l31

v11

v12

v

1 3

v10

dmax,0 = 2

dmax,1 = 1

H qc

H

b s

(b = 2)

Figure 1. Example of parity-check matrices and defined labels.

Optimized Matrix Permutation Method

Let j be the index of the block columns of Hqc and t be

the index of a column vector in a block column. Step 1: Without loss of generality, starting from the column

vector v00 , distribute the first block column of

Hqc to

H

b s

.

Step 2:

Loop on j for C-1 times

Tentatively distribute the j-th block column of Hqc to

Hbs starting from the column vtj , where t = 0, 1, …(p/b1). For every t, let us record dmax,r of each block row r.

Thus, a two dimensional array is obtained. Then, from the information in the two dimensional array, chose the best start column vtjj that leads to a minimum

increase of the maximum block row weight. Distribute the j-th block column of Hqc to Hbs starting

from the selected column vtjj . Update d max,r . Loop end

In simulation, fifty parity-check matrices of (4096, 3584)

(4, 32) QC-LDPC codes are generated using progressive

edge-growth approach [4]. Both the direct permutation and

the optimized permutation methods are tested using the fifty

matrices. The grouping level b in the permutated matrix Hbs

is set as 2, 4, and 8, respectively. The dimensions of sub-

matrices in the three type shift matrices are 128 × 64 ,

128 ×128 , and 128 × 256 , respectively. Table I shows the

distribution of the maximum row weight of block columns. It

can be seen that the optimized matrix permutation method

significantly

reduces

the

maximum

row

weight.

For

H

4 s

matrices, about 20% rows in a block column contain two 1-

components.

TABLE I. THE DISTRIBUTION OF MAXIMUM ROW WEIGHT

b

Direct

Optimized

123 4 5 6 7891 2 3

2 - 4 33 9 3 1 - - - 49 1

4 - 7 25 13 5 - - - -

50

8 - - - 1 15 25 6 2 1

50

III. MIN-SUM ALGORITHM BASED COLUMN-LAYERED DECODING OF LDPC CODES
Column-layered message passing scheme (also known as shuffled iterative decoding) with sum-product algorithm [1] for LDPC decoding was proposed in [5]. Similar to rowlayered decoding [6-7], it significantly reduces the average number of decoding iterations. To our best knowledge, minsum algorithm based column-layered decoding has never been addressed in the literature. In this work, efficient implementation schemes for min-sum algorithm based column-layered decoding are investigated. This work can be incorporated with row-layered decoding through computation interleaving. The detail is not discussed due to the limited space.
A. Min-Sum Algorithm Based Column Layered Decoding
Let C be a binary (N, K) LDPC code specified by a paritycheck matrix H with M rows and N columns. Let Iv denotes the intrinsic message and Rcv represent the check-to-variable message conveyed from the check node c to the variable node v. Let Lcv represent the variable-to-check message conveyed from the variable node v to the check node c. Assume the N bits of a codeword are divided into G groups, i.e., N0 , N1, "NG−1 . Equivalently, the parity-check matrix is divided into G block column layers. The notations of N (m) , N (m) \ n , M (n) , and M (n) \ m in [5] are adopted for the
same meanings.

Min-sum based column-layered decoding
Initialization: Rcv = 0 and Lcv = I v for v=0, 1, …, N-1 and for
c=0, 1, …, M-1. Iterative decoding:
Iteratively perform a predefined number of decoding iterations. In one decoding iteration, for 0 ≤ g ≤ G −1, jointly

process the following two sub-steps: Horizontal Step. For each check node c connected to

variable node v ∈ N g , computes Rcv ,

Rcv = ∏ sgn(Lcn ) × min | Lcn | .

(1)

n∈N (c)\v

n∈N (c)\v

Vertical Step. For each variable node v ∈ N g , updates Lcv

as:

Lcv = I v + α × ∑m∈M (v)\c Rmv ,

(2)

Lv = I v + α × ∑m∈M (v) Rmv .

(3)

Hard decision and termination:

Make hard decision by using the sign of Lv and terminate

decoding if a valid codeword is found or the maximum

decoding iteration is reached.

B. Efficient Algorithmic Implementation Schemes
Assume all variable nodes are divided into G groups. In each decoding iteration, the computation in (1) is performed G times for each row. Thus, the computation complexity of the column-layered decoding in an iteration is much more than that of the conventional two-phase message-passing

1641
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:29:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(TPMP) algorithm. With a close study of the computation
flow of the column-layered decoding, the implementation
complexity can be significantly reduced by incrementally message updating.
For LDPC decoding, each variable node sends a variable-
to-check message to its neighboring check node. Assume that a check node c has dc variable node neighbors. To clarify the
main procedure of column-layered decoding, assume that
each check node has only one variable node neighbor in every variable node group for the time being. Let m(cg) = [m1 m2 ] be a sorted vector associated to check node c, where m1 and
m2 are the smallest and the second smallest value. They are
computed from the magnitudes of dc variable-to-check messages associated to check node c. The superscript g represents that the soft messages corresponding to the g-th block column are processed. Similarly, let Sc(g) be
∏n∈N (c) sign(Lcn) ) when the column-layer decoding for the
layer g is completed. To save computation in min-sum algorithm based column-layered decoding, m(cg) is incrementally updated from m(cg−1) with three computation
steps. First, for each variable node v in N g , if the old | Lcv | is in
m(cg −1) , remove it from m(cg −1) to obtain a temporal sorted vector m~ (cg −1) . Similarly, remove the old sign(Lcv ) from Sc(g −1) and obtain a temporal sign-product S~c(g −1) . Immediately, compute and send Rcv message to the variable node v, where Rcv is computed by S~c(g −1) × m1 . Second,
perform variable-to-check message computations for all variable nodes belonging to N g . The new Lcv messages are
sent back to corresponding check nodes. Third, for each check node, sort the new | Lcv | and m~ (cg −1) to obtain m(cg) . The
column-layer decoding procedure is reformulated as follows:

The column-layered decoding scheme-A

Initialization: Let Lcv = Iv for all variable nodes. For each check node,
sort the magnitudes of Lcv messages from its neighboring

variable nodes. In the same time, compute the sign product

for each check node Sc = ∏n∈N (c) sign(Lcn) .

Iterative decoding:

Iteratively perform a predefined number of decoding iterations. In one decoding iteration, for 0 ≤ g ≤ G − 1 ,

jointly process the following sub-steps: Horizontal Step-a: for each check node c which connects to
variable node v ∈ N g , concurrently performs (4) ~ (5).

Compute m~ (cg −1) by removing the value of old | Lcv | from

m(cg −1) ,

(4)

Rcv = S~c(g−1) × m1 , where S~c(g−1) = sign(Lcv ) × Sc(g −1) . (5) Vertical Step: For each variable node v ∈ N g , updates

Lcv and Lv using the equation (2) and (3). Horizontal Step-b: for each check node c which connects to
variable node v ∈ N g , concurrently performs (6) and (7).

Sort the new | Lcv | and m~ (cg −1) to obtain m(cg) ,

(6)

Sc(g) = S~c(g−1) × sign(Lcv ) .

(7)

In a decoding iteration, m~ (c−1) and S~c(−1) are m~ (cG−1) and

S~c(G −1) , respectively, that computed in the previous iteration.

Hard decision and termination:

Make hard decision by using the sign of Lv and terminate

decoding if a valid codeword is found or the maximum

decoding iteration is reached.

It should be noted that the proposed algorithm is a simplified version of min-sum based column layered decoding. In min-sum algorithm, only the smallest and the second smallest magnitude of variable-to-check messages are required for check-to-variable message updating [9-10]. It can be easily found that the m2 element in m(cg) may not be the second smallest value among all dc magnitudes of variableto-check messages associated with the check node c. In fact, to keep track the smallest and the second smallest magnitude of variable-to-check messages in column-layered decoding, m(cg) should contain all magnitudes of variable-to-check messages associated to the check node c, which will lead to very high implementation complexity. In this work, if a check node has multiple neighbors in a variable node group N g , to
further reduce the computation complexity, only the smallest value among the multiple new Lcv values associated to N g
is chosen to compute with m~ (cg−1) and m(cg) . It is named as column-layered decoding scheme-B in this paper.
IV. SIMULATION
A (4096, 3584) (4, 32) QC-LDPC code is simulated using the decoding approaches presented in Section III. For all column-layer decoding schemes, the number of columns in each block column layer is 128. The maximum number of decoding iterations is set as 50. For the original quasi-cyclic
matrix Hqc , the min-sum based column-layered decoding,
the min-sum based TPMP decoding, and the proposed column-layered decoding scheme-A are applied. For the shiftstructured matrix H4s converted from Hqc , the column-
layered decoding scheme-B is used. It can be observed from Fig. 2 that the standard column-
layered decoding has the fastest convergence speed. For both the proposed decoding scheme-A and scheme-B, the average number of decoding iterations increase by 0.6 at the SNR of 4.0dB. However, they still converge much faster than conventional TPMP decoding algorithm. Fig. 3 shows the decoding performance with various decoding approaches. The

1642
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:29:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

performance differences among all decoding schemes are very not stored in a fixed order in an M register array. It changes

small.

every clock cycle.

Figure 2. Average number of decoding iterations .

Figure 4. The decoder architecture.

VI. CONCLUSION
Using the presented matrix permutation scheme, the paritycheck matrix of a generic QC-LDPC code can be converted to an implementation-friendly shift-structured matrix. As a result, the implementation complexity of the routing network for high-throughput QC-LDPC decoders is significantly reduced. Efficient implementation schemes of min-sum algorithm based column-layered decoding have been proposed. A high-level decoder architecture with the proposed decoding scheme for a generic QC-LDPC code has been presented.

Figure 3. BER and FER with various decoding approaches.
V. QC-LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE WITH MIN-SUM ALGORITHM BASED COLUMN-LAYERED DECODING
A. Architecture for Quasi-Cyclic Parity-Check Matrix
To elaborate the decoder architecture design, let us consider the matrix in Fig. 1b as a parity-check matrix. The top level decoder architecture is shown in Fig. 4. Each M component in the leftmost of Fig. 4 represents a register to store a sorted vector associated to a row of Hs matrix. A check node unit (CNU) is composed of two sub-modules, CNUa and CNUb. A variable node unit (VNU) with label x is designated to perform the vertical step for the x-th variable node in a variable node group. The connection between CNUs and VNUs reflects the edges associated to the first block column of the shift-structured matrix Hs .
The three decoding steps discussed in Section III.B are performed block column by block column. In a clock cycle, all extrinsic messages corresponding to a block column of Hs matrix are processed in parallel. First, the sorted vectors are read from M register arrays and then they are aligned to column order by one-step shifting. Then, the horizontal step-a is performed by CNUa. Second, the vertical decoding step is performed for an entire block column. Third, the horizontal step-b is completed by CNUb. The updated mc vectors for all check nodes are stored back to M register arrays. In the architecture, the sorted vectors associated to a block row are

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity check code decoder,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404-412, March 2002.
[3] J. Sha, M. Gao, Z. Zhang, L. Li, and Z. Wang, “Efficient Decoder Implementation for QC-LDPC Codes,” ICCCAS’06, vol. 4, pp. 2498-2502, June 2006.
[4] Z. Li and B.V.K.V.Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic lowdensity parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” 38th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, vol. 2, pp. 1990-1994, 2004.
[5] J. Zhang, M.P.C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol. 53, Issue 2, pp. 209 – 213 Feb. 2005.
[6] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “An efficient messagepassing schedule for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. the 23rd IEEE Convention of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in Israel, pp. 223-226, Sept. 2004.
[7] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “Extended layered decoding of LDPC codes,” ACM Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI, 457-462, 2008.
[8] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 406-414, Mar. 2002.
[9] M. Cocco, J. Dielissen, M. Heijligers, A. Hekstra, and J. Huisken, “A scalable architecture for LDPC decoding,” Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition, vol. 3, pp. 88-93, Feb. 2004.
[10] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “A memory efficient partially parallel decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes,” 39th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems & Computers, pp. 729-733, 2005.

1643
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:29:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

