1978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

eLDPC: An Efficient LDPC Coding Scheme for Phase-Change Memory
Meng Zhang , Fei Wu , Member, IEEE, Qin Yu, Neidong Fu, and Changsheng Xie , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Low read latency, long lifetime, and high storage density have all been demonstrated in phase-change memory (PCM), making it an attractive contender for main memory. However, due to resistance drift per cell caused by long-term storage, data reliability becomes a major challenge. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with improved error correction capability can be used in PCM to reduce bit error rates and thus improve data reliability. More interestingly, when the raw bit error rates (RBERs) of various pages in PCM is compared at the same storage time, a considerable gap appears, resulting in high sensing and decoding latency. We propose eLDPC, an efficient LDPC coding scheme for reducing sensing and decoding latency, in this article. We start with a preliminary experiment, which reveals that there is a significant variation in resistance drifts between adjacent distributions, resulting in a large RBER gap for different pages. Then, using a submatrix of the paritycheck matrix to shorten the codeword length, eLDPC is inspired to encode pages with lower RBER. The original bit sequence is separated into even bit sequence (EBS) and odd bit sequence (OBS) for pages with higher RBER. eLDPC is used to encode EBS and OBS independently. By utilizing optimized soft information, EBS and OBS are eLDPC decoded. eLDPC can significantly improve the error correction capability of LDPC hard decoding, effectively eliminating soft decoding processes, and lowering decoding latency. The results of simulations show that eLDPC can greatly decrease decoding iterations and time.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, phasechange memory (PCM), raw bit error rates (RBERs), resistance drift.
I. INTRODUCTION
P HASE-CHANGE memory (PCM) [1], [2] shows outstanding advantages, such as low read latency, nonvolatile, good scalability, and high storage density, which has been considered as a potential competitor for main memory. However,
Manuscript received 11 May 2022; revised 5 August 2022; accepted 18 September 2022. Date of publication 27 September 2022; date of current version 19 May 2023. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62102156, Grant 61872413, Grant U2001203, Grant 61902137, and Grant 61821003; in part by the Key Project of Shandong Wisdom Joint Fund under Grant ZR2019LZH009; in part by the 111 Project under Grant B07038; and in part by the Key Laboratory of Information Storage System, Ministry of Education of China and the Engineering Research Center of Data Storage Systems and Technology. This article was recommended by Associate Editor C. Zhuo. (Corresponding author: Fei Wu.)
Meng Zhang and Neidong Fu are with the School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zgmeng@hust.edu.cn).
Fei Wu, Qin Yu, and Changsheng Xie are with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: wufei@hust.edu.cn; cs_xie@hust.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2022.3210068

data reliability becomes a major challenge as a result of resistance drift per PCM cell over time due to structural relaxation [3]. Especially, two adjacent resistance distributions with larger resistance values are more prone to overlap in triple-level cell (TLC) PCM with storing three bits per cell, introducing higher raw bit error rates (RBERs) and hence decreasing reliability. In TLC PCM storage systems, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with excellent errorcorrecting capability can be used to assure data reliability [15]. Hard decoding and soft decoding are two types of LDPC decoding that have differing error correction capabilities [5]. Different pages of TLC PCM have a huge gap in RBER at the same storage time. If the same LDPC codeword length is utilized to correct bit errors, resulting in LDPC error correction capability excess and thereby increasing sensing and decoding latency. Furthermore, once the RBER surpasses the error correction capability of LDPC hard decoding, decoding failure, and more decoding iterations occur. In order to improve data reliability, soft decoding with improved error correction capability must be used. Although soft decoding improves reliability, fine-grained sensing with multireference resistance dramatically increases sensing levels, resulting in higher sensing latency [6].
Based on the resistance drift, the resistance sensing threshold can be adjusted and applied adaptively [9], [10], [11]. Although a time-aware sensing threshold [14] can reduce RBER and latency to some extent, RBER remains high and may exceed the error correction range of error correction codes as storage time increases, so reliability cannot be guaranteed. Resistance drift can be used to improve decoding performance while designing LDPC codes [15]. In contrast to prior works, this article focuses on solving the issue of higher LDPC decoding latency induced by higher RBER from the time-aware sensing. More crucially, by enhancing the error correction capability of LDPC hard decoding, data reliability is greatly improved.
We propose eLDPC, an efficient LDPC coding scheme for TLC PCM, to reduce sensing and decoding latency while maintaining data reliability. A preliminary experiment is carried out that demonstrates that each resistance distribution in the TLC PCM cell has a different drift velocity and range. Drift rate and range are greater in the amorphous with a higher resistance value. It is more likely to result in the crossing of two neighboring resistance distributions. As a result, TLC PCM shows a greater state shift difference, resulting in a huge gap between pages, without fully utilizing the LDPC error correction capability. These findings have led

1937-4151 c 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: eLDPC: AN EFFICIENT LDPC CODING SCHEME FOR PCM

1979

to the development of eLDPC, which can correctly modify the LDPC codeword length when encoding bit information to accommodate different pages with uneven RBER caused by resistance drift. eLDPC, on the other hand, can share the parity-check matrix without adding to the coding complexity. eLDPC uses odd–even bit decoding mode with a hard decision to reduce decoding iterations and latency, throughout the decoding process. More interestingly, the soft decoding is effectively avoided to leverage at a higher RBER. The proposed odd–even bit decoding can ensure data storage reliability over a lengthy period of time. The decoding iterations and decoding latency are greatly reduced by using eLDPC, as demonstrated by computer simulation.
The following are the primary contributions of this article. 1) Higher RBER is mostly caused by higher shift percent-
ages from two nearby resistance distributions with larger resistance values, according to experiments. As a result, there is a significant RBER disparity between different pages. When performing hard decoding on pages with low RBER, the LDPC error-correcting capability cannot be completely utilized. LDPC hard decoding with fullbit decoding cannot guarantee data reliability for pages with a high RBER. 2) Propose eLDPC by adjusting the LDPC codeword length appropriately depending on resistance drift variation. By sharing the parity check matrix and adaptively using full-bit decoding and odd–even bit decoding modes for distinct pages under different data storage periods, eLDPC can reduce coding overhead. Soft decoding is effectively abolished for pages with substantially higher RBER when the proposed odd–even bit decoding is used. 3) Use computer simulation to test the effectiveness of eLDPC. The number of decoding iterations and the time it takes to decode are both greatly reduced. The remainder of this article is arranged as follows. TLC PCM’s background and the motivation of this article are described in Section II. In Section III, the proposed eLDPC is described in depth. In Section IV, the simulation results are evaluated. The related work is presented in Section V, followed by the conclusion in Section VI.

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1. (a) Cell storage array, (b) basic cell structure, and (c) write–read pulses of PCM [3], [4], [12].

Fig. 2. Resistance distribution of TLC PCM before and after drift.
(GST) [3] is the storage material, as indicated in Fig. 1(b). By using different pulses to heat the GST material, the storage state can be altered between crystalline and amorphous [12]. Between the crystalline with low resistance and the amorphous with high resistance, there is a significant difference. As a result, by dividing the resistance value into several ranges, each PCM cell may store multiple bits of information [9]. The fluctuation of required temperature pulses during the writing and reading data is shown in Fig. 1(c). The crystalline can be converted to amorphous during the writing process by applying a reset pulse with a short period and high peak to fast raise the temperature of GST to melting point Tmelting [12]. On the other hand, the amorphous can be converted to crystalline by using a long duration, low-peak set pulse to raise the temperature of GST over the crystallization temperature Tcrystalline and below Tmelting. The differing resistance distributions can be recognized throughout the data reading process by using a low-current read pulse [11].

II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
The background of TLC PCM, including cell architecture and resistance distribution characteristics, is presented in this section. The principle of layered LDPC decoding is then explained. Finally, we illustrate the motivation for this article by demonstrating the variances in sensing resistance and RBER using a preliminary experiment.
A. Basics of PCM
The PCM cell array architecture is shown in Fig. 1(a), which consists of a byte-addressable word line (WL) and a byte-addressable bit line (BL). The bit information can be sensed by the sensing amplifier (SA) when reading data [4]. A top electrode, a bottom electrode, a heating resistor, and a storage layer are all included in each PCM cell. Ge2Sb2Te5

B. TLC PCM Resistance Drift
The resistance distribution for TLC PCM is shown in Fig. 2. The resistance tends to drift as storage time rises, resulting in distribution overlap. The applied default sensing resistance cannot effectively discriminate the resistance state when detecting bit information, resulting in excessive bit errors [11]. The time-aware sensing threshold is utilized according to the fluctuation of storage time to reduce bit errors [14]. Surprisingly, the time-aware sensing cannot reduce bit errors even further over time. Furthermore, the length of the interval between the default sensing and time-aware sensing varies, and it keeps growing as the resistance distribution range widens. As previously stated, resistances with high impedance values are more likely to drift, as shown in Fig. 2. The first bit is termed the most significant bit (MSB), the center bit is called the central significant bit (CSB), and the third bit is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1980

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

Fig. 3. Working process of the layered LDPC decoding based on the parity check matrix.

called the least significant bit (LSB) to identify each bit stored in the TLC PCM cell [5].
C. Layered LDPC Decoding
As previously stated, as storage time increases, the cross of impedance distribution gets more problematic, resulting in substantially greater RBER. As a result of their limited errorcorrecting capability, traditional error correction codes are unable to ensure data reliability. LDPC codes have become a possible substitute, drawing increased attention to PCM. Hard and soft decoding are the two types of LDPC decoding. When the RBER is low, hard decoding is used solely to improve reliability. One sensing resistance is applied between two adjacent resistance distributions during the hard-read operation. When the RBER exceeds the hard decoding’s error correcting capability, soft decoding must be used. Applying extra-sensing resistance around the hard sensing resistance activates the soft sensing action. Compared with soft decoding, the error correction capability of hard decoding is much lower, but the read levels can be significantly reduced. As a result, avoiding soft decoding and achieving a short decoding time is critical.
The layered decoding algorithm depicted in Fig. 3 can be used in the decoding process, which is popular due to its fast convergence speed. We use a parity-check matrix H to explain the working process of layered LDPC decoding. The row weight (number of 1 s in the row) and column weight (number of 1 s in the column) are 4 and 2, respectively. H is a cyclic shift matrix with a 4 × 4 identity matrix. Each row corresponding to a check equation is called a check node (CN) and each column corresponding to a bit is called a variable node (VN). The LDPC decoding can be divided into M/p layers, where p represents the size of the identity matrix and M denotes the number of CN. The concrete layered decoding process is described as follows. First, the information of VN is initialized by computing the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) per bit from the channel. LLR is a real number that represents the probability information contained in bits 0 and 1. Second, using (1), the information of VN in the first layer is updated. Third, using (2), the information of CN in the first layer is updated. Finally, after the information CN and VN information in the first layer is updated, the decoding decision is made

by using (3). Terminate the decoding and output the codeword if the decoding is successful. Otherwise, update the VN and CN information of the second layer by exploiting the VN and CN information that has been updated in the first layer and make decoding decision. If successfully decoded, the codeword is output. Otherwise, increase the number of decoding iterations and perform similar operations to update the information of VN and CN in the first layer. Update the CN and VN information of the first layer using the CN and VN information of the second layer that has been updated during the last iteration.
In the layered decoding process, the information of CN and VN is updated gradually according to the order of layers for each iteration. To update the CN and VN information of the next layer, it needs to use the updated VN and CN information of the previous layer. The layered LDPC decoding algorithm can make timely use of the CN and VN information updated in a specific layer for decoding decisions, with high decoding efficiency. The following is the overall layered decoding algorithm [7].
1) Update VN information by computing

vj

=

Tj

−

c(itr−1). ij

(1)

Tj denotes the a-posterior probability of the jth bit in the

sequence to be decoded.

2) Update CN information of p CNs by calculating

⎛

⎞

ciitjr = ⎝

sign(vk)⎠ · k∈mMi(ni)\j{|vk|} · α

(2)

k∈M(i)\j

where α ∈ (0, 1) is a normalized factor and M(i)\j denotes the set {j : Hij = 0} excluding the jth bit. 3) Calculate the maximum-likelihood information of all
bits through

Tj

=

vj

+

citr . ij

(3)

In (1)–(3), itr denotes the maximum number of decoding iterations, (lay − 1) · p < i ≤ lay · p, 1 ≤ j ≤ N, and Hij = 0. Here, lay and N represent the layer number and the codeword length, respectively. p is the dimension of
the identity matrix in the check matrix H.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: eLDPC: AN EFFICIENT LDPC CODING SCHEME FOR PCM

1981

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 4. Variation of resistance drift (a) and RBER (b) and (c) under different storage time [i.e., 1-day (1D), 1-week (1W), 1-month (1M), 3-month (3M), 5-month (5M), 7-month (7M), 9-month (9M), 1-year (1Y), 1.5 year (1.5Y), and 2-year (2Y)]. The distance between the default sensing and the time-aware sensing (Tas) is different between each state. This is because that different resistance per TLC PCM state has a larger drift rate difference, leading to unbalanced RBER for MSB, CSB, and LSB with the time-aware sensing. (a) SR denotes the sensing resistance. For TLC PCM, seven SRs are required to distinguish between different storage states.

4) Decoding make decision and check: If Tj < 0, vj = 1, otherwise vj = 0. If H · V→ = 0→ or get to the maximum layer and iterations, decoding output. Otherwise, the iterative decoding is continued.
D. Motivation
The drift is more likely to occur at higher resistance states, resulting in a greater distribution overlap range. Furthermore, as time passes, the range of drift is larger and larger, resulting in a considerable RBER differential between various bits, as illustrated in Fig. 4(a) and (b). MSB and CSB RBERs are substantially lower and increase slowly with storage duration when the time-aware sensing is used. The LSB RBER, on the other hand, is substantially greater and grows fast with storage time. With a length of 2 kB and a rate of 0.89, the error correction capability of LDPC hard decoding is approximately 6.5 × 10−3. When the LSB RBER exceeds the error correction range, reliability is compromised, resulting in data loss. Soft decoding must be used to extract high precision LLR information by increasing sensing resistance and producing high sensing delay in order to improve reliability. Under the premise of assuring reliability, it is critical to avoid the usage of soft decoding. Decoding convergence can be considerably accelerated by converting soft decoding to hard decoding. MSB RBER, on the other hand, is low (i.e., less than 1.0 × 10−3), and the short codeword length can meet the error correction requirement. A submatrix of H is adequate to encode MSB information bits. As a result, the MSB sensing delay can be reduced.
The reason why a large gap of RBER exits in MSB, CSB, and LSB pages is analyzed. The storage state is more likely to be misinterpreted if the resistance distribution drifts. The fluctuation of state error percentages under varied storage periods is shown in Fig. 4(c). As time passes, different states show varying error percentages. The error percentages from state 101 to state 100 (denoted as 101 → 100) and from state 100 to state 101 (denoted as 100 → 101) rise over time, resulting in large LSB errors. As a result, it is critical to create efficient LDPC codes for reducing LSB errors, particularly after

a lengthy period of storage. It is necessary to explain that the motivation depicted in Fig. 4 is the result of simulation. Reference [14] for simulation parameters and models has been gained through real-world device testing.
The preliminary experiment is implemented on the simulator. We give specific simulation methods as follows. First, three random 2-kB bitstreams representing MSB, CSB, and LSB pages are generated and encoded by LDPC codes. The corresponding bits are combined to form different resistance storage states. Each resistance state corresponds to an initial mean and variance. With the increase of storage time, the mean, and variance of each initial resistance state change, which can be obtained by using (4). Seven different sensing resistances are applied for state differentiation, as shown in Fig. 4(a). The default sensing resistance is constant and does not change over time. The time-aware sensing resistance is variable that changes over time [14]. After applying seven time-aware sensing resistances, different resistance states are distinguished. According to the mapping rules between bits and states, MSB, CSB, and LSB with errors can be acquired after noise interference. By comparing with the original data, the RBER of MSB, CSB, and LSB pages can be obtained, as shown in Fig. 4(b). Furthermore, the BER due to state transitions can also be calculated.
We analyze the research motivation for this article in depth. TLC PCM, for instance, has a large number of phase storage states, introducing high storage density and capacity. Each state has a different impedance value and a significant gap between them. The resistance value of each phase state will increase as the data storage period increases due to structural relaxation, and the drift phenomena will occur. Phase states with higher resistance levels are more likely to wander and drift at a faster rate. The adjacent phase storage state distributions cross over once the resistance drift starts. During resistance sensing, error detection is common, resulting in inaccuracies in the bits read. The greater the number of phase states stored, the more phase distributions intersect, resulting in more read-bit errors. The phase state distribution is more crossed for long-term storage. Although the time-aware sensing threshold can minimize read errors to some extent, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

Fig. 5. Schematic of eLDPC.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6. Parity-check matrix and odd–even bit used to encode and decode. (a) Parity-check matrix H is used to encode CSB, oLSB and eLSB and the submatrix of H is utilized to encode MSB. (b) Raw LSB sequence is divided into oLSB and eLSB during encoding.
bit error rate remains high, perhaps exceeding the capability of typical error correction codes, and resulting in data failure. We propose eLDPC, a variant of LDPC tailored to efficiently address the error correction demands of phase change memory, to alleviate this problem.
III. PROPOSED ELDPC SCHEME We explain the proposed eLDPC scheme in detail in this part, first providing an overview of eLDPC and then introducing the coding method for MSB, CSB, and LSB. Finally, the proposed odd–even bit decoding technique is described.

Algorithm 1 eLDPC Encoding

Input: MSB, CSB, LSB, and H

Output: Codewords

1: if encoding MSB with information length P then

2: Obtain the sub matrix Hs from H 3: for i = 1 to (1 − R)P/R (R is the code rate) do

4:

for j = 1 to P do

5:

Hs(i, j) = H(i, j)

6:

end for

7: end for

8: Using the Gauss elimination algorithm to transform Hs into [Wmsb, Imsb] (Imsb is the identity matrix)
9: Generate the MSB codeword as (Inmsb, WmTsb · Inmsb) (Inmsb is the information bits of MSB)

10: end if

11: if encoding CSB then

12: Change H into [Wclsb, Iclsb] 13: Generate the CSB codeword as (Incsb, WcTlsb · Incsb) (Incsb is
the information bits of CSB)

14: end if

15: if encoding LSB then

16: Extract the oLSB and eLSB

17: for i = 1 to Inlsb (Inlsb is the information length of LSB) do

18:

if i%2! = 0 then

19:

oLSB(i) = Inlsb(i), eLSB(i) = 0

20:

else

21:

eLSB(i) = Inlsb(i), oLSB(i) = 0

22:

end if

23: end for

24:

Generate the encoded (oLSB, eLSB))

LSB

sequence

as

(oLSB ⊕ eLSB,

WcTlsb

·

25: end if

and LSB codewords are modulated and written into TLC PCM. Each cell corresponds to a resistance distribution that follows the normal distribution with mean μ and standard deviation σ after MSB, CSB, and LSB codewords are modulated and stored into TLC PCM. Storage time, which is a function of t, has an impact on μ and σ . Resistance drift causes distribution overlap as t increases, resulting in large read errors. The LDPC decoding is done after the data has been demodulated. The hard decision is used to decode the entire bits for MSB, CSB, and LSB. Even though the LSB RBER is substantially larger, the odd–even bits are decoded using simply hard decoding. The odd–even bits are recombined after decoding to form the full LSBs, which are then sent to the host.

A. Overview of eLDPC
As illustrated, eLDPC primarily uses two procedures to improve reliability: 1) encoding with a shared matrix and 2) decoding with complete and odd–even bit decoding, as shown in Fig. 5.
Data is encoded by the LDPC codes to generate redundancy bits when it needs to be written into TLC PCM. If the programmed bit is MSB, the MSB is encoded using the H submatrix. If the programmed bit is CSB and LSB, H is adopted due to a longer codeword with higher error correction capability for higher RBER. Furthermore, all LSBs are divided into odd LSB (oLSB) and even LSB (eLSB) for LSB encoding, which are encoded separately. oLSB and eLSB are then rearranged, and the entire LSB is written into PCM. MSB, CSB,

B. eLDPC Encoding
Algorithm 1 depicts the eLDPC encoding process and is explained as follows. According to the change in RBER over time, the coding matrix is utilized for MSB, CSB, and LSB, as illustrated in Fig. 6(a). Because the RBER for MSB is substantially smaller [see Fig. 4(b)], LDPC codes with strong error correcting capability are not required. As a result, using larger codewords to fix bit errors is no longer essential. Shorter codewords are preferable, and the H submatrix can be used for encoding. Short codewords have the advantage of reducing write and read delays. Because PCM is byte readable, fewer codewords can quickly collect all of the necessary information for decoding. Because RBER is much higher for CSB and LSB, it is necessary to build LDPC codes with stronger error

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: eLDPC: AN EFFICIENT LDPC CODING SCHEME FOR PCM

1983

correction capability to reduce bit errors. Consequently, a longer codeword using parity-check matrix H is selected to encode CSB, oLSB, and eLSB. oLSB and eLSB are encoded by the same parity-check matrix H. Only one matrix H is needed to complete the encoding operation. After the encoding is complete, two codewords (i.e., oLSB codeword and eLSB codeword) are generated, which are combined and stored in the LSB page.
C. eLDPC Decoding
The specific eLDPC decoding process is presented in Algorithm 2 explained as follows. To get hard information when decoding MSB and CSB, only the time-aware sensing threshold is applied between states 010 and 110 (see Fig. 2). Hard information is transformed into LLR information as initial input to leverage the layered LDPC decoding algorithm introduced in Section II-C. If the conventional decoding approach is used to decode LSB with higher RBER, the soft sensing resistance must be used to activate LDPC soft decoding by achieving high precision LLR, resulting in increased sensing delay. More interestingly, the proposed odd–even bit decoding strategy effectively avoids the use of soft decoding. In the case of substantially greater RBER, the proposed scheme can guarantee reliability with low decoding iterations and time, as shown in Section IV-B.
IV. EVALUATION AND RESULTS ANALYSIS
In this section, we first introduce the evaluation methodology for eLDPC, then analyze the variations of decoding iterations, decoding latency, sensing resistance, and BER.
A. Evaluation Methodology
Computer simulations are used to test the proposed eLDPC strategy, which includes data encoding, data sensing, and data decoding. Random data is created and encoded using the quasi-cyclic parity-check matrix H during the encoding process. The resistance distribution of TLC PCM is mapped to the codeword bits. When time noise is added, the resistance of each storage state drifts, causing adjacent distributions to crossover and so causing bit errors. By using the time-aware sensing resistance throughout the sensing process, hard bit information of MSB, CSB, and LSB may be retrieved. For LSB, soft sensing resistance is used to launch LDPC soft decoding, which is compared to eLDPC performance. Hard decoding for MSB and CSB is used during the decoding process. The number of decoding layers, decoding iterations, decoding time, and BER is all calculated when performing the odd–even bit decoding and soft decoding for LSB. The following are the models and parameters that are used in the simulation. H and its submatrix Hs have sizes of 2048 × 18432 and 1024 × 9216, respectively. The maximum number of decoding layers and iterations is 4 (i.e., 2 for decoding MSB) and 30 [5], respectively. The layered min-sum algorithm [7] is used to decode the data. The time-aware sensing scheme is used when reading bit information, and the resistance drift

Algorithm 2 eLDPC Decoding

Input: Detected hard information of MSB, CSB, and LSB

Output: Corrected information

1: if decoding MSB then

2: Apply the time-aware sensing threshold to obtain the hard bit

information Ms

3: for i = 1 to Cwmsb with the codeword length of MSB do

4:

if Ms(i) = 0 then

5:

Let Limsb = ωmsb

6:

else

7:

Let Limsb = ζmsb and satisfy ωmsb + ζmsb = 0.

Here, ωmsb and ζmsb denote initial LLR information of

MSB = 0 and MSB = 1, respectively.

8:

end if

9: end for

10: Launch the layered LDPC decoding by using formulas (1)-(3).

11: end if

12: if successfully decode or get to the maximum number of decoding

iterations Itrmax then

13: Count decoding layers, iterations, latency, and BER

14: end if

15: if decoding CSB then

16: Implement steps 2-13

17: if decoding LSB then

18:

Implement steps 2-9 to obtain initial odd LLR oLlsb and

initial even LLR eLlsb from sensed LSB hard information

Ls.

19:

for i = 1 to Inlsb with the LSB information length do

20:

if i%2! = 0 then

21:

if Ls(i) = 0 then

22:

Let oLilsb = ωlsb

23:

else

24:

Let oLilsb = ζlsb and satisfy ωlsb + ζlsb = 0. Here,

ωlsb and ζlsb denote initial LLR information of

LSB = 0 and LSB = 1, respectively.

25:

end if

26:

eLil+sb1 = ηlsb (ηlsb denotes known odd bit LLR

information)

27:

else

28:

Perform steps 21-25 to obtain eLilsb and oLil−sb1 = σlsb

(σlsb denotes known even bit LLR information)

29:

end if

30:

end for

31:

for i = Inlsb + 1 to Inlsb + m do

32:

Perform steps 21-25 and m indicates the length of

redundant information

33:

end for

34:

for i = Inlsb + m + 1 to Cwlsb with the encoded LSB

sequence length do

35:

Perform steps 21-25

36:

end for

37:

Implement steps 10 and 12-14

38: end if

39: end if

distribution models are given in the following [14]:

⎧ ⎪⎨ ⎩⎪

log Rsis(t) = logR0 + μk(t) = μklog R0 + μvk
2
σk2(t) = σlkog R0 +

v · log t · log t
σv2k · (log

t)2

.

(4)

Here, Rsis(t) and R0 represent the drift and initial resistance, respectively. v and t are the drift exponent and

storage time, respectively. The logR0 per storage state and

v N

follow (μvk , σvk

)t,herespneocrmtivaelly.dikstriisbuthtieonnsumNb(eμrkloogfR0s,toσrlkoaggRe0

) and states.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

(a)

(b)
Fig. 7. Variations of (a) decoding iterations and (b) decoding layers under different storage time.

The means and deviations of logR0 and v are provided in [14].
B. Results Analysis
We count the variations of decoding iterations, normalized decoding time by LSB decoding time with the hard decision, decoding layers in the current iteration, and total decoding layers (i.e., computed by lay + 4 · (itr − 1), where lay and itr denote the layer in the current iteration and decoding iterations, respectively), as shown in Fig. 7. Because of the low RBER, the decoding iterations, time, layers, and total decoding layers for correcting bit errors are relatively low for MSB with Hs coding and hard decoding. When utilizing the typical full-bit decoding approach with the hard decision for LSB decoding, the decoding iterations and total decoding layers rapidly increase with the increase in storage time, reaching an abnormally high maximum decoding iteration and decoding layer at time t ≥ 3M. This is due to the fact that at higher RBER, hard decoding with the time-aware sensing has limited error correction capability, failing to repair LSB errors. As a result, the reliability of the system cannot be guaranteed using the traditional error correction method. Furthermore,

the difference in decoding iterations, time, and total decoding layers among MSB, CSB, and LSB is substantially larger.
More interestingly, when using eLDPC with the odd–even bit decoding for LSB, the number of decoding iterations is significantly reduced, and the decoding time is also significantly reduced compared to traditional decoding. The decoding can converge quickly in a certain layer. And, the decoding time and total decoding layers are also considerably reduced, as shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b).
Furthermore, we also compare the eLDPC with two different soft decoding strategies A and B. Soft decision A denotes applying two additional sensing resistances S5 − 0.1 and S5 + 0.1 between state 110 and state 111 and two additional sensing resistances S7 − 0.2 and S7 + 0.2 between state 101 and state 100 to obtain the LSB LLR information. Here, S5 and S7 are the time-aware sensing resistance. Soft decision B means that the additional sensing resistances applied are S5−0.2, S5+0.2, S7−0.4, and S7+0.4. Because the impedance value of different state distributions has varying drift velocities, the extra resistance interval size varies, as shown in Fig. 4. Simulation results show soft decoding can significantly reduce decoding iterations, decoding time, and total decoding layers.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: eLDPC: AN EFFICIENT LDPC CODING SCHEME FOR PCM

1985

(a)

(b)

Fig. 8. Variations of (a) decoding time, and (b) total decoding layers under different storage time.

The number of decoding iterations and time increase when the interval size is increased. Because of the low accuracy of LLR, the error correction capability of LDPC is decreased.
We find that eLDPC and soft decoding with soft decision A have similar error correcting performance, and that both can reduce decoding iterations, decoding time, and total decoding layers significantly. The proposed eLDPC with a hard decision is used to correct oLSB and eLSB errors. The method [14], [15] with soft decision A is used to correct LSB errors. The decoding time is close [i.e., shown in Fig. 8(a)] due to the close number of decoding iterations [i.e., shown in Fig. 7(a)]. For soft decision A, different resistance thresholds are used to obtain LLR with higher precision, compared with a hard decision. The error correction capability of LDPC codes is improved. Therefore, the decoding iterations can be reduced. In other words, the error correction capability of the proposed eLDPC with a hard decision is close to that of soft decoding with soft decision A.
The decoding time is determined by the codeword length and total decoding layers. For MSB with the hard decision using eLDPC, the codeword length is short (i.e., explained in Section III-B) and the total decoding layers are also small. Therefore, the decoding time is less and present a large variation. For LSB with soft decision B using [14], [15], the total decoding layers varies with the storage time and is high, compared with other methods except for LSB with the hard decision using [14], [15]. As the step size of the resistance threshold increases, inaccurate LLR information is generated and thus error correction capability is reduced. For oLSB with a hard decision using eLDPC, eLSB with a hard decision using eLDPC, LSB with soft decision A using [14], [15], and CSB with a hard decision using eLDPC, the decoding time gap does not vary very much because there are similar total decoding layers.
After utilizing eLDPC, the difference in decoding iterations, decoding duration, and total decoding layers among

MSB, CSB, and LSB is considerably reduced. Importantly, soft decoding is not required, only hard decoding is initiated by eLDPC. As a result, sensing latency can be greatly reduced. This is due to the fact that the detection delay is proportional to the number of sensing resistances. Only one sensing operation between adjacent resistance distributions is required by eLDPC.

C. Overhead Analysis

Compared with the conventional encoding method,

we analyze the computation complexity introduced by eLDPC. Assume that the raw bit information is X→ =

(x1, x2, . . . , xN/2, xN/2+1, . . . , xN ) with the length of N and

the parity-check matrix H is used to encoding and decod-

ing, which can be converted to [PM×(N−M)IM×M]. Here,

IM×M is the identity matrix and M is the redundant bit

length. PM×(N−M) is a general matrix. When performing

LDPC encoding, it satisfies [ X→ Re→ ]·[PM×(N−M)IM×M]T =

0→, where Re→ denotes the redundant bit vector. We have

Re→ = (x1, x2, x3, . . . puting, the redundant

, xN−1, xN ) bit vector

·

RPeMT→×(Nis−Mg)e. nAerfateterd

comand

the codeword [ X→ Re→ ] is also produced. When per-

forming eLDPC, the raw bit information X→ is split into

X1→ = (x1, 02, x3, 04, x5, . . . , xN/2+1, 0N/2, . . . , xN−1, 0N )

and X2→ = (01, x2, 03, x4, . . . , 0N/2−1, xN/2, · · · 0N−1, xN ).

X1→ and X2→ contain N/2 0 s, respectively. Using the sim-

ilar operation, we have Re1→ = (x1, 02, x3, . . . , xN−1, 0N ) ·

PTM×(N−M) and Re2→ = (01, x2, 03, x4, , . . . , 0N−1, xN ) ·

tPoMTrs×(oNf−XM1)→ . Hearned,

Re1→ X2→,

and Re2→ are the redundant bit vecrespectively. Because X1→ with the

length of N contains known N/2 0 s, the amount of com-

putation from Re1→ is the half of Re→. The amount of

computation from Re2→ is also the half of Re→. Moreover,

we find that Re→ = Re1→ ⊕ Re2→. Therefore, the amount of

computation from Re→ is the sum of Re1→ and Re2→. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1986

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 42, NO. 6, JUNE 2023

computation complexity induced eLDPC does not increase compared with the conventional LDPC encoding.
The main overhead for eLDPC is incurred by encoding the LSB pages due to greater RBER. It will have to give up some space in order to store the redundant bits. Because of the lower bit error rate, no additional overhead will be introduced for MSB and CSB. Because RBER exceeds the error correction capability of conventional LDPC hard decoding when data storage time is lengthy (e.g., 1 W), eLDPC can be used to improve the error correction capability of LDPC hard decoding. The oLSB page and the eLSB page are the two types of LSB pages used in LDPC encoding. It necessitates the storage of yet another piece of redundant data. Specifically, for code rate 0.89, the length of the codeword is 2 kB + 2048 bits (i.e., 18432 bits) and redundancy bits are 2048. Assume that the PCM has a size of 10 GB (i.e., 10 × 233 bits). (10 × 233/18432) is the maximum number of code words that can be stored. eLDPC is only required for LSB pages. The extra space required as a proportion of overall space is (10 × 233/18432) × (2048/3 × 10 × 233) × 100% = 3.7% . eLDPC can greatly improve data reliability and reduce decoding latency, despite sacrificing some storage space. Data compression can be activated if PCM enables it to save storage overhead when encoding LSB pages. If the compression ratio (i.e., defined as the length after data compressed divided by the original data length) is 0.85 (i.e., equal to [2 kB − 2048 bits]/[2 kB]), the compressed space is exactly 2048 bits that can be used to store the extra redundant bits. Consequently, if the compression ratio is less than or equal to 0.85, eLDPC will not incur any additional storage overhead. The compressed space is approximately 1638 bits if the compression ratio is more than 0.85 (e.g., 0.9). The additional storage required for redundancy bits in one LSB page is (2048-1638) bits. The extra space required as a proportion of total space is ([10 × 233]/[18432]) × ([2048 − 1638]/[3 × 10 × 233]) × 100% = 0.74%, resulting in lesser storage overhead. More importantly, eLDPC is more crucial for reducing decoding delay and improving data reliability.
V. RELATED WORK
To overcome the PCM resistance drift problem, previous works can be split into two types. The first category is concerned with improving the sensing threshold. Jalili et al. [9] used sensed data to investigate the resistance threshold. To modify the sensing voltage, Kwon et al. [10] designed a resistance drift prediction scheme. Stanisavljevic et al. [11] used drift-invariant detection to calculate the read threshold. Wang et al. [12] proposed ReadDuo to alleviate the resistance drift problem. Pozidis et al. [13] investigated the resistance drift model from time and temperature aspects, which helps to find the time-aware sensing threshold.
The second category aims to study error correction codes. Xu and Zhang [14] developed a time-aware sensing approach to aid LDPC decoding. However, the RBER cannot be further reduced as storage time increases, putting more strain on LDPC hard decoding and resulting in more decoding iterations. To minimize decoding iterations, Zhang et al. [15] devised a resistance drift-aware LDPC decoding approach.

Although this method improves LDPC decoding performance, it adds to the write time. Sebastian et al. [16] exploited signal processing and coding schemes to mitigate resistance drift, without optimizing LDPC coding. Compared with these prior works, this article concentrates on solving the problem of higher LDPC decoding latency induced by higher RBER after applying the time-aware sensing [14]. More importantly, error correction capability of LDPC hard decoding and data reliability can be significantly improved.
VI. CONCLUSION
We propose eLDPC with minimal decoding iterations and latency to ensure data reliability, which properly encodes and decodes for MSB, CSB, and LSB by modifying the size of the parity matrix and bit decoding mode. Decoding iterations and latency can be considerably reduced with eLDPC. More importantly, when RBER is extremely high (e.g., higher than 10−2), LDPC soft decoding can be efficiently avoided in favor of odd–even bit decoding, lowering sensing levels. Overall, eLDPC improves the decoding performance of LDPC codes in TLC PCM by a large margin.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Rashidi, M. Jalili, and H. Sarbazi-Azad, “Improving MLC PCM performance through relaxed write and read for intermediate resistance levels,” ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 1–13, 2018.
[2] S. Song, A. Das, O. Mutlu, and N. Kandasamy, “Improving phase change memory performance with data content aware access,” in Proc. ACM SIGPLAN Int. Symp. Memory Manag., 2020, pp. 30–47.
[3] C. Lee, Y. Song, and Y. Shin, “Endurance enhancement of multi-level cell phase change memory,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Comput.Aided Design, 2019, pp. 1–8.
[4] H. Yoon, J. Meza, N. Muralimanohar, N. P. Jouppi, and O. Mutlu, “Efficient data mapping and buffering techniques for multilevel cell phase-change memories,” ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 1–25, 2015.
[5] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3-D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
[6] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020.
[7] J. Kim, J. Cho, and W. Sung, “A high-speed layered min-sum LDPC decoder for error correction of NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst., 2011, pp. 1–4.
[8] C. Yang, M. Mao, Y. Cao, and C. Chakrabarti, “Cost-effective design solutions for enhancing PRAM reliability and performance,” IEEE Trans. Multi-Scale Comput. Syst., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–11, Jan.Mar. 2017.
[9] M. Jalili, M. Arjomand, and H. S. Azad, “A reliable 3D MLC PCM architecture with resistance drift predictor,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Depend. Syst. Netw., 2014, pp. 204–215.
[10] T. Kwon, M. Imran, J. M. You, and J.-S. Yang, “Heterogeneous PCM array architecture for reliability, performance and lifetime enhancement,” in Proc. Design Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit., 2018, pp. 1610–1615.
[11] M. Stanisavljevic, T. Mittelholzer, N. Papandreou, T. P. Parnell, and H. Pozidis, “Drift-invariant detection for multilevel phase-change memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2018, pp. 1–5.
[12] R. Wang, Y. Zhang, and J. Yang, “ReadDuo: Constructing reliable MLC phase change memory through fast and robust readout,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Depend. Syst. Netw., 2016, pp. 203–214.
[13] H. Pozidis, T. Mittelholzer, N. Papandreou, T. P. Parnell, and M. Stanisavljevic, “Phase change memory reliability: A signal processing and coding perspective,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1–7, Apr. 2015.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: eLDPC: AN EFFICIENT LDPC CODING SCHEME FOR PCM

1987

[14] W. Xu and T. Zhang, “A time-aware fault tolerance scheme to improve reliability of multilevel phase-change memory in the presence of significant resistance drift,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1357–1367, Aug. 2011.
[15] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Q. Yu, W. Liu, R. Ma, and C. Xie, “Exploiting resistance drift characteristics to improve reliability of LDPC-assisted phase-change memory,” IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Rel., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 324–330, Sep. 2021.
[16] A. Sebastian, D. Krebs, M. L. Gallo, H. Pozidis, and E. Eleftheriou, “A collective relaxation model for resistance drift in phase change memory cells,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp., 2015, p. 5.
[17] T. Kwon, M. Imran, and J. S. Yang, “Reliability enhanced heterogeneous phase change memory architecture for performance and energy efficiency,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 1388–1400, Sep. 2021.
[18] B. Mao, S. Wu, H. Jiang, Y. Yang, and Z. Xi, “EDC: Improving the performance and space efficiency of flash-based storage systems with elastic data compression,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1261–1274, Jun. 2018.
[19] Y. Zhou, F. Wu, Z. Lu, X. He, P. Huang, and C. Xie, “SCORE: A novel scheme to efficiently cache overlong ECCs in NAND flash memory,” ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1–25, 2018.
[20] S. Wang et al., “Lifetime adaptive ECC in NAND flash page management,” in Proc. Design Automat. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit., 2017, pp. 1253–1256.
[21] A. D. R. Kulandai and T. Schwarz, “Content-aware reduction of bit flips in phase change memory,” IEEE Lett. Comput. Soc., vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 58–61, Jul.-Dec. 2020.
[22] D. Bittman, D. D. E. Long, P. Alvaro, and E. L. Miller, “Optimizing systems for byte-addressable NVM by reducing bit flipping,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST), 2019, pp. 17–30.
[23] W. S. Khwa et al., “A resistance drift compensation scheme to reduce MLC PCM raw BER by over 100× for storage class memory applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 218–228, Jan. 2017.
[24] M. Ito et al., “Lightweight refresh method for PCM-based neuromorphic circuits,” in Proc. IEEE 18th Int. Conf. Nanotechnol. (IEEE-NANO), 2018, pp. 1–4.
[25] B. Liu et al., “Multi-level phase-change memory with ultralow power consumption and resistance drift,” Sci. Bull., vol. 66, pp. 2217–2224, Nov. 2021.
[26] P. M. Palangappa and K. Mohanram, “CompEx++: Compressionexpansion coding for energy, latency, and lifetime improvements in MLC/TLC NVMs,” ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 1–30, 2017.
Meng Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, in 2019.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the School of Computer Science and Technology, HUST. His current research interests include nonvolatile memory, data storage reliability, and error correction codes.

Fei Wu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical automation from the Wuhan University of Technology, Wuhan, China, in 1997 and 2000, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, in 2005.
She is currently a Professor with the Information Storage Lab, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, HUST. Her research interests include the computer architecture, nonvolatile memory, embedded systems, and intelligent storage.
Qin Yu is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.
Her current research interests include nonvolatile memory, holographic data storage, and error correction codes.
Neidong Fu received the B.E. degree in computer science and technology from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2020, where he is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in computer system architecture with the School of Computer Science and Technology.
His current research interests include nonvolatile memory and computational storage drives.
Changsheng Xie (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in computer science and technology from the Huazhong University of Science and Technology (HUST), Wuhan, China, in 1982 and 1988, respectively.
He is currently a Professor with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, HUST, where he served as the Deputy Director of the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics. His research interests include new storage technology and architecture, multimedia computing and network, computer storage, and network storage and security. Mr. Xie served as the Deputy Director Computer Peripheral Equipment Committee of China Computer Federation, the Committee Member of the Information Storage of China Computer Society, and the Vice Chairman of the China Expert Committee of the International Network Storage Industry Association.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:26:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

