2023 Wave Electronics and its Application in Information and Telecommunication Systems (WECONF) | 979-8-3503-4829-3/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/WECONF57201.2023.10148016

About the peculiarities of searching for Information Sets of Block-Permutation LDPC-Codes when Correcting Error Bursts

M. N. Isaeva
Saint-Petersburg State University of Aerospace Instrumentation
Saint-Petersburg, Russia imn@guap.ru
Abstract— Modern communication standards use errorcorrecting coding, especially LDPC codes. Various algorithms are used to decode them, including decoding by information sets. The algorithm for decoding over information sets has exponential complexity. Errors may occur on any communication channel when transmitting messages. Traditionally, independent errors are considered when researching decoding algorithms. However, in real systems, errors are grouped into bursts. This article discusses the probability of detecting information sets while correcting error bursts. Random matrices and block permutation matrices are considered. Graphs of the dependence of the probability of finding information sets on the number of positions that are considered when searching for information sets are given.
Keywords—block permutation matrices, error bursts, decoding by information sets, the probability of detecting information sets, coding theory
I. INTRODUCTION
In the age of digital technologies, the volume of information circulating through communication channels is increasing daily. Every person uses these technologies in their everyday life. Due to various reasons, errors can occur in communication channels that lead to a distortion of the binary transmitted sequence, which, when decoded, can change the essence of the transmitted message.
There is decoding by information sets, which is able to correct errors. In the theory of error-correcting coding, the correction of independent errors is most often considered. The complexity of decoding by information sets in this case is exponential for known algorithms. However, in real communication channels, errors are often grouped within the transmitted sequence and form bursts. When correcting error bursts, the complexity of decoding from information sets can be significantly reduced [1].
Known estimates of the probability of finding an information set are carried out for random matrices, and, for example, to correct bursts of errors, widely used block permutation LDPC codes can be used. This article discusses the question of the probability of finding an information set when correcting error packets.

A. A. Ovchinnikov, Member, IEEE
Saint-Petersburg State University of Aerospace Instrumentation
Saint Petersburg, Russia mldoc@guap.ru
II. DECODING BY INFORMATION SETS The information set is the set γ = {1 ≤ j1 < j2 < … …< jk ≤ n}, which uniquely defines the code word when specifying the components α j1 ,K, α jk . If the information set is free from errors, then the received word can be uniquely recovered [2, 3].
The search for an information set in the generator matrix G can be done as follows. Let's take random k columns of this matrix and compose a new matrix Mγ. The positions of the taken k columns will be the information set γ if the matrix Mγ is invertible, that means its rank will be equal to the number k. Also, at positions γ, the identity matrix should be formed.
Let's call an error burst a vector of length b, in which the first and last non-zero elements are located no further than b positions from each other. The burst of errors can be cyclic, that means it starts at the end of the received word and ends at the beginning of it. When decoding a burst, all erroneous positions are grouped and this can be taken into consideration when searching for information sets: when choosing an information set, you can limit the search for k of its elements to positions that are not included in the intended location of the package. Thus, the search area of the information set also forms a closed interval of some length k + Δ, see Figure 1.
Because there may not be an information set at k consecutive positions, we will expand the search interval by a certain delta value, thus searching for an information sets at k+∆ consecutive positions.
γ ∃ γ? γ
G=
k+Δ
Fig. 1. Search for an information sets in the generator matrix G at random positions in a closed interval of length k +Δ

979-8-3503-4829-3/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:29:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In this case, to reduce the number of information sets, it makes sense to select the interval length as small as possible, that is, the value of the Δ should be minimized.

It is known that the probability that a random matrix M of size k× (k+Δ) will have a full rank is estimated as [4]

P(rank(Mk,k+∆ )

=

k)

=

Q∆

=

∞ i=∏∆+11 −

1 2i

  ,

∆

≥

0.

(1)

From this formula, we get that for Δ=0 this probability will be:

Q0

=

∞ j∏=11 −

1 2j

 

=

0.288788... ≈ 0.29.

(2)

The average Δ value can be calculated using formula (2):

( ) ∞

∞

∆

=

 ∆=0

∆

⋅

P∆

= i=0

1 − Qi

= 1.6066... ≈ 1.61.

(3)

However, the structure of generating and checking matrices, practically used error-correcting codes can be far from random. Taking into account the additional limitation on the search interval when correcting error bursts, formulas (1), (2) may not be correct. The problem arises of assessing the probability of finding an information set considering the formulated restrictions.

The classic way to find information sets is to find the positions k of linearly independent columns that form the invertible k×k submatrix of the generator k×n matrix. However, the search for information sets can be performed on the paritycheck matrix as follows: if r column positions forming a invertible r×r submatrix are found in the r×n parity-check matrix, then these positions form a complement: γ ∪ γ = {1,…, n}. In Figure 3, a) the corresponding linearly
independent columns of the generator and parity-check matrices are indicated in gray, in Figure 3, b) the search for linearly independent columns for the delta case is unequal to zero. Using a parity-check matrix instead of a generator for searching for information sets can be more computationally efficient for codes with a rate R > 1/2 (Figure 2).

III. LDPC CODES
In this article, low-density parity codes or LDPC codes are considered as an example. The use of these codes to correct error bursts was considered, for example, in [5, 6].

LDPC codes were proposed in 1962 by R. Gallager [7]. Such codes are defined using a sparse parity-check matrix H. These codes can be defined based on block permutation constructs. Such a construction can be described through the base matrix Hb.

t11

L

t1ρ

 

Hb =  M O M ,

(4)

tγ1 L tγρ 

where tij – degrees of the cyclic permutation matrix that specify the blocks of the parity-check matrix H. The size of these blocks is m×m, the number of blocks is γ×ρ. The structure of the parity-check matrix is shown below.

Ct11

Ct12

L

Ct1ρ

 

H = Ct21

Ct22

L

Ct2ρ

 

.

(5)

M M O M

Ctγ1

Ctγ2

L

Ctγρ

 

Note that in the matrix of the form (5), the columns of two consecutive blocks in total always form a zero column. This can affect the search for an information set at consecutive positions.

Fig. 2. The dependence of the time of calculating the rank of random matrices on the code speed for generator and parity-check matrices

γ

γ

a)

γ

γ

G=

H=

k

r

k b)

k

r

Δ

G=

H=

k+Δ

r−Δ

k+Δ

r−Δ

Fig. 3. The scheme of searching for information sets in the generator matrix G and the parity-check matrix H a) at Δ = 0 b) at Δ ≠ 0.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:29:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IV. SEARCH FOR INFORMATION SETS
Consider random block-permutation constructions in which the blocks are a cyclic permutation matrix, tij are chosen uniformly from the interval [0: m − 1]. Number of units γ = [2; 3; 4] (several cases considered) and ρ = 6 (value fixed), block size m = 11. In addition, we will consider random matrices of similar size k = 22, n = 66, in which non-zero elements are located with a probability of 0.5.
Figure 4 shows a graph of the probability of finding information sets with Δ=0. Note that with a value of γ = 3, only some peaks are present on the graph that occur at the end positions of the blocks of the block-permutation parity-check matrix. As mentioned above, the columns of two consecutive blocks are always linearly dependent, so if the search interval of an invertible matrix contains two blocks in itself as a whole such a matrix is always singular. With an interval length of 3m - 1, the probability of this event is one. Also, as can be seen, the probability value for the random matrix fluctuates around 0.3, which corresponds to the value of formula (2).

from here

3m − 2

γ≥

.

(7)

m −1

The function on the right side (7) equals 4 at m = 2 and decreases monotonously with growth of m. Thus, with γ ≥ 4, the block-permutation structure (5) does not have information sets of consecutive positions. With γ = 3, such an information set is possible only for the case from Figure 3, with γ = 2 taking into account rank(H) = r = 2m - 1, it is impossible to hit 2m consecutive columns in a window of size r. This explains the shape of all curves in Figure 4.

Now let's look at how the curves will change in Δ ≠ 0. Figure 6 shows a graph of the probability of finding information sets at Δ = 1.

Fig. 6. The probability of finding information sets with Δ=1.

Fig. 4. The probability of finding information sets with Δ=0.

1 block

2 block

3 block

4 block

1 2 . . . 11 12 . . .
2

22 23 . . . 33 34 . . .
32

3m − 2 = 31 = m‧γ − (γ − 1) Fig. 5. The case in which there is an information set for γ = 3 and Δ = 0.

Consider an interval of length 3m-2, then there is the only possible position of the interval that does not include two consecutive blocks (Figure 5). Let's evaluate the code parameters for this case. We will assume that the search is carried out using the parity-check matrix H and intervals of length r are considered, where r is the rank of the matrix H. In the block-permutation construction, the rank of the paritycheck matrix does not exceed m‧γ - (γ - 1). The case shown in Figure 5 is not possible if the interval length r exceeds 3m - 2, then:

m‧γ – (γ – 1) ≥ 3m – 1,

(6)

Fig. 7. The probability of finding information sets with Δ=5.
It can be noted that the shape of the graphs has changed slightly for both all γ values and for a random matrix. Figure 7 shows the graph of probability of finding information sets at Δ = 5, and Figure 8 − the graph of probability of finding information sets at Δ = 10.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:29:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 8. The probability of finding information sets with Δ=10.

Fig. 10. The probability of finding information sets with Δ=30.
Thus, for different sizes of block-permutation matrices, there is a Δ value at which the probability of finding the information set will be maximum, and not only at the ends of the blocks.

V. CONCLUSION
In this article, the probability of finding information sets in random matrices and in block-permutation matrices was considered, the correspondences between the generator and parity-check matrices when searching for information sets are given. It was found out at what values of the Δ there is a possibility of finding information sets for different blockpermutation matrices.

Fig. 9. The probability of finding information sets with Δ=20.
As can be seen from Figures 7, 8 for γ = 2, the subsequent increase in Δ leads to a decrease in the probability of finding an information set, which suggests that after a certain Δ value it makes no sense to increase. For γ = 3 with increasing Δ, the probability of finding the information set appears not only in the positions of the end of the blocks. For γ = 4 to Δ = 10, the probability of finding the information set was zero. Consider another graph shown in Figure 9 to check the graph change for γ = 4.
With a value of Δ = 20 for γ = 2 (this is also true for the subsequent increase ∆), the probability tends to zero, and for γ = 4, on the contrary, it has increased, even relative to the "peaks" from the previous graph. It is also worth noting that for any Δ values presented in the graphs, the probability of finding information set for a random matrix continues to fluctuate at 0.3.
If ∆is increased to 30, then the peaks disappear in the form of graphs, and for γ = 3, the graph tends to the graph for a random matrix. This is due to the fact that ∆ = 30 allows you to search for an information set in an interval that is more than two consecutive blocks.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The paper was prepared with the financial support of the Russian Science Foundation, project No. 22-19-00305 “Spatial-temporal stochastic models of wireless networks with a large number of users”.
REFERENCES
[1] M.N. Isaeva, A.A. Ovchinnikov "About using of decoding by information sets when correcting error bursts", in Radiotekhnicheskiye. opticheskiye i biotekhnicheskiye sistemy. Ustroystva i metody obrabotki informatsii: IV All-Russian scientific conference: collection of reports, SPb.: SUAI, pp. 188-191, 2023.
[2] A. Barg, E. Krouk and H. C. A. van Tilborg, "On the complexity of minimum distance decoding of long linear codes," in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1392-1405, July 1999, doi: 10.1109/18.771141.
[3] M. Baldi, QC-LDPC Code-Based Cryptography.Springer, 120 p., 2014.
[4] E. R. Berlekamp, "The technology of error-correcting codes," in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 564-593, May 1980, doi: 10.1109/PROC.1980.11696.
[5] A.A. Ovchinnikov, A.M. Veresova, A.A. Fominykh "Decoding of linear codes for single error bursts correction based on the determination of certain events" in Informatsionno-upravliaiushchie sistemy [Information and Control Systems], no. 6, pp. 41-52, 2022, doi:10.31799/1684-88532022-6-41-52
[6] W. Ryan, S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2009. 710 p.
[7] R.G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, IRE Transactions on Information Theory. Jan. 1962. Vol. 8. No. 1. P. 21-28.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:29:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

