 
Low-Complexity Coding, Modulation and Pulse 
Shaping for SkyCubesNet CubeSat Transceivers 
Amr Zeedan and Tamer Khattab 
Electrical Engineering, Qatar University, Doha, Qatar 
Email: az1706240@qu.edu.qa, tkhattab@ieee.org 
 
Abstract—CubeSats present a promising opportunity to 
meet the rapidly increasing demand on high-speed connectivity. 
The SkyCubesNet project aims to establish a CubeSat 
constellation over Qatar and Turkey that provides high-speed 
connectivity over urban and rural areas to serve individual 
users and support smart cities infrastructure. Nevertheless, 
establishing high-speed connectivity with CubeSats requires 
groundbreaking solutions to overcome the obstacles associated 
with designing low-power high-speed transceivers at the size 
and mass requirements of CubeSats. Demodulation and channel 
decoding are known to be two of the most computationally 
extensive tasks of any transceiver. In this paper, we develop a 
low-complexity channel coding and modulation scheme suitable 
for CubeSats based on Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) 
coding and Differential Binary Phase Shift Keying (DBPSK). 
We propose a low-complexity LDPC decoding algorithm that 
can 
support 
high-throughput 
applications 
at 
low 
implementation cost. It is found that at a bit error rate of 10-6 
the coded system signal to noise ratio (SNR) requirement is 4 dB 
lower than that of the uncoded system. Moreover, the 
performance improvement of the coded system increases with 
increasing SNR. The paper presents evaluation of the system’s 
performance and implementation cost. Compared with similar 
works on CubeSat transceivers, our system has the highest data 
rate, highest code rate, and lowest number of decoding 
iterations. 
Keywords—Baseband 
modem, 
LDPC, 
CubeSat, 
communication system, LDPC algorithms. 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Small satellites are playing an increasingly important role 
in the global wireless communication sector especially with 
the development of smart cities, smart homes, industry 4.0, 
and Internet of Things (IoT), which all require low-cost 
uninterrupted 
high-speed 
connectivity. 
Traditionally, 
communication satellites have large sizes and follow 
geosynchronous orbits. But recently, many companies are 
moving towards developing constellations of CubeSats in 
low-earth orbits (LEOs) for various commercial and 
technology applications such as communication services and 
Earth imaging [1]. CubeSats can provide more flexible 
services at shorter development times and lower costs 
compared 
with 
conventional 
satellites. 
Nevertheless, 
establishing a high-speed communication link with CubeSats 
requires innovative solutions to overcome the substantial 
difficulties associated with designing low-power high data 
rate communication system at the size and mass requirements 
of CubeSats.  
The present work focuses on a crucial part of the baseband 
communication system which is the channel coding and 
modulation. The design of a low-complexity high 
performance channel coding scheme that can support high 
data rates is an extremely challenging problem especially with 
the additional constraints of CubeSats [2]. In this paper, the 
design of a resource-efficient channel coding and modulation 
scheme that can support high data rates for a 3U CubeSat will 
be presented. The proposed system is based on Low Density 
Parity Check (LDPC) coding and Differential Binary Phase 
Shift Keying (DBPSK) modulation. 
The SkyCubesNet project aims to establish a CubeSat 
constellation over Qatar and Turkey that provides 
uninterruptable high-speed connectivity both over urban and 
rural areas to serve individual users and support smart cities 
infrastructure. The first stage of the project is to develop and 
deploy a 3U CubeSat to become the first satellite in the 
constellation. This prototype should demonstrate a high data 
rate communication link over the Ka-Band at a distance of 
roughly 500 km direct line-of-sight. The majority of existing 
CubeSats have low data rates, below 10 Mbps, at relatively 
high-power demands, above 5 W [3- 5]. Hence, innovative 
solutions are required to develop high-speed energy-efficient 
CubeSat modem. Consequently, this work aims to develop a 
high-speed energy-efficient channel coding and modulation 
scheme for the communication subsystem of the CubeSat. The 
main challenge is the design of a low power system that is also 
highly reliable in terms of bandwidth efficiency, high data 
rate, and low bit error rate (BER). This requires developing 
novel encoding and decoding algorithms for the adopted 
channel coding technique. Furthermore, suitable modulation 
scheme must be selected, and the modulator/ demodulator 
must be custom designed to meet the mission’s requirements.  
Our target is to be able to provide a 1 Gbps communication 
link that has a BER less than or equal to 10-5. Given that the 
total available average system power on the CubeSat is 
approximately 85 W and that most of the power is allocated to 
the downlink RF transmission, our objective is that the 
designed baseband modem consumes no more than 5 W. The 
expected SNR at the receiver is 14.5 dB. Regarding bandwidth 
utilization, the system will operate in the Ka-band at a nominal 
central frequency of 29.250 GHz utilizing a total of 3.5 GHz 
of bandwidth (27.5 GHz to 31 GHz). 
II. SELECTION OF THE CHANNEL CODING SCHEME  
As is well-known, channel coding is the process of 
detecting and correcting bit errors after the signal is 
transmitted over a noisy channel [6]. There are a variety of 
channel coding techniques such as Convolutional coding, 
Turbo coding, and LDPC coding [7].  One of the most 
common standards for satellite communications is the digital 
video broadcasting – satellite – second generation (DVB-S2) 
standard [8]. DVB-S2 employs LDPC coding concatenated 
with an outer BCH (Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem) code, 
with various possible rates, for its channel coding scheme [9].  
LDPC is the most widely used channel coding scheme in 
recent CubeSats [10], [11]. This is because LDPC codes are 
capacity-approaching; their capacity can approach the 
Shannon theoretical capacity limit [12], [13].  
This publication was made possible by an award GSRA8-L-2-0523-
21052 from Qatar National Research Fund, QNRF (a member of Qatar 
Foundation, QF), supporting A. Zeedan, and award number AICC03-0530-
200033 from QNRF (a member of QF), supporting T. Khattab. The contents 
herein are solely the responsibility of the authors. 
979-8-3503-3339-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
1412
2023 International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing (IWCMC) | 979-8-3503-3339-8/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IWCMC58020.2023.10182996
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ Downloaded on June 24 2026 at 14:31:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore
Restrictions apply
TABLE I.  
LIST OF LDPC PARAMETERS 
Parameter  
Definition  
Code length  
Column length of the parity check matrix. 
Code rate 
Ratio of data bits (k) to code length (n). 
Girth 
Length of shortest cycle in Tanner graph. 
Code 
regularity/ 
degree 
(𝑑𝑣, 𝑑𝑐) 
A code is regular if the number of 1’s in 
each column (𝑑𝑣) and each row (𝑑𝑐) are 
constant and the code degree is (𝑑𝑣, 𝑑𝑐). 
The code is irregular otherwise. 
 
Although LDPC coding was first developed by Gallager 
in 1960, it was almost completely forgotten until its 
rediscovery in 1996 [14]. On the other hand, Turbo codes, 
developed in 1993, dominated many applications, including 
satellite communications, in the late 1990s [14]. Nevertheless, 
many advances in LDPC coding made them surpass Turbo 
codes in performance and error floor in the high code rate 
range [14]. While Turbo encoding is less complex than LDPC 
encoding, the decoding of LDPC codes is much less complex 
than Turbo decoding [13]. In fact, compared to Turbo coding, 
LDPC has relatively simple and practical decoding algorithms 
especially for large block sizes [13]. Furthermore, LDPC 
decoding accuracy is improved in each iteration and hence the 
number of decoding iterations can be adjusted based on the 
required application in a tradeoff between the achieved BER, 
latency, performance, and complexity [12], [15]. Moreover, 
while Turbo codes are serial in nature, LDPC codes are 
parallel and so LDPC can more easily support higher data rate 
applications [15].  In fact, LDPC codes can have parallel 
decoding algorithms with an adjustable degree of parallelism 
allowing a tradeoff between complexity and throughput [15]. 
These features of LDPC codes make them an ideal FEC choice 
for CubeSats. Table I shows a list of the most important LDPC 
code parameters. 
III. DESIGN OF THE LDPC ENCODER AND DECODER 
In general, the generator matrix is needed to perform the 
encoding [16], [17]. The generator matrix can be obtained 
from the parity check matrix using various techniques such 
as Gaussian elimination. However, while the parity check 
matrix is sparse, the generator matrix is no longer guaranteed 
to be sparse which leads to increasing the required storage 
and encoding complexity. Restricting a sub-matrix of the 
parity check matrix to be lower triangular is one way to 
eliminate the need for deriving a generator matrix which 
leads to having a linear encoding complexity. This is the 
technique employed in the LDPC encoding scheme of the 
DVB-S2 standard [18]. We introduce some modifications on 
this technique to obtain a custom LDPC code that minimizes 
encoding and decoding complexity while maintaining 
reasonable performance (BER) and high throughput. Our 
parity check matrix is restricted to the form, 𝑯(𝑛−𝑘)×𝑛=
[𝑨(𝑛−𝑘)×𝑘, 𝑩(𝑛−𝑘)×(𝑛−𝑘)], where the submatrix A is a sparse 
matrix (to be generated later) and the submatrix B is a dual-
diagonal matrix. We represent our parity check matrix as two 
submatrices where the first submatrix is sparse, and the 
second submatrix is restricted to dual diagonal format. This 
eliminates the need for deriving a generator matrix to perform 
the encoding and decreases the encoding complexity 
considerably as will be illustrated. Moreover, since submatrix 
A is sparse, the encoding process has linear complexity with 
respect to the block length. Secondly, encoding is 
implemented by applying the following recursion equation.  
𝑝𝑖= 𝑝𝑖−1 ⨁ ∑𝑨 (𝑖−1)𝑗× 𝑑𝑗,
𝑘−1
𝑗=0
 𝑖= 1,2, … , (𝑛−𝑘). 
 
(1) 
Where we set p0=0, pi is the ith parity check bit, and dj is the 
jth data bit. 
The dual diagonal form of the submatrix significantly 
reduces the hardware resources needed to perform the 
encoding process. This is because the calculation of a given 
parity check bit only depends on the value of the previous 
parity check bit and the corresponding data bits. Moreover, 
compared to the lower triangular LDPC parity check 
matrices, the dual diagonal form requires fewer “XOR” 
operations to perform the encoding and hence fewer “XOR” 
units in the hardware implementation. Furthermore, the dual 
diagonal from requires an overall fewer number of 
computations in encoding. In fact, encoding based on the dual 
diagonal form matrix 𝑯(𝑛−𝑘)×𝑛= [𝑨(𝑛−𝑘)×𝑘, 𝑩(𝑛−𝑘)×(𝑛−𝑘)], 
defined here, requires 𝑘∗(𝑛−𝑘) computations, while the 
traditional 
encoding 
method 
requires 
(𝑛2 −𝑘2)/2 
computations [19]. Hence, for our system with a (512, 384) 
block code having a code rate of 
3
4, the developed dual 
diagonal encoding method requires 8,192 less computations 
than the traditional method.  
H is generated, for instance, by pseudo-randomly placing 
ones in an all zero-matrix based on a certain algorithm which 
ensures that the generated matrix has desirable features. 
There are various algorithms for generating LDPC parity 
check matrices such as Progressive Edge Growth (PEG), 
Spatially Coupled algorithm (SC-LDPC), Quasi-Cyclic 
algorithm (QC-LDPC), and the Irregular LDPC Repeat-
Accumulate codes (LDPC-IRA) [10]. H matrices generated 
using PEG algorithms (pseudo-random construction) lack 
well-defined structure and hence require more complex 
hardware implementations. Consequently, structured H 
matrices are more suitable for achieving lower hardware 
complexity. All these algorithms result in regular LDPC 
codes [17]. However, it is known that irregular LDPC codes 
perform better than regular codes. LDPC-IRA algorithm 
results in the construction of irregular LDPC codes. The 
LDPC-IRA codes have simple structure and linear encoding 
complexity [17]. Since our block code is (512, 384), our 
parity 
check 
matrix 
is 
of 
the 
form 𝑯128×512 =
[𝑨128×384, 𝑩128×128]. 𝑩128×128 is easily generated as a dual 
diagonal matrix of the stated dimensions and 𝑨128×384 will 
be generated to have the required features. The matrix is 
irregular but has a well-defined structure in order to improve 
performance and simplify hardware implementation. 
Regarding the LDPC decoder, we will develop a 
customized decoding algorithm for our (512, 384) block 
code. A valid decoded codeword is verified if it satisfies the 
following equation, 
𝑧= 𝑯∗𝑟𝑇= 0. 
(2) 
 
 The LDPC decoder functions as follows. First, the 
decoder assigns the received value of every bit to all the 
outgoing edges from the corresponding bit node to its 
adjacent check nodes in the Tanner graph. Second, the check 
nodes utilize the parity check equations to update the bit node 
information and send it back to the bit node. Third, each bit 
node performs a soft majority vote among the received 
information from its adjacent check nodes. Fourth, if the hard 
decisions on the bits satisfy all the parity check equations, a 
1413
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ Downloaded on June 24 2026 at 14:31:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore
Restrictions apply
valid codeword has been detected and the process terminates. 
Otherwise, the bit nodes continue sending the result of their 
soft majority votes to the check nodes and the process repeats 
until a valid codeword is detected or the maximum number of 
decoding iterations is reached in which case the current 
output is given and a decoding failure may be declared. The 
number of adjacent edges to a node is known as the “degree” 
of that node. It is expected that this low-complexity high-
throughput scheme will come at the expense of somehow 
higher SNR requirement for a given BER compared with 
high-complexity LDPC schemes. It is found that the decoder 
converges in a total of 10 iterations. The performance does 
not change noticeably for higher number of iterations. The 
time complexity of the decoding algorithm expressed in terms 
of the big 𝒪-notation can be evaluated based on the number 
of computations performed by the decoder. It is found that the 
time complexity of the decoding algorithm is 𝒪(𝑛2(𝑛−𝑘)).  
IV. DESIGN OF THE DBPSK MODULATOR AND 
DEMODULATOR  
Most CubeSat transceivers tend to use low-order 
modulation schemes such as BPSK, QPSK, and GMSK 
because of the complexity of higher order modulation 
transceivers and the tight CubeSat limitations on power 
consumption [10], [18]. Differential Binary Phase Shift 
Keying (DBPSK), a variant of BPSK modulation, will be used 
because it meets the application requirements; namely, power 
source constraints. DBPSK demodulator does not need to 
estimate the phase of the carrier (non-coherent receiver). This 
overcomes the ambiguity in the phase that could arise if the 
constellation is rotated during transmission over the 
communication channel. 
 
We design our modulator such that a 180° phase shift 
relative to the previous carrier phase corresponds to bit “1” 
and 0° phase shift relative to the previous carrier phase 
corresponds to bit “ 0 ” . The resulting constellation is 
illustrated in Fig. 1 (left diagram). Based on the constellation 
of DBPSK (two constellation points equidistance, √E, from 
the origin), we can derive the BER formula of DBPSK for an 
optimum receiver in an Additive White Gaussian Noise 
(AWGN) channel as illustrated in Fig. 1 (right diagram) 
showing the probability density function (PDF) of the 
received symbols and the decision boundary. For DBPSK, the 
symbol energy is equal to the bit energy and is denoted by E. 
The AWGN channel is assumed to have a variance of N0/2. 
The received symbol is thus a Gaussian random variable. To 
perform DBPSK mapping, we develop a simple procedure 
using the “XOR” gate. Table II illustrates the different 
mapping cases based on this procedure. Table III illustrates 
the different demapping scenarios. In implementation “0” is 
mapped to “+1” and “1” to “-1” so that we obtain the desired 
phase shift when the baseband signal is multiplied by the high 
frequency carrier. 
There are several pulse shaping filters that are commonly 
used to limit the transmitted signal’s bandwidth and control 
intersymbol interference (ISI). The raised-cosine filter (RCF) 
is a practical pulse shaping filter for implementation with the 
tradeoff that it has smaller sidelobes for a slightly larger 
spectral width. Using a raised-cosine filter allows for adjusting 
the excess bandwidth in a tradeoff between spectral efficiency 
and complexity of the filter. As it is well-known, the roll-off 
factor (α) controls the tradeoff between the signal’s spectral 
bandwidth, ISI sensitivity, and complexity of implementation.  
 
Fig. 1. DBPSK constellation diagram and PDF for the received symbols. 
TABLE II.  
DBPSK MAPPING CASES 
𝑚𝑛−1 
𝑏𝑛 
𝑚𝑛 
𝜃𝑛−1 
𝜃𝑛 
Carrier Phase 
Shift (∆𝜃) 
0 
0 
0 
0° 
0° 
0° 
0 
1 
1 
0° 
180° 
180° 
1 
0 
1 
180° 
180° 
0° 
1 
1 
0 
180° 
0° 
180° 
TABLE III.  
DBPSK DEMAPPING SCENARIOS 
Carrier Phase Shift (∆𝜃) 
𝑚𝑛−1 
𝑚𝑛 
𝑏𝑛 
0° 
0 
0 
0 
0° 
1 
1 
0 
180° 
0 
1 
1 
180° 
1 
0 
1 
 
 
To obtain a balanced compromise between bandwidth, ISI, 
and complexity, we will implement a raised-cosine filter with 
0.5 roll-off factor. The impulse response of the RCF in the 
time domain is given by, 
ℎ(𝑡) =
{
 
 
 
 𝜋
4𝑇𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑐( 1
2𝛼) ,                          𝑡= ± 𝑇
2𝛼
1
𝑇𝑠𝑖𝑛𝑐(𝑡
𝑇)
cos (𝜋𝛼𝑡
𝑇)
1 −(2𝛼𝑡
𝑇)
2 ,       otherwise.
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
And in the frequency domain, 
𝐻(𝑓)
=
{  
  
    1,                                      |𝑓| ≤1 −𝛼
2𝑇 
1
2 [1 + cos (πT
𝛼[|𝑓| −1 −𝛼
2𝑇])],        1 −𝛼
2𝑇
≤|𝑓| ≤1 + 𝛼
2𝑇
0,                                  otherwise.
 
 
 
 
(4) 
 
Where T is the symbol period and for our case α = 0.5. 
Regarding the bandwidth efficiency, defined as, 
𝜂≡𝑅𝑏
𝐵𝑚𝑖𝑛
= log2 𝑀. 
 
 
(5) 
It is equal to 1 bits/s/Hz for the case of DBPSK (M = 2), 
where Bmin  is the minimum RF bandwidth needed to support 
the Rb bit rate, or equivalently for this case, symbol rate. 
However, after applying the RCF pulse shaping filter, Bmin 
becomes, 
𝐵𝑚𝑖𝑛= (1 + 𝛼) 𝑅𝑏
𝜂. 
 
 
(6) 
1414
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ Downloaded on June 24 2026 at 14:31:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore
Restrictions apply
For our system, α = 0.5, Rb = 1 Gbps (maximum data rate 
target), η = 1 bits/s/Hz. Hence, Bmin = 1.5 GHz. Referring to 
our design specifications, particularly bandwidth utilization, 
the system will operate in the Ka-band at a central frequency 
of 29.250 GHz with a total bandwidth of 3.5 GHz (27.5 GHz 
to 31 GHz). Thus, the available bandwidth allocated for our 
system is 2 GHz larger than our minimum required bandwidth. 
Therefore, our design well meets the imposed bandwidth 
requirements.  
Since an ideal RCF has an infinite number of taps, we have 
to window our filter to an appropriate number of taps to 
achieve good performance at a reasonable implementation 
cost. The higher the number of taps or filter order, the better 
the filtering performance. However, this comes at the expense 
of greater implementation complexity due to the larger 
number of operations required for each sample and the greater 
memory requirements to implement the filter, hence, the 
greater the hardware resources needed. Using a window 
length of six symbol durations, the filter spans six symbols, 
gives an acceptable tradeoff between performance and 
complexity. The resulting filter will then have a group delay 
of three symbol durations. Moreover, by using an upsampling 
rate of 8 samples per symbol, the resulting filter is a 48th order 
filter with 49 taps.  
Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 display the time domain impulse response 
and frequency domain magnitude response, in log scale dB, of 
the 48th order implemented filter, respectively. It can be noted 
from the frequency response that the total consumed 
bandwidth is 1.5 GHz, consistent with the above calculations. 
Fig. 4 shows the magnitude response of the implemented filter 
in linear scale dB with respect to the normalized frequency in 
order to have a complete illustration of its characteristics. The 
filter eliminates ISI since its impulse response is equal to zero 
at all nT instants (n is an integer not equal to zero) as 
demonstrated in Fig. 5. The Figure displays the mapped 
symbols and their corresponding pulse shaped signals for the 
first 24 transmitted symbols. It can be verified that the 
symbols do not interfere with each other. Consequently, if the 
receiver samples the received signal at the right time, it can 
recover the original symbols.  
Finally, Table IV illustrates the structure of the RCF as 
well as its implementation cost in terms of the utilized 
hardware resources. The filter only requires 48 multipliers, 41 
adders, and 6 states, since there are 48 multiplications and 41 
additions per each sample. 
V. SIMULATION AND RESULTS 
The simulation verified that the encoder only requires 
k*(n-k) ‘XOR’ operations. Moreover, decoding is by far the 
most computationally extensive process, as expected, even 
with the simplified decoding algorithm. Given the typical 
FPGA ‘XOR’ gate resources and the nature of our LDPC 
decoding algorithm, we can implement a parallel decoder that 
has an adjustable tradeoff between throughput and resources 
utilized. 
Moreover, it is anticipated that a more efficient 
implementation of our algorithms on HDL, compared to the 
current implementation on Matlab, will further greatly reduce 
the number of additions and multiplications computed in the 
different blocks. Furthermore, based on the number of 
operations required and Matlab algorithm analyzer tools, it is 
estimated that our simulated system on Matlab can achieve 
around 30 Mbps. 
 
Fig. 2. Time domain impulse response. 
 
Fig. 3. Frequency domain magnitude response in log dB scale. 
 
 
Fig. 4. Frequency domain magnitude response in linear dB scale with 
respect to the normalized frequency. 
1415
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ Downloaded on June 24 2026 at 14:31:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore
Restrictions apply
 
Fig. 5. Illustration of the mapped symbols on the pulse shaped signal 
demonstrating zero ISI. 
TABLE IV.  
STRUCTURE AND IMPLEMENTATION COST OF THE 
DESIGNED RCF 
 
 
While this data rate is much higher than most data rates 
achieved using similar systems, for example [17], it remains 
to be verified during practical implementation. However, it is 
expected that the data rate of the implemented system will be 
much higher than that reported figure as we take advantage of 
the FPGA environment in making many functions of our 
system work in parallel.  
Fig. 6 shows the eye diagram of the transmitted signal, 
after applying RCF pulse shaping. It is noted that the 
transmitted signal shows no ISI. Fig. 7 and Fig. 8 show the eye 
diagrams of the received signal before and after filtering, 
respectively, at an SNR of 7.5 dB. It is clear that the filtered 
and sampled signal shows much less ISI than the received 
signal before any processing. 
 
Fig. 9 illustrates the BER performance of our system. 
Firstly, the BER of the developed DBPSK scheme, without 
channel coding, is plotted. Then, the BER of the LDPC 
channel coded and DBPSK modulated system is plotted. It can 
be seen from the Figure that at low SNR values, below 4 dB, 
the BER of the coded system is only slightly lower than the 
uncoded system, indicating that our LDPC code does not add 
signficant performance improvement in terms of error 
correction at low SNR.  However, this seems to be the case 
with the other decoding algorithms as well.  
 
Fig. 6. Eye diagram of the transmitted signal. 
 
Fig. 7. Eye diagram of the received signal at SNR = 7.5 dB. 
 
Fig. 8. Eye diagram of the received signal after filtering at SNR = 7.5 dB. 
On the other hand, for moderate and high SNR values, the 
coded system has significantly better BER performance that 
the uncoded system. For example, in order to have a BER of 
10-4, the uncoded system SNR requirement is around 9.5 dB, 
while the coded system SNR requirement is only 6.2 dB. For 
our target BER, ≤ 10-5, the SNR requirement is around 7 dB, 
which is expected to be well-met by our RF system. 
Discrete-Time FIR (Finite Impulse Response) Filter 
Filter structure 
Direct-Form FIR 
Filter length/ Number of taps 
49 
Stable 
Yes 
Linear phase 
Yes (Type 1) 
Implementation Cost 
Number of multipliers 
48 
Number of adders 
41 
Number of states 
6 
Multiplications per input sample 
48 
Additions per input sample 
41 
1416
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ Downloaded on June 24 2026 at 14:31:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore
Restrictions apply
 
Fig. 9. BER of the developed system. 
VI. CONCLUSION  
We have designed a low-complexity high-performance 
high data rate baseband transceiver for CubeSats. We 
developed LDPC encoding and decoding algorithms. 
Furthermore, we designed a DBPSK modulator and 
demodulator based on an efficient and simple architecture. 
Simulation results verified the functionality and improved 
performance of our LDPC code compared to the uncoded 
system. We provided estimation of the type and number of 
operations envaulted by each block of the system. This is 
essential to estimating the complexity of the system and 
enhancing the algorithms and HDL codes to reduce the 
hardware utilization of the implemented system and 
consequently its power consumption, which is a major 
challenge in our CubeSat transceiver design. Our system’s 
code rate, ¾, is the highest among similar works. It also 
supports the highest data rate, around 30 Mbps, among the 
other systems. We anticipate that by constructing a parallel 
hardware architecture for our decoder and utilizing the 
features of FPGA, the system’s efficiency and data rate will 
be significantly increased, potentially reaching our target data 
rate of 1 Gbps at 5 W power consumption.    
 
REFERENCES 
[1] Y. Rahmat-Samii, V. Manohar, and J. M. Kovitz, “For satellites, think 
small, dream big: a review of recent antenna developments for 
CubeSats,” IEEE Antennas & Propagation Magazine, vol. 59, no. 2, 
pp. 22–30, 2017. 
[2]  S. Gao, Y. Rahmat-Samii, R. E. Hodges, and X.-X. Yang, “Advanced 
antennas for small satellites,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 106, no. 3, 
pp. 391–403, 2018. 
[3]  E. Kulu, “Nanosats database,” Nanosats Database, 01-Jan-2022. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.nanosats.eu/. [Accessed: 08- Feb-
2022].  
[4]  S. C. Burleigh, T. De Cola, S. Morosi, S. Jayousi, E. Cianca, and C. 
Fuchs, “From connectivity to advanced internet services: a 
comprehensive review of small satellites communications and 
networks,” Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, vol. 
2019, pp. 1–17, 2019. 
[5]  F. Davoli, C. Kourogiorgas, M. Marchese, A. Panagopoulos, and F. 
Patrone, “Small satellites and CubeSats: Survey of structures, 
architectures, and protocols,” International Journal of Satellite 
Communications and Networking, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 343–359, 2018. 
[6]  J. G. Proakis and M. Salehi, Fundamentals of Communication 
Systems, 2nd ed. Bergen County, New Jersey: Pearson Education 
Limited, 2014.  
[7] A. Anastasopoulos. “A comparison between the sum-product and the 
min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” 
IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, San Antonio, TX, 
2001. 
[8]  Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing 
Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, 
Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite 
Applications; Part 1: DVB-S2, Doc. No. ETSI EN 302 307-1 V1.4.1; 
European Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI): Sophia-
Antipolis, France, 2014. 
[9]  “Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing 
structure, channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, 
Interactive Services, News Gathering and other broadband satellite 
applications; 
Part 
2: 
S2-Extensions 
(DVB-S2X),” 
European 
Telecommunications Standards Institute (ETSI). [Online]. Available: 
https://dvb.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/a083-
2_s2x_draft_en_30230702v010201_10_2019.pdf. [Accessed: 04-Oct-
2021].  
[10]  N. Saeed, A. Elzanaty, H. Almorad, H. Dahrouj, T. Y. Al-Naffouri, 
and M.-S. Alouini, “CubeSat communications: recent advances and 
future challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 
22, no. 3, pp. 1839–1862, 2020.  
[11]  B. Klofas, “CubeSat Communications System Table Version 
17/Latest,” CubeSat Communications System Table, 23-Nov-2018. 
[Online]. Available: https://www.klofas.com/comm-table/table.pdf. 
[Accessed: 08-Nov-2021]. 
[12]  J. H. Bae, A. Abotabl, H.-P. Lin, K.-B. Song, and J. Lee, “An overview 
of channel coding for 5G NR Cellular Communications,” APSIPA 
Transactions on Signal and Information Processing, vol. 8, no. 1, 2019.  
[13]  M. V. Patil, S. Pawar, and Z. Saquib, “Coding techniques for 5G 
networks: A Review,” 2020 3rd International Conference on 
Communication System, Computing and IT Applications (CSCITA), 
2020.  
[14]  K. S. Andrews, D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, J. Hamkins, C. R. Jones and 
F. Pollara, "The Development of Turbo and LDPC Codes for Deep-
Space Applications," in Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 95, no. 11, pp. 
2142-2156, Nov. 2007, doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2007.905132. 
[15]  S. Haddadi, M. Farhang, and M. Derakhtian, “Low-complexity 
decoding of LDPC codes using reduced-set WBF-based algorithms,” 
EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 
2020, no. 1, 2020.  
[16]  S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Role of recursive convolutional codes 
in Turbo codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 31, no. 11, pp. 858–859, 
1995.  
[17] X. Cai, M. Zhou, T. Xia, W. H. Fong, W.-T. Lee, and X. Huang, “Low-
power SDR design on an FPGA for intersatellite communications,” 
IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, 
vol. 26, no. 11, pp. 2419–2430, 2018. 
[18]  A. Gaysin, V. Fadeev, and M. Hennhofer, “Survey of modulation and 
coding schemes for application in CubeSat Systems,” 2017 Systems of 
Signal 
Synchronization, 
Generating 
and 
Processing 
in 
Telecommunications (SINKHROINFO), 2017. 
 
 
1417
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ Downloaded on June 24 2026 at 14:31:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore
Restrictions apply
