680

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 7, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

Low Latency Energy-Efficient Neural Decoders for Block Codes
Cheuk Ting Leung , Student Member, IEEE, Rajshekhar Vishweshwar Bhat , Member, IEEE, and Mehul Motani , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Neural decoders are being explored for 5G and beyond communication networks which have ultra-low-latency and energy-efficiency requirements. We consider several ultrashort linear and non-linear block codes and design neural decoders for them, which (i) provide near maximum-likelihood (ML) performance in terms of bit and block error rates, and (ii) have low decoding complexity (and hence, latency and energy consumption) in terms of the number of hidden layers and hidden nodes. We explore (i) single-label, (ii) multi-label, and (iii) concatenated coding based decoders. We find that single-label decoders with a single hidden layer having a sufficient number of nodes achieve near-ML performance. Since the number of output nodes required in single-label decoders is exponential in the message length, we investigate a multi-label neural decoder requiring a significantly lower number of output nodes but having decreased performance in terms of block error rate. To eliminate extra errors, we concatenate an outer code with the original code as the inner code. The inner and outer codes are decoded by multi-label and single-label neural decoders, respectively, leading to better block error performance than that is achievable using multi-label decoders.
Index Terms—Low latency communication, channel coding, deep learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE FIFTH-GENERATION (5G) technologies may require ultra-reliable low-latency communications (URLLC) [4], which support various state-of-the-art applications such as autonomous driving, remote surgery, augmented reality, haptic communication, and disaster management. This necessitates the use of short to medium length error-correcting block codes, i.e., codes with dimension 10 ≤ k ≤ 1000 [5], with decoders having low decoding latency, defined as the amount of time the decoder takes to estimate the transmitted
Manuscript received 7 February 2022; revised 31 May 2022, 30 September 2022, and 3 November 2022; accepted 8 November 2022. Date of publication 16 November 2022; date of current version 19 May 2023. This work was supported in part by the Singapore Ministry of Education under Grant MOE2019T2-2-171. The work of Rajshekhar Vishweshwar Bhat was supported by the Science and Engineering Research Board, Department of Science and Technology, Government of India under Project SRG/2020/001545. Part of this work has been published in IEEE GLOBECOM 2019, IEEE ICC 2020, and IEEE ISIT 2020 [1], [2], [3] [DOI: 10.1109/GLOBECOM38437.2019. 9014156], [DOI: 10.1109/ICC40277.2020.9148786], and [DOI: 10.1109/ ISIT44484.2020.9174106]. The editor coordinating the review of this article was C. Shen. (Corresponding author: Cheuk Ting Leung.)
Cheuk Ting Leung and Mehul Motani are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore (e-mail: cheukting.leung@u.nus.edu; motani@nus.edu.sg).
Rajshekhar Vishweshwar Bhat is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Dharwad, Dharwad 580011, India (e-mail: rajshekhar.bhat@iitdh.ac.in).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGCN.2022.3222961

message from the time it receives a noisy sequence. In recent years, there has been a growing interest in designing neural-network based decoders (or neural decoders in short) for communication systems. Most existing works are devoted to achieving higher decoding accuracy by adopting complicated neural network (NN) models, deploying which in practical real-time applications may be prohibitive, because of the large number of computations required and the resulting high decoding latency [6], [7], [8]. Other low-complexity classical decoders such as belief propagation decoders do not perform well for short-blocklength codes [9]. Hence, it is required to design low-complexity neural decoders with low decoding latency. At the same time, the upcoming wireless networks are required to be highly energy-efficient, in the sense that they should consume very low amount of power for a short duration of time. Naturally, if the inference latency is low, then the device executing the neural decoder is required to be kept ON for a shorter duration of time, thereby minimizing the amount of energy required for its operation. Furthermore, when the neural decoder is simple in terms of having a low number of nodes and layers in it, the number of memory retrievals and computations required during inference is reduced, thereby reducing the amount of energy required for memory reading and arithmetic operations.
To address this issue, we design efficient neural decoders for ultra-short linear and non-linear block codes, so that the NN models remain small in size without compromising on the performance. Recall that the smaller neural decoders will have low decoding energy and latency. Specifically, the paper makes the following contributions:
• First, single-label neural decoders are constructed for ultra-short linear and non-linear block codes, where single-label refers to training neural decoders by casting the decoding problem as a supervised, single-label classification problem. We observe that, for linear and non-linear block codes with blocklength n, a neural network with a single hidden layer and n hidden nodes is sufficient to achieve the performance of the maximumlikelihood soft-decision (ML-SD) decoder. On the other hand, if there is one hidden layer with less than n nodes, the ML-SD performance can not be achieved.
• Second, we design multi-label neural decoders by recasting the decoding problem as a multi-label supervised classification problem. The number of nodes in the output layer increases linearly with k in this neural decoder. Although the multi-label neural decoder has this desirable characteristic, it necessitates more hidden layers

2473-2400 c 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEUNG et al.: LOW LATENCY ENERGY-EFFICIENT NEURAL DECODERS FOR BLOCK CODES

681

and hidden nodes in each layer than the corresponding single-label neural decoder in order to approach the performance of ML-SD decoder. As a result, the overall size of the neural decoder grows faster than linearly. We also observe that the multi-label neural decoder optimizes the bit error rate (BER), whereas the single-label neural decoder minimizes the block error rate (BLER). • Third, to address the aforementioned flaw, we propose a concatenated coding architecture, in which the original code is wrapped in a short-length outer code before being transmitted. The idea is that the outer code may be able to correct additional errors made by the inner decoder. The original (inner) code is decoded first by a multilabel neural decoder, followed by decoding the outer code by a single-label neural decoder. It is worth noting that the number of output nodes in the inner decoder in this approach grows linearly with k. A high-rate short-length code with good error-correcting capability can be chosen as an outer code for eliminating extra block errors from the inner decoder. Despite the fact that the outer code is decoded using a single-label decoder, the number of output nodes in the outer code is not an issue due to its short blocklength. Our results demonstrate that the concatenated coding architecture leads to better bit and block error performance for decoding ultra-short codes at higher SNRs, compared to the case when the original code is directly transmitted and decoded using a multilabel neural decoder. • Fourth, we present the number of computations (complexity) required in different decoders. We find that the concatenated neural decoder has lower complexity compared to the multi-label neural decoder, while simultaneously having a lower block error rate performance. The above ideas have appeared in [1], [2], [3], which are previous works of the current authors. Compared to them, we make the following novel and significant contributions: • We consider a common set of block codes, which are mostly different from the codes that have been considered in [1], [2], [3], and design neural decoders for them, using single-label, multi-label and concatenated architectures. This allows comparison among various neural decoder architectures. • The codes considered in the current work include larger blocklength and larger dimensional codes compared to the codes studied in [1], [2], [3]. Furthermore, we carry out several novel experiments, including comparison with classical decoders, and glean new insights on adopting neural decoders for decoding channel codes. • We adopt new metrics that allow us to assess and compare different neural decoder architectures, in terms of their decoding delay and complexity in addition to BER/BLER performance.
A. Previous Work
In recent years, the application of deep learning for decoding linear block codes has gained a tremendous interest, though the idea has been present for decades [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. The new wave of deep learning has motivated

researchers in designing channel decoders, using the deep learning models [1], [16]. Meanwhile, there has been a growing interest in designing good short blocklength codes for 5G and beyond [5], [17], [18], [19]. In the coding community, belief propagation (BP) has been a popular approach for decoding linear block codes. By unrolling iterations of the BP algorithm, [20] integrates neural networks into it and the resulting decoder is referred to as the neural belief propagation (NBP) decoder. This has been widely adopted and developed with numerous variants, including linear approximation min-sum BP algorithm [21], introducing the automorphism group [22], introducing graph network as hyper-network [23], partitioning decoding blocks for polar code [24], sparse neural network BP decoding (SNND) [25], 2-D offset min-sum BP decoding [26], graph permutation selection [27], reinforcement learning [28] and active learning [29]. Other than BP decoding, some works perform decoding with a general NN structure. In [30], the authors used NN decoders to decode both random and structured codes, and found that NN decoders can be easily generalized for structured codes but not for random codes. The work in [31] designs an unconstrained NN decoder with the knowledge of syndrome. Researchers have also considered the problem of learning novel codes using deep learning framework [32], [33], [34].
Nevertheless, NBP decoders are constrained by their predefined iteration number, and unconstrained deep learning decoders are often have exponential increase with code length, which brings out the idea of multi-label decoders. In [20], they pointed out that the Sigmoid activation function can be used to optimize the log-likelihood ratio of each bit of a received codeword. Moreover, authors in [16] mention that casting the decoding task as a multi-label classification problem using the Sigmoid as the activation function along with binary cross-entropy as the loss function may help avoid an exponential increase in the number of output nodes with k. However, they did not conduct other experiments on this idea. To design energy-efficient low-latency channel decoders, various works explored reducing the complexity of the decoding algorithms by simplification [35], approximation [36], via statistical error compensation for LDPC decoder [37], and saving memory storage via a memory bypassing scheme [38]. Model compression methods are used in neural decoders to achieve energy-efficiency. In [39], Buchberger et al. remove insignificant check nodes in BP algorithm iteratively via pruning. In [40], authors quantify the weights in neural decoders. Unlike the ideas presented in [39] and [40], which reduce the size of the model from the perspective of general deep learning compression techniques, we optimize the neural network by selecting the number of layers and nodes in each layer, so as to minimize the decoding latency and energy, while achieving the decoding performance (in terms of BER and BLER) close to that of the ML decoder.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present the description for codes under investigation, proposed neural decoders and performance metric. In Section III, we present the single-label neural decoder and its performance results for linear and non-linear block codes. In Section IV, we show the multi-label based neural decoder

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

682

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 7, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

TABLE I THE LIST OF CODES CONSIDERED FOR STUDY IN THIS PAPER

and the corresponding performance results for block codes. In Section V, we then describe the concatenated coding structure and its decoding performance. In Section VI, the evaluation of inference latency and energy efficiency are described. In Section VII, we provide the performance of neural decoder for one code under Rayleigh fading channel, and discuss the limitation of multi-label neural decoders. We make concluding remarks in Section VIII.
II. METHODOLOGY
In this section, we first list the linear and non-linear block codes that we consider for exploration. We then provide a general description of the proposed neural decoder, followed by the data generation, training and inference approach we adopt. We conclude the section by mentioning the performance metrics we use for evaluating the neural decoders.
A. System Model and Studied Block Codes
We consider a communication system with a transmitter, an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, and a receiver. The transmitter first encodes a message vector m(i) ∈ {0, 1}k to a codeword c(i) ∈ {0, 1}n for i = 1, . . . , M , where M 2k . Then, the transmitter modulates codeword c(i) to obtain s(i) ∈ {−1, +1}n by mapping bits 0 and 1 in c(i) to symbols −1 and +1, respectively, and transmits s(i) over an AWGN channel. We assume that {s(1), . . . , s(M )} are chosen with uniform probability, i.e., with probability 1/M, for transmission. The receiver receives a real-valued noisy vector y = s(i) + w , where w is an n-dimensional independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) random vector according to a normal distribution with zero mean and variance N0/2. The goal of the receiver is to estimate the transmitted message from the observed vector y, such that the probability of error is minimized. We denote the average energy per message bit by Eb . Since a message m(i) with k bits is mapped to the codeword c(i) with n bits, the average energy per coded bit, Es = REb , where R = k/n is the rate of the code.
In this work, we consider several ultra-short linear and non-linear block codes. We denote the linear block codes as (n, k)-codes, where n is the blocklength and k is the information length. In these codes, the n-dimensional codeword c(i) corresponding to k-dimensional message m(i) is obtained by c(i) = m(i)G for i = 1, . . . , M , where G is a k × n generator matrix. We also consider constant weight codes (CWC) as non-linear block codes, which we represent as CWC (n, d, w), where n is the blocklength, d is the

minimum Hamming distance and w is the Hamming weight of a codeword. For constant weight code, the codeword c(i) corresponding to a message m(i) is obtained from a certain codebook.1
A comprehensive list of block codes considered in the work is shown in Table I.
In this work, as mentioned earlier, we refer to a neural network based decoder as a neural decoder. A neural network is a series of mappings from an input vector a0 ∈ RN0 to an output vector aL+1 ∈ RNL+1 through L + 1 steps:
al = σ(Wl al−1 + bl ), for l = 1, . . . , L + 1, (1)
where Wl ∈ RNl ×Nl−1 , bl ∈ RNl and σ(·) : RNl → RNl is an activation function. Here, we call the input layer as layer 0, and layers 1, . . . , L are the hidden layers. The output layer is the layer L + 1. The number of nodes in layer 0 is denoted by N0I , and we consider N0I = n in the neural decoder, where the superscript I stand for the word “input”. The number of nodes in layer l is denoted by Nlh for l = 1, . . . , L, where the superscript h stands for the word “hidden”. We propose singlelabel and multi-label neural decoders in this paper, which treat the decoding problem as single-label and multi-label classification, respectively. The difference between a singlelabel neural decoder and a multi-label neural decoder can be seen in Fig. 1. In the single-label neural decoder, the decoder maps n-dimensional noisy sequences to 2k possible messages, while the multi-label neural decoder maps n-dimensional noisy sequences to k-dimensional binary vectors. We also consider a concatenated neural decoder architecture, which will be explained in Section V.

B. Training and Inference

We now describe the process of training and inference of a

neural decoder.

1) Training: In this process, we minimize the loss function

for a given training data set. Training a neural network model

requires extensive example data set {(yt(rja)in, xt(rja)in), j =

1, . . . , Dtrain}, where Dtrain refers to the number of training

saanmd pylt(erjsa).inHreerfee,rsxt(troja)itnheisctohrerelsapboenldfionrgthne-djimthetnrsaiionninagl

example, corrupted

codeword when the and passed through

amecshsaangneeli.ndTihceatejdthbytraxint(rjian)ign

is encoded example is

obtained as follows.

1The generator matrices used for studied block codes are provided in https://github.com/ctleungac/Multi-Label-Neural-Decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEUNG et al.: LOW LATENCY ENERGY-EFFICIENT NEURAL DECODERS FOR BLOCK CODES

683

TABLE II THE ACTIVATION FUNCTIONS AND NUMBER OF NODES ADOPTED
IN THE SINGLE-LABEL NEURAL DECODER

Fig. 1. A block diagram of a communication system consisting of a transmitter, a channel and a neural decoder. The diagram illustrates two types of neural decoders: (a) single-label neural decoder and (b) multi-label neural decoder.
1) We uniformly sample a message m(j ) from the set {m(1), . . . , m(M )}. Note that m(j ) ∈ {0, 1}k and let xt(rja)in,i = 1 and xt(rja)in,p = 0 for all p = i if the i th message is sampled, where xt(rja)in,p is the pth element of xt(rja)in, for p = 1, . . . , M .
2) We generate the corresponding codeword, c(j ) ∈ {0, 1}n using a generator matrix, G ∈ {0, 1}k×n as follows: c(j ) = m(j )G, when linear block codes are studied.
3) We then modulate the codeword, c(j ), by mapping bit 0 to −1 and bit 1 to +1.
4) To each of the n coded and modulated bits of c(j ), we add a random Gaussian distributed noise with zero mean and variance N0/2 to obtain yt(rja)in, at a certain Eb /N0 value.
In the rest of this paper, we denote the training energy-perbit by (Eb /N0)train.
2) Inference: We denote the data set for inference (testing) by {(yt(ejs)t, xt(ejs)t), j = 1, . . . , Dtest}. We generate the above data set in a similar manner as the training data set. However, to test the generalization ability of the trained model, the inference data set is generated at different SNRs. In this paper, we denote the energy-per-bit used for testing by Eb /N0.
C. Performance Metrics
1) Maximum-Likelihood Soft-Decision (ML-SD) Decoder for Benchmarking: We now describe the maximum-likelihood soft-decision decoder, which we use as the baseline decoder for benchmarking the proposed neural decoders. Given a received vector, y, the decoder outputs one of the codewords, cˆ ∈ {c1, . . . , cM } as its guess of the transmitted codeword. The decoder makes an error if cˆ = c(i) when c(i) was transmitted. When messages are transmitted with equal probability, the maximum-likelihood soft-decision decoder, which outputs cˆ = ci if P (y|ck ) is the maximum value for k = i, where P (y|ck ) is the conditional probability of receiving y when ck was transmitted, is an optimal decoder. Here, the term “soft decision” indicates that the real-valued received vector y is directly used for decoding.

2) Decoding Performance Metric: A decoder makes an error when a message m(i) is encoded to a codeword c(i) then transmitted, and the decoder outputs cˆ = c(i). The block
error rate (BLER) is defined as

BLER :=

lim

1

D
I

K →∞ D j =1

cˆ = c(j )

,

(2)

where I(ˆs = c) = 1 when ˆs = c and 0, otherwise. Similarly, the bit error rate (BER) is defined as

BER := lim

1

D

k
I

D→∞ kD j =1 i=1

mˆ (i ) = m(j )(i )

,

(3)

where D is the number of message samples, m(j )(i ) and mˆ (i ) are the i th bits of the transmitted information sequence m(j ), and the predicted information sequence, mˆ , respectively.
3) Decoding Complexity: The emerging applications of 5G and beyond networks require low decoding latency and energy consumption, which are respectively the amount of time and energy the decoder takes to estimate the transmitted message from the received noisy sequence. In this paper, the decoding complexity are computed by calculating the order of all multiplications and the operations taken for executing activation functions. The detailed computation of decoding complexity will be provided in Section VI. In this work, we obtain a neural decoder, which has a low decoding complexity (and hence low-latency and energy efficient) while having its BLER performance close to that of the ML-SD decoder.

III. SINGLE-LABEL NEURAL DECODERS
In this section, we present the single-label neural decoder (see Fig. 1). We first investigate a neural decoder with a single hidden layer and obtain the sufficient number of hidden nodes required for a neural decoder. Next, we perform experiments on single-label neural decoders with different number of layers and nodes that are sufficient to achieve the performance of the ML-SD decoder.

A. Single-Label Neural Decoders for Block Codes

Single-label neural decoder refers to single label classi-

fication based neural decoder, which treats each codeword c(i) ∈ {1, . . . , 2k } as an independent label. In this neural

decoder, we use the ReLU function, σ(x ) = max(0, x ) as

the activation function for hidden layers l = 1, . . . , L and the

SoftMax function, σ(xi ) = exp(xi )/

M j =1

exp(xj

),

as

the

activation function for the output layer, i.e., the layer (L + 1).

The adopted activation function is summarized in Table II.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

684

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 7, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

Fig. 3. BLER vs. number of nodes for single-label neural decoders in the hidden layer N1h , for (7, 4) Hamming code, (10, 5) parity check code, (16, 5) parity check code, a (20, 7) parity check code, a (26, 10) parity check code and a (30, 12) parity check code. We set (Eb/N0)train = 0 dB and Eb /N0 = 8 dB. The figure on right illustrates a magnified portion of the figure on left.

Fig. 2. BLER vs. Eb /N0 for single-label neural decoders. We test for (a) the (7, 4) Hamming code, (b) a (26, 10) parity check code, (c) a (34, 10, 6) constant weight code, (d) a (30, 12) parity check code, (e) a (34, 12) parity check code and (f) a (10, 4, 5) constant weight code with various values of the number of nodes N1h with L = 1. We set (Eb/N0)train = 0 dB.

In a single-label neural decoder, a received vector y ∈ Rn is mapped to a codeword in the codebook with M (= 2k )
codewords, we set N0 = n and NL+1 = M . The number of hidden layers, L, and the number of nodes in each hidden layer, N1h , . . . , NLh are the design parameters. The neural network is trained using a set of labeled data {(y(j ), x (j )), j = 1, . . . , K }, where x (j ) ∈ {0, 1}NL+1 is a one-shot vector where xi(j ) = 1 if c(i) is the transmitted codeword. y(j ) is the received vector after transmitting c(i), and xm(j ) = 0 for m = i . The training and validation data are generated at (Eb /N0)train = 0 dB, according to empirical experiments in [1]. The neural network
learns to decode by finding the parameters Wl ’s, bl ’s that minimize the average loss function:

L

K1 E
j =1 k

aL(j+)1, x (j )

,

(4)

where aL(j+)1 is the output of the neural decoder when the input

vector is y(j ) and the function, L(a, x )

−

M i =1

xi

log(ai

),

which is referred to as the categorical cross-entropy loss func-

tion, where ai and xi are the i th elements of M-dimensional

vectors a and x, respectively.

B. Varying the Structure of the Single-Label Neural Decoder

We first consider a neural network with one hidden layer

(i.e., L = 1) and study the impact of the number of hidden

layer nodes (N1h ) on decoder’s BLER performance. In Fig. 2,

we assume (Eb /N0)train = 0 dB and testing Eb /N0 of range

Eb /N0 ∈ [ − 5, 8] dB . As shown in Fig. 2, we see that the BLER values of the (7, 4) Hamming are higher when N1h

are less than 7, and the BLER attains the minimum value at

N1h = 7 and remains unchanged for N1h > 7. Similarly, the

BLER of a (26, 10) parity check code attains the minimum

Nva1hlue>a2t6N, t1hhe=BL26ERanodf

remains unchanged thereafter for a (30, 12) parity check code attains

any the

Fig. 4. BLER vs. Eb /N0 for single-label neural decoders. We test for (a), (b) (7, 4) Hamming neural decoders and (c) (26, 10) parity check code for various different number of Nlh . We set (Eb/N0)train = 0 dB.
minimum at N1h = 30 and remains unchanged for N1h > 30, and the BLER of a (34, 12) parity check code attains the minimum at N1h = 34 and remains unchanged for N1h > 34. From the figure, we can see that a neural network with a single hidden layer with n hidden nodes and 2k output nodes
is sufficient to decode the linear block codes studied corrupted
by AWGN noise and to match the performance of the ML-SD
decoder. Fig. 3 shows the BLER performance when N1h values are
varied in a neural decoder with a single hidden layer. The Eb/N0 is fixed to be 8 dB and the considered codes have n = 7, 10, 16, 20, 26 and 30. From the figure, we note that when N1h ≥ n, the performance of the single-label neural decoder matches that of the ML-SD decoder, which are
the minimum values for each curve. The performance of the
single-label neural decoder is worse than that of the ML-SD decoder for any N1h < n.
In Fig. 4, we present experimental results of the variations
of the BLER for the (7, 4) Hamming code and a (26, 10) parity check code with Eb /N0 for different structures of the neural network with more than one hidden layers. From Fig. 4(a), we
can observe that the BLER performances for these decoders
are unable to approach those of ML-SD decoder, when the
number of hidden nodes is below n. When comparing neural
decoders with the same number of hidden nodes, the neural
decoder with the narrower (with a fewer nodes) first layer per-
forms worse than the neural decoder with the same number
of hidden nodes but a wider (with a larger number of nodes)
first layer. An example of this observation is the curve of the neural decoder with N1h = 4, N2h = 3 and the curve of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEUNG et al.: LOW LATENCY ENERGY-EFFICIENT NEURAL DECODERS FOR BLOCK CODES

685

TABLE III THE ACTIVATION FUNCTIONS AND NUMBER OF NODES ADOPTED
IN THE MULTI-LABEL NEURAL DECODER

neural decoder with N1h = 3, N2h = 4. As shown in Fig. 4a, where the former decoder performs better than the latter in BLER. Fig. 4b shows the performance of neural decoders with multiple hidden layers. From Fig. 4b, note that if the number of nodes in any one of the hidden layers is less than n (7 in Fig. 4b), the performance of such a single-label neural network becomes worse than that of the ML-SD decoder. The performance degradation depends on the number of hidden nodes in a layer; the less the number of the hidden nodes in a layer, the worse is the performance. Similar observations can also be found in other selected codes (for instance, see (26, 10) parity check code in Fig. 4c). The degraded performance appeared to be unaffected by the increase of the depth of the neural network model. These observations suggest that each hidden layer requires at least n nodes to achieve the ML-SD decoder’s performance. These also imply that some useful information is lost if the number of nodes is smaller than the blocklength n of the code.
We now summarize our observations on the structure of the single-label neural decoder, i.e., the number of hidden layers and the number of hidden nodes in each layer of the neural decoder on the BLER performance.
• A single-label neural decoder with a single hidden layer with n nodes is necessary and sufficient to achieve the BLER of the ML-SD decoder for the considered block codes.
• To achieve the BLER performance of the ML-SD decoder, a single-label neural decoder with more than one hidden layer requires at least n nodes in each layer, i.e., Nlh ≥ n for l = 1, . . . , L, for considered block codes.
• For the considered codes, increasing the depth does not contribute to the improvement of the BLER performance for single-label neural decoders. Furthermore, when a deeper neural network is applied, more hidden layers lead to higher computational complexity of forward and backward propagation in both training and testing, i.e., this results in harder training and longer computation time.
Hanin [41] found that, within a neural network, if all the hidden layer widths are limited to be smaller than din , where din is the input dimension, then even with infinite depth limit, the ReLU networks can only approximate a very limited number of functions. That is, we need at least n nodes in each hidden layer to closely achieve the performance of the optimal decoder.
IV. MULTI-LABEL NEURAL DECODERS FOR BLOCK CODES
Recall that in Section III, we treated the problem of decoding a codeword as a single-label classification problem, and hence the number of nodes in the output layer, NL+1, grows

Fig. 5. BER vs. Eb /N0 for multi-label neural decoders for (a) the (7, 4) Hamming code, (b) a (10, 4, 5) constant weight code, (c) a (20, 7) parity check code and (d) a (34, 10, 6) constant weight code for various values of the number of nodes Nlh with l = 1,2. We set (Eb/N0)train = 0 dB.

exponentially with k. Consequently, as k increases, it becomes

prohibitive to train and deploy such a neural decoder in

practice. To overcome the above limitation, we introduce

the multi-label neural decoder, where the real-valued noisy

sequence is mapped to k bits of the message directly. As in

Section III, we continue working with the feed-forward neural

network structure.

In a multi-label neural decoder, we need to map a received vector y ∈ Rn to a codeword in the codebook with k mes-

sage bits. Hence, we set N0 = n and NL+1 = k . The number
of hidden layers L, and the number of nodes in each hidden layer, N1h , . . . , NLh are the design parameters. We use the ReLU function as the activation function for hidden layers

l = 1, . . . , L and the activation function for output layer, i.e.,

the layer (L + 1), is the Sigmoid function where the output at

node i is given by σ(xi ) = 1/(1 + exp(−xi )). We summarize this in Table III.

Compared to the single-label neural decoder, the multi-label
neural decoder is trained with the information bits {0, 1}k as the labeled data, i.e., each transmitted codeword y(j ) is

mapped to k output nodes, which have only 0 and 1 values.

The neural network learns to decode by finding the parameters

Wl s, bl s that cross-entropy

minimize function,

the average L(a, x )

loss function, and binary

M i =1

xi

log(ai )

+

(1

−

xi ) log(1 − ai ), is adopted in the multi-label neural decoder,

where a is the output of the neural decoder when the input

vector is y. We compare the BLER and BER results with the

ML-SD decoder for benchmarking.

To begin with, we test the multi-label neural decoder with

some block codes with small k, i.e., k < 10. We study the (7, 4)

Hamming code, a (20, 7) parity check code, a (34, 10, 6) con-

stant weight code and a (10, 4, 5) constant weight code. Fig. 5

shows that the BER values of multi-label neural decoders for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

686

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 7, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

Fig. 6. BLER vs. Eb /N0 for multi-label neural decoders for (a) the (7, 4) Hamming code, (b) a (10, 4, 5) constant weight code, (c) a (20, 7) parity check code and (d) a (34, 10, 6) constant weight code for various values of the number of nodes Nlh with l = 1, 2. We set (Eb/N0)train = 0 dB.

Fig. 8. BER vs. Eb /N0 for a multi-label neural decoders, testing for (a) a (26, 10) parity check code, (b) a (30, 12) parity check code, (c) a (34, 12) parity check code and (d) a (31, 21) BCH code for various values of the number of nodes Nlh . We set (Eb/N0)train = 4.5 dB.

Fig. 7. BLER and BER vs. number of nodes N in the hidden layer 1 and 2, where N1h = N2h = N in a multi-label neural decoder for the (7, 4) Hamming code. We set (Eb/N0)train = 0 dB and Eb /N0 = 8 dB.
the studied codes closely approach those of the optimal MLSD decoder for the block codes. However, as can be seen in Fig. 6, the values of BLER have a gap from the optimal BLER values of ML-SD decoder for all the codes. It is because we have changed the number of nodes in the output layer, L + 1, from 2k to k. After modifying the output layer, each node in the output layer is optimized individually, i.e., the binary entropy loss is minimized at each output node, which leads to the optimization of BER instead of the BLER. Therefore, while in terms of BER, the multi-label neural decoder can closely achieve the optimal value, its BLER is higher than the optimal value. Moreover, from the trends of the BER/BLER curves of multi-label neural decoders, we can see that they might have more errors at higher testing Eb /N0 than ML-SD decoders.
Additionally, although the number of nodes in the output layer becomes less, the number of nodes in hidden layers required to achieve or closely approach the performance of

ML-SD decoder increases in comparison to the single-label neural decoder considered in Section III. For instance, the sufficient number of hidden nodes is 7 for the (7, 4) Hamming code, while this number increases to 28 for the multi-label neural decoder. Similar observations can be found in multi-label neural decoders for other studied codes.
To investigate the impact of the number of hidden nodes in a neural decoder with a single or double hidden layers, we fix Eb /N0 to be 8 dB in Fig. 7 for the (7, 4) Hamming code and observe how the BLER/BER values vary with the number of nodes in a hidden layer. As shown in the figure, the multi-label neural decoder with two hidden layers, each of them having at least 28 nodes, achieves the BER equal to that of the ML-SD decoder. It is also shown that the multi-label neural decoder with a single hidden layer does not achieve the BER of the ML-SD decoder, despite the increase in N1h . This observation holds true for other block codes that have been studied empirically. In all the cases, the BLER performance of the multi-label decoders is worse than that achieved by the ML-SD decoders.
We also test the BER performance of multi-label neural decoders when k is larger than 10. We train multi-label neural decoders with (Eb /N0)train in a range of −5 to 8 dB empirically and it performs best during inference when messages are generated at 3 dB for (26, 10) parity check code and 4.5 dB for (30, 12), (34, 12) parity check code and (31, 21) Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) code, as opposed to the single-label case, where the best performance is obtained when messages are generated at 0 dB for training. In Fig. 8, it is shown that multi-label neural decoders perform worse in terms of BER with a large model, e.g., a neural network with more than 3000 nodes. Both BLER and BER values of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEUNG et al.: LOW LATENCY ENERGY-EFFICIENT NEURAL DECODERS FOR BLOCK CODES

687

Fig. 9. Illustration of the concatenated coding architecture for Reed-Solomon outer code.

TABLE IV THE ACTIVATION FUNCTIONS AND THE NUMBER OF NODES ADOPTED
IN CONCATENATED NEURAL DECODERS
multi-label neural decoders for larger k do not achieve the performance of the ML-SD decoder when compared to block codes with smaller k. In Fig. 8, we also provide comparisons of the performance of multi-label neural decoder with that of classical algorithms, namely, belief propagation (BP) decoder for parity check codes and the Berlekamp-Massey (BM) algorithm for BCH codes. From the figure, we see that the BP decoder performs very poorly (much worse than the neural decoder) because the considered codes are high density parity check codes (HDPC) and the BP decoders are known to perform poorly for HDPC [9]. However, the BM algorithm performs significantly better than the multi-label neural decoder for BCH codes.
In essence, the above multi-label neural decoder optimizes BER rather than the BLER. Moreover, the decoding performance of multi-label decoder for codes with larger k is does not closely approach that of the ML-SD decoder. Hence, for correcting the errors, in the following section, we consider concatenating a short-length outer code to correct the extra block errors of multi-label neural decoder.
V. CONCATENATED NEURAL BLOCK DECODERS In this section, we explore the concatenated coding architecture to improve the performance of the above multi-label neural decoder. Concatenated codes were first introduced in [42]. We adopt the concatenation coding architecture as described in [42] with some changes. In the next paragraph, we describe the concatenation process adopted in the paper in detail. In the concatenated coding model, a message is first coded using an outer encoder, whose output is then coded using an inner encoder, as described below. We adopt both binary linear code and Reed-Solomon (RS) codes as the outer codes [43]. Specifically, we adopt a K-dimensional RS code with blocklength N over the finite field B = F2q , where q is an integer.

We now describe the concatenated coding process for RS
outer code when q = 3, as implemented in our experi-
ments. First, K k-bit message words are grouped to form a message word, m = (x (1), . . . , x (kK )) ∈ BkK and it is the input to the RS encoder. The RS encoder then outputs (c(1), . . . , c(kN )) ∈ BkN . Then, we convert the non-binary symbol c(i ) ∈ B, i ∈ {1, . . . , kN } to its equivalent k-bit binary number, c(i )2 ∈ {0, 1}q , and obtain (c(1)2, . . . , c(kN )2) ∈ {0, 1}qkN . Then, the inner encoder takes (c(1)2, . . . , c(N )2) ∈ {0, 1}qkN as an input and outputs y = (y(1)2, . . . , y(nN )2) ∈ {0, 1}qnN . We represent the above process in a block diagram in Fig. 9. Noted that
zero-padding is needed if the input sequence is less than qK
bits. The rate of the outer code is K/N and the rate of the
inner code is k/n. Hence, the overall code rate is (kK)/(nN).
When q = k , multiple k-bit message words are collected and regrouped to construct a message word for the outer code, by obtaining K elements in B. Such groupings are consistently carried out throughout the encoding and decoding steps to
obtain an estimate of the original k-bit message word, at the
receiver.
The proposed concatenated neural decoder consists of two
neural networks, one for decoding the inner code called an
inner decoder, and the other for decoding the outer code
called an outer decoder. Let the number of hidden layers for
inner (outer) decoder be denoted by LI (LO). First, the inner decoder, a multi-label classification based neural network, takes channel outputs (y˜(1), . . . , y˜(qnN )) ∈ RqnN as inputs, and group each n-bit as a block to decode, and outputs the predicted sequence (cˆ(1)2, . . . , cˆ(kN )2) ∈ BkN . Note that, each cˆ(i )2 is represented by q binary bits, and the predicted sequence is equivalent to (cˆ(1), . . . , cˆ(qkN )) ∈ Fq2kN . The bits are further grouped into (cˆ = (cˆ(1), . . . , cˆ(qN )) as one input and fed to the outer single-label neural decoder, to esti-
mate the transmitted message word. The outer decoder then selects the codeword with the highest probability from 2qK
possible codewords, as the estimated codeword. The outer
decoder output the estimated message word mˆ based on the estimated codeword with the highest probability. The num-
ber of input and output nodes in the inner neural decoder
are NI,0 = n and NI,LI+1 = k , respectively. The number of input and output nodes in the outer neural decoder are NO,0 = N and NO,LO+1 = 2qK , respectively. We denote the number of hidden nodes in the l th layer of the outer and inner decoders as NO,l and NI,l , respectively. The structure of neural decoders for concatenated codes is summarized
in Table IV.
In the experiments, we first consider an RS (5, 3) code over the finite field F23 as the outer code and adopt the (7, 4) Hamming code and a (10, 4, 5) constant weight code as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

688

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 7, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

Fig. 10. The variation of the BLER with Eb /N0 for Concatenated neural decoders. The studied concatenated code is constructed from RS (5, 3) code as outer code and (a) (10, 4, 5) constant weight code (b) (7, 4) Hamming code as inner codes. We set (Eb/N0)train = 0 dB.

inner codes. In this case, we have, q = 3. For benchmarking, the BLER results of the multi-label neural decoder for inner codes are provided. All comparisons between two decoders are tested under same chosen Eb /N0. The observations for this setting is shown in Fig. 10. To show that the concatenated coding approach removes extra block errors, we present the comparison of BLER performance among different neural decoders.
From Fig. 10, we note that the BLER values of the inner codes, when it is concatenated with the outer code and decoded by the concatenated neural decoder, are less than when only the codes are directly transmitted (without concatenation) and decoded using the ML-SD and multi-label neural decoders, at high Eb /N0. Note that, in-line with the previous section, the BLER values with the multi-label decoder are greater than that of the ML-SD decoder for the considered codes. Since the concatenated coding approach reduces the BLER, we conclude that it has contributed to correcting the errors caused due to the multi-label decoder.
We now compare the complexity of the multi-label neural decoder and the concatenated decoding approach in terms of the number of nodes. We consider three parity check codes with blocklengths 26, 30 and 34 as inner codes concatenated with an RS (7, 3) code and (21, 9) parity check code as outer codes. We also add a (31, 21) BCH code [44] as one choice of inner codes to see the impact of adopting different codes with larger k. From Fig. 11, we find that concatenated decoders have slightly lower number of nodes as compared to that in the multi-label decoders. However, the performance of the concatenated neural decoders is significantly better than that of the multi-label neural decoders, both when the outer code is the RS (7, 3) code or the (21, 9) parity check code. For the considered BCH code, we also note that the BLER performance of the concatenated decoder is significantly better than that of the classical BM algorithm.
More elaborately, the multi-label neural decoders for (26, 10), (30, 12), (34, 12) parity check codes and the (31, 21) BCH code contain two hidden layers with 1000 and 500 nodes in the first and the second layer, respectively. On the other hand, the inner decoder in the concatenated decoder approach has two hidden layers with 500 and 300 nodes in the first

Fig. 11. The variation of the BLER with Eb /N0 for concatenated neural decoders. The studied concatenated codes are constructed from a (7, 3) RS code or a (21, 9) parity check code as outer codes, and (a) (26, 10) parity check code, (b) (30, 12) parity check code, (c) (34, 12) parity check code and (d) (31, 21) BCH code as inner codes. We set (Eb/N0)train = 0 dB.
and the second layer, respectively, and the outer decoder contains a single-hidden layer neural network, both when the outer code is the RS (7, 3) code or a (21, 9) parity check code. Detailed number of nodes for all neural decoders can be found in Table VI.
From Fig. 11, we also note that the performance of the multi-label neural decoder becomes significantly worse as n increases for a given neural network architecture. However, in the concatenated coding approach, there is no significant reduction in the performance as n increases. From this observation, we can infer the benefit of the concatenated coding approach is more pronounced for large n values.
VI. DECODING COMPLEXITY
In this section, we calculate and compare the decoding complexity of the neural decoders considered in Sections III–V. We note that the higher the decoding complexity, the higher will be the decoding latency and energy consumption. This is because, the inference from a trained model requires energy for accessing the neural network architecture and weights and for multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations [45], [46]. The decoding latency is defined as the time the decoder takes to estimate the sent message from the moment it gets the noisy sequence, which is heavily influenced by the time the decoder takes to perform arithmetic computations and memory access. Similarly, the decoding energy depends on the amount of memory access and computations required for inference. Given a trained neural network, for inference, we need to perform a series of transformations on the received

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEUNG et al.: LOW LATENCY ENERGY-EFFICIENT NEURAL DECODERS FOR BLOCK CODES

689

TABLE V NUMBER OF OPERATIONS IN VARIOUS DIFFERENT NEURAL DECODERS PROPOSED IN THE PAPER

TABLE VI NUMBER OF NODES IN VARIOUS DIFFERENT NEURAL DECODERS PROPOSED IN THE PAPER

noisy sequence, as given in (1). For this, the number of multiplications,

L+1

nmul = Nl Nl−1Nl−2 + N1N0,

(5)

l =2

where Nl is the number of nodes in the l-th layer, and L is the total number of hidden layers and the number of times the
activation function is applied is given by [47],

L+1

ng = Nl .

(6)

l =1

For comparison of complexities of different neural decoders proposed, we provide the details of the number of multiplications and activation function computations in them, along with the number of nodes in different layers in Table V and Table VI. In Table V, we provide the number of operations and weights for three types of neural decoders for different block codes. We define nmul as the number of multiplications, ng as the number of activation functions, and nw as the number of weights. Multiply-accumulate (MAC) operations are the operation of multiplying two numbers and performing addition, and we denote #MAC Operations as the number of MAC operations in ML decoder. In Table VI, details of the number of nodes in each layer for various neural decoders are provided.
The decoding complexity can be observed from the Table V, which in general, the higher values of nmul, ng and nw are, the higher the decoding complexity for the corresponding neural decoder. From Table V, note that the decoding complexity of multi-label neural decoders for codes with larger k is higher than that of the concatenated neural decoders, when the BLER achieved by the concatenated neural decoders is lower than that in the multi-label neural decoders, as shown in Section V.

Fig. 12. Multi-label neural decoder v.s. Viterbi decoder for ZTCC with k = 64, n = 144, under a AWGN channel. We set (Eb/N0)train = 7 dB.
VII. LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE WORK
The multi-layer perceptron based multi-label neural decoder has the limitation of being difficult to train and generalize well when k is large. For instance, it can be seen from Fig. 12, where we consider a zero-terminated convolutional code (ZTCC) with k = 64 and n = 144 from [48] and observe that the performance of all multi-label neural decoders is poorer than that of the classical Viterbi decoder. As we observed in our experiments, for channel codes with larger k, more complicated neural networks are required to perform the multi-label classification task. For a larger k, the probability of each bit needs to be estimated in parallel, which is challenging for a relatively simple structure of a neural network. In such a case, the concatenated neural decoder is unable to function properly due to the bad inputs (erroneously decoded) given by the inner decoder. As part of future work, more sophisticated multi-label classification models may be investigated for channel codes with short to medium blocklengths, such

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

690

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 7, NO. 2, JUNE 2023

We observed that the BLER performance with the above concatenated architecture is better than that when the codes are transmitted without concatenation and then decoded using the multi-label and soft-decision decoders at higher (Eb /N0)s. When n increases, the concatenated decoding approach performs better than a multi-label decoder in terms of the BLER.
We find that the decoding complexity of the concatenated approach is lower than that for the multi-label neural decoder, while it has a better BLER performance compared to that in the multi-label decoder. We also compare the BER performance of the multi-label neural decoder for a (34, 12) parity check code under Rayleigh fading channel.

Fig. 13. Multi-label neural decoder for (34, 12) parity check code under a Rayleigh fading channel, distributed as CN (0, 1). We set (Eb/N0)train = 4 dB.
as the attention-based multi-label classification model in [9]. In addition, methods of pruning and weight-quantizing may be considered in multi-label and concatenated neural decoders for reducing the size of the models.
We also compare the performance of the neural decoder under the Rayleigh fading channel, distributed as CN (0, 1). In Fig. 13, we present the BER results for the multi-label neural decoder for a (34, 12) parity check code. As can be seen in the model, the performance of the multi-label decoder is close to that of the optimal ML-SD decoder. Future works may include consideration of various other channel environments.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this work, we designed low-complexity (and hence lowlatency and energy efficient) neural decoders for decoding ultra-short block codes. We first built single-label neural decoders by using neural networks with minimum number of hidden layers and nodes in each layer for achieving block error rate (BLER) of the maximum-likelihood soft-decision (ML-SD) decoder. We studied various different structures of single-label neural decoders, having different number of hidden layers and nodes. We found that for the considered block codes, a neural network with one single hidden layer with n nodes is sufficient to achieve the performance close to that of the ML-SD decoder, where n is the blocklength.
We investigated the performance of multi-label based neural decoder for the mentioned block codes. We found the BLER results of multi-label neural decoder does not closely match that of the ML-SD decoder. In order to correct the block errors at the output of the multi-label decoder, we use a concatenated architecture, where at the transmitter, the original code is wrapped with a short-length outer code and transmitted. At the decoder, the outer and inner codes are decoded using the multi-label neural decoder and the single-label neural decoder, respectively.

REFERENCES
[1] C. T. Leung, R. V. Bhat, and M. Motani, “Low-latency neural decoders for linear and non-linear block codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[2] C. T. Leung, R. V. Bhat, and M. Motani, “Multi-label neural decoders for block codes,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[3] C. T. Leung, M. Motani, and R. V. Bhat, “Multi-label and concatenated neural block decoders,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, 2020, pp. 274–279.
[4] G. J. Sutton et al., “Enabling technologies for ultra-reliable and low latency communications: From PHY and MAC layer perspectives,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2488–2524, 3rd Quart., 2019.
[5] G. Liva, L. Gaudio, and T. Ninacs, “Code design for short blocks: A survey,” in Proc. EuCNC, Athens, Greece, Jun. 2016, pp. 1–6.
[6] Y. Cheng et al., “An exploration of parameter redundancy in deep networks with circulant projections,” in Proc. IEEE ICCV, Washington, DC, USA, 2015, pp. 2857–2865.
[7] S. S. Ogden and T. Guo, “Characterizing the deep neural networks inference performance of mobile applications,” 2019, arXiv:1909.04783.
[8] J. Hanhirova, T. Kämäräinen, S. Seppälä, M. Siekkinen, V. Hirvisalo, and A. Ylä-Jääski, “Latency and throughput characterization of convolutional neural networks for mobile computer vision,” in Proc. ACM MMSys, New York, NY, USA, 2018, pp. 204–215.
[9] M. Hummert, D. Wübben, and A. Dekorsy, “Machine learning scaled belief propagation for short codes,” in Proc. IEEE VTC, 2021, pp. 1–5.
[10] A. Esposito, S. Rampone, and R. Tagliaferri, “A neural network for error correcting decoding of binary linear codes,” Neural Netw., vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 195–202, 1994.
[11] M. M. Htay, S. S. Iyengar, and S.-Q. Zheng, “Correcting errors in linear codes with neural network,” in Proc. Southeastern Symp. Syst. Theory, Mar. 1995, pp. 386–391.
[12] L. G. Tallini and P. Cull, “Neural nets for decoding error-correcting codes,” in Proc. IEEE Tech. Appl. Conf. Workshops Northcon, 1995, p. 89.
[13] H. Abdelbaki, E. Gelenbe, and S. E. El-Khamy, “Random neural network decoder for error correcting codes,” in Proc. IEEE IJCNN, vol. 5, Jul. 1999, pp. 3241–3245.
[14] J.-L. Wu, Y.-H. Tseng, and Y.-M. Huang, “Neural network decoders for linear block codes,” Int. J. Comput. Eng. Sci., vol. 3, pp. 235–256, Sep. 2002.
[15] A. S. Hadi, “Linear block code decoder using neural network,” in Proc. IEEE IJCNN, 2008, pp. 1111–1114.
[16] T. O’Shea and J. Hoydis, “An introduction to deep learning for the physical layer,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Commun. Netw., vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 563–575, Dec. 2017.
[17] M. C. Cos¸kun et al., “Efficient error-correcting codes in the short blocklength regime,” Phys. Commun., vol. 34, pp. 66–79, Jun. 2019.
[18] E. Arıkan, “From sequential decoding to channel polarization and back again,” 2019, arXiv:1908.09594.
[19] H. Yang, E. Liang, M. Pan, and R. D. Wesel, “CRC-aided list decoding of convolutional codes in the short blocklength regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 68, no. 6, pp. 3744–3766, Jun. 2022.
[20] E. Nachmani et al., “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Feb. 2018.
[21] X. Wu, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Decoding optimization for 5G LDPC codes by machine learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 50179–50186, 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEUNG et al.: LOW LATENCY ENERGY-EFFICIENT NEURAL DECODERS FOR BLOCK CODES

691

[22] E. Nachmani, Y. Bachar, E. Marciano, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “Near maximum likelihood decoding with deep learning,” in Proc. Int. Zurich Seminar Inf. Commun. (IZS), 2018, pp. 1–5.
[23] E. Nachmani and L. Wolf, “Hyper-graph-network decoders for block codes,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2019, pp. 2329–2339.
[24] S. Cammerer, T. Gruber, J. Hoydis, and S. Ten Brink, “Scaling deep learning-based decoding of polar codes via partitioning,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[25] W. Xu, X. You, C. Zhang, and Y. Be’ery, “Polar decoding on sparse graphs with deep learning,” in Proc. ACSSC, 2018, pp. 599–603.
[26] W. Xu et al., “Deep learning-aided belief propagation decoder for polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Emerg. Sel. Topics Circuits Syst., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 189–203, Jun. 2020.
[27] A. Caciularu, N. Raviv, T. Raviv, J. Goldberger, and Y. Be’ery, “perm2vec: Attentive graph permutation selection for decoding of error correction codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 79–88, Jan. 2021.
[28] S. Habib, A. Beemer, and J. Kliewer, “Belief propagation decoding of short graph-based channel codes via reinforcement learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 627–640, Jun. 2021.
[29] I. Be’Ery, N. Raviv, T. Raviv, and Y. Be’Ery, “Active deep decoding of linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 728–736, Feb. 2020.
[30] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, “On deep learningbased channel decoding,” in Proc. IEEE CISS, 2017, pp. 1–6.
[31] A. Bennatan, Y. Choukroun, and P. Kisilev, “Deep learning for decoding of linear codes—A syndrome-based approach,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, 2018, pp. 1595–1599.
[32] H. Kim, Y. Jiang, S. Kannan, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Deepcode: Feedback codes via deep learning,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 194–206, May 2020.
[33] M. Kim, W. Lee, J. Yoon, and O. Jo, “Building encoder and decoder with deep neural networks: On the way to reality,” 2018, arXiv:1808.02401.
[34] L. Huang, H. Zhang, R. Li, Y. Ge, and J. Wang, “AI coding: Learning to construct error correction codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 26–39, Jan. 2020.
[35] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[36] F. Vatta, A. Soranzo, and F. Babich, “Low-complexity bound on irregular LDPC belief-propagation decoding thresholds using a Gaussian approximation,” Electron. Lett., vol. 54, pp. 1038–1040, Jul. 2018.
[37] E. P. Kim and N. R. Shanbhag, “Energy-efficient LDPC decoders based on error-resiliency,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop SiPS, 2012, pp. 149–154.
[38] J. Jin and C.-Y. Tsui, “An energy efficient layered decoding architecture for LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1185–1195, Aug. 2010.
[39] A. Buchberger, C. Häger, H. D. Pfister, L. Schmalen, and A. G. I. Amat, “Pruning and quantizing neural belief propagation decoders,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1957–1966, Jul. 2021.
[40] W. Xu, X. Tan, Y. Lin, X. You, C. Zhang, and A. Y. Be’ery, “On the efficient design of neural networks in communication systems,” in Proc. ACSSC, 2019, pp. 522–526.
[41] B. Hanin, “Universal function approximation by deep neural nets with bounded width and ReLU activations,” Mathematics, vol. 7, no. 10, p. 992, 2019.
[42] G. Forney, Concatenated Codes (M.I.T. Press Research Monographs). Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1966.
[43] I. S. Reed and G. Solomon, “Polynomial codes over certain finite fields,” SIAM J. Appl. Math., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 300–304, 1960.
[44] M. Helmling et al. “Database of channel codes and ML simulation results.” 2019. [Online]. Available: www.uni-kl.de/channel-codes
[45] S. Koppula et al., “EDEN: Enabling energy-efficient, high-performance deep neural network inference using approximate DRAM,” in Proc. ACM MICRO, New York, NY, USA, 2019, pp. 166–181.
[46] Z.-G. Tasoulas, G. Zervakis, I. Anagnostopoulos, H. Amrouch, and J. Henkel, “Weight-oriented approximation for energy-efficient neural network inference accelerators,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 4670–4683, Dec. 2020.

[47] L. Lux. “Computational complexity of neural networks.” Accessed: Nov. 11, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://lunalux.io/computationalcomplexity-of-neural-networks/
[48] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
Cheuk Ting Leung (Student Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. degree in electronic and computer engineering from the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology in 2018. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, National University of Singapore. Her research interests mainly focus on the intersection of communication engineering and machine learning, in particular, deploying deep learning models on decoding errorcorrecting code problems.
Rajshekhar Vishweshwar Bhat (Member, IEEE) received the B.Tech. degree in electrical and communication engineering from the National Institute of Technology Karnataka Surathkal, Mangalore, India, in 2010, the M.Tech. degree from the Indian Institute of Technology Kanpur, Kanpur, India, in 2012, and the Ph.D. degree from the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department from the National University of Singapore, Singapore, in 2019. From 2012 to 2014, he was a Design Engineer with Analog Devices Inc., Bengaluru, India. He was also a Visiting Fellow with TIFR, Mumbai, India. He is currently working as an Assistant Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Dharwad, India. His research interests are in the areas of energy harvesting and low-latency communications, and applications of deep learning techniques for wireless communications.
Mehul Motani (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.E. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Cooper Union, New York, NY, USA, the M.S. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Syracuse University, Syracuse, NY, USA, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, National University of Singapore (NUS) and a Visiting Research Collaborator with Princeton University. Previously, he was a Visiting Fellow with Princeton University. He was also a Research Scientist with the Institute for Infocomm Research in Singapore, for three years, and a Systems Engineer with Lockheed Martin, Syracuse, NY, USA, for over four years. His research interests include information and coding theory, machine learning, biomedical informatics, wireless and sensor networks, and the Internet of Things. He was a recipient of the Intel Foundation Fellowship for his Ph.D. research, the NUS Annual Teaching Excellence Award, the NUS Faculty of Engineering Innovative Teaching Award, and the NUS Faculty of Engineering Teaching Honours List Award. He has served as the Secretary of the IEEE Information Theory Society Board of Governors. He has served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS. He has also served on the Organizing and Technical Program Committees of numerous IEEE and ACM conferences.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:32:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

