2023 IEEE International Symposium on Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB) | 979-8-3503-2152-4/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/BMSB58369.2023.10211558

Adaptive Quantized and Normalized MSA and Its Application for DTMB-A LDPC Codes
Xia An1, Chao Zhang2, Kewu Peng3, Zhitong He4, Jian Song5 Department of Electronic Engineering,
Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology Tsinghua University, Beijing, China
{1ax19, 4hezt20}@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {2z c, 3pengkewu, 5jsong}@tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract—In practical implementation, the input and intermediate signals of Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) message passing decoders are quantized into fixed-point messages with finite bit-width. The quantization operation with limited bit-width enhances the data throughput and reduces the computation and storage overhead of LDPC decoder, but confronts the problem of performance degradation. Existing improved algorithms of minsum algorithm (MSA) generally do not consider the effect of quantization, and thus lack the optimization of the quantization strategy. To fill this gap, we first propose adaptive asymmetric quantization strategy. Then, based on the proposed quantization strategy, combined with conventional adaptive normalization technique, we propose adaptive quantized and normalized MSA (AQNMSA), which significantly alleviates the performance degradation of fixed quantized and normalized MSA (NMSA) with negligible increment of computational complexity. Concurrently, we provide a novel look-up table design algorithm for AQNMSA based on the tool of multi-edge-type density evolution (METDE). Finally, we apply AQNMSA to DTMB-A LDPC codes with a very low quantization bit-width of 4 bits, and observe a superior threshold performance and lower error floor compared with its non-adaptive float-point counterparts.
Index Terms—DTMB-A, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, adaptive quantization, adaptive quantized and normalized min-sum algorithm (AQNMSA)
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], first introduced by Gallager in 1962, is a class of linear block codes featuring sparse parity-check matrix (PCM). Due to its good performance including Shannon-limit approaching performance under iterative belief propagation (BP) decoding, and encoding and decoding complexity proportional to code length, LDPC codes have been widely used in many communication and broadcasting standards such as the 5th-Generation New Radio (5G-NR) [2] [3], Advanced Television System Committee (ATSC) 3.0 [4], and Digital Terrestrial Multimedia Broadcast Advanced (DTMB-A) [5] [6].
The sum-product algorithm (SPA) [7] is usually used for iterative LDPC decoding algorithms, which could provide near optimal decoding threshold performance but involves tanh and atanh operations, and therefore requires relatively high computational resources and show sensitivity to the estimation error of channel-parameter. By comparison, the min-sum algorithm (MSA) [8] uses min instead of tanh and atanh
The corresponding author of this work is Chao Zhang.

operations, leading to low computation and storage overhead and robustness to the estimation error of channel-parameter, but degraded threshold performance.
To improve the threshold performance of MSA, the normalized MSA (NMSA) [9] is proposed, and it retains the robustness of MSA. However, the conventional NMSA uses fixed normalization factor, leading to a performance tradeoff between the decoding threshold and the error floor. Fan et al. propose an improved NMSA called adaptive NMSA (ANMSA) [10], which utilizes a preconfigured look-up table (LUT) between the normalization factor α and the unsatisfied check nodes rate p, also referred to as the check-ratio, and uses Monte Carlo simulation to guide the look-up table design.
The input signal and intermediate signals of practical LDPC decoders are generally quantized to fixed-point signals with limited bit-width. The conventional quantization strategy is symmetric and fixed, which means that the input signals and intermediate signals use the same quantization method with fixed quantization parameters, i.e., the quantization parameters unchanged throughout the decoding process. [11] Since the dynamic range of log-likelihood-ratio (LLR) changes significantly throughout the iterative decoding process, it is difficult to achieve good balance between the decoding performance and data throughput, which both greatly depends on the quantization bit-width.
To meet the growing demand for data throughput, the bitwidth of intermediate signals of LDPC decoder needs to be minimized. An important improvement on quantization strategy is to apply different bit-width to the input and output signals of the variable node unit (VNU) and check node unit (CNU), and choose the minimum bit-width as the message passing bit-width, e.g., binary message passing (BMP) decoding [12], ternary message passing (TMP) decoding [13], and quaternary message passing (QMP) decoding [14], etc. Another potential improvement on quantization strategy is adaptive quantization parameters including message bit-width [15], quantization intervals and reconstruction levels [16] [17], etc. Similarly, a look-up table is preconfigured for the adaptive quantization parameters.
However, the aforementioned improved quantization strategies show noticeable performance degradation when the quantization bit-width is extremely small, e.g. 1 or 2 bit. Besides, they generally adopt iteration number as the look-up table in-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:24:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

dex, which limits their capability in iterative decoding process owing to different codes, fading channel models and channel conditions. Thus, there is still a lot of room for improvement on high performance LDPC decoding algorithms with low quantization bit-width.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• We propose a novel adaptive asymmetric quantization strategy with quantization parameters closely following the iterative decoding process.
• Combining the proposed adaptive quantization with adaptive normalization in previous works, we propose adaptive quantized and normalized MSA (AQNMSA), which significantly alleviates the performance degradation of fixed quantized and normalized MSA (NMSA) with negligible increment of computational complexity.
• Aiming at the proposed AQNMSA, we provide a novel look-up table design algorithm based on the tool of multiedge-type density evolution (MET-DE) [18], which could simplify the design process of look-up table and provide accurate prediction of decoding performance, ensuring the effectiveness of the look-up table design result.
• We apply AQNMSA to DTMB-A LDPC codes with a very low quantization bit-width of 4 bits, and observe a superior threshold performance and lower error floor compared with its non-adaptive counterparts.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the novel adaptive asymmetric quantization strategy. Section III elaborates on the details of the proposed AQNMSA. Section IV provides the novel look-up table design algorithm for AQNMSA. Section V presents the simulation results of AQNMSA applied to DTMB-A LDPC codes. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. ADAPTIVE ASYMMETRIC QUANTIZATION STRATEGY
In iterative LDPC decoding algorithms, the extrinsic information in term of LLR are produced by the variable node unit (VNU) and the check node unit (CNU) and exchanged between them. The process in VNU and CNU of original MSA can be summarized as follows, in which vj and ci refers to the jth VNU and the ith CNU which are connected, M(j) refers to the set of CNU which are connected to the jth VN, N (i) refers to the set of VNU which are connected to the ith CN, LLRch,j refers to the a-priori LLR of the jth bit, and sgn(·) refers to the sign function:

In real implementation, the messages of LLRs are quantized with finite bit-width. Potential improvements of quantization strategy could be made on the adaptation of quantization parameter, i.e., how the quantization parameters adapt to the iterative decoding process. As for the quantization parameters, since it is inconvenient to change the message bit-width throughout the decoding process in hardware implementation, this parameter is usually determined in advance and remain constant through the decoding process. In contrast, quantization intervals and reconstruction levels have relatively high design flexibility, especially for the intermediate signals.
For the convenience of description, we define the quantization operation QUANw,T (·), in which LLR(w,T ) refers to the quantized message with bit-width w and quantization interval T , LLR refers to the float-point message before quantization, w refers to the quantized message bit-width, T refers to the quantization interval, and −2w−1 + 2 ≤ k ≤ 2w−1 − 2, k ∈ Z:

LLR(w,T ) = QUANw,T (LLR)


2w−1 − 1,  

2w − 3 T <LLR
2

 
= k,

2k − 1

2k + 1

T <LLR ≤

T

(3)



2

2





  

−

2w−1

+

1,

2w − 3

LLR ≤ −

T.

2

A. Asymmetric Quantization

We apply the asymmetric quantization strategy to design the bit-width of input and intermediate signals, which means that the input signals and intermediate signals use different quantization parameters. As the computation in VNU involves both LLRch, i.e., the input a-priori messages, and LLRc→v, i.e., the messages delivered to VNU from CNU, we choose the same bit-width for LLRch and LLRc→v. Thus, we determine wL as the message bit-width of CNU’s input and output, and wH as the corresponding message bit-width of VNU’s input and output.
Since the VNU and CNU utilize different input and output bit-width, there must be a function module between them to convert the high bit-width messages into the low bitwidth messages and vice versa. We propose the quantization conversion module (QCM), whose function is to transform a LLR with bit-width w1 and quantization interval T1 into a LLR with bit-width w2 and quantization interval T2. We define function QCM[w2, T1, T2](·), and it can be described by the predefined quantization function QUAN(·) accurately, where LLR(w,T ) refers to a LLR with bit-width w and quantization interval T :

VNU :

LLRvj →ci =

LLRci′ →vj + LLRch,j ,

i′ ∈M(j)\i

(1)

CNU :

LLRci→vj

=

min (
j′ ∈N (i)\j

LLRvj′ →ci

)

(2)

·

sgn(LLRvj′ →ci ).

j′ ∈N (i)\j

LLR(w2,T2) = QCM[w2, T1, T2](LLR(w1,T1)) = QUANw2,T2 (LLR(w1,T1) · T1). (4)
B. Check-ratio Based Adaptive Quantization Strategy
As for the adaptive method, we propose the check-ratio based adaptive quantization strategy, in which the quantization intervals of each iteration are determined by the checkratio, i.e., the unsatisfied check nodes rate, which is a direct

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:24:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LLRHv→c
(High Bitwidth)

QCM1

LLRLv→c
(Low Bitwidth)

LLRLc→v
(Low Bitwidth)

QCM2

LLRHc→v
(High Bitwidth)

check-ratiocur

wL ,T0 ,Tcur

wH ,Tcur ,T0

Quantization Parameters Lookup Table

Fig. 1. Adaptive Asymmetric Quantization Scheme

LLRHv→c
(High Bitwidth)

QCM

LLRLv→c

(Low Bitwidth)

LLRLc→v

QCNM

LLRHc→v

(Low Bitwidth)

(High Bitwidth)

wL ,T0 ,Tcur

wH ,Tcur ,T0 , αcur

check-ratiocur Quantization and Normalization Parameters Lookup Table

Fig. 2. Adaptive Quantization and Normalization Scheme

indication of the iterative decoding process. Since the bitwidth of VNU’s input and output is high, there is little room for optimization of the quantization intervals of VNU’s input and output. Therefore, we only apply adaptive quantization intervals to CNU’s input and output, and choose a fixed quantization interval T0 for VNU’s input and output, which is mainly determined by the maximum or minimum of LLR values.
In practical implementation, the quantization parameters look-up table (check-ratio, T ) is preconfigured and stored in the decoder. Before each iteration, the current unsatisfied check nodes rate check-ratiocur is calculated and served as the index of the look-up table for the decoder to attain the current quantization interval Tcur of CNU’s input and output. Then, wL, T0, and Tcur are send to QCM1 to convert VNU’s high bit-width output LLRHv→c into CNU’s low bit-width input LLRvL→c. Concurrently, wH , T0, and Tcur are send to QCM2. After the CNU process is done, CNU’s low bit-width output LLRLc→v are converted into VNU high bit-width input LLRHc→v. The check-ratiocur is initialized to 0.5 before the start of decoding process. The above quantization conversion process is illustrated in Fig. 1.
III. ADAPTIVE QUANTIZED AND NORMALIZED MIN-SUM ALGORITHM
To further improve the decoding performance and maintain the robustness, we combine the proposed quantization strategy with adaptive normalization, and propose the adaptive quantized and normalized min-sum algorithm (AQNMSA). Since we utilize check-ratio based look-up table for quantization parameters, it is also naturally to apply check-ratio based normalization factor. In this instance, besides the quantization parameters look-up table, the normalization factor look-up table (check-ratio, α) also needs to be preconfigured and stored in the decoder. Since the above two tables could use the same index, they can be stored in one table named quantization and normalization parameters look-up table (check-ratio, (T, α)).
A. Quantization Conversion and Normalization Module
As the normalization operation is carried out directly after the CNU’s operation, the quantization conversion module QCM2 can be modified accordingly to include the normalization operation. Thus, we propose the quantization conversion and normalization module (QCNM), whose function is to multiply a normalization factor α to a LLR with bit-width w1 and quantization interval T1, and then transform it into a

LLR with bit-width w2 and quantization interval T2. We define function QCNM[w2, T1, T2, α](·), and it can be described by the predefined quantization function QUAN(·) accurately, where LLR(w,T ) refers to a LLR with bit-width w and quantization interval T :

LLR(w2,T2) = QCNM[w2, T1, T2, α](LLR(w1,T1)) = QUANw2,T2 (LLR(w1,T1) · α · T1). (5)
Similar to the above quantization conversion process, the quantization conversion and normalization process is illustrated in Fig. 2.
B. Smooth Operation in Practical Implementation
Looking into the actual decoding process, we find that due to finite codeword length, the check-ratio shows great fluctuation. This phenomenon leads to the noticeable fluctuation of the quantization intervals Tcur and normalization factor αcur, which causes performance degradation. Thus, we introduce the smooth operation in order to stabilize the effect of quantization and normalization.
An efficient way to carry out the smooth operation is to apply a smooth factor sT and sα to Tcur and αcur respectively. Specifically, the previous quantization intervals Tpre and normalization factor αpre are stored and updated before each iteration. Denote the current look-up table output by Tout and αout, then Tcur and αcur are updated as follows:

Tcur

=

1 2sT

[(2sT

− 1)Tpre

+ Tout],

(6)

αcur

=

1 2sα

[(2sα

− 1)αpre

+ αout].

(7)

Note that unlike the original algorithm, the actual decoding

performance of AQNMSA with smooth operation could not be

precisely analysed via the tool of MET-DE. Nevertheless, the

smooth factors could be optimized via Monte Carlo simulation.

We will show in Section V that the smooth operation could

bring an extra performance gain and help to achieve capacity-

approaching performance.

IV. LOOK-UP TABLE DESIGN ALGORITHM BASED ON MULTI-EDGE-TYPE DENSITY EVOLUTION
We propose a look-up table design algorithm based on MET-DE for AQNMSA. Based on the channel model, input look-up table, and input signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) SN Rcur, MET-DE gives the exact prediction of AQNMSA’s asymptotic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:24:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1: Find Optimal LUT for AQNMSA

Input: channel model, check-ratio bit-width N ,

quantization intervals bit-width wT , normalization factor bit-width wα Output: targetLUT, {SN Rcur, BERcur} 1 Initialization: generate targetLUT and SN Rcur 2 BERcur ← MET_DE(targetLUT, SN Rcur) 3 do

4 while {SN Rcur, BERcur} ⊈ waterf all region do

5

fine-tune SN Rcur

6

BERcur ← MET_DE(targetLUT, SN Rcur)

7 end

8 [targetLUT, BERcur, targetLUTchanged] ←

FindBetterLUT(targetLUT,B E Rcur ) 9 while targetLUTchanged

decoding performance, i.e., the output asymptotic bit error ratio (BER). Thanks to the fast and precise analysis of METDE, we are able to tell the subtle difference in the decoding performance between AQNMSA with two slightly different look-up tables.
The proposed look-up table design algorithm is shown in Alg. 1. The target look-up table is referred to as the targetLUT. The {SN Rcur, BERcur} located in waterf all region generally means that the BERcur lies in (10−6, 10−2). To fine-tune SN Rcur means that if {SN Rcur, BERcur} lies to the left of waterf all region, then SN Rcur is scaled up by a small amount, otherwise it is scaled down.
The function FindBetterLUT(·) adjusts each parameter of the current look-up table sequentially or randomly, meanwhile retains the monotonicity of the adjusted look-up table, i.e., to ensure that T and α decrease monotonically as the check-ratio increases. If there exists at least one look-up table with whom the asymptotic decoding performance BERnew of AQNMSA provided by MET-DE is better than BERcur, the function returns a better look-up table, the corresponding BERnew, and TRUE, otherwise it returns the current look-up table, BERcur, and FALSE.
Since we utilize accurate MET-DE as the performance prediction tool, the computational complexity for look-up table design is significantly reduced compared to Monte Carlo simulation, and the near-optimal look-up tables together with the asymptotical decoding performance are obtained via the proposed low-complexity parameter design algorithm.
V. APPLICATION TO DTMB-A LDPC CODES
We apply the proposed AQNMSA and the corresponding look-up table design algorithm to DTMB-A LDPC codes under additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and Gray-labelled QPSK modulation specified by DTMB-A. The high bit-width wH of VNU’s input and output is 9, and the low bit-width wL of CNU’s input and output is 4. The the quantization intervals bit-width wT is 4, and the checkratio bit-width N and normalization factor bit-width wα is

TABLE I FINAL LOOK-UP TABLE

check-ratio · 2N 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

T /T0 α · 2wα

15 12 11 9 8 7 5 5 30 30 29 29 29 28 28 27

check-ratio · 2N 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15

T /T0 α · 2wα

55433333 26 25 24 23 22 20 17 14

5. Note that we provide a set of parameters only to show that AQNMSA can achieve good decoding performance with very low quantization bit-width, and these parameters can be adjusted according to the practical needs for data throughput and decoding performance.
The final result of targetLUT is shown in Table I. For simple implementation, the fixed quantization interval of VNU’s input and output T0 is scaled to 1, and thus T is equivalent to the provided T /T0.
The simulation results of float-point SPA, proposed AQNMSA without smooth operation, proposed AQNMSA with smooth operation (sT = sα = 3), fixed quantized ANMSA (QANMSA) (T = 6, 12), fixed quantized NMSA (QNMSA) with optimal normalization factor (α = 0.8125, T = 6, 12), and float-point NMSA with optimal normalization factor (α = 0.8), under code rate 1/2, code length 61440, QPSK modulation, and AWGN channel, is shown in Fig. 3. From the simulation results, we can find that the threshold performance of fixed quantized NMSA deteriorated dramatically compared to float-point NMSA, and a high error floor is observed at the same time. The fixed quantized ANMSA could improve the threshold performance of fixed quantized NMSA, but still fails to balance the threshold performance and error floor. The proposed AQNMSA achieves good threshold performance, with only 0.2 dB loss compared to the threshold of float-point SPA, and also shows low error floor simultaneously.
The simulation results of float-point SPA, proposed AQNMSA without smooth operation, proposed AQNMSA with smooth operation (sT = sα = 3), and float-point NMSA with optimal normalization factor (α = 0.8), under 3 code rates specified by DTMB-A, i.e., CR = 1/2, 2/3, 5/6, code length 61440, QPSK modulation, and AWGN channel, is shown in Fig. 4. From the simulation results, we can find that AQNMSA with the proposed look-up table is superior to the optimal floatpoint NMSA, and closely approachs the threshold of floatpoint SPA under 3 codes rates. Therefore, the AQNMSA could be applied to multiple code rates and achieve good threshold performance and low error floor at the same time, which validates its universality.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we first propose check-ratio based adaptive asymmetric quantization strategy, which is independent from iteration number and compatible with multiple code rates. Then, we combine the proposed quantization strategy with check-ratio based adaptive normalization, and further propose AQNMSA, which significantly improves the threshold

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:24:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

100 10-2 10-4

SPA AQNMSA without smooth AQNMSA QANMSA T=6 QANMSA T=12 QNMSA T=6 QNMSA T=12 NMSA

BER

10-6

10-8

0.6

0.8

1

1.2

1.4

1.6

1.8

SNR(dB)

Fig. 3. Simulation results of SPA, AQNMSA, fixed quantized ANMSA (QANMSA), fixed quantized NMSA (QNMSA), and float-point NMSA under code rate 1/2, QPSK modulation, and AWGN channel.

100

10-2

CR=1/2

10-4

CR=2/3

10-6

SPA AQNMSA without smooth AQNMSA optimal NMSA
CR=5/6

BER

10-8 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 SNR(dB)
Fig. 4. Simulation results of SPA, AQNMSA, and float-point NMSA under 3 code rates, QPSK modulation, and AWGN channel.

performance of fixed quantized NMSA. We also propose a look-up table design algorithm for AQNMSA based on MET-DE tool, which could attain good design results with low design complexity, thanks to the capability of accurate asymptotical decoding performance prediction from MET-DE tool. Finally, we apply AQNMSA with a very low quantization bit-width of 4 bits to 3 code rates of DTMB-A LDPC under AWGN channel and Gray-labelled QPSK modulation, and the proposed AQNMSA shows a better threshold performance and lower error floor compared to float-point NMSA with optimal normalization factor, which indicates that AQNMSA can achieve good balance between computational complexity and decoding performance.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Key Re-
search and Development Program of China under Grant
2021YFA0716602.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] 3rd Generation Partnership Project, “Technical specification group radio access network; nr.; multiplexing and channel coding (release 16), 3gpp ts 38.212 v16. 5.0 (2021-03),” 2021.
[3] F. Li, C. Zhang, K. Peng, A. E. Krylov, A. A. Katyushnyj, A. V. Rashich, D. A. Tkachenko, S. B. Makarov, and J. Song, “Review on 5G NR LDPC Code: Recommendations for DTTB System,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 155 413–155 424, 2021.
[4] K.-J. Kim, S. Myung, S.-I. Park, J.-Y. Lee, M. Kan, Y. Shinohara, J.-W. Shin, and J. Kim, “Low-density parity-check codes for atsc 3.0,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, 2016.
[5] J. Song, C. Zhang, K. Peng, J. Wang, C. Pan, F. Yang, J. Wang, H. Yang, Y. Xue, Y. Zhang, and Z. Yang, “Key technologies and measurements for dtmb-a system,” IEEE Transactions on Broadcasting, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 53–64, 2019.
[6] C. Zhang, K. Peng, Z. He, Y. Xue, and H. Yang, “High robust broadcasting over dtmb-a with low-rate ldpc codes,” China Communications, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 192–201, 2022.
[7] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kotter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” European Transactions on telecommunications, vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 513–525, 1995.
[8] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, 1999.
[9] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, 2002.
[10] L. Fan, C. Pan, K. Peng, and J. Huang, “Adaptive normalized minsum algorithm for ldpc decoding,” in 2013 9th International Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2013, pp. 1081–1084.
[11] J.-S. Lee and J. Thorpe, “Memory-efficient decoding of ldpc codes,” in Proceedings. International Symposium on Information Theory, 2005. ISIT 2005., 2005, pp. 459–463.
[12] G. Lechner, T. Pedersen, and G. Kramer, “Analysis and design of binary message passing decoders,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 601–607, 2012.
[13] E. B. Yacoub, F. Steiner, B. Matuz, and G. Liva, “Protograph-based ldpc code design for ternary message passing decoding,” in SCC 2019; 12th International ITG Conference on Systems, Communications and Coding, 2019, pp. 1–6.
[14] F. Steiner, E. Ben Yacoub, B. Matuz, G. Liva, and A. G. i. Amat, “One and two bit message passing for sc-ldpc codes with higher-order modulation,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 37, no. 23, pp. 5914–5925, 2019.
[15] M. Geiselhart, A. Elkelesh, J. Clausius, F. Liang, W. Xu, J. Liang, and S. t. Brink, “Learning quantization in ldpc decoders,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2208.05186, 2022.
[16] S. Kim, G. E. Sobelman, and H. Lee, “Adaptive quantization in min-sum based irregular ldpc decoder,” in 2008 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), 2008, pp. 536–539.
[17] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Min-sum decoder architectures with reduced word length for ldpc codes,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 105–115, 2010.
[18] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern coding theory. Cambridge university press, 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:24:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

