Decoder Optimised Progressive Edge Growth
Algorithm
C. T. Healy and R. C. de Lamare
Department of Electronics
University of York
York, UK, YO10 5DD
Email: cth503@york.ac.uk, rcdl500@ohm.york.ac.uk
AbstractŌĆöA novel construction for irregular low density parity
check (LDPC) codes based on a modification of the Progressive
Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm is presented. The edge placement
procedure of the PEG algorithm is enhanced by the use of the
Sum-Product decoder in the design of the parity-check matrix.
The proposed algorithm, like the PEG algorithm, is highly flexible
in block length and rate. The codes constructed by the methods
presented are tested in the AWGN channel and significant
performance improvements are achieved. The flexibility of the
proposed decoder optimisation operation in its application to
PEG-based construction methods is then demonstrated by its
use in modifying the Improved PEG (IPEG) extension to the
PEG algorithm to achieve further performance gains.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are a class of
capacity approaching codes first introduced by Gallager [1].
Along with turbo codes, they are among the best-performing
codes currently known. Key to practical implementation of
LDPC codes was the development of the graphical interpre-
tation of the parity check matrix, now known as the Tanner
graph [2]. Luby et al. [3] extended the concept of LDPC codes
to the irregular case, showing that by allowing varied row
and colulmn weights, performance can be improved. In [4],
Richardson et al. provided an analytical tool, density evolution
(DE) for identifying the optimal degree distribution of these
irregular LDPC codes under certain conditions.
For DE, a notable assumption is that the decoding neigh-
bourhood of a given variable node (VN) is tree-like [4].
This has implications when applying the degree distributions
provided by DE in the construction of practical finite-length
codes. The tree-like assumption is true in the case of infi-
nite length codes and the assumption approximately holds
for codes with large block length. However, for codes of
medium to short length this assumption is not verified. As
a consequence, the assumption of independence of messages
passed under belief propagation/sum-product decoding breaks
down and so performance suffers.
Given a degree distribution pair which is optimal in terms
of density evolution, the challenge in constructing practical
short to medium length LDPC codes is then to mitigate the
effects on performance of the failure of the independence
assumption. This failure manifests as cycles in the Tanner
graph of the code. It is known that the girth, the length
of the shortest cycle present in the graph of the code, has
a significant effect on code performance. For regular codes,
the number of independent messages passed in SPA decoding
is proportional to the girth of the code [1]. Consequently, a
number of code construction methods aim to produce codes
of large girth. From the promising results of a number of
early heuristic approaches for girth conditioning on randomly
generated codes, this was seen to be an effective method
for improving performance and further effort was invested
in finding methods to produce codes of large girth. Among
those algorithms capable of producing LDPC codes of highest
performance is the Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm
[5]. Given the code dimensions and variable node degree
distribution, this algorithm constructs the parity-check matrix
(PCM) of an LDPC code through an edge by edge progression,
maximising the local girth at each placement. This results in
practical length codes with relatively large overall girth and
with particularly large girth in the left-hand subgraph of the
codes. Large girth in the left-hand subgraph is of particular
value when, as is specified for the PEG algorithm, the variable
node degree sequence is presented in non-decreasing order
as this eliminates damaging short cycles among low-weight
variable nodes. The codes produced by the PEG algorithm ex-
hibit improved performance compared to random construction
methods [5].
Another approach to the problem of constructing good
finite length LDPC codes is to focus on connectivity of the
graph rather than its girth [6]. In this case, given a particular
degree distribution pair, graphs are constructed by progressive
random column generation, with each column being analysed
to ensure it provides a prescribed level of connectivity among
any cycles which may be created. By ensuring a higher level
of connectivity among the cycles present in the Tanner graph
of the code, their negative effect on code performance under
SPA decoding is reduced. This is because a greater number
of extrinsic messages are passed between the two decoding
stages of the SPA decoder. For each randomly generated
column, the measure of connectivity which is defined to be the
978-1-4244-8331-0/11/$26.00 ┬®2011 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Approximate Cycle EMD (ACE) metric, an approximation of
the Extrinsic Message Degree (EMD) of the cycles created.
Codes generated by this method are shown to outperform
those generated by random construction [6] but are in turn
outperformed by PEG constructed codes.
The performance achieved by the ACE-based codes of Tian
et al. [6] described above clearly demonstrated the validity
of the connectivity concept for LDPC Tanner graphs, and
convenient calculability of the ACE metric naturally lent
itself to incorporation into the PEG algorithm, specifically at
the edge placement stage of the construction method when
a number of edges are equivalent in terms of local girth.
A number of modifications to the PEG algorithm based on
this metric demonstrate excellent performance, including the
Improved PEG (IPEG) algorithm [7] and the Generalized ACE
Constrained PEG algorithms [8] [9].
In this work we propose an approach to improve the design
of PEG-based techniques by employing the sum product
algorithm (SPA) in a decoder optimisation stage during PEG
construction of the PCM of the code. This decoder optimi-
sation stage is carried out prior to edge placement when a
number of edges are found to be equivalent according to the
metrics of choice. In the case of the original PEG algorithm,
this would be the case when a number of candidate check
nodes are at equal maximum distance from the variable node
of interest, and so would each result in the creation of a cycle
of the same length, the greatest possible under the current
graph settings. The proposed modification provides a method
to compare these equivalent nodes and to choose the node
which will give the best performance under SPA decoding.
This modification is quite flexible in that it can be applied to
PEG-based construction method. This is shown for the case
of IPEG construction, where the set of candidate check nodes
are pruned according to the ACE metric introduced in [6].
The decoder optimisation (DO) operation is then applied in
the case where there is more than one surviving node. These
modifications to the PEG and IPEG algorithms are called the
DOPEG and DOIPEG algorithms, respectively.
The rest of this paper is arranged as follows: Section II pro-
vides the definitions and notation used in the rest of the paper.
In Section III the proposed decoder optimised modifications
to the PEG and IPEG algorithms are presented. Section IV
contains simulation results for the proposed algorithms and a
discussion of the performance. Section V concludes the paper.
II. DEFINITIONS AND NOTATION
The LDPC code is specified by its sparse PCM H:
H = [InŌłÆk P]
(1)
where InŌłÆk is the identity matrix of size (n-k) and P is an
(n-k)-by-k matrix. Then the generator matrix for the code is
G:
G = [PŌĆ▓ Ik]
(2)
The variable node degree sequence Ds is defined to be the
set of column weights of the PCM H as designed, and is
prescribed by the variable node degree distribution ╬╗(x) as
described in [4]. Ds is arranged in non-decreasing order.
The PEG algorithm, upon which the work presented herein
is based, constructs the PCM by operating progressively on
variable nodes to place the edges required by Ds. The VN
of interest is labeled vj and the candidate check nodes are
individually referred to as ci. The PEG algorithm chooses a
check node ci to connect to the variable node of interest vj by
expanding a subgraph from vj up to maximum depth l. The set
of check nodes found in this subgraph is denoted N l
vj while
the set of check nodes of interest, those not currently found
in the subgraph, are denoted N lvj. For the PEG algorithm, a
check node is chosen at random from the minimum weight
check nodes of this set. This is the set upon which the DO
operation is performed in the DOPEG modification, and upon
which the ACE metric comparison is performed in the IPEG
modification.
III. DECODER OPTIMISED PEG AND IPEG ALGORITHMS
Given a set of candidate check nodes, as provided by the
original PEG algorithm after the minimum check node degree
criterion has been applied, or by the IPEG algorithm after the
minimum check node degree and ACE metric criteria have
been applied, the decoder optimisation stage is carried out in
order to choose the candidate check node which will provide
the best performance.
For each candidate check node ci the candidate code is
formed, the PCM for which is simply the graph under the
current setting but with an edge in the position [ci,vj] where
vj is the variable node of interest. Then for each candidate
code, the generator matrix is formed according to the equations
(1) and (2). Following this, each candidate code is used in
encoding a preset number of random message vectors. The
codewords produced are subjected to additive white Gaussian
noise (AWGN) over a range of values of signal-to-noise ratio
(SNR) and the candidate PCM is used to decode through log-
domain SPA decoding. The performance of each candidate
code is evaluated and the code which provides the best
performance indicates which candidate check node to choose
for edge placement.
A. Description of Metric Calculation
For each candidate code and at each value of SNR, a
prescribed number of randomly generated message vectors
are encoded and soft-input/soft-output decoding is performed
on noise-corrupted versions of these codewords. The output
vector of the decoder is then a vector of bit log-likelihood
ratios (LLRs) corresponding to the bits of the transmitted
codeword. For each output vector, the magnitude of each bit
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
H
Nlvj
Min(wc(Nlvj))
ci
Length
Rate
Ds
H
Length
Rate
Ds
Gtest
Channel
SPA, Htest
Decoder Optimisation Operation
DOPEG
metric
Max(DOPEGmetric(Nlvj))
Nlvj
ci
╬®vj
PEG Algorithm
DOPEG Algorithm
Subtree to Depth l
Subtree to Depth l
Minimum Weight CN Operation
No. of
Instances
No. of
Decoder
Iterations
Fig. 1.
PEG and DOPEG block diagrams
LLR is taken. If the LLR is converging to the correct value,
this magnitude is multiplied by +1, otherwise it is multiplied
by -1. The entries of this corrected vector are then summed and
these sums are accumulated over the number of transmitted
codeword vectors. This process is repeated at each SNR value
and for each candidate code. This results in a matrix of metric
vectors corresponding to the performance of each candidate
code (and thus each candidate check node) over the chosen
range of SNR values. As the soft-output SPA decoder will
produce larger convergence at higher SNR values, this metric
matrix must be normalised at each SNR point in order that the
higher end of the SNR range is not weighted to have greater
significance in the final choice of check node. The normalised
metric vector is then simply summed for each candidate and
the largest value indicates the candidate which provides the
best performance over the SNR range specified.
B. Pseudocode for the DOPEG Algorithm
1) Note: In the pseudocode of Table I, the section between
the grey dashed lines constitutes the DO operation. Before
the first dashed line, the pseudocode merely implements the
beginning of the PEG algorithm as described in [5] and the
DO operation simply replaces the ŌĆśminimum check nodeŌĆÖ
operation carried out on the candidate check node set, N lvj,
supplied by the PEG algorithm.
C. DOIPEG Extension to the DOPEG Algorithm
As was described in the introduction, the IPEG [7] modi-
fication to the PEG algorithm exhibits improved performance
thanks to its utilisation of the graph connectivity concept of
[6]. This is implemented by pruning the set of candidate check
nodes returned by the subgraph expansion of the PEG algo-
rithm, removing candidates which have inferior connectivity.
TABLE I
For j = 1 to n
For k = 1 to Ds(j)
If k == 0
choose candidate at random from minimum weight
CNs of the Tanner graph under the current graph setting.
Else
expand tree under current setting s.t. the cardinality
of N l
vj stops increasing but is less than m or N lvj ╠Ė= Ōłģbut
N l+1
vj
= Ōłģ
Then
If j < m + 1
choose candidate at random from minimum
weight CNs among N lvj
Else
For p = 1 to length(N lvj)
1) Form matrix Htest which is the constructed H matrix
under the current graph setting up to column vj, the
current column of interest, with a 1 in the position
[N lvj(p),vj].
2) Use Htest to encode a message and decode in the
presence of noise over a range of SNR values using
soft-input soft-output log-domain SPA decoding.
3) Compute metric, described above, from the soft-
output vectors of the SPA decoder.
End For
Choose the candidate with the highest metric,
place edge in this position.
End If
End If
End For
End For
As will be seen in section IV, the DOPEG algorithm
provides significant performance improvements over the PEG
algorithm in the short to medium length. However, the decoder
optimisation stage is relatively costly in terms of computation
and, as already discussed, the IPEG effectively utilises the
ACE metric to reduce the number of candidate check nodes
while improving performance. With this in mind, investiga-
tions were made into whether the IPEG algorithm returned a
candidate check node set after the ACE pruning stage with car-
dinality greater than one on a regular basis. It was determined
that this happens regularly enough to allow advantageous use
of the DO stage previously described.
The operation of the DOIPEG is as described above in the
pseudocode for the DOPEG algorithm, except that the set of
candidate check nodes which the DO operation is carried out
on is the set of nodes which has first been pruned according to
the expanded subtree operation of the PEG algorithm, followed
by the ACE metric comparison of the IPEG algorithm. In other
words, each candidate check node which is compared in the
DO stage has equal maximum possible distance from vj under
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
H
Nlvj
Min(wc(Nlvj))
ci
Length
Rate
Ds
H
Length
Rate
Ds
Gtest
Channel
SPA, Htest
Decoder Optimisation Operation
DOPEG
metric
Max(DOPEGmetric(Nlvj))
Nlvj
ci
╬”vj
IPEG Algorithm
DOIPEG Algorithm
Subtree to Depth l
Subtree to Depth l
Max(

vp
(wvp ŌłÆ2))
╬®vj
Max(

vp
(wvp ŌłÆ2))
Minimum Weight CN
Operation
ACE Metric
Calculation
ACE Metric
Calculation
Fig. 2.
IPEG and DOIPEG block diagrams
the current graph setting and has equal maximum connectivity
to the rest of the graph as defined by the path ACE metric.
D. Pseudocode for the DOIPEG Algorithm
In Table II, the pseudocode for the combined ACE metric
and DO operations of the DOIPEG modified algorithm is
presented. The section of pseudocode below replaces the
section of pseudocode between the dashed lines in Table I
to provide the full DOIPEG pseudocode.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The performance of the proposed decoder optimised modi-
fications to the PEG and IPEG algorithms was evaluated for
a number of short block length LDPC codes.
We consider the rate-1/2 codes which are constructed to
have the density evolution optimised variable node degree
distribution with maximum VN degree 8, described by
╬╗1(x) = .30013x + .28395x2 + .41592x7
(3)
presented in [4] [Table I].
For the codes to be constructed, the additional constraint
was placed on the variable node degree sequence that the
number of weight-2 VNs be smaller than the number of check
nodes. This ensures that no cycles exist which are composed
only of weight-2 VNs, a particularly damaging case. This
constraint is discussed in [4].
In Fig. 3, the performance of the code constructed by
the DOPEG algorithm is compared to that of a code with
identical parameters which was generated by the original PEG
algorithm [5]. Both codes are of length 250 and rate-1/2.
For the DOPEG code, in the decoder optimisation stage for
candidate selection, the optimisation was carried out over the
TABLE II
If j < m + 1
choose candidate at random from minimum weight CNs
among N lvj
Else
For each CN cq ŌłłN lvj
calculate ACEcq = 
vp
(wvpŌłÆ2) where the summation
is taken over all VNs vp in the cycle
created placement of edge connecting cq to vj.
End For
then the set ╬”vj is the set of CNs cm s.t. ACEcm Ōēź
ACEcq for all cq ŌłłN lvj
If the cardinaltiy of ╬”vj == 1
the check node ╬”vj is connected to vj
Else
For p = 1 to length(╬”vj)
1) Form matrix Htest which is the constructed H matrix
under the current graph setting up to column vj, the
current column of interest, with a 1 in the position
[╬”vj(p),vj].
2) Use Htest to encode, decode over SNR range with
SISO SPA decoder.
3) Compute metric, described previously, from the soft-
output vectors of the SPA decoder.
End For
End If
End If
2.5
2.75
3
3.25
3.5
3.75
4
4.25
4.5
10
ŌłÆ7
10
ŌłÆ6
10
ŌłÆ5
10
ŌłÆ4
10
ŌłÆ3
10
ŌłÆ2
SNR (dB)
BER
Length 250 RateŌłÆ1/2
 
 
PEG
DOPEG
Fig. 3.
BER curves for DOPEG and PEG codes
SNR range [1:.05:2] and 5 message vectors were randomly
generated for transmission per SNR point. The log-domain
SPA decoder in the optimisation stage was operated to a
maximum of 50 iterations. The performance of the codes is
compared for the AWGN channel with BPSK modulation. For
each point in the plot, a minimum of 100 block errors and 500
blocks were transmitted. Fig. 3 demonstrates that the code
constructed by the DOPEG achieves significant gain over the
PEG generated code in the error floor region.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
3.5
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
4
4.1
4.2
10
ŌłÆ7
10
ŌłÆ6
10
ŌłÆ5
10
ŌłÆ4
SNR (dB)
BER
Length 250 RateŌłÆ1/2
 
 
Instances: 1
Instances: 2
Instances: 5
Fig. 4.
The effect of varying the number of message vectors in the DO stage
3
3.25
3.5
3.75
4
4.25
4.5
10
ŌłÆ8
10
ŌłÆ7
10
ŌłÆ6
10
ŌłÆ5
10
ŌłÆ4
10
ŌłÆ3
SNR (dB)
BER
Length 250 RateŌłÆ1/2
 
 
DOIPEG
IPEG
PEG
Fig. 5.
BER curves for DOIPEG, IPEG and PEG codes
In Fig. 4, the effect of varying the number of instances of
message vector in the DO stage is investigated. A number of
codes of length 250, rate-1/2 codes with VN degree distri-
bution defined by 3 are generated by the proposed DOPEG
algorithm. The codes were generated for the same SNR range
and with the decoder in the DO stage operating to the same
maximum number of iterations, both the same as for the
code of Fig. 3. The codes were generated with 2, 3 and 5
instances of message vectors transmitted at each SNR point
in the decoder optimisation.
In Fig. 5, the performance of the length 250, rate-1/2 code
generated by the DOIPEG is compared to that of the code
generated by the IPEG [7] with the same parameters. Both
codes have VN degree distribution defined by 3. The DO
stage was operated with the same parameters as the DOPEG
code of Fig. 3, namely SNR range [1:.05:2], a maximum
of 50 decoder iterations and 5 instances of random message
vectors. From Fig. 5 we see that the DOIPEG provides an
improvement in performance when compared to the IPEG
in the error floor region. It is noted that the gain achieved
by applying the DO stage in this case is not as great as is
displayed in the comparison in Fig. 3 of DOPEG and PEG
construction methods. This is eas expected, for the DOIPEG
modification the DO operation is carried out on a smaller set
of candidate check nodes which are optimum in the sense of
the ACE metric. Additionally, when operating on the set N lvj
provided by the original PEG algorithm, as in the DOPEG
and IPEG modifications, it is highly likely that there is a large
degree of crossover between candidate CNs which are optimal
in the sense of the ACE metric and those which are found to
be optimal by the DO operation.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper the concept of decoder optimisation for candi-
date check node selection in PEG-based construction methods
was presented. The proposed method is flexible in length and
rate, and is applicable to both regular and irregular LDPC
codes. The DO operation was described and applied to the case
of the original PEG algorithm, where significant performance
gains were shown.
The flexibility and promise of the DO operation was then
demonstrated by applying it to the IPEG construction method,
producing the DOIPEG modification. Given length, rate and
VN degree distribution, the IPEG is capable of producing
among the best performing LDPC codes currently available.
It was demonstrated that the DOIPEG achieves a performance
gain over the IPEG in the error floor region.
Particularly noteworthy is the fact that, while the DO
modified construction methods require increased computation
compared to the PEG and IPEG methods, this cost applies
only in the code construction phase. During transmission, the
codes generated provide improved performance with no extra
cost in computational complexity.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, ŌĆ£Low-density parity-check codes,ŌĆØ IRE Trans. Inform.
Theory, vol. 20, pp. 21ŌĆō28, Jan. 1962.
[2] R. M. Tanner, ŌĆ£A recursive approach to low complexity codes,ŌĆØ IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533ŌĆō547, Sep. 1981.
[3] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrohalli, D. Spielman, and V. Ste-
mann, ŌĆ£Practical loss-resilient codes,ŌĆØ Proc. 29th Annual ACM Symp.
Theory of Computing, pp. 150ŌĆō159, 1997.
[4] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, ŌĆ£Design of
capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,ŌĆØ IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619ŌĆō637, Feb. 2001.
[5] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, ŌĆ£Regular and irregular
progreesive edge growth tanner graphs,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50,
no. 1, pp. 21ŌĆō28, Jan. 2005.
[6] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, ŌĆ£Selective
avoidance of cycles in irregular ldpc code construction,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1242ŌĆō1247, Aug. 2004.
[7] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, ŌĆ£Improved progressive-edge-growth
(peg) construction of irregular ldpc codes,ŌĆØ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8,
no. 12, pp. 715ŌĆō717, Dec. 2004.
[8] D. Vukobratovic, A. Djurendic, and V. Senk, ŌĆ£Ace spectrum of ldpc codes
and generalized ace design,ŌĆØ IEEE Conference on Comms., ICC, pp. 665ŌĆō
670, Jun. 2007.
[9] D. Vukobratovic and V. Senk, ŌĆ£Generalized ace constrained progressive
edge-growth ldpc code design,ŌĆØ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 1, pp.
32ŌĆō34, Jan. 2008.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:24:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
