2011 10th IEEE/ACIS International Conference on Computer and Information Science
Implementation of LDPC encoding to DTMB standard based on FPGA

Xiang Ouyang
School of Information Science and Technology Xiamen University Xiamen, China 303oyx@163.com

Changcheng Ruan, Lingxiang Zheng*
School of Information Science and Technology Xiamen University Xiamen, China
lxzheng@xmu.edu.cn

Abstract—In this paper, an implementation of Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) encoder is introduced, which meets the demand of Chinese Digital Terrestrial Multimedia Broadcasting (DTMB) standard. A design of the LDPC encoder which uses a partially-parallel encoding structure based on the Shift Register Adder Accumulator (SRAA) circuit is studied according to the irregular quasi-cyclic characteristic of LDPC encoding specified by the standard. Then we use the FPGA to implement the design. The simulation and implementation results show that the design meets the requirement of DTMB standard and reduces the resource usage.
Keywords-LDPC codes; DTMB; SRAA circuit; partiallyparallel encoding
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes was firstly proposed by R. Gallager in his doctoral thesis [1], in 1962. It was not well concerned for the large cost of computation then. With the development of device technology, the advantages of LDPC codes become more and more obvious. Now it is widely used in optical communication, satellite digital video and audio broadcasting and other fields. In August 2006, China released its Digital Terrestrial Multimedia Broadcasting (DTMB) standard [2] which takes LDPC codes as a part of its channel encoding. To design an algorithm to meet the demand of DTMB standard has great practical meaning.
There are three algorithms to realize the LDPC encoding in general, SRAA-based serial LDPC encoding structure, SRAA-based parallel LDPC encoding structure and Twostage LDPC encoding structure [3][4][5]. Most researches are based on these algorithms. In [6] it presented a real-time LDPC encoder based on linear feedback SRAA-based serial architecture. Although the encoding structure is fitting to the LDPC encoder design, the resource usage of it is relatively large. In [7] it proposed a plan of single-rate optimization and triple-rate combination. The design improves the resource utilization, but the encoding speed is still relatively slow. Hence a partially-parallel encoding structure based on the Shift Register Adder Accumulator (SRAA) circuit is studied in this paper. This encoding structure can balance and optimize the encoding speed and resource utilization. Moreover, the FPGA is employed to implement the design.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The LDPC
*Corresponding author

encoding in DTMB standard is introduced in section II. In section III, we present the algorithm of QC-LDPC encoding. In section IV, the implementation of LDPC encoder based on DTMB is illustrated. Finally section V provides a summary of our conclusions.

II. LDPC ENCODING IN DTMB STANDARD

LDPC codes is a member of block codes. The processing

of encoding can be consider as a matrix multiply between

information sequences and generator matrix. Taken M as the

message sequences and G as generator matrix, and the result

of encoding C can be given by:

C = M ×G

(1)

The parity-check matrix of LDPC codes is a sparse

matrix. The matrix only has a small number of non-0

elements (for binary LDPC codes, the non-0 element is the

element 1), other elements are 0 [8]. Because of the sparsity

of parity-check matrix, the complexity of LDPC encoding

and decoding methods can be reduced greatly, and achieve a

higher performance [9]. Let H be the parity-check matrix of LDPC codes. H is
called quasi-cyclic parity-check matrix if matrix H can be

divided into several sub matrices which are cyclic. The

LDPC codes is called quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes when H is the format listed previous. The LDPC codes

specified in DTMB standard is QC-LDPC, where the generator matrix G is given in (2). The sub matrices Gi,j are all square matrix, which are cyclic matrices, O and I are zero

matrix and identity matrix respectively. The implementation

of LDPC encoding can be greatly simplified if the generator

matrix is Quasi-Cyclic.

G

=

⎜⎛ ⎜

G0,0 G1,0

⎜ ⎜⎝⎜

G

#
k −1,0

G 0,1 G1,1
#
G k −1,1

" " Gi, j "

G 0,c−1 G1,c −1
#
G k −1,c−1

I O # O

O I

" "

O O

⎞⎟ ⎟

(2)

#% O"

# I

⎟ ⎠⎟⎟

Where Gi,j, I, O are all b×b matrix. The DTMB standard

specified three coding efficiencies for LDPC, where the

parameters of three coding rate in (2) are given in Table I.

TABLE I.
Rate 0.4 0.6 0.8

THE PARAMETERS OF 3 CODING RATE SPECIFIED IN DTMB
SYSTEM

k

c

b

24

35

127

36

23

127

48

11

127

978-0-7695-4401-4/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE

235

DOI 10.1109/ICIS.2011.44

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. THE ALGORITHM OF LDPC ENCODING
As stated above there are three algorithms to realize the QC-LDPC encoding. Information bits are put into encoder serially in serial encoding structure, and these information bits are put into encoder parallelly in parallel encoding structure and two-stage encoding structure. The resource usage of these three algorithms are listed in Table II. Since of the balance between encoding speed and resource usage, the SRAA-based serial QC-LDPC structure is employed in our design.

TABLE II.

COMPARISON OF THREE ENCODING SCHEMES [3]

Encoding scheme SRAAbased serial SRAAbased parallel Two-stage

Encoding speed kb
cb
b

Flip-flops 2cb

XOR-gates AND gates

cb

cb

kb

kb-1

kb

tb

O(c2b)

0

The central part of the SRAA-based serial QC-LDPC

structure is SRAA circuit. The rest of this section will

discuss it in detail. The scheme of SRAA circuit is

illustrated in Figure 1. The processing of SRAA circuit is: z Let a = (a0 , a1,..., ak−1 ) be the information bits to
be encode, where ai = (ai,0 , ai,1,..., ai,b−1 ) for 0 ≤ i
≤ k-1, i.e. the information sequence is divided into k different cells with equal length of b. z The codeword for the information sequence a is v = aG = ( p0 , p1,..., pc−1, a) where pi, 0 ≤ i ≤ c-1, is the i-th portion of parity-check bits. It follows from v = aG that

pi = a0G0,i + a1G1,i + ... + ak−1Gk−1,i

(3)

The computation of (3) can be retrieved step by step by

simply cyclic shift, logic AND and logic exclusive OR in

circuit,

if

the

generator

matrix

is

Quasi-Cyclic.

Let

g (0) i, j

be

the 1st row vector of matrix Gi,j, Gi,j is cyclic if the i-th row

vector

of

Gi,j

is

the

i-th

cyclic

shift

of

g

(0) i, j

,

where

0

≤i≤ b-1.

Then the result of alGm,k is given in (4):

al Gm,i

=

a g (0) l,0 m,i

+

al ,1

g (1) m,i

+

...

+

al ,b−1

g

(b−1) m,i

(4)

The i-th portion of encoding result is given in (3). As

discussed above, the structure of SRAA circuit can be easily

retrieved as illustrated in Figure 1. The procedure of SRAA

circuit is:

1)

Firstly,

g (0) i, j

is

set

into

the

feedback

shift

register

(SR) B, and the content of register A is set to zeros.

2) When the first information bit a0,0 is shifted into

the

SRAA circuit,

the

product

of

a g (0) 0,0 0,i

is formed

at the output of the AND gates, and the sum of

a g (0) 0,0 0,i

and

register

A is

restored

into

register

A.

3) The next information bit a0,1 is then shifted into the SRAA circuit as well as register B is shifted once

to the right, repeat the step 2) until the end of the

sub matrix (i.e. iterate b times).

4)

Reload

the

g (0) 1,i

to

register

B,

and

repeat

step

2)

and step 3), until the entire information sequence

has been shifted into the encoder. The content of

register A is the result of (3), which should be

latched for final output.

5) Repeat above steps until the multiply the whole

generator matrix.

Figure 1. SRAA circuit schematic.[3]
IV. THE IMPLEMENTATION OF LDPC ENCODER BASED ON DTMB
As discussed in the previous section, there are c SRAA circuits needed for SRAA-based serial QC-LDPC encoding structure given a generator matrix as (1). The scheme of this SRAA-based serial QC-LDPC structure is illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2. SRAA-based serial QC-LDPC structure.

236 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The DTMB standard specified three coding efficiencies for LDPC, where the c (i.e. the number of column matrices) is 35, 23 or 11 respectively as list in Table I. It's not appropriate to employ 35 SRAA circuit in FPGA for consuming a large amount of Slices resource. It's also not suitable to employ only 1 SRAA circuit in FPGA and works 35, 23, 11 times successively to encode a code word as well, for the data rate requirement (the max data rate is up to 32Mbps). Take the balance between encoding speed and resource usage into consideration, finally 12 SRAA circuits are employed in FPGA, and they work 3, 2, 1 times successively to encode a code word in parallel, and it is called partially-parallel encoding structure in general. A. System scheme
The scheme of LDPC encoder designed for DTMB system is illustrated in Figure 3. The main modules of the encoder are SRAAs module, input buffer module, generator matrix storage module, output buffer module and control module. B. Sub-modules
z input buffer module: the module output the information bits to SRAAs module and output buff module under the control of control module.
z SRAAs module: the module consists of 12 SRAA circuits, which receive the information bits one by one, and output the results of encoding one by one. Be aware of that, they works 3,2,1 times for one code word encoding depending on code rate respectively.
z generator matrix storage module: the module loads the generator matrices to SRAAs module under the control of control module.
z output buffer module: the module stores the intermediate results of SRAAs and receives the data from input buff. Finally, combines the information bit and parity-check bits into a code word for next module.
z control module: the module is the timing control module which coordinates the timing of other modules.

The scheme of QC-LDOC encoder is illustrated in Figure 4 and the interface of LDPC encoding module is list below.
Figure 4. Scheme of QC-LDOC encoder.
z in_data: Input information bits. z in_data_rdy: Input enable, active high. z clk: System clock. z rst: Reset signal. z in_mode: Select signal for different rate. z out_data: Serial output of encoder. z out_data_rdy: Output enable, active high.
The XST synthesis tool is employed for the synthesis base on Xilinx's ISE platform by using xc4vlx100 FPGA as its device. The resource usage and timing report is illustrated in Figure 5 and Figure 6 respectively.
The results show that the encoder occupied 3909 Slices, 5119 Slice Flip Flops and 24 FIFO16/RAMB16s, which is only 7%, 5% and 10% of the total logic resources units.
The highest payload in DTMB is 32.486Mbps, thus the minimum programming clock should be 48.73MHz [4]. It can be clearly seen from Figure 6 that our design meets the requirements perfectly. Our system can support a maximum operating clock frequency of 208.106 MHz which is better than other existing design.

Figure 5. Recourse usage of design.

Figure 3. The system scheme.
C. Performance Analysis

Figure 6. Timing report of the design.

237 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

D. Simulation result The modelsim platform is employed for the simulation.
The simulation waveform is illustrated in Figure 7, and the codeword can be easily derived by multiply between information bits and generator matrix G in matlab. Compare the results between modelsim simulation and matlab simulation in Figure 8, the simulation results are exactly the same.
(a) rate=0.4
(b) rate=0.6
(c) rate=0.8 Figure 7. Simulation waveform of modelsim.

V. CONCLUSION
This paper analyzes the FPGA implementation method of QC-LDPC encoder based on DTMB standard. For the feature of quasi-cyclic encoding matrix, the partiallyparallel encoding structure based on the SRAA circuit is adopted to optimize the encoder in the encoding efficiency and resource utilization. Whole design is synthesized on Virtex4 xc4vlx100 device. The result shows that it can satisfy the design requirement in terms of encoding speed and resource usage in practical use.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions. This work is supported by the Major Science and Technology Special Project of Fujian Province, China (No. 2009HZ0003-1); the Ph.D. Programs Foundation of Ministry of Education of China (No. 20100121120020).
REFERENCES
[1] R.G. Gallager, “ Low density parity check codes”, IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp.21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] Framing structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for Digital Television Terrestrial Broadcasting System. GB20600-2006. Aug. 2006.
[3] Zongwang Li, Lei Chen, Lingqi Zeng. “Efficient Encoding Of QuasiCyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”. IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol.54, pp.71 - 81, 2006.
[4] Tao Tao, Feng Fan,Ying Hu. FPGA design of LDPC encoding and decoding based on Digital Terrestrial Multimedia Broadcasting. University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. Apr. 2009.
[5] Bo Chen, Weile Zhu. LDPC encoding and decoding design based on Digital Terrestrial Multimedia Broadcasting. University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. Apr. 2008.
[6] Haiyun Peng, Jianmin Xu, Peng Wang, Wei Liu, “Real-time LDPC Encoder Design for DTMB”. Video Engineering. vol.34, 2010.
[7] Shuwen Yang, Kewu Peng, Changyong Pan, “Design and Optimization of LDPC Encoder in DTMB Transmitter”. Video Engineering. vol.32, 2008.
[8] Bernard Sklar. Digital Communications Fundamentals and Applications. Publishing House of Electronics Industry. Oct. 2006.
[9] Anderws K, Dolinar S, Thorpe J. “Encoders for block-circulant LDPC codes”. International Symposium Proceedings on Information Theory. vol.4, pp.2300-2304. 2005.

Figure 8. Comparison between matlab simulation and modelsim simulation( rate=0.4).

238 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

