2011 International Conference on Multimedia and Signal Processing

A 16Gbps Real-Time BF-based LDPC Decoder for IEEE 802.3an Standard
Jui-Hui Hung1 and Sau-Gee Chen2
Institute of Electronics & Department of Electronics Engineering National Chiao Tung University Hsinchu, Taiwan
e-mail: 1paholisi.nctu@gmail.com 2sgchen@mail.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract—Existing LDPC decoders are mostly based on belief-propagation (BP) algorithms for high decoding performance but demand high hardware cost, especially for applications with very high throughputs. In order to alleviate the problem, this work proposes a high-throughput LDPC decoder based on the much simpler bit-flipping (BF) algorithms, for the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code adopted in the IEEE 802.3an standard. High decoding performances and low iteration numbers are achieved by introducing a strategy of flipping low-correlation bits and an additional syndrome vote scheme. As a result, the decoding performance is comparable to the most popular BP-based min-sum algorithm (MSA) but with much lower computational complexity. Besides, the decoder achieves high hardware utilization with real-time processing capability. Synthesized with UMC 90nm process, the decoder chip area, throughput and average power dissipation are 1.22M gates, 16Gbps and 315mW, respectively, at 500MHz clock rate.
Keywords-channel coding; ldpc; hardware design; 802.3an standard
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] were proposed in the early 1960’s, which have been shown to achieve BER performances very close to the Shannon bound, when operated with iterative belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm and sufficiently long code length [2]. The sum-product algorithm (SPA) [3], a realization of the BP algorithm, has the best decoding performance among the existing BP-based algorithms. However, it is impractical for applications, due to its high complexity. In comparison, the popular min-sum algorithm (MSA) [4] and modified MSA [5] (all simplified from SPA) have lower complexities than SPA, but with comparable performances. Besides, to meet the demanding requirements of high-throughput applications, fullyparallel LDPC decoders [6], [7] were proposed. However, those decoders are very area consuming, even though they use simplified SPA algorithms (i.e., MSA and modified MSA).
In contrast to the mentioned BP-based algorithms (i.e., SPA, MSA and modified MSA), the bit-flipping (BF) algorithm in [1] adopts a much simpler bit-update scheme and hence has a much lower complexity than BP-based algorithms. However, its performance is much lower than all those BP algorithms. To remedy this problem, some improved BF techniques have been proposed, including the weighted bit-flipping (WBF) algorithm [8], the

modified WBF (MWBF) algorithm [9], and the improved MWBF (IMWBF) algorithm [10]. Among those BF algorithms, IMWBF algorithm has the best decoding performance, with comparable complexity to those other BF algorithms. Nevertheless, all of them are still significantly inferior to SPA and MSA in terms of performance.
All the mentioned BF-based algorithms only flip one bit in each iteration and demand high iteration counts to obtain satisfactory decoding results. To speed up decoding process, recently we proposed a multi-bit flipping decoding algorithm, called LCCBT-MBF algorithm [11] which achieves high decoding performances with low iteration counts. Since LCCBT-MBF algorithm has much lower complexities than the BP-based SPA and MSA algorithms, it is suitable for applications with very high throughputs. In this work, the algorithm has been applied to the decoder hardware realization of the (2048, 1723) RS-LDPC code [12] adopted in 10-Gbps IEEE 802.3an standard [13]. Such high data rate poses a stringent challenge to the LDPC decoder design. The proposed decoder not only satisfies the high throughput requirement, but also has much smaller chip area compared with the existing BP-based decoders.
II. THE LCCBT-MBF ALGORITHM [11]
LCCBT-MBF algorithm combines the most effective IMWBF algorithms with our two recently proposed performance-enhancement algorithms, termed Culprit Bit Test (CBT) algorithm [14] and Low-Correlation Multi-Bit Flipping (LCMBF) algorithm [15]. To speed up the LDPC decoding process, the most intuitive and simplest way is to flip more than one bit in each iteration, as done in LCMBF algorithm. Overall, LCCBT-MBF algorithm not only improves the BER performance, but also significantly reduces the iteration number of the existing BF decoding algorithms.
The basic idea of the CBT algorithm is to find out and flip those potential culprit error bits which have more 1s than 0s in its associated syndrome bits of the syndrome vector. By doing so, the syndrome vector will get closer to the zero vector than before. One can simply identify a culprit bit by checking its reliability [8] and conducting the majority vote operation on the bit’s associated syndrome bits.
By flipping more than one bit in each iteration, there is risk that one may induce additional error bits and propagate the errors to later iterations [15]. LCMBF algorithm further reduces the error probability by

978-0-7695-4356-7/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE

63

DOI 10.1109/CMSP.2011.19

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:19:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

separating all the bit nodes into three different categories so that those culprit bits with low correlation are flipped, as briefly explained below.
Tanner graph [16] is a convenient way of demonstrating the LDPC decoding mechanism between the message bits (i.e., the bit nodes) and the syndrome vector bits (i.e., the check nodes). Note that a check node is linked to all those bit nodes participating in its syndrome bit generation, while a bit node is linked to all those check nodes it participates in the generation of their syndrome bits. Hence, through Tanner graph, one can define three different kinds of correlation relationships between any two bit nodes as: (1) Unconnected: there is no any path connecting these two bit nodes (through some check nodes). (2) Indirectly connected: these two bit nodes are connected by a path, and the path passes through more than one check node in between these two bit nodes. (3) Directly connected: these two bit nodes are connected by a path, and the path passes through only one check node in between these two bit nodes.
It can be easily shown [15] that if two bit nodes are unconnected, then flipping any one of them will not affect the syndrome bit result of the other bit node. According to intensive simulations [15], for any two indirectly connected bit nodes, there will be roughly similar result to that of the unconnected case. However, for any two directly connected bit nodes, by flipping one of these two bit nodes, it will be very likely increasing the number of 1s in the syndrome vector than before and cause severe growth of error bits.
As a result, we can treat those unconnected and indirectly connected bits as low-correlation (LC) bits and particularly perform multi-bit flipping on those bits in the decoding process without causing error divergence. That is the key idea of the LCMBF algorithm.
III. THE PROPOSED LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE
To achieve 10Gbps throughput of the IEEE 802.3an standard, a fully-parallel decoder architecture is proposed, as shown in Fig. 1. It is based on LCCBT-MBF algorithm and the parity-check matrix H specified in the IEEE 802.3an LDPC code. The code is regular, with column weight and row weight of 6 and 32, respectively. According to simulation results, data with 4-bit long (including two fractional bits), denoted as (4,2), is enough for the proposed decoder to meet the BER performance requirement. The decoder consists of 32 Input Processing Units (IPU), an Index generator, 384 Check Node Units (CNU), 2048 Bit Node Units (BNU), 2048 Flipping-Bit Decision Units (FBDU), 2048 Priority Decoders (PD), a Threshold Detector (TD), a Syndrome Test Unit (STU), a Max-8 sorter, a Multi-bit Flipping Unit (MBFU), Correlation Detector (CD) and several register sets. Besides, the decoder receives 32 channel values at a time similar to the architecture in [7] due to the limitation on the I/O pad number in IC packaging. Hence, decoding of a codeword should be finished in 2048/32=64 clock cycles.
An IPU outputs an one-bit hard-decision value and absolute value of its input channel value (with (4,2) data

format). The index generator assigns each of the 2048 channel value an 11-bit index. All the 32 IPUs’ 1-bit harddecision values will be stored in one of the two codeword register sets (i.e., Creg set 1 and Creg set 2) for later syndrome test. The combined 15-bit index and absolute value of each received channel value are then passed to its connected CNUs through interconnection network 1 (ICN1). A CNU module finds the minimum and second minimum values from all its input absolute channel values. Besides, all the absolute channel values of the current codeword for decoding are temporarily stored in one of the two absolute channel value register sets (i.e., ACV Reg set 1 and Reg set 2) until the whole decoding process for the codeword is finished. While the current codeword is being decoded, the oncoming channel values and hard-decision code bits of the next codeword are simultaneously delivered to the other register set. With this overlapped and pipelined design, the proposed architecture can achieve 100% hardware utilization.
STU computes the syndrome vector based on the harddecision bit values from IPUs. It consists of 384 32-input exclusive-or gates; each gate executes an assigned check node operation and generate one of the 384 syndrome bits in the syndrome vector. STU then passes those syndrome bits to proper BNUs through interconnection network 2 (ICN2). Each BNU is responsible for the computation of a specific bit node’s reliability based on the corresponding channel values and syndrome bits it receives, and then the computed reliability is sent to its associated FBDU. A FBDU receives all the syndrome bits associated with a message bit and decides if the bit is a culprit bit or not by using the mentioned concept of CBT algorithm.
Next, for each decoding iteration, the decoder needs to form MBF set and expel all the culprit bits which are directly connected to the bits in MBF set as discussed before. After that, those bits in MBF set will be flipped and the member bits in MBF set will be renewed for the next decoding iteration. In forming MBF set, the decoder has to rank all the bit nodes according to their reliabilities. However, directly sorting 2048 channel values will take enormous time. Instead, this work proposes three special designs to collectively solve the problem in an efficient way, namely, the function units of PD, Threshold Detector and Max-8 Sorter, as will be detailed later.
The indices of the sorted bit nodes will then be transmitted to the Correlation Detector (CD) for further classification of their connectivity, and MBFU will decide which bit should be flipped first. The decoded bits will be outputted when they satisfy the test constraint of zero syndrome vector, i.e., HxT = 0 , or when the iteration number exceeds a defined maximum iteration number. Structures of those mentioned major functional units are discussed below.
A. Function units of the proposed architecture
1) Check Node Unit Since IMWBF algorithm [10] has high performance, it
is adopted here for demonstration purpose, without loss of

64 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:19:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1. The proposed LDPC decoder architecture for IEEE 802.3an standard.

generality. In this algorithm, given a check node cj, and the bit node set B(c ) composed of all the bit nodes
j

connected to cj, all c j nodes, j = 1 to 384, need to

compute the following so called reliability information

which will be sent to all

b i

nodes ∈ B(c j )

|

y

|min −i ,

j

=

min
bk ∈B(c j )\bi

yk

,

bi ∈ B(c j ),

(1)

where yk is the received channel value of the kth bit (i.e., bit

node

bk

),

B(c ) j

is

the

set

containing

all

the

bit

nodes

connected

to

cj,

and

B(c j ) \ bi

represents

the

set

B(c ) j

excluding b . According to (1), a p-input CNU (i.e., the i
check node is connected to p bit nodes) also needs to generate p outputs for all its connected bit nodes.
In realizing (1), it is well known that a CNU only needs to find out the minimum and second minimum absolute values of its received channel values, and then pick one of these two values, depending on if the particular bit node’s message value is equal to the minimum value or not. Hence, the output number of a CNU can be reduce to two (i.e., the minimum and second minimum values) and use an index information to indicate which input has the minimum value. For convenience, we term this design as “two-minimum CNU” (i.e., TM-CNU for simplicity).
For high throughput requirement, we propose a new CNU architecture which can get a shorter delay time and smaller hardware cost than conventional TM-CNU

structures [17]. The new design is basically based on Priority Decoders (PD). A PD decodes its n-bit input value to an expanded 2n-bit output format, called PD representation, which has zero bit values in all its 2n bit positions, except the value of ‘1’ in the Mth bit position, where M is magnitude of the n-bit input.
In the proposed CNU architecture, for finding out the minimum and second minimum values form a set of several n-bit values, we firstly use PDs to decode each element in the set, and then the minimum and second minimum values can be obtained by detecting the lowest and second lowest positions of ‘1’ from the bitwise OR operation result of all PD outputs. The operations are realized by a minimum decoder (Min1_Dec) and a second minimum decoder (Min2_Dec) which find out the minimum and the second minimum values, respectively. However, if there are two (or more) elements in the set have the same values with the minimum value, the second minimum value should be equal to the minimum value. Hence, we employ an Equality Checker (EC) to deal with this condition.
2) Bit Node Unit Based on IMWBF algorithm, a BNU computes the

following total reliability E i

of bit node bi by using all

the reliability information (1) it receives from its

connecting check nodes:

∑ E = i

(2s j

−1)⋅ |

y |min −i, j

−α ⋅

y i

, i = 1 to

2048,

(2)

j:c ∈C ( b )

j

i

where C(bi ) denotes the set of check nodes connected to

65 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:19:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

bi , and

s j

is the

jth syndrome bit value. The optimal

factor α is 0.4 based on simulations for the (1723, 2048)

RS-LDPC code. However, α is set to 1/2 which basically

does not need any hardware cost in realization. Since the

column weight of H is 6, there are 7 inputs (including

channel value) to each BNE equation (2), which can be

realized by using only three 2-input adders and one 2-

input subtractor in each BNU.

3) Flipping Bit Decision Unit (FBDU) A FBDU simply executes the majority vote operation

Maj(s , s , ..., s ) on its input syndrome bits associated

i ,1 i ,2

i ,6

with bit node bi . Note that all the 2048 bit nodes execute their own majority vote operations in parallel. If a bit node passes majority vote (i.e., there are more 1s than 0s), then

Maj(s , s ,..., s ) = 1 and the input reliability will be

i ,1 i ,2

i,6

directly outputted, otherwise Maj(s , s ,..., s ) = 0 and

i ,1 i ,2

i ,6

the output will be set to the minimum 6-bit 2’s

complement value ‘100000’ so that the bit will never be

flipped. Note that the output of FBDU will be converted to

PD output representation by PD (as shown in Fig. 1) for

helping the threshold detection.

4) Threshold Detector

Threshold detector will generate the threshold required

in Max-8 sorter. The threshold detector must ensure that

there are exactly 8 inputs larger than the generated

threshold. Since the bit position value with value ‘1’ in a

PD output is simply equal to the PD input magnitude value,

the threshold can be simply decided by counting the

number of ‘1’ of all inputs starting from the most

significant bit positions to the least significant bit positions,

till the count of 8 is reached; and TD will output the magnitude corresponding to the 8th count, which is exactly

the threshold.

5) Max-8 Sorter

Instead of ranking all the 2048 reliability values Ei s received from FBDU with extremely high complexity, we propose a novel sorting architecture (as shown in Fig. 2), named Max-8 sorter which finds out those 8 bit nodes with the largest reliabilities from all 2048 bit nodes. As such, the sorter complexity is significantly reduced. In the
architecture, first, all 2048 Ei values (in PD output representations) are compared against a threshold value (also in PD output representation) received from threshold detector, in the comparators represented by those shaded circles that enclose the comparison sign ‘>’. After that, all inputs will be converted back to normal fixed-point 2’s complement representation by using the Priority Encoder (PE) for the consideration of low hardware cost. Then each converted output will be appended an additional flag bit to its LSB, and its index information will also be prepended
to its MSB. The flag is set to ‘1’ if the Ei is larger than the threshold; otherwise, it is set to ‘0’. The comparison operations is intended to quickly tag the 8 largest

reliability values from the 2048 values for later sorting operations with low complexity. Together with the flag bits and index information, all the 2048 reliability values are sent to the Flag-Bit Tree Sifter (FBTS). FBTS quickly compares all the 2048 flag bits by using binary tree comparators and outputs the 16 largest results (each
contains its own reliability value Ei , bit node index and
flag bit) to the following Flag-Bit Sifter (FBS). Then the final 8 maximum outputs are obtained from these 16 results. Due to page limit, the detail of FBS operation is omitted here.
6) Correlation Detector According to LCCBT-MBF algorithm [11], we can get
the LC bit nodes by excluding the directly connected bit nodes for low complexity consideration. To find out the directly connected bit nodes, the correlation detector first converts the inputs (i.e., the index of sorted bit nodes) to PD representations with PDs. Next, the threshold detector will sends the decoded index of the bit node with the largest reliability (i.e., the first flipping bit) to the correlation network, and the correlation network will set the bit value of a bit in a 2048-bit word to one, where the bit position corresponds to the index of a directly connected bit nodes. Since the input of the correlation network has been converted to PD representation, the correlation network can be simply implemented with an interconnection network and some OR gates. Then, all the other decoded inputs (also in PD representations) will do bitwise AND operations with the output of correlation network to check their relationships with the first flipping bit. Finally, the correlation detector passes the results to the multi-bit flipping unit for finding out the specific bits to flip.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
Based on simulations, the optimal iteration number of the decoder is 16. Its fixed-point performance with Nfb = 2 and Nitr = 16 is presented in Fig. 3. In the figure, we observe that LCCBT-MBF algorithm improves the BER performance by about 3dB over the best known IMWBF algorithm and its BER performance is comparable to modified MSA [5]. The synthesized results of the proposed architecture uses SynopsysTM Design Compiler and the cell library based on the UMC CMOS 90-nm process technology. The total gate count of the proposed design is about 1.22M. Since BF-based algorithms are much simpler than BP-based algorithms, the synthesized decoder’s critical path is very short, and the maximum clock rate can reach 500MHz. As such, the decoding throughput of the proposed design is 16Gbps which significantly exceeds the requirement of the IEEE 802.3an 10GBase-T standard. The synthesized power consumption is 315mW.
The comparison results of the proposed LDPC decoder and other designs with (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code are shown in TABLE I. Compared with the existing designs for (2048,1723) RS-LDPC code [6], [7], the proposed LDPC decoder has much smaller chip area.

66 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:19:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 2. The architecture of Max-8 Sorter.

100

BPSK

modified MSA Nitr=2

10-2

modified MSA Nitr=8

IMW BF Nitr=16

IMW BF with LCCBT-MBFNitr=16 10-4

BE R

10-6

10-8

10-10

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

SNR

Figure 3. The (4,2) fixed-point performance of the LCCBT-MBF algorithm combined with IMWBF and modified MSA algorithms at Nfb
= 2 and Nitr = 16, for 802.3an standard.

TABLE I.

COMPARISON OF THE PROPOSED LDPC DECODER WITH
THE EXISTING ARCHITECTURES

Quantization bits Technology (nm) Clock rate (MHz) Iteration number
Throughput Gate count Power dissipation
(mW) Decoding performance (SNR @ BER=10-6)
Architecture

[6] 5 180 52 N/A 7.1G ≈3.38M N/A
N/A
Split-row(a) fully parallel

Decoding algorithm

MSA

[7] 4 90 250 8 16G 2.23M
N/A
N/A
Bit-serial fully
parallel Modified
MSA

Proposed 4 90 500 16
16G 1.22M 315@0.9V
5.3
Fully parallel
LCCBT-MBF

V. CONCLUSION
A high-throughput LDPC decoder, based on our recently developed LCCBT-MBF decoding algorithm, for IEEE 802.3an 10G standard has been proposed. The synthesized decoder throughput is about 16Gbps which is much higher than the requirement 10Gbps of the IEEE 802.3an standard. Since the decoding algorithm is a BFbased algorithm, it has much lower complexity than the

designs based on the most popular BP-based decoding algorithms. As a result, with comparable decoding performance, the realized decoder has higher performance than existing BP-based decoders, in terms of speed, area and power consumption.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported in part by the grants NSC 982220-E-009 -029 and NSC 98-2219-E-009 -010, Taiwan.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes,” Electronics Letters, vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. Mackay, “Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399431, Mar. 1999.
[4] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D. M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementation of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM’01, vol. 02, pp. 1036-1036E, Nov. 2001.
[5] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 583-587, no.3 Mar. 2002.
[6] T. Mohsenin and B. M. Baas, “High-Throughput LDPC Decoders Using a Multiple Split-Row Method,” IEEE ICASSP, vol. 2, pp. II–13–II–16, Apr. 2007.
[7] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A 3.3-Gbps Bit-Serial Block-Interlaced Min-Sum LDPC Decoder in 0.13-μm CMOS,” IEEE CICC, pp. 459-462, 2007.
[8] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and, M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-Density Parity Check Codes Based on Finite Geometries: A Rediscovery and More,”IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 2711-2736, 2001.
[9] J. Zhang, M.P.C. Fossorier, “A Modified Weighted Bit-Flipping Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,”IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 165-167, Mar. 2004.
[10] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z.Shi, and Y. Chen, “An Improvement on the Modified Weighted Bit Flipping Decoding algorithm for LDPC Codes,”IEEE Commum., Vol. 9, No.9, pp.814-816, Sept. 2005.
[11] J. H. Hung and S. G. Chen, “A High-Performance MultibitFlipping Algorithm for LDPC Decoding,” IEEE Proceedings of ISIC, pp. 1-5, Dec. 2009.
[12] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “Construction of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Based on Shortened ReedSolomon Codes with Two Information Symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lettetters, No. 7, pp. 317-318, July 2003.
[13] Carrier Sense Multiple Access with Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications, IEEE Std. 802.3an, 2006.
[14] J. H. Hung and S. G. Chen, “An Efficient BF LDPC Decoding Algorithm Based on A Syndrome Vote Scheme,” IEEE Proceedings of APCC, pp. 1-5, Oct. 2008.
[15] J. H. Hung and S. G. Chen, “An Effective Multibit-Flipping Algorithm for LDPC Decoding,” IEEE Proceedings of ICSPCS, p.p. 15-17, Dec. 2008.
[16] R. Tanner, “A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 27, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
[17] C. C. Lin, K. L. Lin, H. C. Chang and C. Y. Lee, “A 3.33Gb/s (1200,720) low-density parity check code decoder,” IEEE Proceedings of ESSCIRC, pp.211-214, Sept. 2005.

67 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:19:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

