2011 18th International Conference on Telecommunications

An LDPC-based Improved Decoding Scheme for Distributed Video Codec

Bin Li, Yumei Wang, Qing Huang, Yu Liu
Key Lab of Universal Wireless Communications, Ministry of Education, School of Information and Communication Engineering, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications Beijing, China Email: ymwang@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract—Low-density Parity-Check (LDPC) code is widely used in distributed video coding (DVC) to realizing Wyner-Ziv (WZ) coding for its better performance than other channel codes. However, during the LDPC decoding process, most of DVC solutions do not make use of the video character to help decoding. In this paper, we propose an improved LDPC decoding scheme for DVC by utilizing the movement of the objects in the video sequence to partition different confidence areas for the side information (SI). The pixels in the SI correspond to different confidence areas, and the corresponding binary representations of the pixels will have different likelihood-ratio (LLR) initialization methods which are used to generate the LLR values for LDPC iterative decoding. The experimental results show that with the proposed decoding scheme the PSNR gain can reach up to 0.8 db without increasing the decoding complexity.
Keywords- distributed video coding; Likelihood-ratio(LLR); LDPC; confidence area
I. INTRODUCTION
In the conventional video coding architecture, the video encoder needs to make use of the video statistical character and to explore complex motion estimation and compensation solutions for better rate-distortion (RD) performance. As a result, the computing power of the encoder is typically 5 to 10 times more complex than that of the decoder. Therefore, this architecture is just well-suited for broadcasting or video-ondemand systems in which video sequences are compressed once but decoded for many times. However, with the development of multimedia techniques, this architecture has being challenged by some emerging applications such as wireless video surveillance, mobile camera phones, multimedia sensor networks, etc. In contrast with the conventional architecture, these new applications need an encoder with significantly lower complexity while permit a decoder with higher complexity.
Distributed video coding (DVC) can well fit for the requirements as mentioned above. It can shift the computing complexity form the encoder to the decoder with efficient compression and fully or partly exploit the video redundancy at the decoder only. From the information theory, the SlepianWolf (SW) theorem [1] states that in lossless source coding case it is possible to achieve almost the same rate by

independently encoding but jointly decoding two statistically dependent signals compared with jointly encoding and decoding. The Wyner-Ziv (WZ) theorem [2] extends the SW theorem to the lossy case and proves to be the key theoretical basis of DVC. However, there is still a significant compress efficiency gap in practical between the conventional video coding and DVC.
Basically, this gap is due to many specific aspects of DVC, such as the design of efficient WZ codec [3], the generation of side information (SI) frames [4], the estimation of correlation noise model (CNM) [5] and the bit-rate allocation [6]. Among these aspects, the design of WZ codec plays a key role to improve the overall system performance. In most of DVC solutions, such as [7] and [8], the authors convert the quantified coefficients of the WZ frame into their corresponding binary representations. Then, the same-position bits of the binary representations for the coefficients are used to construct a serial of bitplanes. Finally, every bitplane will be independently encoded and decoded with the WZ codec based on binary LDPC code. In [9], the authors propose to exploit a Q-LDPCbased Wyner-Ziv codec to encode two correlated non-binary sources. This codec can utilize the correlation of sources to achieve better performance, while hugely increasing the complexity of the system due to the utilization of non-binary LPDC. In these methods, decoding each bitplane independently will weaken the correlation between different bitplanes, and the system performance will be affected also. In [10], the authors propose an improved decoding scheme based on traditional LDPC WZ codec. It makes use of the decoded bitplanes as the prior information to help decoding the succeeding bitplanes to avoid correlation weakening and to enhance the RD performance of DVC without increasing decoding complexity.
In this paper, we propose an improved decoding scheme for DVC based on the decoding scheme in [10]. Considering the video inherent character, we set different confidence areas in the residual frame to partition the pixels in side information according to the movement of objects in the video sequence. The pixels corresponding to different confidence areas will have different likelihood-ratio (LLR) initialization methods for iterative decoding. Using our proposed decoding scheme, we can decrease the transmitted syndrome bits while guaranteeing the same rate-distortion performance.

This work is partially supported by the 111 Project (No.B08004), the major project of Ministry of Industry and Informationization of China (2009ZX03006-007 and 2010ZX03002-006), the National Science & Technology Pillar Program (2008BAH37B04), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
978-1-4577-0024-8/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
298

Figure 1. The improved architecture of DVC

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe in brief the improved architecture of DVC for our proposed decoding scheme. In Section III, we will expatiate on the implementation details of our decoding scheme. Then, we present our experimental results in Section IV. Finally, conclusions are presented in Section V.
II. THE IMPROVED ARCHITECTURE OF DVC
In this section, we propose an improved architecture of DVC for the improved decoding scheme. In this architecture, the main functionalities and the coding process will be described briefly in the following.
Fig. 1 illustrates the basic architecture of our proposed method, which works as follows. We adopt a fixed Group of Pictures (GOP=2) in this architecture, which means that the video frames are divided into odd (key) frames and even (WZ) frames. The odd frames are intra coded by using a traditional video coding approach like H.264/AVC, while the even frames are WZ coded [11].
At the WZ encoder, we adopt the 2M uniform scalar
quantization to partition the WZ frames. Then, the quantization coefficients are converted to their binary representations and a series of bitplanes are constructed by the same coefficient location bit of them. These bitplanes from the most significant bitplane (MSB) to the least significant bitplane (LSB) are encoded using a rate-compatible Low Density Parity Check accumulate (LDPCA) encoder [6]. For every encoded bitplane, the corresponding syndrome together with an 8-bit Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) is stored in the buffer and will be transmitted depending on the requirements of the decoder through the feedback channel.
At the WZ decoder, we adopt the adjacent decoded key
frames ( X B and X F ) to interpolate the side information [4]
and to estimate the residual frame R between the encoded WZ frame and the SI [5]. Subsequently, the residual frame R is sent to the “residual classification” unit for setting different confidence areas. Each point in the residual frame belongs to one confidence area. Simultaneously, with the estimated
residual frame R, we can obtain the CNM parameterα , which
will be sent along with the SI to the LDPCA decoder to calculate the LLR values for all bits in every bitplane with the

methods in [10]. Then, according to the corresponding points in R of the pixels in SI belonging to different confidence areas, the LLR values will be revised with our proposed scheme. Subsequently, the modified LLR values are viewed as the original inputs of LDPCA to proceed iterative decoding. During the decoding process, if the Hamming distance between the received syndrome bits and that calculated from the decoded bitplane is not equal to zero or the CRC sum is incorrect, it means that the bitplane can not be decoded successfully. Therefore, we will require more syndrome bits from the LDPCA encoder until the syndrome bits are enough for successful decoding. Finally, we can transmit as fewer syndrome bits as possible and thus improve coding efficiency and decoding performance.
III. THE IMPROVED DECODING SCHEME
In this section, we will describe in detail the specific realization steps of our improved decoding scheme based on that in [10]. Compared with the decoding scheme in [10], we propose to utilize the video inherent character to divide the points in the residual frame R into different confidence areas. According to the one-to-one correspondence between the points in R and the pixels in SI, the pixels corresponding to the different confidence areas will have different LLR initialization methods, and the binary representations of one pixel located in different bitplanes also have different LLR initialization methods. With these methods, we can update the LLR values obtained from [10] and send the modified LLR values to the LDPCA decoder for iterative decoding. The implementation process is shown in the following.
In Fig.1, “Frame Interpolation” unit is used to generate the SI and the residual frame R. In this unit, besides the forward and bidirectional motion estimation, we exploit a spatial motion smoothing method proposed in [4] to assist the SI generation for the WZ frame decoding. When we get the SI, the Laplacian distribution [12] is used to model the residual between the original WZ frame and the corresponding SI frame, which is shown in (1):

p [WZ

( x,

y)

−

SI

(

x,

y)]

=

α 2

exp ⎡⎣−α

WZ

(

x,

y)

−

SI

(

x,

y)

⎦⎤

(1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
299

Where p(.) represents the probability density function; the

( ) x, y is the location of the pixel in the WZ frame as well as

in the SI frame; and α is the parameter of the Laplacian

distribution defined by α =

2 , in which σ 2 is the variance σ2

of the residual frame R.

However, it is impossible and unrealistic to obtain the WZ frame at the decoder or get the SI frame at the encoder. Therefore, we adopt an online estimation method proposed in [5] to adaptively estimate the residual frame R at the decoder according to the following (2):

( ) R ( x, y ) = X F

x + dx , y + dy

f

f

−

XB

(

x

+

dx b

,

y

+

dy b

)

(2)

2

( ) Where

X B ( x + dxb , y + dyb )

and

X F

x + dx f , y + dy f

represent the backward and forward motion-compensated

( ) reference frames, respectively. ( dxb , dyb ) and dx f , dy f

correspond to the motion vectors for X B and X F reference
frames respectively, which can be acquired from the SI generation process. Taken as an estimate of the residual between the WZ frame and the SI, the R can express in what extent the two blocks in the reference frames are similar.

When we get the residual frame R, we can calculate the
corresponding Laplacian parameter α using the proposed method in [5]. After that, the α along with the SI frame is sent
to LDPCA decoder to calculate the LLR value for every bit of each bitplane. Then, the initialized LLR and the corresponding syndrome bits are utilized to proceed iterative decoding on the tanner graphs of LDPCA. Therefore, our proposed decoding scheme can be divided into two parts: the LLR initialization and the iterative decoding.

⎧

R

=

⎪⎪ ⎨

R1 R2

if

(TB

≤T 1

)

( ) ∑ if

T 1

<TB

≤T 2

TB =

RB(i)

(3)

⎪

1≤i≤64

⎪⎩ R3 if (TB >T2 )

Where RB(i) corresponds to a point value in the block RB of the residual frame R. R1 , R2 and R3 are the three different confidence areas in the residual frame, which are used to differentiate the movement of the object in the block RB . If the
value of TB is smaller than the threshold T1 , it means the
object in the block is stationary or the movement of the object is translational, and the points in RB belong to the confidence
area R1 . If the movement of the object is not linear, such as
curving and zooming, the value of TB will be large and we need to define another threshold T2 . When the value of TB exceeds T2 , the points in the block RB belongs to the
confidence area R3 . Otherwise, it means that the movement of the object is relatively slow, and the corresponding points belong to R2 . For different confidence areas, we will exploit different methods to obtain the corresponding LLR values as inputs for the LDPCA decoder.
Step 2): Generate the original LLR values. Using the
obtained Laplacian parameter α and the SI, we can get the
original LLR values with (4), (5) and (6).

P (WZi

=

A|

SIi

=

B)

=

β

α 2

e−α

B−A

(0 ≤ A ≤ 255)

(4)

A. The LLR initialization for all bits in every bitplane
The value of LLR for one bit represents the probability of this bit equal to one or zero. The larger the absolute value of LLR is, the higher the probability is. In addition, the positive value of LLR represents the probability of one bit equal to zero, and the negative value of LLR corresponds to the probability of one bit equal to one. During the decoding process, the LLR values for all bits in every bitplane plays an important role to save coding rates and decrease iterative time. In our proposed decoding scheme, we will get it according to the following steps:
Step 1): Setting different confidence areas. After obtaining the residual frame R from (2), the R is sent to the residual classification unit and is partitioned into non-overlapped 8x8 blocks. All of points in these blocks are divided into three confidence areas using the (3) as follows:

Here, WZi and SIi denote two pixels at the same location
in the WZ frame and in the SI. A represents the value of WZi and B represents the value of SIi . The value of β is used to
make the sum of P (.) in the entire area of A (0 ≤ A ≤ 255)
equal to 1. Using (4), we can get the probability of WZi equal to A when the value of SIi is B. Thus, the probability of bi(k)
equal to 0 can be calculated with (5).

( ) ∑ ( ) P

b(k) i

=0|

bi(

b k−1) ( i

k−2)

...bi(1)

,

SIi

=B

=

P WZi =A| SIi =B

(5)

Where k is the index of bitplane and bi(k) represents the i-
[ ] th bit of the k-th bitplane. Let s1s2...s8 denotes the binary
representations of A , where s1 is the MSB and s8 is the LSB.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
300

In (5), the value of sk−1sk−2...s1 is equal to that of bi(k−1)bi(k−2)...bi(1) . As a result, the probability of bi(k) equal to 0 is constrained with the decoded bitplane bi(k−1)bi(k−2)...bi(1) . Using (4) and (5), we can get the LLR value of bi(k) with (6)
when the value of SIi is B:

( ( ) ) L(ik )

=

log

⎛ ⎜⎜⎝

1

P −

bi(k ) = P bi(k )

0 =

|

bi( k

b −1) (k i

−

2) ...bi(1)

,

SI

i

=

0

|

bi( k

b −1) (k i

− 2 ) ...bi(1)

,

SIi

B =

B

⎞ ⎟⎠⎟ (6)

Step 3): Verify the original LLR values according to the different confidence areas. With the obtained original LLR for all bits in every bitplane, we now can exploit the decoding method in [10] to decode every bitplane. However, subjected to
the estimated residual frame R and Laplacian parameter α ,
these calculated LLR values are not always precise. For the
points in the R1 and R2 , the values of the corresponding
pixels in SI are nearly equal to that in the WZ frame. Therefore, it is not necessary to exploit the obtained LLR values in step 2). We can replace them with a serial of larger fixed LLR for these binary representations of these pixels using the (7).

Step 1): transmit LLR information from the variable nodes to the check nodes. With the revised LLR values, we can transmit the LLR information to the check nodes using the (8).

∑ ϕ m i, j

=

LLRi

+

φ m−1 j′,i

(8)

j′∈V (i)\ j

Let LLRi denotes the calculated LLR value of one bit from

the

LLR

initialization

step.

ϕm i, j

corresponds

to

the

LLR

information transmitted from the i-th variable node to the j-th

check

node

when

the

iterative

time

is

m,

and

φ m−1 j ,i

represents

the LLR information transmitted from the j-th check node to

the i-th variable node at the (m-1)-th iteration. V(i) denotes the

degree of the variable node i . In addition, when we first

transmit the LLR information from the variable nodes to the

check nodes, the value of

φ0 j,i

is zero.

Step 2): transmit LLR information from the check nodes to
the variable nodes. When some check node j receives the
LLR values from all variable nodes connected to it, it can transmit the modified LLR information to these variable nodes using the (9).

⎧ ⎪

T3(k)

( ) if L(ik) <T3(k) i∈R1

LLRi(k)

=

⎪ ⎨

T4(k)

( ) if L(ik) <T4(k) i∈R2

(7)

⎪ ⎪⎩

L(ik)

others.

In (7), let LLRi(k) denotes the revised LLR value of the i-th
bit for the k-th bitplane. Considering different confidence areas, if the corresponding point in the residual frame R of one pixel
in the SI belongs to the confidence area R1 or R2 , we can
replace/update the original LLR value L(ik) with T3(k) or T4(k) when the L(ik) is smaller than T3(k) or T4(k) . Otherwise, we
will keep the LLR value unchanged. Generally, according to
the movement of objects, the points in R1 is more reliable than
that in R2 .As a result, the value of T3(k) is larger than that of T4(k) . For different bitplanes, the values of T3(k) and T4(k) are also different. From MSB to LSB, the values of T3(k) and T4(k)
decrease with the ascending index (i.e. k) of the bitplane.

B. The iterative decoding on tanner graphs of LDPC
After obtaining the modified LLR values for all bits in every bitplane, we will exploit it along with the corresponding syndrome bits to realize iterative decoding on the tanner graphs of LDPCA according to following steps:

( ) ∏ ⎛

φm j ,i

=

2 tanh−1 ⎜⎜⎝

1− 2sj

i′∈C(

j)\i

tanh

⎛ ⎜⎜⎝

ϕm i′, 2

j

⎞⎞ ⎠⎟⎟ ⎟⎠⎟

(9)

In (9), let

φm j,i

denotes to the LLR information transmitted

from the j-th check node to the i-th variable node at the m-th

iteration,

and

ϕm i′, j

represents

the

LLR

information

from

the

i-

th variable node calculated at the step 1). C( j) denotes the

degree of the check node j . s j corresponds to the syndrome value of check node j . With the (9), we can update the LLR

information at check nodes and transmit it to the corresponding variable nodes.

Step 3): Attempt to export the decoding result. According to the received LLR information from step 2) along with the
original LLR value LLRi from step 1), we can attempt to get the decoding results with (10).

⎧ 0,

bi

=

⎪⎪ ⎨

⎪

1,

∑ if LLRi +

φm j,i

≥

0

j∈V(i)

∑ if LLRi +

φm j,i

<0

(10)

⎩⎪

j∈V(i)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
301

Here, bi represents the decoding result of the i-th bit. With
the received LLR information from all check nodes connected
to the variable node i , we can obtain the decoding result bi .
Then, we will calculate the syndrome bits according to the decoded bitplane. If the Hamming distance between the received syndrome bits and that calculated from the decoded bitplane is not equal to zero or the CRC sum is incorrect, this attempt will fail. We will repeat the process from step 1) to step 3) until the iterative time reaches a pre-defined limit. After that, if the Hamming distance still exists, it means the received syndrome bits are not enough to realize decoding successfully. Then we will need more syndrome bits through the feedback channel and so we restart this decoding process, until the decoding becomes successful. In this way, we can exploit as fewer syndrome bits as possible to acquire better decoding performance.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In this section, we will evaluate the performance improvement brought by our proposed decoding scheme. Following test conditions will be used to get experimental results. The test video sequences are foreman, coded at QCIF; the GOP size is 2. A LDPCA codec is exploited for the WZ coding, and different coding rates, i.e. from 2/66 to 66/66 are used to generate syndrome bits. The variable node degree distribution is the same as that in [13], which is shown as follows:

λ ( x) = 0.234029x + 0.212425x2 + 0.146898x5 (11) + 0.102840x6 + 0.303808x19
The degree of every check node is the same as each other and can be deduced by the variable node degree distribution. The
threshold T1 and T2 obtained through the experimental tests
are set to 64 and 256 respectively for the differentiation of
confidence areas. And T3 and T4 are the threshold sets, which
are used for different bitplanes. It is indeed difficult to estimate
the threshold sets T3 and T4 . In this paper, the two sets are
obtained through pre-training. Moreover, the error ratio between the WZ frame and the SI is very small for the MSB, and it is unnecessary to verify the LLR values. So, our experimental tests start from the second bitplane. In addition, in

TABLE I.

THE COMPARISON FOR CODING BITS PER FRAME WITH DIFFERENT DECODING SCHEME

proposed scheme(bpf)
Scheme in [10](bpf)

M=2 7096 7603

quantization level

M=3

M=4

12672 23570

13423 24837

M=5 37763 40551

bits saving

6.67% 5.59%

5.1%

6.88%

PSNR(db )

44

43

42

41

40

39

38

37

36

proposed decoding scheme

original decoding scheme in [10]
35

34

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

number of bits per frame

x 104

Figure 2. PSNR comparison between different decoding schemes

order to change the rate, we varied the value of the quantization
levels M from 2 to 5, where 2M ∈(4, 8, 16, 32) .

As shown in Table.1, the bpf is the abbreviation of the number of bits per frame, which represents the number of bits needed for the decoding of one frame. From Table.1, we can observe that with our proposed decoding scheme, the bits saving for each frame can reach up to 5%-7% compared with that in [10] for different quantization levels.
Fig.2 illustrates the comparison of PSNR values between our proposed decoding scheme and the decoding scheme used in [10] for foreman video sequences. In Fig.2, we can observe that with our proposed decoding scheme the improvement of the PSNR increases with the quantization level. For the lower quantization level (e.g. the quantization level is 2 and 3), we only need encode and decode the higher bitplanes of the WZ frame, e.g. bitplane 1, bitplane 2 and bitplane 3. For these bitplanes, although the bits saving ratios are no less than those in the higher quantization level, we can exploit fewer bits to realize the decoding (as shown in Tab.1) with the different decoding schemes, and then the difference of PSNR is relatively small. In this case, the PSNR improvement can only reach up to 0.3db. However, for the higher quantization level (i.e. when the quantization level is 4 and 5), we also need to encode and decode the lower bitplanes of the WZ frame, e.g. bitplane 4 and bitplane 5. The PSNR difference is obvious between our proposed scheme and that in [10]. Therefore, the gain of PSNR can reach up to 0.8db in average.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose an LDPC-based improved decoding scheme for distributed video coding. This scheme can exploit the video statistical character to revise the LLR values for WZ decoding. Compared with the decoding scheme in [10] that we base on, our improvements focus on the initialization of LLR, and do not increase the decoding complexity. In addition, the efficiency of decoding performance in our

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
302

proposed scheme increases with the quantization levels, and the gain of PSNR can reach up to 0.8db.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Slepian and J. Wolf, “Noiseless Coding of Correlated Information Sources”, IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol.19, no.4, July 1973.
[2] A. Wyner and J. Ziv, “The Rate-Distortion Function for Source Coding with Side Information at the Decoder”, IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol.22, no.1,January 1976.
[3] Liveris A.D, Zixiang Xiong and Georghiades C.N, “Compression of binary sources with side information at the decoder using LDPC codes”, Communications Letters, IEEE, vol 6, no.10, pp. 440-442, 2002.
[4] J. Ascenso, C.Brites, and F.Pereira, “Improving frame interpolation with spatial motion smoothing for pixel domain distributed video coding,”5th EURASIP Conference on Speech and Image Processing, Multimedia Communications and Services, July 2005.
[5] Brites. C, Pereira. F, “Correlation Noise Modeling for Efficient Pixel and Transform Domain Wyner-Ziv Video Coding”, Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, IEEE Transactions on, Vol.18, no.9,2008, pp 1177-1190..
[6] D. Varodayan, A. Aaron, and B. Girod, “Rate-adaptive distributed source coding using low-density parity-check codes,” EURASIP Signal

Process. Journal, Special Section on Distributed Source Coding, vol 86, pp. 3123-3130, Nov. 2006.
[7] Bernd Girod, Anne Aaron, Shantanu Rane and David RebolloMonedero, “Distributed Video Coding”, Proceedings of the IEEE, Vol. 93, no. 1, Jan 2005.
[8] DISCOVER Project: www.discoverdvc.org, Dec. 2007.
[9] Z.L. Wang, X.M. Li and M. Zhao, “Distributed coding of Gaussian correlated sources using non-binary LDPC,” Proceedings of the IEEE International Congress on Image and Signal Processing, Sanya, China: IEEE Computer Society Press, 2008.
[10] Zunliang Wang, Xueming Li, Yan Xu. “An Improved Decoding Algorithm for Distributed Video Coding, ” International Conference on Image and Signal Processing, 2009.
[11] Xin Huang, Brites. C, Asecnso. J, Pereira. F, Forchhammer. S, “Distributed Video Coding with multiple side information,” Picture Coding Symposium, PCS.2009.
[12] dligiannis. N, Munteanu. A, Clerchk. T, “Correlation channel estimation in pixel-domain distributed video coding,” Image Analysis for Multimedia Interactive Services, May 2009.
[13] Xiaofei Zong, Bo Yang, Aidong Men, “Improved Side Information Generation and Virtual Channel Modeling for Distributed Video Coding,” International Conference on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing, Oct 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
303

