2011 International Conference on Multimedia and Signal Processing

A New High-Performance and Low-complexity Turbo-LDPC Code

Jui-Hui Hung1, Jin-Shun Shyu and Sau-Gee Chen2
Institute of Electronics & Department of Electronics Engineering
National Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan email:1paholisi.nctu@gmail.com 2sgchen@mail.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract—In this paper, a new coding scheme, named TurboLDPC code, is proposed. It applies LDPC codes to the product coding scheme, and performs the decoding operation iteratively between the two component codes. Besides, to boost the decoding performance, a linear extrinsic information normalization (EIN) method is also devised, which greatly reduces the problem of belief propagation distortion of extrinsic information after message interleaving. Altogether, the decoding performances of Turbo-LDPC codes are much higher than those of the original LDPC codes under comparable computational complexities. Compared to block turbo code combined with BCH codes, the proposed TurboLDPC code also has much better decoding performance as well as lower computational complexity.
Keywords- channel coding; block turbo codes; LDPC codes; product codes
I. INTRODUCTION
There are two kinds of channel coding schemes which can achieve high decoding performance close to Shannon limit: low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and turbo codes. LDPC code proposed [1] in the early 1960’s is a binary linear block code which has a sparse parity-check matrix with much fewer 1’s than a common matrix. LDPC codes have been adopted by many state-of-the-art communication systems, such as the DVB-S2, DMB-TH, 802.16e and 802.3an standards. An LDPC code structure is often represented by a bipartite graph, called Tanner graph [2], which provides a clear picture of all the information exchange links in a decoding process. In a Tanner graph, a check node and a bit node need to execute their own check node equation (CNE) and bit node equation (BNE), respectively. In decoding an LDPC code, the belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm can achieve a BER performance very close to Shannon limit for sufficiently long code lengths. The BP decoding algorithm includes sumproduct algorithm (SPA) [3], min-sum algorithm (MSA) [4], and modified MSA [5].
The original turbo code [6], called convolutional turbo code (CTC), consists of two recursive systematic convolutional codes as the concatenated component codes; and one of the component coder is preceded with an interleaver. Each component code is decoded iteratively by using a maximum a posteriori (MAP) soft decoding algorithm. The soft outputs from these two component coders in the decoding process, called extrinsic information, can be again utilized as the soft input to each other’s component decoder. By employing this soft-input/soft-output (SISO) scheme to decode the component codes iteratively,

the decoding performance can be very close to Shannon’s limit after sufficient number of iterations. Unfortunately, like SPA for LDPC codes, the MAP algorithm has very high computational complexity. Hence, for practical applications, suboptimal weighting algorithms were proposed [7], [8]. Actually, the structure of two component codes was first introduced for block codes and named product code [9]. However, the performance of the decoding algorithm [10] first proposed for the product code is too poor to attract much attention. Until 1994, Pyndiah proposed a SISO decoder with Chase algorithm [11] which improves decoding performances of the product code. A product code employs the mentioned SISO decoder is called turbo product code or block turbo code (BTC). Its decoding performance is comparable to CTC using the suboptimal weighting algorithms.
In this work, we propose an efficient coding scheme, called Turbo-LDPC code, which combines the merits of both the turbo code and LDPC code. Specifically, this work applies the LDPC codes to the block turbo coding scheme, that is, it decodes codewords with turbo decoding concept by using LDPC decoding algorithms. Hence, the decoding performance is significantly improved by utilizing turbo decoding process, while the major part of the decoder is basically the same as a conventional LDPC decoder.

II. OVERVIEW OF BLOCK TURBO CODES

A. Encoding scheme

The basic concept of a product code is to serially concatenate two shorter block codes as a longer block code

as follows. Consider two systematic linear block codes C 1

with

parameters

(n1, k1,δ1 )

and

C 2

with

parameters

(n2 , k2 ,δ2 ) , where ni , ki , and δi (i = 1, 2) represent

codeword length, information bit number, and minimum

Hamming distance, respectively. Then, a product code P of

length (n1 × n2 ) can be constructed by the following three

steps:

Step 1) Restructure (k1 × k2 ) information bits into a

matrix with k1 rows and k2 columns.

Step 2) Encode the k1 rows with code C2 .

Step 3) Encode the n2 columns with code C1 .

978-0-7695-4356-7/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEE

68

DOI 10.1109/CMSP.2011.20

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Then P can be denoted as C1 × C2 or C12 , if C1 = C2 .
The overall code rate of P is R = R1 × R2 , where Ri is the
code rate of Ci . Thus, one can build very long block codes with large minimum Hamming distances based on the product code structure. According to the construction procedure, one can realize that all the rows and columns of
the matrix are C1 codewords and C2 codewords, respectively.

B. Decoding scheme [11]
Consider product code P transmitted in binary symbols of +1 and -1 on an AWGN channel (with a standard
deviation σ ). The transmitted data is defined as a n1 × n2
matrix Y. After the BTC decoder receives channel values, which in turn are contained in the message matrix R=Y+Z,
where Z is a n1 × n2 AWGN matrix, the decoder
interchangeably decode all the columns and then all the rows of R, and so on until a maximum number itrturbo of turbo iterations is reached. For convenience of further discussion, we denote a single run of all the column (or row) decoding operations as a turbo decoding operation and index it with integer notation i. Furthermore, a turbo iteration is defined as a pair of cascaded column (or row) turbo decoding operation and row (or column) turbo decoding operation. Therefore, the i/2-th turbo iteration comprises (i-1)-th and i-th turbo decoding operations, where i is an even integer without loss of generality.
For the i-th turbo decoding operation of R, i=1 to 2 × itrturbo , the decoder first determines the suboptimal codeword matrix D(i) [11] from the soft input matrix (i.e., also called reliability matrix R(i)) by using Chase algorithm. Note that R(i) in the 1st turbo decoding operation (i.e., R(1)) is equal to R. Then, the decoder computes the reliabilities of the row (or column) vector of the suboptimal codeword matrix D(i) by using

K

⎛

K r

(i)

−

K d ′(i)

2

−

K r

(i

)

−

K d

(i

)

2

⎞

K

Λ(d (i + 1)) = ⎜

⎟ d (i) , (1)

⎝

4

⎠

KK

where r of R(i)

(i) , d and

(i) are D(i),

codeword vectors respectively, and

of a row (or function |

cofKl−umgKn)|

reKpresenKts the Euclidean distKance between codeword vectors f and g . KDiffering from d (i) in the i-th turbo decoding operation, d ′(i) is called the competing codeword, which is

tKhe codeword with the minimum Euclidean distance from r (i) . If the competing codeword does not exist, the decoder

should use the following equation to replace (1):

K Λ(d

(i

+

1))

=

K r (i)

+

β

(i

)

×

K d (i)

,

(2)

where β (i) is a predefined reliability factor in the i-th turbo decoding operation[11]. Actually, β (i) can be considered as
an average reliability of those suboptimal codewords which have no corresponding competing codewords. After obtaining the reliabilities Λ(D(i + 1)) of D(i+1), the decoder
generates the following extrinsic information matrix W(i + 1) :

W(i + 1) = Λ(D(i + 1)) − R .

(3)

Next, since the standard deviation of absolute values of the elements in R and W(i+1) are different [11], the decoder obtains the soft output matrix by using the following equation:

R (i + 1) = R + α (i)W (i + 1) ,

(4)

where α (i) is a scaling factor used to reduce the standard
derivation of W(i+1). α (i) should be initialized to a small
value which will grow larger gradually as the iteration increases [11]. According to (4), one can find that the soft output matrix R(i+1) is the soft input matrix for the (i+1)-th turbo decoding operation. Hence, for each decoding operation, the decoder adjusts the received channel value matrix by adding the extrinsic information matrix generated in the previous turbo decoding operation.
III. THE PROPOSED TURBO-LDPC CODES
According to the decoding procedures for block turbo codes introduced in the previous section, the BTC decoder receives the extrinsic information matrix W(i+1) generated in the i-th turbo decoding operation, and determines the suboptimal codeword matrix D(i) by using Chase algorithm. However, Chase algorithm used in the SISO decoder is based on the algebraic decoder, and the propagation of extrinsic information is restricted due to the limited error correction capability of a common algebraic decoder. Besides, the computation complexity of Chase algorithm is proportional to the size of candidate set. If one decreases the size so as to reduce the computation complexity, the probability of missing the competing codewords will increase. Although we can utilize a predefined reliability factor β (i) for alleviating the problem, the improvement on
the decoding performance is limited. To relax the limitation induced by Chase algorithm used
in BTC decoding, this work proposes a new coding scheme named the Turbo-LDPC code which applies the LDPC codes to the block turbo coding scheme. Unlike other linear block codes, the error correction capability of the LDPC codes do not have the mentioned problem of restricted extrinsic information propagation found in common algebraic codes. The proposed Turbo-LDPC code is similar to BTC but employs the LDPC codes for the rows and columns encoding and decoding operations. It implies that the information network of each bit can cover the whole codes. Besides, it is

69 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

obvious that we can reuse the extrinsic information of bit node b1 in the previous row decoding operation when decode b1 in the current column decoding operation, and vice versa, if we encode the rows and columns of the proposed TurboLDPC code with LDPC codes L1 and L2, respectively.
A. Encoding scheme
The encoding scheme of the proposed Turbo-LDPC is the same as the encoding scheme introduced in section II-A, but considers two regular systematic LDPC codes L1 and L2
with parameters (nl , kl , λl , μl ) , l=1, 2, where λl and μl
stand for column weight and row weight, respectively. Note
that an irregular LDPC code, denoted as (nl , kl ) , has no
parameters λl and μl . The proposed Turbo-LDPC code is
denoted as L1 × L2 code or L12 if L1=L2 code. Due to
simplicity consideration, and without loss of generality, we assume two identical LDPC component codes for the proposed Turbo-LDPC decoder in the ensuing discussion. The proposed coding scheme can be applied to general LPDC codes.
B. Decoding scheme
The decoding scheme of the proposed Turbo-LDPC code is very similar to a BTC decoding but does not need Chase algorithm, scaling factor and predefined reliability factor. Besides, since LDPC code itself is already an iterative code, it means that each turbo iteration of Turbo-LDPC code contains one row turbo decoding operation and one column turbo decoding operation, and each row (or column) turbo decoding operation contains multiple LDPC iterations.
The decoding process is similar to a BTC decoding. The involved quantities and parameters are the same as before. After the Turbo-LDPC decoder receives channel values R, it should iteratively decode all the columns and rows of R until a predefined iteration number is reached. For the i-th turbo decoding operation of R (either for rows or columns), i=1 to 2 × itrturbo , the decoder directly decodes R(i) and generates W(i + 1) . Note that initially R(1) is equal to R.
Just like BTC decoding, we must know how to extract the extrinsic information for the Turbo-LDPC decoding scheme. It is the most crucial part in the turbo iteration. Note that we consider BPSK modulation and AWGN channel for latter simulations in this section.
1) Extrinsic information extraction For the Turbo-LDPC code, the post log-likelihood ratio
(LLR) information in the LDPC decoding process is actually the reliability information in the turbo decoding operation. Generally, LDPC decoding is based on the mentioned highperformance SPA [3], whose message is in the form of log-
likelihood ratio (LLR), i.e., log (P{x = 0} P{x = 1}) . By
employing this algorithm in Turbo-LDPC decoding, the LLR
message Lbk→cj (i + 1) sent by bit node bk to check node cj in
the i-th turbo decoding operation is defined by the following bit node equation (BNE):

∑ Lbk→cj (i + 1) = rk (i) +

Lcl→bk (i)

(5)

cl∈Ck \c j

where Ck\cj is a set containing all the check nodes connected to bit node bk, excluding check node cj; and rk(i) is the k-th element of the concerned row (or column) vector of R(i). In
the equation, Lcl→bk (i) is the LLR message passed from check node cl to bit node bk in the i-th turbo decoding operation as defined by the following check node equation (CNE):

Lcj→bk (i)

∏ ∑ =

sign(Lbl→cj (i))φ(

φ (| Lbl→cj (i) |)) (6)

bl ∈B \bk

bl∈B \bk

where B\bk is a set containing all the bit nodes connected to

check

node

cj

excluding

bit

node

bk,

and

φ(x)

=

ex ln( ex

+1 )
−1

.

After the execution of all the CNEs and BNEs, the bit-node

message of bi can be updated by

∑ Lbk (i + 1) = channel(bk ) +

Lcl→bk (i) ,

(7)

cl ∈Ck

where channel(bk) is the received LLR channel value of bk,

and Ck is a set containing all the check nodes connected to

∑ bk. Thus, the term

Lcl→bj (i) is a correction term

cl∈Ck

applied to the received channel value; and it plays the same

role as the extrinsic information in CTC [6]. Hence, after

completing LDPC iteration decoding in the i-th turbo

decoding operation, the Turbo-LDPC decoder will generate

the extrinsic information matrix W(i + 1) composed of the

∑ Lcl→bj (i) correction terms corresponding to all bit
cl∈Ck
nodes.

2) Distortion in belief propagation In the proposed Turbo-LDPC codes, one can decode each
row (or column) codeword with multiple LDPC iterations and reuse the extrinsic information matrix for the next column (or row) decoding. However, directly reusing the extrinsic information matrix in the next turbo decoding operation will introduce some distortion problem. Specifically, the divergent propagation of extrinsic information in LDPC decoding processes may be unbalanced in the message passing between two turbo decoding operations (i.e., two successive row and column decoding operations). That is, since the absolute extrinsic LLR values of bit nodes will increase with the LDPC iteration number, some bit nodes may incoherently have much larger extrinsic LLR values than others. If some bit nodes with large values are erroneous and the values are too large to be corrected by

70 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

other correct bit nodes with small values, those erratic bit nodes’ extrinsic information will dominate the correct bit nodes’ extrinsic information. Hence, eventually some originally correct bit nodes may be modified to incorrect values after LDPC decoding. This kind of local errors will globally propagate to the whole codes and significantly degrade the overall decoding performance. This problem can be significantly alleviated by introducing an extrinsic information normalization process as follows.
3) Remedy for belief propagation distortion For reducing the belief propagation distortion in Turbo-
LDPC decoding caused by multiple LDPC decoding iterations, we propose an extrinsic information normalization (EIN) method which maps an extrinsic information to a more balanced value than without normalization. As a result, the belief propagation distortion can be reduced. The normalization is done by considering the propagation mechanism among all the absolute mean values of LLR values in each turbo decoding operation, as explained below.
Since the value of extrinsic information grows with the number of LDPC decoding iterations, belief propagation distortion in Turbo-LDPC decoding will be increasingly severe due to the diverging extrinsic information as the number of LDPC decoding iterations increases. Thus, the key concept of the EIN is to map the extrinsic propagation information after multiple LDPC iterations to the extrinsic information after the single LDPC iteration.
Since the normalization process is code-dependent, for a specific code, we first extensively simulate the mean absolute extrinsic values ys(i)s, i=1 to 2× itrturbo , of the single
LDPC iteration (i.e., itrldpc=1) for each turbo decoding operation. Next, since the extrinsic propagation information of multiple LDPC iterations will be normalized to that of single LDPC iteration in each turbo decoding operation, in evaluating the mean absolute extrinsic values ym(i) , i=1 to 2 × itrturbo , due to multiple LDPC iterations, the LDPC
iteration numbers in all the previous turbo decoding operations (i.e., from 1 to i-1) should be set to one.
Next, one can form a piecewise linear curve on a 2-D coordinate, by linearly connecting all the consecutive coordinate point pair of (ym(i),ys(i)) and (ym(i+1),ys(i+1)), i=1 to 2 × itrturbo , where ym(i) and ys(i) are the horizontal and vertical coordinate components, respectively. Hence, when doing Turbo-LDPC decoding, one can interpolate and obtain the normalized extrinsic information value from the following piecewise linear mapping equation:

y( x) = ai ⋅ x + bi ,

(8)

if the input extrinsic value x is in the i-th segment, where ai
and bi are the slope and offset of the i-th segment, respectively.
The performance improvements by using EIN for EG (63, 37, 8, 8)2 Turbo-LDPC codes with SPA and MSA are shown in Fig. 1, which indicates that the belief propagation

distortion can be effectively eliminated. After EIN process, the soft output matrix R(i+1) of the Turbo-LDPC decoder in the i-th turbo decoding operation can be obtained by plugging W(i+1) into (8).
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND COMPARISON
In this section, we will discuss the performance of the Turbo-LDPC codes from three aspects. Note that all the simulations here are based on BPSK data modulation and AWGN channel environment, and all the Turbo-LDPC codes are decoded with the help of EIN method.
A. Performance evaluation of Turbo-LDPC code
As mention before, each turbo iteration of the TurboLDPC code contains one row decoding and one column decoding, while each row (or column) decoding contains multiple LDPC iterations. Thus, the total LDPC iteration
( ) number is itrtotal = itrldpc × 2 × itrturbo . There are many
different iteration number settings (itrldpc,itrturbo) can be selected for a fixed itrtotal. All of them correspond to the same computational complexity (excluding the computational complexity of EIN method). Fig. 2 shows the performance comparisons of SPA when itrtotal is 24 for EG
(63,37,8,8)2 Turbo-LDPC code. One can see that the
decoding performances of Turbo-LDPC codes are higher than that of the original LDPC codes by more than 3dB under the similar computational complexity. Besides, one can see that it leads to the best performance when itrldpc = 2 .
B. Performance and computational complexity comparisons of Turbo-LDPC code with BCH BTC
Before comparing the proposed Turbo-LDPC code with BCH BTC, we first compare the decoding performance of their component codes: original (63,37,8,8) EG-LDPC code employing MSA for decoding algorithm and (63,36,11) BCH code with Chase algorithm as shown in Fig. 3. One can see that the original (63,37,8,8) EG-LDPC code has better
performance than (63,36,11) BCH code when itr ≥ 2 . In ldpc
the same figure, the performance comparisons of EG (63,37,8,8)2 Turbo-LDPC code employing MSA and (63,36,11)2 BCH BTC with different parameters are shown. Note that, for BCH BTC, the pattern codeword number is set
to 25 = 32 for the 5 least reliable positions, and α (i) and β (i) values are set to the same values suggested in [11].
The comparison of computational complexities for Turbo-LDPC code and BCH BTC are shown in Table I. In the table, one can see that the Turbo-LDPC codes adopting EIN with parameters (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(4,3) needs more addition operations (i.e., 2493099-2262456=230643) but much less multiplication operations (i.e., 5506704-19845= 5486859) than BCH BTC. It means that the proposed TurboLDPC code not only has higher decoding performance, but also lower computational complexity than BCH BTC. Due to page limit, the detail derivations of the computational complexity of BCH BTC and Turbo-LDPC are omitted here.

71 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BER BE R

0
10
-1
10
-2
10
-3
10
-4
10

(itrldpc,itrturbo)=(2,4), SPA no normalization (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(4,4), SPA no normalization (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(2,4), MSA no normalization (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(4,4), MSA no normalization (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(2,4), SPA with EIN (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(3,4), SPA with EIN (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(2,4), MSA with EIN (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(4,4), MSA with EIN

-5
10

-6

10

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

SNR

Figure 1. The performance improvements of applying EIN to EG
2
(63, 37, 8, 8) Turbo-LDPC code employing SPA and MSA.

100 BPSK

BCH with Chase algorithm

10-1

EG-LDPC, itr=1 using MSA

EG-LDPC, itr=2 using MSA

EG-LDPC, itr=24 using MSA

10-2

EG-LDPC, itr=48 using SPA

BCH BTC, itr=1

10-3

BCH BTC, itr=4 (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(1,12) using MSA

10-4

(itrldpc,itrturbo)=(4,3) using MSA (itr ,itr )=(3,8) using SPA
ldpc turbo

Shannon limit for R=0.345

10-5

10-6

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

SNR

Figure 3. The performance comparisons of EG (63,37,8,8)2 Turbo-LDPC
code, (63,37,8,8) EG-LDPC code, (63,36,11) BCH with Chase algorithm and (63,36,11)2 BCH BTC with different parameters.

V. CONCLUSION
By applying the turbo coding scheme and product code structure to general LDPC codes, one can not only break the performance bound limit, but also significantly reduce the performance gap relative to the Shannon limit. Compared with BCH BTC with similar code length and code rate, the proposed Turbo-LDPC code also has much better decoding performance and significantly lower computational complexity. The positive results are partly due to the introduction of an effective normalization method (EIN) (with little overhead) for preventing divergence of extrinsic information during the decoding process. Moreover, since the proposed Turbo-LDPC codes employ the same decoding algorithm as LDPC codes, one can directly realized the proposed Turbo-LDPC decoder by utilizing the existing LDPC decoder structure.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported in part by the grants NSC 982220-E-009 -029 and NSC 98-2219-E-009 -010, Taiwan.

100 (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(1,12)

(itrldpc,itrturbo)=(2,6)

(itrldpc,itrturbo)=(3,4)

10-2

(itrldpc,itrturbo)=(4,3)

(itrldpc,itrturbo)=(6,2)

EG-LDPC, itr=24 using SPA

BPSK

10-4

BE R

10-6

2

4

6

8

10

12

SNR

2
Figure 2. The performance comparisons of SPA, for EG (63, 37, 8, 8) Turbo-LDPC code, itrtotal=24.

TABLE I.

THE COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY (PER CODE BLOCK)

COMPARISON BETWEEN EG (63,37,8,8)2 TURBO-LDPC CODE EMPLOYING

MSA AND (63,36,11) 2 BCH BTC.

Codes
BCH BTC (itr=4) Turbo-LDPC codes (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(1,12) Turbo-LDPC codes (itrldpc,itrturbo)=(4,3)

Computational Complexity (per code block)

No. of Additions

No. of Multiplications

2230704

5506704

2354184

--

2493099

19845

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D. M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementation of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM’01, vol. 02, pp. 1036-1036E, Nov. 2001.
[5] J. Chen and M.P.C. Fossorier, “ Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 583-587, no.3 Mar. 2002.
[6] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes (1),” in Proc. IEEE ICC’93, vol. 2/3, pp. 1064–1071, May 1993.
[7] C. Berrou, P. Adde, E. Angui, and S. Faudeuil, “A low complexity softoutput Viterbi decoder architecture,” in Proc. IEEE ICC’93, Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 737–740, May 1993.
[8] Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM’89 Conf., Dallas, TX, pp. 1680–1686, Nov. 1989.
[9] P. Elias, “Error-free coding,” IRE Trans. Inform Theory, vol. IT-4, pp. 29–37, Sept. 1954.
[10] S. M. Reddy, “On decoding iterated codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-16, pp. 624–627, Sept. 1970.
[11] R. Pyndiah, A. Glavieux, A. Picart, and S. Jacq, “Near optimum decoding of products codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM’94 Conf., vol. 1/3, San Francisco, CA, pp. 339–343, Nov.–Dec. 1994.

72 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

