A Modified Decoding Algorithm involving Priori Characteristics Bits for LDPC

Wei Bi, Wenbo Zhang, Wenxue He, Chao Li State Key Laboratory of Information Photonics and Optical Communications
Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications Beijing,China
biwei2013bupt@163.com

Abstract—The initial condition of BP decoding algorithm for Low-Density Parity-Check code（LDPC）which is based on the knowledge of channel has greatly affected the performance of the algorithm. In ultra-high-speed optical transmission systems, the probability of correction of each bit transmitted will have shown some relativity. In this paper, we introduce a new method which can be used to estimate the state of the channel by using prior information of some watermark bits. The simulation results show that the performance of the modified decoding algorithm can be improved and the complexity can be reduced effectively.
Keywords- Low-Density Parity-Check code(LDPC); Blief Propagation (BP) algorithm; priori characteristic bits (watermark); ultra-high-speed optical transmission systems
I. INTRODUCTION
Recently, forward error-correction(FEC) has gradually become a key ingredient to a robust optical transmission system, which can not only enhance the reliability but also increase the tolerance to optical parameters such as chromatic dispersion(CD),polarization mode dispersion(PMD) and nonlinearity(NL). Deploying advanced error-correction technologies in optical links is one of the most cost-effective methods to combat system impairments [1]. Current optical transmission systems employ forward error-correction (FEC) based on classical error-correcting codes such as ReedSolomon codes.
Iteratively decodable codes, like low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, have drawn significant research attention. For 40 Gb/s or even above optical communications, LDPC which is a linear code defined by the sparse parity-check matrix invented by Gallager is one potential candidate for strong softdecision and it is expected to exhibit superior error correcting performance. It has been shown that soft-decision based on LDPC exhibits significant coding gain over hard decision based on conventional codes. Several trials aimed at exceeding a net coding gain (NCG) of 10 dB have been initiated. Chan et al. proposed a continuously interleaved BCH code having an NCG of 9.35 dB with 7% redundancy [2]. This is considered to be one of the best performing hard decision FECs for optical communications. LDPC using soft-decision decoding method can show an even better performance than HD FEC does. Belief propagation (BP) algorithm have been seen as a typical and relatively competent one for LDPC decoding,

which should acquire initial probability information from the optical channel. Therefore, whether we can obtain a precise initial information or not is extremely significant to decoding performance and iteration numbers for BP algorithm.
In this paper, we propose a modified BP decoding scheme that we, for the first time, involve in priori characteristics bits(watermarks) which can be used to get a more reliable initial information. We discuss how watermarks affect initial probability distribution and futher have an impact on decoding performance. At the same time, we conduct the simulation of LDPC with the modified BP algorithm in 40Gb/s differential quadrature phase shift keying(DQPSK) optical systems. By comparing this new method with traditional BP without adding watermark, we show the promising prospect in enhancing the performance of SD decoding at the cost of increasing tiny redundancy of LDPC codes.

II. DECODING OF LDPC INVOLVING WATERMARK

A. Initialization Information Equation for BP

In optical transmission channel, we can view the noise

conforming to Gaussian distribution because of ASE noise

which is the noise mainly considered can approximately be

seen as AWGN[3]. The initialization probability information

is used in the first step in BP algorithm and it can be deduced

as follows:

P( xi

=

x

|

y)

=

P( xi

P(xi = x) p( y | = 1) p( y | xi = 1) + P(xi

xi =

= x) −1) p( y

|

xi

=

− 1)

(1)

Probability density function(pdf) is written as:

p( y | xi = x) =

1 exp(− ( y − x)2 )

2π σ

2σ 2

(2)

Then we can get the initialization equation according above

two equation:

P( xi

=

x

|

y)

=

1+

1 −2 xy
exp( σ 2 )

(3)

B. Principle of Watermarks in Modifying Initialization Information Equation for BP
We insert a characteristic bit into LDPC codes every 10 bits(might as well insert bit ”0”) in LDPC encoder and in LDPC decoder, we extract every corresponding watermark before conducting BP decoding. Influenced by AWGN in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

optical channel, some watermarks could be transformed into bit”1”,that is to say, these bits have been added a relatively high-power noise. Therefore, we maintain that every bit of LDPC codes has also been influenced by noise with different power each other. Moreover, the variant σ 2 can reflect the value of noise power. If we extract a different watermark compared with the bit inserted before, we can infer that this bit suffer from a high-power noise and the LDPC codes around this watermark has also suffered from big noise. Of course，
we assume that our inference are sensible in ultra high speed transmission systems such as 40Gbit/s optical fiber system because adjacent bits has relativity. On the contrary, if the extracted watermark is consistent with inserted one, we infer the LDPC codes around it suffer from a small noise, whose variant σ 2 are relatively small. We can model the σ as follows:

bit-error-rate(BER) performance of the modified BP decoder is compared with traditional BP decoders in Fig 3.

-1

0.5 -rotation• traditional BP

-2

0.5 -rotation• modified BP

-3

-4

-5

log(BER )

-6 -7 -8

-9

8

8.5

9

9.5

10

OSNR(dB)

Figure 3. BER versus OSNR for the systems with two type BP

We can learn from figure 3 that the modified BP can bring a certain NCG about 0.1dB when achieving BER 1e-8. In contrast, this new method can decrease numbers of iteration for BP significantly. We can achieve nearly BER1e-9 with the modified BP as long as we conduct 17 times iteration.

Figure 1.Illustration of distribution of σ according to watermarks
In Figure 1,we model the standard deviation distribution as Gaussian one, the smaller the distance is between LDPC bit
and watermark, the closer σ is. The bigger the distance is,the closer the σ is to the average value 1/ 2R ⋅ SNR .Point B possesses a higher σ than point A, the corresponding pdfs of
the two points are as follows:

(a) the pdf of point A

(b)the pdf of point B

Figure 2.Comparision of pdf of two point with different σ

The distribution of σ can be described as equation (4)

σ (n) =

1

∑c/10 x(n)ea(nTb−10iTb)2 +

1

(4)

2R ⋅ SNR i=1

2R ⋅ SNR

Equation above describes σ at each bit, Tb is bit

interval(1/40G).

III. SIMULATION AND DISCUSSION
To verify the functionality and the decoding performance of the modified BP decoder, we present simulation results for a (2048,1024) LDPC code transmitted in 40Gb/s DQPSK optical system. The matrix H is π-rotation with code rate 50%[4]. The

80

traditional BP

70

modified BP

Number of Iteration(times)

60

50

40

30

20

10

8

8.5

9

9.5

10

OSNR(dB)

Figure 4 Number of iteration versus OSNR for two type BP

IV. CONCLUSION
We have discussed the outstanding performance of the modified BP algorithm with watermark in BER and number of iteration. It has been clearly shown that this method can improve performance and decrease time of iteration.
REFERENCES

[1] Tychopoulos A, Koufopaulou O, Tomkos I. FEC in optical communications-A tutorial overview on the evolution of architectures and the future prospects of outband and inband FEC for optical communications[J]. Circuits and Devices Magazine, IEEE, 2006, 22(6): 79-86. J. Clerk Maxwell, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, 3rd ed., vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon, 1892, pp.68–73.
[2] Chang F, Onohara K, Mizuochi T. Forward error correction for 100 G transport networks[J]. Communications Magazine, IEEE, 2010, 48(3): S48-S55. K. Elissa, “Title of paper if known,” unpublished.
[3] Cai Y, Chen J, Li J, et al. On channel models for predicting soft-decision error correction performance in optically amplified systems[C]//Optical Fiber Communication Conference. Optical Society of America, 2003.
[4] Echard R, Chang S C. The π-rotation low-density parity check codes[C]//Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001. GLOBECOM'01. IEEE. IEEE, 2001, 2: 980-984. M. Young, The Technical Writer's Handbook. Mill Valley, CA: University Science, 1989

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

