IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

4553

Hierarchical and High-Girth QC LDPC Codes
Yige Wang, Member, IEEE, Stark C. Draper, Member, IEEE, and Jonathan S. Yedidia, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We present an approach to designing capacity-approaching high-girth low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes that are friendly to hardware implementation, and compatible with some desired input code structure defined using a protograph. The approach is based on a mapping of any class of codes defined using a protograph into a family of hierarchical quasi-cyclic (HQC) LDPC codes. Whereas the parity check matrices of standard quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes are composed of circulant submatrices, those of HQC LDPC codes are composed of a hierarchy of circulant submatrices that are, in turn, constructed from circulant submatrices, and so on, through some number of levels. Next, we present a girth-maximizing algorithm that optimizes the degrees of freedom within the family of codes to yield a high-girth HQC LDPC code, subject to bounds imposed by the fact that HQC codes are still quasi-cyclic. Finally, we discuss how certain characteristics of a code protograph will lead to inevitable short cycles and show that these short cycles can be eliminated using a “squashing” procedure that results in a high-girth QC LDPC code, although not a hierarchical one. We illustrate our approach with three design examples of QC LDPC codes—two girth-10 codes of rates and 0.45 and one girth-8 code of rate 0.7—all of which are obtained from protographs of one-sided spatially coupled codes.
Index Terms—Error correction codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, protograph, quasi-cyclic codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T WO broad classes of methods have emerged for the construction of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2], [3]. One set of methods is based on highly random graph constructions, while the other is based on structured algebraic constructions. It is now well known that random constructions (see, e.g., [4]–[8]) can produce LDPC codes that closely approach the
Manuscript received November 01, 2011; revised February 12, 2013; accepted February 14, 2013. Date of publication March 20, 2013; date of current version June 12, 2013. This paper was presented in part at the 5th International Symposium on Turbo Coding and Related Topics, Lausanne, Switzerland, September 2008 [1].
Y. Wang was with Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA. She is now with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640 China (e-mail: eeygwang@scut.edu.cn).
S. C. Draper was with Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA. He is now with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, ON M5S 3G4 Canada (e-mail: stark.draper@utoronto.ca).
J. S. Yedidia was with Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA. He is now with Disney Research Boston, Cambridge, MA 02142 USA (e-mail: yedidia@disneyresearch.com).
Communicated by D. Burshtein, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2013.2253512

Shannon capacity. However, highly random constructions are not easy to implement in hardware as the irregular connections between check and variable nodes in the code graph imply high wiring complexity. In actual implementations, more structured constructions have been strongly preferred because they result in much more practical wiring and more straightforward parallelism in the decoders.
Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC LDPC) codes are a particularly practical and widely used class of structured LDPC codes. These codes have a parity check matrix which is broken into submatrices that have a circulant structure. QC LDPC codes are featured in a variety of communications system standards, such as IEEE 802.16e [9], DVB-S2 [10], and 802.11 [11]. In view of their practicality, we focus in this paper on the design of QC LDPC codes that have good decoding performance.
For nearly any application, it is important to optimize decoding performance in the “water-fall” regime where the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is relatively low. The standard way to do that for irregular random constructions is to use “density-evolution” or “EXIT chart” techniques to obtain the degree distribution that optimizes the code threshold in the asymptotic limit of long block lengths [8]. These techniques can also be adapted to QC LDPC codes [12].
However, for some applications, optimizing water-fall performance is not sufficient, and one must also avoid the “error floors” that plague many LDPC codes in the higher SNR regime. An “error floor” in the performance curve means that the decoding failure rate does not continue to decrease rapidly as the SNR increases. Eliminating or lowering error floors is particularly important for applications that have extreme reliability demands, including magnetic recording and fiber-optic communication systems.
In the past, QC LDPC codes have been constructed based on a wide variety of mathematical ideas, including finite geometries, finite fields, and combinatorial designs [3], [13]–[19]. Recently, there has also been great interest in the class of “convolutional” [20], [21] or “spatially coupled” [22] LDPC codes. They have been shown, using density evolution techniques, to approach Shannon capacity closely, or even provably to achieve it on the binary erasure channel [22]. These codes are significant here, because they can be implemented using quasi-cyclic constructions, and they should thus be able to achieve very good performance while retaining the practicality of other structured QC LDPC codes.
In this paper, we will focus on how to take a code structure, such as a particular spatial-coupling structure, that has been designed to perform near the Shannon limit in the waterfall regime, and constructing a QC LDPC code with that structure that also empirically has excellent error floor performance.
Error floor issues for LDPC codes were investigated in [23] and [24], which showed that error floors in belief propagation

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4554

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

LDPC decoders are generally caused by “trapping sets.” A trapping set is a set of a small number of bits that reinforce each other in their incorrect beliefs. Trapping sets of bits are invariably arranged in clustered short cycles in a code’s Tanner graph [25]. Therefore, one way to try to remove trapping sets is to design the code’s Tanner graph carefully so that the dangerous clusters of short cycles do not exist [26].
An alternative, and at least conceptually simpler approach, is to design codes with larger girths—the “girth” of a code is the length of the shortest cycle in the code graph. By removing short cycles, we remove large swaths of potentially dangerous configurations of cycles and, at one fell swoop, hopefully lower the error floor. Motivated by this idea, in this paper, we focus on optimizing the girth of QC LDPC codes that have already been given a structure optimized for waterfall performance. In this way, we hope to design a practical code that simultaneously has good waterfall and error floor performance.
There has been considerable work on optimizing girth in LDPC codes. In some of this literature, the focus is specifically on designing codes with very large girth. For example, in [27], codes with girths up to 14 were obtained using parity check matrices with submatrices that were sums of permutation matrices, while [28] showed how to obtain QC LDPC codes with girths of 18. More recently, [29] designed another class of regular QC LDPC codes with girths as large as 24. While these design techniques yield codes of very large girth, they have the limitation that the structure of the code will be an output of the design rather than an input so, for example, they do not help in the design of a spatially coupled code with large girth.
The focus in this paper is somewhat different. We assume that we are given a specific code structure that has already been optimized for waterfall performance (e.g., a spatially coupled code with specific length, rate, and degree distributions), and desire to create a QC LDPC code with that code structure and optimized girth. Codes with good water-fall performance inevitably have some irregularity in the degree-distribution of the factor or variable nodes of the code graph. For the case of QC LDPC codes, these irregular distributions are most easily described in terms of “protographs” [30]. Protographs are variants of Tanner graphs where bits and checks of the same type are represented by a single “proto-bit” or “proto-check.” In the case of QC LDPC codes, proto-bits can, for example, represent sets of bits belonging to the same circulant submatrices.
Previous approaches that optimize girth given a particular code structure include the progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [31], which was generalized to QC LDPC codes in [32]. Another approach to optimizing the girth of QC LDPC codes was studied in [33], where high-girth QC LDPC codes were obtained using a random “guess-and-test” algorithm.
In this paper, we use a hill-climbing search algorithm for optimizing girth, that we previously introduced in [1], that is more efficient than the PEG and guess-and-test methods. The hill-climbing algorithm greedily adjusts an initial QC LDPC code to find a code of short length that meets the specified code and girth parameters. Since the algorithm is greedy, it can get stuck in local minima. However, given a set of parameters, the algorithm finds QC LDPC codes of shorter length and in less time than guess-and-test or PEG.

The protographs that arise in codes that have been optimized for waterfall performance typically have some pairs of protobits and proto-checks that are connected by multiple edges. A straightforward way to handle this would be to use QC LDPC codes where the circulant matrices had rows and columns of weight greater than one. However, as we shall see, this direct approach inevitably introduces short cycles into the graph.
The tricky problem of creating QC LDPC codes with good girth and that correspond to protographs optimized for waterfall performance is solved in this paper by a somewhat complicated procedure. First, we need to introduce a new family of generalized QC LDPC codes, which we call “hierarchical” QC LDPC (HQC LDPC) codes. The parity check matrices of these hierarchical codes consist of circulant submatrices, which in turn consist of circulant sub-sub-matrices, and so on for multiple “levels.” We show that, via a graph “lifting” procedure [26], [34], [35], we can transform any protograph with multiple edges between proto-checks and proto-bits into a two-level HQC LDPC code with circulant matrices with higher weight at second level.
It turns out that many different HQC LDPC codes correspond to a particular protograph, and thus, many degrees of freedom exist following the lifting. We use our hill-climbing algorithm to choose from this family to get rid of as many short cycles as possible. However, HQC LDPC codes with weights greater than one at higher levels will also automatically have some short cycles, just as nonhierarchical QC LDPC codes do. Our hill-climbing algorithm can do nothing about these “inevitable” cycles, but it can, hopefully, eliminate all short noninevitable cycles. To get rid of the inevitable cycles, we introduce a “squashing” procedure. The squashing step destroys the hierarchical structure of the code, but the squashed code nevertheless remains a QC LDPC code that corresponds to the desired protograph. The squashing procedure is computationally trivial. This makes the two-step procedure—first HQC LDPC then squash into a QC LDPC code—much more computationally efficient than directly applying our hill-climbing procedure to maximize the girth of higher weight QC LDPC codes with the desired protograph structure. Thus, HQC LDPC codes are a necessary intermediate stage in the design of practical QC LDPC codes that will simultaneously have good waterfall and error floor performance.
The rest of this paper will explain in much more detail the ideas outlined above. We begin in Section II by reviewing the standard construction of QC LDPC codes in terms of their parity check matrices. Then, in Section III, we review the standard Tanner graph representation of LDPC codes and the “protograph” representation of structured codes. In Section IV, we review how short cycles can be identified from the parity check matrix of a QC LDPC code. We also discuss why the most straightforward transformation of the protographs of interesting LDPC codes, such as spatially coupled codes, into QC LDPC codes will lead to inevitable short cycles in the Tanner graph of the resulting codes.
This leads us to the heart of our paper, where we introduce HQC LDPC codes that can be used to solve the problem of inevitable short cycles. In Section V, we introduce the most general form of HQC LDPC codes and show that they can be de-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4555

scribed both in terms of a multivariate polynomial parity check matrix in multiple variables and in terms of a tree structure. In Section VI, we explain how to find cycles in the Tanner graphs of HQC LDPC codes. In Section VII, we describe our hill-climbing algorithm for finding high girth QC LDPC codes and HQC LDPC codes. In Section VIII, we discuss restricted two-level HQC LDPC codes, the lifting transformation of protographs into such codes, and the “squashing” procedure that efficiently eliminates inevitable cycles. Finally, in Section IX, we exhibit high-girth QC LDPC codes that simultaneously have good theoretical waterfall thresholds (because they are spatially coupled codes) and have good error-floor behavior resulting from their high girth (which in turn is a result of the fact that they are squashed versions of HQC LDPC codes). Many details are deferred to the appendixes.

II. QC LDPC CODES

We begin by reviewing the well-known construction of stan-

dard QC LDPC codes as previously described in the literature,

e.g., in [3], [20], and [33]. In Section V, we will generalize these

codes and introduce a novel hierarchical family of QC LDPC

codes.

QC LDPC codes are defined in terms of circulant permutation

matrices. Let denote the circulant permutation matrix, or

“cyclic shift matrix,” obtained by cyclically left-shifting a

identity matrix by positions, where

; is thus

the

identity matrix. We often suppress the dependence on

, writing instead of . As an example, if

, then

An important special case of QC LDPC codes is “weight-I

regular” QC LDPC code. The parity check matrix of such

a code consisting of rows and columns of

cyclic shift

submatrices. The submatrix in the row and column is

and the code has blocklength

. We

abstractly represent the th submatrix as a power of dummy

variable as .

More generally, a QC LDPC code is represented by a polyno-

mial parity check matrix

whose entries are polynomials in

:

...

...

...

(1)

Example 1: Let be a length-9 QC LDPC code described by (3)

For this code,

,

, and

, and can equivalently

be written as

(4)

The polynomial version of the parity check matrix is (5)

In [35], Smarandache and Vontobel classified QC LDPC

codes according to the maximum weight among the circulant

submatrices in their parity check matrix, or equivalently, ac-

cording to the maximum weight of the polynomials in their

polynomial parity check matrix. (The weight of a polynomial

is simply the number of nonzero terms in that polynomial.)

They defined a “type- ” QC LDPC code as one for which

the maximum weight among all polynomial entries

in

is . We will change their terminology slightly and call

such a code a weight- QC-LDPC code

Since

in the code of Example 1—that is,

is a binomial—and because

for all

,

, the code in Example

1 is a weight-II QC LDPC code.

For any QC LDPC code, we define the vector of weight sums

for

, to be the “column weight

sum,”

, of

. We define the row weight sum

of

similarly. Thus, the code of Example 1 has

column and row weight sums

As we often work with weight-I QC LDPC codes, and these

codes are particularly important in practice, we introduce some

additional useful notations for them. We use the standard def-

inition [3] of the base matrix of a weight-I QC LDPC code

to be the

matrix of powers (circulant shifts) that de-

fines the code, i.e.,

, where logarithms are taken

entry-by-entry, and where

is defined to be , used to

indicate an all-zero submatrix.

where

III. GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATIONS OF QC LDPC CODES

(2)

As is very well known, an LDPC code can either be represented by its parity check matrix , or equivalently by its

Tanner graph [25]. A Tanner graph for an LDPC code is a bipar-

for

,

.

tite graph consisting of “variable” nodes representing the code-

For binary QC LDPC codes, which will be our focus for the word bits, and “check” nodes representing the parity checks. A

rest of this paper, the polynomial coefficients

must all be variable node is connected to a check node by an edge if and

0 or 1. For a weight-I QC LDPC code for each , at most only if the corresponding entry in is nonzero. The degree of

one coefficient

is nonzero.

a node is defined as the number of edges incident to that node.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4556

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 1. A simple protograph with three types of variables and two types of checks.

To derive a quasi-cyclic parity-check matrix

from the

template specified by a particular protograph, one “lifts” (cf.,

e.g., [3] and [26]) the protograph into a

that specifies a

Tanner graph. The Tanner graph so produced is termed a “cover”

[34] (see [35] and references therein for a more formal defini-

tion) of the original protograph. The lifting procedure is simply

to replace each entry in the incidence matrix with a polynomial

of weight equal to the entry.

For example, the protograph in Fig. 1, which has the inci-

dence matrix given in (6), can be lifted into a QC LDPC code

with parity check matrix

(7)

where , , , , , and are integer exponents between 0 and

, with

. These integer exponents (with some additional

constraints such as

) parameterize an ensemble of QC

LDPC codes all of which are liftings of (and which cover) the

original protograph. In our algorithms, we will optimize over

the choice of these exponents to find a lifting that maximizes

the girth of the resulting code.

As an example, the particular lifting that would convert this

Fig. 2. Two Tanner graphs corresponding to the protograph shown in Fig. 1. The Tanner graph in (a) does not have a quasi-cyclic structure; the one in (b) does, and in fact has the parity check matrix of the QC LDPC code given in Example 1.

protograph into the Tanner graph shown in Fig. 2(b), i.e., the QC LDPC code with parity check matrix given in Example 1, is when the exponents are chosen to give

(8)

A “protograph,” as introduced by Thorpe in [30], is a template

that can be used to derive a class of Tanner graphs. Each node in

a protograph represents a “type” of node in a Tanner graph. The

nodes will all be duplicated times in the Tanner graph derived

from the protograph.

As an example, consider Fig. 1, which shows a simple ex-

ample of a protograph that has three types of variable nodes

and two types of check nodes. This protograph tells us that each

check of type A should be connected to one variable of each of

the three types, and each check of type B should be connected

to one variable of type 2 and two variables of type 3. Similarly,

each variable of type 1 should be connected to one check of type

A, and so on.

Fig. 2 shows two Tanner graphs derived from the protograph

of Fig. 1, with

. Note that there are many possible Tanner

graphs that one can construct, which correspond to a particular

protograph, and they need not necessarily have a quasi-cyclic

structure. The Tanner graph shown in Fig. 2(a) is not quasi-

cyclic. But it is always easy to construct a quasi-cyclic version

of any protograph.

Protographs can equivalently be described by an “incidence”

IV. CYCLES IN QC LDPC CODES
In this section, we review how to identify cycles in QC LDPC codes from their parity check matrices. As was shown in [33], there are efficient ways to describe sets of cycles of a QC LDPC code in terms of the code’s polynomial parity check matrix. In Section IV-A, we introduce the basic ideas from [33] behind identifying cycles in weight-I QC LDPC codes. These results have been extended to higher weight QC LDPC codes [27], [35], [36]. In Section IV-B, we review how to identify cycles in QC LDPC codes of arbitrary weight and introduce the notation we will subsequently need to discuss cycles in HQC LDPC codes. Finally, in Section IV-C, we review why higher weight QC LDPC codes with certain characteristics inevitably have short cycles. We point out that this poses an obstacle to constructing QC LDPC codes with good girth—an obstacle that we will overcome by introducing HQC LDPC codes in Section V. As described in Section VIII, we will ultimately apply a lifting transformation into HQC codes combined with a “squashing” procedure to obtain high-girth QC codes.

matrix. An incidence matrix has a number of rows equal to the number of types of checks in the protograph and a number of columns equal to the number of types of variables. Each entry in the incidence matrix tells you how many edges there are connecting a type of check node to a type of variable node in the protograph. For example, the incidence matrix (alternately termed a “protomatrix”) for the protograph in Fig. 1 would be

A. Finding Cycles in Weight-I QC LDPC Codes
A cycle is a path through nodes in the Tanner graph of a code. It alternates between check and variable nodes, and starts and ends at the same node. In terms of the code’s parity check matrix, each check node in the Tanner graph corresponds to a row in its parity check matrix, and each variable node corresponds to a column. A cycle can thus be visualized as a sequence of alter-

(6)

nating vertical and horizontal moves through the parity check matrix starting and ending on the same row. A vertical move

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4557

index is subtracted rather than added). For example, consider

the left-hand path of Fig. 3. The sum is

. Each

difference between neighboring shift indices in the sum corre-

sponds to the shift in what column (i.e., what variable node) of

the cyclic permutation matrices the path passes through. Only if

the differences sum to zero (mod- ) at the end of the path will

the path return to the same variable node in the starting permuta-

tion matrix, thereby forming a cycle. For the example of Fig. 3,

the condition for a length-four cycle to exist is:

mod

(9)

Fig. 3. A parity-check matrix and four 3 3 circulant permutation matrices

( , , and ) selected from it. One set of parameters (lower left,

,

,

,

) results in a cycle of length four. An alternate set (lower

right,

,

) results in a cycle of length twelve.

which is satisfied for

,

,

,

, but is not

satisfied by

,

.

B. Finding Cycles in Higher Weight QC LDPC Codes

(along a column) corresponds to choosing a second edge connected to the same variable node that will form the next step in the cycle. A horizontal move (along a row) corresponds to

We now consider the more involved example of the weight-II code of Example 1 from Section II. Recall that this code is defined by the 2 3 polynomial parity-check matrix

choosing two edges connected to the same check node that form

part of the path.

To make the connection between this logic and the special In terms of the coefficients

defined by

structure of QC LDPC codes more concrete, consider Fig. 3.

This figure depicts the parity check matrix of a weight-I QC

LDPC code with parameters

,

, and

. We

focus on the four 3 3 cyclic shift matrices (represented by the

black squares) , , , and . Two choices for the parameters

of these four matrices are shown in the subfigures:

,

,

, cf. equation (2),

if

,

,

, or

; and

if

; all other

.

Now, consider the following ordered series:

equals or
(10)

, and

on the left, and

,

on the

right.

Consider any path through the base matrix of this code. Be-

cause of the replacement of each base matrix entry by a

circulant matrix, a path through the base matrix corresponds to

paths through the Tanner graph. For any of these paths to be

a cycle, it is necessary for the path through the base matrix to

form a cycle, without passing through any all-zeros matrices.

However, this is not sufficient since each cyclic shift matrix cor-

responds to parity and variable nodes. The path could end

up at a different variable node in the same cyclic shift matrix

and thus not complete a cycle.

The necessary and sufficient condition for cycles to exist is

that when the path through the base matrix returns to the starting

entry, it returns to the same column of the cyclic shift matrix

from which it started. In the example of Fig. 3, consider the path

through the base matrix starting at the entry labeled , then pro-

gressing through the entries labeled , , and in turn, and ter-

minating at the entry labeled . The corresponding path through

the parity check matrix, with parameter settings

,

,

,

, is depicted in the left-hand example of Fig. 3

where each pair in satisfies

and

. This ordered series specifies a sequence of rectilinear

moves through

. These moves are analogous to those in

Fig. 3 with the important distinction that if the polynomial in

position has more than one term (that is,

is nonzero

for more than one value of ), then the next pair in the sequence

can be the same. For example, in (10), the third, fourth, and fifth

pairs are identical.

To specify a candidate cycle through the Tanner graph, we as-

sociate a coefficient index with each pair in , such that

. We denote this series of coefficient indices by .

To ensure that each step in the series corresponds to traversing

a distinct edge in the Tanner graph, we require the following

of neighboring pairs

and

in and the cor-

responding neighboring coefficient indices and in : if

, then the corresponding indices

.

The candidate cycle will be a cycle if the alternating sum of

coefficient indices in modulo equals zero.

In our example, consider the two following choices for the

respective (ordered) sets of coefficient indices:

and results in a cycle of length four. However, with the slightly

(11)

different choice of circulant shifts of the right-hand example, a return to the same column of the cyclic shift matrix occurs only

(12)

after two more passes around the base matrix and an overall Each of these choices corresponds to a cycle of length-6 through

cycle of length 12.

the Tanner graph of the code. The alternating sums modulo-3

We now specify the conditions on the

developed in can be verified to be equal to zero. Respectively, these sums are:

[33] that result in a cycle (in fact in a set of cycles). Calculate

an alternating sum of the shift indices associated with neigh-

boring permutation matrices along a given path (every odd shift

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4558

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

C. Inevitable Cycles in Higher Weight QC LDPC Codes

Unfortunately, the logic described in the previous section im-

plies that higher weight QC LDPC codes will inevitably contain

short cycles. An important theorem proven by Smarandache and

Vontobel [35] (see also [27, Example 3.2], where inevitable cy-

cles are called “balanced cycles”) states that any weight-III QC

LDPC code will inevitably contain cycles of length six. Sup-

pose that, without loss of generality, the polynomial

is

weight-III and has the form

. To see that a cycle

must exist using our notation, choose the length-six ordered se-

ries (13)

or 3 2 nonzero submatrix. One can evade that bound with constructions that place a large number of all-zeroes submatrices into the parity check matrix [27], [28], but the challenge we take up here is somewhat different. We are interested in taking as an input a protograph for a spatially coupled code where it is not even obvious how to avoid cycles of length 6 or 8, and obtaining a reasonably large-girth version of such a code.
It turns out that there do exist techniques to construct QC LDPC codes corresponding to these protographs that have girth of 10 or greater. We present such codes in Section IX-A. But, to understand these techniques, we need to make an apparent detour and introduce HQC LDPC codes.

and choose

. We find that

mod

(14)

for any value of . Therefore, an “inevitable” cycle exists.

One can also prove (see [35, Th. 17] or [27, Example 3.3])

that a parity check matrix

of a weight-II QC LDPC code

that contains two weight-2 polynomials in the same row or the

same column will inevitably have eight-cycles. To see this, sup-

pose the two weight-2 polynomials are in the same row , but

in two different columns

. Let

and

. Consider the length-eight ordered series

(15) and choose
(16)

We again find that

mod

(17)

regardless of the value of .

These inevitable six-cycles and eight-cycles appear to put

serious limitations on what protographs can be converted into

quasi-cyclic codes with high girth. For example, if the proto-

graph has a type of variable that is connected to a type of check

by three edges, the simple lifting of the incidence matrix of

the protograph described in Section III will inevitably lead to

six-cycles in the QC LDPC code obtained.

Furthermore, protographs with higher edge weights are not

particularly exotic. Consider, for example, the protographs

shown in Section IX-A, Fig. 8, which are the protographs for

“one-sided” spatially coupled codes as described by Kudekar

et al. [22]. Notice that if we convert these protographs into

QC LDPC codes by a simple lifting, the QC LDPC codes

corresponding to the protographs in Fig. 8(a) would inevitably

have eight-cycles, while those in Fig. 8(b) would inevitably

have six-cycles.

It should be noted that even for weight-I QC LDPC codes,

there are limits to the girth. In particular, Fossorier [33] has

proven (see his Theorem 2.5) that any

regular QC LDPC

code must have girth of at most 12, and that theorem can easily

be extended to show that there are inevitably 12-cycles for any

weight-I QC LDPC code with a base matrix containing a 2 3

V. HQC LDPC CODES
We now introduce HQC LDPC codes, motivated by the fact these codes will ultimately enable us to solve the problem of constructing QC LDPC codes corresponding to protographs with multiple edges between check and variable types, without creating inevitable short cycles in the Tanner graph of the code. However, because these codes may eventually have other applications, we present their construction in a form that is actually more general than we will need for the purpose of eliminating inevitable short cycles.
An HQC LDPC code is formed from “levels” that each have a quasi-cyclic structure. The structure can be specified in two equivalent, complementary forms. The first, in terms of the polynomial parity check matrices of these codes, is presented in Section V-A. The second, in terms of the “tree structure” of these codes is presented in Section V-B. This second form finds use in our girth maximizing algorithms. Finally, in Section V-C, we connect the hierarchical structure to a particular sequence of liftings of a base graph, per the discussion of Section III. The number of liftings equals the number of levels in the resulting HQC LDPC code.
Although our definitions of general HQC LDPC codes are novel so far as we know, we have identified one prior example of a discussion of hierarchical codes in the literature. This is the short discussion in [35, Sec. VII] of the possibility of using a sequence of graph covers to increase the minimum distance of the base code. The special case described there is a two-layer code, discussed in more depth in our examples in Section VIII.

A. Parity Check Matrices of HQC LDPC Codes

Before fully defining HQC LDPC codes formally, it is easier

to have a concrete example in mind.

Example 2: Consider the polynomial parity check matrix

specified in (18) with

. Because the highest weight of any

of the polynomial entries is 2, (e.g.,

), and

because there are 12 columns in the matrix, this is a length-96

weight-II QC LDPC code.

But note that this parity check matrix has additional struc-

ture which makes it an HQC LDPC code. In particular, in this

example, each 3 3 submatrix of polynomials in (18) has a cir-

culant structure, as do both the left-hand and right-hand sets of

2 2 submatrices of 3 3 submatrices.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4559

Just as we use polynomials in the dummy variable to

represent the underlying circulant submatrices in a standard

QC LDPC code, we can use a bivariate polynomial in the

two dummy variables and to represent both the circulant

matrices represented by the variable in (18) as well as the

circulant arrangements within each 3 3 submatrix of polyno-

mials in . The latter circulant structure we represent using the

dummy variable . We can further represent the 2 2 circulant

structure of 3 3 circulant submatrices using the additional

dummy variable .

Thus, in (19), we contract the 6 12 polynomial parity check

matrix

of (18) into the 2 4 bivariate polynomial parity

check matrix

. As we use this example to illustrate many

aspects of the ensuing discussion, make sure you think about and

understand why, e.g., the upper right 3 3 submatrix in

is represented by the bivariate polynomial

in

.

We can repeat the process to contract

into the 1 2

trivariate polynomial parity check matrix

given in

(20).

Each of the three contractions of the parity check matrix of

this code into the polynomial parity check matrices represented

by (18), (19), and (20), corresponds to a “level” in the hierarchy

of this three-level HQC LDPC code.

In this example, we started with a polynomial parity check

matrix

, and contracted it first to

and then to

. When constructing an HQC LDPC code, it is often

more natural to go in the other direction—expanding a matrix

like

into

and then ultimately into the full parity

check matrix whose entries are ones and zeroes. To expand a

polynomial matrix, we obviously need to know the size of the

circulant matrices at every level.

We now present a formal definition of the family of -level

HQC LDPC codes which generalizes our example.

Definition 1: An HQC LDPC code with levels is defined

by a

multivariate polynomial parity check ma-

trix

in variables. The entry in the row and

column of ,

,

is a -variate

polynomial

over the variables,

.

The maximum exponent of any of these polynomials in ,

, is

. The coefficient associated with the

term

, where

for all , is

. With these definitions, we defined the code by the polynomials

(21)

The parity check matrix of such a code is obtained by replacing

each of the

entries of

with the

submatrix

(22)

where denotes a Kronecker product. Defining the recursive

relations

and

, where

, the parity check matrix thus constructed has

rows and

columns.

While the definition of HQC LDPC codes holds more gener-

ally for codes defined in fields other than GF(2), in this paper,

we exclusively consider binary QC LDPC codes wherein all

are binary. We return to our previous example to

illustrate our definitions.

Example 2 (continued): The code of this example is a three-

level HQC LDPC code. To cast this example into the language

of Definition 1, we first identify with , with , and

with .

In this example,

,

,

. Therefore,

,

;

,

;

,

; and

,

.

We can rewrite, e.g., the term

of (20) as

where all coefficients .

are zero except for

(18)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(19) (20)

4560

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Rather than expanding

into a full parity

check matrix as in (22), one often wants to generate the form

given in (1) of the polynomial parity check matrix

of a QC LDPC code in one variable. To do this, we use the

construction of (22) for all but the first level. We replace each

with the polynomial matrix in

(23)

The matrix

is of size

. We return once more

to our example to illustrate this idea.

Example 2 (continued): Consider the term of

, namely

, corre-

sponding to the nonzero coefficients

and

.

According to (23), the contribution of this term to

is

where

,

, and

(24)

Referring back to the left-hand six-by-six submatrix of

in (18) we can confirm the correctness of this pat-

tern, as a

term appears in each of the nonzero entries in

the matrix of (24).

Having worked this example, we can now see how the form

of (23) nicely reveals the structure of HQC LDPC codes. Each

row and each column of the matrix

has

exactly one nonzero element. If the coefficient

is nonzero, the permutation matrix

(equivalent to the term

) is added at the location of each of these nonzero elements.

Finally, we note that the polynomial parity check matrix of a -level HQC LDPC code can more generally be expanded into

a parity check polynomial

in variables,

where

. We call this the “level- ” polynomial parity

check matrix of the code. We derive this matrix by expanding

out all but the last levels. Replace each

with the polynomial matrix in

Fig. 4. Example of the tree structure of a family of three-level HQC LDPC codes. The left-hand tree is , and the right-hand tree is .

show that there is a complete equivalence between Definition

1 of the last section and the definitions of this section. We can

start with Definition 1 and easily find the unique set of labeled

trees that specify the code or, starting from a tree structure, find

the unique HQC LDPC code that has that structure.

The reasons to consider this alternative description are

twofold. First, the representations of this section help reveal

the hierarchical structure within the algebraic description of

Definition 1. Second, we will use unlabeled trees to define a

family of HQC LDPC codes, and then will want to search for a

labeling within that family to optimize girth.

The basic observation that motivates the following definitions

is that the nonzero terms of the polynomials that define any HQC

LDPC code have a hierarchical clustering that can be repre-

sented by a labeled tree. We formally define such a labeled tree

as follows.

Definition 2: A labeled tree , corresponding to an entry in

the

multivariate polynomial parity check matrix

in variables defining a -level HQC LDPC code, is

a depth- tree. The root node of the tree is the single node at

the top

level. Each node at level ,

, has a

number of edges connecting it to nodes in the next level down.

The number of edges must be an integer in the set

.

Each edge below a node at level is labeled by an integer in

the set

. Edges are termed “siblings” if they

share the same parent (i.e., are connected to the same node at the

higher level). The edge labels of sibling nodes are constrained

to be distinct. We refer to the edges below the lowest nodes as

“leaves.” We will have need to index the edges at each level of

the tree, so use

to denote the number of edges in at

level , i.e., the set of edges that have a parent node at level .

The code discussed in Example 2 is characterized by the ma-

The matrix

has dimension

trix of two labeled trees shown in Fig. 4. The left-hand tree char-

.

acterizes the polynomial

and the right-hand tree

B. Tree Structure of HQC LDPC Codes

characterizes

, both specified in (20). Before under-

standing how these labeled trees relate to the structure of the

We now show that we can alternatively describe an HQC code, we note that for this code,

,

and

,

LDPC code by specifying the code’s tree structure. The tree and node and edge labels are within the ranges specified by Def-

structure of any HQC LDPC code is defined by a matrix of la- inition 2.

beled trees, defined in Definition 2. These labeled trees quite The next definition relates these trees to the structure of the

naturally reveal the hierarchical structure of the code. We will code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4561

Definition 3: The tree structure of a -level HQC LDPC

code is specified by a matrix of labeled trees

,

,

. To each leaf of , we asso-

ciate a single nonzero coefficient

in a one-to-one

manner. If the edge labels on the unique path from the leaf to

the root node are

, then the nonzero coefficient asso-

ciated with the leaf is

.

In certain cases (corresponding to all-zero polynomials), we

want to define a “null” tree. This is a nonexistent tree (and there-

fore, no edges exist so all coefficients are zero). We use the spe-

cial symbol to denote the null tree. E.g.,

for the code

specified in (5).

The number of edges below level of tree

indi-

cates the number of distinct powers of

that appear in

. Each node at level

corresponds to

one of these terms. The number of edges below each of the

nodes at level

indicates the number of distinct powers

of

associated with that term, and so on down the tree.

The number of leaves in the tree equals the number of terms

in the polynomial

. The maximum number

of leaves below any of the lowest level nodes (across all

pairs) tells us the weight of the code (weight-I, weight-II, etc.).

The edge labels indicate the exponents that define the nonzero

polynomials.

We can also define a more fine-grained “weight at level ” of

a hierarchical code by the maximum number of edges below any

of the nodes at level . A hierarchical code can have different

weights at different levels; for example, the code from Example

2 with tree structure shown in Fig. 4 is weight-II at level 1 (the

lowest level), weight-III at level 2, and weight-II at level 3.

The following lemma shows that the two ways of concep-

tualizing HQC LDPC codes (Definition 1 or Definition 3) are

equivalent.

Lemma 1: There is a one-to-one mapping between any HQC

LDPC codes as defined in Definition 1 and a tree structure, as

defined in Definition 3.

Proof: We first show that any HQC LDPC code has a tree

structure that can be read off from the form of the polynomials

that make up its polynomial parity-check matrix. To see this,

start with Definition 1. The

polynomials each define

one labeled tree. Using the distributive law, we cluster the terms

of each polynomial as much as possible (i.e., into the least-fac-

tored form of the polynomial). The resulting (hierarchical) clus-

tering of terms specifies a labeled tree.

Conversely, we now show that any set of labeled trees can

be uniquely mapped to an HQC LDPC code. Starting with the

set of labeled trees, we first solve for the nonzero coefficients

by concatenating edge labels on all paths from distinct leaves

to the root. Using the resulting set of nonzero coefficients in

Definition 1 specifies the code.

Example 3: To understand the structure on the code imposed

by the tree topology, consider again the two trees shown in

Fig. 4. By “tree topology,” we simply mean the unlabeled ver-

sions of these trees. Each unlabeled tree has three levels and

there are two of them. From this, we infer that these unlabeled

trees specify a family of three-level HQC LDPC codes where

and

. Since the maximum number of leaves

below a node at the first level is two, these trees specifies a

family of weight-II QC LDPC codes.

Now focus on the left-hand tree. To simplify notation, let us

again use for , for , and for . Since the number

of leaves is six, we deduce that

has six terms, i.e.,

where

,

and

,

,

,

and

. Since the root node has two edges, we deduce

that these six terms are clustered into two sets of polynomials

defined by

and

; thus

where

. (Since and are both binary, without loss of

generality we could set

and

at this point.) Now

from the second level in the tree, we deduce that the terms in

group into two sets, one with two terms so

. The same

happens with the terms in where

. This tells us that

the polynomials compatible with this tree have the form

(25)

where

,

,

,

and

(but,

e.g.,

is allowed).

One can now see that the topology of the unlabeled version

of the trees of Fig. 4 specifies a family of HQC LDPC codes, of

which the code considered in Example 2, and specified in (20),

is one member. As the last example illustrates, many degrees of

freedom remain within the specified family. In particular, these

are the choice of the , , and in (25), subject to the con-

straints

. In the algorithms of

Section VII, were we maximize the girth of our codes, we search

among these degrees of freedom, keeping the code’s unlabeled

tree structure fixed.

Finally, we note that in a nonhierarchical weight-I QC LDPC

code, the trees in are quite simple. Each is either the null tree

or a tree that consists of a single root node with a single leaf

below it. No leaf has a sibling, so no constraints are placed on

the choice of edge labels.

C. Hierarchical Structure as a Particular Choice of Graph Coverings

We now connect the hierarchical structure of HQC LDPC

codes to a particular sequence of graph “covers” [34], [35]. We

illustrate this connection by showing how the code discussed

in Example 2 is a three-layer cover of the code’s protograph.

This is the perspective taken in [35]. The sequence of covers is

depicted in Fig. 5.

Example 2 (continued): Fig. 5(a) depicts the Tanner graph of

the QC LDPC code, whose parity check matrix is obtained by

substituting for each in (18). In Fig. 5(a), the dots in each

circle depict the variable nodes that correspond to one circulant

matrix. The squares in each rectangle depict the check nodes that

correspond to one circulant matrix. Fig. 5(b) can be regarded as

a -cover (where

) of the protograph of Fig. 5(a) and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4562

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Definition 4: A length- path through a -variate

polynomial parity check matrix

of an HQC LDPC

code is specified by two sets, and , i.e.,

.

The first set is an ordered series

(26)

such that

(i)

and

for all ,

,

(ii)

,

(iii)

for

(even integers),

(iv)

for

(odd integers),

(v)

for all

, where the set

is

defined to be the set of coefficients in the polynomial in

the row and column of

that are nonzero:

(27)

The second set is a set of length- vectors of coefficient indices

(28)

Fig. 5. Visualizing the HQC LDPC code of Example 2 as a three-layer graph cover of the code’s protograph.

represents (18). Each column and each row in

of (18),

respectively, correspond to a dot and a square in Fig. 5(b). If

any nonzero element in

is the summation of more than

one term, the number of edges connecting the corresponding

dot and square in Fig. 5(b) equals the number of terms.

To get Fig. 5(c) and 5(d), we recursively apply the same logic.

Fig. 5(b) is a -cover (where

) of the protograph of

Fig. 5(c). Each column and each row in

of (19), re-

spectively, correspond to a dot and a square in Fig. 5(c). Fi-

nally, Fig. 5(c) is a -cover (where

) of the protograph

shown in Fig. 5(d). Each column and each row in

of

(20), respectively, correspond to a dot and a square in Fig. 5(d).

Reversing the above steps, the protograph in Fig. 5(d) can thus

be “lifted” into the Tanner graph of Fig. 5(a) through a sequence

of three covering steps.

VI. CYCLES IN HQC LDPC CODES
We now state the necessary and sufficient conditions on the polynomial parity check matrix of an HQC LDPC code to have a cycle of a particular length. These conditions generalize those specified by Fossorier in [33] for weight-I QC LDPC codes. They are also formalizations and generalizations of the examples we gave for higher weight QC LDPC codes in Section IV-B; the main important new requirement compared to those examples is that our cycles now need to be cycle at all levels of the hierarchy simultaneously.

where, as implied by the notation,

for all

, and

. Furthermore,

(vi) the coordinate

of

satisfies

for all

,

(vii)

for all

, where

is

a compact notation for

,

(viii) if consecutive elements of are identical, i.e.,

for some ,

, then

.

The above definition generalizes those definitions made and

used in Sections IV-A and IV-C for finding cycles in higher

weight QC LDPC codes. In those sections, the ordered set

and coefficient indices were first introduced and their charac-

teristics were described. For examples of , see (10), (13), and

(15), and for those of , see (11), (12), and (16). These examples

illustrate the reasoning behind criteria (1)–(8) in the definition

above.

We now state the conditions for a length- path

actually to correspond to length- cycles in the Tanner graph.

Consider the following alternating sums, one for each ,

:

(29)

As reflected in the following theorem, these sums are the gen-

eralization of the sum in (9) to HQC LDPC codes.

Theorem 1: A path length- path

through the

-variate

polynomial parity check matrix

corresponds to length- cycles in the Tanner graph if and only

if for every ,

,

mod

(30)

A. Finding Cycles in HQC LDPC Codes

Proof: First consider the case where

, i.e., a non-

We start by defining a path (or “candidate cycle”) through a hierarchical QC LDPC code for which (30) corresponds to Fos-

-variate polynomial parity check matrix.

sorier’s condition. Recall the logic of Section IV. In this setting,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4563

if condition (30) is not satisfied, then the column of the polyno-

mial parity check matrix from which the path originates is dis-

tinct from the one on which the path terminates. Since distinct

columns of the polynomial parity check matrix correspond to

distinct sets of variable nodes in the Tanner graph, this means

that if (30) is not satisfied, the path does not correspond to a set

of cycles.

In general, what condition (30) is helping us to understand is

whether, in the expanded parity check matrix at the next lower

level, the path through the polynomial parity check matrix cor-

responds to a set of path through the parity check matrix that

all correspond to cycles in the Tanner graph. In the case of a

nonhierarchical QC LDPC code, there is only one level of ex-

pansion, from the polynomial parity check matrix to the parity

check matrix. However, in an HQC LDPC code, there are mul-

tiple levels of expansion.

Now consider HQC LDPC codes where

. Given any

path, consider whether condition (30) holds for

. If the

condition does not hold, then, similar to Fossorier’s logic, the

path through the parity-check matrix at the next lower level,

i.e., through the level-

polynomial parity check ma-

trix, will not start and end in the same column. In the hierar-

chical setting, each column at level

corresponds to a set

of variable nodes. However, due to the way we expand out the

parity-check matrix using Kronecker products in Definition 1,

the sets of variable nodes corresponding to distinct columns of

the level- polynomial parity check matrix for any given are

nonintersecting. A path that originates and terminates in distinct

subsets of the variable nodes cannot correspond to a set of cy-

cles. Thus, if (30) does not hold for

, the path cannot

correspond to a set of cycles.

On the other hand, if (30) is satisfied for

, then cycles

may exist, depending on what happens at the lower levels. Using

the same argument, we recurse down the levels from

to

. If there is any for which (30) is not satisfied, then

the path originates from and terminate at distinct variable nodes

and, therefore, does not correspond to a set of cycles. However,

if (30) is satisfied for all ,

, then the path originates

and terminates on the same variable node and cycles exists.

We immediately have the following theorem.

Theorem 2: A necessary and sufficient condition for a

-level HQC LDPC code to have girth at least

is the

following. For all paths through the polynomial parity check

matrix of length at most (path length at least four and at

most ), condition (30) does not hold for at least one ,

.

B. Examples

Example 4 (Cycle in an HQC LDPC Code): Consider again

the polynomial parity check matrices

and

, re-

spectively, specified in (18) and (19). First consider the non-

hierarchical description of the code specified by

. A cycle

of length-four exists traversing the path

where

This corresponds to, in order, the four polynomials

Selecting out

,

,

, and

choose

means we

We calculate the sum in (29) to be

(31)

where

for this code. This example confirms, in the

general notation, the test for cycles in nonhierarchical QC LDPC

codes already discussed in Section IV-A.

Now, consider the same cycle from the hierarchical perspec-

tive. With respect to the two-level representation

of

(19), the same cycle through the Tanner graph corresponds to

the ordered series

Now we have polynomials

and

which, respectively, are

and

The same cycles correspond to the coefficient indices

Note that the first subindex of each coefficient corresponds to the subindex of the coefficients selected at the one-level view. The alternating sums along the path are

We now give examples of two paths through the polynomial

parity check matrix of the code of Example 2. In the first, we

describe a path that corresponds to cycles through the Tanner where

and

for this code. While we do not work

graph. We first consider the code as a QC LDPC code (ignoring out the example for the three-level representation

of

its hierarchical structure) and use Fossorier’s condition to verify (20), we note that the ordered traversed by this cycle would be

the existence of cycles. We then look at the same code from a

.

hierarchical perspective to illustrate Theorem 2. In the second Example 5 (Noncycle in an HQC LDPC Code): We now pro-

example, we consider a path through the same code that does vide an example of a path through

for which

not correspond to a cycle through the Tanner graph.

mod but

mod . Let the ordered set be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4564
mials

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

. This corresponds to polyno-

,

,

, and

. We select the set of coefficient indices to be

from which we can verify that

mod but

Fig. 6. The labeled trees in a restricted two-level HQC LDPC code will all have two levels, with each node at the bottom level having exactly one leaf below it.

mod . Hence, while condition (30) holds at level one, it does

not hold at level two. Referring to the expanded

in (18),

one can confirm this conclusion using the logic of Section IV-A.

In particular, is located in the sixth column of the first row of

, while the polynomial traversed by the path is located

in the fifth column of the fifth row of

.

none of the leaves of the trees have siblings. In Section VIII-A, we name such codes restricted two-level HQC LDPC codes. An example of such a tree is given in Fig. 6.
Example 6 (Inevitable Length-Six Cycle in HQC LDPC Codes): First consider any code containing a tree of the type il-

C. Inevitable Cycles in HQC LDPC Codes
Since HQC LDPC codes are QC LDPC codes, they also have inevitable cycles. In this section, we describe how the logic and results of Section IV-C regarding inevitable cycles extend to HQC LDPC codes. We illustrate the logic for specific examples

lustrated in Fig. 6. This code has three leaves and so, according

to our discussion, the code must contain six cycles. Without

loss of generality, let such a tree be located in row and column

of the parity check matrix

. The polynomial has the

form

of HQC LDPC codes that we will use in our design pipeline

presented in Section VIII.

Recall that in Section IV-C, we discussed two classes of in- As discussed above, choose the ordered series to be

evitable cycles. We first saw that there will inevitably be cycles of length six in any weight-III QC LDPC code. We also

(32)

saw that the code will have eight-cycles if the polynomial parity and the ordered set of coefficient vectors to be

check matrix

of a weight-II QC LDPC code contains two

weight-2 polynomials in any row or in any column.

We analogously find that there will inevitably be cycles of

length six for an HQC LDPC code if any labeled tree in the tree matrix defining the code has three leaves. There will

Cycles inevitably exist because

(33)

inevitably be eight-cycles if, in any row or in any column of

mod

the matrix of labeled trees defining the HQC LDPC code, there is a pair of labeled trees both having two leaves. In terms of

mod

the polynomial parity check matrix

in variables, the

former means that one of the polynomials has three terms (cf.,

Example 7), and the latter means that in some column or row

there is a pair of polynomials having two terms each (cf., Ex-

ample 6). We also note that if the three leaves (or the two pairs

of leaves each) are siblings of the same parent node, then this

would be a weight-III (weight-II) QC LDPC code, and the con-

ditions of the last paragraph would apply. However, the sibling

condition is not required for inevitable cycles to exist.

The logic behind these statements is almost identical to

the earlier case. We describe it completely for the first situ-

ation. We pick a length-six ordered series equal to (13),

i.e.,

, where

is the index of the labeled tree

that has three leaves.

regardless of the values of the coefficients or of or .

Example 7 (Inevitable Length-Eight Cycle in HQC LDPC

Codes): Now suppose that the parity check matrix of a restricted

two-level HQC LDPC code contains two labeled trees in the

same row or column where both trees are similar to the one de-

picted in Fig. 6, but with only two leaves each.

Suppose that the two weight-2 polynomials are in

the same row but in two different columns and

. Let the polynomial at

be

and let the polynomial at

be

.

Consider the same ordered series as in (15), i.e.,

, and

choose the ordered set of coefficient indices to be

Let the three length- coefficient vectors correspond to

the three leaves be

and select the coefficient set

. Then, because each element is both an even and an odd element of the set, (30) is satisfied for every

Eight cycles are inevitable because

(34)

, just as it was in the QC LDPC example of (14). The logic for

mod

automatic eight-cycles follows from the analogous extensions

mod

of the choices made in (15) and (16).

We now illustrate these points about inevitable cycles for regardless of the values of the coefficients or of or .

a subclass of two-level HQC LDPC codes that are described Although it is not our main focus, we note that there will be

solely by labeled trees with weight-1 at the bottom level. That is, structures in tree matrices that also give rise to inevitable 10-cy-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4565

cles and 12-cycles. For example, if there is a 2 3 or 3 2 searches for codes of girth 10 (which is the largest girth for

submatrix where all the entries contain trees with at least one which we have so far implemented our algorithm) because of

leaf, one inevitably obtains 12-cycles, analogously to the situa- the many possible ways that eight-cycles can form.

tion described in Section IV-C for ordinary weight-I QC LDPC

codes.

B. Girth Maximizing Algorithm for QC LDPC Codes

VII. MAXIMIZING THE GIRTH OF QC LDPC CODES

In this section, we present the main algorithmic ideas in the simplified setting of weight-I QC LDPC codes. This simplifica-

In this section, we present the ideas behind our girth-max- tion also reduces notation. For the duration of this section, we

imizing algorithms for QC LDPC and for HQC LDPC codes. set

,

,

. Further, path elements are

The latter is a generalization of the former, presented in part in scalars so

. In a weight-I QC LDPC, each tree

[1]. These algorithms can rid the codes of all noninevitable cy-

has a single edge and

for at most one value of

cles. In Section VIII, we will describe a secondary procedure for (if

, then

for all ). The set of other possible

ridding the codes of their inevitable cycles. As the details of the edge labels are the set of ,

, such that

algorithms are somewhat involved, we choose only to describe (there are no sibling edges so there are no further constraints on

the basic ideas in the main text and defer to the appendixes the the choice of ).

details. The overall algorithms are described in Appendix A, We now define a set of cost vectors, each of which tracks the

while in Appendix B–D, we describe the subroutines that con- cost (in terms of the weighted sum of the number of cycles) of

tain much of the computational complexity (and descriptive in- changing any edge label to each of its other possible values. In

tricacies).

particular, for each edge in each

, we define

In Section VII-A, we describe the general idea of the algo-

rithms, which applies both to QC and to HQC LDPC codes.

(35)

Then, in Section VII-B, we give more detail for the case of weight-I QC LDPC codes. The discussion of the generalization to HQC LDPC codes (which includes higher weight QC LDPC codes as a special case) is deferred to the appendixes.

where

is the cost we pay for assigning

for

each value of for

. If the desired code girth

is , then the cost is a linear function of the number of

cycles of each length that results from each possible choice for

A. Girth Maximization Using Hill Climbing
The general idea of our algorithm (for both QC and HQC LDPC codes) is as follows. We start by specifying the desired tree topology of the code by specifying a set of unlabeled trees. We initialize our algorithm with a code chosen randomly from the ensemble of codes that have the desired tree topology.

. The weight vector

defines the

cost function, where is the cost assigned to each length-

cycles.

It is useful to visualize the set of cost vectors as a matrix

of vectors. For example, a regular

LDPC code can be

represented as

This means that we randomly assign labels to the trees subject

to the constraints that sibling edges must have distinct labels.

(36)

Our algorithm iteratively updates a sequence of edge labels.

At each iteration, it changes the single edge label to the value that effects the greatest reduction in a cost function. The cost function we use depends on the number of cycles in the current code that have length less than the desired girth. Shorter cycles are weighted to be more costly than longer cycles. The algorithm

Given a parity check matrix and desired girth , the cost vectors are calculated via the following argument. We consider the set of all possible and distinct length- paths per Def. 4, i.e.,

terminates when either (a) the current values of all coefficients

give zero cost (and thus the code has the desired girth), or (b)

when we can no longer change any single coefficient to a value for

. For each path

and each

that further reduces the cost (and thus the number of undesired , we consider the corresponding coefficient

. As-

cycles). When the tree topology of the code implies the exis- suming all other distinct coefficients

for

are kept

tence of inevitable cycles (b) will always be the stopping cri- fixed, we note the “guilty” value(s) of

to be the value ,

terion. Updates are performed subject to the sibling constraint

, such that if

were changed to , then

on edge labels. This preserves the tree topology of the code and condition (30) would be satisfied. In other words, a cycle would

thus, e.g., the protograph structure of the code is an invariant result.

under the updates. We note that a change in a single edge label For example, for a potential six-cycle, we know that a cycle

will, in general, have a trickle-down effect on a number of code will exist if and only if

coefficients (equal to the number of leaves in the tree that are a

mod

. Suppose, for example,

descendent of that edge).

that the current summed value of

The main challenge in implementing the algorithm lies in

mod is equal to one.

book-keeping: tracking how many cycles of each length the cur- Then, the guilty values for

,

, and

would

rent code contains, and what the resulting number of cycles will be one less than their respective current values, and the guilty

be if each edge label is changed to each of its other possible values for

,

, and

would be one greater

value. The calculation becomes particularly involved when one than their respective current values.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4566

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Computing “guilty” values is relatively uncomplicated for codes. In Section VIII-B, we show how to lift any protograph

paths consisting of distinct elements. It becomes more com- into such a code. In Section VIII-C, we describe the squashing

plicated if some elements of the path appear more than once. procedure, and finally, in Section VIII-D, we explain the full de-

This can occur in potential eight-cycles and occurs, e.g., in the sign pipeline, including “inflating” the incidence matrix corre-

second example of Fig. 3. In such cases, we must keep in mind sponding to the protograph, lifting the inflated incidence matrix

that when such coefficients are changed, the contribution to al- into a family of restricted two-level HQC LDPC codes, max-

ternating sum can double, triple (e.g., in the length-12 cycle of imizing the girth over that family, and squashing the resulting

Fig. 3 because the path passes through each submatrix three HQC LDPC code.

times), or contribute even more times. Alternately, repeated el-

ements can also cancel (if they enter modulated by both and ), not contributing at all to the sum. We deal with this com- A. Restricted Two-Level HQC LDPC Codes

plexity in Appendix B by defining the “multiplicity” of a path element; used in the cost calculating algorithms subsequently specified in Appendixes C and D.

As “restricted two-level” implies, the hierarchy in restricted two-level HQC LDPC codes has only two levels. The additional “restriction” is that the weight of the first (lowest) level must be

one. In terms of the tree structure description of these codes,

the labeled trees will all have a form like that shown in Fig. 6,

VIII. DESIGN PIPELINE FOR HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

with the nodes at the bottom level each having exactly one leaf, i.e., leaves have no siblings. In comparison, there are leaves in

In this section, we describe our design procedure for highgirth QC LDPC codes. We pause to recall the overall objective of the paper. We want to be able to map any interesting existing code design specified by a protograph into a high-girth QC code. As mentioned earlier, the protographs that motivate us are those of spatially coupled codes. These codes have excellent theoretical and empirical performance in the waterfall

left-hand tree of Fig. 4 that do have siblings. Nodes at the second

level can have an arbitrary number of edges.

The fact that these codes have two levels means that they are

described by a polynomial parity check matrix in two dummy

variables

. The restriction to the lowest level having

weight one means that any weight- polynomial in the matrix

must have the form

regime. Furthermore, they can be specified to have a wide range of rates and lengths. However, the protograph of a spatially cou-

(37)

pled code will have multiple edges between variable and check nodes. Thus, a QC LDPC codes created via a simple lifting operation would suffer from inevitable cycles. Through our procedure, we want to deliver a high-girth code that will also have good performance in the error-floor regime. In Section IX, we design such spatially coupled codes, for a variety of girths, and illustrate the error-floor improvement due to increased girth.
We first show how to map such a protograph into an “inflated” HQC LDPC code structure, on which we can use the girth maximizing algorithm of Section VII to remove all noninevitable cycles. We then show how the resulting HQC LDPC codes can be “squashed” down to yield a nonhierarchical QC LDPC code which no longer contains the inevitable cycles and which is a member of the family of codes described by our protograph. The subclass of HQC LDPC codes with which we work are the re-

where all the exponents must be distinct. As usual, the ex-

ponents are integers which range between 0 and

for the

exponents and 0 and

for the exponents.

Because the weight at the lowest level is restricted to be one,

these codes, when described as standard QC LDPC codes, look

like weight-I QC LDPC codes, whose base matrix is composed

of circulant submatrices of size by . In [35], Smaran-

dache and Vontobel briefly introduce a further restricted class

of such QC LDPC codes in the context of designing codes of

large minimum distance. They also required that the codes be

weight-II at the second level and that

, which they term

“type-I QC codes based on double-covers of type-II QC codes.”

They do allow for generalization beyond

to

which, for

, is the starting point of our design.

stricted two-level HQC LDPC codes, already mentioned briefly

in the examples of Section VI-C.

B. Transforming Protographs Into Restricted Two-Level HQC

It is worth mentioning a couple related techniques. In [37], LDPC Codes

a “masking” technique was introduced which zeroes out partic-

ular elements of the base matrix of a weight-I QC LDPC code Recall that in Section III, we introduce a graph lifting trans-

to improve its girth. Of course, this has the effect of changing formation to convert a protograph into an ordinary QC LDPC

the code structure, while the intent in our method is to maintain code. The transformation replaces the incidence matrix equiv-

the input code structure. In [38], a two-step lifting procedure is alent to the protograph with a polynomial parity check matrix

applied to weight-I QC LDPC codes which allows the resulting

whose polynomial entries had weight equal to the entries

code to exceed bounds on minimum distance that apply to or- in the incidence matrix. A completely analogous transformation

dinary QC LDPC codes. However, the technique was only ap- exists for converting protographs into restricted two-level HQC

plied to codes based on protographs that never had more than LDPC codes. One replaces the incidence matrix with a bivariate

one edge connecting two nodes.

polynomial parity check matrix

whose polynomial en-

The outline of the section is as follows. In Section VIII-A, tries each have the restricted form of (37) and have weight equal

we fully define the class of restricted two-level HQC LDPC to the entries in the incidence matrix.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4567

For example, the incidence matrix corresponding to the protograph depicted in Fig. 1 is
(38)
This matrix is lifted into a two-level restricted HQC LDPC code with polynomial parity check matrix
(39)

where we recall that represents the

all-zeros ma-

trix. These submatrices are obtained from lifting the polyno-

mials

and

.

The second situation involves four polynomials of weight

2 arranged rectilinearly, e.g.,

,

,

,

and

. Furthermore, after inflation, the exponents of

the polynomials in the same column will have the same expo-

nents, so that the corresponding submatrices would look some-

thing like

where , , , , , and are integer exponents between 0 and

, and , , , , , and are integer exponents be-

tween 0 and

that satisfy

.

(41)

C. Squashing Sets of Trees to Eliminate Inevitable Cycles

Because restricted two-level HQC LDPC codes are weight-I

at the lowest level, they can also be considered weight-I QC

LDPC codes and can, therefore, be described in terms of their base matrix.1 In this section, we develop a technique that selectively removes rows or columns from the base matrix describing a restricted two-level HQC LDPC code in a way that eliminates all inevitable six- and eight-cycles from the corresponding Tanner graphs of the code. There are two underlying assumptions in this section. First, that via a girth-maximization procedure, the base matrix entries involved have already

By the results of Section VI-C, the first situation contains sixcycles within each submatrix and the second situation contains inevitable eight-cycles between the pair of submatrices in each row and in each column. We argue that if we “squash” the two matrices in the first example—by stacking the first two rows of the upper matrix on the last two rows of the lower matrix—then the matrix produced

been optimized to eliminate all noninevitable cycles. Second,

we concentrate on restricted two-level HQC LDPC codes where

, which implies that the base matrix is composed of cir-

culant submatrices of size four by four.

(42)

There are two situations we will want to consider. Respec-

tively they will correspond to Examples 6 and 7 of Section VI-C.

The full connection to these examples will only become clear contains no six-cycles. Similar if we squash the matrices in the in the next section, when we explain our “inflation” procedure, second example, then the resulting pair of matrices which has the effect of placing pairs of similarly structured four

by four submatrices on top of each other (or besides each other).

The first situation involves a polynomial of weight 3 in the

polynomial parity check matrix

, which after inflation

will be converted into two polynomials of weight 3, e.g.,

(43)

and

, with identical exponents, in the

same column of the polynomial parity check matrix. Assuming

a restricted two-level code with

, the corresponding

submatrices in the base matrix would, respectively, look some-

thing like

contains no eight-cycles. Since by assumption there were no noninevitable six- or
eight-cycles between the original matrices, to show our as-

sertion, we need solely to demonstrate that the squashing

procedure removes all inevitable cycles. We argue this based

on the following lemma, proved in Appendix E.

Lemma 2:

(40) (i) Any inevitable six-cycles within a polynomial of the form

traverse three distinct rows

and three distinct columns of the corresponding base ma-

trix.

(ii) Any inevitable eight-cycles between a pair of polynomials

1Recall from Section II that the base matrix is the matrix of powers of the polynomial parity check matrix expressed in a single dummy variable.

of the form

and

lo-

cated in the same row (column) of the polynomial parity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4568

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 7. The design procedure to produce high-girth codes. The inputs are a protograph and the dimension of the first-level circulant matrices. The output is a weight-I QC LDPC code.

check matrix traverse three distinct rows (columns) of the

corresponding base matrix.

Now, consider the squashing of the matrices in (40) into the

matrix in (42). Note that the latter matrix has only two rows

from each of the matrices in (40). However, by Lemma 2-(i), all

inevitable cycles pass through three rows. Therefore, the matrix

in (42) does not contain any inevitable six-cycles.

Next, consider the squashing of the matrices in (41) into the

matrices in (43). First we show that the squashing procedure

eliminate the automatic cycles between pairs of matrices arising

from pairs of weight-2 polynomials on the same row of the poly-

nomial parity check matrix. This follows from Lemma 2-(ii)

which states that these eight-cycles traverse three distinct rows,

because only two rows of each of the matrices are retained.

Next consider the inevitable cycles between pairs of matrices

arising from pairs of weight-2 polynomials in the same column

of the polynomial parity check matrix. Since we squash ver-

tically, parts of all columns of the base matrix are retained.

However, if one examines (43), one sees that the second and

fourth columns of the left-hand matrix only include contribu-

tions from the upper left-hand and bottom-left-hand matrices of

(41), respectively. The remaining inevitable cycles from (41),

therefore, cannot include these columns, but that leaves only

two columns in the left-hand matrix, and by Lemma 2-(ii), we

know that these inevitable cycles require three columns. There-

fore, the inevitable cycles have been eliminated. The same logic

holds for the right-hand side of (43).

Note that for the above logic regarding eight-cycles to hold,

it is important that the -exponents of the two matrices to be

squashed together (those in the same column) are the same.

Thus, the two matrices should represented by polynomials of the

form

and

, which share the same

exponents. Note also that the same squashing procedure would

work in the horizontal direction as long as the matrices on the

same row have the same -exponents. The logic is the same with

the argument for rows and columns reversed.

D. Design Procedure for High-Girth Codes
We now turn to demonstrating how to construct a weight-I QC LDPC code that does not have any six-cycles or eight-cycles. We first sketch the procedure, depicted in Fig. 7, and then illustrate the details with a worked design example.

Roughly speaking, the procedure will start with a desired protograph and code parameter (our procedure assumes
). We first map the protograph into a incidence matrix, cf. equation (38). Depending on the weight and relative locations of the entries in the incidence matrix, we “inflate” the incidence matrix. We then use the lifting transformation of Section VIII-B to produce a polynomial parity check matrix for a restricted two-level HQC LDPC code. Next, using our max girth algorithm, we eliminate all noninevitable six- and eight-cycles. Finally, we use the squashing procedure of Section VIII-C to eliminate inevitable cycles. Of course, the way in which we inflate the code must be compatible with the way we squash the code to produce a valid parity check matrix that meets the parameters of interest.
It should be emphasized that the LDPC code resulting from this procedure will be a QC LDPC and not an HQC LDPC code, although the final structure will be quite similar to that of an HQC LDPC code. Note also that although a lifting procedure is being applied, it does not necessarily mean that the resulting code must have very large block-lengths, as the increase in the number of submatrices may be partially or entirely compensated for by a decrease in the size of the submatrices that is required to obtain a desired girth.
1) Inflate incidence matrix: As indicated, the procedure first produces the incidence matrix of the protograph, which we assume has no entries greater than 3. (We make no effort here to deal with inevitable cycles caused by weights greater than 3). The “inflation” procedure works as follows. We first mark for duplication of each row of the matrix with two or more elements of value 2 or greater or a single element of value 3. We also mark for duplication of each column that has two or more elements of value 2 or greater. Then, we inflate to produce a new incidence matrix in which each of the rows in marked for duplication is duplicated. We then inflate again to produce from by duplicating each of the marked columns. As will be evident when we get to squashing, we must track in the matrices
and which rows and columns are duplicated versions of each other. The following example illustrates the inflating procedure.
Example 8: Suppose we start with a protograph that has the incidence matrix
(44)
The first row in this incidence matrix contains an element with value 3 (and also two elements of value 2 or greater), so we mark it, and we also mark the second column because it has two elements with value 2 or greater. Duplicating the first row, we obtain
(45)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4569

Now duplicating the second column, we obtain the inflated in- The code with the above polynomial parity check matrix is

cidence matrix

equivalent to a standard weight-I QC LDPC code with base ma-

trix given by

(46)

In , the first and second rows, and also the second and third

columns, are tracked as duplicated versions of each other.

2) Lift into

: Next we lift the inflated incidence

matrix into the polynomial parity check matrix

for

a two-level restricted HQC LDPC code with

. We per-

form this transformation under one additional restriction. The

restriction is that the exponents in pairs of duplicated rows or

pairs of duplicated columns must be identical to each other. The

value of is left as a design parameter.

Example 8 (continued): The inflated incidence matrix is

lifted into a polynomial parity check matrix

, yielding

the form

Notice that the exponents in the first and second rows and in

the second and third columns of this matrix have been restricted

to be identical to each other. Otherwise, all the exponents are

free parameters that satisfy

for any exponent

and

for any exponent .

3) Maximize the code’s girth: In the next step, we apply

the girth-maximization algorithm of Section VII to produce a

set of -exponents and -exponents such that no short

cycles exist except those that are inevitable. Of course, the hill-

climbing algorithm of Section VII is just one possible approach.

Other algorithms could be used in its place. The polynomial

parity-check matrix

obtained in this manner can be

converted into an equivalent base matrix for a weight-I QC

LDPC code.

Example 8 (continued): Using our girth-maximizing algo-

rithm, we find that with

, the following choices for

the and exponents in

will create no six-cycles or

eight-cycles except for inevitable short cycles:

(47)
Notice that the base matrix is composed of 4 by 4 circulant submatrices.
4) Squash the base matrix to remove inevitable cycles: We now have a base matrix corresponding to the inflated incidence matrix . The next steps in our procedure will remove columns and rows from to obtain a base matrix corresponding to our original incidence matrix .
First, we note that each column of the incidence matrix corresponds to four columns in the base matrix . In the next step of our procedure, we focus on the columns that have been marked as duplicates in . We retain the left two columns and remove the right two columns in from the four that correspond to the left column of a duplicated pair in , and also remove the left two columns but retain the right two columns in
from the four that correspond to the right column of a duplicated pair in . We call the thinned-out base matrix that is obtained from this procedure .
Example 8 (continued): Recall that the second and third columns of given in (46) have been marked as duplicates of each other. So to obtain from the base matrix given in (47), we retain the left two columns from the second four in
, and the right two columns from the third four in , so that is given by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Now note that each row in the incidence matrix corresponds to four rows in the base matrix . In the final step of our procedure, we focus on the rows that have been marked as duplicates in . We retain the top two rows in from the four that correspond to the top row in a duplicated pair in , and we retain the bottom two rows in from the four that correspond to the bottom row of a duplicated pair in . We call the base matrix obtained by this further thinning-out procedure ; this is the base matrix that will correspond to our original incidence matrix .
Example 8 (continued): The first and second rows of given in equation (45) have been marked as duplicates. It means that we should retain the top two rows of the first group of four rows from , and the bottom two rows from the second group of four rows. Thus, we obtain

Notice that the code defined by the final base matrix is not

an HQC LDPC code, because that base matrix is constructed

from

submatrices that are not circulant. Still, the code is a

member of the class defined by the original protograph. In our

example, each group of four rows and four columns in the base

matrix defines a type of check or bit. So in our example, from

the structure of , each check of the first type will be connected

to three bits of the first type, and two bits of the second type,

and so on, just as required by the protograph.

In fact, any code defined by a base matrix of a form similar

to our , for example, of the form

in the base matrix, and thus normally involves far fewer parameters for the hill-climbing algorithm to optimize. When one tries to optimize over more parameters, there is a greater chance that the hill-climbing algorithms will get stuck in an unfortunate local optimum.

IX. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we present a set of numerical results illustrating our design methodology and associated performance. In Section IX-A, we present performance results for three codes: a pair of girth-10 codes (of rates 0.45 and ) and a rate-0.7 girth-8 code. All are one-sided spatially coupled codes. For each design, we compare its performance to that of girth-6 code(s) that have the same protograph. In Section IX-B, we give a sense of the effectiveness of the hill-climbing approach to girth maximization. We do this by considering a pair of metrics of success: the minimum block length code found of the desired girth and rate, and the “success rate” of the algorithm. We compare these metrics for hill-climbing to three other approaches: guessand-test [33], PEG [31], and the code construction method of O’Sullivan [27]. Then, in Section IX-C, we discuss the computational motivations and demonstrate the computational efficiency of the squashing procedure in comparison to other possible approaches. Finally, in Section IX-D, we address how the computational complexity of our approach scales with the target girth as a function of the code rate.

A. Performance of Girth-10 or Girth-8 QC LDPC Codes

In this section, we present word-error-rate (WER) results for

two girth-10 and one girth-8 one-sided spatially coupled codes.

We plot analogous results for girth-6 codes for comparison. The

first code is a rate-0.45 length-8000 QC LDPC code. The pro-

tograph structure of the code is a lengthened version of the one

depicted in Fig. 8(a). As in that protograph, each variable has de-

gree 3 and check nodes have degree 6, 4, or 2. The protograph of

the code we present has 20 variable nodes and 11 check nodes

(in contrast, the protograph in Fig. 8(a) has ten variable and six

check nodes). In other words,

and

. The

incidence matrix of the code is

(48)
where the parameters are arbitrary, would also be a member of the class defined by our protograph.
So the question might be raised: why not simply try to find suitable parameters for a weight-I QC LDPC defined by a base matrix like that in (48) directly, instead of using the squashing procedure? This question will be answered in more detail in Section IX, but the short answer is that the squashing procedure is more practical because it enforces useful additional structure
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4571

Fig. 8. Protographs for “one-sided” spatially coupled codes as described in [22]. The QC LDPC code constructed by a simple lifting of the protograph in (a) will inevitably have eight-cycles because the check type at the right end is connected by two edges to the bit types above and below it. The QC LDPC code constructed by a simple lifting of the protograph in (b) will inevitably have six-cycles because there exist bits types at the right end that are connected by three edges to a check type.

Fig. 9. Word-error rate plots of the Gallager-B algorithm for the rate-0.45, length-8000 girth-6 and girth-10 QC LDPC codes over the BSC.

4. There are in total 20 variable nodes and 6 check nodes, i.e.,

and

. The incidence matrix of the code is

Setting

and using our design approach (girth maxi-

mization and squashing), we found a girth-10 QC LDPC code

with

. The code length is

and its base matrix, , is specified in Appendix F.

The second code is a rate- length-24000 QC LDPC code.

The protograph structure of the second code is a shortened ver-

sion of the structure depicted in Fig. 8(b). As in that protograph,

the variables are all of degree 4. There are six variable nodes and

four check nodes, i.e.,

and

(in contrast, the

protograph in Fig. 8(b) has ten variable and six check nodes).

The incidence matrix of the code is

Again we use

and find a girth-8 QC LDPC code with

. This code’s length is

. The

base matrix, , of this code is also specified in Appendix F.

In Figs. 9, 10, and 11, we plot the respective error rate per-

formance of the three codes for the binary symmetric channel

(BSC). For purposes of comparison, we plot analogous results

for some randomly generated girth-6 QC LDPC codes. These

codes have the same length, same rate, and same nonzero posi-

tions in the base matrix (i.e., same protograph structure) as the

girth-10 and girth-8 codes to which they are compared.

In all cases, we plot the WER as a function of the SNR,

using the Gallager-B decoding algorithm [2] running for a (49) maximum of 200 iterations to guarantee the convergence of

decoding. Here, SNR is calculated by

, where is the

energy per information bit and is the noise power spectral

density. While there is a significant difference between the

error rates of a standard sum–product decoder and Gallager-B,

Again we use

and find a girth-10 QC LDPC code with the performance trends of Gallager-B and sum–product are

. This code’s length is

. typically quite similar. That said, computational complexity

The base matrix, , of this code is also specified in Appendix F. is our main reason to plot results for Gallager-B rather than

The third code is a rate-0.7 length-28000 QC LDPC code. sum–product. The error floor of Gallager-B occurs at a higher

The protograph structure of the third code is similar to the one WER and thus is easier to attain. In addition, the Gallager-B

depicted in Fig. 8(b) but with four rows of variable nodes instead algorithm runs very fast. This further helps in the collection of

of just two. As in that protograph, the variables are all of degree useful statistics in the error floor regime.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 10 plots the results of the rate- length-24000 codes

and illustrates some of the same points that were made for the

codes in Fig. 9, though somewhat more dramatically. First, we

note that at these lengths, the error floor effect for girth-6 codes

is very abrupt, initiating just below 9 dB. Again, as also noted in

Fig. 9, we see some variability in the performance of the girth-6

codes. And again, higher girth yields a marked improvement in

the error floor. In fact, for the girth-10 code, we cannot see evi-

dence of an error floor, though it is possible that one would even-

tually be reached. One difference between these codes and those

in Fig. 9 is that the codes in Fig. 10 have a longer block-length,

but we believe that the more significant difference leading to

the qualitative difference in behavior is that the codes in Fig. 10

have a constant variable degree of 4 rather than the variable de-

gree of 3 for the codes in Fig. 9.

Generally, similar results are also observed for higher rate

codes, although as we describe below, the block lengths required

Fig. 10. Word-error rate plots of the Gallager-B algorithm for the ratelength-24000 girth-6 and girth-10 QC LDPC codes over the BSC.

,

to achieve girth-10 codes are prohibitive, so we restrict ourselves to comparing girth-6 and girth-8 codes. In Fig. 11, we

plot the results of a comparison of two rate-0.7 length-28000

codes with variable degree of 4. The girth-8 version of the code

was constructed using the hill-climbing procedure in combina-

tion with the squashing procedure. For this class of codes, not

all girth-6 codes had an error floor that we could easily reach

with our simulations, and we have selected one with a notice-

able high error floor for clarity.

We think that it is interesting to note that no girth-8 code

among any spatially coupled code with a constant variable de-

gree of 4 that we examined (we have simulated on the order of

10 such codes) had a noticeable error floor to the error levels

we could reach in our software simulations. The girth-8 code

studied in Fig. 11 is one such example.

B. Effectiveness of the Girth Maximization Algorithm

We now develop a sense of how much the hill-climbing

girth maximization algorithm presented in Section VII helps

in finding high girth codes. We present comparisons with

Fossorier’s “guess-and-test” algorithm [33], Hu et al.’s PEG

Fig. 11. Word-error rate plots of the Gallager-B algorithm for the rate-0.7, algorithm [31], and O’Sullivan’s code construction method

length-28000 girth-6 and girth-8 QC LDPC codes over the BSC.

[27].

In [33], Fossorier uses guess-and-test to find high girth QC

LDPC codes. To understand this algorithm, consider a regular

In the plots, the SNRs are calculated assuming that the BSC

results from hard-decision demodulation of a binary phase-shift

keying

sequence transmitted over an additive white

Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. The resulting relation be-

tween the crossover probability of the equivalent BSC- and

the SNR of the AWGN channel is

weight-I QC LDPC code specified by a

base matrix, and

a desired girth. Without loss of generality, all entries in the first

row and the first column of the base matrix can be fixed to zero,

while the remaining entries are chosen independently and uni-

formly between 0 and . The guess-and-test algorithm then

tests conditions, e.g., (9) for four-cycles, to verify that no cycles

shorter than the desired girth exist. Guess-and-test can quickly

where is the rate of the code and is the Q-function.

generate each instance, i.e., a candidate code, and check the girth

Fig. 9 plots the results of the rate-0.45 length-8000 codes and conditions efficiently. But since the algorithm randomly and in-

illustrates the general improvement to error floor behavior pro- dependently samples the space of codes, and no structure is ex-

vided by larger girth. At the highest SNR (around 7.8 dB), the ploited to find codes satisfying the desired girth that are “close”

WER of the girth-10 code is about two orders of magnitude to the random samples, the algorithm runs into difficulty when

larger than those of the girth-6 codes. Further, we note that the the set of codes with the desired parameters (length, rate, girth)

three girth-6 codes plotted show variability in their error rates. is sparse in the overall set of QC LDPC codes with the same

This illustrates the observation that the error floor is not solely length and rate parameters. This is the regime where methods

a function of girth, though higher girth certainly helps.

such as hill-climbing start to dominate.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

TABLE I

MINIMUM CIRCULANT MATRIX DIMENSION,

, FOUND, TABULATED AS A

FUNCTION OF FOR GIRTH-8 QC-LDPC CODES WITH

TABLE II

MINIMUM CIRCULANT MATRIX DIMENSION,

, FOUND, TABULATED AS A

FUNCTION OF FOR GIRTH-10 QC-LDPC CODES WITH

4573

In [27], O’Sullivan proposed an algebraic method to gen-

erate large girth QC LDPC codes. We can compare directly to

a portion of his results, when he constructs regular weight-I QC LDPC codes of girth-8 and girth-10. Both [33] and [27] provide a minimum size of circulant matrices (the parameter in

Fig. 12. Comparison of the success rate of guess-and-test, hill climbing and PEG in finding a weight-I girth-8 regular QC LDPC code when base matrix has dimension 3 12.

our notation), denoted as , at which the algorithms of those

papers were able to find a regular weight-I QC LDPC code of

the target design parameters. In Tables I and II, we compare the

best (which directly translates to block length as

) of either algorithm yields a base matrix that has the desired girth

we obtained using hill-climbing algorithm to those obtained in for some target circulant matrix size . Fig. 12 depicts the suc-

[33] and [27]. We observe that while guess-and-test and O’Sul- cess rate of guess-and-test, hill climbing, and PEG in generating

livan’s method give roughly similar results, hill-climbing results girth-8 weight-I regular QC LDPC codes with base matrices of

in a noticeably smaller (i.e., improved) for both girth-8 and size 3 12. We observe, e.g., that for the guess-and-test to find

girth-10 codes. We note that no results are reported for girth-10 a parity check matrix with girth-8 at a circulant size

,

codes in [33].

we need, on average, to test random matrices. In contrast,

Another well-known algorithm for maximizing girth is PEG. hill climbing has near certain success and PEG has a slightly

This algorithm was developed in [31] to find high-girth, but lower success rate.

random, LDPC codes. PEG constructs the Tanner graph of the

code sequentially, adding the required number of edges to each C. Effectiveness of the Squashing Procedure variable node, node-by-node. At each step, the newly added

edge connects the current variable node to a newly neighboring We turn now to the computational motivations for the

check node. The check is chosen so that, once all variable and squashing procedure. Recall that in Section VIII-D, we raised

check nodes are already connected through some path, the re- the following question: Why do we not simply try directly to

sulting cycle has maximum girth. Different (random) initializa- find suitable parameters for a weight-I QC LDPC code, rather

tions of the early steps lead to different final girths. In [32], the than constructing an HQC code and using the squashing pro-

approach is applied to weight-I QC LDPC codes. In effect, the cedure? We now show that it is much harder to find a suitable

PEG algorithm is applied to the protograph of the QC code. code using this “direct” method.

In comparison to the random sampling style of guess-and-test, To show this, we present results on the following experiment.

PEG explores the space of codes in a sequential manner which First, we construct several protographs with structures similar to

can be much more effective. As no results on are presented Fig. 8(a) with the number of check nodes ranging from three to

in [32], we could not include them in Tables I and II. However, nine. We set

which means that the number of rows in the

we did implement PEG so as to be able to compare the frequency corresponding base matrices ranges from 12 to 36. For each pro-

with which it finds a good code. We define this “success rate” tograph, we construct girth-10 QC LDPC codes with

metric next.

using the girth maximization algorithm and the squashing pro-

From Table I, we cannot draw the conclusion that, e.g., the cedure. We also try to construct girth-10 weight-I QC LDPC

hill-climbing algorithm is always more effective than guess- codes with base matrices having the same size and same nonzero

and-test since either algorithm could get lucky and find an un- positions as those obtained from the squashing procedure using

usually good base matrix. To make an informative comparison, the direct method. The same hill climbing algorithm is applied

we define the “success rate” to be the fraction of times that a run to this design problem as is used in conjunction with the HQC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

TABLE III

MINIMUM CIRCULANT MATRIX DIMENSION OF THE FIRST LEVEL,

,

FOUND, TABULATED AS A FUNCTION OF

FOR GIRTH-8 AND GIRTH-10

CODES WITH PROTOGRAPH STRUCTURE SIMILAR TO THAT DEPICTED

IN FIG. 8(A) BUT WITH ADDITIONAL COPIES OF VARIABLE NODES (IN

FIG. 8(A)

) Other Code Parameters are Kept the Same as in the

Figure:

and

TABLE IV

MINIMUM CIRCULANT MATRIX DIMENSION OF THE FIRST LEVEL,

,

FOUND, TABULATED AS A FUNCTION OF

FOR GIRTH-8 CODES WITH

PROTOGRAPH STRUCTURE SIMILAR TO THAT DEPICTED IN FIG. 8(B) BUT WITH

ADDITIONAL COPIES OF VARIABLE NODES IN FIG. 8(B)

) Other Code

Parameters are Kept the Same as in the Figure:

and

Fig. 13. Average time of constructing one girth-10 QC LDPC code with the direct method and the squashing procedure.

LDPC approach. We record the time (in seconds) it took to de- of parameters; for example, in Table IV, we only tried to find the

sign ten codes for each configuration. Fig. 13 depicts the av-

value for larger values of to the nearest multiple of

erage time required to construct one girth-10 QC LDPC code 50. We observe that

grows much faster with the increase

using each of these two schemes.

of code rate (the rate will be

) for girth-10 codes

For both schemes, the time required to find a girth-10 code than girth-8 codes. For protographs similar to those shown in

increases with the number of rows in the base matrix. When the Figs. 8(a) and 8(b), it is difficult to achieve girth-10 high-rate

squashing procedure is used, we can find a suitable base matrix codes with a reasonable code length (for example, Table III in-

in reasonable time even for large base matrices (large number dicates that a girth-10 code with rate 0.8 and protograph struc-

of rows). In contrast, when using the direct method, we have to ture similar to Fig. 8(a) would require a block-length of approx-

spend an extremely long time searching even for a small base imately

), but it is still possible to obtain

matrices. From this comparison, we conclude that the squashing girth-8 high-rate codes. We also see that for the same girth, it is

method is quite a bit more efficient.

more difficult to construct codes with the protograph of Fig. 8(b)

D. Complexity Scaling With Code Parameters

than with the protograph of Fig. 8(a). Finally, we discuss how the time required to construct these

In this section, we discuss how complex it will be to con- codes scales with the parameters. The total time to generate

struct codes of certain rates using our algorithm. Here, “com- a code with desired girth, denoted by

, is decided by

plex” refers two things. One is the block length required to be many factors, among others, protograph structure, code rate,

able to find a code of a certain girth and the other is how much and

. For now, we focus on the time scaling for a given

time it takes to find such a code. We emphasize that both mea- family of protographs. We consider how the execution time

sures of complexity also depend on the protograph specified. to generate one instance (i.e., one iteration of our algorithm),

We studied three families of protographs. The first corre- denoted by , scales with the code rate. Since our algorithm

sponds to regular

weight-I QC LDPC codes with a reduces cycles iteratively, if we need to generate instances

all-ones incidence matrix. The

found by the before finding the desired girth, then

. Here,

hill-climbing algorithm as a function of for girth-8 and is not sensitive to

, i.e., as

changes, is almost

girth-10 has already been tabulated in Tables I and II, respec- invariant. This is because the complexity of calculating guilty

tively. The second and third protograph families are similar values is independent of

. While is not sensitive to

to those shown in Figs. 8(a) and 8(b), respectively, but where

, is closely related to

. As

increases,

we increased the number of rows of variable nodes, so that the

decreases. For the three families of codes discussed above,

number of types of variables increased from 10 to 15, 20, 25, we found that scales with the number of potential cycles

and so on. (In Figs. 8(a) and 8(b), there are two rows of variable that must be ruled out in the protograph structure. Thus, for

nodes).

the first family for fixed and target girths of 6, 8, and 10,

To illustrate the complexity scaling, we tabulate

for we observed scalings of

,

,

the second and third families of codes in Tables III and IV. Be- and

, respectively. (We note that the code

cause we are here mainly interested in illustrating the general rate is increasing in for fixed, so it takes longer to find

scaling, we did not try seriously to optimize

for each set high-rate codes.) For the second and third families for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4575

fixed, we similarly obtain

,

, strongly indicates that the techniques introduced herein can pro-

and

.

duce practical codes with very good performance in both the

waterfall and error floor regimes.

X. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we present a methodology for designing highgirth QC LDPC codes that match a given protograph structure. In comparison to other approaches in which constructing a code with maximum girth is the ultimate goal, in this paper, we have a combined goal: to maximize girth subject to an already-specified protograph structure. Thus, our methodology can be thought of as a second step in a design chain that starts with a class of codes, such as spatially coupled codes, that have good theoretical waterfall performance, and outputs a code that has large girth. The point is that, due to the increased girth, the resulting codes will also have good error-floor performance. Our numerical results illustrate this outcome.
In developing our methodology, we introduce a new class of HQC LDPC codes and explain how to determine the girth of such codes. The HQC LDPC codes can be represented using parity check matrices over multivariate polynomials, or in terms of a tree structure. We also connect the hierarchical structure of HQC LDPC codes to a particular sequence of graph coverings where the number of coverings equals the number of layers in the code. Each covering has a cyclic structure, which make possible the very compact polynomial representation. We show that higher weight versions of hierarchical codes suffer from inevitable cycles in analogous ways to nonhierarchical QC LDPC codes, but a straightforward squashing procedure can remove these cycles. We introduce a hill-climbing procedure to eliminate the noninevitable cycles from the code, and subsequently remove the inevitable cycles by squashing. Thus, the main use of the hierarchical codes in this paper is to reduce the number of free parameters in the codes in an effort to make the girth maximization procedure computationally tractable and fast, while knowing that the inevitable cycles can be removed by squashing. In our numerical results, we illustrate the computational advantage of the hill-climbing and squashing procedures in comparison with other standard approaches.
We demonstrate our concepts and design procedure for the case of one-sided spatially coupled QC LDPC codes. We present designs for three such codes of different rates and block lengths: two of girth-10 and a higher rate example of girth-8. We compare the performance of each of these codes to girth-6 codes with the same protograph structure and observe a significant decrease in the error floor. We note that the codes we designed that have variable nodes of degree 4 (e.g., the second and third examples of Figs. 10 and 11, respectively) do not demonstrate any error floor tendencies down to a WER of about , i.e., the slope of the WER as a function of SNR is still steepening. Computational effort limited us from simulating lower WERs. But we note that the Gallager-B algorithm we chose to simulate displays much higher error floors than the standard sum–product or min-sum algorithms. (In fact, this is why we choose to simulate this algorithm.) Given that the class of one-sided spatially coupled codes has already been theoretically shown to have excellent waterfall performance, we believe the evidence presented

APPENDIX

A. Girth Maximizing Algorithms

In this appendix, we present our girth maximizing algorithms.

As discussed in the text, the objective of these algorithms is to

remove all noninevitable cycles from the quasi-cyclic codes.

We first present our algorithm for weight-I QC LDPC codes,

and then for general heavier weight or HQC LDPC codes. We

do this for simplicity of explanation as the latter algorithm is a

generalization of the former.

Algorithm 1: Weight-I QC LDPC code construction

(i) Set-up and code initialization: Specify the desired girth

, matrix dimension , and .

For each pair

such that

, pick a value in-

dependently and uniformly from

. Initialize

the code with

(and

for all

).

(ii) Calculate cost vector of current code: Use Subroutine

1, described in Appendix C, to calculate the cost vectors

of the current code, i.e.,

. Then for each ele-

ment of we calculate the change in edge label that most

reduces cost, and the resulting cost, respectively:

Recalling that

is the value of the of the coefficient

of the current code

, let

be the cost of the coefficient if it remains unchanged. (iii) Identify best coefficient to change: Identify the coeffi-
cient to change that would most greatly reduces the cost, i.e.,

where we break ties randomly. There are two possible outcomes.

(a) If by setting

, we update the code

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4576

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

We iterate by now returning to Step (ii).

(b) If

, the algorithm termi-

nates.

(iv) Terminate algorithm: There are two possible termina-

tion conditions.

(iii) Identify best edge label to change: Identify the edge label to change that would most greatly reduces the cost, i.e.,

(a) If

for all

such that

,

then we have found a code that satisfies the desired

parameters.

(b) Else if there is a

such that

the

algorithm has converged to a local minimum.

We now present the generalized algorithm for heavier weight

QC LDPC and HQC LDPC codes. In contrast to the first algo-

rithm, the trees

that define these codes have more than

one edge. Therefore, for each edge of each tree, we define a cost

vector. We index the cost vectors both by their level in the tree

and by their position within each level, as well as by and ;

thus

where we break ties randomly. There are two possible outcomes.

(a) If

,

we update the code by setting the value of the

edge at the

level of

equal

to

. We iterate by now returning

to Step (ii).

(b) If

,

the algorithm terminates.

(iv) Terminate algorithm: There are two possible termina-

tion conditions.

for

and

, where we recall that

is the number of edges at level in .

Algorithm 2: HQC LDPC code construction

(i) Setup and code initialization: Specify the desired girth

, matrix dimension , and .

For each pair such that

, randomly initialize

the values for each edge label (while obeying the require-

ment that sibling edges must have distinct labels). Prob-

ably the most straightforward way to do this is to work

down the tree from level to the first level, picking the

edge labels for each set of sibling edges at level uni-

formly without replacement from

. Given

the initial edge labels, compute all nonzero code coeffi-

cients, i.e., those associated with each leaf.

(ii) Calculate cost vector of current code: Use Subroutine

2, described in Appendix D, to calculate the cost vectors

of the current code, i.e.,

. Then for each

element of we calculate the change in edge label that

most reduces cost, and the resulting cost, respectively:

(a) If for all

we have

when is

set to equal the current label of the edge at level

in tree , then we have found a code that satisfies

the desired parameters.

(b) Else there is a

such that

and

the algorithm has converged to a local minimum.

B. The Multiplicity of a Path Element

Recall from the discussion of Section VII-B that the determi-

nation of guilty values becomes complicated when there are re-

peated elements in a path. To aid in dealing with these repeated

elements, in this appendix, we define the “multiplicity” of each

path element. This definition is needed for the cost vector calcu-

lation subroutines of both QC and HQC LDPC codes, described

in Appendixes C and D, respectively.

Definition 5: Given a path

, any coefficient

in is said to be repeated times if there are elements of

, indexed by

, for which

and for which

.

The multiplicity of the element is computed as

(50)

Recalling that

is the value of the of the th coor-

dinate of the current code coefficient

, let

For path elements where

, is termed the first occur-

rence of the element.

The multiplicity can be a positive integer, a negative integer,

or zero. When a path element has multiplicity zero, the value

of the coefficient has no effect on whether (that particular) path

corresponds to a cycle.

C. Cost Calculation Subroutine for Weight-I QC LDPC Codes

In this appendix, we present the subroutine for the calculation

of the cost vectors of a weight-I QC LDPC code. In other words,

be the cost if the coefficient value at the level remains given a set of labeled trees we calculate the matrix specified in

unchanged.

(36).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4577

Subroutine 1:

The subroutine takes as inputs the current tree structure

(i.e., the set of labeled trees or, equivalently, the current parity

check matrix ), the desired girth , and a vector of costs .

(i) Define helper variables: Define to be the number of

cycles of length- that would result if edge label

were set to equal value . In other words, the code was

modified to be one in which

and

for all

. Initialize all

.

(ii) Iterate through path lengths, paths, and path ele-

ments: Consider in turn: (a) each path length where

and is the desired girth; (b) each

path of length ,

where

and

; and (c) the first occurrence of each

path element (indexed by

) in that has

nonzero multiplicity.

(iii) Calculate guilty values and adjust helper variables:

Let

be the first occurrence of a path element of

multiplicity

. We want to compute the set of pos-

sible values for

that would satisfy the condition

for the existence of a cycle. Recall from (30) that a cycle

exists for the current path values if

mod

(51)

To check if a value

to which

could be changed would satisfy (51), we subtract the con-

tribution of the current value of

, add in the con-

tribution of the candidate value , and see if the result is

equal to zero. That is, we check whether or not the rela-

tion

mod

lets the multiplicity of the element indicate its “aggregate

polarity,” i.e., whether it enters the sum (51) as a positive

or a negative contribution. Since the calculations of in

(52) are over a ring, multiple values of can satisfy the

condition.2 However, at most there are such values of

. This is because the set of satisfying values of forms a

coset of with respect to the subgroup

,

the cardinality of which is upper bounded by . Finally,

we note that if

, a satisfying (52) exists and it is

the unique such .

(iv) Compute cost vectors: After considering all paths lengths

,

, all

, and all elements of each

path , calculate the cost vectors element-by-element as

D. Cost Calculation Subroutine for HQC LDPC Codes

We now present the subroutine used to calculate the cost vec-

tors of a general HQC LDPC code.

Subroutine 2:

The subroutine takes as inputs the current tree structure

(i.e., set of labeled trees or, equivalently, the current parity check

matrix ), the desired girth , and a vector of costs .

(i) Define helper variables: Define

to be the

number of cycles of length- that would result if the

th edge at level in

were set to equal value ,

.

Remark: Modification of a single edge has in a hierar-

chical code will, in general, change a number of code

coefficients. In particular, all coefficients associated with

leaves that are descendants of that edge will change in

their coordinate. These coefficients will change from

ones in which

holds. Equivalently, we ask whether

(52)

to ones in which

where the congruence is modulo- ?

For each value of ,

satisfying (52), we

increment

as

Initialize all

.

(ii) Set infinite costs: For each

, each pair ,

Remarks: By only computing for the first occurrence of

each path element, we avoid double-counting the contri-

bution to cycles of elements with

. Allowing , de-

fined in (50), to take on either positive or negative values

,

, each level ,

,

2If, however, you restrict to be prime, which we do not, then the calculations would be over a field and there would be a unique solution . We do not choose to do this due to the greater limitation on the possible resulting block lengths of the code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4578

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 14. Illustrative inevitable six-cycle that traverses three rows and three columns.

Unless

for all but one value of , there are no

guilty values. If there are no guilty values, proceed to the

next path element. If there is a single level such that

, proceed to step (v).

Remark: The reason for the all-but-one condition is that

we change at most one edge label per iteration. Therefore,

unless

for all but one value of , there is no single

change in an edge label that would result in a cycle in this

iteration.

(v) Calculate guilty values and adjust helper variables:

Now consider coordinate of the path element

whose multiplicity

. The same logic as led to (52)

can again be used to identify the guilty values, now at

level . That is, compute the set of values of ,

such that

Fig. 15. Illustrative inevitable eight-cycle that traverses three rows.

and each level- edge index , the set of labels of sibling edges. For each

, let be set

For each value of ,

increment

as

(53) satisfying (53), we

Remark: Recall from the algorithms described in

Section VII that our approach to code optimization

is to identify the change in the single edge label that most reduces a weighted sum of cycle counts. In the special case of weight-I QC LDPC codes, there was a one-to-one mapping between code coefficients and tree edges (since each tree has only a single edge). In the generalized setting we are now considering, we seek to identify the change in a single edge of one of the trees that will most reduce the cost. By setting certain costs to infinity, certain changes in code structure will never be made. The changes thus barred are those that would change the tree topology. By setting those costs to infinity, we ensure that the unlabeled trees that describe our code remains an invariant under our algorithm.

where ,

, is the index of the level-

edge in

whose label is

.

Remarks: One of the added complications of the general-

ized algorithm is that there is not a one-to-one mapping

between the code parameters that we are adjusting (the

tree edge values) and the code coefficients (each of which

is associated with one leaf of the tree). When an edge

value is adjusted, there is a ripple effect, changing the co-

efficients associated with all descendent leaves. However,

each change in an edge label affects only one of the

sums (29), all of which Theorem 2 requires to be equal to

zero for a cycle to exist. Thus, although there is a ripple

effect on the code coefficient when adjusting edge labels,

(iii) Iterate through path lengths, paths, and path ele-

ments: Consider in turn: (a) each path length where

; (b) each path of length ,

where

and

; (c) the first oc-

the values of at other levels are not effected. Thus, considering the tree structure of the code nicely decouples the question of girth and the search for high-girths from the algebraic structure of the code.

currence of each path element (indexed by in that has nonzero multiplicity.

) E. Proof of Lemma 2 To prove part (i) of the lemma, consider the ordered set of

(iv) Determine whether a particular path element can have coefficients (33) that describes the inevitable cycle. Note that

“guilty” values: Let

be the first occurrence of a the first and last coefficients must be in the same row of the

path element of multiplicity

. Recall that

base matrix since the path defines a cycle. The second and third

corresponds to the label of an edge of tree

at level and the fourth and fifth coefficients must also each be in the

. Now, for the coefficient

under consideration, same row. Since, when viewed at the first level of the code,

iterate through each level of the code. For each level , successive rows in a path must be distinct, three distinct rows

compute

are traversed. In Fig. 14, we illustrate this logic for a matrix

corresponding to the polynomial

mod

,

, and .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4579

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

The logic of part (ii) is the same for rows and columns; hence,

we provide the proof only for the former part. Consider the or-

dered set of coefficients of (34). We assert that again the path

must traverse at least three rows of the base matrix. As before

the first and last coefficients must be in the same row since

this path defines an inevitable cycle. Each other sequential pair

of elements

,

, and

must also lie in the same rows. Consider

the pair

. The row this pair lies in can ei-

ther be distinct from the starting row or it can be the same. If

this row is distinct from the starting row then, since successive

rows are distinct, the row in which

lies

must be distinct both from this row and from the starting row

and the lemma is proved for this case. On the other hand, sup-

pose that

lies in the starting row. We assert

that in this case

and

must lie in distinct rows and so the total number of rows again

is at least three. To see this last assertion, note first that the first

and the fifth

coefficients are, by assumption,

in the same row. Next observe that the second and sixth coeffi-

cients are

and

, respectively, both in distinct

rows from the first. As long as

, these latter two coeffi-

cients (the second and sixth) must be in distinct rows of the base

matrix. This follows from the cyclic nature of the code. The only

way a pair of coefficients could appear in two distinct rows and

two distinct columns in swapped order would be if

, but

we have assumed that

.

The logic of the second case is illustrated in Fig. 15 for the

pair of polynomials

and

.

The path illustrated corresponds to

and

F. Base Matrices
In this appendix, the base matrices of the two girth-10 QC LDPC codes and the rate 0.7 girth-8 QC LDPC code discussed in Section IX are specified below. The base matrices of the first code, , and the third code, , are written in transposed format due to space.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4581

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

[21] M. Lentaier, A. Sridharan, K. S. Zingangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr,

“Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.

The authors would like to acknowledge Prof. Benjamin Recht of the University of Wisconsin, Madison, Department of Computer Sciences and Michelle Craft of the Wisconsin Institute for Discovery (WID) for providing access to the computational resources of the WID Optimization Cluster which were used to produce some of the numerical results herein.

[22] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[23] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” presented at the 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., 2003.
[24] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic, “Error floors of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2006, pp. 1089–1094.
[25] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[26] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering

REFERENCES

the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.

[27] M. E. O’Sullivan, “Algebraic constructions of sparse matrices with

[1] Y. Wang, J. S. Yedidia, and S. C. Draper, “Construction of high-girth QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Top., Lausanne, Switzerland, Sep. 2008, pp. 180–185.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[5] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[7] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[8] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[9] Air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems, IEEE Std 802.16e, 2006 [Online]. Available: http://standards.ieee.org/ getieee802/download/802.16e-2005.pdf.
[10] Draft DVB-S2 Standard [Online]. Available: http://www.dvb.org. [11] B. Bangerter et al., “High-throughput wireless LAN air interface,” J.
Intel Technol., vol. 7, pp. 47–57, Aug. 2003. [12] G. Liva, S. Song, L. Lan, Y. Zhang, S. Lin, and W. E. Ryan, “Design
of LDPC codes: A survey and new results,” J. Commun. Softw. Syst., vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 191–211, Sep. 2006. [13] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001. [14] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 545–546. [15] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” presented at the Int. Symp. Commun. Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001. [16] B. Vasic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity check

large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 718–727, Feb.

2006.

[28] M. Esmaeili and M. Gholami, “Structured quasi-cyclic LDPC codes

with girth 18 and column-weight

,” Int. J. Electron. Commun.,

vol. 64, pp. 202–217, 2010.

[29] I. E. Bocharova, F. Hug, R. Johannesson, B. D. Kudryashov, and R.

V. Satyukov, “Searching for voltage graph-based LDPC tailbiting

codes with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp.

2265–2279, Apr. 2012.

[30] J. Thorpe, Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from

protographs Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, USA, IPN Progress

Rep. 42-154, Aug. 2003, pp. 42–154.

[31] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Irregular progres-

sive-edge growth (PEG) Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf.

Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jul. 2002, pp. 480–480.

[32] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density

parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc.

8th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput., 2004, pp. 1990–1994.

[33] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from

circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no.

8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.

[34] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding

of finite length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Sep. 2003,

pp. 75–82.

[35] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: In-

fluence of proto- and Tanner-graph structure on minimum Hamming

distance upper bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 2, pp.

585–607, Feb. 2012.

[36] K. Lally, “Explicit constructions of type-II QC LDPC codes with

girth at least 6,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2007, pp.

2371–2375.

[37] J. Xu, L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construc-

tion of regular and irregular LDPC codes: Geometry decomposition

and masking,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121–134,

Jan. 2007.

[38] D. G. M. Mitchell, R. Smarandache, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “Quasi-

cyclic LDPC codes based on pre-lifted protographs,” in Proc. IEEE

Inf. Theory Workshop, Oct. 2011, pp. 350–354.

codes for iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory,

Lausanne, Switzerland, Jul. 2002, pp. 312–312.

[17] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of low-

density parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003. [18] D. Sridhara, T. Fuja, and R. M. Tanner, “Low density parity check codes from permutation matrices,” presented at the Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., Baltimore, MD, USA, Mar. 2001. [19] T. Okamura, “Designing LDPC codes using cyclic shifts,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, pp. 151–151. [20] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, T. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.

Yige Wang (S’03–M’09) received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from South China University of Technology, Guangzhou, China in 2000 and 2003, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Hawaii at Manoa in 2008, all in electrical engineering.
She worked as a researcher in the Algorithms Group at Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, MA, from 2008 to 2011. She is currently an associate professor at South China University of Technology. Her research interests include error control coding, digital communications, and VLSI implementation of communication algorithms.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: HIERARCHICAL AND HIGH-GIRTH QC LDPC CODES

4583

Stark C. Draper (S’99–M’03) received the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), and the B.S. and B.A. degrees in electrical engineering and history, respectively, from Stanford University.
He is an Associate Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Toronto, Canada. From 2007–2013 he was an Assistant Professor at the University of Wisconsin, Madison. Before moving to the University of Wisconsin he was with the Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, MA. He has held postdoctoral positions in the Wireless Foundations, University of California, Berkeley, and in the Information Processing Laboratory, University of Toronto. He has worked at Arraycomm, San Jose, CA, the C. S. Draper Laboratory, Cambridge, MA, and Ktaadn, Newton, MA. His research interests include communication and information theory, error-correction coding, statistical signal processing and optimization, security, and application of these disciplines to computer architecture.
Dr. Draper has received the NSF CAREER Award, the 2010 MERL President’s Award, the UW ECE Gerald Holdridge Teaching Award, the MIT Carlton E. Tucker Teaching Award, an Intel Graduate Fellowship, Stanford’s Frederick E. Terman Engineering Scholastic Award, and a U.S. State Department Fulbright Fellowship.

Jonathan S. Yedidia (M’01–SM’10) received the A.B. degree in physics from Harvard University, Cambridge, MA, in 1985, and the M.A. and Ph.D. degrees in physics from Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, in 1987 and 1990, respectively.
His graduate work and his postdoctoral work as a Junior Fellow in Harvard’s Society of Fellows (1990–1993), focused on the statistical mechanics of disordered systems. From 1993 to 1997, he was a professional chess player and teacher. From 1998 to 2011, he was with Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge, MA, where he was a Distinguished Member of the Research Staff in the Algorithms Group. Since 2011 he has been a Senior Research Scientist at Disney Research in Cambridge, MA. His main research interests are in message-passing algorithms for probabilistic inference and optimization and their applications to computer vision and artificial intelligence.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:42:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

