IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2013

1857

A 2.0 Gb/s Throughput Decoder for QC-LDPC Convolutional Codes
Chiu-Wing Sham, Member, IEEE, Xu Chen, Francis C. M. Lau, Senior Member, IEEE, Yue Zhao, and Wai M. Tam

Abstract—This paper proposes a decoder architecture for

low-density parity-check convolutional code (LDPCCC). Specif-

ically, the LDPCCC is derived from a quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC

block code. By making use of the quasi-cyclic structure, the

proposed LDPCCC decoder adopts a dynamic message storage

in the memory and uses a simple address controller. The decoder

efficiently combines the memories in the pipelining processors into

a large memory block so as to take advantage of the data-width

of the embedded memory in a modern field-programmable gate

array (FPGA). A rate-5/6 QC-LDPCCC has been implemented

on an Altera Stratix FPGA. It achieves up to 2.0 Gb/s throughput

with a clock frequency of 100 MHz. Moreover, the decoder dis-

plays an excellent error performance of lower than 10 at a

bit-energy-to-noise power-spectral-density ratio

of 3.55

dB.

Index Terms—Decoder architecture, FPGA implementation, LDPC convolutional code, QC-LDPC convolutional code.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes, first invented by Gallager in 1960’s [1], have been found to be capable of approaching the channel capacity. Later, LDPC convolutional codes (LDPCCCs) have been shown to outperform LDPC block codes in terms of error performance (e.g., lower error floors and higher coding gains) under a similar decoding complexity [2]. The comparisons between LDPCCCs and LDPC block codes from the perspectives of hardware complexity, delay requirements, memory requirements have been discussed in [3] and [4].
LDPCCC has inherited the basic structure of convolutional code and enables a continuous encoding and decoding of messages of varying lengths. Such a property has made LDPCCC a promising solution in many applications. When designing an LDPCCC for an application, furthermore, many factors such as
Manuscript received June 15, 2012; revised October 08, 2012; accepted November 01, 2012. Date of publication March 18, 2013; date of current version June 24, 2013. The work described in this paper was supported by a grant from the RGC of the Hong Kong SAR, China (Project No. PolyU 519011). This paper was recommended by Associate Editor J. Ma.
C.-W. Sham, F. C. M. Lau, and W. M. Tam are with the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong (e-mail: encwsham@polyu.edu.hk, encmlau@polyu.edu.hk; tamwm@encserver.en.polyu.edu.hk).
X. Chen was with the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. He is now with Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208 USA (e-mail: chenxugz@gmail.com).
Y. Zhao was with the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. He is now with Qualcomm Research Center, Beijing, China (e-mail: zhaoyuemagic@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2012.2230506

code rate, sub-block length, coding gain, throughput, error per-

formance and the encoder/decoder complexity may have to be

taken into consideration. High data rate optical communications

require powerful error correction codes with low redundancies

to achieve an error floor lower than a bit error rate (BER) of

, preferably

[5], [6]. Motivated by such applica-

tions, the goal of this work is to design and implement an ef-

ficient decoder architecture such that codes can achieve high

throughput, high coding gain, high code rate and low error

floor.

Designing high-throughput decoder architectures for

LDPC block codes has been extensively studied. In [7], a

high-throughput memory-efficient decoder architecture that

jointly optimizes the code design, the decoding algorithm and

the architecture level has been proposed. A practical coding

system design approach has been presented in [8] whereby

the LDPC codes are constructed subject to decoder hardware

constraints. Simulation results have shown that the codes

constructed suffer from only minor performance loss com-

pared with unconstrained ones. In [9], a quasi-cyclic LDPC

(QC-LDPC) decoder architecture that achieves a throughput of

172 Mbps has been studied. The high throughput is achieved by

reducing the critical path through modifying the decoding al-

gorithm as well as the check-node and variable-node processor

architectures. In [10], the throughput of a QC-LDPC decoder

is further improved by parallelizing the processing of all layers

in layered decoding. Subsequently, the decoder can achieve a

maximum throughput of 2.2 Gbps with an operating frequency

of 950 MHz and 10 min-sum decoding iterations. In [11],

the authors have proposed a high-speed flexible shift-LDPC

decoder that can adapt to different code lengths and code

rates. The decoder employs the Benes network to handle the

complicated interconnections for various code parameters. It

adopts the single-minimum min-sum decoding and achieves

a throughput of 3.6 Gbps with an operating frequency of 290

MHz.

Although LDPCCC decoders may “borrow” some design

techniques used in the LDPC block decoder architectures,

overall they are very different from the block code counterparts

due to the distinct code construction mechanism and unique

characteristics of LDPCCCs. High-throughput LDPCCC de-

coder architectures based on parallelization have been studied

in [12], [13]. Such architectures can achieve a throughput

of over 1 Gbps with a clock frequency of 250 MHz. They,

however, are confined to time-invariant LDPCCCs and cannot

be easily applied to time-varying ones, which usually produce

a better error performance. In [14], a register-based decoder

architecture attaining up to 175 Mbps throughput has been

proposed. This architecture has successfully implemented a

1549-8328/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1858

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2013

pipeline decoder with 10 processing units. Nonetheless, its register-intensive architecture has limited its power efficiency. In [15], [16], a low-cost low-power memory-based decoder architecture that uses a single decoding processor has been proposed. On one hand, the serial node operation uses a small portion of the field-programmable gate array (FPGA) resources. On the other hand, such a design has posed a significant limitation on the achievable throughput. Subsequently, the memory-based designs with parallel node operations have been proposed and have led to a substantial improvement in throughput [17]–[19]. The high throughput accomplished under these designs, however, is achieved at the cost of a complicated switch network.
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, the previously proposed LDPCCC decoder architectures mainly handle random time-varying LDPCCCs. In this paper, we propose a decoder architecture for LDPCCCs with regular structures. In particular, the proposed decoder caters for a class of LDPCCCs that have a quasi-cyclic structure and can be derived from a QC-LDPC block code [20]. The motivation of considering codes with regular structures is twofold. First, LDPCCCs with regular structures have recently attracted much interest both theoretically and empirically [21], [22]. Second, following the insights from LDPC block codes, regular codes can make the decoder structure much simpler and at the same time achieve good error performance. Therefore, developing an efficient architecture for regular codes is of high importance in practice.
The contributions in our paper are distinct from previous works in many aspects including complexity, throughput, reliability and scalability. Firstly, we eliminate all switch networks, which are included in most of the previous implementations and are very complex for a high-rate LDPCCC. Instead, we propose the use of dedicated block processing units, with which we can provide higher throughput with similar decoder complexity. Second, the quantized sum-product algorithm (QSPA) applied in our LDPCCC decoder is more reliable compared with the min-sum-based LDPCCC decoder, i.e., QSPA outperforms the min-sum-based decoder in terms of error performance. Furthermore, our proposed QSPA implementation has a complexity only linearly proportional to the check-node degree. Third, it is known that more decoding iterations can enhance the error performance of the decoder. In our decoder design, each decoding iteration is accomplished by one processor and the processors

are serially connected. Our decoder architecture also enables us to change the number of processors easily without re-designing the whole decoder. Thus, our decoder is scalable in terms of the number of processors. We have implemented our decoder architecture for a rate 5/6 LDPCCC in an Altera Stratix FPGA. The decoder has produced a throughput of 2.0 Gbps with a clock running at 100 MHz. Moreover, the LDPCCC has an excellent error performance, achieving an error of lower than
at a bit-energy-to-noise-power-spectral-density ratio of 3.55 dB.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the construction of QC-LDPCCCs and the decoding process for such codes. Section III describes the proposed decoder architecture and pipeline schedule. Section IV presents the implementation complexity of the decoder architecture. The FPGA simulation results are also presented in this section. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.

II. REVIEW OF LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

A. Structures of LDPCCC and QC-LDPCCC

The parity-check matrix of an unterminated time-varying pe-

riodic LDPCCC is shown in (1) at the bottom of the page,

where is termed as the memory of the parity-check ma-

trix; and

,

, are

sub-ma-

trices with full rank. An LDPCCC is periodic with period if

for all

. If

, the

code is time-invariant; otherwise, it is time-varying. The code

rate of the LDPCCC is given by

. Moreover, a coded

sequence

with

satisfies

Given a quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) block code with a

base matrix of size

and an expansion factor of [23],

we can construct a QC-LDPCCC1 as follows.

1) Expand the parity-check matrix of the QC-LDPC block

code into a

matrix .

1We define a QC-LDPCCC as an LDPCCC in which all the elements in the parity-check matrix are composed of identity matrices, cyclic-rightshifted identity matrices or zero matrices.

...

...

...

...

(1) ...

...

...

...

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHAM et al.: A 2.0 Gb/s THROUGHPUT DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

1859

Fig. 1. Illustration of constructing a QC-LDPCCC from a QC-LDPC block code.

2) Represent the matrix, where
and , i.e.,

parity-check matrix as a is the greatest common divisor of
. Then we have

...

...

(2)

where

is a

matrix, for

.

3) Split into and which correspond to the lower tri-

angular part and the strictly upper triangular part of , re-

spectively. and are therefore denoted, respectively,

by

...

...

...

and

... ...

...

4) Unwrap the parity-check matrix of the block code to obtain the parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPCCC in the form of (1), i.e.,

The above construction process is illustrated in Fig. 1. By

comparing (1) and (3), it can be observed that the period of

the QC-LDPCCC is

and the memory satisfies

. It can also be observed that the relative positions

between the variable nodes and the check nodes do not change.

Hence the girth of the QC-LDPCCC is no less than that of the

original QC-LDPC block code [24]. Therefore, we can construct

a large-girth QC-LDPCCC by first designing the sub-matrices to

obtain a large-girth QC-LDPC block code and then performing

the unwrapping operation.

B. Decoding Algorithm for LDPCCC

LDPCCC has an inherent pipeline decoding process [2].

The pipeline decoder consists of processors, separated by

code symbols, with being the maximum number

of decoding iterations. Throughout the decoding process, we

assume that messages in log-likelihood-ratio (LLR) form are

being used.

At the start of each decoding step (say at time ), the in-

coming channel messages associated with the new variable

nodes

enter the first processor.

Moreover, the corresponding variable-to-check messages for

these variable nodes have the same values as the incoming

channel messages. At the same time, the messages associated

with the variable nodes

are shifted from the -th

processor to the

-th processor, where

.

Then, each processor updates the

check nodes corre-

sponding to the

-th block row of

in (1) using

(4)

... ...

(3)

where

is the check-to-variable message from check node

to variable node ;

is the variable-to-check message

from variable node to check node ;

is the set of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1860

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 2. Generic processing unit and dedicated block processing unit.

variable nodes connected to check node ; and

is level of parallelism that the decoder can achieve. The error

the set

excluding variable node . Next, the processors performance of an LDPCCC improves as increases and/or

perform variable-node updating for

,

increases and/or decreases. Furthermore, the informa-

, using

tion throughput is proportional to

while the memory

usage is proportional to

. Also, the processor

(5) complexity in terms of combinational logics is proportional to

. More details about the complexity of memory

where is the channel message for variable node ;

is the set of check nodes connected to variable node ; and

is the set

excluding check node . Finally,

the a posteriori probabilities (APPs) for the variable nodes

leaving the last processor are computed

using

usage are shown in Section III-B.

It can be seen that the error performance of an LDPCCC

can generally be improved at the cost of a higher processor

complexity, more memory usage or a lower throughput. For in-

stance, with the sub-matrix size

fixed, as the code rate

decreases, the error performance becomes better at the cost

of a lower information throughput. Furthermore, both the pro-

(6) cessor complexity and the memory requirement become higher due to an increase in the number of check nodes. With the code

based on which the binary value of each individual variable

node is determined.

Thus, each decoding step consists of inputting new channel

messages to the decoder, shifting messages, updating check-to-

variable messages, updating variable-to-check messages, com-

puting APPs and decoding the output bits. As a result, after an

initial delay of

decoding steps, there is a continuous

output of the decoded bits.

rate and the throughput fixed, as the sub-matrix size increases, the error performance improves with the same processor complexity but more memory usage. The experiment results presented in Section IV will provide a rough guideline on how to choose the parameters in order to achieve a targeted error performance, processor complexity and memory usage.
In most of the previous works, a generic processing unit such as that shown in Fig. 2(a) is applied in the LDPCCC decoder. For this type of design, a switch network and some corre-

III. DECODER ARCHITECTURE

sponding control logics are required. The complexity overhead of the switch network is not a concern in the previous works

In the hardware design of an LDPCCC decoder, the pro- mainly because the number of edges between the check nodes

cessor complexity, memory requirement, throughput and error and the variable nodes is small. When the number of edges

performance are closely related. It is worthwhile to study their between the check nodes and the variable nodes is large, e.g.,

tradeoffs so as to design a decoder meeting the application for a high-throughput and high code-rate LDPCCC, the routing

requirements. Following the notations presented in the con- and hardware complexity of the switch network becomes a

struction of a QC-LDPCCC, we can roughly characterize the critical issue.

factors affecting the decoder as follows. Suppose the decoding In our proposed decoder, we use dedicated Block Processing

process is divided into stages. A smaller provides a higher Units (BPUs) instead of generic processing units. Consequently,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHAM et al.: A 2.0 Gb/s THROUGHPUT DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

1861

Fig. 3. Block diagram of the pipeline processors in the LDPCCC decoder.

the complexity of routing and switching the messages are no the variable nodes that are about to leave the processor are given

longer required i.e., the complex switch network is eliminated. by

As shown in Fig. 2(b), we use BPUs in one processor. One and

,

BPU is used during each decoding step of one codeword and respectively. At each decoding step, a BPU is responsible for

BPUs are used to facilitate the pipeline of distinct code- processing the check nodes that enter the processor (i.e., )

words simultaneously. In general, our approach can obtain a

and the variable nodes that are about to leave the processor

times speed-up in throughput with the pipeline of distinct (i.e.,

).

codewords. Details will be described in Section III-C.

At the start of each decoding step,

check nodes are

to be processed. We divide them into groups and conse-

A. Architecture Design

quently we divide a complete decoding step into stages.

At the -th stage

,

check nodes

A high-throughput decoder requires parallel processing of

are

the LDPCCC. We propose a partially parallel decoder architec- processed in parallel. The variable-to-check messages ex-

ture that utilizes parallelization on both the node level and the pressed in the sign-and-magnitude format are input to a group

iteration level. The number of rows and the number of columns of

check-node processors (CNPs). Among the

of the sub-matrices

in (2) (corresponding to

in resulting check-to-variable messages, those between the check

(1)) are

and

, respectively. Our nodes in and the variable nodes not in the set

will

proposed decoder architecture is illustrated in Fig. 3. The de- be written to the local RAMs, waiting to be further processed by

coder consists of processors where is the maximum number other BPUs. On the other hand, the updated check-to-variable

of decoding iterations. Since the memory of a QC-LDPCCC messages between the check nodes in and the variable

constructed using the method in Section II is

, nodes in

are converted to the format of 2’s comple-

the variable nodes and the check nodes in each processor are ment before being processed by the variable-node processor

separated by a maximum of

time instants. Denote the (VNP). Since each check node is connected to a total of

check nodes and the variable nodes that enter a partic- variable nodes in

,

ular processor by

and

variable nodes in

are connected to the newly updated

, respectively. Then the check nodes and check nodes and hence

VNPs are needed in one

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1862

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2013

BPU. Finally, the updated variable-to-check messages are con-

verted back to the format of sign-and-magnitude and they will

be shifted to the next processor together with their associated

channel messages in the next decoding step.

In the BPUs, the CNPs update the check nodes according to

(4). However, in practical implementations we need to quantize

the messages to reduce the complexity. In our implementation,

we adopt a four-bit quantization, where the quantization step

is derived based on density evolution [25] and differential evo-

lution [26]. Empirical results show that its error performance

is only 0.1 dB worse than the floating-point sum-product algo-

rithm (SPA).

We consider a check node with degree . For a full quan-

tized-SPA (QPSA) implementation, there should be inputs,

each of length 4-bits. Consequently, the size of the look-up table

(LUT) becomes , which equals (as we use

)

in our design. We can observe that it is impractical to imple-

ment such an enormous LUT. Here, we propose to implement

the CNP with quantization (QSPA) by first pairing up the input

messages and then calculating the extrinsic messages excluding

the input itself. More specifically, suppose the variable nodes

connected to check node is listed as

and the

corresponding input messages are denoted by

.

The updated check-to-variable message to variable node is

then calculated as

(7) where

(8)
(9) (10)

Thus, (7) can be implemented based on a simple LUT tree, as

shown in Fig. 4. In fact, it can be easily verified that each LUT is

of size

and the total number of units required is always

. Thus, our proposed tree-structured implementation

ensures that the CNP complexity remains low, namely in

.

Moreover, the VNP is basically an adding operation which can

be implemented using an adder tree.

B. Memory Storage

For clarity of presentation, we first assume

. Hence

we have

and

. As mentioned earlier, we

divide the decoding step into stages with

check nodes

being processed in parallel. We consider the -th block row of

shown in Fig. 1. This block row consists of

sub-matrices, each having a size of

. Thus, this block row

corresponds to check nodes and

variable nodes in the

Tanner graph. We also assume that the

sub-ma-

trices are either the identity matrix or cyclic-right-shifted iden-

tity matrices. Suppose and just enter a particular pro-

cessor and

and

are about to be shifted out

of the same processor. The memory requirement is explained as

follows.

1) Storage of Check-to-Variable and Vari-

able-to-Check Messages: We denote the check nodes

by

. We further divide

them into groups with the -th group being denoted by

. As explained previously, in processing

,

are processed in parallel at the -th stage of a decoding step.

Therefore in order to avoid the collisions of memory access,

different RAMs are needed for storing the messages

on the edges if each of the check nodes is connected to only

one variable node. From the construction of the QC-LDPCCC,

moreover, each check node has a regular degree of , i.e., each

check node is connected to variable nodes. Consequently, a

total of

RAMs are needed for storing the edge-messages

passing between the check nodes in and their connected

variable nodes to avoid the collisions of memory access.

Further, each processor has sets of such check nodes, i.e.,

. As a result,

RAMs are

allocated in one processor to store the edge-messages, i.e.,

check-to-variable or variable-to-check messages. In addition,

the data-depth and the data-width of the RAMs are equal to

and the number of quantization bits, respectively.

2) Storage of Channel Messages: For the channel mes-

sages, the memory storage mechanism is similar. The set of

variable nodes corresponding to every

sub-matrix are

first divided into groups. Then

RAMs, each of which

having entries, are allocated to store the channel messages.

Moreover, the variable nodes in correspond to

sub-matrices and each processor contains variable-node sets

denoted by

. Consequently, a total of

RAMs are allocated to store the channel

messages in one processor. The data-depth and the data-width

of the RAMs are equal to and the number of quantization

bits, respectively.

For a general case where is not necessarily equal to ,

RAMs are needed to store the edge-messages and

RAMs are required to store the channel messages

in one processor. In modern FPGAs, the total number of internal

memory bits is usually sufficient for storing the messages of

codes with a reasonable length and with a reasonable number

of decoding iterations. However, the number of RAM blocks

is usually insufficient. Note that the operations of the pipeline

processors are identical, the connections between the RAMs and

the BPUs are the same and the addresses of accessing the RAMs

are the same. By taking advantage of the homogeneity of the

processors, we can combine the RAMs in different processors

into one large RAM block. In particular, for the RAMs handling

edge-messages, we can combine the sets of

RAM

blocks distributed in the processors into one set of

RAM blocks. Similarly, for the RAMs storing the channel mes-

sages, sets of

RAM blocks are combined into one

set of

RAM blocks. The data-depth of the RAMs

remains the same while the data-width becomes times wider.

Note that the memory combination is a unique feature of LD-

PCCC and is not boasted by LDPC block codes.2

2For block codes, sophisticated memory optimization has been proposed in [27]. High complexity is involved and memory efficiency is achieved at the cost of a lower throughput.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHAM et al.: A 2.0 Gb/s THROUGHPUT DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

1863

Fig. 4. Implementation of a CNP using a tree of look-up tables.

Fig. 5. Conventional pipelining. S: Shift messages between processors; CNR: Input messages to CN; CNP: CN processing; CNW: Output messages from CN; VNR: Input messages to VN; VNP: VN processing; VNW: Output messages from VN.

Another advantage of such a memory storage mechanism is to VNP and update the variable nodes. This pipeline schedule

that the address controller is a simple counter incrementing by only utilizes pipelining on the iteration level following the

one at every cycle, thanks to the quasi-cyclic structure. Specif- standard decoding process. In this paper, we propose a more

ically, at the start of each decoding step, the addresses of ac- efficient pipeline scheduling based on our dynamic memory

cessing the RAMs are initialized based on the parity-check ma- storage structure.

trix

. As the decoding process proceeds, the addresses We first describe the pipeline schedule for a single codeword.

are incremented by one after every stage, until all stages are Instead of writing the updated messages from CNP and those from

completed.

VNP in two separate stages, we combine them with the shifting

C. Pipeline Scheduling

operation. The updated messages from VNP and the channel messages associated with the updating variable nodes are directly

Conventional LDPCCC decoder architectures [12]–[14] output to the next processor, which completes the writing and

adopt the pipeline design shown in Fig. 5. Each processor shifting operations at the same time. Since some of the updated

sequentially does the following: shift the messages in, update messages from CNP need not be processed by VNP, they are

the check nodes, write the data to memories, input the messages written to the local memories at the same time. Note that the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1864

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 6. Proposed Pipeline. : processing of block ; S-W: Shift messages and write messages to the next processor; R: Input messages to the block processing unit; CNP: check-node processing; VNP: variable-node processing. (a) Single-codeword pipeline. (b) Multiple-codeword pipeline.

memory locations into which the messages are shifted are exactly a maximum of different codewords in one processor, i.e.,

those storing the original messages loaded by the BPU. Therefore, allowing

to process Codeword- , for

.

there would not have any memory collisions during the process. Depending on the number of codewords incorporated, the

It can also be inferred from this process that the types of mes- throughput can be increased by a factor of at the cost of

sages stored in the memories are dynamically changing. The additional memory storage and additional hardware complexity

messages associated with are all variable-to-check mes- of the BPUs. Fig. 6(b) illustrates the pipeline schedule for four

sages by the time first enters a processor and is ready to be codewords with

and

.

processed by CNP. After each decoding step, some of the mes- Using our proposed pipeline schedule, the throughput of the

sages are substituted by the updated variable-to-check messages decoder is

information bits for every

from the previous processor. When decoding steps are com- cycles, where is the time delay for each pipeline stage such

pleted, all the check-to-variable messages originally associated that

cycles are used by one BPU. As there are more de-

with will be completely substituted by variable-to-check coding stages, i.e., increases, the throughput tends to

messages. Yet, they are now messages for

and are

with a running clock of Hz.

ready for CNP in a new round of decoding.

An illustrative example of the RAM storage and decoding

Fig. 6(a) describes the pipeline for a single codeword as- process.

suming

and

. Comparing Fig. 5 and Fig. 6(a), it Example: We consider a QC-LDPCCC with

,

,

can be observed that decoding a group of check nodes using the

and

. Since

, each pro-

proposed pipeline scheduling only takes 4/7 of the time cost cessor has

BPUs. In each processor,

in conventional scheduling. The homogeneity of the pipeline RAMs are dedicated to store edge-messages and

processors also facilitates a pipeline processing of multiple RAMs are dedicated to store channel messages. Assume that the

codewords. As shown in Fig. 6(a) where a single codeword check nodes

just enter a processor

is being decoded, the processing time of different BPUs are and the variable nodes

separated in the sense that while one BPU is processing, the are about to leave. The decoding step of processing

(

other BPUs remain idle. To further increase the throughput, we , 2) is divided into

stages. Fig. 7 shows the dynamic

can schedule other BPUs to process other codewords. Since the storage of the edge-messages in the RAMs at different time in-

total number of blocks in a processor is , we can incorporate stances.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHAM et al.: A 2.0 Gb/s THROUGHPUT DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

1865

TABLE I

IMPLEMENTATION COMPLEXITY FOR QC-LDPCCC OF DIFFERENT SUB-MATRIX SIZES. CODE 1-S:

,

, SINGLE-CODEWORD. CODE 2-S:

,

, SINGLE-CODEWORD. CODE 3-S:

,

, SINGLE-CODEWORD. CODE 4-S:

,

, SINGLE-CODEWORD. CODE 1-P:

,

, FOUR-CODEWORD PIPELINE. CODE 2-P:

,

, FOUR-CODEWORD PIPELINE. CODE 3-P:

,

, FOUR-CODEWORD

PIPELINE. CODE 4-P:

,

, FOUR-CODEWORD PIPELINE. THE IMPLEMENTATION COMPLEXITY OF THE QC-LDPC BLOCK DECODER IN [9] IS

SHOWN FOR COMPARISON

Step 1) It shows the RAM storage at the start of processing

are written to RAM 5 to 8 and those between

and

by

. It can be seen that RAM

and

are written to RAM 13 to 16.

1 to 8 store the variable-to-check messages for

The RAM updating at the decoding step of

is analo-

which is ready to be processed. RAM 13 to 16 store gous to Steps 2) and 3) above. After the second stage of

,

the latest check-to-variable messages for

, RAM 1 to 8 will have the variable-to-check messages ready for

which are updated in the previous decoding step by

and their connected variable nodes in

. The RAM

. RAM 9 to 12 store the variable-to-check storage is similar to that in Step 1) with the time instances in-

messages that are newly updated in the previous crementing by

. A new round of

updating will

decoding step and are shifted from the previous follow according to Steps 2) and 3).

processor.

Also note that once the address controller is initialized at the

Step 2) It shows the RAM storage after the first start of the stages, the read/write address of accessing the

stage of

processing. At the first stage, RAMs are simply incremented by 1.

will process

and

connected variable nodes in

and their , e.g.,

IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS

. CNP reads the We have implemented the QC-LDPCCC decoder on Altera

variable-to-check messages from the first set of Stratix IV. All the BER results for the QC-LDPCCC decoder are

entries located in RAM 1 to 8. The newly updated hence obtained from FPGA experiments under additive white

check-to-variable messages between and

Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels and 4-bit quantization. Based

from CNP are input to the first set of entries in on a QC-LDPC block code with a 4 24 base matrix, we

RAM 1 to 4 (i.e., from where the check-to-vari- construct QC-LDPCCCs of different sub-matrix sizes. More-

able messages are read), while the newly up- over, the sub-matrices of the block code are chosen such that

dated check-to-variable messages between

the girth equals 8. Then we simulate the BER performance of

and

are input to the VNP and the resulting the QC-LDPCCCs under different decoding iteration numbers.

variable-to-check messages are shifted to the next Specifically, we have implemented LDPCCC decoders with the

processor. As a result, the updated variable-to-check following parameters: (a)

and

; (b)

and

messages between

and

are written to

; (c)

and

; (c)

and

.

RAM 5 to 8 and those between

and

are Recall that

represents the sub-matrix size of each entry in

written to RAM 13 to 16.

the 4 24 base matrix while denotes the number of iterations

Step 3) It shows the RAMs after the second stage of

(i.e., processors) used in the LDPCCC decoders.

processing. At the second stage,

will process Table I shows the hardware complexity of the decoders when

and

and their connected variable nodes combined with the noise generator. The complexities for a

in

, e.g.,

. single-codeword implementation as well as a four-codeword

CNP reads the variable-to-check messages from the pipeline implementation are shown. We observe that the hard-

second set of entries located in RAM 1 to 8. The ware complexity increases as the code length and the number

newly updated check-to-variable messages between of processors increases. Fig. 8 further shows the BER results

and from CNP are input to the second for the LDPCCCs.

set of entries in RAM 1 to 4 (i.e., from where the Based on Fig. 8 and Table I, we can see a tradeoff between (i)

check-to-variable messages are read), while the the BER performance, (ii) the code length and (iii) the number

newly updated check-to-variable messages between of processors (i.e., the number of iterations). We compare the

and

are input to the VNP and the re- performance of LDPCCC with

but with different

sulting variable-to-check messages are shifted to number of decoding iterations . We can see that the LDPCCC

the next processor. As a result, the updated vari- with

is more than dB better than that with

at

able-to-check messages between

and

a BER of

. We further compare the error performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1866

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 7. Example of RAM storage.

and

.

of codes with similar processor complexity. We observe from iterations plays an important role in the error performance of the

Table I that the LDPCCC using

and

has a LDPCCC.

similar complexity with the ones using (i)

and

Based on the above results, the following guidelines can be

or (ii)

and

. Fig. 8 shows that the LDPCCC used in designing a LDPCCC decoder.

using

and

is outperformed by the ones using • To increase the decoder throughput while maintaining a

(i)

and

or (ii)

and

, even

similar BER performance and the same number of memory

though the latter two codes have smaller sub-matrix sizes. It is

bits, we can reduce the memory depth at the cost of more

therefore obvious that a larger number of decoding iterations

combinational logics.

can help reducing the error rate even when a smaller sub-matrix • To reduce the cost of combinational logics while main-

size is used. In summary, we find that the number of decoding

taining a similar BER performance and throughput, we can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHAM et al.: A 2.0 Gb/s THROUGHPUT DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

1867

Fig. 8. Bit-error-rate (BER) results for the LDPCCCs with different sizes. The results are obtained from FPGA experiments under AWGN channels and 4-bit quantization.
increase and use a smaller number of processors . Under such circumstances, the total memory bits may increase. • To reduce the memory bits while maintaining a similar

Fig. 9. Comparison of BER results between LDPCCCs and LDPC block-code counterparts under AWGN channels. The results of the LDPCCCs and the LDPC block codes are represented by solid lines and dashed lines, respectively. The results of the LDPCCCs are obtained from FPGA experiments under 4-bit quantization while and those of the LDPC block codes are obtained from computer simulations (using C programming) based on 4-bit quantized messages.

BER performance and throughput, we can use a smaller

and a larger at the cost of combinational logics.

In addition, we attempt to compare our implementation re-

sults with those found from the literature. Since the objective

of our work is to achieve high throughput and good error per-

formance, the code length and code rate of the codes used in

our experiments are relatively large. While we can find quite

a number of decoders in the literature, none of them consider

codes with length comparable to the ones we use. All of them

assume lengths which are relatively short and consequently they

have high error floors and small coding gains. The “closest”

one we can find is the QC-LDPC block decoder described by

Wang and Cui [9], who target a high-speed decoder and adopt a

length-8176 QC-LDPC code in the experiment. In Table I, we

add the implementation results of the decoder in [9]. Although

the decoder in [9] seems to be less complex than our designs,

its throughput (0.2 Gbps) is only 1/10 of ours (2 Gbps). If 10

decoders in [9] are put together in order to achieve the same

throughput as our decoders, the total complexity of the decoders

will become larger than ours. Furthermore, the decoder in [9]

displays an error floor at a BER of

while our decoder

does not. In fact, at a BER of

, our decoders can achieve an

extra coding gain of 0.8 dB to 1 dB over the decoder in [9]. Thus,

our proposed decoder is superior in achieving high throughput,

high coding gain and low error floor.

overall complexity of the LDPC block decoder will increase

by times and becomes the same as the LDPCCC counter-

part. Therefore, the fairness of comparing LDPCCC with its

block-code counter part based on which the LDPCCC is de-

rived is validated from the perspective of processor complexity

and throughput.

Fig. 9 shows the BER performance of LDPCCCs and their

block-code counterparts. The results of the LDPC block codes

are obtained from computer simulations (using C programming)

based on 4-bit quantized messages. It can be seen that the BER

performance of LDPCCCs are generally superior. For instance,

the LDPCCC with

and

has a gain of 0.2 dB

at a BER of

over its block-code counterpart. Another

observation is that the advantage of LDPCCC over its block-

code counterpart becomes obvious as the number of decoding

iterations increases. For example, the performance of LDPCCC

with

and

has a similar performance of its

block-code counterpart at a BER of

; and it outperforms

its block-code counterpart by 0.1 dB at a BER of

when

the number of decoding iterations increases to 12, i.e.,

.

As a result, when the number of decoding iterations is large,

LDPCCC is considered to be a better choice in terms of error

performance.

We also compare the BER performance of LDPCCCs and their block-code counterparts under similar processor com-

V. CONCLUSION

plexity and throughput. Compared with a single-processor An efficient partially parallel decoder architecture for

decoder of an LDPC block code with the same iteration number QC-LDPCCC has been proposed in this paper. The dedi-

, the LDPCCC decoder with processors, the length of the cated Block Processing Unit is also proposed such that the

coded bits stored in each processor being the code length of complexity overhead of the switch network can be removed.

the block code, incurs times more complexity, but achieves Rate-5/6 LDPCCC decoders of different sub-matrix sizes

times higher throughput. In order for the LDPC block decoder have been implemented on an Altera FPGA with our pro-

to attain the same throughput, times more processors are posed architecture. It is found that our decoders can achieve a

needed to decode in parallel. Under such circumstances, the throughput of 2.0 Gb/s. Experimental results further show that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1868

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 7, JULY 2013

QC-LDPCCCs outperform their block-code counterparts under

[17] T. Brandon, J. Koob, L. van den Berg, Z. Chen, A. Alimohammad, R.

the same throughput and similar overall decoder complexity.

Moreover, the QC-LDPCCCs derived from well-designed

block codes can achieve an error floor of lower than

.

Swamy, J. Klaus, S. Bates, V. Gaudet, B. Cockburn, and D. Elliott, “A compact 1.1-Gb/s encoder and a memory-based 600-Mb/s decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 1017–1029, May 2009.

[18] Z. Chen, T. Brandon, D. Elliott, S. Bates, W. Krzymien, and B. Cock-

burn, “Jointly designed architecture-aware LDPC convolutional codes

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the associate editor and the anonymous reviewers for their invaluable comments on the earlier version of this paper.

and high-throughput parallel encoders/decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 836–849, Apr. 2010. [19] Z. Chen, S. Bates, and W. Krzymien, “High throughput parallel decoder design for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. 4th IEEE Int. Conf. Circuits and Systems for Communications, ICCSC 2008, May 2008, pp. 35–39. [20] M. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from cir-

culant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp.

REFERENCES

1788–1793, Aug. 2004. [21] D. L. Donoho, A. Javanmard, and A. Montanari, “Information-theo-
retically optimal compressed sensing via spatial coupling and approximate message passing,” Computing Research Repository, 2011, abs/

[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 7, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] A. J. Felstrom and K. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[3] D. J. C. , Jr., A. E. Pusane, S. Bates, and K. S. Zigangirov, “A comparison between LDPC block and convolutional codes,” in Proc. Workshop Information Theory and Its Applications, 2006.
[4] A. Pusane, A. Feltstrom, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. Zigangirov, and D. Costello, “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
[5] T. Mizuochi, Y. Konishi, Y. Miyata, T. Inoue, K. Onohara, S. Kametani, T. Sugihara, K. Kubo, H. Yoshida, T. Kobayashi, and T. Ichikawa, “Experimental demonstration of concatenated LDPC and RS codes by FPGAs emulation,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 21, no. 18, pp. 1302–1304, Jul. 2009.
[6] I. B. Djordjevic, M. Arabaci, and L. L. Minkov, “Next generation FEC for high-capacity communication in optical transport networks,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 27, no. 16, pp. 3518–3530, Aug. 2009.
[7] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, pp.

1112.0708. [22] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled en-
sembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” CoRR, 2012, abs/1201.2999. [23] W. M. Tam, F. C. M. Lau, and C. K. Tse, “A class of QC-LDPC codes with low encoding complexity and good error performance,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 169–171, 2010. [24] Z. Chen and S. Bates, “Construction of low-density parity-check convolutional codes through progressive edge-growth,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1058–1060, Dec. 2005. [25] S.-Y. Chung, J. G. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, February 2001. [26] R. Storn and K. Price, “Differential evolution—A simple and efficient Heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Global Optimization, vol. 11, pp. 341–359, 1997. [27] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Memory system optimization for FPGA-based implementation of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 98–111, Jan. 2011.

976–996, Dec. 2003.

[8] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding

system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers,

vol. 52, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.

[9] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-complexity high-speed decoder design for Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104–114, Jan. 2007.
[10] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “High-throughput layered decoder implementation for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, pp. 985–994, Aug. 2009.
[11] C. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Sha, L. Li, and J. Lin, “Flexible LDPC decoder design for multigigabit-per-second applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, pp. 116–124, Jan. 2010.
[12] M. Tavares, E. Matus, S. Kunze, and G. Fettweis, “A dual-core programmable decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, ISCAS 2008, May 2008, pp. 532–535.
[13] E. Matus, M. Tavares, M. Bimberg, and G. Fettweis, “Towards a GBit/s programmable decoder for LDPC convolutional codes,” in

Chiu-Wing Sham received the Bachelor degree in computer engineering, and the M.Phil. degree and the Ph.D. degree from The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, in 2000, 2002, and 2006, respectively.
He was a Research Engineer with Synopsys, Shanghai, China, and an Electronic Engineer working on the FPGA applications of motion control system with ASM (HK). He joined the Electronic and Information Engineering Department of The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, as a Lecturer in August 2006. His research interests include design automation of VLSI, design optimization of digital VLSI systems and embedded systems.

Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, ISCAS 2007, May 2007, pp. 1657–1660. [14] R. Swamy, S. Bates, T. Brandon, B. Cockburn, D. Elliott, J. Koob,

and Z. Chen, “Design and test of a 175-Mb/s, rate-1/2 (128, 3, 6) low-

density parity-check convolutional code encoder and decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2245–2256, Oct. 2007. [15] S. Bates, Z. Chen, L. Gunthorpe, A. Pusane, K. Zigangirov, and D. Costello, “A low-cost serial decoder architecture for low-density parity-check convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I: Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 1967–1976, Aug. 2008. [16] S. Bates and G. Block, “A memory-based architecture for FPGA implementations of low-density parity-check convolutional decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, ISCAS 2005, May 2005,

Xu Chen received the B.E. degree from Sun Yat-sen (Zhongshan) University, China, in 2007 and the M.S. degree from Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN, in 2009. He is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree at Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.
From 2009 to 2011, he was a research assistant in the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. His research interests include coding theory, optimization and cooperative communications.

vol. 1, pp. 336–339.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHAM et al.: A 2.0 Gb/s THROUGHPUT DECODER FOR QC-LDPC CONVOLUTIONAL CODES
Francis C. M. Lau (M’93–SM’03) received the B.Eng. (Hons) degree in electrical and electronic engineering and the Ph.D. degree from King’s College London, University of London, U.K., in 1989 and 1993, respectively.
He is a Professor and Associate Head at the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. He is the co-author of Chaos-Based Digital Communication Systems (Springer-Verlag, 2003) and Digital Communications with Chaos: Multiple Access Techniques and Performance Evaluation (Elsevier, 2007). He is also a co-holder of three U.S. patents and one pending U.S. patent. He has published over 230 papers. His main research interests include channel coding, cooperative networks, wireless sensor networks, chaos-based digital communications, applications of complex-network theories, and wireless communications. Prof. Lau served as an associate editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS II in 2004–2005 and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS I in 2006–2007. He was also an associate editor of Dynamics of Continuous, Discrete and Impulsive Systems, Series B from 2004 to 2007, a co-guest editor of Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing for the special issue “Applications of Chaos in Communications” in 2005, and an associate editor for IEICE Transactions (Special Section on Recent Progress in Nonlinear Theory and Its Applications) in 2011. He has been a guest associate editor of International Journal and Bifurcation and Chaos since 2010 and an associate editor of IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine since 2012.

1869
Yue Zhao received the B.E. degree in information Engineering from Shanghai Jiaotong University, China, in 2009.
He was a postgraduate student and research assistant at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong, from 2009 to 2012, where he was working on algorithms and implementations for the LDPC decoding. He is currently working at the Qualcomm Research Center, Beijing, China.
Wai M. Tam received the B.Sc. degree in electronics and information systems from Jinan University, China, and the M.Phil. and Ph.D. degree in electronic and information engineering from The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong.
She is currently a Research Fellow at the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. Her research interests include channel coding, mobile cellular systems, complex networks and chaos-based digital communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:45:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

