4542

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

On the Girth of Quasi-Cyclic Protograph LDPC Codes
Mehdi Karimi, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we study the relationships between the girth of the Tanner graph of a quasi-cyclic (QC) protograph lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) code, the lifting degree, and the size and the structure of the base graph. As a result, for a given base graph, we derive a lower bound on the lifting degree as a necessary condition for the lifted graph to have a certain girth. This also provides an upper bound on the girth of the family of graphs lifted from a given base graph with a given lifting degree. The upper bounds derived here, which are applicable to both regular and irregular base graphs with no parallel edges, are in some cases more general and in some other cases tighter than the existing bounds. The results presented in this work can be used to design cyclic liftings with relatively small degree and relatively large girth. As an example, we present new QC protograph LDPC code constructions with girth 8 using fully connected base graphs. These constructions provide upper bounds on the lifting degree required for achieving girth 8 using fully connected base graphs.
Index Terms—Cyclic lifting, girth, lifting, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, protograph, protograph LDPC codes, quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, upper bounds on girth.
I. INTRODUCTION
O NE of the well-known classes of structured low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is protograph LDPC codes [1]. Protograph LDPC codes are constructed by lifting a smaller Tanner graph, called the base graph (see, e.g., [2]). The resultant graph after lifting is called a lifted graph. In the case of using circulant permutations in the lifting process, the resultant code is called quasi-cyclic (QC). QC protograph codes are attractive for their simple implementation. A special case of protograph construction is where the base graph is a fully connected or complete bipartite graph. In this case, each node in one partition is connected to all the nodes in the other partition of the graph. We refer to the protograph codes constructed by applying circulant permutations to the edges of such a base graph as conventional QC LDPC codes. Clearly, these codes are regular, i.e., the degrees of all the nodes in each partition of their Tanner graph are the same. Two examples of conventional QC LDPC codes are Tanner–Sridhara–Fuja (TSF) codes [3] and array-based LDPC
Manuscript received July 16, 2012; revised December 29, 2012; accepted February 28, 2013. Date of publication March 06, 2013; date of current version June 12, 2013. A. H. Banihashemi was supported by NSERC grants. This paper was presented in part at the 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: mkarimi@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Communicated by D. Burshtein, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2013.2251395

codes [4]. It was shown in [4] that array-based LDPC codes have

very good performance in the waterfall region. These codes

have also been proposed for magnetic recording [5] and digital

subscriber lines [6].

The girth of the Tanner graph of an LDPC code, defined as

the length of the shortest cycle(s) in the graph, has long been

identified as an important parameter to measure the iterative de-

coding performance of the code [7]. Finding QC LDPC codes

with large girth has been the subject of several works, for ex-

ample, [8]–[17]. Fossorier [10] studied the cycle structure of

conventional QC LDPC codes and presented some bounds on

the lifting degree in order to have a certain girth. He also showed

that the girth of such codes is upper bounded by 12. Myung et

al. [19] also studied the cycle properties of QC LDPC codes by

defining block cycles and considering the overlaps between such

cycles. They used this concept to obtain an upper bound on the

girth of QC protograph LDPC codes, and rederived the upper

bound of 12 on the girth of conventional QC LDPC codes.

Kim et al. [8] extended the concept of block cycles by

defining inevitable cycles and found all the inevitable cycles of

length up to 20. They also proposed a QC LDPC code construc-

tion that avoided all the inevitable cycles of length up to 12,

resulting in LDPC codes with girth larger than 12. However,

the construction of [8] relies on using very large lifting degrees

of

and

, which are not suitable in practice.

In [20] and [21], the work of [8] was extended by defining

abelian-inevitable cycles, and a new proof was provided for the

upper bound of 12 on the girth of conventional QC LDPC codes.

In [22], the girth of conventional QC LDPC codes for the special

case that the base graph is a (fully connected) 3 5 graph and

the lifting degree is a prime number of the form

was

studied.

In the literature listed above, except [10] and [22], only the

structure of the subgraphs of the base graph that inevitably give

rise to cycles in the lifted graph was studied. Such subgraphs

were generally studied in isolation. In addition, in the literature,

a great deal has been devoted to finding LDPC codes with girths

equal to or larger than 12. Such codes generally have very sparse

graphs and very large block lengths (corresponding to very large

lifting degrees and/or low rates) [8], [14], [16], [17]. The girth

of practical LDPC codes (of medium to high rate with short to

medium block length), however, is usually less than 12.

In this paper, we study the relationships between the short cy-

cles of a lifted graph, the size of the base graph, and the lifting

degree. For this, we closely examine the relationships among

the subgraphs of the base graph that give rise to short cycles

in the lifted graph. As a result of this study, we derive a lower

bound on the required lifting degree for having a specific girth in

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:40:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON THE GIRTH OF QUASI-CYCLIC PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

4543

the protograph construction using a given base graph, or equivalently, an upper bound on the girth of a lifted graph constructed using a given base graph and a given lifting degree. Unlike the other bounds that are only based on the inevitable cycles, the proposed upper bound is based on the dependence of the circular permutation shifts of short cycles in the base graph. Comparing with the available bounds on the girth of QC protograph codes, the proposed upper bound is tighter for many cases. As an example, we show that for the TSF (155, 64) code [3], which is constructed by lifting a 3 5 fully connected base graph with a lifting degree 31, the largest possible girth is 8, regardless of the permutations used. This improves the upper bound of 12, derived based on inevitable cycles, and the upper bound of 10, derived in [12] from the well-known tree bound [18].
It should be mentioned that for the case of a fully connected base graph and a girth 6 or 8, our method generally results in the same bounds as those of [10]. However, there are two main differences between our work and that of [10]. First, the bounds in [10] are only for the protograph codes with a fully connected base graph. Our method, however, can be easily used for a protograph code with a not-fully connected regular or irregular base graph as well. In fact, the only condition we assume for the base graph is not to have any parallel edges. It is worth noting that this assumption covers all the protograph LDPC codes currently adopted in standards. Second, we provide bounds for the case where the girth of the lifted graph is equal to 10. This case is not covered in [10]. Moreover, the general technique proposed here can be applied to girths even larger than 10. The derivations however become more tedious as larger girths are considered.
The results presented in this paper can be used as part of the toolbox to design QC protograph LDPC codes. They can help in the selection of the base graph and its edge permutations, or in choosing the lifting degree. As an example, we construct new QC protograph LDPC codes with girth 8 using fully connected base graphs. These constructions provide upper bounds on the required lifting degree for such protograph codes to have girth 8.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Basic definitions and notations are provided in Section II. Section III contains discussions on the images of cycles of cyclic liftings in the base graph. In Section IV, the lower bounds on the lifting degree required for the lifted graphs to have girth values 6, 8, and 10 are derived. Section V presents a new protograph construction with girth 8. Section VI includes more numerical results. Section VII concludes this paper.

II. DEFINITIONS AND PRELIMINARIES

An undirected Graph

is defined as a set of nodes

Cycles of length are also referred to as -cycles. In the sequel, we may describe a walk only with its sequence of edges, or if there are no parallel edges in the graph, just with the sequence of its nodes.
Lemma 1 ([23]): In a graph with girth , every tailless backtrackless closed walk of length less than is a cycle.

A graph

is called bipartite if the set can be par-

titioned into two disjoint subsets and (

and

) such that every edge in connects a node from

to a node from . We denote by and by . Tanner

graphs of LDPC codes are bipartite graphs, in which and

are referred to as variable nodes and check nodes, respectively.

This implies

, which is what we assume in the rest of

this paper. We call a Tanner graph regular if all the nodes in

have the same degree and all the nodes in have the same

degree . For a regular Tanner graph, we refer to and as “left-degree” and the “right-degree,” respectively, pointing to the side of the bipartite graph where variable nodes and check nodes are located, respectively. We also use the term “girth of an LDPC code” to refer to the girth of the Tanner graph of the code.
Consider the cyclic subgroup of the symmetric group

over the set of integer numbers

, with the

group operation defined as composition. Consider the circulant

permutation in which corresponds to cyclic shifts to

the right. We refer to as the shift of the permutation .

Consider the following construction of a graph

from a graph

: We first make copies of such

that for each node

, we have copies

in . For each edge

, we apply a circulant per-

mutation

to the copies of in such that an edge

belongs to if and only if

. The set of these

edges is denoted by

. The graph is called

a cyclic N-cover or a cyclic N-lifting of , and is referred to

as the base graph corresponding to . In the sequel, we use the

terms “image” and “inverse image” to refer to the projection

from the lifted graph to the base graph and the mapping from

the base graph to the lifted graph, respectively. In the rest of

this paper, we also use the terminology “

base graph” to

refer to a base graph with check nodes and variable nodes.

An

base graph is called fully connected or complete if it

is regular and if

and

.

In this work, is a Tanner graph, and we define the edge

permutations from the variable side to the check side, i.e., the

set of edges in corresponding to an edge

,

where

and

, is defined by

,

.

We denote the biadjacency matrix of by , and refer to it as

and a set of edges , where is some subset of the pairs

. The degree of a node

is

denoted by . A walk of length in a graph is a nonempty

alternating sequence

of nodes and edges

in such that

for all

. If the two

the base matrix. The base matrix has rows and columns.

To the lifted graph , we associate an LDPC code , referred

to as the lifted code, such that the

parity-check matrix

of is equal to the biadjacency matrix of . More specifi-

cally, consists of a total of submatrices ,

,

end nodes are the same, i.e., if closed walk is backtrackless if

, the walk is closed. A

, with each submatrix of dimension

for

. in rows and columns. The submatrix

, arranged in row and

A backtrackless closed walk is called tailless if

. A column is the circulant permutation matrix corresponding to

closed walk with distinct intermediate nodes is called a cycle. the edge

when

; otherwise,

is the all-zero

The length of the shortest cycle(s) in the graph is called girth. matrix. Following [25], we define the

matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:40:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4544

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 1. Inevitable cycles. (a) Theta graph. (b) Dumbbell graph.

Fig. 2. Dependences between permutation shifts of 4-cycles.

by

, where

is a circulant per-

mutation matrix whose rows are obtained by cyclically shifting is the idea used in [8] and [19]–[21]. In this work, we use the

the rows of the identity matrix to the left by , if

, dependences among the permutation shifts of different back-

and

, otherwise. Matrix , called the matrix of edge trackless tailless closed walks of the base graph. We show that

permutation shifts, or permutation shift matrix, in brief, fully depending on the base graph and the lifting degree and regard-

describes and thus the cyclically lifted code .

less of the values of permutation shifts, the permutation shift of

some of the tailless backtrackless closed walks shorter than the

III. IMAGES OF CYCLES OF CYCLIC LIFTINGS

inevitable cycles may necessarily be zero. This then dictates an

IN THE BASE GRAPH

upper bound on the girth of the lifted graph, which is tighter than

It is known that the structures that map to cycles in a lifted the one imposed by inevitable cycles.

graph are tailless backtrackless closed walks in the base graph [24]. Consider a walk of length in , with the sequence

IV. DERIVATION OF BOUNDS

of edges

. Suppose that, associated with the edges, To derive the bounds in this section, we consider necessary

we have the sequence of permutation shifts

, corre- conditions required for a lifted graph to have a certain girth .

sponding to a cyclic lifting of degree . The permutation shift For this, we examine certain tailless backtrackless closed walks

of is defined as [24] 1

of the base graph whose lengths are less than and require

that their permutation shifts be nonzero. In general, how-

(1) ever, we do not necessarily consider all such walks, and thus, the necessary conditions are in general not sufficient.

In the rest of this paper, for the simplicity of presentation, we sometimes use the notation to denote modulo operation. We also sometimes drop the notation altogether when there is no possibility of confusion.

In this paper, we consider base graphs with no parallel edges. This implies that the girth of the base graph is at least 4. Considering Lemma 1, it thus turns out that all the tailless backtrackless closed walks of lengths 4 and 6 in such base graphs are cycles.

The following theorem gives the necessary and sufficient A. Necessary Conditions for

conditions for a tailless backtrackless closed walk to map to cycle(s) in the lifted graph.
Theorem 1 ([24]): Consider a cyclic -lifting of , and let be a tailless backtrackless closed walk of length in . Then, the inverse image of is a set of -cycles in the lifted graph if and only if is 0 and does not contain any tailless backtrackless closed walk of length shorter than with the permutation shift of 0.
According to Theorem 1, the permutation shift of a walk in the base graph, and consequently the permutation shift assignment to the edges of the walk, play a crucial role in whether the walk is mapped to a cycle or not. However, there are situations where the permutation shift of a walk is zero, independent of the permutations assigned to the edges of the walk. This can happen when the number of traversals of each edge in one direction is the same as that in the opposite direction. In this case, the permutation shift of the walk is always zero. The structures with this property are called inevitable cycles [20]. Fig. 1(a) and (b) shows two important classes of inevitable cycles, called the theta graph and the dumbbell graph, respectively [24]. By finding the inevitable cycles of the base graph, one can provide an upper bound on the girth of the lifted graph. This

According to the aforementioned discussion, all the tailless

backtrackless closed walks of length 4, which may be mapped

to 4-cycles of the lifted graph, are 4-cycles in the base graph. To

avoid 4-cycles in the lifted graph, one thus needs to assign the

edge permutation shifts such that the permutation shifts of all the

4-cycles of the base graph will be nonzero. In the following, we

study the dependences between the permutation shifts of 4-cy-

cles which have exactly two edges in common.

Fig. 2 shows three 4-cycles

, ,, ,,

,

, , , , and

, , , , . Let and be the

permutation shifts of cycles and , respectively. It is then

easy to check that the permutation shift of is

.

This means that if

, then will be zero, and therefore,

will be mapped to a set of -cycles in the lifted graph.

This implies that to have a lifted graph with a girth greater than

4, all the cycles of length 4 in the base graph which share exactly

two edges must have different permutation shifts.

Consider a base graph and all the distinct 4-cycles in it that

share only two variable nodes and and one check node

that is connected to both variable nodes. Since there are no

parallel edges in the base graph, all such cycles also share the

two edges

and

. (See, e.g., Fig. 2.) Suppose that

the columns of the base matrix corresponding to and are

1For more recent references, see [25] and [26].

denoted by and , respectively. In the absence of parallel

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:40:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON THE GIRTH OF QUASI-CYCLIC PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

4545

edges in the base graph, it is easy to see that, for any check

node connected to both and , the number of 4-cycles

described above is

, where

is the number

of positions in which both and have nonzero values. Sim-

ilarly,

is the number of distinct 4-cycles that only

share the two check nodes corresponding to rows and

of the base matrix and a variable node that is connected to

both check nodes. Let , and

Fig. 3. Dependences between the permutation shifts of two 4-cycles having one edge in common.

. Then, the lifting degree must be at least

to allow all the 4-cycles structure that may be mapped to a 6-cycle in the lifted graph is

sharing only two edges to have different nonzero permutation also a 6-cycle in the base graph. To avoid 6-cycles in the lifted

shifts.

graph, one thus needs to assign the edge permutation shifts such

Lemma 2: For any QC protograph code constructed using that the permutation shifts of all 6-cycles of the base graph will

a base graph with no parallel edges, a necessary condition for be nonzero.

having a girth of at least 6 is to have the lifting degree

Consider the structure of Fig. 3, where two 4-cycles share an

, where

is the maximum number of common nonzero edge

. In Fig. 3, there are two 4-cycles

,

positions between any two rows or any two columns of the base , , , ,

, , , , , and a 6-cycle

,

matrix.

, , , , , . Let and be the permutation shifts

It should be mentioned that since the size of the base graphs of cycles and , respectively. It is then easy to check that

is usually small, it is computationally very easy to find

. the permutation shift of is

. This means that if

For the case where the base graph is an

fully connected

, then will be zero, and therefore, will be mapped

graph,

, for all

, and

, for all to a set of 6-cycles in the resultant lifted graph. This implies that

. Therefore, must be chosen to be at least

to avoid cycles of length 6 in the lifted graph, all the cycles of

.

length 4 in the base graph that share exactly one edge must have

Corollary 1 ([10] Corollary 2.2): In constructing a cyclically different permutation shifts. We are thus interested in counting

lifted graph with lifting degree using an

fully con- such cycles.

nected base graph with no parallel edges, a necessary condition 1) Fully Connected Base Graphs: First, we consider the spe-

for having a girth of at least 6 for the lifted graph is

.

cial case where the base matrix is an all-one matrix (fully con-

Example 1: Consider the following matrix of permutation nected base graph). For a given edge

, we con-

shifts:

sider all the 4-cycles containing . All such cycles can be rep-

resented in the form of , , , , , with different

values for and . For an

fully connected base graph,

...

...

...

...

...

can be any value between 1 and , except (i.e.,

and

). This means that there are

choices for .

(2)

where

denotes the value of modulo . If the fully con-

nected base graph is lifted based on and with the degree

of lifting , where is the smallest prime number satisfying

, then the lifted graph has a girth of 6.2 In the case that

itself is a prime number (and thus

), the bound of Corol-

lary 1 is tight and the lifted codes are called array-based LDPC

codes [4]. Based on Corollary 1, for a prime , array-based

LDPC codes are the smallest possible QC protograph codes with

girth 6 resulting from a fully connected base graph.

Similarly, the choices for are

and

, i.e.,

there are

possible choices for . This means that there are

distinct 4-cycles that contain . These cycles can

share only one edge (edge ) or two edges (edge and another

edge), but not three edges because there are no parallel edges in

the graph. For the lifted graph to have a girth of at least 8, all

such 4-cycles must have different nonzero permutation shifts.

Satisfying this condition will also satisfy the necessary condi-

tion discussed in Section III-A for avoiding 4-cycles in the lifted

graph.

Lemma 3: For any QC protograph code constructed using

B. Necessary Conditions for
For a base graph with no parallel edges, all the tailless backtrackless closed walks of length 6 are cycles. That is, the only

an

fully connected base graph with no parallel edges, a

necessary condition for having a girth of at least 8 is that the

lifting degree must satisfy

.

Example 2: According to Lemma 3, in order to have a girth of

2Consider the 4-cycle between variable nodes and

and , where

,

and

,

and check nodes , respectively. The

at least 8 in a protograph construction using a fully connected

3 5 base graph, the lifting degree must be

. The fol-

permutation shift of this cycle is

. As

, lowing permutation shift matrix with a lifting degree

,

and is prime, will be nonzero. That is, the permutation shift of any 4-cycle in the base graph is nonzero, and thus, the girth of the lifted graph is at

found by a heuristic search, results in a lifted graph with girth 8

least 6. Moreover, if ,

, the permutation shift of the 6-cycle , , ,

, , , is

,

where and denote the variable node and the check node corresponding to the th column and the th row of the base matrix, respectively. The girth of

(3)

the resultant graph is thus 6.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:40:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4546

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 4. Irregular base graph of Example 3.

In Section V, we present new systematic constructions of

cyclic liftings with girth 8 based on fully connected base graphs

with variable node degrees 3, 4, 5, and 6.

2) Arbitrary Base Graphs: For an arbitrary regular or irreg-

ular base graph, the minimum lifting degree for having a girth

of at least 8 can similarly be determined based on the maximum

number of 4-cycles sharing a specific edge.

Lemma 4: For any QC protograph code constructed using

a base graph with no parallel edges, a necessary condition for

having a girth of at least 8 is that the lifting degree must

satisfy

, where the maximum is taken over all

the edges of the base graph, i.e.,

, and is the

number of distinct 4-cycles containing the edge .

It should be mentioned that can be computed efficiently

by subtracting the number of distinct 4-cycles of the base graph

after removing from the graph, from the total number of dis-

tinct 4-cycles in the graph. To count the number of distinct 4-cy- Fig. 5. Structures in a base graph that may be mapped to 8-cycles in the lifted cles of the base graph in both cases (with an without ), one can graph.

use, for example, the algorithm of [23]. Moreover, it is easy to

check that for any edge

,

.

This upper bound can be used to find an approximation for the

lower bound on .

Example 3: Consider the irregular base graph shown in

We first consider the case of Fig. 5(b). Starting from node

, one possible tailless backtrackless closed walk is

,

, , , , , , , , and another one is

,

Fig. 4. This graph consists of three variable nodes of degree , , , , , , , . Let the permutation shifts of

4, two variable nodes of degree 3, and two variable nodes of the 4-cycles , , , , and , , , , be

degree 2. There are four check nodes with degrees 4, 5, 6, and

and , respectively [see Fig. 5(b)]. The permutation shift

7. According to Lemma 4, in order to have a girth of at least

of walk is then

, and the permutation

8 in the QC protograph construction using this base graph, the shift of walk is

. In order to have a

lifting degree must be at least 13. This is obtained based on the girth greater than 8, the permutation shift of such walks must

number of 4-cycles containing the edge connecting and

be nonzero. That is, the permutation assignment of the edges

in Fig. 4, which is 12. By a heuristic search, we were able to must be such that

and

. In other words,

find the following permutation shift matrix:

the permutation shifts of all the 4-cycles sharing one specific

node must be different from each other and be different from

the additive inverse of each other. (Note that in addition to

(4) and , there are many other tailless backtrackless closed walks of length 8 in Fig. 5(b). However, it is easy to check that the

permutation shift of each of these walks is one of the values

which with a lifting of degree with girth 8.

,

,

, or

. It can thus be seen

results in a lifted graph that such walks will not provide any additional constraints on

the permutation shifts and .)

C. Necessary Conditions for

A similar investigation of Fig. 5(c) and (d) reveals that to avoid the 8-cycles in the lifted graph caused by the tailless back-

Fig. 5 shows all the possible tailless backtrackless closed trackless closed walks in these figures, the permutation shifts of

walks of length 8 in a base graph with no parallel edges. Fig. 5(a) all the 4-cycles that share two nodes (one edge) or three nodes

is a simple cycle of length 8. In Fig. 5(b)–(d), the walks consist (two edges) must be different from each other and be different

of two 4-cycles which share one node, two nodes (one edge), from the additive inverse of each other. Satisfying these con-

and three nodes (two edges), respectively. One of the possible ditions will also satisfy the necessary conditions discussed in

walks for the case of Fig. 5(c) is specified using the arrows in Sections III-A and III-B, for avoiding 4-cycles and 6-cycles in

the figure. In Fig. 5(e), the walks go through the 4-cycle twice. the lifted graph, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:40:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON THE GIRTH OF QUASI-CYCLIC PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

4547

For the case of Fig. 5(e), one possible tailless backtrackless

closed walk of length 8 is

,, ,, ,, ,

, . Let the permutation shift of the 4-cycle , , , ,

be . Therefore, the permutation shift of walk is

. That is, for having a nonzero ,

, or equivalently

and

for an even

, and

for an odd .

Given a base graph, by enforcing all (or some of) the con-

straints discussed previously on the permutation shifts of 4-cy- Fig. 6. Dependences between permutation shifts of 4-cycles. cles involved in structures of Fig. 5(b)–(e), one can derive a

lower bound on the lifting degree that would result in a lifted

graph with girth at least 10. In the following, we provide such

bounds starting with the special case of a fully connected base

graph.

1) Fully Connected Base Graphs: Consider the structure of

Fig. 5(b). There are several ways to count the number of distinct

4-cycles sharing a specific node. For instance, one approach is to

subtract the number of 4-cycles of the base graph after removing

the node from the graph, from the total number of 4-cycles in

the graph. For an

fully connected base graph, the number

of distinct 4-cycles is

. Removing any

variable node, the number of 4-cycles in the resulting graph is

. Similarly, after removing a check node, the

number of 4-cycles in the new graph is

. This

implies that for a fully connected base graph, each variable node

is contained in

4-cycles and each check node

is contained in

4-cycles. The consequence

of this result and the discussion presented earlier on the tail-

less backtrackless closed walks of Fig. 5(b)–(e) is the following

lemma.

Lemma 5: For any QC protograph code constructed using

most 8, regardless of the edge permutations used. It should be

mentioned that the girth of TSF (155, 64) code is also 8, which

is the highest possible based on Lemma 6. A construction that

achieves the bound of 61, i.e., a lifting of degree 61 and girth

10, is also presented in [3].

2) Arbitrary Base Graphs: For an arbitrary regular or irreg-

ular base graph, we have the following result.

Lemma 7: For any QC protograph code constructed using a

base graph with no parallel edges, a necessary condition to have

a girth of at least 10 is that the lifting degree must satisfy

, where

is the maximum number of

distinct 4-cycles sharing one node of the base graph.

Note that

, where and

are the numbers of distinct 4-cycles containing the variable node

and the check node , respectively, and the maximum is

taken over all variable nodes ,

, and all check nodes

,

, of the base graph.

Note that as the size of base graphs is usually small, it is easy

to find the values

and . It is also straightforward to

see that for any variable node ,

,

an

fully connected base graph, a necessary condition to and for any check node ,

, where

have a girth of at least 10 is that the lifting degree must satisfy

and

are the maximum check node degree and the

.

maximum variable node degree in the base graph, respectively.

The fact that any two distinct 4-cycles that have at least one These upper bounds can be used to obtain an approximation for

node in common must have nonzero permutation shifts different the lower bound on .

from each other and different from the additive inverse of each Remark 1: One should note that, in addition to the constraints

other can be used to tighten the bound for special cases. For used in this work to derive the bounds, there are other constraints

instance, for a

fully connected base graph, it is easy to that need to be satisfied to achieve a certain girth. For example,

check that any two 4-cycles in the base graph have at least one suppose that one is interested in having

, and consider the

check node in common. This together with the fact that there graphical structure presented in Fig. 5(d). For convenience, this

are

distinct 4-cycles in such a base graph results in structure is also shown in Fig. 6.

the following lemma.

In this figure, consider the three 4-cycles

, ,,

Lemma 6: For any QC protograph code constructed using a , ;

, , , , ; and

, ,, ,.

fully connected base graph, a necessary condition to have Let , , and be the permutation shifts of cycles , ,

a girth of at least 10 is that the lifting degree must satisfy and , respectively. By careful examination of Fig. 6, and by

.

considering that

, one can show that the following

Example 4: Consider the TSF (155, 64) code [3], constructed constraints are necessary to ensure that the girth of the lifted

using a fully connected base graph of size 3 5 and a lifting graph is larger than 8:

degree of 31. The maximum girth for the Tanner graph of this

code based on inevitable cycles is 12. A tighter upper bound

of 10 on the girth of this construction was derived in [12] using the well-known tree bound [18]. Based on Lemma 6,

(5)

however, the minimum lifting degree using this base graph

that can result in a girth larger than 8 for the lifted graph is

. That is, using this base graph and the For instance, the last inequality comes from the fact that the

lifting degree 31, the girth of all possible lifted graphs is at walk , , , , , , , , is a tailless backtrack-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:40:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4548

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

less closed walk of length 8 with permutation shift .
Although we have not been able to use the additional constraints such as those explained in Remark 1 to tighten the bounds, one can still use them to devise the permutation shift matrix for achieving a certain girth.

TABLE I LOWER BOUNDS ON LIFTING DEGREE FOR DIFFERENT GIRTHS OF A GRAPH
LIFTED FROM A 6 32 FULLY CONNECTED BASE GRAPH

V. NEW CONSTRUCTIONS OF QC LDPC CODES WITH GIRTH 8

In this section, we present new constructions with girth 8 for

QC LDPC codes using fully connected base graphs with vari-

able node degrees 3, 4, 5, and 6. The corresponding QC LDPC

codes are thus regular with rates

,

,

,

and

, respectively. These constructions provide upper

bounds on the lifting degrees required for a given base graph to

achieve girth 8 for the lifted graph.

Lemma 8: Suppose that the following permutation shift ma-

trix is used to construct a cyclic -lifting of a fully con-

nected

base graph with

:

(6)

Then, has girth 8.

Proof: It is easy to check that the girth of the lifted

graph is not 4. If there exists a cycle of length 6 in the lifted

graph, its image in the base graph must be a 6-cycle with zero

permutation shift. Now, consider a 6-cycle in the base graph.

Since the base graph has only three check nodes, any 6-cycle

must contain all the check nodes. Let the three check nodes be

labeled by 1, 2, and 3, corresponding to the three rows of ,

respectively, and consider the labeling of the variable nodes in

the base graph from 1 to , corresponding to the columns of ,

respectively. Let and in ,

, correspond to the

variable nodes in that are connected to the first check node.

Cycle can then be represented by one of the following two

sequences of edges , , , , , , or ,

, , , , , where is the edge connecting

the th check node to the th variable node, and

,,

and

. The permutation shifts corresponding

to the two sequences are

6-cycle in the base graph has a nonzero permutation shift. It is

also easy to find a tailless backtrackless closed walk of length

8 with zero permutation shift in the base graph. One example is

, , , , , , , , which has a permutation

shift of

, where and denote

the th variable node and the th check node in the base graph,

respectively. The girth of the resultant graph is thus 8.

It should be mentioned that for array-based LDPC codes with

left degree 3, it is known that the minimum distance is 6 re-

gardless of the code length [27]. It can be shown however that

the construction of Lemma 8 results in codes with a minimum

distance at least 8 (see Appendix A, Lemma 10). Moreover,

applying a permutation to the second row of the permutation

shift matrix of Lemma 8 with a lifting degree larger than

results in a minimum distance of at least 10

(see Appendix B, Lemma 11).

Another advantage of the proposed construction compared to

array-based LDPC codes is the higher flexibility in selecting the

block length of the lifted code. While the block length for the

proposed construction is

and can thus be changed by

selecting any value of larger than

, the block length

for the array-based LDPC codes can only be , where

is a

prime number. It should however be noted that for the proposed

construction, the minimum lifting degree increases with , and

thus, the block length of the lifted code increases by at least

. This implies that the proposed construction may be more

suitable for rather small base graphs.

Lemma 9: Suppose that the following permutation shift ma-

trix is used to construct a cyclic -lifting

of a

fully connected

base graph :

(7)

and Then, has girth 8.

Proof: The proof is similar to that of Lemma 8. In par-

ticular, by considering any submatrix of which consists of

three rows of (corresponding to 3 check nodes of the base

graph), one can show that the permutation shift of any 6-cycle

respectively, where denotes the element of in row and containing those check nodes is nonzero.

column . Considering that

and that , , and Similar to the constructions of Lemmas 8 and 9, one can

are distinct integer numbers between 1 and , it is easy to have constructions with girth 8 for protographs with larger left

check that neither nor can be zero. This proves that any degrees.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:40:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON THE GIRTH OF QUASI-CYCLIC PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

4549

TABLE II

PROPOSED LOWER BOUND ON LIFTING DEGREE

COMPARED TO THE RESULTS OF [9]

, RESULTS OF [17] (

), AND RESULTS FOUND BY A

HEURISTIC SEARCH

FOR DIFFERENT GIRTHS OF GRAPHS LIFTED FROM FULLY CONNECTED BASE GRAPHS WITH DIFFERENT SIZES

The following matrices represent the permutation matrices for left degrees 5 and 6, respectively:
(8)
(9)

given base graph and a given lifting degree, were obtained by examining the dependences among the permutation shifts of certain tailless backtrackless closed walks of the base graph. The bounds derived in this paper, which are applicable to both regular and irregular base graphs with no parallel edges, are in some cases more general and in some other cases tighter than the existing bounds. The results presented in this work can be used to design cyclic liftings with relatively small degree and relatively large girth. As an example, we presented new QC protograph LDPC code constructions with girth 8 based on fully connected base graphs. These constructions provide upper bounds on the required lifting degree to achieve girth 8 using fully connected base graphs.

For the two cases, the lifting degrees need to be at least

and

, respectively.

APPENDIX A
Lemma 10: The protograph code corresponding to the lifted graph constructed using the permutation shift matrix

VI. MORE NUMERICAL RESULTS

given in (6) applied to a fully connected a lifting degree satisfying

base graph with has a minimum

Example 5: Consider the (2048, 1723) rate-0.8413 regular

LDPC code adopted in IEEE 802.3an. This code is constructed

using a fully connected base graph of size 6 32 and a lifting

degree of 64, and has girth 6. Table I shows the proposed lower

bounds on lifting degree for different girth values of a graph

cyclically lifted from a 6 32 fully connected base graph.

Based on Table I, one can see that the code used in IEEE

802.3an has the highest possible girth for the chosen lifting de-

gree.

Example 6: In this example, for fully connected base graphs

of different sizes, we compare the proposed lower bounds on the

lifting degree to achieve a certain girth with the results reported

in [9] and [17] (lifting degrees for the same base graph that result

in the same girth) as well as those obtained by a heuristic search

in Table II. The results of [17] are stronger than those of [9] only

for

, and are thus reported only for this case. Table II

shows that the proposed lower bound is rather tight for base

matrices of size , or cases corresponding to

. Table II

also demonstrates that in five cases the results obtained by the

heuristic search are superior to those of [9].

distance of at least 8.

Proof: The proof consists of two parts. In Part I, we

study the graphical structure(s) corresponding to a codeword

of weight less than 8. We show that for a Tanner graph with

variable node degree of 3 and girth of 8, it is impossible to have

a codeword of weight less than 6 (Part I.A), or a codeword

of weight 7 (Part I.B) in the corresponding code. In addition,

in Part I.C, we prove that the only graphical structure cor-

responding to the nonzero variable nodes of a codeword of

weight 6 is the one shown in Fig. 8. In Part II, we show that the

structure of Fig. 8 cannot exist in the lifted graph constructed

under the lemma’s conditions. The combination of Parts I and

II indicates that the minimum distance must be at least 8.

Part I:

A) Codewords of Weight Less Than or Equal to 5: Ac-

cording to [28], for a regular Tanner graph with variable node

degree 3 and girth 8, the weight of a codeword cannot be less

than 6. This is obtained by substituting

,

, and

( is the number of unsatisfied check nodes) in Lemma 7 of [28].

B) Codewords of Weight 7: By definition, every check

node in the induced subgraph of a codeword, i.e., the subgraph

VII. CONCLUSION

induced by the nonzero variable nodes of a codeword, is connected to even number of variable nodes. This implies that

In this paper, for a given base graph, we derived lower bounds the total number of edges in the induced subgraph is an even

on the lifting degree of QC protograph LDPC codes required to number. In a regular graph with variable node degree of 3 (or

achieve a certain girth. The bounds, which can also be inter- in general, with an odd variable degree), any set containing an

preted as upper bounds on the girth of the lifted graphs for a odd number of variable nodes is connected to an odd number

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:40:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4550

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

we show that under lemma’s conditions, such an 8-cycle cannot

exist in the lifted graph.

We recall that all the possible tailless backtrackless closed

walks of length 8 in the base graph are covered in Fig. 5. Since

we are only interested in 8-cycles of the lifted graph with two

copies of the second check node and one copy of each of the

other two check nodes of the base graph, we just focus on

Fig. 5(b)–(d). (Note that the structure in Fig. 5(a) does not exist

in a base graph with only three check nodes, and the structure

Fig. 7. First four layers of the induced subgraph of a codeword of weight 6, in Fig. 5(e) has two copies of only two of the check nodes of

grown from one of its variable nodes.

the base graph.) All the tailless backtrackless closed walks in

Fig. 5(b)–(d) consist of two 4-cycles. The permutation shift of

these walks can thus be expressed in terms of the permutation

shifts of the constituent 4-cycles.

Consider the permutation shift of a 4-cycle between the vari-

able nodes and and the first two check nodes of the base

graph. The permutation shift of this cycle is

. The permutation shift of a 4-cycle

between variable nodes and and check nodes 1 and 3 is

. Similarly, the

permutation shift of a 4-cycle between variable nodes and

and check nodes 2 and 3 is

.

Now, consider Fig. 5(b)–(d) and let be the check node cor-

Fig. 8. Only possible structure for the induced subgraph of a codeword of weight 6 in a graph with variable degree 3 and girth 8.

responding to the second row of the permutation shift matrix. The permutation shift of the corresponding tailless backtrackless closed walks can thus be expressed in the general form of

,

,

. It is then easy to

of edges. Therefore, it is impossible to have a codeword of odd weight, e.g., 7, in such a code.
C) Codewords of Weight 6: According to [28], for a regular Tanner graph with variable node degree 3 and girth 8, all the check nodes in the induced subgraph of any codeword with weight less than 12 are connected to exactly two variable nodes.

check that since

, such permutation shifts cannot

be zero. In other words, there will be no 8-cycle in the lifted

graph whose image in the base graph consists of two copies of

, i.e., the second check node of the base graph, one copy of

the first check node, and one copy of the third check node of the

base graph.

Now, consider the induced subgraph of a codeword of weight

6 in the code constructed under the conditions of the lemma, and suppose that this subgraph is grown from one of its variable nodes as the root. In the first layer, we have only one variable node (the root). In the second layer, we have three distinct check

APPENDIX B
Lemma 11: Consider a QC protograph LDPC code constructed based on the following permutation shift matrix:

nodes. Similarly, the third and the fourth layers consist of three

variable nodes and six check nodes, respectively (see Fig. 7).

(10)

Note that according to Lemma 4, the girth of the graph is 8, and

thus, all these variable/check nodes are distinct. Since we have six check nodes in Layer 4, the number of variable nodes in the next layer is at least 2. As this is the subgraph of a codeword of weight 6 which already has four variable nodes in the previous layers, Layer 5 consists of exactly two variable nodes. Each of these variable nodes must be connected to check nodes with different parents in order to satisfy the girth condition (see Fig. 7). It is then easy to check that any subgraph satisfying these conditions has the structure of Fig. 8.
Part II: In this part, we prove that it is impossible to have the structure of Fig. 8 in a graph under lemma’s conditions. A careful inspection of Fig. 8 reveals that there necessarily exists an 8-cycle in this graphical structure that contains two copies of the second

and a lifting degree satisfying

. Suppose

that in (10) is a permutation over

with the

property that

if

for distinct

values of , , and .3 Then, the code has girth 8 and minimum

distance of at least 10.

Proof: The proof of having a girth 8 is very similar to that

of Lemma 8. The only difference is that, here, the permuta-

tion shift of a 6-cycle is either

or

.

Considering that

and that , , 4 as

well as ,

and

are distinct integer numbers be-

tween 0 and

, it is easy to check that neither nor can

be zero. The proof of not having a codeword of weight 6 in the

check node (the check node corresponding to the second row of 3An example of such a permutation for

is

the permutation shift matrix) and one copy of each of the other

.

two check nodes of the base graph. In the following, however, 4Note that here, we assume that the index of a variable node starts from 0.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:40:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KARIMI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON THE GIRTH OF QUASI-CYCLIC PROTOGRAPH LDPC CODES

4551

Fig. 9. Only possible structures for the induced subgraph of codewords with Fig. 10. Graphical structure of tailless backtrackless closed walks of length 8

weight 8 in a regular Tanner graph with variable node degree 3 and girth 8.

containing two copies of each of the check nodes and of the base graph.

lifted code also follows similar general steps as those of Lemma 10. Again, it is easy to check that, in the lifted graph constructed under lemma’s constraints, there cannot exist any 8-cycle whose image contains two copies of the second check node of the base graph and one copy of each of the other two check nodes. This is in contradiction with the graphical structure of the induced subgraph of a codeword with weight 6. The proof of having no codeword of weight 8 has two parts. As the first part, it can be seen that the only structures corresponding to the induced subgraph of a codeword of weight 8 are those shown in Fig. 9. The

graph. Among all the possible structures discussed in Fig. 5 for tailless backtrackless closed walks of length 8, the only possible structures that can contain only two check nodes of the base graph are 1) a modification of Fig. 5(d) in which variable nodes and check nodes are switched, and 2) the structure of Fig. 5(e). Case 1) is shown in Fig. 10. In the case that in Fig. 10, and are the check nodes corresponding to the second and the third rows of the permutation shift matrix, the permutation shift of the tailless backtrackless closed walk , , , , , ,
, , is

proof for this claim follows similar steps as those described in

the proof of Lemma 10 to conclude that the structure of Fig. 8

is the only possible structure for a codeword of weight 6, and is

thus omitted.

In the following, we show that, under the lemma’s conditions,

there cannot be any 8-cycle in the lifted graph which contains Considering the lemma’s conditions, is nonzero. Similarly,

two copies of one of the check nodes of the base graph and one it can be shown that, under the conditions of the lemma, the

copy of each of the other two check nodes of the base graph. permutation shifts of all the other possible tailless backtrackless

Moreover, there cannot be any 8-cycle that contains two copies closed walks of length 8 in Fig. 10 are nonzero. It is also easy

of the second check node and two copies of the third check node to check that for Case 2) where the two check nodes correspond

of the base graph. These are in contradiction with the structures to the second and the third rows of the permutation shift ma-

of Fig. 9.

trix, under the condition of the lemma, all the tailless backtrack-

Consider the permutation shifts of tailless backtrackless less closed walks of length 8 have nonzero permutation shifts.

closed walks in Fig. 5(b)–(d). In the case that in these figures, Therefore, it is impossible to have an 8-cycle in the lifted graph

represents the first check node of the base graph, the permu- whose image contains two copies of the second check node and

tation shift of corresponding tailless backtrackless closed walks two copies of the third check node of the base graph.

can be expressed in the general form of

, The proof for the contradiction of the aforementioned results

,

. In this case, if

, with the structures in Fig. 9 follows similar steps as those de-

the permutation shifts of such walks cannot be zero. That is, scribed in the second part of the proof of Lemma 10, and is thus

there will be no 8-cycle in the lifted graph whose image in the omitted.

base graph consists of two copies of the first check node of

the base graph, one copy of the second, and one copy of the third check node of the base graph. Similarly, in the case that
, there will be no 8-cycle in the lifted graph whose image in the base graph consists of two copies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers whose comments improved the presentation of the paper.

of the third check node of the base graph, and one copy of each of the first and the second check nodes of the base graph.

REFERENCES

In the case that represents the second check node of the base graph, to avoid such tailless backtrackless closed walks with permutation shift zero, the lifting degree must satisfy
. So for all three cases, the condition of the lemma ensures that there will be no 8-cycle in the lifted graph with the corresponding properties. Here, we also show that it is impossible to have an 8-cycle in the lifted graph whose image contains two copies of the second check node and two copies of the third check node of the base

[1] J. Thorpe, Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protograph IPN Progr. Rep. 42-154, Aug. 2003, JPL.
[2] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[3] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. E. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun. Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370.
[4] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Appl., Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 543–546.
[5] B. Vasic and E. Kurtas, Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:40:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4552

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

[6] E. Eleftheriou and S. Olcer, “Low density parity check codes for digital

subscriber lines,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Apr.–May 2002,

pp. 1752–1757.

[7] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-

density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int.

Conf. Commun., Finland, Jun. 2001, vol. 1, pp. 41–44.

[8] S. Kim, J.-S. No, H. Chung, and D.-J. Shin, “Quasi-cyclic low density

parity-check codes with girth larger than 12,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 2885–2891, Aug. 2007.

[9] M. E. O’Sullivan, “Algebraic construction of sparse matrices with large

girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 718–727, Feb. 2006.

[10] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from

circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no.

8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.

[11] O. Milenkovic, N. Kashyap, and D. Leyba, “Shortened array codes of

large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3707–3722,

Aug. 2006.

[12] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, J. Daniel, and

J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984,

Dec. 2004.

[13] G. Zhang and X. Wang, Girth-12 quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with con-

secutive lengths 2010 [Online]. Available: arxiv.org/abs/1001.3916

[14] M. Esmaeili and M. Gholami, “Structured quasi-cyclic LDPC codes

with girth 18 and column-weight

,” Int. J. Electron. Commun.,

vol. 64, no. 3, pp. 202–217, Mar. 2010.

[15] Y. Wang, J. S. Yedidia, and S. C. Draper, “Construction of high-girth

QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Top.,

Lausanne, Switzerland, Sep. 15, 2008, pp. 180–185.

[16] I. E. Bocharova, F. Hug, R. Johannesson, B. D. Kudryashov, and R.

V. Satyukov, “Some voltage graph-based LDPC tailbiting codes with

large girth,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, St. Petersburg,

Russia, Jul.–Aug. 31–5, 2011, pp. 732–736.

[17] I. E. Bocharova, F. Hug, R. Johannesson, B. D. Kudryashov, and R. V.

Satyukov, Searching for voltage graph-based LDPC tailbiting codes

with large girth 2011 [Online]. Available: arxiv.org/abs/1108.0840

[18] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA,

USA: MIT Press, 1963.

[19] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast

encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894–2901,

Aug. 2005.

[20] C. A. Kelley and J. L. Walker, “LDPC codes from voltage graphs,” in

Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 6–11,

2008, pp. 792–796.

[21] C. A. Kelley, “On codes designed via algebraic lifts of graphs,” in Proc.

46th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Urbana-Cham-

paign, IL, USA, Sep. 2008, pp. 583–590.

[22] S. Kim, J.-S. No, H. Chung, and D.-J. Shin, “On the girth of Tanner

(3,5) quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no.

4, pp. 1729–1744, Apr. 2006.

[23] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Message-passing algorithms for

counting short cycles in a graph,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no.

2, pp. 485–495, Feb. 2013.

[24] J. L. Gross and T. W. Tucker, Topological Graph Theory. New York,

NY, USA: Wiley, 1987.

[25] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering

the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf.

Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.

[26] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Design of irregular quasi-cyclic protograph codes with low error floors,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 902–907, Apr. 2012.
[27] K. Yang and T. Helleseth, “On the minimum distance of array codes as LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 3268–3271, Dec. 2003.
[28] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
Mehdi Karimi (S’10) received B.A.Sc. and M.A.Sc. degrees both in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran in 2003 and 2005, respectively. From 2005 to 2008, he was with the Information and Communication Technology Institute, Isfahan University of Technology. Since 2008, he has been pursuing his Ph.D. under the supervision of Prof. Amir H. Banihashemi at Carleton University, Canada. His research interests include graphical modeling, iterative coding, statistical signal processing and wireless communications.
Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03–SM’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communications engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes.
From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology. During 1994–1997, he was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada, for his Ph.D. degree. He held two Ontario Graduate Scholarships for international students during this period. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, where he worked as a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering at Carleton University in 1998, where at present he is a Professor in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications, network coding, theory and implementation of communication algorithms, and compressed sensing and sampling. He has published more than 150 papers in refereed journals and conferences.
Dr. Banihashemi served as an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2003 to 2009. He is the Director of the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre at Carleton University. He has been involved in many international conferences as chair, member of technical program committee, and member of organizing committee. These include co-chair for the Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom’07, TPC co-chair of the Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2007, member of the organizing committee for the International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) 2008, and co-chair of the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory (CWIT) 2009. Dr. Banihashemi is a recipient of Carleton’s Research Achievement Award in 2006 and 2012, and Faculty Graduate Mentoring Award in 2011. He is also awarded one of the NSERC’s one hundred 2008 Discovery Accelerator Supplements (DAS).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:40:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

