4598

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Design of Multiple-Edge Protographs for QC LDPC Codes Avoiding Short Inevitable Cycles
Hosung Park, Seokbeom Hong, Jong-Seon No, Fellow, IEEE, and Dong-Joon Shin, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—There have been lots of efforts on the construction of quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with large girth. However, most of them focus on protographs with single edges and little research has been done for the construction of QC LDPC codes lifted from protographs with multiple (i.e., parallel) edges. Compared to single-edge protographs, multiple-edge protographs have benefits such that QC LDPC codes lifted from them can potentially have larger minimum Hamming distance. In this paper, all subgraph patterns of multiple-edge protographs, which prevent QC LDPC codes from having large girth by inducing inevitable cycles, are fully investigated based on a graph-theoretic approach. By using combinatorial designs, a systematic construction method of multiple-edge protographs is proposed for regular QC LDPC codes with girth at least 12 and another method is proposed for regular QC LDPC codes with girth at least 14. Moreover, a construction algorithm of QC LDPC codes based on certain liftings of multiple-edge protographs is proposed and it is shown that the resulting QC LDPC codes have larger upper bounds on the minimum Hamming distance than those lifted from single-edge protographs. Simulation results are provided to compare the performance of the proposed QC LDPC codes with progressive edge-growth (PEG) LDPC codes and with PEG QC LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Design theory, girth, inevitable cycle, minimum Hamming distance, multiple-edge protograph, quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have been one of the major research topics in coding theory over the past decade due to their near capacity-approaching performance. Since low decoding complexity can be achieved by various iterative decoding algorithms, LDPC codes have been adopted in many practical applications. Especially, quasi-cyclic
Manuscript received June 18, 2011; revised June 10, 2012; accepted February 18, 2013. Date of publication March 07, 2013; date of current version June 12, 2013. This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIP) (No. NRF-20090081441). This paper was presented in part at the 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
H. Park, S. Hong, and J.-S. No are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Institute of New Media and Communications, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-744, Korea (e-mail: hpark1@snu.ac.kr; fousbyus@ccl.snu.ac.kr; jsno@snu.ac.kr).
D.-J. Shin is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Hanyang University, Seoul 133-791, Korea (e-mail: djshin@hanyang.ac.kr).
Communicated by P. O. Vontobel, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2013.2250574

(QC) LDPC codes are well suited for hardware implementation using simple shift registers due to the regularity in their parity-check matrices.
Thorpe [2] introduced the concept of protograph-based LDPC codes, a class of LDPC codes lifted from protographs. QC LDPC codes belong to the protograph-based LDPC codes because they can be regarded as being lifted from protographs using cyclic permutations. Therefore, the performance of QC LDPC codes mainly depends on how to design their protographs as well as how to assign shift values that specify the cyclic permutations.
The performance of LDPC codes under message-passing iterative decoding algorithms depends on the girth of the codes because a message sent by a node along a cycle propagates back to the node itself after some iterations, which causes dependences among messages and performance degradation. Therefore, there have been lots of efforts to construct QC LDPC codes with large girth [3]–[12]. In [4], necessary and sufficient conditions on determining the girth of QC LDPC codes from circulant permutation matrices have been derived and some families of QC LDPC codes have been constructed. Most of QC LDPC codes with large girth are constructed based on algebraic structures [3]–[7], [9], [11] while some optimization algorithms and greedy search algorithms are used to find QC LDPC codes with large girth [8], [10], [12]. Various combinatorial designs have also been widely used to construct QC LDPC codes in order to guarantee girth at least 6 [7], [9], [13]–[15].
The girth of QC LDPC codes constructed from protographs is determined by the structure of the protograph, the lift size, and all the shift values. The papers [3], [5], [7], and [16] discuss an upper bound on the girth of QC LDPC codes, which depends only on the structure of the protograph. Especially, in [5], all substructures of multiple-edge protographs, which inevitably give rise to cycles of length up to 12, are searched but no construction method of multiple-edge protographs for QC LDPC codes with large girth is provided. The paper [7] identifies all substructures of single-edge protographs which inevitably give rise to cycles of length up to 20 in QC LDPC codes, and by using combinatorial designs, some single-edge protographs for girth larger than or equal to 18 and other single-edge protographs for girth larger than or equal to 14 are constructed.
Although the behavior of iterative message-passing decoders is mostly dominated by the pseudoweight of pseudocodewords [17], [18], the minimum Hamming distance still plays an important role because it characterizes the undetectable errors and provides an upper bound on the minimum pseudoweight of a code. Smarandache and Vontobel [19] derived two upper bounds on the minimum Hamming distance of QC LDPC

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: DESIGN OF MULTIPLE-EDGE PROTOGRAPHS FOR QC LDPC CODES AVOIDING SHORT INEVITABLE CYCLES

4599

codes, where one bound is applied when QC LDPC codes are explicitly given and the other bound can be applied even when only the protographs are given. It is shown by experiments that these upper bounds are very close to the actual minimum Hamming distance when the lift size for a protograph is large enough. Also, through several examples in [19], we can see that when the size and row- and column-weights of incidence matrices of protographs are given, these two upper bounds increase as the number of multiple edges increases in the protographs. Therefore, these upper bounds can be increased if multiple-edge protographs are used to construct QC LDPC codes, compared to the case of single-edge protographs. These two upper bounds are extended to cover puncturing cases and tightened for some specific cases [20].
In this paper, multiple-edge protographs, which can be lifted to QC LDPC codes with large girth, are investigated. A search for all single- and multiple-edge subgraphs, which inevitably generate cycles of certain lengths in QC LDPC codes, is systematically performed based on a graph-theoretic approach as an extension of the results in [5], [7], and [16]. Construction methods of multiple-edge protographs using various combinatorial designs are proposed and a lifting algorithm to construct regular QC LDPC codes with large girth is also proposed.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces QC LDPC codes, protographs, and the concept of inevitable cycles. In Section III, all single- and multiple-edge subgraphs that generate inevitable cycles in QC LDPC codes are fully searched. Based on these subgraph patterns, Section IV describes a design method for multiple-edge protographs of regular QC LDPC codes having girth larger than or equal to 12. In Section V, construction methods of multiple-edge protographs are proposed for regular QC LDPC codes having girth 14 when the variable node degree is 3 and they are generalized for regular QC LDPC codes with variable node degree larger than 3. In Section VI, a construction algorithm of QC LDPC codes that are lifted from multiple-edge protographs is proposed. It is also shown that the proposed QC LDPC codes have larger upper bounds on the minimum Hamming distance than those lifted from single-edge protographs and the performance of the proposed QC LDPC codes is verified via numerical analysis. Finally, the conclusions are provided in Section VII.

II. INEVITABLE CYCLES OF QC LDPC CODES

A. QC LDPC Codes

Let be a binary LDPC code whose parity-check matrix

is a

array of

circulants or zero matrices as follows:

a codeword gives another codeword. Also, a bipartite graph,

which has as its incidence matrix, is called the Tanner graph

of .

The weight of a circulant is defined as the number of the

nonzero elements in its zeroth column and denoted by

.

A circulant is entirely described by the positions of the nonzero

elements in its zeroth column. Let ,

, be the

index of the

st element in the zeroth column. Then, the

shift value (s) of a circulant is/are defined as the index (indices)

of the nonzero element(s) in the zeroth column. Note that a shift

value takes value in the set

, where

is used as the shift value of a zero matrix .

QC LDPC codes can be fully represented by binary poly-

nomials as shown, e.g., in [19]. This polynomial representa-

tion is based on the isomorphism between

binary circu-

lants and the polynomial ring

. The polynomial

parity-check matrix

of is defined as

...

...

...

...

where

and

is the element with index in the zeroth column of . We

can see that the number of nonzero terms in

, which is

denoted by

, is equal to

and the degrees of

all nonzero terms in

are equivalent to the shift values of

.

The protograph [2] of a QC LDPC code is a bipartite graph

whose incidence matrix is

, where

.

There are two kinds of nodes in the protograph: namely, check

nodes correspond to rows in and variable nodes correspond to

columns in . The Tanner graph of is constructed by copying

the protograph times and cyclically permuting the same

edges. (If

, there are multiple edges between the check

node with index and the variable node with index in the pro-

tograph.) Such a copy-and-permute operation is called lifting

and the length of a subblock is also called the lift size of . A

shift value is assigned to each edge in the protograph so that an

edge is lifted by using the cyclic permutation with the assigned

shift value to generate . Note that, because of the equivalence

of a bipartite graph and its incidence matrix, in this paper, the

term “protograph” refers to both of them.

B. Inevitable Cycles

Necessary and sufficient conditions on the existence of cycles

in the Tanner graph of QC LDPC codes are derived in terms of

...

...

...

...

shift values in [4]. These conditions are only applied to singleedge protographs but they can be naturally extended to cover the

case of multiple-edge protographs as in the upcoming Lemma 1.

Let

denote a graph with a vertex set and an

where a circulant is defined to be a matrix where each row edge set . Let

represent a vertex (an edge) in

.A

is cyclically shifted to the right by one position with respect walk is an alternating sequence of vertices and edges, denoted by

to the row above it. Such an LDPC code is called quasi-cyclic

, where the vertices and

are

because applying circular shifts to the length- subblocks of the endpoints of the edge . The length of a walk , denoted

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

III. SUBGRAPHS OF MULTIPLE-EDGE PROTOGRAPHS INDUCING INEVITABLE CYCLES

In order for QC LDPC codes to have large girth, their pro-

tographs should not contain subgraphs which induce short in-

evitable cycles in the QC LDPC codes, and thus, it is neces-

sary to find out all such subgraphs. From now on, the terms

“an inevitable-cycle-inducing (ICI) subgraph of length ” will

refer to a subgraph inducing inevitable cycles of length . In

[5], ICI subgraphs of length up to 12 in single- and mul-

Fig. 1. Examples of inevitable cycles in QC LDPC codes. (a) Inevitable cycle tiple-edge protographs were fully investigated and, in [7], all

of length 12. (b) Inevitable cycle of length 10.

ICI subgraphs of lengths 12 to 20 in single-edge protographs

were searched by a brute force method. After that, a graph-the-

by

, is defined as the number of edges in . A walk is

closed if

and a walk is nonreversing if

for

. A closed walk is said to be tailless if

. In this paper, only connected graphs are considered

and a cycle is defined as a closed walk whose traversed vertices

and edges are all distinct. Also, the length of the shortest cycle

in a graph is called the girth of the graph.

Cycles in the Tanner graph of a QC LDPC code are

closely related to tailless nonreversing closed (TNC) walks

in its protograph. The shift sum of a walk in a pro-

tograph, denoted by

, is defined as the alternating

sum of shift values assigned to the edges in , that is,

. Lemma 1 shows

necessary and sufficient conditions for a cycle of a certain

length in the Tanner graph of a QC LDPC code to be generated

from the underlying (single-edge or multiple-edge) protograph.

Its proof is directly derived from the results in [4] and [16].

Lemma 1: Let denote the set of all TNC walks of length

in a protograph. Suppose that a QC LDPC code is lifted from

the protograph with lift size . Then, the Tanner graph of this

QC LDPC code has a cycle of length if and only if there exists

a TNC walk

such that

and does

not contain any shorter TNC walks whose shift sum equals zero.

oretical framework was provided in [16], which can be used

to search all single- and multiple-edge ICI subgraphs. In this

section, we will search and provide all ICI subgraphs as an

extension of [5], [7], and [16].

Define as the set of all irreducible ICI subgraphs of length

satisfying the following conditions.

1) A subgraph

induces inevitable cycles of length

in the QC LDPC code.

2) A subgraph

does not contain any proper subgraph,

which induces inevitable cycles of length less than or equal

to .

3) The number of rows in a subgraph

is not larger

than that of columns.

4) From each isomorphic class in , only one protograph

must be chosen as a representative of that class.

The conditions 1) and 2) guarantee that if a protograph does not

have any subgraph

for

, the QC LDPC code

appropriately lifted from this protograph has girth larger than or

equal to . A subgraph

is irreducible because con-

dition 2) implies that if any edge is removed from , it cannot

induce inevitable cycles of length . Conditions 3) and 4) are

required to choose a unique representative for each isomorphic

class of subgraphs inducing inevitable cycles of length .

The girth of QC LDPC codes is determined by the structure For identifying , we need to investigate the relationship

of the protograph, the lift size, and all the shift values assigned between inevitable cycles and TNC walks. A TNC walk of

to the edges. However, we can derive an upper bound on the a protograph is called abelian-forcing[16] if for each edge in

girth of QC LDPC codes lifted from protographs without con- , the number of traversals of the edge in a direction is the

sidering the lift size and the shift values based on the concept of same as that in the opposite direction. Clearly, the shift sum of

inevitable cycles [3], [5], [7].

abelian-forcing TNC walks is zero regardless of the shift values

Definition 1: An inevitable cycle induced by a protograph of their edges. An abelian-forcing TNC walk is said to be simple

is defined as a cycle that always appears in the QC LDPC code if it does not contain any shorter abelian-forcing TNC subwalk.

lifted from the protograph regardless of the lift size and the shift It is obvious that inevitable cycles of QC LDPC codes are gen-

values.

erated from simple abelian-forcing TNC (SAF-TNC) walks in

It is well known that a QC LDPC code whose protograph has protographs.

the 2 3 (or 3 2) all-one matrix as a submatrix must have in- Lemma 2: Any abelian-forcing TNC walk contains at least

evitable cycles of length 12 [3], [4]. In other words, the girth two different cycles.

of this QC LDPC code is less than or equal to 12. Such an in-

Proof: Consider an abelian-forcing TNC walk

evitable cycle of length 12 is depicted in Fig. 1(a). In QC LDPC

. There exist and with

codes lifted from multiple-edge protographs, inevitable cycles such that

, i.e.,

. Also, there exists a path

can also appear. As an example, Fig. 1(b) shows an inevitable

in such that all vertices from to

cycle of length 10, which appears in QC LDPC codes lifted from

are distinct. Since is nonreversing and tailless, that path

protographs with double edges. We can see that for a certain forms a cycle, and thus, contains at least one cycle.

subgraph structure, inevitable cycles are always generated no Assume that contains only one cycle. Since is abelian-

matter what shift values are assigned to the edges.

forcing, there exists a path

in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: DESIGN OF MULTIPLE-EDGE PROTOGRAPHS FOR QC LDPC CODES AVOIDING SHORT INEVITABLE CYCLES

4601

Fig. 2. Theta graph and dumbbell graph. (a) Theta graph. (b) Dumbbell graph.

such that

for all

. This contradicts

the assumption that contains only one cycle because in , a

vertex cannot go back to itself without reversing. Therefore,

contains at least two different cycles.

As in [16], two classes of graphs are defined as illustrated in

Fig. 2.

Definition 2 ([16]): An

-theta graph, denoted by

, is a graph consisting of two vertices, each of de-

gree three, that are connected to each other via three disjoint

paths , , of length

,

, and

, respec-

tively. A

-dumbbell graph, denoted by

, is

a connected graph consisting of two edge-disjoint cycles and

of length

and

, respectively, that are connected

by a path of length

.

Lemma 3: Connecting two different cycles always results in

either a theta graph or a dumbbell graph.

Proof: Let and denote two different cycles. Then,

and can be connected in only three ways: The number

of common vertices in and is 1) 0, 2) 1, or 3) larger than

or equal to 2. For cases 1) and 2), and form

with

or

, respectively. In case 3),

is

formed where

,

, and

is

the number of the common vertices.

Lemma 4: The lengths of SAF-TNC walks in

and

are

and

,

respectively.

Proof: Consider

in Fig. 2(a). Let and

denote the left and the right vertices of degree three, respec-

tively, and let , , and be the paths from to .

Also, let , , and denote the reverse paths of , ,

and , respectively. Then, we can see that the SAF-TNC walk

has the length

and any other

SAF-TNC walks possibly generated in

have the

same length.

Similarly, consider

in Fig. 2(b). Let and

denote the left and the right vertices of degree three, respec-

tively, and let and be the cycles rotating clockwise from

and , respectively, and let be the path from to .

Also, let , , and denote the reverse paths of , ,

and , respectively. Then, we can see that the SAF-TNC walk

has the length

and any other

SAF-TNC walks possibly generated in

have the

same length.

Note that if any edge is removed from

or

, those inherent SAF-TNC walks disappear, and

thus,

and

are of irreducible form.

Now, we will check whether it is sufficient to only consider

theta graphs and dumbbell graphs for .

Lemma 5: Suppose that a graph contains at least one

theta graph or one dumbbell graph as its proper subgraphs. The

shortest SAF-TNC walk in occurs only in a theta graph or a

dumbbell graph.

Proof: Let denote the shortest SAF-TNC walk and as-

sume that traverses all edges in . From Lemmas 2 and 3,

should contain a theta graph or a dumbbell graph. Consider

the following two cases: 1) has some theta graphs, 2) does

not have any theta graphs.

In case 1), we first note that

is at least twice the number

of edges in due to the definition of abelian-forcing TNC

walks. The SAF-TNC walk only generated by a theta graph in

is shorter than because the SAF-TNC walk has the length

exactly twice the number of edges in the theta graph. This con-

tradicts the assumption that is the shortest one. In case 2),

we note that a SAF-TNC walk should traverse the edge not be-

longing to any cycles at least four times because if the walk

traverses the edge twice, the walk will include two SAF-TNC

walks each of which occurs on different sides of the edge. Since

cycles in are connected with each other via only one path

which does not belong to any cycles, the SAF-TNC walk only

generated by a dumbbell graph in is shorter than . This con-

tradicts the assumption that is the shortest one. Therefore,

occurs only in a theta graph or a dumbbell graph.

In the next theorem, will be identified.

Theorem 1: is the collection of all

’s with

and all

’s with

.

Proof: From Lemmas 2 and 5, any subgraph

should be either a theta graph or a dumbbell graph. Therefore,

the proof is completed by Lemma 4.

Remark 1: Lemmas 3 and 4 are known results from [16] and

Theorem 1 is similar to Theorem 4.5 in [16]. However, in this

paper, is formally defined as the set of all irreducible ICI

subgraphs of length and it is clearly shown in Theorem 1

that is equivalent to a collection of all

’s with

and all

’s with

. For a natural flow from the definition of to The-

orem 1, we supplement Lemmas 2 and 5 which are not found in

[16].

Now, we can find all single- and multiple-edge ICI subgraphs

from

and

. A representative of an iso-

morphic class in can be uniquely chosen by selecting param-

eters satisfying the following conditions.

1)

2) , , are all even or all odd.

3)

,

4) and are even.

Note that the second and the fourth conditions follow from

the fact that each subgraph

is a bipartite graph.

According to Theorem 1, each integer solution of the equa-

tions

and

yields an

ICI subgraph in . Note that all ICI subgraphs of any length

can be easily found and

and

are ICI sub-

graphs having multiple edges. All ICI subgraphs of length up

to 20 are listed as a form of theta or dumbbell graphs in Table I

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013
TABLE I ALL ICI SUBGRAPHS OF LENGTH UP TO 20 (T: THETA GRAPH, D: DUMBBELL GRAPH, S: SINGLE EDGE, M: MULTIPLE EDGE)

and all ICI subgraphs of length up to 14 are listed as a form of length less than are avoided, this protograph may have some

incidence matrices as follows:

inevitable cycles of length larger than or equal to .

To construct protographs that do not induce inevitable cycles

of length less than 10, a pair of 2’s should not appear in any row

or in any column of the protograph to avoid . As shown in the

next lemma, the number of double edges in a protograph should

be upper bounded by the number of check nodes to construct

QC LDPC codes with girth larger than or equal to 10.

Lemma 6: If a

protograph does not induce inevitable

cycles of length less than 10, then

.

Proof: If

, there always exists a row that has at least

two 2’s, and thus, the protograph contains . This contradicts

the assumption.

In order for QC LDPC codes to have girth larger than or equal

to 12, their protographs should not contain , , and .

where the single-edge ICI subgraphs in Table I were also listed We will explain that an incidence matrix of a balanced ternary

in [7] and all ICI subgraphs of length up to 12 were also listed in design (BTD) with

and

is also the incidence

[5]. Note that the transpose of each ICI subgraph also generates inevitable cycles of the same length, and thus, will be used to denote both the listed matrices and their transposes.

matrix of a regular protograph with inevitable cycles of length less than 12.
Definition 3 ([21]): A BTD

that does not induce is an ar-

rangement of elements

into multisets, or

IV. CONSTRUCTION OF REGULAR PROTOGRAPHS AVOIDING INEVITABLE CYCLES OF LENGTH LESS THAN 12

blocks, each of cardinality ,

, satisfying that 1) each

element appears

times altogether, with mul-

tiplicity one in exactly blocks, with multiplicity two in

In this section, we will construct regular protographs that exactly blocks and 2) every pair of distinct elements appears

avoid inevitable cycles of length less than 12 in QC LDPC times, i.e., if

is the multiplicity of element in the

codes. Consider a regular

protograph of which the th block, then for any elements and with

, we have

column- and row-weights are and , respectively, where

.

. If triple or more edges exist in the protograph, the girth Note that a

incidence matrix of a BTD

of the lifted QC LDPC code is limited to 6 because of

.

is simply expressed as

and

Therefore, only protographs with single and double edges will the column- and row-weights are and , respectively.

be considered in this paper. Let denote the number of double Theorem 2: A

incidence matrix of a BTD

edges in the protograph.

with

and

does not

Most of the considered protographs have at least two cycles, contain , , and .

and thus, they always induce some inevitable cycles according

Proof: Let

be an incidence matrix of a BTD

to Lemmas 3 and 4. Note that even if a protograph is designed

with

and

. Since every

not to contain any with

so that inevitable cycles of element of this BTD can have multiplicity up to two, does

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: DESIGN OF MULTIPLE-EDGE PROTOGRAPHS FOR QC LDPC CODES AVOIDING SHORT INEVITABLE CYCLES

TABLE II

REGULAR PROTOGRAPHS WITH

AVOIDING INEVITABLE CYCLES OF

LENGTH LESS THAN 12 CONSTRUCTED FROM BTDS FOR

4603

Fig. 4. Structure of regular protographs avoiding inevitable cycle of length less than 14.

the smallest integer root of this equality is

, we

have

and (1) is not satisfied. Similarly, for

,

should be larger than or equal to 10 and (1) is not satisfied either.

For

, from

, the smallest possible protograph

Fig. 3. Two regular protographs with

and

cycles of length less than 12. (a) 6 12. (b) 6 8.

avoiding inevitable

has size 6 8 and it satisfies (1). By first constructing a 6 6 regular matrix where each column and each row has one 2 and

then properly adding two columns only consisting of 0’s and

1’s, a 6 8 regular protograph can be constructed as given in

not appear in

. The condition

implies that 2 Fig. 3(b). This is the smallest regular protograph with

appears once in each row of

and

implies that each and

avoiding inevitable cycles of length less than 12.

column of

can have at most one 2. Hence,

does

not contain . Since a pair of distinct elements will appear at

least three times in this BTD if

has as its submatrix,

does not contain .

V. CONSTRUCTION OF REGULAR PROTOGRAPHS AVOIDING INEVITABLE CYCLES OF LENGTH LESS THAN 14

All possible BTDs with

are given in [22]. Table II lists

all parameters of regular protographs with

avoiding

inevitable cycles of length less than 12 constructed from BTDs.

Example 1: An incidence matrix of BTD

is shown in Fig. 3(a) and we can see that any ICI subgraph

for

does not appear.

As shown in Table II, the incidence matrices of BTDs with

and

do not provide a sufficiently large number

of regular protographs. In fact, the condition that every pair of

distinct elements appears exactly twice is not necessary and the

condition that each pair of distinct elements appears at most

twice is enough for constructing regular protographs avoiding

inevitable cycles of length less than 12. Besides the regular pro-

tographs listed in Table II, there are many regular protographs

with

avoiding inevitable cycles of length less than 12.

Example 2: We want to find the smallest regular protograph

with

and

avoiding inevitable cycles of length

less than 12. We first derive a necessary condition for the exis-

tence of such a regular protograph by regarding the protograph

as an incidence matrix of a block design as shown in Definition

3. There are total pairs of distinct elements in

,

and, on the other hand, the number of all possible pairs of dis-

tinct elements in such a block design is

.

Since every pair of distinct elements appears at most twice, that

is, does not appear in the protograph, we have the necessary

condition

Now, we will focus on the construction of regular multiple-

edge protographs avoiding inevitable cycles of length less than

14. By avoiding only the third ICI subgraphs of , a sys-

tematic construction method of single-edge regular protographs

avoiding inevitable cycles of length less than 14 was provided

in [7]. Since multiple-edge protographs are considered, we have

to additionally avoid , , and the remaining two ICI sub-

graphs of , which makes the problem more complicated.

In this section, systematic construction methods for multiple-

edge protographs are proposed based on various combinatorial

designs.

Consider a regular

protograph whose column- and

row-weights are and , respectively. We remind the reader

that denotes the number of double edges in the protograph.

Assume that

because regular QC LDPC codes with

are not used in general due to their poor performance.

Using row and column permutations, every regular proto-

graph not inducing inevitable cycles of length less than 14 can

be represented as in Fig. 4. The

submatrix has ’s

as its diagonal elements and the other elements of should be

zero to avoid the first ICI subgraph of . is a

submatrix consisting of columns of weight

. By appro-

priate column permutation of all but and in the protograph,

all the columns whose lower parts have nonzero weight form

the submatrix

, and the remaining columns form the

submatrix

, where has column-weight and is

an all-zero matrix. Let and be

and

ma-

(1) trices, respectively.

By Lemma 6, cannot be larger than . Moreover, if the

For

, due to

and

, the necessary condition regular protographs, which do not induce inevitable cycles of

(1) is not satisfied. For

, by counting the edges in the pro- length less than 14, are considered for

, the following

tograph, the equality

, that is,

holds. Since theorem provides an additional condition on .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4604

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Theorem 3: Assume that a regular protograph with

and

does not induce inevitable cycles of length less than

14. Then,

.

Proof: The inequality

holds by Lemma 6. The

protograph with

should be of the form

from

Fig. 4 and the submatrix is no longer a diagonal matrix due

to

. Therefore, should contain the first ICI subgraph of

because each column of also contains exactly one 1, and

hence, should be less than .

Now suppose that

. The protograph has the form

of Fig. 4 and is the

all-1 matrix. Due to ,

cannot be less than

. If

, becomes the

all-1 matrix and each column of has a pair

of 1’s, which generates in the union of , , , and . If

, the protograph is made up of only , , , and ,

and the size of is

because the

column- and row-weights of are 3 and

, respectively.

Since should not have

as its submatrix to avoid the

second and the third ICI subgraphs of in the union of ,

, and , a pair of 1’s in the same column can appear at most

once in . To satisfy this condition, the number of all possible

columnwise pairs of 1’s should be larger than or equal to the

number of actual columnwise pairs of 1’s in . Therefore, we

have

, i.e.,

. Due to

, this contradicts the assumption of

.

Based on Theorem 3, the case of

and

is considered in Section V-A and the construction method of

regular protographs for

and

is extended not

only to the case of

and

but also to the case

of

in Section V-B.

TABLE III

ALL POSSIBLE REGULAR PROTOGRAPHS AVOIDING INEVITABLE CYCLES OF

LENGTH LESS THAN 14 WHEN

AND

FOR

’s, which generates the second ICI subgraph of

in the union of , , and . Therefore, case 1) is impossible.

For case 2), if a column of has a pair of 1’s, the column

including this pair in the protograph and another column in the

union of and generate . Therefore, no column of and

can have a pair of 1’s. Since the number of columns in is

and the total number of columns in and is , we

have

, where the equality holds when and

do not appear in the protograph. If a row of has a pair of 1’s,

either or the second ICI subgraph of must occur in the

union of , , , and . Therefore, each row of can have

at most one 1 so that the number of 1’s in cannot exceed the

number of rows in . Since the column-weight of is 2 and

has

’s, we obtain

from

. Finally, it remains to determine the

structure of such that the submatrix

does not appear

in the union of and to prevent the second ICI subgraph of

A. Regular Protographs With

and

. As in the proof of Theorem 3, by counting the number of

In this section, we elaborate the construction of regular pro-

tographs with

and

. Moreover, we derive

necessary conditions on and for the existence of regular

protographs with

and

which avoid in-

evitable cycles of length less than 14 as follows.

columnwise pairs of 1’s in and , we obtain the condition yielding
. The aforementioned conditions on and are summarized as follows:

Theorem 4: Assume that a regular protograph with

,

, and

does not induce inevitable cycles of

length less than 14. Then, and should satisfy either

1)

,

, and

; or

2)

,

, and

; or

Since and are integers, the aforementioned conditions

3)

,

, and

; or reduce to simple linear relations with respect to modulo 6 as

4)

,

, and

; or

given in the theorem statement.

5)

,

, and

; or

In Theorem 4, all possible regular protographs avoiding in-

6)

,

, and

.

evitable cycles of length less than 14 are provided for

Proof: By counting the edges in the protograph, we have and

, and Table III only lists those for

among

. Since

and is an integer,

. them.

Also, the submatrix in Fig. 4 is a

matrix consisting Now, we focus on the existence problem and the construction

of weight-1 columns. Consider two cases: 1) contains an all-1 of the regular protographs with the parameters found in The-

row, 2) does not contain an all-1 row.

orem 4. Note that the proposed protographs we will construct

For case 1), if

, the ICI subgraph appears in the may not be all instances with the parameters in Theorem 4 but

union of , , , and . If

, is a

matrix we provide at least one instance per each set of parameters and

with an all-1 row at the complementary row position from the also note that

,

,

, and

all-1 row of . Then, there exist a row containing a pair of 1’s

. For given and , the matrices , , ,

in because has column-weight 2 and so has a total of and can be constructed step by step as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: DESIGN OF MULTIPLE-EDGE PROTOGRAPHS FOR QC LDPC CODES AVOIDING SHORT INEVITABLE CYCLES

4605

1. For constructing and at once, an incidence matrix of a

combinatorial block design suitably chosen for each case in

Theorem 4 is modified such that it has size

,

whereby the columns corresponding to have disjoint

pairs of 1’s (these pairs have no overlap at all), the other

columns have weight 3, all rows have weight

, and

any columnwise pair of 1’s appears at most once to avoid

the second and the third ICI subgraphs of in

.

2. In , 1’s are placed such that

columns have 1’s in

the first row and the other columns have 1’s in the second

row.

3. For constructing , 1’s are placed such that the union of Fig. 5. 15 30 regular protograph with

and

.

, , , and does not contain .

Note that the placement of 1’s in the third step is guaranteed by

the bound

in the proof of Theorem 4.

Since the conditions in Theorem 4 are necessary ones for the

existence of , a protograph may not exist for some parameter

values. However, as we show in the Appendix, there exist pro-

tographs for all parameter values given in Theorem 4. We do

this by providing explicit combinatorial design-based construc-

tion methods for the submatrices and of the protographs.

not have a constant row-weight, while an incidence matrix of

or configurations

is always regular.

To obtain

from an incidence matrix of different size,

we may use the following modification schemes.

1) Remove some rows.

2) Remove a row and some columns incident to the row.

3) Remove some parallel classes.

4) Delete some 1’s and insert some columns such that

B. Regular Protographs With

and

With

, and

does not have any repeated columnwise pairs of 1’s.

5) Insert some parallel classes such that

does not have

any repeated columnwise pairs of 1’s.

Regular protographs that do not induce inevitable cycles of By properly applying these modification schemes, an incidence

length less than 14 for the case of

and

and matrix is changed into

having no repeated columnwise

the case of

also have the same structure as the matrix pairs of 1’s and proper size. Moreover, Schemes 1), 3), and 5)

in Fig. 4 and the construction method in the previous section change all row-weights by the same amount and Schemes 2) and

can be similarly applied to these cases. However, we do not 4) flexibly control row-weights according to how the columns

elaborate on deriving necessary conditions in the same way used and the 1’s are selected. Therefore, we can freely use the afore-

in the proof of Theorem 4 and providing specific construction mentioned modification schemes until the desired size and the

methods for all cases because they have to be done case by case constant row-weight

of

are achieved.

and are very lengthy. Instead, for given , , , , and , we For given , , , , and , it may be possible for

provide a general framework for checking the constructibility to take various forms, which implies that each may have a

and for constructing each submatrix.

different number of columns and a different distribution of 1’s.

First, some basic conditions on the parameters , , , , Therefore, some bounds on , or the number of columns of ,

and are provided to determine whether a regular protograph need to be satisfied in order for a matrix

to exist. Since

with the given parameters can be potentially constructed. In , the number of 1’s in is

and each

the number of all possible columnwise pairs of 1’s should be column in can have weight from 1 to , we have

larger than or equal to the number of actual columnwise pairs

which yields

of 1’s, that is,

. Also, the last

rows of

. Therefore, when

the protograph must have

’s and the matrix must is constructed by selecting and modifying an incidence matrix

have

’s, and thus, we have

. of a block design, the aforementioned bound on must be

Second, consider constructing

of size

. considered.

The matrix

has the constant row-weight

and is not Finally, consider constructing of size

and

allowed to have any repeated columnwise pairs of 1’s in order to of size

. If is already constructed, the column-

avoid the second and the third ICI subgraphs of in

. weights of are also determined and 1’s in should be located

Moreover, has constant column-weight . The matrix

to avoid the second and the third ICI subgraphs of in the

can be constructed from an incidence matrix of block designs union of , , and . Then, for a given ,

’s in

such as

, configurations

, PBD

, group should be located such that the union of , , and does not

divisible designs (GDD) [21] and so on because they do not have contain the second and the third ICI subgraphs of , and the

any repeated columnwise pairs of 1’s. If an incidence matrix of union of , , , and does not contain while enforcing

an

or a configuration

has the desired size of row-weights of

to be and column-weights of to be

, it can be directly used as

whereby is an empty

.

matrix, i.e.,

. Otherwise, an incidence matrix of some For given parameters , , , , and , a general pro-

block designs can be used as

by doing a simple modifi- cedure for constructing regular protographs, which avoid in-

cation. Note that an incidence matrix of PBDs or GDDs may evitable cycles of length less than 14, is summarized as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 6. 28 49 regular protograph with

and

.

1. Check if the parameters satisfy the conditions

a matrix

of size 21 28, an incidence matrix of a sym-

and

. If the conditions metric configuration is considered. We can find a parallel

are not satisfied, stop the procedure.

class consisting of seven weight-3 columns such that if those

2. Select an satisfying

seven columns are inserted to the incidence matrix, no repeated

.

columnwise pairs of 1’s appear. Thus, we obtain

with

3. Construct

from an incidence matrix of a proper

. The 7 7 matrix should have column-weight 1 and

block design.

its row-weight can be set to 1. The matrix has size 7 21,

4. Construct

satisfying the weight constraints such that column-weight 2, and row-weight 6. Due to

, can

the union of , , , and does not have and as be constructed not to have any repeated columnwise pairs of

its subgraph.

1’s. Also, we can choose so that it avoids in the union of

Example 3: Consider the construction of a 15 30 regular , , , and . The resulting 28 49 regular protograph with

protograph with

,

, and

. The given

,

, and

is shown in Fig. 6.

parameters satisfy the conditions

and

. The 12 18 matrix

has

row-weight 4 and satisfies

. An incidence

VI. CONSTRUCTION OF QC LDPC CODES AND THEIR MINIMUM HAMMING DISTANCES

matrix of a symmetric configuration is chosen for the

construction of

, which is constructed by removing A. Construction of QC LDPC Codes From the Proposed

two parallel classes from a 12 20 incidence matrix of the Protographs

configuration

in Fig. 11(b). By inserting a parallel To verify the effectiveness of the proposed protographs, QC

class consisting of six weight-2 columns to an incidence matrix LDPC codes will be constructed by determining the lift size and

of the symmetric configuration ,

with

is assigning an appropriate shift value to each edge of a proto-

constructed, where any repeated columnwise pairs of 1’s do not graph. Given a protograph, it is not easy to find all shift values

appear. Since the column-weight of is 2, the 3 6 matrix even for a moderate lift size such that the girth of the QC LDPC

should have column-weight 1. Let each row of have two 1’s. code is the same as the length of the shortest inevitable cycle.

Then, should have column-weight 1 and row-weight 4, and Huang et al. [10] proposed a search algorithm for small lift size

the 1’s in can be properly distributed so that and

and a shift value assignment scheme to achieve the target girth

do not appear in the union of , , , and . The resulting based on a greedy search. This algorithm was originally de-

15 30 regular protograph with

,

, and

signed for single-edge protographs. However, by a slight mod-

is shown in Fig. 5.

ification, this algorithm can be extended to the case of mul-

Example 4: Consider the construction of a 28 49 regular tiple-edge protographs.

protograph with

,

, and

. We can Consider a

protograph with the column-weight ,

check that those parameters satisfy the two necessary condi- the row-weight , and the lift size . Each column of has

tions for the construction and

. For constructing shift values and let ,

, denote the th shift

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: DESIGN OF MULTIPLE-EDGE PROTOGRAPHS FOR QC LDPC CODES AVOIDING SHORT INEVITABLE CYCLES

4607

value of the th column in . Our goal is to determine all shift

values

and search the minimum when a protograph and

a target girth of QC LDPC codes are given. Let denote

the set of all TNC walks of length in . Then, by Lemma

1, the condition for achieving the target girth of QC LDPC

codes is that for any

,

, the shift

sum

satisfies

. However, it requires too

much computational complexity to find and the minimum

satisfying the aforementioned condition by considering the

entire search space of and .

In order to reduce the search space of shift values, let

as in [10], where is the

st ele-

ment of the set

which is constructed

from

by specifying ,

, to be

. Thus, we only

need to find values of instead of values of , and

is typically chosen in an interval around zero. Moreover,

for further reduction of computational complexity, is deter-

mined in a greedy manner, that is, shift values of the th column

in are determined by considering only the first columns in

. For this, let

denote the set of all TNC walks of length

in the matrix consisting of the first columns of .

For a given target girth , if is already determined such

that

for every

,

, the

minimum , denoted by , can be suboptimally determined

as

.

Note that for any

, the target girth is achieved.

Algorithm 1: Greedy Search for the Minimum Lift Size and Shift Values

INPUT: Target girth ,

protograph, search bound

OUTPUT:

and

INITIALIZATION:

,

for

MAIN ROUTINE

for

to

begin

for

to

begin

Let

for

.

If

for every

,

,

An algorithm to construct QC LDPC codes of moderate

length by determining all shift values and searching the min-

imum lift size, called Algorithm 1, is provided as follows. If the

target girth is set to the length of the shortest inevitable cycle,

we can generate QC LDPC codes of moderate length with the

maximum achievable girth from the proposed protographs.

Note that the computational complexity of Algorithm 1 is

the same for both single-edge protographs and multiple-edge

protographs under the same parameter values.

Four QC LDPC codes are generated by using Algorithm

1. From the 9 15 protograph in Fig. 13, a

QC LDPC code with girth 14, denoted by Proposed Code

1, is constructed, which has

and

. From the 9 12 protograph in Fig. 17(b),

a

QC LDPC code with girth 14, denoted by

Proposed Code 2, is constructed, which has

and

.

From the 6 12 protograph in Fig. 3(a), a

QC LDPC code with girth 12, denoted by Proposed

Code 3, is constructed, which has

and

. From the

6 8 protograph in Fig. 3(b), a

QC LDPC code with

girth 12, denoted by Proposed Code 4, is constructed, which

has

and

.

B. Upper Bounds On the Minimum Hamming Distance of the Proposed QC LDPC Codes

Smarandache and Vontobel [19] derived two upper bounds on

the minimum Hamming distance of QC LDPC codes. While one

bound needs the entire code specification, e.g., the structure of

the protograph, the lift size, and the shift values, the other bound

only requires knowledge of the protograph.

These two upper bounds are shown in Theorems 5 and 6,

and they are directly derived by finding some low-weight code-

words as in Lemma 7. Let denote the submatrix of that

contains only the columns of whose index appears in the set

. Also, recall that the polynomial parity-check matrix

is

defined as

, where

, and

is defined as the number of

nonzero terms in

.

Definition 4 ([19]): The permanent of an

matrix

over some commutative ring is defined to be

.

Otherwise,

.

end

Select the minimum

and save the minimum

to and also save the argument to .

If there are multiple minima, randomly pick any one.

end

where the summation is over all permutations on the set

.

Lemma 7 ([19]): Let be a binary QC LDPC code defined

by a

polynomial matrix

with lift size . Let be an

arbitrary size-

subset of

and let

, where

is a polynomial over

defined by

if otherwise.

Then, is a codeword of .
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4608

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 7. Two single-edge regular protographs with cycles of length less than 14. (a) 9 15. (b) 9 12.

Fig. 8. Two single-edge regular protographs with avoiding inevitable cycles of length less than 12. (a) 6 12. (b) 6 8.

avoiding inevitable

of the randomly constructed protographs in the sense of upper

Theorem 5 ([19]): Let be a binary QC LDPC code defined bounds on the minimum Hamming distance. The upper bounds

by a

polynomial matrix

with lift size . Then, the in (2) and (3) for this code are both 56.

minimum Hamming distance of is upper bounded as

Finally, consider the (800, 200) Proposed Code 4. The upper

bounds in (2) and (3) for this code are 130 and 174, respec-

(2)

tively. For comparison, a QC LDPC code with the same parameter values is generated from the 6 8 single-edge regular pro-

tograph in Fig. 8(b) by using Algorithm 1. This single-edge pro-

tograph is the best one of the randomly constructed protographs

where the operator gives back the minimum value of all

nonzero entries in a list of values.

Theorem 6 ([19]): Let be a binary QC LDPC code lifted

from a

protograph . Then, the minimum Hamming dis-

tance of is upper bounded as

in the sense of upper bounds on the minimum Hamming distance. The upper bounds in (2) and (3) for this code are 98 and 110, respectively.
The aforementioned results clearly show that two upper bounds (2) and (3) on the minimum Hamming distance of QC LDPC codes are affected in a positive way by using double

(3) edges in the protographs. In general, a multiple-edge protograph is more difficult to design than a single-edge protograph under

the condition that they avoid the shortest inevitable cycles of

Theorems 5 and 6 imply that for given , , , and , these two upper bounds on the minimum Hamming distance of QC LDPC codes possibly increase as the number of multiple edges in the protograph increases, which is supported by examples for some regular protographs in [19]. Note that in general the upper bound in (2) approaches the upper bound in (3) for a large and proper shift values.
Consider the (15000, 6000) Proposed Code 1. The upper

the same length. However, if multiple-edge protographs are successfully constructed to avoid inevitable cycles of undesirable lengths, QC LDPC codes lifted from them can potentially give a larger upper bound on the minimum Hamming distance than those lifted from single-edge protographs. Nevertheless, note that these are just upper bounds on the minimum Hamming distance and it is plausible that the actual minimum Hamming distance behaves similarly, but need not be so.

bounds in (2) and (3) for this code are 246 and 256, respectively.

For comparison, a QC LDPC code with the same parameter C. Comparison of Error Correcting Performance values is generated from the 9 15 single-edge regular pro-

tograph in Fig. 7(a) by using Algorithm 1. This single-edge The performance of four proposed QC LDPC codes, that is,

protograph is constructed by attaching the last three columns Proposed Codes 1–4 is compared with those of the progressive

to an incidence matrix of

to avoid inevitable cycles edge-growth LDPC codes, called PEG 1–4 [23] and the QC

of length less than 14. The upper bounds in (2) and (3) for this LDPC codes, called PEG QC 1–4 [24] with the same code

code are 218 and 230, respectively.

length, code rate, and column-weight. PEG LDPC codes and

Consider the (3600, 900) Proposed Code 2. The upper bounds PEG QC LDPC codes are well known to have good error

in (2) and (3) for this code are 362 and 416, respectively. For correcting performance comparable to those of random LDPC

comparison, a QC LDPC code with the same parameter values codes. Note that the girths of such (15000, 6000), (3600, 900),

is generated from the 9 12 single-edge regular protograph (7200, 3600), and (800, 200) PEG LDPC codes and PEG QC

in Fig. 7(b) by using Algorithm 1. By using the construction LDPC codes are 12, 12, 12, and 10, respectively, and these

method in [7], this single-edge protograph is constructed by codes are obtained by the PEG algorithm to have as large girth

concatenating an incidence matrix of a

configuration as possible.

and cyclically row-shifted matrix of it. The upper bounds in (2) The binary input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN)

and (3) for this code are 314 and 384, respectively.

channel is used for simulations. The belief propagation (BP) de-

Consider the (7200, 3600) Proposed Code 3. The upper coding algorithm is used and the number of maximum iterations

bounds in (2) and (3) for this code are all 68. For comparison, is set to 100. The frame error rate (FER) performances of all the

a QC LDPC code with the same parameter values is generated aforementioned LDPC codes are compared in Fig. 9 and we can

from the 6 12 single-edge regular protograph in Fig. 8(a) by see that the proposed QC LDPC codes show as good error cor-

using Algorithm 1. This single-edge protograph is the best one recting performance as the PEG LDPC codes and the PEG QC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: DESIGN OF MULTIPLE-EDGE PROTOGRAPHS FOR QC LDPC CODES AVOIDING SHORT INEVITABLE CYCLES

4609

In this case, we have

,

, and

. We need to construct

of size

to avoid repeated columnwise pairs of

1’s, i.e., the subgraph

. For this, the following Steiner

Fig. 9. Error correcting performance comparison of the proposed QC LDPC codes, the PEG LDPC codes, and the PEG QC LDPC codes.

LDPC codes. Note that the bit error rate curves behave qualitatively the same as the FER curves and they are omitted in this paper.

VII. CONCLUSION

The subgraphs of protographs having multiple edges, which

cause inevitable cycles in the QC LDPC codes, are fully inves-

tigated by taking a graph-theoretic approach. For regular QC

LDPC codes with girth larger than or equal to 12, we propose

a systematic construction method of protographs that avoids in-

evitable cycles of length less than 12 by using BTDs. For reg-

ular QC LDPC codes with girth larger than or equal to 14, we

provide construction methods of all

protographs with

column-weight three and the number of double edges

by

using various block designs. These construction methods can

be extended to construct regular protographs with double edges

less than

and with column-weight larger than three. Also,

a construction algorithm of QC LDPC codes from the proposed

protographs is provided based on the work in [10]. To check

the validity of the proposed QC LDPC codes, we show that

the proposed QC LDPC codes have larger upper bounds on the

minimum Hamming distance than the QC LDPC codes lifted

from single-edge protographs. However, these upper bounds

only serve as a surrogate and it is an open problem to derive

better upper and lower bounds on the minimum Hamming dis-

tance for the proposed codes. Finally, the error correcting per-

formance of the proposed QC LDPC codes is compared with

those of PEG LDPC codes and PEG QC LDPC codes via nu-

merical analysis.

APPENDIX CONSTRUCTION OF AND OF THE PROTOGRAPHS
IN THEOREM 4

In this appendix, we show that there exist regular protographs

for all parameter values given in Theorem 4 by providing ex-

plicit combinatorial design-based construction methods for the

submatrices and of the protographs.

1)

and

.

system can be used.

Definition 5 ([21]): A

design is a pair

,

where is a -set of points and is a collection of -subsets

(blocks) of with the property that every -subset of is con-

tained in exactly blocks in . A Steiner system

is

the

design with

.

Lemma 8 ([21]): There exists

only when

.

The number of blocks in

is

. Since three

columns have weight two and the other columns have weight

three in the

matrix

, the

incidence matrix of

may be modified to be used as

by deleting one 1 from each

of well-chosen three columns and adding one column of weight

three. In order for such a modified matrix to be a valid

,

we should check whether three columnwise pairs of 1’s in the

weight-2 columns are disjoint, all rows have weight

,

and any columnwise pair of 1’s appears at most once.

Without loss of generality, let

,

, and

,

, be three blocks of

corre-

sponding to three columns containing a cycle of length 6. Three

disjoint blocks

,

, and

are obtained

by removing , , and from

,

, and

, respectively. Inserting a block

to this

modified

still makes every pair appear at most

once. An incidence matrix of

has row-weight

and the aforementioned modifications clearly keep

the row-weight unchanged. Therefore, we propose a construc-

tion method of

in the case of

and

as follows:

1. Permute the columns of an incidence matrix of

so that the first three columns contain a cycle of length

6.

2. Delete a 1 on the cycle of length 6 from each of the first

three columns so that the resulting three columnwise pairs

of 1’s are disjoint.

3. Insert one column of weight three where three 1’s are lo-

cated in the rows traversed by the above cycle of length 6.

Actually, it is easy to choose three columns which contain a

cycle of length 6 because an incidence matrix of

has many cycles of length 6. The following lemma shows

how many cycles of length 6 exist in an incidence matrix of

.

Lemma 9: An incidence matrix of

has

cycles of length 6.

Proof: Consider three points

of

. Three pairs

appear

in

in either of two ways: 1) one block has all the

three pairs, that is, consists of

; or 2) each pair is con-

tained in a block which does not have the other two pairs, that

is, there are three blocks

,

where

and

. Three pairs in case 2) form

a cycle of length 6 in the incidence matrix of

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4610

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 10. Construction of an 11 22 regular protograph with

and

. (a) Incidence matrix of

. (b) 11 22 regular protograph with

and

.

Hence, the number of cycles of length 6 in the incidence matrix

can be enumerated by substracting the number of all blocks

from the number of ways of choosing three points in . This

yields

.

Example 5: Fig. 10 illustrates the construction of an

11 22 protograph with

and

. A cycle of length

6 is denoted by the circles in the incidence matrix of

,

which has been already column-wisely permuted in Fig. 10(a).

To obtain

, three 1’s marked by dotted circles are deleted

and the column with 1’s in the first, the second, and the fourth

rows is inserted as the first column of . Let

,

denote the points of

, which also denotes the th row

of

. We can see that every column in

has none of

three pairs of 1’s

and it is clear that

three pairs

in are disjoint. The

resulting 11 22 protograph with

and

is shown

in Fig. 10(b) and we can check that with

does not

appear in this protograph.

2)

and

.

In this case, we have

,

, and

. Since and do not appear in the pro-

tograph, should be designed to avoid repeated columnwise

pairs, where has constant row-weight

and column-

weight 3. A configuration whose incidence matrix has column-

weight 3 and the size

can be used

for .

Definition 6 ([21]): A configuration

is an inci-

dence structure of points and blocks such that 1) each block

contains points, 2) each point lies on blocks, and 3) two dif-

ferent points are contained in at most one block. If

and

hence

, the configuration is called symmetric and denoted

by .

It is important to check the existence of the configuration with

the required parameters. The following theorem shows that such

configuration always exists and therefore can be constructed.

Theorem 7: There exists a configuration

with

,

,

, and

for all

and

.

Proof: Necessary conditions for the existence of a

configuration [25] are given as 1)

and

, 2)

,

and 3)

. We can easily check that the parameters

in the theorem statement satisfy these conditions. Finally, the

existence of such configurations is guaranteed by Theorem 3.1

in [25], that is, there exists a configuration with

if and

only if the necessary conditions hold.

Now, a construction method of is proposed based on the

results in [25], which uses configurations with parallel classes

and resolvable configurations.

Definition 7 ([21]): A parallel class in a design is a set

of blocks that partition the point set. A resolvable design is a

design whose blocks can be partitioned into parallel classes.

If a configuration

has at least one parallel class, for

some positive integer , we can obtain a matrix with rows,

columns, and a constant row-weight

by removing

parallel classes from an incidence matrix of the configuration.

This property also helps to obtain from a configuration.

For

,

exists by Lemma 8. For

, an incidence matrix of a resolvable configuration

with

,

,

, and

can be constructed by removing a row and its inci-

dent columns in an incidence matrix of

[25]. For

, there is no resolvable configuration

but we

can find a configuration

in the same manner as illus-

trated in Fig. 11(b), which contains some parallel classes from

[25]. Since a parallel class of a configuration

with

,

,

, and

consists of

blocks and has all points exactly once, we

obtain by removing one parallel class from the incidence ma-

trices of these configurations. The construction procedure of

for

and

is summarized as follows.

1) Construct

.

2) Construct an incidence matrix of a resolvable configuration

with

,

,

, and

by removing a row and its incident columns

in an incidence matrix of

.

3) Remove one parallel class which consists of

columns to obtain .

Example 6: An incidence matrix of

is shown

in Fig. 11(a). An incidence matrix of a configuration

in Fig. 11(b) is constructed by removing the eighth row and

its incident columns in the incidence matrix of

in

Fig. 11(a). We see that the fourth, the sixth, the thirteenth, and

the sixteenth columns form a parallel class. By removing these

columns, an incidence matrix of a configuration

is

constructed, which is used as . The resulting 14 28 proto-

graph with

and

is shown in Fig. 11(c).

3)

and

:

3.1)

,

;

In this case, we have

and

, and

thus, should have only one pair of 1’s. Since

ex-

ists by Lemma 8,

may be constructed by removing

columns from a

incidence matrix

of

and then deleting a 1 in some other column.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: DESIGN OF MULTIPLE-EDGE PROTOGRAPHS FOR QC LDPC CODES AVOIDING SHORT INEVITABLE CYCLES

4611

Fig. 12. Construction of a 15 35 regular protograph with

and

. (a) Incidence matrix of

. (b) 15 35 regular protograph with

and

.

3) Find

columns that form one parallel class in the

aforementioned configuration.

4) In the incidence matrix of

, delete a 1 in the

selected row in Step 2 and remove the

columns

obtained in Step 3.

5) Move the column which had the deleted 1 in Step 4 to the

Fig. 11. Construction of a 14 28 regular protograph with

and

. (a) Incidence matrix of

. (b) Incidence matrix of a configuration

. (c) 14 28 regular protograph with

and

.

leftmost to obtain

.

Note that the aforementioned construction method cannot be

applied to the case of

and

because the configura-

tion

does not have any parallel class. The case of

To achieve the desired row-weight

of

, there

should exist a submatrix consisting of columns satisfying

that 1) two rows have weight 2 and the others have weight 1 and

2) one column has a 1 at each of these two rows of weight 2.

As seen in the case of

and

, for

and

,

contains as a substructure

a configuration

with

,

,

, and

which has at least one parallel

class consisting of

blocks. This implies that there are

blocks in

which partition all but one point.

Also, there always exists another block containing that point in

. These blocks satisfy the aforementioned

requirements 1) and 2) for

. The construction procedure

of

for

,

, and

is

summarized as follows.

and

will be covered in the last part of this section.

Example 7: Fig. 12 illustrates the construction of a 15 35

regular protograph with

and

. In an inci-

dence matrix of

in Fig. 12(a), the fifth, the seventh,

the 16th, and the 20th columns partition the set of row indices

except for the index of the eighth row. Also, we can see that

the fourth column has a 1 in the eighth row. Thus, the 1 in the

fourth column and the eighth row is deleted and the four boxed

columns are removed from the incidence matrix. Then, the re-

sulting column of weight 2 is moved to the far left and a 15 35

protograph with

and

is shown in Fig. 12(b).

3.2)

;

In this case, we have

and

, and

there are three columnwise pairs of 1’s in . Since

exists for

and

by Lemma 8, the construc-

tion method for

and

can also be applied

1) Construct

.

to this case in the same way. As an example, a 9 15 regular

2) Select one row in an incidence matrix of

protograph with

and

is shown in Fig. 13.

such that if the row and its incident columns are removed 4)

and

:

from the incidence matrix, the remaining part forms an In this case, we have

,

, and

incidence matrix of a configuration

with

,

. To construct

, start with

,

, and

including which always exists by Lemma 8. Similar to the case of

at least one parallel class.

and

, a configuration

with

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

Fig. 13. 9 15 regular protograph with

and

.

,

, and

can be

constructed by removing a row and its incident columns in an

incidence matrix of

. Any

blocks sharing

a common point in the configuration partition all points except

the common point and another point. Therefore, by removing

any row and its incident columns in an incidence matrix of the

configuration, a

matrix with

rows of weight

and a row of weight

is

obtained. Removing a 1 in the row of weight

results

in a matrix which has the desired row-weight

and

exactly one column of weight 2. Clearly, this matrix can be used

as

. The construction procedure of

for

Fig. 14. Construction of a 13 26 regular protograph with

and

. (a) 11 15 modified matrix. (b) 13 26 regular protograph with

and

.

and

is summarized as follows.

1) Construct a configuration

with

,

,

, and

from

similar to the case of

and

.

2) Obtain a matrix of size

by

removing a row and its incident columns.

3) Delete a 1 in the row of weight

and move the

column having the deleted 1 to the leftmost to obtain

.

Example 8: An incidence matrix of a configuration

is given in Fig. 11(b). By removing the first row and Fig. 15. 12 20 regular protograph with

and

.

its incident columns, we obtain an 11 15 matrix shown in

Fig. 14(a), where the seventh row has weight 5 and the others

have weight 4. Then, the 1 in the seventh row is deleted from According to [25], the construction procedure of is provided

the second column and the second column is moved to the as follows.

far left. The resulting 13 26 protograph with

and 1. Construct a

-DTS with

,

is shown in Fig. 14(b).

.

5)

and

:

2. For each ,

, construct a column of

5.1)

;

length

denoted by , which has a 1 at the

st,

In this case, we have

and

.

the

st, and the

st rows and 0 at other rows.

Similar to the case of

and

, an incidence 3. For each , construct a

matrix whose

matrix of a configuration

with

,

th column,

, is obtained by cyclically

,

, and

can be used as . Such

shifting downward

times.

configuration can be constructed by using difference triangle set 4. Concatenate

matrices in Step 3 to obtain .

(DTS).

Note that we can easily construct a

-DTS from

Definition 8 ([21]): An

-difference triangle set, or the DTS lists in [26] for

and

. Fig. 15

-DTS, is a set

, where for

, shows a 12 20 regular protograph with

and

with an integer satisfying

constructed from

-DTS.

, and the differences

over the 5.2)

;

integers for all , , ,

,

, are all distinct In this case, we have

and

. Pairwise

and nonzero.

balanced designs (PBDs) can be used to construct

.

Theorem 8 ([25]): If there is an

-DTS, a configura-

Definition 9 ([21]): Let be a subset of positive integers

tion

for

,

,

, and

can be and let be a positive integer. A PBD of order with block sizes

constructed from this DTS.

from , denoted by PBD

, is a pair

, where

For

and

, a configuration

with is a point set of cardinality and is a family of blocks of

,

,

, and

which satisfy 1) if

, then

and 2) every pair of

can be constructed from

-DTS by Theorem 8. distinct elements of occurs in exactly blocks of .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PARK et al.: DESIGN OF MULTIPLE-EDGE PROTOGRAPHS FOR QC LDPC CODES AVOIDING SHORT INEVITABLE CYCLES

4613

Let PBD

denote a PBD

with

and use

PBD

to denote a PBD containing only one block

of size in the PBD, where

is a positive integer. For

, it was shown in [27] that PBD

always exists. Note that five rows sharing a 1 with the column of

weight 5 have weight

and the other rows have weight

in a

incidence matrix

of PBD

.

Theorem 9: Removing a row of weight

and its

incident columns except the weight-5 column from an incidence

matrix of PBD

makes a

matrix of constant row-weight

.

Proof: Without loss of generality, assume that the first

column has 1’s at the first five rows in an incidence matrix

of PBD

. Consider the

submatrix which consists of the columns incident to the first

row. Except the first row, each row of this submatrix has only

one 1 because every columnwise pair of 1’s should appear

exactly once in an incidence matrix of this PBD. Thus, the

submatrix obtained by removing the

first row and the first column from the

submatrix does not have 1 in the first four rows and each of

the other rows has only one 1. After removing the first row

and the

submatrix from the incidence

matrix of PBD

, the remainder forms the

matrix of row-weight

.

The matrix constructed in Theorem 9 cannot be directly

used as

due to the improper number of columns and

the weight-4 column, but it can be easily modified to meet the

requirements for

by splitting the weight-4 column into

two weight-2 columns. The construction procedure of

for

,

, and

is summarized as

follows.

1. Construct PBD

.

2. Remove a row of weight

and its incident columns

except the weight-5 column from an incidence matrix of

PBD

.

3. Split the weight-4 column into two weight-2 columns and

move them to the leftmost to obtain

.

Example 9: The construction process for a 12 24 regular

protograph with

and

is illustrated in Fig. 16. An

incidence matrix of PBD

is shown in Fig. 16(a).

We can see that the submatrix consisting of the columns inci-

dent to the first row has exactly one 1 in each row except the first

row. By removing the first row and the second, the third, and

the fourth columns and splitting the weight-4 column into two

weight-2 column,

is obtained. The resulting 12 24 reg-

ular protograph with

and

is shown in Fig. 16(b).

6)

,

and

,

.

Only two cases of Theorem 4 remain for which we need to

provide construction methods. When

and

, we

have

and

, and

is a 7 5 matrix with

row-weight 2. Although the construction method of

for

and

cannot be directly used,

we can construct

from an incidence matrix of

in Fig. 17(a). Since any two columns of an incidence matrix of

have a common 1, removing the first two columns

from an incidence matrix results in a 7 5 matrix where one

Fig. 16. Construction of a 12 24 regular protograph with

and

. (a) Incidence matrix of PBD

. (b) 12 24 regular protograph

with

and

.

Fig. 17. Construction of a 9 12 regular protograph with

and

.

(a) Incidence matrix of

. (b) 9 12 regular protograph with

and

.

Fig. 18. 10 20 regular protograph with

and

.

row has weight 1, four rows have weight 2, and the remaining

two rows have weight 3 as shown in Fig. 17(a). To obtain

,

first delete 1 from each of two rows of weight 3 in the 7 5 ma-

trix such that two deleted 1’s do not belong to the same column

and the columns containing two deleted 1’s do not have 1 in the

row of weight 1. These two deleted 1’s are marked by circle in

Fig. 17(a). Then, by replacing a 0 at the row of weight 1 and one

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 7, JULY 2013

of the columns containing the deleted 1’s with a 1,

is con-

structed and the resulting 9 12 regular protograph is shown in

Fig. 17(b).

When

and

, we have

and

,

and has disjoint four columnwise pairs of 1’s. An incidence

matrix of a symmetric configuration can be used as , which

does not have disjoint four columnwise pairs of 1’s. A 10 20

regular protograph with

and

is shown in Fig. 18.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are very grateful to anonymous reviewers and especially the associate editor for a number of very helpful comments including several technical corrections and suggestions, which substantially improved the paper.

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA,

USA: MIT Press, 1963.

[2] J. Thorpe, Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from

protograph Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, USA, 2003, IPN

Progr. Rep. 42-154.

[3] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured

LDPC codes,” presented at the Int. Symp. Commun. Theory Appl.,

Ambleside, U.K., 2001.

[4] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from

circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no.

8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.

[5] M. E. O’Sullivan, “Algebraic construction of sparse matrices with large

girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 718–727, Feb. 2006.

[6] O. Milenkovic, N. Kashyap, and D. Leyba, “Shortened array codes of

large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3707–3722,

Aug. 2006.

[7] S. Kim, J.-S. No, H. Chung, and D.-J. Shin, “Quasi-cyclic low-density

parity-check codes with girth larger than 12,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,

vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 2885–2891, Aug. 2007.

[8] Y. Wang, J. S. Yedidia, and S. C. Draper, “Construction of high-girth

QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Top.,

Sep. 2008, pp. 180–185.

[9] M. Esmaeili and M. Gholami, “Structured quasi-cyclic LDPC codes

with girth 18 and column-weight

,” J. Electron. Commun., vol.

64, no. 3, pp. 202–217, Mar. 2010.

[10] J. Huang, L. Liu, W. Zhou, and S. Zhou, “Large-girth nonbinary

QC-LDPC codes of various lengths,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58,

no. 12, pp. 3436–3447, Dec. 2010.

[11] X. Jiang, Y. Yan, and M. H. Lee, “Construction of multiple-rate quasi-

cyclic LDPC codes via the hyperplane decomposing,” J. Commun.

Netw., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 205–210, Jun. 2011.

[12] I. E. Bocharova, F. Hug, R. Johannesson, B. D. Kudryashov, and R.

V. Satyukov, “Searching for voltage graph-based LDPC tailbiting

codes with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp.

2265–2279, Apr. 2012.

[13] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes from differ-

ence families,” presented at the 3rd Australian Commun. Theory Work-

shop, Canberra, Australia, Feb. 2002.

[14] B. Ammar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and S. Lin, “Construction of

low-density parity-check codes based on balanced incomplete block

designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1257–1268, Jun.

2004.

[15] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of

low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans.

Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.

[16] C. A. Kelley and J. L. Walker, “LDPC codes from voltage graphs,” in

Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp.

792–796.

[17] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding

of finite length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related

Top., Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 75–82.

[18] C. A. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.

[19] P. O. Vontobel, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: Influence of proto- and

Tanner-graph structure on minimum Hamming distance upper bounds,”

IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 585–607, Feb. 2012.

[20] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Bounds on the minimum distance of

punctured quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory [On-

line]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1201.2386

[21] C. J. Colbourn and J. H. Dinitz, The CRC Handbook of Combinatorial

Designs. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 1996.

[22] E. J. Billington and P. Robinson, “A list of balanced ternary designs

with

, and some necessary existence conditions,” Ars Combin.,

vol. 16, pp. 235–258, 1983.

[23] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular

progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.

51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.

[24] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density

parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc.

38th Asilomar Conf. Sig. Syst. Comput., Nov. 2004, pp. 1990–1994.

[25] H. Gropp, “Nonsymmetric configurations with natural index,” Discr.

Math., vol. 124, pp. 87–98, 1994.

[26] [Online]. Available: http://www.research.ibm.com/people/s/shearer/

dtsopt.html

[27] S. Kucukcifci, “The intersection problem for

,” Discr.

Math., vol. 308, pp. 382–385, 2008.

Hosung Park received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 2007, 2009, and 2013, respectively. He is currently a postdoctoral researcher working with Prof. JongSeon No and Prof. Young-Han Kim at Institute of New Media and Communications in Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, since March 2013. From September 2013, he will work with Prof. Young-Han Kim as a postdoctoral researcher in Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, San Diego, USA. His research interests include low-density paritycheck codes, coding theory, coding for memory, compressed sensing, network information theory, and network coding.

Seokbeom Hong received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering and computer science from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 2007, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering and computer science. His area of research interests includes compressed sensing, error-correcting codes, and communications theory.

Jong-Seon No (S’80–M’88–SM’10–F’12) received the B.S. and M.S.E.E. degrees in electronics engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, in 1981 and 1984, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Southern California, Los Angeles, in 1988. He was a Senior MTS at Hughes Network Systems from February 1988 to July 1990. He was also an Associate Professor in the Department of Electronic Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul, from September 1990 to July 1999. He joined the Faculty of the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Seoul National University, in August 1999, where he is currently a Professor. His area of research interests includes error-correcting codes, sequences, cryptography, space-time codes, LDPC codes, and wireless communication systems.

Dong-Joon Shin (S’96–M’99–SM’09) received the B.S. degree in electronics engineering from Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea, the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Northwestern University, Evanston, USA, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA. From 1999 to 2000, he was a member of technical staff in Wireless Network Division and Satellite Network Division, Hughes Network Systems, Maryland, USA. Since September 2000, he has been a Professor in the Department of Electronic Engineering at Hanyang University, Seoul, Korea. His current research interests include error correcting codes, sequences, and wireless/mobile communication systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:41:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

