Performance Improvement of optical fiber communication system by using π-rotation Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Lixia Xi, Lei Yang, Xiaoguang Zhang, Wenbo Zhang
State Key Laboratory of Information Photonics and Optical Communications, Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876, China xilixia@bupt.edu.cn

Abstract
The π-rotation LDPC codes are used in DQPSK system, the correction performance are simulated. Using this FEC, the required OSNR is decreased 3dB. With 1dB OSNR penalty, system can tolerate 200ps/nm dispersion and 23ps PMD.

πB , πC and πD are obtained by rotating π A matrix
π 2,π ,3π 2 respectively. The generation of πA follows the flow chart as shown in Fig.1, where m = k /4 and a and b are
the integral numbers. For LDPC decoding, sum–product algorithm (SPA) is used.

1 Introduction

Low-density parity-check (LDPC) code used in optical fiber communication system is becoming the hot research issues [1-5]. In the previous works, quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes were often used [3-5]. The π-rotation LDPC codes were introduced by Rich Echard and Shih-Chun Chang [6-8]. One main feature of this code is using of single permutation matrix to define the entire code, which leads to very efficient encoding circuits [8]. Encoder of π-rotation LDPC codes only use H matrix and don’t need Gaussian elimination algorithm to get P matrix, the amount of computation is reduced. Because its H matrix is composed of 16 small matrices and only one matrix needs to be stored, hence the storage capacity is compressed.
In this paper, the π-rotation LDPC codes are adopted in 40Gbit/s DQPSK optical transmission system and the correction performance are discussed.

πA
Fig.1 The flow chart for generating the π matrix
A

2 Construction of π-rotation LDPC codes

3 Simulation system schematic

The parity check matrix of π-rotation LDPC code is composed of two sub-matrices Η = [Ηp | Ηd ] , which can be

described as :

⎡1 ⎢⎢0 H= ⎢# ⎢ ⎢0 ⎣⎢0

1 0 " 0π

1

1

"

0

A
π

#

%

%

#

B
π

0"

1

1

C
π

0" 0 1D

π B
π C
π D
π A

π C
π D
π A
π B

π

D

⎤ ⎥

π⎥

A⎥

π B

⎥

π C

⎥ ⎦⎥

(1)

If the length of LDPC codes is n and the length of
information bit is k, H would be a (n - k ) × n matrix. H p is

an (n - k) × (n - k) square dual-diagonal matrix and Hd is an

(n - k) × k matrix. With 50% redundancy, n=2k, then H p and

Hd are all square matrices. π A ,π B , π C and π D are k 4 square matrices, where πA is generated by a permutation vector,

Fig. 2 Schematic diagram of the DQPSK transmission system with LDPC
Fig. 2 illustrates the schematic of the simulation system. A 40Gbit/s DQPSK direct detection system with LDPC is set up. The fiber link consists of 1 span of fiber and two Erbiumdoped fiber amplifiers (EDFA), which length L is variable, PMD coefficient and CD coefficient of fiber are τ = 0.1 ps km and Dλ = 17 ps / nm / km respectively. The main noise sources are the amplified spontaneous emission noise of EDFA.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4 simulation results and discussion
The correction performances of different LDPC codes are discussed. Fig. 3 shows BER performance versus OSNR. Here, we define cut-off OSNR, which corresponds to the value that the BER turns to zero when OSNR exceeds it. The smaller cut-off OSNR is, the better correction performance of LDPC codes have. We see that the cut-off OSNR are 9.7dB, 9.8dB, 10.5dB and 12.2dB corresponding to 0.5 redundancy π-rotation LDPC, 0.5 QC-LDPC, 0.4 and 0.25 π-rotation LDPC respectively. These cut-off OSNR values are all less than accepted OSNR value 13dB, for some cases, the OSNR value even decreases 3dB. With the same redundancy, πrotation LDPC codes and QC-LDPC have the similar performance. But the memory space they need are different, which is described in table 1, where m is the row number,
i stands for the weight of column and bi is the percent of
column when the weight of column is i . shift and location stand for the memory space for shift and location of the circulant permutation matrices. For general situation, i ≥ 4 . We can see that the π-rotation LDPC need less memory space.
Fig.3 BER versus OSNR for different LDPC codes ( Arrow means when OSNR is over the value, BER turns to zero)
Table 1 memory space of π-rotation LDPC and QC-LDPC codes

value and consider 1dB OSNR penalty (that is to say OSNR is 14dB), corresponding to different LDPC codes, the system can tolerate 215 ps/nm, 210ps/nm,153 ps/nm and 102 ps/nm dispersion respectively，the PMD tolerance lie in 20~26ps. For a real optical communication system, there always have the CD compensation module, the residual dispersion will not be too large. So the LDPC codes are very suitable for highspeed optical fiber system.
Fig.5 OSNR versus DGD for different LDPC codes
5 Conclusion
The π-rotation LDPC codes are used in DQPSK direct detection optical fiber communication system, the error correction performance is numerically simulated. Ccompared with QC-LDPC codes, π-rotation LDPC codes have the same correction ability while much lower hardware cost. By using LDPC codes as forward error correction, the minimum required OSNR value is lower 3dB than the accepted value of 13dB at the end of DQPSK receiver; For 1dB OSNR penalty (OSNR is 14dB), the system can tolerate about 200ps/nm residual dispersion as well as twenties picoseconds first-order polarization mode dispersion.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61205065)

Parameter Memory space

QC-LDPC
(∑ m ×bi × i)× (shift + location) i

π-rotation LDPC m × (shift + location) 4

Fig.4 OSNR versus CD for different LDPC codes
The CD and PMD tolerance of the optical transmission system are also investigated when LDPC codes used as FEC. For the cases of BER lower than 10-12, the required OSNR with different CD and PMD are simulated, the results are shown in Fig.4 and Fig.5. If we select 13dB as the baseline

References
[1] D. Chang, etal. “ LDPC Convolutional Codes using Layered Decoding Algorithm for High Speed Coherent Optical Transmission”, OFC2012, paper OW1H.1
[2] J. Fu, etal, “First Experimental Demonstration of Nonbinary LDPCCoded Modulation Suitable for High-Speed Optical Communications,” OFC2011, paper OWF4.
[3] S. Mumtaz, et al. "Quasi-Cyclic LDPC based on PEG Construction for Optical Communications," in Signal Processing in Photonic Communications 2011, paper SPWB2.
[4] D. Chang, et al., “FPGA Verification of a Single QC-LDPC Code for 100 Gb/s Optical Systems without Error Floor down to BER of 10-15”, in OFC 2011, paper OTuN2.
[5] F. Yu, et al., “Soft-Decision LDPC Turbo Decoding for DQPSK Modulation in Coherent Optical Receivers,” in ECOC 2011, paper We.10.P1.70.
[6] R. Echard and S. C. Chang, “ The π-rotation low-density parity check codes, ” Global Telecommunications Conference. 2, 980, (2001).
[7] R. Echard and S. C. Chang, “Design considerations and performance analysis of good π-rotation LDPC codes,” Wireless Telecommunications Symposium. (2006).
[8] R. Echard and S. C. Chang, “Good High-Rate π-Rotation LDPC Codes Based on Novel Puncuring Techniques,” Information Theory and its Applications (ISITA), 2010 International Symposium on, (2010)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:43:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

