Chinese Journal of Electronics Vol.22, No.3, July 2013

A Belief Propagation Algorithm with
Set-Breaking to Lower Error-Floors of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes∗

MA Kexiang, LI Yongzhao, ZHANG Hailin, ZHU Caizhi and ZHANG Yuming
(State Key Laboratory of ISN, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China)

Abstract — In order to more exactly describe the errorfloor phenomenon in the iterative decoding of Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, a modified concept of the stable trapping set is introduced. Based on this new concept, an improved belief propagation algorithm with setbreaking mechanism is proposed to lower the error-floors of LDPC codes. Message ranking of the bit nodes in the stable trapping sets will be greatly lowered than that of other bit nodes in the iterative decoding process. By using this characteristic to label the bit nodes in the set, the corresponding initial log likelihood ratios will be flipped to break the stable trapping set and restart to decode. Simulation results verify the validity of the proposed algorithm.
Key words — Low-density parity-check (LDPC), Trapping set, Set-breaking, Error floor.
I. Introduction
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes[1], were first proposed by Gallager in the 1960s and later resurrected by MacKay and Neal[2]. Because of their near Shannon limit performance, LDPC codes have received much attention in recent years and been adopted by the latest satellite communications system (DVB-2[3]), as well as for the relay-based networks and frequency-hopping communications systems[4,5]. Furthermore, LDPC codes in these communications systems can well satisfy the performance demands of corresponding systems with the current iterative decoding algorithms, such as Belief propagation (BP) algorithm and Min sum (MS) algorithm. However, most LDPC codes behavior a high error floor in the decoding process. Consequently, they cannot work well in some systems, such as data storage and optical communications systems, which need an extremely low error rate. Hence, lowering the error floor of LDPC codes is critical to satisfy the requirement of these systems.
In recent years, this problem has attracted much study interest, and many different methods are proposed to lower the error floor of the LDPC codes. In a whole, all the methods

can divide into two kinds: construct the special LDPC codes or design an improved decoding algorithm based on existing algorithms. Some LDPC codes with special algebra structure have inherent low error floor in the iterative decoding process, such as Finite geometries (FG) and Reed-solomon (RS)-based LDPC codes[6,7]. However, the number of the well-constructed LDPC codes is limited, which cannot well satisfy all the demands of different systems. Because the error floors of LDPC codes under message-passing decoding are usually due to trapping sets in the iterative decoding step, liftings are designed to eliminate dominant trapping sets of the base code by removing the short cycles which are part of the trapping sets[8]. On the contrary, the trapping redundancy is introduced to the current check matrix, which can provided more unsatisfied parity-check equations to lower the error rate of LDPC codes[9]. From the perspective of decoding, some researchers propose modified BP-based algorithms to break the trapping set in the decoding process. A class of absorbing sets (one special trapping set) determines the error floor performance of the RS-based LDPC codes, and the pre-biasing reliabilities of selected nodes are performed to prevent the decoding process entering the absorbing set, which greatly lower the error floor of the RS-based LDPC codes[10]. In Ref.[11], three classes of decoders are proposed, including a bit-mode decoder, a bitpinning decoder, and three generalized-LDPC decoders, separately. However, they all require identifying the trapping sets of LDPC codes interested. Hence, the corresponding LDPC decoders are custom-designed to special LDPC codes. In order to solve this problem, Kang proposed a backtracking stagey to enable the decoder to escape the trapping set, and its key technique is to choose the flipped bit nodes. The trapping set is only a priori structure in the check matrix of LDPC codes and doesn’t take the decoding process into account. Consequently, an actual decoding failure cannot be well described by the trapping set. Therefore, it is necessary to propose a modified structure to make up this flaw.
In the iterative decoding process, the bit nodes with differ-

∗Manuscript Received May 2012; Accepted Dec. 2012. This work is supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No.61072069), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No.72001859), Important Nationa Science and Technology Specific Projects (No.2011ZX03003-001-04 and No.2012ZX03003012-003), Special Project for State Key Laboratory of ISN (No.ISN120201), State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Network (No.ISN090105), and the 111 Project (No.B08038).

A Belief Propagation Algorithm with Set-Breaking to Lower Error-Floors of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes 605

ent initial Log likelihood ratios (LLRs) have a different effect on the stability of the involved trapping sets. Based on this observation, the concept of the stable trapping set is proposed to describe this distinction. Correspondingly, a simple method is proposed to efficiently identify the bit nodes in the stable trapping sets. In the proposed algorithm, the stable trapping set can be broken just by flipping only one bit node, and then the decoding process will succeed. Compared with the existing algorithm[12], the proposed algorithm has a higher efficiency to lower the error floor of different kinds of LDPC codes.
II. Stable Trapping Sets
In this section, based on the trapping set, the concept of the stable trapping set is further proposed. LDPC codes belong to the class of linear block codes which can be defined by a sparse parity-check matrix. For a given LDPC code C, its parity-check matrix H can be described by a bipartite graph, defined as Tanner graph. Tanner graph includes two kinds of node set, i.e. the set of bit nodes V and the set of check nodes C, and its edges E represent the connection between bit nodes and check nodes. The set of bit nodes which participate in the m-th check nodes is defined as N (m), and the set of check nodes to which the n-th bit node connects is defined as M(n). A trapping set T is a set of p bit nodes in a LDPC code’s Tanner graph which induces a subgraph with q odd-degree check nodes[9]. In the decoding process, the n-th bit node will obtain the check messages from all adjacent check nodes. Then, the message contained in this bit node, which is composed of its initial LLR un and check messages, is defined as the decision message εn. The decision message can be used in hard decision. When (p, q) are relatively small, the p error bit nodes cannot acquire enough correct check messages to modify the wrong LLRs (from the q odd-degree check nodes[9]), and then the decoding process will trap in this p-bits error state until the iteration number reaches the maximum value.
In the initial stage of the decoding process, a large number of trapping sets will result due to the existence of error bit nodes. However, the error bit nodes with small initial LLR are vulnerable to the variation of the obtained check messages, and the trapping set constructed by these bit nodes is unstable. Thus, the decoding failure does not mainly cause by this kind of bit nodes. On the other hand, the bit nodes with large wrong LLRs (denoted by bad nodes) require many correct check messages to modify their wrong LLRs. Because the bad nodes in the trapping set can merely acquire limited right check messages from the q odd-degree check nodes, bad nodes are hardly corrected and the decoding process may stay at the p-bits error state with a high probability. From this perspective, we define such trapping set as a stable trapping set (denoted by Vs) if all the elements in the set are bad nodes. (The n-th bit node is defined as a bad node if the ranking of |un| is beyond the pre-set stable threshold Th.). After the decoding process is trapped in Vs, the bit nodes outside Vs will only get the right check messages from the adjacent check nodes. Then its decision message εn will be continuously enhanced during the decoding process. Unfortunately, however, the bit nodes in Vs simultaneously acquire right check messages and

wrong check messages from the odd-degree and even-degree check nodes, respectively. Therefore, the corresponding decision message εn cannot be efficiently enhanced. As a result, the ranking of |εn | (n ∈ Vs) greatly drops as compared with the ranking of |un |.
III. Proposed Algorithm
In this section, based on the concept of the stable trapping set, we propose a modified BP algorithm with set-breaking to lower the error-floors of LDPC codes. In order to show the validation of our algorithm, a detailed analysis is proposed in the following. As is shown in Fig.1, when the bad node v1 is corrected, the number of even-degree check nodes who provide error check messages is greatly reduced. Correspondingly, the bit nodes v2 and v3 can be corrected and then the stable trapping set will be totally broken when v4 is corrected at last. Namely, just one bit node in the stable trapping set is labeled and corrected, and then the set can be broken. In the following, a method is provided to label the bit node in the stable trapping set. From Section II we can see that the ranking of |εn | (n ∈ Vs) greatly drops as compared with the ranking of |un |. As a result, the n-th bit node will be labeled as a potential bit node in Vs, if the ranking of |un| is beyond T h1 and the ranking of |εn| in some iteration step is below T h2 (T h1 < T h2). Consequently, the flipping set composed of all labeled potential bit nodes in Vs is denoted by Γ(n). If the initial BP decoding fails, the bit node vn (n ∈ Γ(n)) is flipped, i.e., set un = −sgn(un) · IMax, where IMax is the maximum possible LLR value and sgn(x) is a function to calculate the sign of the variable x. Then, the BP decoding process will be restarted. When the flipped bit node is in some stable trapping set, a successful decoding with high probability is achieved. If the re-decoding fails, any other bit node in Γ(n) is flipped. Restart the re-decoding process.
Fig. 1. (a) (4, 4) Stable trapping set; (b) The set after the bit node v1 is flipped
The optimal iteration step must be determined to provide the optimal decision messages, which is discussed in this paragraph. The decoding failures caused by small trapping sets are usually characterized by two types of behaviors, i.e., false convergence and oscillation[13] . In the oscillation case, the numbers of wrong bit nodes and unsatisfied check nodes simultaneously grow larger after the decoder falls into the starting trapping set. Hence, the iteration step with the least number of unsatisfied check nodes has the least error bit nodes. Furthermore, wrong bit nodes in this iteration step are mainly in some trapping set. Therefore, utilizing the message in the

606

Chinese Journal of Electronics

2013

iteration step with least wrong check nodes, it is more effi-

cient to locate bit nodes in the trapping set. Certainly, it is

also effective for the stable trapping set and adopted to pro-

vide the optimal decision messages in the proposed algorithm.

What’s more, when the re-decoding attempts fail, more er-

ror bits may be introduced because of the wrong bit-flipping.

Therefore, under that case, the hard-decision sequence zα of the optimal decision messages is chosen as the final decoding

output.

In the following, given a binary (N, K)LDPC code, its parity-check matrix is denoted as H = [hMN ]. An arbitrary codeword c = [ c1 c2 · · · cN ] is chosen and transmitted by BPSK modulation over AWGN channels, which maps the

codeword into a bipolar sequence x = [ x1 x2 · · · xN ] by xn = 1 − 2cn, for n = (1 2 · · · N ). zk is the tentative binary hard-decision vector at the end of the k-th decoding iteration (0 < k ≤ Kmax) where Kmax is the maximum iteration number. At the receiver, we get the received vector

y = [ y1 y2 · · · yN ], where yn = xn + ηn (n = 1, 2, · · · , N ). ηn is the AWGN with zero mean and variable δ2. Let umn be
the check message which are transmitted from the m-th check

node to the n-th bit node and vmn be the bit message from the
n-th bit node to the m-th check node. At the k-th iteration, denote εnk as the decision message of the n-th bit node. The weight of the syndrome vector sk = zk × H T is denoted by
wk. The detailed decoding process is described as follows: Step 1 k = 0; For all n and each m ∈ [1, M ], un =
4yn/δ2, zn = (1 − sgn(un))/2, umn = 0 and vmn = 0. Step 2 update the bit message of the n-th bit node,
n ∈ [1, N ].

vmn = un +

um n

(1)

m ∈M (n)\m

Step 3 update the check message of the m-th check node, m ∈ [1, M ].

umn = 2tanh−1

1

tanh 2 vmn

(2)

n ∈N (m)\n

Step 4 update the decision message for every bit node n, k = k + 1.

εkn = un +

um n = vmn + umn

(3)

m ∈M (n)

znk = (1 − agn(εkn))/2

(4)

Step 5 examine whether the iteration stopping criterion
is satisfied.
If (wk = 0), terminate decoding and then output the decoding sequence zk, else if (k ≤ Kmax), repeat Step 2 to Step 4, else if (k = Kmax + 1), go to Step 6.
Step 6 perform the re-decoding attempts. Let k = min(wk) (0 < k ≤ Kmax) and store za. For the n-th bit node, if (rank (|un|) > α and rank (|εnk |) < β) Γ (n) = n, where rank(x) represents the ranking of the variable x. For each bit nodes in Γ (n), perform un = −sgn(un) · IMax, and then repeat Step 1 to Step 4 until k = Kmax + 1 or wk = 0 (and when wk = 0, terminate decoding and output zk), where Km† ax is the maximum iteration number of the re-decoding attempt.

Step 7 The re-decoding attempts fail and output zα.
IV. Simulation Analysis
In the following paragraphs, numerical results for the proposed algorithm are provided. Mackay (504, 252) and IEEE 802.16 (576, 288) code are adopted[14,15]. For the convenience of description, they are represented by Code 1 and Code 2, separately. For the two codes, Kmax and Kmax are 50 and 30, separately. Moreover, an AWGN channel with zero mean and variance N0/2 is assumed. BPSK modulation is adopted. For each SNR, 100 codeword errors are watched.
For the proposed algorithm, the optimal values of α and β are provided by extensive simulation results, which is discussed in detail below. Obviously, when a larger α or a smaller β is adopted, the length of the flipping set gets longer, resulting in more re-decoding attempts, and then the decoding performance can be improved. Also, the computational complexity is correspondingly increased. But, simulation results indicate that the improvement of the decoding performance is limited when the values of α and/or β are beyond some thresholds. Due to the lack of existing theoretical model for α and β, the optimal α and β are obtained through extensive simulations in this work, which is discussed in detail below:
(a) α ∈ {a = np, 1 ≤ n ≤ N/p − 2} β ∈ {β = (α + p) + (m − 1)p, 1 ≤ m ≤ N/p − 1},
where p is a large step size. Test each possible (α, β) and record the corresponding BER and the number of re-decoding attempts (T ). Based on BER and T , the estimates (α , β ) of the optimal α and β are chosen from all the tested (α, β), which involves tradeoff between the decoding performance and computational complexity (From the discussion in Section IV, we know that the computational complexity of the proposed algorithm can be evaluated by T ).
(b) α ∈ {α = α + nq, −p/q ≤ n ≤ (s − α†)/q } β ∈ {β = β† + mq, (l − β)/q ≤ m ≤ p/q },
where s = min(α† + p, β† − p), l = max(α† + p, β† − p) and q is a small step size. Test each possible (α, β) and record the corresponding BER and T . Based on BER and T , the optimal α and β are chosen from all the tested (α, β), which involves tradeoff between the decoding performance and computational complexity.
In this paper, p = 50 and q = 5. For code 1 and code 2, the optimal values are separately (α = 150, β = 395) and (α = 100, β = 400).
In Fig.2 and Fig.3, a series of performance comparison among augmented BP algorithm[12], BP algorithm with backtracking[13] and the proposed algorithm are provided, which are denoted by Algorithm 1, Algorithm 2 and Algorithm 3, respectively. For the two codes, the optimal backtracking threshold τ [13] is equal to 15. As is shown in Fig.2 and Fig.3, the decoding performance of Algorithm 2 is similar to that of the proposed algorithm, and Algorithm 1 has the best decoding performance. However, Algorithm 1 is not always the optimal choose because of its computational complexity, which is discussed in detail below. Compared with BP algorithm, all the three algorithms obtain the performance improvement by re-decoding attempts. Thus, their computational complexity

A Belief Propagation Algorithm with Set-Breaking to Lower Error-Floors of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes 607

can be evaluated by the number of re-decoding attempts. For Algorithm 1, the number of re-decoding attempts can be determined by LAug = 2j+1 −2, where j is the decoding stage[12]. For the two codes, their decoding stage j is equal to 4 and the number of re-decoding attempts is 30. As is shown in Table 1, the computational complexity of the other two algorithms is much lower than that of Algorithm 1, especially for the proposed algorithm (Algorithm 3). Taking Code 1 as example, with the proposed algorithm, its computational complexity is ten times lower than that of Algorithm 1 at 3.6dB. Furthermore, the proposed algorithm has a lower complexity than Algorithm 2, especially in the low SNR region. For Code 1, the proposed algorithm requires 4.41 re-decoding attempts at 1.8dB, while Algorithm 2 needs 34.84.

cially discussed below. Code 1 is a regular code and Code 2 is an irregular code. Furthermore, because of the dual-diagonal structure of Code 2, there are many bit nodes with 2-weight columns. Consequently, these bit nodes are sensitive to the variation of the message. Therefore, compared with Code 1, there are less (stable) trapping sets in its iterative decoding process. Moreover, for the (stable) trapping set with weight2 bit nodes, once some bit node in the set is rightly flipped, bit nodes in the dual-diagonal section can obtain enough right message and will be corrected. Then, the set is broken and the received vector will be rightly decoded. For Code 1, there are many prior trapping sets in its check matrix[16]. Because the received vector includes many error bits in the low SNR region, many (stable) trapping sets will appear in its decoding process. Under this case, most decoding failure is caused by many (stable) trapping sets, involving too many bit nodes. Correspondingly, it is hard to label the bits in the (stable) trapping sets to break all the sets, and to obtain more improvement of the decoding performance. However, for Code 2, as is discussed above, it will form less (stable) trapping sets in the decoding process as compared with Code 1. Therefore, with all the three algorithms, the performance improvement of Code 2 is greater than that of Code 1 in the low SNR region.

Fig. 2. Simulation results of Code 1 under different decoding algorithms

Table 1. The average re-decoding attempts of Algorithms 2[13] and 3 for Codes 1 and 2

Average re-decoding

Average re-decoding

attempts of Code 1

attempts of Code 2

SNR (dB) Algorithm 3 Algorithm 2 Algorithm 3 Algorithm 2

1.8

4.41

34.84

5.43

21.94

2.1

4.78

22.73

6.14

15.73

2.4

5.68

19.16

6.76

10.63

2.7

5.61

12.46

6.79

8.68

3.0

5.30

6.91

6.80

6.25

3.3

4.45

5.45

5.23

6.07

3.6

3.13

4.02

4.83

6.22

VI. Conclusion
In this paper, the concept of the stable trapping set is proposed to describe the critical structure in the check matrix of the LDPC codes, which leads to the error floor in the iterative decoding process. Based on this concept, a simple method is proposed to efficiently label the bit nodes in the stable trapping set. Simulation results indicate that only a few re-decoding attempts can greatly reduce the error floor of the tested LDPC codes. Furthermore, the proposed algorithm can work well for the LDPC codes with different structure.

Fig. 3. Simulation results of Code 2 under different decoding algorithms
From Fig.2 with Fig.3, compared with BP algorithm, all the three improved algorithms can efficiently lower the error floor of the two codes in the high SNR region. However, because of their different structure of the check matrix, the improvement of their decoding performance is different with all the three algorithms above in the low SNR region, which is spe-

References
[1] R.G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check codes”, Ire Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.8, No.1, pp.21–28, 1962.
[2] D.J.C. MacKay, R.M. Neal, “Near shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes”, Electronics Letters, Vol.32, No.18, pp.1645–1646, 1996.
[3] EN 302 307 V1.1.1, “Digital video broadcasting (DVB) second generation framing structure for broadband satellite applications”.
[4] Du Bing, Zhang Jun, “Parity check network coding for wireless

608

Chinese Journal of Electronics

2013

cooperative communications”, Chinese Journal of Electronics, Vol.19, No.2, pp.339–344, 2010. [5] Zhang Guohua, Wang Xinmei, “Construction of low-density parity-check codes based on frequency-hopping sequences”, Chinese Journal of Electronics, Vol.18, No.1, pp.141–144, 2009. [6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, M.P.C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.47, No.7, pp.2711–2736, 2001. [7] I. Djurdjevic, Xu Jun, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, Lin Shu, “A class of low-density parity-check codes constructed based on ReedSolomon codes with two information symbols”, IEEE Communications Letters, Vol.7, No.7, pp.317–319, 2003. [8] R. Asvadi, A.H. Banihashemi, M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.57, No.4, pp.2213– 2224, 2011. [9] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, J.B. Huber, “The trapping redundancy of linear block codes”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.55, No.1, pp.53–63, 2009. [10] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, M.J. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing”, Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2008. [11] Han Yang, W. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes”, IEEE Trans. Commun., Vol.57, No.6, pp.1663–1673, 2009. [12] N. Varnica, M.P.C. Fossorier, A. Kavcic, “Augmented belief propagation decoding of low-density parity-check codes”, IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol.55, No.7, pp.1308–1317, 2007. [13] J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error-floors of LDPC codes”, IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol.59, No.1, pp.64–73, 2011. [14] IEEE Std 802.16e-2005, “IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks Part 16: Air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems”. [15] D.J. MacKay, “Online database of low-density parity check codes”, http://www.inference.phy. cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/ data.html, 2011-6-12. [16] Wang Chihchun, S.R. Kulkarni, H.V. Poor, “Finding all small error-prone substructures in LDPC codes”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol.55, No.5, pp.1976–1999, 2009.
MA Kexiang is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in communications and information system at Xidian University, Xi’an, China. His current research interests include digital communications and signal processing, with emphases on error-control coding on graphs and iterative algorithms, and its application to optical communications systems. (Email: kxma@ mail.xidian.edu.cn)

LI Yongzhao received the Ph.D. degree in signal and information processing at Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 2005. Since 1996, he joined Xidian University, where he is currently an Professor at the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University. His research interests include MIMO, OFDM, space-time coding, co-channel interference, beamforming and cooperative MIMO communications, etc. He has been funded by more than ten projects, including the National Natural Science Foundation of China, RCUK for the UK-China Science Bridges Project, the Special Grade of China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded project, and the Important National Science & Technology Specific Projects.
ZHANG Hailin received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Northwestern Polytechnic University, Xi’an, China, in 1985 and 1988, respectively, and the Ph.D. form Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 1991, all in electronic information engineering. Since then, he has been with Xidian University as a member of teaching and researching and is currently a senior Professor and a Ph.D. adviser with School of Telecommunications Engineering at Xidian University. He is currently the Dean of this School, the Director of Key Laboratory in Wireless Communications Sponsored by China Ministry of Information Technology, a key member of State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, one of the state government specially compensated scientists and engineers, a field leader in Telecommunications and Information Systems in Xidian University, and an Associate Director for National 111 Project. His current research interests include key transmission technologies and standards on broadband wireless communications for B3G, 4G, and next-generation broadband wireless access systems. He has recently published 78 papers in core journals and conferences.
ZHU Caizhi is currently a postgraduate student in the School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University. His research interest is the fast decoding algorithm of LDPC codes.
ZHANG Yuming is currently a postgraduate student in the School of Telecommunications Engineering, Xidian University. His research interest is the decoding algorithm to lower the error floor of LDPC codes.

