2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

On the Minimum Distance of Generalized Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes

David G. M. Mitchell∗, Michael Lentmaier†, and Daniel J. Costello, Jr.∗ ∗Dept. of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA,
{david.mitchell, costello.2}@nd.edu †Dept. of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University, Lund, Sweden
Michael.Lentmaier@eit.lth.se

Abstract—Families of generalized spatially-coupled low-density parity-check (GSC-LDPC) code ensembles can be formed by terminating protograph-based generalized LDPC convolutional (GLDPCC) codes. It has previously been shown that ensembles of GSC-LDPC codes constructed from a protograph have better iterative decoding thresholds than their block code counterparts, and that, for large termination lengths, their thresholds coincide with the maximum a-posteriori (MAP) decoding threshold of the underlying generalized LDPC block code ensemble. Here we show that, in addition to their excellent iterative decoding thresholds, ensembles of GSC-LDPC codes are asymptotically good and have large minimum distance growth rates.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check convolutional (LDPCC) codes [1] have been shown to be capable of achieving capacityapproaching performance with iterative message-passing decoding [2]. The excellent iterative decoding thresholds [3], [4] that these codes display has been attributed to the threshold saturation effect [5], [6]. In addition to good threshold performance, it can also be shown that the minimum free distance typical of most members of these LDPCC code ensembles grows linearly with the constraint length as the constraint length tends to infinity, i.e., they are asymptotically good [7], [8]. A large free distance growth rate indicates that codes randomly drawn from the ensemble should have a low error floor under maximum likelihood (ML) decoding.
Generalized LDPC (GLDPC) block codes were first proposed by Tanner [9] and have been shown to possess many desirable features, such as large minimum distance [10], [11] and good iterative decoding performance [12]. Following this construction, more complicated constraints than a single parity-check (SPC) constraint are permitted. In other words, a constraint node with n inputs can represent an arbitrary (n, k) linear block code. In [13], it was shown that ensembles of generalized terminated LDPCC codes, called generalized spatially-coupled LDPC codes (GSC-LDPC) codes, constructed from a protograph have better iterative decoding thresholds than their block code counterparts, and that, for large termination lengths, their thresholds coincide with the maximum a-posteriori (MAP) decoding threshold of the underlying GLDPC block code ensemble.
In this paper, using weight enumerator evaluation techniques presented by Abu-Surra, Divsalar, and Ryan [14], we study the asymptotic weight spectrum of GSC-LDPC code ensembles. We show, using a (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code with (7, 4) Hamming code constraints as an example, that the corresponding GSC-LDPC code ensembles are asymptotically good and have large minimum distance growth rates. As the

termination length increases, we obtain a family of codes with capacity approaching iterative decoding thresholds and declining minimum distance growth rates. However, since these are convolutional codes, a more appropriate distance measure for assessing the ML decoding performance of such code ensembles is the free distance growth rate of the associated ensemble of periodically time-varying generalized LDPC convolutional (GLDPCC) codes. Consequently, in the final part of the paper, we show that the terminated GSC-LDPC code ensembles can be used to obtain an upper bound on the free distance growth rate of ensembles of periodically time-varying GLDPCC codes. The free distance growth rate can also be bounded below by using ensembles of tail-biting GLDPCC codes using a similar technique to one previously presented for LDPCC code ensembles with SPC constraints [15], [8]. By comparing and evaluating these bounds we find that, for a sufficiently large period, the bounds coincide, giving us exact values for the GLDPCC code ensemble free distance growth rates.
II. BACKGROUND
A protograph [16] is a small bipartite graph that connects a set of nv variable nodes V = {v1, . . . , vnv } to a set of nc generalized constraint nodes C = {c1, . . . , cnc } by a set of edges E. In a protograph-based GLDPC code, each constraint node cm can represent an arbitrary block code of length ncm . Figure 1 displays the protograph of a (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code.







   

 





      

Fig. 1: Protograph of a (2, 7)-regular GLDPC block code. The white circles represent generalized constraint nodes and the black circles represent variable nodes. The labels on the edges indicate the corresponding columns of the parity check matrix of the generalized constraint code.

A protograph can be represented by means of an nc × nv bi-adjacency matrix B, which is called the base matrix of the protograph. The entry in row i and column j of B is equal to
the number of edges that connect nodes ci and vj. The base matrix of the protograph in Fig. 1 is given by

B=

1111111 1111111

.

(1)

978-1-4799-0446-4/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

1874

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:49:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

In order to construct ensembles of protograph-based GLDPC codes, a protograph can be interpreted as a template for the Tanner graph of a derived code, which can be obtained by a copy-and-permute operation [16]. The protograph is lifted by replicating each node N times and the edges are permuted among these replicated nodes in such a way that the structure of the original graph is preserved. Allowing the permutations to vary over all N ! possible choices results in an ensemble of GLDPC block codes.

A. Convolutional protographs

An unterminated GLDPCC code can be described by a

convolutional protograph [4] with base matrix

⎡

⎤

B0

B[0,∞]

= ⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢

B...1 Bms

B0 B...1 Bms

. .

. .

. .

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥ ,

...

(2)

where ms denotes the syndrome former memory of the convolutional code and the bc × bv component base matrices Bi, i = 0, 1, . . . , ms, represent the edge connections from the bv variable nodes at time t to the bc (generalized) constraint nodes at time t + i. An ensemble of (in general) timevarying GLDPCC codes can then be formed from B[0,∞] using the protograph construction method described above.
The decoding constraint length of the resulting ensemble is
given as νs = (ms + 1)N bv. Starting from the base matrix B of a block code ensemble,
one can construct GLDPCC code ensembles with the same
computation trees. This is achieved by an edge spreading
procedure (see [4] for details) that divides the edges from each
variable node in the base matrix B among ms + 1 component base matrices Bi, i = 0, 1, . . . , ms, such that the condition B0 + B1 + · · · + Bms = B is satisfied. For example, we could apply the edge spreading technique to the (2, 7)-regular
block base matrix in (1) to obtain the following component
base matrices

B0 =

0000111 1110000

,

(3)

B1 =

1111000 0001111

.

(4)

From a convolutional protograph with base matrix B[0,∞], we can form a periodically time-varying N -fold graph cover
with period T by choosing, for the bc × bv submatrices B0, B1, . . . , Bms in the first T columns of B[0,∞], a set of N × N permutation matrices randomly and independently to
form N bc × N bv submatrices H0(t), H1(t + 1), . . . , Hms (t + ms), respectively, for t = 0, 1, . . . , T − 1. These submatrices are then repeated periodically (indefinitely) to form a convo-
lutional parity-check matrix H[0,∞] such that Hi(t + T ) = Hi(t), ∀i, t. An ensemble of periodically time-varying GLDPCC codes with period T , rate R = 1 − N MCbc/N bv = 1 − MCbc/bv, and decoding constraint length νs = N (ms + 1)bv can then be derived by letting the permutation matrices used to
form H0(t), H1(t+1), . . . , Hms (t+ms), for t = 0, 1, . . . , T − 1, vary over the N ! choices of an N × N permutation matrix.

III. TERMINATION OF GLDPCC CODES

Suppose that we start the convolutional code with parity-

check matrix defined in (2) at time t = 0 and terminate it

after L time instants. The resulting finite-length base matrix

is then given by ⎡

B0

B[0,L−1] = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢

... Bms

... ...

⎤

B0 ...

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥

. (5)

Bms (L+ms)bc×Lbv The matrix B[0,L−1] can be considered as the base matrix of a terminated protograph-based GLDPCC code, or generalized

spatially-coupled LDPC (GSC-LDPC) code. This terminated

protograph is slightly irregular with lower constraint node

degrees at the beginning and end. These shortened constraint

nodes are now associated with shortened constraint codes in

which the symbols of the missing edges are removed. Note that

such a code shortening is equivalent to fixing these removed

symbols and assigning an infinite reliability to them. The

variable node degrees are not affected by termination.

The parity-check matrix H of the block code derived from

B[0,L−1] by lifting with some factor N has N bvL columns and (L + ms)N bcMC rows, where MC denotes the number of parity-checks of the constraint code.1 It follows that the rate

of the GSC-LDPC code is equal to

RL

=

1

−

(L

+

ms)bcMC Lbv

−

Δ

(6)

for some Δ ≥ 0 that accounts for a slight rate increase due

to the shortened constraint nodes. If H has full rank, the rate

increase parameter is given by Δ = 0. However, shortened

constraint codes at the ends of the graph can cause a reduced

rank for H, which slightly increases RL. In this case, Δ > 0 and depends on both the particular constraint code chosen and

the degree of shortening. As L → ∞, the rate RL converges

to the rate of the underlying GLDPC block code with base

matrix B.

The generalized convolutional base matrix B[0,∞] can also be terminated using tail-biting [17], [18], resulting in a gen-

eralized tail-biting LDPC (GTB-LDPC) code. Here, for any

λ ≥ ms, the last bcms rows of the terminated parity-check

matrix B[0,λ−1] are removed and added to the first bcms rows

to form the λbc ×λbv tail-biting parity-check matrix Bt(bλ) with

ta⎡il-biting termination factor λ:

⎤

B0

Bms · · · B1

⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢

B1 ...
Bms

B0 ...
Bms−1
Bms

...

B0

...

...

B0

. . . Bms−1

...

... ...

... Bms

⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥ .

Bms Bms−1 · · · B0

(7)

1We assume here that each generalized constraint node in the block
protograph is of the same type and has MC parity-checks. This assumption can be relaxed in general.

1875
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:49:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory













 

 

  





 



 























 

  

 

 

  










 

 



Fig. 2: Protograph of a (2, 7)-regular GLDPCC code ensemble. The white circles represent generalized constraint nodes and the black circles represent variable nodes.

Note that, if ms = 1 and λ = 1, the tail-biting base matrix is simply the original block code base matrix, i.e., B(tb1) = B. Terminating B[0,∞] in such a way preserves the design rate of the ensemble, i.e., Rλ = 1−λbcMC/λbv = 1−bcMC/bv = R, and we see that Bt(bλ) has exactly the same degree distribution as the original block code base matrix B.

IV. MINIMUM DISTANCE ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED GSC-LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES

In [14], Abu-Surra, Divsalar, and Ryan presented a tech-

nique to calculate the average weight enumerator and asymp-

totic spectral shape function for protograph-based GLDPC

code ensembles. The spectral shape function can be used to

test if an ensemble is asymptotically good, i.e., if the minimum

distance typical of most members of the ensemble is at least as

large as δminn, where δmin is the minimum distance growth rate of the ensemble and n is the block length.

Consider the protograph with generalized constraint nodes

shown in Fig. 1. If we suppose the constraint nodes to be (7, 4)

Hamming codes with parity-check matrix

⎡

⎤

1001110

H1 = ⎣ 0 1 0 1 1 0 1 ⎦ ,

0011011

cannot immediately be applied to these ensembles. This conjecture relies on grouping together nodes of the same type and optimizing them together. However, in the GSC-LDPC case, nodes from different time instants must be optimized separately, even if they are of the same type.
Fig. 3 shows the asymptotic spectral shape functions for the GSC-LDPC code ensembles with termination factors L = 7, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, and 20. Also shown are the asymptotic spectral shape functions for “random” codes of corresponding rate RL calculated using (see [19])

r(δ) = H(δ) − (1 − RL) ln(2),

(9)

where H(δ) = −(1 − δ) ln(1 − δ) − δ ln(δ). We observe that the GSC-LDPC code ensembles are asymptotically good and have large minimum distance growth rates. This indicates that a long code based on this protograph has, with probability near one, a large minimum distance. As L increases, the design rate increases and the minimum distance growth rate decreases. This behavior is the same as was observed in the SPC case [20].

0.1

0.08

then the resulting ensemble has design rate R = 1/7, is

asymptotically good, and has growth rate δmin = 0.186 [14]. We will construct the base matrix of a GSC-LDPC code

ensemble using (2) and component base matrices (3) and (4).

The resulting protograph is shown in Fig. 2. We use the

(7, 4) Hamming code with parity-check matrix H1 for the generalized constraint nodes. The numbers on the edges of

the protograph in Fig. 2 indicate which columns of H1 (or shortened version of H1) the nodes are connected to. After termination, the resulting ensemble corresponds to a GSC-

LDPC code ensemble. The design rate of the ensemble is given

as

RL

=

1

−

6(L

+ 1) 7L

−

2.

(8)

Note that Δ = 2 in this example because the two leftmost (shortened) constraint nodes in Fig. 2 correspond to shortened codes with rate 1/3, i.e., the number of parity-checks in these two constraint nodes is MC = 2, while all of the other constraint nodes have MC = 3 parity-checks. These ensembles were shown to have thresholds numerically indistinguishable from the MAP threshold as L → ∞ in [13].
The evaluation of the asymptotic weight enumerators for
GSC-LDPC codes is complex, since the conjecture regarding
simplification of the numerical evaluation proposed in [14]

0.06

GSC−LDPC

L = [20,18,16,14,12,10,8,7]

0.04

r(δ)

0.02

0

−0.02

Random codes of rate RL

−0.04 0

0.05 0.1 0.15 0.2 0.25 0.3 0.35 0.4 0.45 0.5
δ

Fig. 3: Spectral shape functions of GSC-LDPC code ensembles and random linear codes of the corresponding rate.

V. FREE DISTANCE ANALYSIS OF PROTOGRAPH-BASED GLDPCC CODE ENSEMBLES
In Fig. 3 we saw that the minimum distance growth rates of GSC-LDPC codes decrease as the termination factor L increases. However, since GSC-LDPC codes are terminated GLDPCC codes, a more appropriate distance measure for assessing the ML decoding performance of such codes is the free distance growth rate of the GLDPCC ensemble. In this section, we first calculate the minimum distance growth rates

1876
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:49:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

for GTB-LDPC code ensembles and show that for sufficiently large termination factors, the growth rates coincide with those calculated for the GSC-LDPC code ensembles in Section IV. We then show that the growth rates of the GTB-LDPC code ensembles and GSC-LDPC code ensembles can be used to obtain lower and upper bounds on the free distance growth rate of the GLDPCC code ensemble, respectively.

A. Minimum distance analysis of GTB-LDPC code ensembles
We now consider terminating the protograph in Fig. 2 as a GTB-LDPC code with termination factor λ. Unlike the previous termination technique, this results in a (2, 7)-regular protograph with design rate Rλ = 1/7 for all λ. The minimum distance growth rates of the GTB-LDPC code ensembles are presented in Fig. 4 alongside those corresponding to the GSCLDPC code ensembles. We observe that the growth rates remain constant at δmin = 0.186 (the growth rate of the original GLDPC block code ensemble) for λ = 1, 2, . . . , 8, and then begin to decay to zero as λ → ∞. Also, as a result of the convolutional structure, we observe that the GTB-LDPC and GSC-LDPC growth rates coincide for L, λ ≥ 10. This is the same behavior that we observed for TB-LDPC and SCLDPC codes with SPC constraints [8].

B. Free distance bounds for GLDPCC code ensembles

Consider an ensemble of periodically time-varying GLD-

PCC codes with rate R = 1 − bcMC/bv and period T constructed from a convolutional protograph with base ma-

trix B[0,∞] (see (2)) as described in Section II-A. Using a modification of the proof techniques in [8], [15], it is possible

to show that the average free distance of this ensemble can

be bounded below by the average minimum distance of an

ensemble of GTB-LDPC codes derived from the base matrix Bt(bλ) (see (7)) with termination factor λ = T . Here, we show that the average free distance of the GLDPCC ensemble can

also be bounded above by the average minimum distance of the

ensemble of GSC-LDPC codes derived from the base matrix

B[0,L−1] (see (5)) with termination factor L = T . Theorem 1: Consider a rate R = 1 − bcMC/bv untermi-
nated, periodically time-varying GLDPCC code ensemble with

memory ms, decoding constraint length νs = N (ms + 1)bv, and period T derived from B[0,∞]. Let dm (Li)n be the average minimum distance of the GSC-LDPC code ensemble with

block length n = LN bv and termination factor L. Then the ensemble average free distance d(fTre)e of the unterminated convolutional code ensemble is bounded above by d(mLi)n for termination factor L = T , i.e.,

d(fTre)e ≤ d(mTi)n.

(10)

Sketch of proof. There is a one-to-one relationship be-

tween members of the periodically time-varying GLD-

PCC code ensemble and members of the corresponding

GSC-LDPC code ensemble with termination factor L =

T . For any such pair of codes, every codeword x =

[ x0 x1 · · · xLNbv−1 ] in the GSC-LDPC (terminated convolutional) code can also be viewed as a codeword

x[0,∞] = [ x0 x1 · · · xLNbv−1 0 · · · ] in the unterminated code. It follows that the free distance d(fTre)e of the unterminated code cannot be larger than the minimum distance

dm (Ti)n of the terminated code. The ensemble average result

df(Tre)e ≤ dm (Ti)n then follows directly.

2

Since there is no danger of ambiguity, we will henceforth

drop the overline notation when discussing ensemble average

distance measures.

C. Free distance growth rates of GLDPCC code ensembles

For GLDPCC codes, it is natural to define the free distance

growth rate with respect to the decoding constraint length νs,

i.e., as the ratio of the free distance dfree to νs. By bounding df(Tre)e using (10), we obtain an upper bound
on the free distance growth rate as

δf(Tre)e

=

df(Tre)e νs

≤

δˆm(Ti)nT (ms + 1)

,

(11)

where δˆm(Ti)n = d(mTi)n/n = d(mTi)n/(N T bv) is the minimum

distance growth rate of GSC-LDPC code ensemble with ter-

mination factor L = T and base matrix B[0,T −1]. Similarly, using a similar argument to that presented in [8], we have

δf(Tre)e

≥

δˇm(Ti)nT (ms + 1)

,

(12)

where δˇm(Ti)n is the minimum distance growth rate of the GTB-

LDPC code ensemble with tail-biting termination factor λ = T

and base matrix Bt(bλ). The free distance growth rate δf(Tre)e that we bound from

above using (11) is, by definition, an existence-type lower

bound on the free distance of most members of the ensemble,

i.e., with high probability a randomly chosen code from the

ensemble has minimum free distance at least as large as δf(Tre)eνs as νs → ∞. Note that the free distance growth rate may also be calculated with respect to the encoding constraint

length νe, which corresponds to the maximum number of

transmitted symbols that can be affected by a single nonzero

block of information digits. As a result of normalizing by the

decoding constraint length, it is possible to have free distance

growth rates larger than 0.5. For further details, see [8].

D. Numerical results

As an example, we consider once more the (2, 7)-regular

GLDPCC code ensemble with memory ms = 1 and rate R = 1/7 depicted in Fig. 2. For this case, we calculate the upper

bound on the free distance growth rate of the periodically timevarying GLDPCC code ensemble as δf(Tre)e ≤ δˆm(Ti)nT /2 using (11) for termination factors L = T ≥ 7. Fig. 4 displays the minimum distance growth rates δˆm(Li)n of the GSC-LDPC code ensembles defined by B[0,L−1] for L = 7, 8, 10, 12, . . . , 20 that were calculated using the technique proposed in [14] and

the associated upper bounds on the GLDPCC code ensemble

growth rates δf(Tre)e ≤ δˆm(Ti)nT /2 for L = T . Also shown are the

minimum distance ensembles defined

growth by base

rmataetsriδxˇm(λBi)nt(bλo)ffothreλG=TB1,-L2,D4P,C. .

code . , 20

and the associated lower bounds on the GLDPCC code en-

semble growth rates δf(Tre)e ≥ δˇm(Ti)nT /2 for λ = T calculated

using (12).

We observe that the calculated GTB-LDPC code ensemble minimum distance growth rates δˇm(λi)n remain constant for λ = 1, . . . , 8 and then start to decrease as the termination

1877
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:49:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

0.9

0.8

Upper bound

0.7

on δfree

Lower bound

0.6

on δfree

0.5

Growth rate

0.4

0.3

GSC−LDPC growth rates

δm(Li)n

0.2

0.1

GTB−LDPC growth rates δ(mλi)n

0

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

20

L or λ

Fig. 4: Minimum distance growth rates of GSC-LDPC code ensembles and GTB-LDPC code ensembles and calculated upper and lower bounds on the free distance growth rates of the associated periodically time-varying GLDPCC code ensembles.

factor λ grows, tending to zero as λ tends to infinity. Correspondingly, as λ exceeds 8, the lower bound calculated for δf(Tre)e levels off at δf(Tre)e ≥ 0.805. The calculated GSC-LDPC code ensemble minimum distance growth rates δˆm(Li)n are larger for small values of L (where the rate loss is larger) and decrease monotonically to zero as L → ∞. Using (11) to obtain an upper bound on δf(Tre)e we observe that, for T ≥ 10, the upper and lower bounds coincide, indicating that, for these values of the period T , δf(Tre)e = 0.805, significantly larger than the underlying GLDPC block code minimum distance growth rate δmin = 0.186. In addition, we note that, at the point where the upper and lower bounds on δf(Tre)e coincide, the minimum distance growth rates for both termination methods also coincide. Recall that the GTB-LDPC code ensembles all have rate 1/7, wheras the rate of the GSC-LDPC code ensembles is a function of the termination factor L given by (8). This general technique can be used to bound the free distance growth rate above and below for any regular or irregular periodically timevarying protograph-based GLDPCC code ensemble.
While large free distance growth rates are indicative of good ML decoding performance, when predicting the iterative decoding performance of a code ensemble in the high SNR region other graphical objects such as trapping sets, pseudocodewords, absorbing sets, etc., come into effect. Based on results from the SPC case [8], we would expect GSC-LDPC codes with large minimum/free distance growth rates to also have large trapping set growth rates, indicating good iterative decoding performance in the high SNR region.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
GSC-LDPC codes constructed from a protograph are known to have better iterative decoding thresholds than their block code counterparts, and, for large termination lengths, their thresholds coincide with the MAP decoding threshold of the underlying GLDPC block code ensemble. In this paper, we used an asymptotic weight enumerator analysis to show that GSC-LDPC code ensembles are also asymptotically good. We saw, using a (2, 7)-regular GLDPC code as an example, that the corresponding GSC-LDPC code ensembles have large minimum distance growth rates for all computed values of L.

This indicates that long codes chosen from these ensembles
have, with probability near one, large minimum distances
as well as excellent iterative decoding thresholds. Finally,
we obtained asymptotic minimum distance growth rates for
GTB-LDPC code ensembles and showed that the growth
rates of GTB-LDPC and GSC-LDPC code ensembles can be
used to obtain lower and upper bounds, respectively, on the
free distance growth rate of the associated periodically time-
varying GLDPCC code ensemble.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was partially supported by NSF Grant CCF-
1161754.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Jime´nez Felstro¨m and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sept. 1999.
[2] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 835–857, Feb. 2011.
[3] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.n Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[4] M. Lentmaier, G. P. Fettweis, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Approaching capacity with asymptotically regular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory and App. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2009.
[5] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803– 834, Feb. 2011.
[6] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” 2012. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1201.2999
[7] A. Sridharan, D. Truhachev, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Distance bounds for an ensemble of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4537–4555, Dec. 2007.
[8] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Minimum distance and trapping set analysis of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 254–281, Jan. 2013.
[9] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[10] M. Lentmaier and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density parity-check codes based on Hamming component codes,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 248–250, Aug. 1999.
[11] J. J. Boutros, O. Pothier, and G. Ze´mor, “Generalized low density Tanner codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Comm., Vancouver, Canada, June 1999.
[12] G. Liva, W. E. Ryan, and M. Chiani, “Quasi-cyclic generalized LDPC codes with low error floors,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 49–57, Jan. 2008.
[13] M. Lentmaier and G. Fettweis, “On the thresholds of generalized LDPC convolutional codes based on protographs,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Austin, TX, July 2010.
[14] S. Abu-Surra, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Enumerators for protograph-based ensembles of LDPC and generalized LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 858–886, Feb. 2011.
[15] D. Truhachev, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Distance bounds for periodically time-varying and tail-biting LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 4301–4308, 2010.
[16] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA, INP Progress Report 42-154, Aug. 2003.
[17] G. Solomon and H. C. A. Tilborg, “A connection between block and convolutional codes,” SIAM Journal on App. Math., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 358–369, Oct. 1979.
[18] H. H. Ma and J. K. Wolf, “On tail biting convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 104–111, Feb. 1986.
[19] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[20] M. Lentmaier, D. G. M. Mitchell, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Asymptotically regular LDPC codes with linear distance growth and thresholds close to capacity,” in Proc. Inf. Theory and App. Workshop, San Diego, CA, Feb. 2010.

1878
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:49:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

