2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

A Revolving Iterative Algorithm for Decoding Algebraic Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes
Keke Liu, Shu Lin, Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
University of California Davis, CA, 95616, USA Email: {kkeliu,shulin, ghaffar}@ucdavis.edu

Abstract—An effective reduced-complexity min-sum algorithm for decoding algebraic quasi-cyclic LDPC codes is presented. The proposed decoding algorithm significantly reduces the hardware implementation complexity, the size of memory required to store information, and the computational complexity of a decoder with no or a small loss in performance compared to the scaled minsum algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
Among various types of LDPC codes, the most preferred type in applications is the type of codes with quasi-cyclic (QC) structure. Many QC-LDPC codes have been chosen as the standard codes for various next generations of communication systems and they are appearing in recent data storage products. A QC-LDPC code is typically given by the null space of an array of sparse circulants of the same size over a finite field. Encoding of a QC-LDPC code can be efficiently implemented with simple shift-registers [1]. In hardware implementation of an iterative decoder, the QC structure simplifies the wire routing and allows partially parallel decoding which offers a trade-off between decoding complexity and decoding speed.
In this paper, we present an effective reduced-complexity min-sum (MS) algorithm for decoding QC-LDPC codes. This decoding algorithm is devised based on the quasi-cyclic structure and a cyclic partition of the parity-check matrix of a QCLDPC code. The proposed decoding algorithm significantly reduces the hardware implementation complexity, the size of memory required to store information, and the computational complexity with no or a possibly small loss in performance compared to the scaled min-sum algorithm [1],[2]. This algorithm is particularly efficient for algebraic QC-LDPC codes constructed based on finite fields, combinatorial designs and finite geometries whose parity-check matrices have relatively high density and large row redundancy [1],[3]–[5].
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II first presents a method to put the parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC code into an array of submatrices of the same size with block cyclic structure. Based on this structure, a general algorithm is then introduced for decoding a QC-LDPC code using a small subarray of the entire parity-check matrix of the code in a revolving manner. Section III presents a revolving min-sum (RMS) algorithm for decoding QC-LDPC codes. Section IV analyzes the complexity of the RMS-decoder of a

QC-LDPC code. Section V demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposed RMS-algorithm through two examples. Section VI concludes the paper with some remarks.

II. A GENERAL REVOLVING ALGORITHM FOR DECODING
QC-LDPC CODES
Consider a QC-LDPC code Cqc given by the null space of a J × K array of e × e circulant matrices Hqc. Label the rows and columns from 0 to Je − 1 and 0 to Ke − 1, respectively. Define the following two mappings: πrow : i → (i mod e)J + i/e for 0 ≤ i < Je and πcol : i → (i mod e)K + i/e for 0 ≤ i < Ke. Then πrow and πcol define a permutation of the rows and a permutation of the columns of Hqc, respectively. If we first permute the rows of Hqc based on πrow and then permute the columns of Hqc based on πcol, we obtain an e × e array Hqc,perm of J × K matrices as follows:

⎡

⎤⎡

⎤

H0

A0 A1 · · · Ae−1

Hqc,perm = ⎢⎢⎢⎣

H1 ...

⎥⎥⎦⎥ = ⎣⎢⎢⎢

Ae−1 ...

A0 ...

··· ...

Ae−2 ...

⎥⎥⎥⎦ ,

He−1

A1 A2 · · · A0 (1)

where Ai, 0 ≤ i < e, is a J × K matrix over GF(2). The array Hqc,perm consists of e row blocks H0, H1, . . . , He−1. Each row block consists of a row of e J × K matrices and

is a J × Ke sub-matrix of Hqc,perm. From (1), we see that each row block is the cyclic-shift of the row block above it K

positions to the right and the first row block is the cyclic-shift

of the last row block K positions to the right. For 0 ≤ i < e,

the sub-matrix Hi can be obtained from the first submatrix H0 by cyclically shifting all the rows of H0 iK positions to the right. The sub-matrices H0, H1, . . . , He−1 in (1) form a cyclic partition of the permuted matrix Hqc,perm.
The null space of Hqc,perm also gives a QC-LDPC code, denoted by Cqc,perm, in the sense that cyclically shifting each codeword K positions to the right is also a codeword [1],[6].

Cqc,perm is combinatorially equivalent to Cqc as it can be

obtained by permuting the code symbols of each codeword

in Cqc using the permutation πcol. Let l be an integer where 1 ≤ l ≤ e. For i ≥ 0, form a

978-1-4799-0446-4/13/$31.00 ©2013 IEEE

2656

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

sequence of matrices (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,..., each of size J l × Ke, where

Hqc,perm,i =

HT(il)mod e HT(il+1)mod e · · · H(Til+l−1)mod e T , (2)

which is a submatrix of Hqc,perm and consists of l consecutive row blocks of Hqc,perm in cyclic order. From the construction, we readily see that any consecutive e/l matrices in the

sequence (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,... cover all the rows of Hqc,perm. In the case for which l is a factor of e, any consecutive

c = e/l matrices in (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,... form a partition of Hqc,perm. For i ≥ 0, the matrix Hqc,perm,i can be obtained by cyclically shifting the rows of the first matrix Hqc,perm,0 ilK positions to the right. This cyclic structure allows us to

decode the code Cqc,perm based on the first matrix Hqc,perm,0 of (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,... alone in a revolving manner.

The decoding of Cqc,perm based on its entire parity-check matrix Hqc,perm can be carried out in terms of the consecutive matrices in the sequence (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,.... For i ≥ 0, the i-th decoding iteration is defined as the information updating

process based on the matrix Hqc,perm,i and passing the updated information to the next matrix Hqc,perm,i+1 as input for decoding. Let Imax be the preset maximum number of iterations such that Imax ≥ e/l , and label the decoding iterations from 0 to Imax−1. For 0 ≤ i < Imax, at the completion of the i-th decoding iteration based on Hqc,perm,i, we pass

the updated reliability information of the received symbols

to Hqc,perm,i+1 based on which we carry out the (i + 1)-th

iteration. At the end of each iteration, a hard-decision vector

z is formed based on the reliabilities of the decoded symbols.

Using this hard-decision vector z, we compute the syndrome s = zHTqc,perm. If s = 0, z is a codeword in Cqc,perm and the decoding process stops, otherwise it continues until

a preset number Imax of decoding iterations is reached. Since the sequence of matrices in (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,... is obtained by repeating the process of taking the top Jl consecutive rows

from Hqc,perm and revolving (or cyclically shifting) Hqc,perm upwards by Jl rows, the above iterative decoding is referred

to as a revolving decoding (RD) algorithm.

Consider the special case for which l is a factor of e. Let c = e/l. As pointed out earlier, the matrices Hqc,perm,0, Hqc,perm,1, ..., Hqc,perm,c−1 form a cyclic partition of the entire parity-check matrix Hqc,perm. In this case, the above RD-algorithm is similar to the layered decoding [7]
or its variation, the staggered decoding in [8], in the sense that one decoding iteration based on a submatrix Hqc,perm,i, 0 ≤ i < c, in the RD-algorithm is similar to one sub-iteration (or
step) based on one layer in the layered decoding algorithms
proposed in [7] or [8]. In layered decoding, the parity-check matrix Hqc of a QC-LDPC code is in a form of an array of circulant permutation matrices (CPMs) and zero matrices
(ZMs) of the same size. It contains a set of non-overlapped row blocks, say J of them, each consisting of a certain number of CPMs and a certain number of ZMs. These J row blocks correspond to J layers and form a partition of Hqc. One decoding iteration based on the entire parity-check matrix Hqc

consists of J sub-iterations corresponding to J layers. Each layer processes the received messages by the check nodes (CNs) of the Tanner graph of the code that correspond to one row block of CPMs and ZMs. Two subsets of CNs processed in two layers in one iteration are non-overlapping, and all the subsets of CNs, corresponding to all the layers in one iteration, form a partition of all the CNs in the Tanner graph of the code. The layered decoding of QC-LDPC codes is known for increasing decoding throughput and reducing the size of memory required for storing information.
It follows from the construction of the sequence (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,... of matrices that there may be overlapping between two matrices. For example, Hqc,perm,i and Hqc,perm,i+ e/l may have common row blocks. Consequently, the RD-algorithm gives a more flexible decoder architecture for implementation than the layered decoding algorithm. The major advantage of the RD-algorithm over the layered decoding and its variations is that it can be carried out based on only the first submatrix Hqc,perm,0 in the sequence (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,... alone (or any matrix in the sequence). This is due to the block cyclic structure of the matrices in (Hqc,perm,i)i=0,1,... such that each submatrix Hqc,perm,i can be obtained from Hqc,perm,0 by cyclically shifting the rows of Hqc,perm,0 ilK positions to the right. Since Hqc,perm,0 is a submatrix of the parity-check matrix Hqc,perm of the QCLDPC code Cqc,perm and can have a much smaller size and density than Hqc,perm, using Hqc,perm,0 alone for decoding with the RD-algorithm will significantly reduce the hardware complexity of the decoder in terms of the memory size for storing information, the number of CN processing units, and the number of wires connecting the CN processing units and VN (variable nodes) processing units.
The RD-algorithm based on Hqc,perm,0 works as follows. The decoding process begins with initial symbol reliability information. For i > 0, at the completion of the (i − 1)-th decoding iteration, the reliability vector of the decoded word is cyclically shifted to the left lK positions. This left shifted reliability vector together with the channel information are used as input to carry out the i-th decoding iteration based on Hqc,perm,0. Note that using the left shifted reliability vector at the completion of the (i − 1)-th decoding iteration as the input to the i-th decoding iteration based on Hqc,perm,0 is equivalent to carrying out the i-th decoding iteration based on Hqc,perm,i using the (un-shifted) output reliability vector of the (i − 1)-th decoding iteration as the symbol reliability information input. At the completion of each iteration, a harddecision vector z is formed and its syndrome s = zHTqc,perm is computed. If s = 0, z is a codeword in Cqc,perm and decoding stops, otherwise the revolving decoding process continues until either a codeword is found at the end of a certain iteration or the preset number Imax of iterations is reached.
III. A REVOLVING MIN-SUM ALGORITHM
In each decoding iteration of the RD-algorithm, we could use either the sum-product algorithm (SPA) or the min-sum algorithm (MSA) [1] to update the reliabilities of the received

2657
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

code symbols. Since our objective is to reduce the decoder
complexity, we choose the MSA. This combined algorithm is
referred to as a revolving MS (RMS)-algorithm.
Before we formulate the RMS-algorithm, we need to define some notations and expressions. Let n = eK be the code length and y = (y0, y1, ..., yn−1) be the soft-decision received vector at the output of the receiver detector. We assume that the symbols of a codeword in Cqc,perm are transmitted over a binary AWGN channel with BPSK signaling. Let Hqc,perm,0 = [ht,j]0≤t<Jl,0≤j<n. For 0 ≤ j < n and 0 ≤ t < Jl, let N (j) = {t : 0 ≤ t < Jl, ht,j = 1} and M (t) = {j : 0 ≤ j < n, ht,j = 1}, respectively. The notation (i) denotes the i-th iteration. Let Imax be the maximum number of iterations to be performed such that Imax ≥ e/l . For 0 ≤ i ≤ Imax, let R(i) = (R0(i), R1(i), . . . , Rn(i−) 1) denote the reliability information vector at the beginning of the ith iteration and let F(i) = (F0(i), F1(i), . . . , Fn(i−)1) denote the updated reliability information vector at the end of the i-th iteration. Let λatten denote the attenuation factor for MS-based reliability information updating. We label the iterations from 0 to Imax − 1. Let f be a positive integer such that we include channel information for information update every f iterations.
With the above definitions and notations, the RMS-
algorithm is formulated as follows:
RMS-Algorithm Step 1. (Initialization) Set i = 0, and Rj(0) = yj for 0 ≤ j < n. Step 2. (Iteration) Carry out the following i-th iteration: (1) If i mod f = 0, compute the updated reliability information F(i) based on R(i) as follows: for 0 ≤ j < n,

Fj(i) = Rj(i)+ λatten
t∈N (j)

sign Rj(i)
j ∈M(t)\j

× min{|Rj(i)| : j ∈ M (t) \ j} , (3)

else, i.e., for i mod f = 0, compute the updated reliability information F(i) based on y as follows: for 0 ≤ j < n,

Fj(i) = yj + λatten
t∈N (j)

sign Rj(i)
j ∈M(t)\j

× min{|Rj(i)| : j ∈ M (t) \ j} . (4)

(2) Form the hard decision vector z based on F(i) and compute its syndrome s = z · HqTc,perm. If s = 0, go to Step 3. If s = 0 go to Step 2-(3).
(3) If i = Imax − 1, stop decoding and declare a decoding failure. Otherwise, cyclically shift F(i) by lK positions to the left to obtain R(i+1), set i ← i + 1 and return to Step 2-(1)
to begin another iteration.
Step 3. Cyclically shift the hard decision vector z to the right by ilK positions to make it corresponding to the transmitted codeword and output the shifted z as the decoded
codeword and stop decoding.

Different from the layered-decoding [7], the RMS-algorithm is performed based on a single sub-matrix Hqc,perm,0 of the entire parity-check matrix Hqc,perm, and requires that each VN pass the same message to all its adjacent CNs, which can further reduce the hardware complexity of VN processing units and the computational complexity. Also with the RMSalgorithm, all the memory for storing CN messages can be released at the completion of each iteration (corresponding to each layer in the layered-decoding), which further reduces the memory size. Moreover, in contrast to the staggered decoding in [8], the RMS-algorithm uses channel information for information updating every f iterations, which can further improve the error performance with properly chosen f .
IV. ANALYSIS OF DECODER COMPLEXITY
In this section we compare the decoder complexity for the RMS-, the MS- and the layered-MS-decoders. We assume maximum possible degree of parallel processing for each type of the decoders and suppose Hqc,perm has constant row weight ρ and column weight γ.
Since Hqc,perm,0 contains only l/e × 100% as many rows as Hqc,perm, the number of CN processing units for the RMS-decoder based on Hqc,perm,0 is l/e × 100% of those of the MS- and the layered-MS-decoders implemented based on Hqc,perm. Also, the number of wires required for the RMSdecoder based on Hqc,perm,0 is l/e × 100% of that of the MS-decoder implemented based on Hqc,perm. Since in the RMS-decoder each VN passes the same message to all its adjacent CNs, the VN processing units in the RMS-decoder require less complexity for implementation than those in the MS-decoder and the layered-MS-decoder.
For memory size analysis, we assume that each real number (RN) message is quantized and represented by b bits for all types of decoders. The RMS-decoder needs nb binary memory units (BMUs) to store y received from the channel and nb BMUs to store F(i). R(i) can share memory units with F(i). In addition, each CN in the Tanner graph of Hqc,perm,0 requires 2(b − 1) BMUs to store the two smallest magnitudes of the messages of its adjacent VNs, log2 ρ BMUs to store the index of the smallest magnitude of the messages of its adjacent VNs, and ρ BMUs for the signs of the messages of its adjacent VNs. Since the Tanner graph of Hqc,perm,0 has J l CNs, the total number of BMUs required is Jl[2(b − 1) + log2 ρ + ρ] + 2nb. Table I shows the memory size comparison among the RMS-, the layered-MS- and the MS-decoders.
For computational complexity comparison among the three types of decoders, we use the sorting algorithm in vol. 3, Sec. 5.3.3 of [9] to find the two smallest magnitudes. Let P be the least common multiple of l and e. Then it is fair to compare the computational complexity of P/e iterations of the MS-decoder and the layered-MS-decoder, and P/l iterations of the RMSdecoder. For the layered MS-decoder and the MS-decoder, each VN needs to subtract the previous CN message from its reliability value, which could result in more RN additions. Table I shows the number of RN additions required for P/l

2658
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

TABLE I COMPLEXITY COMPARISONS BETWEEN DIFFERENT DECODERS

Memory Size # of RN additions

RMS
Jl[2(b − 1) + log2 ρ + ρ] + 2nb JP (2ρ + log2 ρ − 2)

layered-MS
Je[2(b − 1) + log2 ρ + ρ] + nb JP (3ρ + log2 ρ − 2)

MS
Je[2(b − 1) + log2 ρ + ρ] + (2b + γ)n JP (3ρ + log2 ρ − 2)

iterations of the RMS-decoder and P/e iterations of the MSdecoder and the layered MS-decoder.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
QC-LDPC codes can be constructed using different methods
[1],[3]–[5]. The RMS-algorithm can be used to decode any of
these codes to reduce decoding complexity. In the following,
we use two algebraic QC-LDPC codes based on Latin squares
[4] to demonstrate the effectiveness of the RMS-algorithm. Example 1: The code considered in this example is the
(992,750) QC-LDPC Cqc given in Example 1 of [4]. Its paritycheck matrix Hqc is a 32 × 32 array of 31 × 31 CPMs and ZMs with the ZMs lying on the main diagonal of the array. It is a 992 × 992 matrix with both column and row weights equal to 31. The rank of this matrix is 242. Hence,
it has 750 redundant rows (a very large row redundancy). The code Cqc has minimum distance at least 34. Permuting the rows and the columns Hqc based on permutations πrow and πcol, respectively, we obtain a 31 × 31 array Hqc,perm of permutation matrices of size 32 × 32. Each row block in Hqc,perm consists of 31 permutation matrices of size 32 × 32. It has block cyclic-shift structure. Each row block is a cyclic
shift of the row block above it to the right by 32 positions and
the first row block is the cyclic-shift of the last row block to the right by 32 positions. The QC-LDPC code Cqc,perm given by the null space of Hqc,perm is also a (992,750) QC-LDPC code which is combinatorially equivalent to the code Cqc. Choose l = 10 and let Hqc,perm,0 be the submatrix of Hqc,perm which consists of the top 10 row blocks of Hqc,perm.
Suppose we decode the code based on Hqc,perm,0 using the RMS-algorithm with 155 iterations, and based on the entire parity-check matrix Hqc,perm using the layered-MSA with 50 iterations and the MSA with 50 iterations. For l = 10, 155 iterations of the RMS-algorithm is equivalent to 50 iterations
of the layered-MSA and the MSA based on the entire paritycheck matrix Hqc,perm. In order to optimize the performance, we choose λatten = 0.25 for the layered-MSA and the MSA, and λatten = 0.375 for the RMS-algorithm. For the RMS-algorithm, we choose f = 3. The bit error (BER) performances of this code decoded with the three algorithms
are shown in Figure 1. We see that the performance curves
of the three decoding algorithms basically overlap with each
other. Also included in Figure 1 are the BER performances of
the RMS-algorithm with 30 and 10 iterations (roughly 10 and 3 iterations of the layered-MSA and MSA based on Hqc,perm, respectively). We see that the RMS decoding converges very fast. At the BER = 10−6, the performance gap between 10 and 155 iterations is about 0.3 dB. Also included in Figure 1 is the performance of the code decoded based on Hqc,perm using the SPA with 50 iterations. We see that the performance gap

BER

100

Shannon Limit

SPA 50

10−1

layered−MS 50 revolving MS 155

uncoded BPSK

revolving MS 30

10−2

revolving MS 10

MS 50

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 1. The error performance of the (992,750) QC-LDPC code decoded with the RMS-, the MS-, the layered-MS-algorithms, and the SPA.

between 155 iterations of the RMS-algorithm and 50 iterations of the SPA is about 0.1 dB.
The number of wires and CN processing units required for the RMS-decoder is 32.26% of those required for the MS decoder. Based on simulations we find that at SNR=3.6 dB, the RMS-decoder requires only 36% as many RN additions per decoding process as the MS-decoder. If we choose 6bit quantization for implementation, the RMS-decoder has an up to 89% memory saving compared to the MS-decoder. Compared with the layered-MS-decoder, the RMS-decoder needs the same number of RN additions per decoding process as the layered-MS-decoder at SNR=3.6 dB, and requires only 32.26% as many CN processing units as the layeredMS-decoder. With 6-bit quantization for implementation, the RMS-decoder has a 48.39% memory saving compared to the layered-MS-decoder. The RMS-decoder obviously reduces the decoding latency and enhances the decoder throughput compared to the layered-MS-decoder which processes only one row of CPMs/ZMs at a time.
Example 2: In this example, we consider the RMS decoding of the (4032,3304) QC-LDPC code Cqc given in Example 3 of [4], whose parity-check matrix Hqc is a 64 × 64 array Hqc of 63 × 63 CPMs and ZMs, with the ZMs lying on the main diagonal of the array. It is a 4032 × 4032 matrix with both column and row weights equal to 63. The rank of this matrix is 728. Hence, it has 3304 redundant rows (a very large row redundancy). The code Cqc has minimum distance at least 66 and its Tanner graph contains no harmful trapping set with size smaller than 60 [5].

2659
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2013 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory

Permuting the rows and columns of Hqc based on πrow and πcol, respectively, we obtain a 63 × 63 circular array Hqc,perm of 64 × 64 matrices of the form given by (1) which consists of 63 row blocks, each consisting of 63 permutation matrices of size 64 × 64. Each row-block is a 64 × 4032 matrix. The null space of Hqc,perm gives a QC-LDPC code Cqc,perm which is combinatorially equivalent to Cqc. Hqc,perm has the block cyclic structure which allows us to decode it using the RMS-algorithm. Suppose we choose l = 21 which is a factor of e = 63. Then Hqc,perm can be partitioned into three submatrices Hqc,perm,0, Hqc,perm,1 and Hqc,perm,2, each a 1344 × 4032 matrix. Hqc,perm,1 and Hqc,perm,2 can be obtained by cyclically shifting all the rows of Hqc,perm,0 to the right 1344 and 2688 positions, respectively.
Suppose we decode the code based on the sub-matrix Hqc,perm,0 using the RMS-algorithm with 150 iterations and based on the entire matrix Hqc,perm using the MSA with 50 iterations, respectively. We choose λatten = 0.25 for both the MSA and the RMS-algorithm, which provides good error
performance for both algorithms. Note that three iterations
of the RMS-algorithm are equivalent to one iteration of the MSA. For the RMS-algorithm, we choose f = 3. The BER performances of this code decoded using the MSA with 50
iterations, the SPA with 50 iterations and the RMS-algorithm
with 15, 30, and 150 iterations are shown in Figure 2. We
see that the performance curves of the code decoded using
the RMS-algorithm with 150 iterations and the MSA with 50
iterations basically overlap with each other, and the RMS-
algorithm performs only 0.12 dB away from the SPA algorithm
with 50 iterations. Also we see that the performance curves
of the code decoded with 15 and 30 iterations of the RMS-
algorithm are very close to the performance curve of the code
with 150 iterations (within 0.2 dB). So, the RMS decoding of
the code converges very fast. This is attributed to the large
row redundancy of the parity-check matrix of the code. If 6-
bit quantization is used for decoding with the RMS-algorithm,
from Figure 2, we see that there is no performance loss
compared to the unquantized case. Now we consider the extreme case for which l = 1. In
this case, the RMS decoding of Cqc,perm is based on one row block of Hqc,perm, i.e., Hqc,perm consists of a row of 63 permutaion matrices of size 64 × 64. This is equivalent to the typical layered decoding, except that all the 63 layers of decoding use the same submatrix Hqc,perm,0. Typical layered decoding is implemented based on unpermuted array Hqc, each layer corresponding to one row of CPMs/ZMs in Hqc. We choose f = 252 for the RMS-decoder, and still assume 6-bit quantization and λatten = 0.25 for both the RMSdecoder and the layered-MS-decoder. Based on the analysis in Section IV, we find that the RMS-decoder can save 84.6% in memory compared to the layered-MS-decoder. Also, based on
simulations we find that at SNR=4.0 dB, the RMS-decoder has 30% saving of RN additions per decoding process compared to the layered-MS-decoder. All the above advantages of the
RMS-decoder over the layered-MS-decoder are gained at the
expense of only about 0.1 dB performance loss as shown in

BER

100 MS 50

(4032,3304) QC−LDPC

revolving MS (l=21) 150

10−1

revolving MS (l=21) 30

revolving MS (l=21) 15

SPA 50

10−2

uncoded BPSK Shannon Limit

6−bit layered MS 50

10−3

6−bit revolving MS (l=21) 50 6−bit revolving MS (l=1) 3150

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 2. The error performance of the (4032,3304) QC-LDPC code decoded with the RMS-, the layered-MS-, the MS-algorithm, and the SPA.

Figure 2.
VI. CONCLUSION AND REMARKS
In this paper, we presented a revolving-decoding algorithm for decoding QC-LDPC codes. The algorithm is devised based on the block cyclic structure and partitions of the parity-check matrices of QC-LDPC codes. This algorithm in conjunction with the min-sum algorithm results in not only a large reduction in hardware complexity and memory units but also in computational complexity with no or possibly only a small performance loss. Numerous simulation results, not reported here, show that the proposed RMS-algorithm is effective in decoding regular algebraic QC and cyclic LDPC codes but may not perform as well when decoding irregular codes.
REFERENCES
[1] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. New York, NY: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[2] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X. -Y. Hu, ”Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commu., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[3] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: A finite field approach, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007.
[4] L. Zhang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar and I.F.Blake, “Quasicyclic LDPC codes: An algebraic construction, rank analysis, and codes on Latin squares,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3126–3139, Nov. 2010.
[5] Q. Huang, Q. Diao, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Cyclic and quasicyclic LDPC codes on constrained parity-check matrices and their trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 2648–2671, May 2012.
[6] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004.
[7] D. E. Hocevar, ”A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS), Austin, TX, Oct. 13–15, 2004, pp. 107–112.
[8] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, ”High-throughput lowdensity parity-check decoder architecture,” Proc. IEEE Globecom, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 25–29, 2001, pp. 3019–3024.
[9] D. E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming, 2nd ed. New York: Addison-Wesley, 1998.

2660
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

