Low Complexity Neural Network-Aided NMS 
LDPC Decoder 
Honghao Shi1, Mingyang Zhong1, Zhiyong Luo*, 1, 2, Congduan Li1 
1 School of Electronics and Communication Engineering 
Sun Yat-sen University 
Shenzhen, China 
2 Peng Cheng Laboratory, 
Shenzhen, China 
E-mail: {shihh5, zhongmy7} @ mail2.sysu.edu.cn, {luozhy57, licongd} @ mail.sysu.edu.cn
AbstractвҖ”For recent years, deep learning has been studied 
and utilized among decoders in wireless and optical 
communication. For low density parity check (LDPC) codes, 
most works use neural network (NN) to implement the belief 
propagation (BP) decoder and unfold its iterations into layers 
activated by different functions. However, the whole decoder 
composed by neural network performs lots of non-linear 
operations, which are time consuming and unfriendly to 
hardware implementation. In this work, a neural network-aided 
normalized min-sum (NN-aided NMS) decoder for LDPC code 
is proposed, in which the normalization factors are inferred 
from input log likelihood ratio (LLR) by a pre-trained NN, while 
maintaining check and variable nodes processing the same as in 
min-sum (MS) decoder. In order to test the proposed decoder 
with irregular LDPC code, a rate-7/8 one was constructed using 
progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm, showing better error 
correction capability than the standard of consultative 
committee for space data systems (CCSDS) LDPC (8176,7154) 
code by 0.08 dB with the same rate. Simulation results show that, 
NN-aided NMS decoder outperforms MS decoder by 0.3 dB, and 
its performance approaches BP decoder with a gap of 0.02 dB, 
which is 50% closer than the best NMS decoder using 0.7 as the 
normalization factor. The proposed decoder has good 
performance for both regular and irregular LDPC codes, and 
needs much less computation complexity than BP decoder. It 
introduces more linear computation than NMS decoder but 
achieves better bit error rate (BER) performance, thus 
becoming a good complement between BP and NMS decoder 
when trading off among complexity, error correction 
performance and hardware implementation for wireless and 
satellite communication. 
KeywordsвҖ”neural network, normalized min-sum decoder, low 
density parity check code, progressive edge growth, CCSDS LDPC 
code 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Low density parity check (LDPC) code was first proposed 
by Gallager in 1962 [1]. Originally, LDPC did not get much 
attention due to incomplete theoretical knowledge. Over the 
years, with the improvement of relevant basic theories, 
researchers have put more and more energy into the study of 
LDPC code. Now LDPC code has become one of the most 
popular coding technologies and has been widely used in 
various communication systems, such as wireless, satellite 
and fiber communication. With enough long code length, 
LDPC code can get very close to Shannon Limit [2], and be 
capable for error correction in low signal to noise ratio (SNR). 
Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm is an effective 
method to construct LDPC codes, whose main idea is 
gradually connecting the edges between variable nodes and 
check nodes while keeping the cycle length on Tanner graph 
as large as possible [3]. PEG can be used to construct regular 
and irregular LDPC codes, and the latter may achieve better 
performance. Among soft decision decoding methods, belief 
propagation (BP) is a promising decoding scheme for LDPC 
and other codes which need soft decision and iterative 
decoding. However, BP decoder contains a lot of tanh and 
tanhвҖ“1 functions which are nonlinear and consume huge 
amount of time to calculate [4]. In order to solve such problem, 
min-sum (MS) algorithm was proposed, which uses the 
minimum value of soft information from relevant variable 
nodes to approximate the result of nonlinear functions that BP 
decoder performs thus reducing computation complexity and 
latency significantly [5]. Although MS decoder needs less 
computations, the approximated results are always greater 
than that BP calculates, which causes performance 
degradation. To mitigate the performance loss, normalized 
min-sum (NMS) scheme was brought up in [6]. Classical 
NMS decoder uses one same normalization factor for all 
check nodes during the whole decoding, and the factor is 
always selected around 0.8 with empirical knowledge, rather 
than derived. However one same normalization factor cannot 
suit all check nodes well, making NMS still has a performance 
gap inferior to BP. 
Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of 
deep learning and its application among various fields. Neural 
networks 
have 
been 
utilized 
in 
computer 
vision, 
communication, pattern recognition, 
natural language 
processing and so on. For channel coding, there are many 
remarkable works. Xin Xiao et al. proposed finite alphabet 
iteration decoders with recurrent quantized neural networks, 
using 
model-driven 
NNs, 
and 
unfold 
iterations of 
conventional LDPC decoder into feed forward layers [7]. 
Results in [8] show that the BER performance of the decoder 
implemented with NN is 1.5dB better than the conventional 
NMS decoder, using fewer iterations. However, in all the 
researches mentioned above, NN are used to realize the whole 
LDPC decoder through imitating decoding functions, learning 
from Tanner graph, and quantizing intermediate calculation 
results and so on. Although getting good performanceвҖ”even 
better than conventional decoderвҖ”these NNs are composed 
of large amount of neurons and nonlinear operations, making 
it resource consuming.  
Even employing model driven technique to construct the 
network structures, afore mentioned NN decoders cannot be 
implemented on common PC for codes with length above 
4000 yet, due to hardware limitations such as out of memory 
and lacking computing capability while running neural 
network optimization. The longest code decoded by pure NN 
decoder is a medium length code, QC-LDPC code (1296, 972) 
with column weight four in [9]. Longer LDPC codes usually 
has better performance than short ones with the same rate, but 
for LDPC code with length above 8000, it seems unrealistic 
to implement a pure NN architecture decoder. For example, 
* Corresponding author: Zhiyong Luo.
978-1-6654-2798-2/21/$31.00 В©2021 IEEE
227
2021 Computing, Communications and IoT Applications (ComComAp) | 978-1-6654-2798-2/21/$31.00 В©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/COMCOMAP53641.2021.9652964
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:43:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
we have tried to utilize the NNMS decoder for LDPC 
(576,432) code brought up by [8] and adapted it for the 
(8176,7154) code, but unfortunately it ran out 128 GB 
memory. Since the tanner graph of (8176,7154) code is about 
20 times as (576,432) one, we estimate that model driven NN 
decoder consumes above 160 GB memory, 20 times of what 
decoder for (576,432) code needs, which is neither easy for 
simulation on PC nor friendly to implement with hardware 
platform. 
Considering future hardware implementation, neither BP 
nor model driven neural network could be used in FPGA or 
ASIC, although they have better performance than NMS-
based algorithms. Since there is still a gap between NMS and 
BP decoder, we consider using different normalization factors 
for every check node (each row in correction matrix пҒҲ 
accordingly) while calculating messages it passes to relevant 
variable nodes according to пҒҲ  and tanner graph. 
In this work, we used PEG and constructed an irregular 
LDPC (8176,7154) code which outperforms CCSDS code by 
0.08 dB with the same length and rate. And a tradeoff has been 
made between error correction performance and complexity. 
We 
explored 
using 
neural 
network 
to 
implement 
normalization factors estimation scheme, then proposed 
small-scale NN to estimate them for each check node, 
maintaining other parts the same as normalized min-sum 
decoder, and called neural network-aided normalized min-sum 
(NN-aided 
NMS) 
decoder. 
Via 
applying 
different 
normalization factors for check nodesвҖҷ massage passing, a 
gain of 0.02 dB over NMS decoder has been observed. The 
proposed small-scale NN-aided NMS decoder can be 
implemented in the future with hardware platforms such as 
FPGA and ASIC for data transition. 
The remainder of this work is organized as follows: 
Section II introduces the background about PEG construction, 
NN and MS decoder. Section III proposes the neural network- 
aided normalized min-sum decoder. Section IV shows the 
performance comparation between PEG constructed LDPC 
code and CCSDS LDPC code, and simulation results using 
NN-aided NMS, MS NMS decoding. Section V concludes the 
paper. 
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. LDPC code
Let n be the block length of the LDPC code, and k be the
data length, then m = n вҖ“ k is the parity length. Let d = (d1, 
d2, вҖҰ, dk) be the data and G be the generation matrix of k-by-
n size. The code word c = dG has the property cHT = 0, where 
H is the parity matrix of m-by-n. The code is called low 
density parity check code whose feature is that parity matrix 
H is sparse, namely, there are lots of zeros and few ones in H 
[10]. There are binary and non-binary LDPC codes, and only 
binary codes are discussed in this work. LDPC codes can be 
classified into two types from the construction of parity matrix 
H, as regular codes and irregular ones. The number of ones in 
a row (column) of  H is called row (column, resp.) degree. 
Regular codes have the same row degree for each row, and the 
same column degree for each column. Row iвҖҷs degree 
indicates how many variable node are connected to check 
node i. And column jвҖҷs degree indicates how many check 
nodes are connected to variable node j. For example, the 
CCSDS LDPC (8176,7154) code used for simulation among 
this work has a regular, quasi-cyclic parity matrix H, whose 
row degrees are all 32 and column degrees are all 4 [11]. 
While the PEG generated LDPC (8176,7154) code used here 
has row degrees varying from 29 to 31, and column degrees 
varying from 1 to 4. 
B. PEG algorithm
Specifically, the parity-check matrix H = [hij] corresponds
to a Tanner graph (рқ‘ү, рқҗё), where рқ‘ү denotes the set of vertices 
and рқҗё denotes the set of edges. рқ‘үрқ‘Ј= {рқ‘Ј0, рқ‘Ј1, вӢҜ, рқ‘Јрқ‘ӣвҲ’1} is the
vertex set of variable node, рқ‘үрқ‘җ= {рқ‘җ0, рқ‘җ1, вӢҜ, рқ‘җрқ‘ҡвҲ’1}  is the
vertex set of check node, рқҗёвҠҶрқ‘үрқ‘ЈГ— рқ‘үрқ‘җ,where edge(рқ‘җрқ‘–, рқ‘Јрқ‘—) вҲҲрқҗё
if and only if в„Һрқ‘–,рқ‘—вү 0,and в„Һрқ‘–,рқ‘— is the element of H at the рқ‘–-th
row and рқ‘—-th column and 0 вүӨрқ‘–вүӨрқ‘ҡвҲ’1,0 вүӨрқ‘—вүӨрқ‘ӣвҲ’1. The 
variable 
degree 
sequence 
is 
denoted 
by 
рқҗ·рқ‘Ј=
{рқ‘‘рқ‘Ј0, рқ‘‘рқ‘Ј1, вӢҜ, рқ‘‘рқ‘Јрқ‘ӣвҲ’1} , where рқ‘‘рқ‘Јрқ‘— (0 вүӨрқ‘—вүӨрқ‘ӣвҲ’1)  is the
degree of variable node рқ‘Јрқ‘— and рқ‘‘рқ‘Ј0 вүӨрқ‘‘рқ‘Ј1 вүӨвӢҜвүӨрқ‘‘рқ‘Јрқ‘ӣвҲ’1. The
check 
degree 
sequence 
is 
denoted 
by 
рқҗ·рқ‘җ=
{рқ‘‘рқ‘җ0, рқ‘‘рқ‘җ1, вӢҜ, рқ‘‘рқ‘җрқ‘ҡвҲ’1}, where the degree of check node рқ‘җрқ‘– is
denoted by рқ‘‘рқ‘җрқ‘– (0 вүӨрқ‘–вүӨрқ‘ҡвҲ’1)  and рқ‘‘рқ‘җ0 вүӨрқ‘‘рқ‘җ1 вүӨвӢҜвүӨ
рқ‘‘рқ‘җрқ‘ҡвҲ’1. The set of edge is denoted by рқҗё= рқҗёрқ‘Ј0 вҲӘрқҗёрқ‘Ј1 вҲӘвӢҜвҲӘ
рқҗёрқ‘Јрқ‘ӣвҲ’1, where рқҗёрқ‘Јрқ‘—is the set of edge connected to variable node
рқ‘Јрқ‘— and рқҗёрқ‘Јрқ‘—
рқ‘ҳ (0 вүӨрқ‘ҳвүӨрқ‘‘рқ‘Јрқ‘—вҲ’1) is the рқ‘ҳвҲ’th edge connected
to the variable node рқ‘Јрқ‘—. Since Tanner graph is a simple graph, 
a subgraph with depth рқ‘ҷ  can be expanded from a given 
variable node рқ‘Јрқ‘—. рқ‘Ғрқ‘Јрқ‘—
рқ‘ҷ represents the set of all check nodes
directly or indirectly connected with the subgraph, whose 
complement set is рқ‘Ғрқ‘Јрқ‘—
рқ‘ҷ= рқ‘үрқ‘җ/рқ‘Ғрқ‘Јрқ‘—
рқ‘ҷ . PEG algorithm adds 
edges into Tanner graph step by step according to the 
variable degree sequence рқ‘‘рқ‘Ј0 вүӨрқ‘‘рқ‘Ј1 вүӨвӢҜвүӨрқ‘‘рқ‘Јрқ‘ӣвҲ’1.  
1) When connecting the first edge рқҗёрқ‘Јрқ‘—
0  of variable node 
рқ‘Јрқ‘—, assign рқҗёрқ‘Јрқ‘—
0 вҶҗ(рқ‘җрқ‘–,рқ‘Јрқ‘—), and рқ‘җрқ‘– is the check node with the 
smallest degree in current edge set рқҗё. 
2) When connecting other edges with the variable node 
рқ‘Јрқ‘—, expand a subgraph from variable node рқ‘Јрқ‘— up to depth рқ‘ҷ 
under the current graph setting. Then select the one with 
the least degree among the check nodes as рқ‘җрқ‘–, add new edge 
to Tanner graph рқҗёрқ‘Јрқ‘—
рқ‘ҳвҶҗ(рқ‘җрқ‘–, рқ‘Јрқ‘—). 
C. BP, MS and NMS decoders
Consider a code word modulated by binary phase shift
keying (BPSK) and transmitted through AWGN channel, we 
use log-likelihood ratios as the input of LDPC decoders. The 
code word c = (c1, c2, вҖҰ, cn), and modulated signal s = (s1, 
s2, вҖҰ, sn) can be expressed as si = 1 вҲ’ 2ci. For AWGN channel, 
let пҒі2 = N0 / 2 be the noise variance, and the mean value of 
noise is zero. Denote y = (y1, y2, вҖҰ, yn) as the received signal, 
then LLRs can be expressed as L = 2y / пҒі2. Iterative decoders 
such as BP, MS and NMS treat L = (l1, l2, вҖҰ, ln) as soft 
information (soft bits), and use it for iterative decoding. 
Define the set of variable nodes connected to check node i as 
N(i) = {j: hij = 1}. In the same way, we denote the set of check 
nodes connected to variable node j as M(j) = {i: hij = 1}. Zij is 
the soft information passed from variable node j to check node 
i. Lij is the soft information passed from check node i to
variable node j.
BP decoder uses message passing and iteration to 
propagate soft information among check nodes and variable 
nodes [12]. The scheme can be described as follows. 
Initialization: Zij = lj, for each i, j. 
228
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:43:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Iteration: Do the following steps until satisfying stopping 
criterion . 
1) Row operation: For each check node i, calculate
рқҗҝрқ‘–= вҲҸ
tanh (
рқ‘Қрқ‘–рқ‘—
2 )
рқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–)
пҖ¬ 
(пҖұ) 
and for message from i to each relevant variable node j, 
рқҗҝрқ‘–рқ‘—= 2 tanhвҲ’1(рқҗҝрқ‘–/tanh (
рқ‘Қрқ‘–рқ‘—
2 ))пҖ® 
(пҖІ) 
2) Column operation: For each variable node j,
рқ‘Қрқ‘—= рқ‘ҷрқ‘—+ вҲ‘
рқҗҝрқ‘–рқ‘—
рқ‘–вҲҲрқ‘Җ(рқ‘—)
пҖ¬
(пҖі) 
and message passed from j to each relevant check node i 
is 
рқ‘Қрқ‘–рқ‘—= рқ‘Қрқ‘—вҲ’рқҗҝрқ‘–рқ‘—пҖ®
(пҖҙ) 
3) stopping criterion:
Make hard decision b = (b1, b2, вҖҰ, bn) out from Zj as 
рқ‘Ҹрқ‘–= {0,   рқ‘–рқ‘“ рқ‘Қрқ‘—> 0
1,   рқ‘–рқ‘“ рқ‘Қрқ‘—вүӨ0пҖ® 
(пҖө) 
If bHT = 0 (no error) or the maximum iteration limit has 
been reached, stop the decoder, otherwise continue. 
Output: The decoding result b. 
Min-sum decoder uses minimum value instead of tanh and 
tanhвҖ“1 functions in (1) and (2), and check node to variable node 
message can be calculated as 
рқҗҝрқ‘–рқ‘—=
min
рқ‘—вҖІвҲҲрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–)\рқ‘—|рқ‘Қрқ‘–рқ‘—вҖІ| Г— вҲҸ
sign(рқ‘Қрқ‘–рқ‘—вҖІ)
рқ‘—вҖІвҲҲрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–)\рқ‘—
пҖ¬
(пҖ¶) 
where sign(x) = вҖ“1 if x < 0, and sign(x) = 1 for other x. рқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–)\рқ‘— 
means excluding j from N(i). Although decoding complexity 
is reduced, the performance of MS decoder degrades. Jinghu 
Chen et al. [5] found that |Lij| calculated by MS decoder is 
always greater than what BP decoder calculates. So NMS was 
brought up with a normalization factor to solve such problem. 
NMS decoder updates Lij as 
рқҗҝрқ‘–рқ‘—= рқӣјГ—
min
рқ‘—вҖІвҲҲрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–)\рқ‘—|рқ‘Қрқ‘–рқ‘—вҖІ| Г— вҲҸ
sign(рқ‘Қрқ‘–рқ‘—вҖІ)
рқ‘—вҖІвҲҲрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–)\рқ‘—
пҖ¬  (пҖ·)
where пҒЎ is the normalization factor satisfying 0 < пҒЎ пҖј пҖұ. Most 
researches use brute-force search to get a proper value for 
пҒЎ and use the same value for every check node and every 
iteration during decoding. Introducing пҒЎ ameliorates the 
degradation caused by MS decoding, but there is still a gap 
between NMS and BP decoder. 
III. NEURAL NETWORK-AIDED NMS DECODER
NMS decoder uses a fixed пҒЎ for every row operation 
(every check node) and among the whole iterations. To 
mitigate the gap between NMS and BP, we consider using 
different пҒЎ values for each check node and for each iteration. 
So, the neural network normalized min-sum (NN-aided NMS) 
decoder estimates normalization factors from variable LLRs 
Fig. 1. (a) Porposed NN-aided NMS decoder. (b) Layers of NN used for 
per-check-node-wise пҒЎ value estimation, illustrated as NN module in (a). 
Zij. 
Fig. 1(a) shows NN-aided NMS decoder. The initializer 
maps input LLRs L = (l1, l2, вҖҰ, ln) to variable-to-check node 
information Zij. Then variable nodes pass Zij to check nodes 
and a pre-trained NN. This procedure is denoted as variable 
nodes processing (VNP). The NN estimates normalization 
factors пҒЎNN for each check node, and check nodes perform 
check nodes processing (CNP), i.e. calculating normalized 
information to variable nodes Lij, as in (8). The dashed 
rectangle is equivalent to NN-aided NMS iteration, and after 
each iteration, hard decision will be made to check whether 
there is no error. The decoder will stop if no error remains or 
the maximum iteration limit has been reached. 
Fig. 1 (b) shows layers of NN module in (a), which is used 
for per-check-node-wise пҒЎ value estimation. In detail, there 
are 12 layers: the input layer passes data without processing, 
followed by 10 hidden layers of fully connected (dense) neural 
network, nine with ReLU as activation function, and followed 
by one layer activated with Softplus function. The output layer 
passes data without processing. 
For LDPC(n, k) code with row iвҖҷs weight w(i), i = 1, 2, вҖҰ, 
m, and maximum row weight wmax in parity matrix H, w(i) 
variable to check node messages Z(i) = {Zij, j = 1, 2, вҖҰ, w(i)} 
are taken into NN as input, then the NN calculates through 
layers and activation functions to estimate the normalization 
factor пҒЎNN(i). Then NN-aided NMS decoder calculates Lij as 
рқҗҝрқ‘–рқ‘—= рқӣјрқ‘Ғрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–) Г—
min
рқ‘—вҖІвҲҲрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–)\рқ‘—|рқ‘Қрқ‘–рқ‘—вҖІ| Г— вҲҸ
sign(рқ‘Қрқ‘–рқ‘—вҖІ)
рқ‘—вҖІвҲҲрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–)\рқ‘—
пҖ®
(пҖё) 
The difference is that NN calculates an normalization 
factor пҒЎNN(i) for each check node i, rather than one same пҒЎ for 
all check nodes. Below lists detailed properties of training 
proposed NN. Note that NN here can be pre-trained and 
directly used in the decoder. 
Training data: Generate random transmitted data, get the 
received LLRs, and use them as input training data for NN. 
Training label: LLRs are parsed to conventional decoding 
functions tanh and tanhвҖ“1 as in (1) and (2) to calculate soft 
information Lij from check node i to relevant variable node j. 
So, for check node i (and row i in parity matrix H), w(i) results, 
Zij
VNP
Variable Nodes Processing
CNP
Check Nodes Processing
Pre-trained
NN
пҒЎNN
Hard 
Decision
b = (b1, b2,    bn)
Zij
Lij
Initializer
Zij
пҒЎ values estimated by NN
NN-aided NMS iteration
(a) 
(b) 
229
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:43:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
namely L(i) = {Lij, i = 1, 2, вҖҰ, w(i)} are calculated out and 
since these values are very close to each other due to the 
property of tanh and tanhвҖ“1 functions, we can simply use the 
average рқҗҝМ…(i) instead. Find the minimum value of Z(i) denoted 
as Zmin(i), and calculate the normalization factor, 
рқӣјрқҗҝ(рқ‘–) = рқҗҝМ…(рқ‘–) / рқ‘Қрқ‘ҡрқ‘–рқ‘ӣ(рқ‘–)пҖ®
(пҖ№) 
Thus we can use пҒЎL(i) for each row (check node) i as 
training label for NN. 
Loss function: We use mean square error (MSE) between 
пҒЎL(i) and NN inferred value пҒЎNN(i) as loss function, 
рқҗҝрқ‘ңрқ‘ рқ‘ =
1
рқ‘ҡвҲ‘
(рқӣјрқҗҝ(рқ‘–) вҲ’рқӣјрқ‘Ғрқ‘Ғ(рқ‘–))
2
рқ‘ҡ
рқ‘–=1
пҖ® 
(пҖұпҖ°) 
The optimizer is Adam with learning rate of 0.001, and 
max epochs of NN optimization is limited to 1000, utilizing 
early-stopping with patience of 20 epochs. Once the training 
has been completed, weights and biases are saved, then the 
NN can be used in FPGA and other devices. No more training 
is needed during decoding stage, which is very convenient for 
hardware implementation. 
For regular LDPC codes, row weights are the same value 
i.e. wmax, so one NN with input amount of wmax suits each
check to variable node message calculation. But for irregular
codes, whose row weights are different values i.e. w(i) вүӨ wmax,
it is impractical to use different NNs for each kind of input
with amount w(i). We simplify the structure by utilizing one
same NN with input size of wmax for all check node degrees
w(i), and substitute the lacking wmax вҖ“ w(i) values with a big
value (e.g. 50 or 100) which has a result very close to 1 after
tanh function and has little effect on check to variable node
message passing according to the property of (1) and (2). This
substitution is very useful when dealing with irregular LDPC
code constructed by PEG and other algorithms.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The training was performed via TensorFlow 2.4 machine 
learning framework, then parameters of trained NN were 
adapted to neural network toolbox of MATLAB 2021a. We 
used MATLAB communication toolbox to simulate all codesвҖҷ 
BER performance. We used PEG algorithm with computer 
searching and found an irregular LDPC(8176,7154) code with 
row weight between 29 and 31, and column weight 1 to 4, 
outperforming CCSDS LDPC(8176,7154) code by 0.08 dB. 
Fig.2 illustrates the simulation result after 10000 frames of 
blocks have been transmitted through AWGN channel with Eb 
/ N0 varying from 3.3 to 3.8 dB. It shows that PEG code with 
low complexity NMS decoder achieves better performance 
than CCSDS code with BP decoder which performs large 
amount of non-linear calculations. 
In order to decode CCSDS LDPC(8176,7154) code, the 
NN was constructed with input size of 32 data. The training 
data were acquired from variable to check node message of 
traditional BP decoder and training label пҒЎL was calculated as 
in (8). Training data were generated from 102200 check nodes 
and 0.5 dB step of Eb / N0 values ranging from 0 to 6dB. After 
training above 100 epochs of 102200 * 32 * 13 dataset, the 
MSE loss converged around 2.4 * 10вҖ“5. The layers of proposed 
NN are listed as in table I. For dense layer 1 to 9, activation 
functions are all ReLU, which is: y = 0 for x < 0, and y = x for 
x вүҘ 0. So ReLU function can be implemented with a selector  
TABLE I. 
LAYERS OF PROPOSED NN 
Layer 
Type 
Neuron amount 
Activation function 
Input 
32 
None 
Dense 1 
128 
ReLU 
Dense 2 
128 
ReLU 
Dense 3 
128 
ReLU 
Dense 4 
128 
ReLU 
Dense 5 
128 
ReLU 
Dense 6 
128 
ReLU 
Dense 7 
128 
ReLU 
Dense 8 
128 
ReLU 
Dense 9 
64 
ReLU 
Dense 10 
1 
Softplus 
Output 
1 
None 
and a comparator in FPGA, which is very simple and 
convenient. Its complexity is no more than other linear 
functions like wx + b. The dense layer 10 has activation 
function of Softplus, which is y = log(1 + exp(x)). However, 
there is only one Softplus activated layer in this NN and can 
be implemented with look-up-table (LUT) when using FPGA 
to calculate. So the proposed NN is very convenient and of 
low complexity. 
Fig. 3 shows error correction performance of BP, MS, 
NMS and NN-aided NMS decoders, with 10000 data blocks 
of CCSDS LDPC(8176,7154) code transmitted over AWGN 
channel through BPSK modulation. The maximum iteration 
numbers are set as 20. It can be seen that conventional BP 
decoder has the best performance. Min-sum decoderвҖҷs error 
correction capability is relatively poor, 0.3 dB worse than 
other algorithms. The best NMS decoder with fixed 
normalization factor 0.7 has a gap of 0.04 dB worse than BP. 
The proposed NN-aided NMS decoder which predicts 
variable normalization factors for each check node during 
each iteration has a gap of 0.02 dB worse than BP, improving 
the performance by 50% of the best NMS decoder. 
Fig. 4 shows the error correction performance of afore 
mentioned decoding algorithms with 10000 data blocks 
Fig. 2. PEG constructed LDPC code vs CCSDS code 
230
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:43:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 3. Performance of BP, MS, NMS and NN-aided NMS decoders, with 
10000 blocks of CCSDS LDPC(8176,7154) code, maximun iteration limit 
is 20 
Fig. 4. Performance of BP, MS, NMS and NN-aided NMS decoders, with 
10000 blocks of PEG LDPC(8176,7154) code, maximun iteration limit is 20 
transmitted through BPSK modulation over AWGN channel 
using PEG code. The same result can be observed that 
proposed NN-aided NMS decoder has a gap of 0.02 dB worse 
than BP, and mitigates such gap by 50% of NMS decoder with 
пҒЎ = пҖ°пҖ®пҖ·, which has a gap of 0.04 dB to BPпҖ® 
V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we constructed a rate-7/8 LDPC code using 
PEG algorithm, showing better error correction capability 
than the standard of CCSDS LDPC (8176,7154) code by 0.08 
dB with the same rate. We proposed a Neural Network-aided 
NMS decoder using a pre-trained NN to estimate 
normalization factors from variable LLRs. Simulation results 
show that, NN-aided NMS decoder outperforms MS decoder 
by above 0.3 dB, and its performance approaches BP decoder 
and still has a gap of 0.02 dB, which is 50% closer than the 
best NMS decoder using 0.7 as the normalization factor (the 
gap between best NMS and BP is 0.04 dB). For PEG 
generated irregular code, whose row weights range from 29 to 
31, we found a method that fill the lacking input LLRs with a 
relatively large number, then we can utilize the same NN-
aided NMS decoder as what CCSDS code (of which row 
weight is 32) used. And simulation result shows that proposed 
decoder is useful for PEG irregular code constructed by this 
work. So we can infer that NN-aided NMS decoder is an 
effective architecture for both regular and irregular codes. For 
the latter one, only the filling method is needed and NN itself 
needs no modification. Since the first to the 9-th layer of dense 
network and activation (ReLU) is nearly linear, and the last 
layerвҖҷs activation function (soft-plus) can be substituted by 
LUT, the NN-aided NMS decoder has much less computation 
complexity than BP decoder and friendly to hardware.  
From those methods and techniques mentioned above, the 
pre-trained NN can be adapted into real systems which already 
utilized NMS decoder. The proposed NN aided NMS decoder 
architecture introduces more linear computation than NMS 
decoder but achieves better bit error rate (BER) performance 
while approaching BP decoder, thus becoming a good 
complement between BP and NMS decoder when trading off 
among complexity, error correction performance and 
hardware implementation. The pre-trained neural network can 
be saved and implemented with FPGA, DSP, ASIC and other 
hardware platforms. Future research includes implementing 
high speed NN-aided NMS decoder with FPGA in a parallel, 
high speed and low latency architecture. Studies on decoding 
and channel LLR estimation methods through RNN, CNN and 
other kind of neural networks will be carried out in the future. 
REFERENCES 
[1]
R. Gallager, вҖңLow-density parity-check codes,вҖқ IRE Transactions on 
information theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21вҖ“28, 1962. 
[2]
P. W. Zhang, F. C. M. Lau and C. -W. Sham, "Protograph-based 
LDPC-Hadamard codes," in 2020 IEEE Wireless Communications and
Networking Conference (WCNC), 2020, pp. 1-6. 
[3]
L. Fanari, E. Iradier, J. Montalban, P. Angueira, Г“. Seijo and I. Val,
"PEG-LDPC coding for critical communications in factory 
automation," in 2020 25th IEEE International Conference on
Emerging Technologies and Factory Automation (ETFA), 2020, pp.
1135-1138. 
[4]
N. Liu, X. Ren, Y. Liu and X. Liu, "Research of LDPC coding and
encoding for satellite communication," in 2018 Eighth International
Conference 
on 
Instrumentation 
& 
Measurement, 
Computer,
Communication and Control (IMCCC), 2018, pp. 63-68. 
[5]
R. Wu, L. Wang, T. Yuan and M. Wang, "Improved MS LDPC decoder
based on Jacobian Logarithm," in 2019 7th International Conference
on Information, Communication and Networks (ICICN), 2019, pp. 53-
56. 
[6]
Jinghu Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, "Near optimum universal belief
propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes," in
IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406-414,
March 2002. 
[7]
X. Xiao, B. VasiДҮ, R. Tandon and S. Lin, "Designing finite alphabet
iterative decoders of LDPC codes via recurrent quantized neural
Networks," in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 7, 
pp. 3963-3974, July 2020. 
[8]
Q. Wang, S. Wang, H. Fang, L. Chen, L. Chen and Y. Guo, "A model-
driven deep learning method for Normalized Min-Sum LDPC
decoding," 
in 
2020 
IEEE 
International 
Conference 
on
Communications Workshops (ICC Workshops), 2020, pp. 1-6. 
[9]
B. VasiДҮ, X. Xiao and S. Lin, "Learning to decode LDPC dodes with
finite-alphabet message passing," in 2018 Information Theory and 
Applications Workshop (ITA), 2018, pp. 1-9. 
[10] H. Praveena and K. Kalyani, "FPGA implementation of parity check
matrix based low density parity check decoder," in 2018 2nd
International Conference on Inventive Systems and Control (ICISC),
2018, pp. 1214-1217. 
[11] J. Kang, B. Wang, Y. Zhang and J. An, "Enhanced partially-parallel
LDPC decoder for near earth applications," 2021 IEEE 11th
International Conference on Electronics Information and Emergency 
Communication (ICEIEC), 2021, pp. 12-16. 
[12] K. Zavertkin, A. Panarina, A. Ovinnikov and E. Likhobabin, "Efficient
BP-based decoding algorithms for QC-LDPC codes," in 2021 10th
Mediterranean Conference on Embedded Computing (MECO), 2021,
pp. 1-4. 
231
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:43:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
