A Method of Soft-Sensing Log-Likelihood Ratios 
Based on Broad Learning System for NAND Flash 
Memories  
Kainan Ma  
Institute of Semiconductors, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences 
University of Chinese Academy 
of Sciences  
Beijing, P. R. China 
makainan@semi.ac.cn 
Tao Li 
Institute of Semiconductors, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences 
University of Chinese Academy 
of Sciences  
Beijing, P. R. China 
litao@semi.ac.cn 
Yibo Yin 
Institute of Semiconductors, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences 
University of Chinese Academy 
of Sciences  
Beijing, P. R. China 
yyb2018@semi.ac.cn 
Sitao Zhang 
Institute of Semiconductors, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences 
University of Chinese Academy 
of Sciences  
Beijing, P. R. China 
zhangsitao@semi.ac.cn 
Ming Liu 
Institute of Semiconductors, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences 
University of Chinese Academy 
of Sciences  
Beijing, P. R. China 
liuming@semi.ac.cn 
Abstract—To accelerate the convergence of the soft-decision 
decoder and improve the reading performance of the NAND flash 
memory, a multi-level reading method is usually adopted to sense 
precise log-likelihood ratios (LLR). However, multi-level readings 
interfere with the threshold voltage in the cells, increasing the 
probability of bit errors and accelerating cells wear. To solve this 
problem, this paper proposed an LLR soft-sensing method based 
on a broad learning system (BLS) to replace multi-level reading, 
which improves accuracy of sensing from 97.1% to 97.3% by using 
the raw bit error rate (RBER) as one of the inputs. The output 
classification probabilities of the network model are used to 
calculate the LLR. Compared with the multilayer perceptron 
model, the adoption of BLS hugely decreases the computation 
amount of network training from 113 epochs to 5, making on-chip 
retraining feasible. The proposed BLS-based LLR soft-sensing 
method will be of great application potential in the intelligent 
error control of non-volatile memories.  
Keywords—NAND flash memory; neural network; broad 
learning system; low-density parity-check code. 
I. INTRODUCTION
The NAND flash memory has become the main data storage 
medium due to its high-speed reading performance. However, 
compared with hard drive disks, the data in the NAND flash 
memory are more vulnerable to noise interference, resulting in a 
higher bit error rate (BER). Error control codes are usually used 
to detect and correct bit errors. The most commonly used one is 
the low-density parity-check (LDPC) code. The data are 
encoded through LDPC codes before programmed into the 
NAND flash memory and decoded to detect and correct errors 
during the reading operation. The hard decision decoding (HDD) 
algorithms are usually used when the BER is low, and the soft 
decision decoding (SDD) algorithms with stronger error 
correction capability are used when the BER is high, such as 
sum-product decoding algorithm (SPA) and minimum sum 
decoding algorithm (MSA). The error correction capability of 
the SDD algorithm is related to the accuracy of the input log-
likelihood ratios (LLRs). The precise LLRs can speed up the 
decoding convergence, improving the reading speed, whereas 
inaccurate LLRs may even cause the decoder to fail to converge 
within the maximum number of iterations, resulting in decoding 
failure and bringing the NAND flash into a re-read state, which 
will cause serious read speed drop. A hard-sensing method that 
directly “read” the LLR called multi-level reading [1, 6] is 
usually adopted to obtain input LLRs for the SDD, as shown in 
Fig. 1, where the 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ continues to be compared with 𝑉𝑉𝑎𝑎𝑎𝑎 or 𝑉𝑉𝑏𝑏𝑏𝑏 
to obtain a precise probability of being “0” or “1” after it is 
compared with the primary read reference voltage 𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟. The 
farther the subdivided region is from 𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟𝑟𝑟, the greater the 
probability is. Usually, 7 voltage levels (a reference voltage 
level with 3 arithmetic levels on its left and right) are assigned 
to sense the LLR of 1 bit, which is equivalent to 4 times readings 
for 1 bit’s LLR. However, the data retention errors [4] and other 
noises caused by repeated read operation will make 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ more 
probable to shift and thus increase the probability of data errors 
or even lead to data corruption. Also, the repeated read 
operations will sharply accelerate the wear level of the cells and 
shorten the service life of the NAND flash memory. 
Consequently, the read performance will be degraded. Increased 
risk of data damage, shortened service life, and degraded read 
performance brought by multi-level reading are fatal to NAND 
431
2021 IEEE 9th International Conference on Information, Communication and Networks
2021 IEEE 9th International Conference on Information, Communication and Networks (ICICN) | 978-1-6654-3861-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICICN52636.2021.9673965
978-1-6654-3861-2/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:45:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
flash memories, so a method that can replace it to sense LLRs is 
very necessary. 
 
Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of multi-level reading. 
Nakamura et al, 2019 [7] use data retention times and 
program/erase (P/E) cycles as two of the inputs of an artificial 
neural network (ANN) and the output classification probabilities 
as results for precise LLR calculation. However, data retention 
times and P/E cycles can not completely reflect the noise in the 
NAND flash memory, so there is still room for improvement in 
the accuracy of the network. Also, the ANN models are pre-
trained before leaving the factory and they can not be adjusted 
once it is deployed to chips. However, the noise environment of 
each flash memory chip may be different due to the impact of 
operating temperature, peripheral equipment, reading and 
writing frequency, etc. Therefore, the trained model can hardly 
maintain its accuracy when the noise environment changes, 
especially after a period of use as the cells are wearing. Hence, 
on-chip retraining which updates the network model of the 
individual chip is necessary, but there is no mechanism in 
NAND flash memories for collecting the noisy data in the new 
working environment for retraining and the computation amount 
of training an ANN is huge. Hence, this paper proposed an 
improved model for LLR soft-sensing based on broad learning 
system (BLS), combined with the RBER estimated in the 
method from Ma et al, 2020 [9]. The proposed model improved 
the accuracy of the classification and is feasible to on-chip 
retraining. 
The rest of the paper is divided into the following parts: 
section II introduces principles of the LLR sensing task by 
taking a multi-level cell (MLC) NAND flash as an example, 
section III proposes three optional models of multilayer 
perceptron (MLP) network and broad learning system (BLS) 
network to sense LLR and compares the performance of them, 
Section IV proposed an error control framework used in 
conjunction with the proposed method, and section IV draws a 
conclusion. 
II. PRICIPLES 
Cells in the NAND flash are made of floating gate or charge-
trap metal oxide semiconductors (MOS). To program data into 
a cell, the data is first modulated to the corresponding voltage 
level 𝐿𝐿𝑖𝑖 with Gray coding data mapping, as shown in Table I. 
The symbol of all “1” represents the erased state, and the other 
symbols present the programmed states. The cells are charged 
with programming voltages PVs by using incremental step pulse 
programming (ISPP) technology [8]. The voltage retained in the 
cell is called the threshold voltage, 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ. PV and 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ have some 
fluctuations in practice due to factors such as process and circuit 
interference, as shown in Fig. 2. The read operation in the 
NAND flash is to compare the 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ in the cell with the read 
reference voltages 𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟s on each page, as shown in Table II. For 
example, to read the data on the lower page, 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ should be 
compared with 𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟2. If 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ> 𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟2, it is determined that the data 
stored on the page is “0”, otherwise it is “1”. However, in 
practice, 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎs are interfered with by a variety of noises, so they 
are not exactly separated by the read reference voltages, as 
shown in Fig. 3. In this case, multi-level reading is used to sense 
how likely the data mapped by 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ is “0” or “1” to provide SDD 
with LLR input. 
Data program and read in the NAND flash memory is 
equivalent to data transmission through a noisy channel model 
[10] which inputs programmed threshold voltage signal and 
outputs a noise-disturbed one. 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ is mainly affected by 
incremental step pulse programming (ISPP) noise [10], random 
telegram noise (RTN) [2], data retention noise [4], and cell-to-
cell interference (CCI). We use the parameter provided by [5, 6, 
11] to simulate a noise channel model of an MLC NAND flash 
and add a small random disturbance to simulate how 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ is 
disturbed when the working environment changes. 
 
TABLE I.  
DATA MODULATION IN AN MLC NAND FLASH WITH GRAY 
CODING MAPPING 
 
Data Modulation 
Voltage 
level 
L0 
L1 
L2 
L3 
Bit[0]→ 
lower 
page 
1 
1 
0 
0 
Bit[1] 
→ 
upper 
page 
1 
0 
0 
1 
States 
Erased 
Programmed 
 
 
Fig. 2. The distribution of threshold voltages in an MLC NAND flash of ideal 
wearing level. 
 
Fig. 3. The threshold voltage distribution affected by noise and wear. 
432
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:45:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE II.  
DATA DEMODULATION IN AN MLC NAND FLASH 
 
Read reference 
volt 
e.g. 𝑽𝑽𝒕𝒕𝒕𝒕= 𝑳𝑳𝟐𝟐 
Data 
Read 
Lower Page 
𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟2 
𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ> 𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟2 
0 
Upper Page 
𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟1 −𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟3 
𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟1 < 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ< 𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟3 
0 
 
III. NETWORK TRAINING 
TABLE III.  
CLASSIFICATION PERFORMANCE AND REQUIRED COMPUTING 
POWER OF EACH CASE 
Method 
Accuracy 
Multiplications 
per bit 
Epochs 
Case1: MLP 
97.1% 
30 
75 
Case 2: MLP with RBER 
97.3% 
18 
113 
Case 3: BLS with RBER 
97.3% 
36 
5 
 
 
Fig. 4. The MLP model used in CASE 1, consisting of an input layer, a hidden 
layer, and an output layer, where the input layer has 8 nodes, the hidden layer 
has 3 nodes, and the output layer has 2 nodes. 
 
Fig. 5. The training loss of the MLP-based soft sensing for each epoch in 
CASE 1. 
200,000 sets of MLC noisy read data are generated, where 
70% of them are used as the train set, 15% as the test set, and 
15% as the validation set. In the dataset, 5.68% of the 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎs were 
shifted out of the region between 𝑉𝑉𝑟𝑟s and thus were misjudged. 
Namely, the bit error rate of the dataset is 0.0568, considering 
that the Gray codes between two adjacent regions have only a 
one-bit difference. 
 
Fig. 6. The MLP model after the input format is improved and BER is 
introduced in. 
 
Fig. 7. The training loss of the MLP-based soft sensing for each epoch in 
CASE 2. 
Three optional cases are illustrated in Table III. Case 1 uses 
input parameters shown in Table IV, which is also adopted in 
reference [7], where Data retention time and the number of P/E 
cycles are to reflect the noise environment in the NAND flash 
memory, Page type indicates which page the read bit is on, and 
the output of the model is the probability that the data is 
classified as “0” and “1”. The log-likelihood ratio of the read bit 
is calculated with LLR = log
Pr(y=0)
Pr(y=1), where Pr(y = 0) is the 
probability of being “0” and Pr(y = 1) is the probability of 
being “1”. The model of Case 1 is a single-hidden-layer multi-
layer MLP, as shown in Fig. 4. It takes 75 epochs of training to 
converge to the best performance, as shown in Fig. 5, reaching 
the classification accuracy rate of 97.1% under the validation set, 
which is equivalent to reducing the BER by 48.9% to 0.029, 
greatly easing the error correction pressure of the decoder. The 
Case 1 model takes 8 × 3 + 3 × 2 = 30  multiplications to 
sense an LLR of 1 bit of data. In engineering practice, fixed-
point multipliers in parallel operations can be used to speed up 
the calculations to reduce the delay caused by the MLP sensing 
LLR.  
TABLE IV.  
DATA FORMAT FOR CASE 1 
Input Parameters 
Output 
Parameters 
Data 
retention 
times 
P/E 
cycles 
State[1:4] 
Page type[1:2] 
y = 
0? 
y = 
1? 
 
Case 2 replaces data retention time and the number of P/E 
cycles with raw bit error rate (RBER), as shown in Table V, 
because the two parameters can not cover noises irrelated to 
them, such as ISPP noise, process deviation, etc. RBER can 
describe the noise situation more accurately, instead. It is 
obtained with the method in reference [9], where known 
sequences are inserted into data frames and the read ones are 
compared with their actual values to estimate the RBER. The 
433
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:45:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
contaminated data of sequences and their actual values can be 
collected to update the network model when the accuracy gets 
decreased. Also, State is represented by only one input node to 
reduce the size. The improved MLP model, as shown in Fig. 6, 
converges to the best performance after 113 epochs of training, 
and the introduced RBER improves the classification accuracy 
to 97.3% under the validation set, as shown in Fig. 7. It takes 
4 × 3 + 3 × 2 = 18 multiplications to sense an LLR of 1 bit of 
data, reducing the number of multiplications required by 40%, 
compared to Case 1. However, more epochs are needed for 
model convergence due to the reduction of input nodes. 
TABLE V.  
IMPROVED INPUT AND OUTPUT DATA FORMAT FOR CASE 2 
Input Parameters 
Output 
Parameters 
BER 
State 
Page 
type 
y = 
0? 
y = 
1? 
 
MLPs require too many epochs for training, which will be a 
huge cost of computing time and power for on-chip retraining, 
so the broad learning system (BLS) [3] is adopted. BLS consists 
of feature nodes, hidden enhancement nodes, and output nodes, 
where the feature nodes 𝒁𝒁(𝑿𝑿) are the mapping of the input 𝑿𝑿=
[𝒙𝒙𝟏𝟏, 𝒙𝒙𝟐𝟐, … , 𝒙𝒙𝒏𝒏] and the hidden enhancement nodes 𝑯𝑯(𝒁𝒁) are the 
mapping of the feature nodes. The BLS network can be 
expressed as 𝒀𝒀= [𝒁𝒁|𝑯𝑯]𝑾𝑾, where 𝑾𝑾 is the connection weight 
matrix. BLS obtains connection weights through fast learning 
that generating random weights first and then pruning nodes 
with smaller weights, so it takes less time to train and is suitable 
for on-chip training. The mathematical form of BLS is similar 
to a neural network with two hidden layers. The BLS model, as 
shown in Fig. 8, achieves an accuracy of 97.3% after up to only 
5 epochs of training with the same dataset format as Case 2, 
hugely reducing the computation amount of training by 95.6%. 
It takes 4 × 2 + 2 × 6 + (2 + 6) × 2 = 36  multiplication 
operations to calculate the LLR of 1-bit data. From the 
perspective of hardware implementation, the side effect of the 
increased number of multiplication operations can be alleviated 
because the calculation can be done in one clock cycle via 
parallel computing due to the flat structure of BLS, whereas the 
MLP with a hidden layer requires at least two clock cycles. 
 
Fig. 8. 
1A BLS structure for CASE 3. 
In summary, although all the three models can reduce the 
number of reads required to sense LLR from 4 to 1 and reduce 
the bit error rate of the read data by about 50%, the BLS model 
is more suitable for LLR soft-sensing and on-chip retraining 
because of the least computation amount of training and little 
latency to read operation. Noteworthily, although the LLR soft-
sensing method effectively reduces the number of reads, it 
increases the hardware complexity of the error control system as 
a tradeoff.  
IV. A FRAMEWORK 
An error control framework is proposed where the multi-
level read is replaced with BLS-based LLR sensing, as shown in 
Fig. 9. In the programming operation, a small number of known 
sequences are inserted into the input data frame, which is then 
encoded with LDPC codes. The codewords are interleaved 
before written into the memory for accurate RBER estimation. 
In the reading operation, the demodulated codeword is first to 
recover to original orders via deinterleaving, and then the known 
sequences in codewords are compared with their actual values 
to estimate RBER. Meanwhile, the sequences are also collected 
during backfilling for the network model retraining. Hard-
decision decoding (HDD) is selected when the RBER is low, 
and soft-decision decoding (SDD) is used with the input of 
LLRs obtained through the BLS model in Case 3 when HDD 
fails or the RBER is high. Subsequently, the known sequences 
in the data frame are removed from the output. 
 
Fig. 9. The data flow of the error control framework with BLS-based LLR-
sensing module is introduced when soft-decision decoding is used, where the 
black arrows the normal program and read operation with RBER estimation 
embedded, red arrows indicate the flow of BLS-based soft-decision decoding, 
and blue arrows indicate data collecting for retraining. 
V. CONCLUSION 
This paper has proposed a BLS-based LLR soft-sensing 
method to replace the multi-level read for sensing LLR, which 
can reduce the interference of multi-level reading with 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎ and 
thus extend the service life of the memory. The RBER of the 
NAND flash memory is used as one of the input nodes to 
improve the classification accuracy of the models from 97.1% 
to 97.3%. Also, the known data introduced by the RBER 
estimation can be collected for retraining the models. The model 
also has a small computation amount of training, so it is suitable 
for on-chip retaining to update models when the accuracy 
degrades. It takes only up to 5 epochs of training to obtain the 
same accuracy as MLP models training for 113 epochs. 
Additionally, its flat structure can make the hardware parallel 
computing takes only need a few clock cycles to obtain results, 
which helps maintain the read performance of NAND flash 
memories. The paper then proposes an error control framework 
that senses LLRs with BLS model and is capable to on-chip 
retraining, which further advances the realization of on-chip 
training of the neural networks for the intelligent error control 
system in NAND flash memories. However, at a cost, the 
434
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:45:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
proposed method has increased the hardware complexity of the 
controller, so our nest-step work will focus on hardware 
optimization to reduce the hardware complexity as much as 
possible. Considering that the noise situation in NAND flash 
memories will be more complicated and the service life will be 
shorter as storage density goes high, the 𝑉𝑉𝑡𝑡ℎs in cells will be 
more sensitive to noise interference consequently. Therefore, the 
proposed LLR soft-sensing method that can reduce data 
retention errors caused by repeated readings will be of great 
application value.  
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
This research was funded by the National Key Technologies 
RD Program, grant number 2017YFB0405604, the Key 
Research Program of Frontier Science, Chinese Academy of 
Sciences, grant number QYZDY-SSW-JSC004. 
REFERENCES 
[1] S. Liu, X. Zou, and B. Wang, "Quad-Level Cell NAND Design and Soft-
Bit Generation for Low-Density Parity-Check Decoding in System-Level 
Application," (in English), Wuhan University Journal of Natural Sciences, 
Article vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 70-78, 2018, Art. no. 1007-
1202(2018)23:1<70:qlcnda>2.0.tx;2-c. 
[2] K. L. Wang, G. Du, Z. Y. Lun, W. Y. Chen, and X. Y. Liu, "Modeling of 
program Vth distribution for 3-D TLC NAND flash memory," (in 
English), Science China-Information Sciences, Article vol. 62, no. 4, p. 
10, Apr 2019, Art. no. 042401. 
[3] C. P. Chen and Z. Liu, "Broad learning system: An effective and efficient 
incremental learning system without the need for deep architecture," 
IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems, vol. 29, no. 
1, pp. 10-24, 2017. 
[4] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, "Read and write voltage signal 
optimization for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory," IEEE 
transactions on communications, vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1613-1623, 2016. 
[5] Z. Mei, K. Cai, and X. He, "Deep Learning-Aided Dynamic Read 
Thresholds Design For Multi-Level-Cell Flash Memories," IEEE 
Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 2850-2862, 2020. 
[6] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, "Enabling NAND flash memory use soft-
decision error correction codes at minimal read latency overhead," IEEE 
Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: regular papers, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 
2412-2421, 2013. 
[7] T. Nakamura, Y. Deguchi, and K. Takeuchi, "Adaptive Artificial Neural 
Network-Coupled LDPC ECC as Universal Solution for 3-D and 2-D, 
Charge-Trap and Floating-Gate NAND Flash Memories," (in English), 
Ieee Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Article vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 745-754, 
Mar 2019. 
[8] K.-D. Suh et al., "A 3.3 V 32 Mb NAND flash memory with incremental 
step pulse programming scheme," IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 
vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 1149-1156, 1995. 
[9] K. Ma, M. Liu, T. Li, Y. Yin, and H. Chen, "A Low-Cost Improved 
Method of Raw Bit Error Rate Estimation for NAND Flash Memory of 
High Storage Density," Electronics, vol. 9, no. 11, p. 1900, 2020. 
[10] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, "Threshold voltage 
distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, 
and modeling," in 2013 Design, Automation & Test in Europe Conference 
& Exhibition (DATE), 2013, pp. 1285-1290: IEEE. 
[11] H. Yang et al., "Reliability issues and models of sub-90nm NAND Flash 
memory cells," in 2006 8th International Conference on Solid-State and 
Integrated Circuit Technology Proceedings, 2006, pp. 760-762: IEEE. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
435
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:45:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
