2606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

Decoding Behavior Study of LDPC Codes Under
a Realistic Magnetic Recording Channel Model
Xinde Hu1, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar1, Lingyan Sun2, and Jin Xie2
Data Storage System Center, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA Marvell Systems, Longmont, CO 80503 USA
Low-density parity check (LDPC) codes have shown near-capacity performance in additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. However, in magnetic recording systems, the readback signals suffer from various impairments (namely, transition noise, nonlinear transition shift, and partial erasure) in addition to AWGN. In this paper, we describe an FPGA-based advanced magnetic recording tchheanpnreeslesnimceuolaftsourc(hthraetaliinsctilcudimesptahiersmeeimntps aairreminenvetss)tiagnadteadndLowDnPCtocboidtienrgrosyrsrteamte.(TBhEeRe)rorof r10cor1r1ecatnindgfrpaemrfeoremrraonrcreastoef(LFDERPC) ocfo1d0es 8in.
Index Terms—EPR4, FPGA, LDPC code, magnetic recording, nonlinear transition shift, partial erasure.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY CHECK (LDPC) codes [1]–[4] are being studied for use in high-density magnetic recording systems to handle low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and high inter-symbol interference (ISI). Hard disk drives require very high (1 Gb/s and faster) data rates and this suggests the use of LDPC codes with hardware-friendly structure and with small column weight (i.e., the number of ones in each column of the parity check matrix). In [2], Vasic et al. introduced LDPC codes (designed using Kirkman systems) that exhibit simple encoding and decoding structures. Kurtas et al. [3] investigated the performance of latest LDPC codes such as irregular repeat accumulate (IRA) codes and finite geometry codes from a systems perspective. Song et al. [4] proposed a novel approach to construct low column weight quasicyclic (QC) LDPC codes free of 6-cycles in the Tanner graph; eliminating short cycles increases the effectiveness of the iterations during the decoding process.
In order to take advantage of the iterative soft decoding of LDPC codes, a soft-output equalizer is required for partial response (PR) channel, commonly used in magnetic recording systems. Gross et al. [5] proposed a novel design of a soft-output maximum a posterior (MAP) detector. Sun et al. [6] implemented a soft output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) on a field programmable gate array (FPGA). Although the SOVA is suboptimal compared to MAP algorithm, the implementation complexity is significantly lower [6]. Moreover, channel iterations between the LDPC decoder and the SOVA are employed to take advantage of the soft information.
Additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and idealized PR channel are convenient assumptions in evaluating the performance of the LDPC codes, but a more realistic channel model should include impairments such as transition noise, nonlinear transition shift and partial erasure in addition to electronic noise and inter-symbol interference (ISI). Oenning et al. [7], Yamaguchi et al. [8], and Ryan [9] et al. used different approaches to model various types of noise and nonlinearities. In the work described in this paper, we implement in FPGA a magnetic
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2006.878652

recording simulator including these impairments and evaluate performance for such a realistic channel.
Typical hard disk drive systems require bit error rates (BERs) around 10 to 10 and such very low BERs cannot be estimated by most software LDPC decoders. In this effort, we implement the readback signal simulator and the system on FPGA hardware and are able to reliably estimate BERs down to 10 . Although it is desirable to reach even lower BERs, the observed BER performance indicates important trends such as the presence of error floors above the 10 BER level. Typically performance evaluation at lower BER such as 10 to 10 relies more on analytical models since the amount of simulation required is out of reach. Under this more realistic magnetic recording channel model, the system exhibits excellent error correcting performance (over 20 dB coding gain).
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present the magnetic recording channel model. Section III details the FPGA implementation and Section IV gives the simulation results. Section V concludes the paper.
II. ADVANCED MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNEL MODEL
Besides AWGN, the readback signal in magnetic recording suffers from ISI, transition noise, and media nonlinearity. For longitudinal magnetic recording channel, an isolated magnetic transition response is a Lorentzian pulse characterized by PW50 and pulse energy , and the bit interval is typically shorter than the channel response, which leads to ISI. The zigzag magnetic boundaries cause the readback signal transitions to shift in time domain (transition jitter) and cause the distortion of the pulse shape (width variation)
(1)
(2)
Equation (1) models the ideal isolated transition response [7] whereas (2) models the readback signal as a noise-
corrupted superposition of these transition responses except that the width of can vary with (to model the pulse width variation due to transition noise) and the transition location changes by [(2) does not include media nonlinearities, which will be

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU et al.: DECODING BEHAVIOR STUDY OF LDPC CODES

2607

Fig. 1. The overall system structure comprising three major components: the encoder, the channel and the decoder. Data is processed in a serial structure.

discussed in the last part of Section II]. Here denotes NRZI

data (

and ) and denotes noise.

We use the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in (3) defined as the

ratio of the power in the isolated transition response to

the height of noise power spectral density, which includes jitter

noise, width variation, and AWGN [7]. Typically, the transition

noise is the dominant part of the noise

Fig. 2. The magnetic recording channel model. The transition noise and additive noise come from the Gaussian number generators using the Box-Muller method [6]. The readback channel module simulates the readback channel (h ) responses to certain written bit sequence (b ), as in (4).

(3)

where is the AWGN power, and and are the standard deviations of jitter noise and width variation, respectively.
Media nonlinearities typically include partial erasure (PE) [8], [9] and nonlinear transition shift (NLTS) [9]. When back-toback transitions occur, the magnetic field generated by the bit cells interferes with each other, and thus reduces the readback signal amplitude. This phenomenon is referred to as partial erasure (PE). The parameter characterizes the loss in signal amplitude due to PE, as shown in (4). In addition, during the writing process, the magnetic field generated by previous written bit cells interferes with the writing field potentially affecting the transition location. This effect is called nonlinear transition shift (NLTS). The NLTS is modeled by the transition shift factor . Note from (4) that the NLTS happens only when consecutive transitions appear

Fig. 3. The overall system BER performance under different channel models.
passes through the Lorentzian pulse filter with certain transition jitter and width variation factors. Then, AWGN is added and an 11-tap equalizer filters (using longer equalization filters does not lead to any noticeable improvement in our simulation) the soft data into an appropriate PR target. The output data is sent to the SOVA and to the LDPC decoder. Fig. 2 shows the structure of the hardware channel model.

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION (4)

The overall system including

scheme and the

where is the effective PE ratio.

•

if no transition occurs in adjacent boundaries;

•

(typically assumed to be around 0.9) if one transi-

tion occurs in adjacent boundaries;

•

if two transitions occur in adjacent boundaries.

channel model is implemented in VHDL. A quasicyclic LDPC code with column weight 3, length 4623 bits, and code rate 8/9 is chosen to be the ECC for evaluation and ERP4 is selected to be the PR target. Timing analysis shows that the overall throughput can reach around 35 Mb/s. The complex channel simulator and the limited memory in the FPGA hardware pre-

III. SYSTEM IMPLEMENTATION ON FPGA

vent the throughput from going higher. Fig. 3 compares the overall BER performance of the same

The overall system including the LDPC encoder, the decoder,

system under different channels. In the pres-

the SOVA, and the magnetic recording channel model is imple- ence of the transition noise and the effect of media nonlinear-

mented on a Xilinx Virtex II 8000 FPGA device. The communi- ities, the BER reaches

at SNR of 17.5 dB, shown as the

cation between the FPGA device and software is performed by rightmost curve in Fig. 3. If a precompensator is used to elimi-

the external registers located on the Alphadata ADM-XRC-II nate the effect of PE and NLTS, the error correcting performance

PCI adaptor.

can be improved by around 3 dB (indicated as the gap between

The overall channel is implemented in a first-in first-out struc- two rightmost curves in Fig. 3). In addition, assuming an ideal-

ture, as shown in Fig. 1. A string of binary bits generated by the ized PR channel instead of a Lorentzian response and an equal-

LDPC encoder is transmitted to the channel. The PE and NLTS izer, the SNR is about 6 dB better. Finally, with just AWGN, the

effects are determined based on the data pattern of these bits. BER reaches 10 at SNR of 5 dB, which is about 2.5 dB better

Using the corresponding PE and NLTS factors, the bit string than the idealized PR channel.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2608

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

Fig. 4. BER and FER performance with magnetic recording channel. Impairments include media nonlinearities and transition noise. Top four curves in each figure shows the error rates in different inner iterations inside the LDPC decoder while all in the first channel iteration. The bottom curves show the error rates during the second channel iteration.
Fig. 5. The impact of media nonlinearities on BER. The figure on the left shows the effect of PE and the right figure shows the effect of NLTS.

For most of the magnetic recording systems, processing speed is a crucial parameter. However, the overall speed is largely determined by the number of iterations. Given the large performance gain from the channel iteration with the SOVA detector, reducing the number of inner iterations and relying more on the channel iterations can be a more practical solution for high speed recording devices. Fig. 6 shows the BER with only 10 overall iterations. The difference compared to the 50 iterations case is only 0.6 dB. But the guaranteed throughput increases by 5 times.

V. CONCLUSION

In this research effort, we implemented an advanced magnetic

recording channel model together with the

system in FPGA. The

system shows strong

error correcting performance (over 15 dB coding gain) under

the magnetic recording channel. The impact of different im-

pairments on error correcting performance is presented as

well. With limited number of iterations (high throughput), the

system still maintains excellent error cor-

recting performance (over 20 dB coding gain), largely because

of the effective channel iterations. In addition, the decoding

behavior under recording channel model (e.g., error floor) is

investigated.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by a grant from INSIC EHDR program and by NIST through the MTS Advanced Technology Program.

Fig. 6. The bit error rate with only 10 iterations.

Fig. 4 shows the BER and the frame error rate (FER) of the

system after 25 inner iterations in the LDPC decoder and 2

channel iterations (between LDPC decoder and SOVA). At a

normalized recording density

of 2, the BER reaches

10 for SNR of 20.5 dB. The different curves in Fig. 4 show

the BER and FER at intermediate decoding iterations inside the

LDPC decoder as well as the channel iterations. The overall

coding gain is over 20 dB (raw BER reaches 10 at SNR level

of 38 dB). The performance gain through the channel iteration

is around 3.5 dB. Compared to the BERs for the ideal cases

(AWGN only and idealized PR), the general trend of the LDPC

codes remain the same. Error floor starts to appear when BER

reaches 10 . Compared to large column weight LDPC codes,

the codes evaluated (of column weight 3) typically have better

BER performance in the low SNR region but have high error

floors [10]. For LDPC codes with high error floors (10 or

higher), the use of a simple outer code can further ensure the

BER reaches 10 at very low SNR.

Fig. 5 shows the impact of the PE and the NLTS on BER. The

simulation is carried out at SNR of 15.5 dB. When the PE ratio

reaches 0.7, the loss in BER is significant. The loss is less dam-

aging when PE ratio is above 0.7. For the NLTS, the threshold

lies around 0.15 . When exceeds 0.15 , a precompensator

is necessary.

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit errorcorrecting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. 1993 Int. Conf. Commun., 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] B. Vasic, E. M. Kurtas, and A. V. Kuznetsov, “Kirkman systems and their application in perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1705–1710, Jul. 2002.
[3] E. M. Kurtas, A. V. Kuznetsov, and I. Djurdjevic, “System perspectives for the application of structured LDPC codes to data storage devices,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 200–207, Feb. 2006.
[4] H. Song, J. Liu, and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Low complexity LDPC codes for partial response channels,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM’02, vol. 2, Nov. 2002, pp. 17–21.
[5] W. J. Gross, V. C. Gaudet, and P. G. Gulak, “Difference metric soft -output detection: Architecture and implementation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II: Analog Digit. Signal Process., vol. 48, no. 10, pp. 904–911, Oct. 2001.
[6] L. Sun, T. Horigome, and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A high-throughput, field programmable gate array implementation of soft output Viterbi algorithm for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 3081–3083, Jul. 2004.
[7] T. Oenning and J. Moon, “Modeling the Lorentzian magnetic recording channels with transition noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 583–591, Jan. 2001.
[8] T. Yamauchi and J. M. Cioffi, “A nonlinear model for thin film disk recording systems,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 3950–3952, Sep. 1996.
[9] W. E. Ryan and N. H. Yeh, “Viterbi detector for PR4-equalized magnetic recording channels with transition-shift and partial erasure nonlinearities,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 3993–3995, Nov. 1993.
[10] L. Sun, H. Song, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and Z. Keirn, “Field-programmable gate-array-based investigation of the error floor of low-density parity check codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 2983–2985, Oct. 2005.
Manuscript received March 13, 2006 (e-mail: xindeh@andrew.cmu.edu).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:52:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

