IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

1765

Transactions Papers

Algebraic Construction of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for the AWGN and Erasure Channels
Ying Yu Tai, Student Member, IEEE, Lan Lan, Lingqi Zeng, Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE, and Khaled A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper is concerned with construction of quasicyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for three different types of channels: the additive white Gaussian noise, the binary random erasure, and the binary burst erasure channels. Two algebraic methods for systematic construction of QC-LDPC codes are presented. Codes constructed perform well over all three types of channels.
Index Terms—Erasure burst, erasure correction (EC), Euclidean geometry, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, quasi-cyclic (QC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
EVER SINCE the rediscovery of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] in the late 1990s as a class of Shannonlimit-approaching codes [2], [3], a great deal of research effort has been expended in the design and construction of LDPC codes that perform well with iterative decoding based on belief propagation [1], [3], [4]. Based on methods of construction, LDPC codes can be classified into two categories: randomlike codes and structured codes. Random-like LDPC codes [3], [5] are constructed by computer search, based on certain design guidelines and required structural properties of their Tanner graphs [6], such as girth, degree distributions of variable and check nodes, and stopping sets [5]–[8]. Structured LDPC codes are constructed based on algebraic and combinatorial tools, such as are given in [9]–[24].
One particularly attractive class of structured LDPC codes for practical applications is the class of quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes [9], [12], [13], [16], [18], [20], [21]. QC-LDPC codes have encoding advantage over other types of LDPC codes. They can be encoded using simple shift-registers in linear time with
Paper approved by T.-K. Truong, the Editor for Coding Theory and Techniques of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received July 5, 2005; revised December 20, 2005. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grants CCR-0117891 and ECS-0121469, in part by NASA under Grant NNG05GD13G, and in part by a grant from Northrop Grumman Space Technology. This paper was presented in part at the 39th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, Baltimore, MD, March 2005.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: yytai@ece.ucdavis.edu; squash@ece.ucdavis.edu; lqzeng@ece.ucdavis.edu; shulin@ece.ucdavis.edu; ghaffar@ece.ucdavis.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.881361

linear complexity [25]. Furthermore, well-designed QC-LDPC codes can perform just as well as random-like LDPC codes in terms of bit-error probability, block-error probability, and error floor, collectively [16], [22], [24], [25].
So far, most of the proposed designs and constructions of LDPC codes have been focused on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, with only a few constructions for other types of channels, such as binary erasure, fading, and recording channels. This paper is concerned with algebraic constructions of QC-LDPC codes for three types of channels, the AWGN, binary random erasure, and burst erasure channels. Two methods of code construction are presented. Experimental results show that the constructed codes decoded with iterative decoding perform very well over all three types of channels. Design of LDPC codes that provide universally good performance across multiple channels was first investigated in [26], and recently in [27].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II gives an introduction of various types of LDPC codes and some properties of their Tanner graphs that affect their performance with iterative decoding over the AWGN channel, Section III discusses LDPC codes and their decoding for the binary erasure channel (BEC), Section IV gives the mathematical foundations for code construction, Section V presents a class of QC-LDPC codes for both the AWGN channel and BEC, Section VI discusses correction of erasure bursts, Section VII presents a method for constructing QC-LDPC codes that not only are capable of correcting erasure bursts but also perform well over AWGN and binary random erasure channels; and Section VIII concludes the paper.
II. LDPC CODES
A binary regular LDPC code is defined [1] as the binary null space of a sparse parity-check (PC) matrix over GF(2) with the following structural properties: 1) each row has constant weight ; 2) each column has constant weight ; and 3) no two rows (or two columns) have more than one 1-component in common. Such a PC matrix is said to be -regular, and the code given by the null space of is called a -regular LDPC code. Property (3) is referred to as the row-column (RC) constraint. The RC constraint ensures that the Tanner graph of the code is free of cycles of length four, and the minimum distance of the code is at least [12]. An LDPC code is said to be irregular if its PC matrix has varying column and/or varying

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1766

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

row weights [5], [7]. A QC-LDPC code is given by the null space of an array of sparse circulants [12], [13], [16].
The performance of an LDPC code with iterative decoding depends on a number of structural properties besides its minimum distance. One such structural property is the girth of the code, which is defined as the length of the shortest cycles in the code’s Tanner graph. For a code to perform well with iterative decoding in general, its Tanner graph must not contain too many short cycles. The shortest cycles that affect the code performance the most are cycles of length four. Therefore, cycles of length four must be prevented in code construction. This is the case in almost every method of constructing LDPC codes that has been proposed. The RC constraint on the PC matrix of an LDPC code (regular or irregular) automatically rules out cycles of length four in the code’s Tanner graph. Being free of cycles of length four ensures that the Tanner graph of an LDPC code has a girth of at least six. Experimental results show that for many classes of structured LDPC codes, a girth of length six is all that is needed to perform well or close to the Shannon limit [16], [23]–[25]. Experimental results also show that a code with girth larger than six does not necessarily perform well with iterative decoding if it has a relatively small minimum distance. In general, an LDPC code with small minimum distance has a high error floor.

The symbols in are unknown. For to be a codeword in ,

we must have

. This constraint can be put in the form

(1)

The right-hand side of (1) is known, and can be computed from

and . On the left-hand side of (1), is unknown. Then

decoding is to solve (1). Any method of solving this equation

gives a decoding algorithm. Decoding and design of efficient

LDPC codes for correcting random erasures were first investi-

gated in [29], and later in [8].

Let

be the rows of . For

, let

. Then a code-

word

must satisfy the condition

for

,

which is called a check-sum. The code symbol is said to

be checked by the sum (or by ) if

, i.e., is

contained in the sum . Then can be determined from other

code bits that are checked by as follows:

(2)

III. LDPC CODES FOR THE BEC

For transmission over the BEC [28], a transmitted symbol,

0 or 1, is either correctly received with probability

or erased with probability (called the erasure probability).

Hence, the output alphabet of the BEC consists of three sym-

bols, 0, 1, and ?, where the symbol “?” denotes a transmitted

symbol being erased, called an erasure. Suppose a codeword

from a binary code of length is

transmitted and

is the corresponding

received sequence. Let

be the set of

locations in with

, where the

transmitted symbols are erased, i.e.,

. Let

For each erased position in an erasure pattern

with

, if there exists a row

in that checks only the erased symbol and not any of

the other

erased symbols in , then it follows from (2)

that the value of each erased symbol can be determined from

the correctly received symbols in that are checked by row

(i.e.,

). Such an erasure pattern is said to

be resolvable in one step (or one iteration). However, there are

erasure patterns that are not resolvable in one step, but resolv-

able in multiple steps iteratively. Given an erasure pattern ,

we first determine the values of those erased symbols that can

be resolved in one step using (2). Then we remove the known

erased symbols from . This results in a new erasure pattern

. Define

. Then is the set of smaller size. Next we determine the values of erased sym-

of locations in where the transmitted symbols are correctly bols in that are resolvable using (2). Removing the known

received, i.e.,

for . The set actually displays the erased symbols from , we obtain an erasure pattern of size

pattern of erased symbols in . For this reason, we call an smaller than that of . We repeat the above process until either

erasure pattern. An erasure pattern is said to be correctable all the erased symbols in are resolved, or an erasure pattern

(or resolvable) if the value of each erasure in can be uniquely

is obtained such that no erasure in can be resolved using

determined.

(2). In the latter case, some erasures can not be recovered.

Consider an LDPC code of length given by the null The above decoding process is iterative in nature, and can be

space of a

sparse matrix . Then a binary -tuple formulated as an algorithm [8], [29]. To initialize the decoding

is a codeword in if and only process, we first set

and

. Then we execute the

if

. Suppose a codeword is transmitted and following steps iteratively.

is the corresponding received sequence. 1) Determine . If is empty, stop decoding, otherwise go

Let

be the erasure pattern contained in

to Step 2.

. Let be the submatrix that consists of the columns of

2) Form , , , and .

corresponding to the locations of the erased symbols given in 3) Compute

.

, and be the submatrix that consists of the columns of

4) Find the rows in such that each contains only a

corresponding to the locations of the correctly received code

single 1-component. Determine the erasures in that

symbols in . Let denote the subsequence that consists of

are checked by these rows. Determine the values of these

the erased symbols of , and denote the subsequence that

erasures by application of (2). If there is no row in that

consists of the known symbols of at the locations given in .

contains only a single 1-component, stop decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAI et al.: ALGEBRAIC CONSTRUCTION OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

1767

5) Remove the erasures resolved at Step 4 from . Set

and go to Step 1.

If decoding stops at Step 1, all the erasures in the erasure pattern

are resolved and the decoding is successful. If decoding stops

at Step 4, some erasures in can not be recovered.

Luby et al. [29] and Di et al. [8] have investigated the

threshold for regular LDPC codes with a given degree-dis-

tribution pair

(or column and row-weight pair of a

-regular PC matrix) using the above iterative decoding

algorithm. The threshold is a probability

associated

with an ensemble of regular LDPC codes whose Tanner graphs

have constant variable-node degree and constant check-node

degree . The implication of threshold

is as follows.

Over all BECs with erasure probability smaller than

,

information can be reliably transmitted by using a sufficiently

long LDPC code with degree-distribution pair . Reliable

transmission of information is not possible if the erasure prob-

ability is larger than the threshold

.

The performance of an LDPC code over the BEC is deter-

mined by the stopping sets of its Tanner graph [8]. Let be

a set of variable nodes in , and be a set of check nodes in

that are adjacent to the nodes in , i.e., each check node in

is connected to at least one variable node in . The nodes in

are called the neighbors of the nodes in . A set of variable

nodes is called a stopping set of if each check node in the

neighbor check set of is connected to at least two nodes in

. If an erasure pattern corresponds to a stopping set in the

Tanner graph of an LDPC code, then a check-sum that checks

an erasure in also checks at least one other erasure in . As a

result, no erasure in can be determined with (2) or (1).

A set of variable nodes in may contain many stopping

sets. It is clear that the union of two stopping sets in is also

a stopping set in , and the union of all the stopping sets in

gives the maximum stopping set of . A set of vari-

able nodes in is said to be stopping-set-free (SSF) if it does

not contain any stopping set. The following theorem [8] charac-

terizes the significance of stopping sets for correcting erasures.

Suppose an LDPC code is used for correcting erasures using

iterative decoding. Let be a received sequence that contains

an erasure pattern . Then, the erasures contained in the max-

imum stopping set of cannot be recovered. This theorem says

that any erasure pattern is recoverable if it is SSF.

Let be a stopping set of minimum size in the Tanner graph

of an LDPC code, called a minimum stopping set. If the code

symbols corresponding to the variable nodes in are erased, it

follows from the above theorem that forms an irrecoverable

erasure pattern of minimum size. Therefore, for random erasure

correction (EC) with iterative decoding, it is desired to construct

codes with the largest possible minimum stopping sets in their

Tanner graphs. A good LDPC code for EC must have no or

very few small stopping sets. For

-regular LDPC codes,

it has been proved in [30] that the sizes of minimum stopping

sets of their Tanner graphs with girths four, six, and eight are

, and , respectively. Hence, for iterative decoding of

an LDPC code over the BEC, the most critical cycles in the

code’s Tanner graph are cycles of length four. Therefore, in code

construction for the BEC, cycles of length four must be avoided

in the Tanner graph of a code. It is proved in [31] that for a

code with minimum distance , it must contain a stopping set of size . In fact, [31] proves that the support of any codeword forms a stopping set. Therefore, in the construction of a code for EC, we need to keep its minimum distance large. For a regular LDPC code whose PC matrix has column weight
and satisfies the RC constraint, the size of a minimal stopping set in the code’s Tanner graph is at least .

IV. FIELDS AND EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRIES

Consider the Galois field GF

that is an extension

of the ground field GF , where is a power of a prime.

Let be a primitive element of GF . Then

,

form all the elements of GF

and

. For each nonzero element with

, we form a

-tuple over GF(2),

, whose components correspond to

the

nonzero elements of GF , where the th compo-

nent

and all the other

components are equal to 0.

This

-tuple

is referred to as the location vector

of [15], [20]. The location vector of the zero element of

GF is defined as the all-zero

-tuple, (0, 0, , 0).

Let be a nonzero element in GF , then the location vector

of is the cyclic shift (one place to the right) of the

location vector of . Form a

matrix

over GF(2) with the location vectors of

as rows. Then is a circulant permutation matrix, i.e., is a

permutation matrix, but each row of is a cyclic shift of the

row above it, and the first row is the cyclic shift of the last row.

Consider the -dimensional Euclidean geometry, EG ,

over GF [23], [32]. This geometry consists of points and

lines. A point is simply an -tuple

over GF , and the all-zero -tuple is called the origin of the

geometry. A line in EG

is either a 1-D subspace of the

vector space of all the -tuples over GF or a coset of .

A line consists of points. Two points are connected by one

and only one line. If is a point on a line , we say that the

line passes through the point . Two lines either do not have

any point in common, or they have one and only one point in

common. If two lines have a common point , we say that they

intersect at . For any point in EG , there are exactly

lines passing through (or intersecting at) .

It is known that the field GF as an extension field of

GF is a realization of EG

[32]. Then the elements

of GF ,

,

, represent all

the points of EG . Let and be two linearly in-

dependent points in EG , represented by two powers of ,

respectively. Let be a primitive element of GF . Then, the

collection of points,

, constitutes a line in EG

passing through the

point . Let be a point in EG

that is linearly inde-

pendent of and . Then the line

and the line intersect at point . For

, let

. It can be proved that is also a

line in EG

[23], [32]. The following theorem is the basis

for the construction of QC-LDPC codes based on the lines of

EG , whose Tanner graphs are free of cycles of length four.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1768

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

Theorem 1: Let be a nonorigin point in EG

[or

is not the zero element in GF ]. For ,

with

, form the following two -tuples over GF with the

points on lines

and

as components, respectively

size

,

,

where consists of the location vectors of the entries of the

th column of ,

,

as rows. Next, we form the following

array

of

circulant permutation matrices:

...

...

... . . .

...

(3)
where connects and , connects and , and and are linearly independent. Then these two -tuples can not have more than one position with identical symbols in GF .
Proof: Suppose there are two positions, and with , where the two -tuples have identical symbols. Then,

(5)

is a

matrix over GF(2) with

column and row weights and , respectively. It follows from

the structural properties of matrices

that

sat-

isfies the RC constraint. Let be the transpose of , i.e.,

and

.

These equalities imply that and This is a contradiction of the fact that independent points.

are linearly dependent. and are two linearly

Then

is a

array of

permutation matrices and is a

(6)
circulant matrix over

V. A CLASS OF QC-LDPC CODES FOR THE AWGN AND BINARY ERASURE CHANNELS

Consider the

lines in EG

that in-

tersect at the point

. Among these lines, there

is a line passing through (or connecting) the point

and the origin

. Removing this line, we obtain

lines that intersect at point

and

do not pass through the origin of EG . Denote these lines

by

. For

, the line consists of

the points (represented by elements in GF )

, where is a point linearly

independent of

, and furthermore,

are

linearly independent points in EG . For

,

form the following

matrix over GF with the

points on

as the entries of the th row:

GF(2) with column and row weights and , respectively. For

,

. For

, is larger than . Clearly,

also satisfies the RC constraint.

For any pair of integers

with

and

, let

be any

subarray of .

Then

is a

matrix over GF(2)

with column and row weights and , respectively. Clearly,

satisfies the RC-constraint. The null space of

gives a regular QC-LDPC code , whose Tanner

graph has a girth of at least six. Since

satisfies the

RC constraint, the minimum distance of is at least

.

Since

consists of an array of permutation matrices,

only even number of columns of

can be added to

zero. This implies that the minimum distance of must be

even. As a result, the minimum distance of is at least

for even , and

for odd . The above construction gives

a class of QC-LDPC codes with various lengths, rates, and

minimum distances, whose Tanner graph have girth at least six.

...

Since the girth of the Tanner graph of a code in this class is at least six, the size of a minimal stopping set in the Tanner graph

is at least . For a given pair , it is unknown whether

different choices of subarrays of have the same rank

and give similar codes. However, for all the choices that we

...

...

...

...

have made, they all have the same rank and give similar codes. In the following, we use two examples to illustrate the error

performances of several QC-LDPC codes constructed based on (4) the method presented in this section for both the AWGN channel

We label the columns of with

that cor- and BEC, using iterative decoding with the maximum number

respond to the powers of . We readily see that has the fol- of iterations set to 100. We assume binary phase-shift keying

lowing structural properties: 1) any two rows differ in every po- (BPSK) signaling. For the AWGN channel, each code is de-

sition; 2) any two columns differ in every position; and 3) the coded with the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [3], [7], [12], and

entries in each column form the

nonzero elements the code performance is compared with the Shannon limit. For

of GF . It follows from Theorem 1 that two rows from two the BEC, each code is decoded with the iterative decoding al-

different matrices and can have at most one position with gorithm presented in Section III, and the code performance is

identical symbols (i.e., they differ in at least

positions). compared with the threshold

for a degree-distribution

For

, replacing each entry in by its location pair

of the Tanner graph of the code [8].

vector, we obtain a

matrix over GF(2) Example 1: Based on the 3-D Euclidean geometry EG

which consists of a row of circulant permutation matrices of over GF and using the method presented above, we can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAI et al.: ALGEBRAIC CONSTRUCTION OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

1769

Fig. 1. Performances of the codes on AWGN channel given in Example 1, Fig. 3. Performances of the codes on AWGN channel given in Example 2. where BER and BLER stand for bit-error and block-error rates, respectively.

Fig. 2. Performances of the codes on BEC given in Example 1.

Fig. 4. Performances of the codes on BEC given in Example 2.

construct an 8 72 array

of 511 511 circulant permuta-

tion matrices. For the pairs of integers (3,6), (4,16), (4,20), and we construct a 4 84 array

of 255 255 circulant per-

(4,32), we take the following subarrays from ,

, mutation matrices. For three pairs of positive integers (4,8),

,

, and

. These subarrays are (4,20), and (4,40), we take the first 8, 20, and 40 columns of

1533 3066, 2044 8176, 2044 10 220, and 2044 16 352 ma- circulant permutation matrices of

to form three subar-

trices with column and row weight pairs (3,6), (4,16), (4,20), rays

,

, and

, respectively.

and (4,32), respectively. The null spaces of these subarrays give They are 1020 2040, 1020 5100, and 1020 10 200 regular

(3066,1544), (8176,6162), (10 220,8206), and (16 352,14 338) matrices over GF(2) with column and row weight pairs (4,8),

QC-LDPC codes with rates 0.5036, 0.7537, 0.8029, and 0.8768, (4,20), and (4,40), respectively. The null spaces of these three

respectively. The performances of these codes over the AWGN matrices give three QC-LDPC codes. They are (2040,1051),

channel and BEC are shown in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. We (5100,4111), and (10 200,9211) codes with rates 0.5152, 0.806,

see that they perform very well for both the AWGN channel and 0.903, respectively. The performances of these codes over

and BEC. For example, consider the (16 352,14 338) code. At the AWGN and binary random erasure channels are shown in

a bit-error rate (BER) of , the code performs 0.8 dB from Figs. 3 and 4, respectively. We see that they perform well over

the Shannon limit over the AWGN channel and 0.01 from the both types of channels. For example, consider the (10 200,9211)

threshold 0.0966 over the BEC.

code. At a BER of , it performs 0.85 dB from the Shannon

Example 2: We use the 4-D Euclidean geometry EG

limit for the AWGN channel, and only 0.01 from the threshold

over GF for code construction. Based on this geometry,

for the BEC.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

VI. LDPC CODES FOR BURST-ERASURE CHANNELS

In Section III, we discussed the BEC, in which erasures

occur at random locations. However, there are channels in

which erasures cluster in bursts, such as recording and some

fading channels. Such channels are called burst-erasure chan-

nels. In this section, we consider designing LDPC codes that

are capable of correcting erasure bursts. Design and analysis of

LDPC codes for erasure-burst correction were earlier investi-

gated in [33]–[35].

Let

be a nonzero -tuple over

GF(2). The first (or the leftmost) 1-component of is called the

leading-1 of , and the last (or the rightmost) 1-component of

is called the trailing-1 of . If has only a single 1-component,

then the leading-1 and trailing-1 of are the same. A zero span

of is defined as a sequence of consecutive zeros between

two 1-components. The zeros to the right of the trailing-1 of

together with the zeros to the left of leading-1 of also form

a zero span, called the end-around zero span. The number of

zeros in a zero span is called the length of the zero span. Given

a nonzero binary -tuple , we can determine all its zero spans.

A zero span in with the longest length is called a maximum

zero span of (not unique). Consider the binary 16-tuple

. It has three zero spans with lengths

three, six, and four, respectively. The end-around zero span has

length four.

Consider a

-regular LDPC code given by the null

space of an RC constrained

PC matrix with constant

column weight . Label the columns of from 0 to . For

, there are rows of , each with a “1” in the th

column of . For each of these rows, we find its zero span

starting from the

th column to the next 1-component and

compute its length. If the 1-component of a row at the position

(or in the th column of ) is the trailing-1 of the row, we

determine its end-around zero span. Among the zero spans of

the rows with a “1” in the th column of , the longest one,

denoted , is called the zero-covering span of the column .

Define

. This parameter is called

the zero-covering span of the PC matrix . The next theorem

gives the erasure-burst-correction capability of an LDPC code

in terms of the zero-covering span of its PC matrix.

Theorem 2: An LDPC code given by the null space of a

PC matrix over GF(2) with zero-covering span is capable

of correcting any erasure burst of length at least up to .

Proof: Consider an erasure burst of length

or

shorter, whose first erasure occurs at position with

.

Since the zero-covering span of the PC matrix is , there ex-

ists a row in that checks the erasure at the position and no

other erasures in . From (2), the value of the erasure at position

can be uniquely determined. Once the value of the erasure at

the position is determined, the erasure burst is shortened.

Let be the new erasure burst. Determine the position, say ,

of the first erasure in . Since the length of is less than the

zero-covering span , there must exist a row in that checks

the erasure in at the position and no other erasures in .

Find this row and determine the value of the erasure in at the

position . This results in another shorter erasure . We repeat

the above correction process until the values of all the erasures

in are determined.

A direct consequence of Theorem 2 is Corollary 1.

Corollary 1: For an LDPC code whose PC matrix has a zero-

covering span , no

or fewer consecutive variable nodes

in its Tanner graph form a stopping set, and hence, every

consecutive variable nodes form an SSF zone.

The parameter

given in Theorem 2 is a lower bound

on the erasure-burst-correction capability of an LDPC code

whose PC matrix has a zero-covering span . It follows from

the proof of Theorem 2 that the iterative decoding algorithm

given in Section III can be used for decoding erasure bursts.

Actually, Theorem 2 is very general, and can be applied to any

linear block codes.

Theorem 2 can be either used to determine the erasure-burst-

correction capability of an existing LDPC code or to design new

LDPC codes for correcting erasure bursts. To evaluate the actual

erasure-burst-correction capability of a code of length , we first

determine the zero-covering span of the PC matrix of the code.

For

, we create a solid erasure burst of length

starting at position and apply the iterative decoding algorithm

given in Section III, called the EC algorithm. If all the erasures in

the solid erasure burst are recovered, we then extend the length

of the solid erasure burst starting at position to

. We

repeat the EC algorithm and check whether all the erasures in

the solid erasure burst of length

starting at the position

can be recovered. If decoding is successful, we continue to

increase the length of the solid erasure burst starting at position

and repeat the EC algorithm. Each time, the length of the solid

erasure burst starting at position is increased by one. The above

process continues until we obtain a solid erasure burst of length

for which not all the erasures can be recovered. Then

is the longest solid erasure burst starting at position that can

be corrected. Note that if a solid erasure burst of length or

shorter is correctable, any erasure burst of length or shorter

starting at position is correctable. Consequently, the actual

erasure-burst-correction capability of the code is

.

By computer search, we have found the zero-covering spans

of the PC matrices of the codes given in Examples 1 and 2 and

their actual erasure-burst-correction capabilities using the EC

algorithm of Section III as given in Table I. This table shows

that the codes given in Examples 1 and 2 not only perform well

over the AWGN and binary random erasure channels, but also

have large erasure-burst-correction capabilities.

In [12], two classes of cyclic finite-geometry LDPC codes

were presented. Even though these codes were constructed for

the AWGN channel, they do have erasure-burst-correction ca-

pabilities. For codes constructed based on 2-D Euclidean (or

projective) geometries, their burst-EC capabilities can be easily

determined. Consider a cyclic EG-LDPC code constructed from

the 2-D Euclidean geometry EG over GF . Take a line

in EG not passing through the origin, and form its inci-

dence vector (a

-tuple over GF(2) with components

corresponding to the

nonorigin points of EG ) [12],

[32]. Form a

matrix

over GF(2) with

and its

cyclic shifts as rows. Then, the null space of

gives a cyclic EG-LDPC code of length , with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAI et al.: ALGEBRAIC CONSTRUCTION OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES
TABLE I ERASURE-BURST-CORRECTION CAPABILITIES OF QC-LDPC CODES GIVEN IN EXAMPLES 1 AND 2

1771

TABLE II ERASURE-BURST-CORRECTION CAPABILITIES OF SOME FINITE-GEOMETRY CYCLIC LDPC CODES [12]

minimum distance at least

[12], [32]. Since the incidence as follows:

, where for

vector has 1-components, it has zero spans. Determine

the maximum zero span of . Then the zero-covering span

of

is equal to the maximum zero span of . Table II

gives the zero-covering spans and actual erasure-burst-correc-

(7)

tion capabilities of a list of cyclic EG-LDPC codes. Computing

the zero-covering span of the PC matrix of a cyclic PG-LDPC code constructed based on the 2-D projective geometry PG [12], [32], can be done in the same manner. The zero-covering spans of the PC matrices and the actual erasure-burst-correction capabilities of some cyclic PG-LDPC codes are also given in Table II.
LDPC codes of lengths between 4000–4550 bits for correcting erasure bursts were also given in [33]–[35]. Some of them are irregular codes designed based on density evolution, and the other are regular codes taken from known classes, such as MacKay [3], array [10], and finite-geometry codes [12]. Since these codes are different from the codes given in Tables I and II in lengths and rates (except one EG and one PG code), no fair comparison can be made. It must be pointed out that the codes given in Tables I and II are primarily designed for the AWGN and/or binary random erasure channels. Erasure-burst correction is just an additional noise (or interference)-combating capability of these codes.

Since

satisfies the RC constraint, each subarray

also satisfies the RC constraint.

From , we form an

array of circulant permutation

and zero matrices, as shown in (8) at the top of the next page.

is called a dispersion of , and we can readily see that

also satisfies the RC constraint. Each submatrix in is ei-

ther a

circulant permutation matrix or a

zero matrix. is an

matrix over GF(2) with both column and row weights four.

Since each circulant permutation matrix in is followed by

four

zero matrices (including the end-around

case), the zero span of is at least

. Replacing each

subarray in

by its dispersion , we obtain

an

array of

circulant permu-

tation and zero matrices,

.

is an

matrix over GF(2)

with column and row weights 4 and , respectively, that sat-

isfies the RC constraint and has a zero-covering span of length

VII. QC-LDPC CODES CONSTRUCTED BY DISPERSION

at least

bits. . The null space of

is called the dispersion of gives a QC-LDPC

In this section, we present a dispersion method for con- code whose Tanner graph has a girth of at least six. The

structing QC-LDPC codes for correcting erasure bursts. The code is capable of correcting any erasure burst of length at least

codes constructed by this method also perform well over up to

bits.

the AWGN and binary random erasure channels. Consider Example 3: Based on the 2-D Euclidean geometry EG

a

subarray of an array

of circu- over GF , we construct a 4 84 array of 255 255 cir-

lant permutation matrices given by (6), with

and culant permutation matrices. Choose

and

. Take

. Divide

into

subarrays a 4 20 subarray

of . Divide

into

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1772

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

(8)

Fig. 6. Performances of the codes on BEC given in Examples 3 and 4.

Fig. 5. Performances of the codes on AWGN channel given in Examples 3 and 4.

a row of five 4 4 subarrays,

. For

,

disperse each into an 8 8 array of circulant permu-

tation and zero matrices, as shown in (8). Replacing each

in

by its dispersion , we obtain an 8 40 array

of 255 255 circulant permutation and zero ma-

trices. The null space of

gives a (10 200,8191)

QC-LDPC code with rate 0.803. The lower bound on its era-

sure-burst-correction capability is 1021. However, by computer

search, we find that the code is capable of correcting any era-

sure burst of length 1366 or shorter. The performances of this

code over the AWGN and binary random erasure channels are

shown in Figs. 5 and 6, respectively. We see that the code also

performs well over the AWGN channel and BEC.

The above code construction by dispersion can be generalized

by dispersing any subarray

of the array given

by (6), with

and

. The dispersion

of

results in a

array

of

circulant permutation and zero matrices.

The zero span of

is at least

.

Example 4: Suppose we choose

and . Take a 3 6

subarray

from

constructed from EG

.

Disperse this subarray into a 6 12 array

of

255 255 circulant permutation and zero matrices. The null

space of this dispersed array gives a (3060,1540) QC-LDPC

code with rate 0.5033. The lower bound on its erasure-burst-correction capability is 766, but its actual erasure-burst-correction capability is 1155. The performances of this code over the AWGN channel and BEC are also shown in Figs. 5 and 6.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented two algebraic methods for constructing regular QC-LDPC codes for the AWGN, binary random erasure, and binary burst-erasure channels. The codes constructed by these methods perform well over these three types of channels with iterative decoding.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[4] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[5] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 6, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAI et al.: ALGEBRAIC CONSTRUCTION OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

1773

[8] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Teletar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[9] R. M. Tanner, “On quasi-cyclic repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 37th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 1999, pp. 249–259.
[10] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 545–546.
[11] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structure LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISCTA, Ambleside, U.K., 2001, pp. 365–370.
[12] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A discovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[13] R. M. Tanner, “Spectral graphs for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 226.
[14] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Codes for iterative decoding from partial geometries,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 236–247, Feb. 2003.
[15] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “Construction of low-density parity-check codes based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[16] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-limit quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[17] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial construction of low density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[18] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic construction of Gallager and circulant low density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1269–1279, Jun. 2004.
[19] B. Ammar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and S. Lin, “Construction of low density parity-check codes based on balanced incomplete block designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1257–1268, Jun. 2004.
[20] L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of QC-LDPC codes based on the minimum-weight codewords of RS codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun.–Jul. 2004, p. 239.
[21] M. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low density parity check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[22] L. Chen, L. Lan, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An algebraic method for constructing quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Parma, Italy, Oct. 2004, pp. 535–539.
[23] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.
[24] J. Xu, L. Chen, L.-Q. Zeng, L. Lan, and S. Lin, “Construction of lowdensity parity-check codes by superposition,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 243–251, Feb. 2005.
[25] Z.-W. Li, L. Chen, L.-Q. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[26] C. Jones, A. Matache, T. Tian, J. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “The universality of LDPC codes on wireless channels,” in Proc. MilCom, Boston, MA, Oct. 2003, pp. 440–445.
[27] F. Peng, W. E. Ryan, and R. D. Wesel, “Surrogate-channel design of universal LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., submitted for publication.
[28] P. Elias, “Coding for two noisy channels,” in Proc. Inf. Theory, 3rd London Symp., 1955, pp. 61–67.
[29] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[30] A. Orlitsky, R. L. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graph,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun.–Jul. 2002, p. 2.
[31] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2003, pp. 3125–3129.
[32] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[33] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Performance of efficiently encodable lowdensity parity-check codes in noise bursts on the EPR4 channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 2, pt. 1, pp. 507–512, Mar. 2004.

[34] F. Peng, M. Yang, and W. E. Ryan, “Design and analysis of eIRA codes on correlated fading channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Dallas, TX, Nov.–Dec. 2004, pp. 503–508.
[35] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Design of LDPC codes for two-state fading channel models,” in Proc. 5th Int. Symp. Wireless Pers. Multimedia Commun., Honolulu, HI, Oct. 2002, pp. 986–990.
Ying Yu Tai (S’05) received the B.S.M.E. degree from National Sun Yat-Sen University, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1995, and the M.S. degrees in mechanical engineering and statistics, both from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, in 2000 and 2002, respectively. In 2004, he also received the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from the University of California, Davis, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree.
His current research areas include low-density parity-check codes, coded modulation, and their applications to digital communications systems.
Lan Lan received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China, in 1998 and 2001, respectively. She is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering at the University of California, Davis.
Her research interests include error-control coding techniques and their application to digital communications and digital storage systems.
Lingqi Zeng was born in Shanghai, China, in 1979. He received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, China, in 2001, and the M.S. degree in 2004, in electrical engineering, from the University of California, Davis, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in coding theory.
Shu Lin (S’62–M’65–SM’78–F’80–LF’00) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1959, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Rice University, Houston, TX, in 1964 and 1965, respectively.
In 1965, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He became an Associate Professor in 1969 and a Professor in 1973. In 1986, he joined Texas A&M University, College Station, as the Irma Runyon Chair Professor of Electrical Engineering. In 1987, he returned to the University of Hawaii. From 1978 to 1979, he was a Visiting Scientist at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, where he worked on error-control protocols for data communication systems. He spent the academic year of 1996–1997 as a Visiting Professor at the Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. He retired from the University of Hawaii in 1999, and is currently a Visiting Professor at the University of California, Davis. He has published numerous technical papers in IEEE TRANSACTIONS and other refereed journals. He is the author of the book An Introduction to Error-Correcting Codes (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970). He also co-authored (with D. J. Costello) the book Error-Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Englewood Cliffs,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1774

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1st ed., 1982, 2nd ed., 2004), and (with T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier) the book Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms (Boston, MA: Kluwer, 1998). His current research areas include algebraic coding theory, coded modulation, error-control systems, and satellite communications. He has served as the Principal Investigator on 30 research grants.
Dr. Lin is a Member of the IEEE Information Theory Society and the Communication Society. He served as the Associate Editor for Algebraic Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 1976 to 1978, and as the Program Co-Chairman of the IEEE International Symposium of Information Theory held in Kobe, Japan, in June 1988. He was the President of the IEEE Information Theory Society in 1991. In 1996, he was a recipient of the Alexander von Humboldt Research Prize for U.S. Senior Scientists, and a recipient of the IEEE Third Millennium Medal in 2000.

Khaled A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar (M’94) received the B.Sc. degree from Alexandria University, Alexandria, Egypt, in 1980, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, in 1983 and 1986, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
In 1988, he joined the University of California, Davis, where he is now a Professor of Electrical and Computer Engineering. He performed research at the IBM Almaden Research Center, San Jose, CA; Delft University of Technology, The Netherlands; University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway; and Alexandria University, Egypt. His main interest is coding theory. From 2002 to 2005, Dr. Abdel-Ghaffar served as an Associate Editor for Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

