1054

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 53, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

Degree-Matched Check Node Decoding for Regular and Irregular LDPCs
Sheryl L. Howard, Student Member, IEEE, Christian Schlegel, Senior Member, IEEE, and Vincent C. Gaudet, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This brief examines different parity-check node decoding algorithms for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, seeking to recoup the performance loss incurred by the min-sum approximation compared to sum–product decoding. Two degree-matched check node decoding approximations that depend on the check node degree are presented. Both have low complexity and can be applied to any degree distribution. Simulation results show near sum–product decoding performance for both degree-matched check node approximations for regular and irregular LDPCs.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, LDPC codes, reduced-complexity decoding.

decoding and the min-sum approximation. A correction factor between sum–product decoding and min-sum decoding for degree-3 check nodes is examined along with existing approximations for that correction factor. In Section III, the maximal value for the general correction factor for any degree check node is presented and used as a basis for two new degree-matched check node approximations of low complexity. Simulations for both degree-matched check node approximations are presented in Section IV and compared with the performance of sum–product, min-sum, and other decoding algorithms for both regular and irregular LDPC codes. Section V concludes this brief.

I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check codes (LDPCs) [1] are a class of iteratively decoded error-control codes whose capacity-approaching performance and simple decoding algorithm have resulted in their inclusion in new communications standards such as DVB-S2, IEEE 802.11n, 802.3an, and 802.16. LDPCs are iteratively decoded by a message-passing algorithm operating between variable and check nodes of the LDPC; each node type performs its own decoding operation. Typically, LDPCs are decoded by belief propagation (BP) [2], also known as sum–product decoding, or by its suboptimal approximation the min-sum algorithm [3], which is easily implemented but results in performance loss.
Several approximations that aim to recover some of the performance loss incurred by the min-sum approximation exist. However, none offer a general expression matched to the degree
of the check node (the number of variable nodes connected to a check node). Irregular codes have check nodes of varying degrees; an approximation with a single value applied to all check nodes either will not be well matched to an irregular code, or if optimized for a specific degree distribution, is best suited to that distribution. Moreover, different rate codes have very different check node degrees.
We seek a general approximation matched to the check node degree and applicable to any regular or irregular LDPC without requiring optimization to a specific degree distribution.
This brief is organized as follows: Section II discusses several LDPC check node decoding algorithms, including sum–product
Manuscript received August 23, 2005; revised March 6, 2006. This work was supported by Alberta iCORE and NSERC. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor B. C. Levy.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4, Canada (e-mail: sheryl@ece. ualberta.ca; schlegel@ece.ualberta.ca; vgaudet@ece.ualberta.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2006.882204

II. LDPC CHECK NODE DECODING ALGORITHMS

Several algorithms exist for LDPC decoding at the check

nodes. Sum–product decoding exactly represents the extrinsic

output log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) based on the incoming

LLRs and the parity-check constraints of each check node.

For a cycle-free code, which is well approximated by LDPCs

with large girth or cycle length, sum–product decoding is

optimal, performing maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding.

Sum–product decoding at parity-check node of degree cal-

culates extrinsic output LLR messages

from check node

to variable node , given input LLR messages

from vari-

able node to check node , as

(1)

The extrinsic principle of excluding the self-message

is

used in all check node decoding algorithms described herein.

A simple approximation to the sum–product algorithm is the

min-sum algorithm [3], [4], which is calculated as

(2)

where

is the minimum magnitude extrinsic input LLR.

The min-sum approximation is simple to implement but costs

some tenths of a decibel over the sum–product decoding perfor-

mance. If all input LLR messages but one are large, the min-sum

output is quite accurate as the smallest LLR dominates the tanh

product. If not, the min-sum approximation overestimates the

output LLR compared to the sum–product decoding.

Some approximations address this performance versus com-

plexity tradeoff. Most start with the min-sum approximation re-

1057-7130/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:01:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOWARD et al.: DEGREE-MATCHED CHECK NODE DECODING FOR REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPCs

1055

ducing its output by subtraction of a correction factor or by di-

vision.

Another approach, taken in [5] and the -min algorithm [6],

uses only the smallest LLR magnitudes in (1), but still requires

sum–product calculations.

Normalized BP-based decoding [7] divides

by

,

reducing the overestimation of the min-sum approximation. The

optimal value depends on the degree

of the LDPC and

may be determined by density evolution or simulation. Results

of 0.1 dB from the sum–product decoding for a (3, 6) length

8000 LDPC were achieved with

. Dividing by

is equivalent to multiplying by 0.8; approximating with

, multiplication can be accomplished with

the addition of a 1-bit and a 2-bit left shift.

Since the original submission of this brief, an extension of

the normalized BP-based decoding termed 2-D normalization,

introducing multiplicative values for variable nodes as well as

check nodes, has been presented [8]. This method optimizes

multiplicative values for each degree of variable and check node

and is adapted to irregular codes in a manner similar to our de-

gree-matched approximation presented in Section III. However,

unlike our approximation, 2-D normalization requires optimiza-

tion over parameters, where is the total number of nonzero

variable and check node degrees. In [8], their normalization

vector has multiplicative values. Optimizing over so many

values is computationally intensive.

The 2-D normalization technique is not considered further in

this brief. Its very good performance is outweighed by the sig-

nificant computational cost of optimizing over many parameters

as well as the cost of extending the normalization to all variable

nodes.

Offset BP-based decoding [7] subtracts a value from the

minimum input LLR magnitude if

, otherwise, it

outputs a 0. The optimal value of also depends on the degree

distribution of the LDPC, as determined from density evolution

or simulations. Each check node of the LDPC uses the same

value . This approximation offers good performance, with re-

sults of 0.1 dB away from the sum–product decoding for op-

timal , with minimal additional complexity. However, as the

same value is used at each check node, an optimal value of

must be determined for each degree distribution.

Determining a correction factor that expresses the difference

between sum–product decoding and min-sum decoding would

allow subtraction of the exact amount from

to compen-

sate for the min-sum approximation overestimation. Such a cor-

rection factor has been determined for a degree-3 check node

[9]. For incoming LLRs and , the outgoing extrinsic LLR

may be expressed directly as the min-sum approximation

plus a correction factor as [10], [11]

recursive property

(4)

and similarly for higher degree nodes, as shown by induction.

The correction factor for any check node of degree

may

be calculated exactly with

degree-3 check nodes.

A simple approximation to the correction factor of (3) is given

as [10]

if

if

otherwise (5)

using the form in [11]. Good performance was obtained using

[10], implemented recently in [12].

This approximation may be applied once at each check node,

with and as the two smallest magnitude input LLRs.

For

, there is some performance loss compared to using

a subdivided check node of

degree-3 check nodes, but

subdivision is not practical due to increased complexity and area

from replication.

A very similar approximation, with smaller and easily imple-

mented constraint range, was examined in [11], i.e.,

if

if

(6)

otherwise.

Use of approximations (5) and (6) as a correction factor to the min-sum approximation is referred to as the modified min-sum algorithm. Both approximations require threshold decisions based on the difference between the two smallest magnitude input LLRs and suffer some performance loss when applied to larger degree check nodes.

III. DEGREE-MATCHED CHECK NODE APPROXIMATION

A general expression for check node decoding of arbitrary de-

gree check nodes, in the form of the minimum input LLR plus

a correction factor as in (3), may be derived. However, this cor-

rection factor is quite complex; as presented in [14], it is a com-

bined function of exponentials of all the input LLRs, requiring

look-up tables (LUTs) to compute both the exponentials and

the log of the final expression. In fact, there is negligible com-

plexity savings over sum–product decoding for a general cor-

rection factor. Therefore, we look at an approximation to this

general correction factor that depends only on the degree of the

individual check node and .

In [14], we showed that the maximum value of the general

correction factor is

for large and equal magnitude

input LLRs , i.e.,

(3)

(7)

This correction factor requires the computation of exponents of

the magnitudes of the sum and difference of the two input LLRs For a

check node and equal magnitude , the correction

and a final log computation.

factor converges to

for

.

Equation (3) may be applied exactly to a check node of degree If the input LLRs are close in magnitude, the correction factor

greater than 3 by subdividing it into multiple degree-3 check is well approximated by the maximum correction factor value

nodes. This is possible because the parity-check constraint en- of

. But if the input LLRs differ in magnitude, the

forcement is commutative and associative [9], [13] and obeys a correction factor decreases and approaches zero if

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:01:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1056

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 53, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

, the next smallest magnitude LLR. Thus, instead of the

maximum correction factor, we use a fraction of it to widen the

useful range of approximation. A convenient choice is

.

The degree-matched check node approximation subtracts a

positive correction factor CF from

with

,

thus avoiding any sign change.

Two-Step Degree-Matched Check Node Approximation:

TABLE I DENSITY EVOLUTION THRESHOLDS IN SNR

if

then

else if then

else (8)

The two-step degree-matched check node approximation has

two decision thresholds to extend the useful range of approx-

imation; both thresholds are based on

and its distance

from

.

To further simplify this approximation, we consider a one-

step degree-matched check node approximation with only one

decision threshold, dependent only on

.

One-Step Degree-Matched Check Node Approximation:

if

then

else

cycle-free LDPCs of infinite length by tracking the iterative

evolution of the error probabilities out of the node algorithms,

independent of specific code structure. The threshold of a de-

gree distribution is the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) marking the

boundary below which the error probability fails to converge to

zero with increasing iterations.

The threshold is an asymptotic value, approached by very

long codes. However, the threshold provides a good measure of

comparison between different degree distributions or different

decoding algorithms. In a manner similar to [7] for their density

evolution analysis of the offset BP-based algorithm, we exam-

ined different values of correction factor and decision threshold

for the one-step degree-matched approximation and determined

the values used to be near-optimal over a large range of in

terms of threshold. Table I shows the threshold results in terms

of SNR for three degree distributions: regular rate 1/2 (3, 6), rate

0.8125 (3, 16), and a rate 1/2 irregular distribution with variable

degree distribution

,

,

, and

check distribution

,

,

. The

results in Section IV use the same distributions.

Density evolution results show that, for regular codes, the de-

gree-matched approximations, normalized and offset BP-based

approximations all have thresholds near sum–product decoding.

For the irregular distribution, however, the degree-matched ap-

proximations show significantly better thresholds than the

normalized and offset approximations. This is expected, as the

degree-matched approximations modify the correction factor

based on each check node degree, rather than one global value

for all check nodes.

(9)

The one-step degree-matched check node approximation is

simpler than either the two-step degree-matched approxima-

tion or the modified min-sum approximations of Section III

as it eliminates the constraint on the distance between

and

. This constraint ensures that the approximation is

not applied when the actual correction factor is zero, which

occurs when

is significantly smaller than

, and

its elimination means the approximation may be applied when

it is not needed, decreasing the extrinsic output below that of

sum–product decoding. However, the reduced complexity of the

one-step approximation, with only a single threshold depen-

dent only on

, is significant, justifying its consideration.

Its complexity is equivalent to offset BP-based decoding; how-

ever, the one-step degree-matched approximation does not re-

quire parameter optimization based on degree distribution.

The optimal decision threshold is determined via density

evolution or simulations. Density evolution [15] calculates

the threshold for a degree distribution of regular or irregular

IV. SIMULATIONS

Simulation results are presented for the degree-matched

approximations and some of the other check node decoding

algorithms described in this brief. Results are shown for a rate

0.5 length 1024 regular (3, 6) LDPC, a rate 0.8125 length 2048

regular (3, 16) LDPC, and a rate 0.5 length 1000 irregular

LDPC. BPSK transmission of the all-zero codeword over an

additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with noise

variance

was used.

Bit error rate (BER) performance results are shown

versus SNR, with SNR (in decibel) defined as

, where

. Each simulation point

counts at least 50 frame errors. A maximum of 64 decoding

iterations was used.

The modified min-sum algorithm uses (6) with the constraint

that

for subtraction of the correction factor added

to prevent sign switching.

A. Floating Point Simulations
Fig. 1 compares the decoding performance of sum–product decoding, min-sum decoding, normalized BP-based decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:01:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOWARD et al.: DEGREE-MATCHED CHECK NODE DECODING FOR REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPCs

1057

N Fig. 1. Degree-matched check node approximation results. SNR versus BER
for rate 0.5 = 1024 regular (3, 6) LDPC compared to sum–product, minsum, normalized and offset BP-based, and modified min-sum decoding.

N Fig. 2. Degree-matched check node approximation results. SNR versus BER
for rate 0.5 = 1000 irregular LDPC compared to sum–product, offset, normalized, modified min-sum, and min-sum decoding.

with

and offset BP-based decoding with

( and found optimal for (3, 6) LDPCs in [7]), the modified

min-sum approximation of (6), the two-step degree-matched ap-

proximation of (8), and the one-step degree-matched approxi-

mation of (9) for a length 1024 regular (3, 6) LDPC.

The two-step degree-matched check node approximation

provides sum–product decoding results or better at higher SNR.

The one-step degree-matched approximation shows slight

performance loss compared to the two-step approximation but

still achieves near-optimal results with low complexity. Ap-

proximate decoding of short codes at high SNR can sometimes

provide better results than sum–product decoding, as seen also

in [8] and [16]. Normalized BP-based decoding also achieves

sum–product performance. The modified min-sum algorithm

loses 0.1 dB, the offset-based BP decoding loses 0.15 dB, and

the min-sum algorithm loses 0.4 dB.

Results for a rate 0.5 length 1000 irregular LDPC of

degree distribution C in Table I are shown in Fig. 2. The degree-matched approximations are compared with min-sum, normalized, offset, and sum–product algorithms.
Sum–product performance is achieved at a BER of

N Fig. 3. Degree-matched check node approximation results. SNR versus BER
for rate 0.8125 = 2048 regular (3, 16) LDPC compared to sum–product, modified min-sum, normalized, offset, and min-sum decoding.

for the two-step approximation and at a BER of

for the one-step degree-matched approximation, similar to the

regular LDPC. Normalized decoding sees a loss of 0.2 dB, while

offset and modified min-sum decoding show a loss of 0.05–0.1

dB for BER

.

Fig. 3 shows simulation results for a rate 0.8125 length 2048

regular (3, 16) LDPC. The degree-matched approximations

are compared with min-sum, modified min-sum, normalized,

offset, and sum–product algorithms. The sum–product de-

coding results are achieved by both two-step and one-step

degree-matched and the normalized BP-based approximations

at BER

but show 0.1-dB loss at higher BER. The

modified min-sum algorithm has 0.1-dB loss, and the offset

BP-based approximation loses 0.05 dB for BER

.

used, resulting in quantization bins. A maximum bin value

of 8 was chosen, where all channel LLRs

are quan-

tized to magnitude 8. The quantization bins are evenly spaced

over the range

with bin edges at

. The center value of each bin is used for quan-

tizing LLRs within the bin.

The channel LLRs are quantized, as are all extrinsic LLRs

into and out of the variable and check nodes, with the same pre-

cision and quantization bins. The decoding algorithms at each

node are performed using floating point operations.

Both the rate 0.5 (3, 6) and the irregular LDPCs were ex-

amined. Sum–product decoding, two-step and one-step degree-

matched, normalized and offset BP-based, and min-sum approx-

B. Finite Precision Simulations

imations were used. Finite precision simulations showed that all algorithms required 6 bits of precision (one sign, five magnitude

Finite-precision simulations were also examined. Quantiza- bits) to achieve near-floating point results for both codes. At 5

tion to bits, with one sign bit and

magnitude bits, was bits, all algorithms saw about 0.1-dB loss compared to floating

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:01:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1058

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 53, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

TABLE II CORE AREA OF CHECK NODE ALGORITHMS IN 90-nm CMOS PROCESS
point. With 4 bits, sum–product decoding and the two-step degree-matched approximation show 0.4-dB loss in performance for the irregular code and 0.15-dB loss for the regular code, but the one-step degree-matched approximation loses 0.65 dB compared to floating point. This increased loss is due to larger bin sizes with lower bit precision; the amount subtracted off
is too small to move the quantized value to the next lowest bin. The one-step degree-matched approximation converges to min-sum performance at this point. Subtracting off the bin size instead counteracts this if but only improves performance by 0.1 dB.
C. Check Node ASIC Design Area
Four VHDL check node algorithms were synthesized for a 90-nm CMOS process using the STMicroelectronics design kit and Synopsys’ Design Compiler version 2004.12-SP4. Sum–product decoding, min-sum, one-step degree-matched, and normalized approximations were synthesized for a single degree-6 check node with 4-bit sign-magnitude parallel input messages. The normalized approximation uses two different approximation factors: one closer to the optimal value, and one that is easily implemented. Table II shows our area estimates for the different check node decoding algorithms.
The min-sum check node requires the least area, i.e., at 29% of the sum–product node area. The one-step degree-matched check node has 41% the area of a sum–product node and provides near-optimal performance. For a near-optimal value of , the normalized node takes 48% of the sum–product area, but using an easily implemented less-optimal value reduces the normalized node to 39% of the sum–product node area with minimal loss. However, for irregular codes such as distribution C, there is significant performance loss for the normalized approximation. For a slight increase in area over a min-sum node, the one-step degree-matched check node offers performance near sum–product decoding for both regular and irregular LDPCs.
V. CONCLUSION
This brief examines several LDPC check node decoding approximations that recoup much of the min-sum approximation’s loss and yet keep its simplicity. The degree-matched check node approximations developed here are matched to individual check node degrees. These approximations can thus be applied to any regular or irregular LDPC without optimization of parameters to a specific degree distribution. They are particularly well suited to multirate applications.

Two versions of this approximation were presented, namely 1) a two-step degree-matched approximation and 2) a simpler one-step approximation. Both provide near sum–product decoding results, with slight improvement for the two-step approximation. The one-step approximation, however, is much simpler and recoups nearly all the loss of the min-sum algorithm, in 41% of the area required by the sum–product algorithm. Similar area and performance can be obtained by the offset and normalized approximations for regular LDPCs, but these approximations show performance degradation for some irregular distributions. Additionally, optimization of the offset and normalization parameters must be determined by either density evolution or simulation for every new degree distribution, which is a time-consuming process, especially for multirate systems. The one-step degree-matched approximation shows good performance for both regular and irregular distributions.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank T. B. Lee, R. Swamy, and R. Hang for Synopsys estimates and VHDL, S. Zeinoddin for density evolution, Dr. S. Bates for his steady interest in this project, and the reviewers and editors for their helpful suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufman, 1988.
[3] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[4] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic´, and I. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity-check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[5] X.-Y. Hu and T. Mittelholzer, “An ordered-statistics-based approximation of the sum–product algorithm,” in Proc. ITS, Natal, Brazil, 2002.
[6] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, and J.-L. Danger, “ -min decoding algo-
rithm of regular and irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. 3rd ISTC, Brest, France, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 451–454. [7] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002. [8] J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, D. Gu, and J. Zhang, “Two-dimensional correction for min-sum decoding of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 180–182, Mar. 2006. [9] G. Battail and H. M. S. El-Sherbini, “Coding for radio channels,” Ann. Télécommun., vol. 37, pp. 75–96, Jan./Feb. 1982. [10] E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, and A. Dholakia, “Reduced-complexity decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 102–104, Jan. 2001. [11] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum–product and the min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 25–29, 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1021–1025. [12] L. Yang, H. Liu, and C.-J. R. Shi, “Code construction and FPGA implementation of a low-error-floor multi-rate low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 892–904, Apr. 2006. [13] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996. [14] S. Howard, C. Schlegel, and V. Gaudet, “A degree-matched check node approximation for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Adelaide, S. Aust., Australia, Sep. 4–9, 2005, pp. 1131–1135. [15] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density Parity-Check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001. [16] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:01:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

