Partly Parallel Overlapped Sum-Product Decoder
Architectures for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes
Ning Chen, Yongmei Dai, and Zhiyuan Yan
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Lehigh University, PA 18015, USA E-mail: {nic6, yod3O4, yan}@lehigh.edu

Abstract- In this paper, we propose partly parallel architectures based on optimal overlapped sum-product (OSP) decoding. To ensure high throughput and hardware utilization efficiency, partly parallel parity check and pipelined access to memory are utilized. Impacts of different node update algorithms and quantization schemes are studied. FPGA implementation of our proposed architectures for a (1536, 768) (3, 6)-regular QC LDPC code can achieve an estimated 61 Mbps decoding throughput at SNR= 4.5 dB. Finally, noncoherent OSP decoder, which does not always satisfy the data dependency constraints, is proposed to ensure that the maximum throughput gain 2 of the OSP decoding is achieved for all QC LDPC codes.
Index Terms- low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, quasicyclic (QC) codes, turbo decoding, sum-product decoding, FPGA.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have attracted much attention due to their spectacular error performance and inherent parallelism in their decoding algorithms. The latter is significant since it is conducive to high throughput implementations. Quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes [1], [2] not only have relatively good error performance [1] but also are suitable for hardware implementation due to their regular structure: they can be encoded efficiently with shift registers [2] and can be decoded with partly parallel decoder architectures that require simpler address generation, less memory, and localized memory access [3], [4]. Thus, QC LDPC codes are of great interest and we focus on the decoding of QC LDPC codes in this paper.
An LDPC code can be represented by its Tanner graph, wherein the codeword bits and the parity check equations are represented as variable and check nodes respectively. The sum-product (SP) algorithm [5], sometimes referred to as the message passing algorithm, is an efficient iterative decoding algorithm for LDPC codes based on belief propagation. Each iteration of the SP algorithm has two sequential updates: check node updates (CNUs) and variable node updates (VNUs). Due to the data dependency between the VNUs and CNUs, partly parallel decoder architectures based on direct implementation of the SP algorithm either require twice as much memory or lead to low throughput and hardware utilization efficiency (HUE). Overlapped sum-product (OSP) decoder has been proposed for QC LDPC codes [4] to improve throughput and HUE. Optimal OSP decoder is proposed in [6] for regular QC LDPC codes, which can improve throughput and HUE by up
to 100%. In this paper, we further study the OSP decoding of
QC LDPC codes. The main contributions of this paper are:

* We utilize partly parallel parity checks (PPPCs) and pipelined memory access to ensure high throughput and HUE for our OSP decoder architectures;
* We evaluate the performances of the SP and the min-sum algorithms as well as different quantization schemes for our OSP decoder architectures;
* We implement our decoder architectures in FPGA and compare the implementation results with those of previously proposed decoder architectures;
* Noncoherent OSP decoder of QC LDPC codes is proposed, where data dependency is not always satisfied, so as to improve throughput and HUE.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we briefly review QC LDPC codes and the SP algorithm and its variants. Section III presents our partly parallel OSP decoder architectures and evaluates the impacts of different design choices. In Section IV, we compare the FPGA implementation results of our decoder architectures with those of previously proposed decoder architectures. We also propose noncoherent OSP decoding of QC LDPC codes in Section V.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes
A subclass of (j, k)-regular QC LDPC codes can be represented by a parity check matrix of the form
Ido,o Ido, I -... Ido,k 1
H Idi,ok Id, I - *... Idi,k

Idj[' ,o Idj_.1)1K . Idjl,k- 1
where Ids denotes an m x m identity matrix with all the rows
cyclically shifted to the right by d,,t positions (0 < s < 1,
0 < t < k -1). The (j, k)-regular QC LDPC code defined by H has block length k m and rate > 1 -j/k. Various ways
to define the values of d,,t have been proposed [1], [3].

B. Sum-Product Decoding
Given the Tanner graph of an LDPC code, let N(c) and M(v) denote the sets of the variable and check nodes that are adjacent to the check node c and variable node v respectively. In CNUs of the i-th iteration, the check-to-variable message R$i) from each check node c to any variable node v C N(c) is updated as follows

nzhv

nz/ v

-Isign(L'- l) )O E: o (Lc(' ) ) (1)

nGN(c)

nGN(c)

©2006 1-4244-0383-9/06A/u$t2h0o.r0iz0ed licensedIEuEsEe limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

220

2

where L4') denotes the variable-to-check message from the
variable node v to the check node c, and is updated in VNUs of
the i-th iteration by L$i) 2r2 + Zm7&M(v) R(2v. Note that
b(x) =In et , or stands for the estimated standard deviation of the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, and
2rv/(2 is the intrinsic information.
A well-known variant of the SP algorithm is the min-sum (MS) algorithm, where VNUs remain the same and the CNU in (1) is approximated as

R(J§ cv

17 sign(L( -1)) min L 1)

(2)

nrN(c)

Obviously, the update in (2) involves less computation. It is also shown that the MS algorithm can outperform the SP algorithm when there are many short cycles [7].
Since b(x) function is typically implemented using lookup tables, CNUs involve two look-up operations and are more complex than VNUs, often leading to low throughput in hardware implementation due to the unbalanced computation. A variant of the SP algorithm (see, for example, [8]), referred to as the balanced SP algorithm henceforth, redistributes the computation between CNUs and VNUs. CNUs and VNUs of the balanced SP algorithm are respectively given by

n:,?tv

n:,?tv

R(civ) IIsign(Lc(n-')) E:0((tCi-1)) (3)

nGN(c)

nGN(c)

and 4(v) _2r2+ ZrncMzv [- sign(R( )) (R()R)]-

C. Overlapped Sum-Product
Overlapped sum-product (OSP) algorithm [4], where CNUs and VNUs are partially overlapped, improves both throughput and HUE while introducing no error performance loss. If dualport memory is used, CNUs and VNUs can work on the same memory blocks so as to reduce the memory requirement. By choosing the addressing schemes of CNUs and VNUs properly, throughput of OSP decoder can be optimized [6]. For partly parallel decoder architectures, the optimal throughput gain of overlapping is bounded by 2, and whether the maximum throughput gain of 2 can be achieved depends on the given code itself [6].

III. PARTLY PARALLEL OSP DECODER ARCHITECTURES
In this section, we propose partly parallel OSP decoder architectures based on the optimal OSP decoding scheme [6], and discuss various implementation issues.

A. Partly Parallel Architectures
Similar to the partly parallel architecture in [4], our partly parallel OSP architectures include j check node function units (CNFUs), k variable node function units (VNFUs), j x k message memory banks, k intrinsic information memory banks, parity check function units (PCFUs), and memory banks for hard decisions. CNFUs, VNFUs, and PCFUs are the hardware units that implement CNUs, VNUs, and parity

checks, respectively. The numbers of PCFUs and hard decision memory banks depend on implementation, and are discussed below. Fig. 1 illustrates our OSP architectures for (2, 3) QC LDPC codes. Each message memory bank consists of m units, indexed by row and column addresses [6]. The j CNFUs update the j block rows simultaneously, while the k VNFUs update the k block columns simultaneously. CNFU-s updates the m rows in the s-th block row of H sequentially, one row each step. VNFU-t updates the m columns of the t-th block column of H sequentially, one column each step.

Fig. 1. OSP decoder architecture with PPPCs for (2,3) QC LDPC codes

B. PCFUs and Hard Decision Memory

The iterative decoding stops when either all parity checks

are satisfied or the maximum iteration number is reached. Dur-

ing VNUs of the i-th iteration in the SP and MS algorithms,

hard decision on the bit corresponding to the variable node v is

made based on the soft output' L

2r2 +Z:mcM(v) R(').

Fully parallel implementation of the jm parity checks achieves

high throughput and small latency, but it leads to very high

hardware cost (km bit registers to store the hard decisions and

jm PCFUs) and routing congestion due to the typically large

size of H. This is also unnecessary due to limited throughput

achieved by partly parallel decoders. It is natural to utilize

partly parallel parity checks with j PCFUs so as to match

throughput of CNFUs and VNFUs. This enables us not only

to reduce the number of PCFUs, but also to use memory

to store the hard decisions. Similar to the CNFUs, the j

PCFUs check the parity of the j block rows simultaneously

and PCFU-s check the parity check equations in the s-th block

row sequentially. Clearly, parity checks run concurrently2 with

CNUs because when VNUs generate the messages (LC )s) for

(L(')s) CNUs, they also generate soft outputs

and the hard

decisions needed by parity checks.

The amount of hard decision memory depends on imple-

mentation. A straightforward implementation needs k memory

banks, each of m bits, to store the hard decisions. Each

memory bank corresponds to one block column and the hard

decisions come from the VNFU for this block column. If each

parity check takes one clock cycle, since each memory bank

is accessed by all j PCFUs and this VNFU simultaneously, it

'A minor modification is necessary for the balanced SP algorithm. 2This possibility of concurrency was mentioned in [4].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

221

3

is necessary to use (j + 1)-port memory, which is generally unavailable in RAM compilers supplied by standard cell library vendors. An alternative solution is to use j dual-port memory banks, one for each PCFU, instead of one (j + 1)port memory bank. The VNFU writes the decisions into all j banks, and each bank is accessed by only one PCFU.
In fact, CNUs and parity checks may be combined by merging the PCFU and CNFU as well as the k dual-port memory banks for messages and k dual-port memory banks for hard decisions corresponding to the same block row. The advantage of this approach is that only one set of addressing mechanisms is shared for both CNUs and parity checks. However, this approach is not adopted in our decoder architectures since it does not allow the improvements described in Section III-D. Since PPPCs perform parity check concurrently with CNUs, it is checking the decisions from VNUs of the previous iteration.
Thus the latency introduced by PPPCs is m - w, where w,
is the intra-iteration waiting time in the optimal OSP [6].
C. Pipelined Access to Message Memory
In FPGA and RAM compilers for ASIC with deep submicron technology, only synchronous static memory is available [9]. A drawback of typical synchronous memory is that one or two waiting clock cycles are needed in every read operation. We assume exactly one waiting clock cycle is added for each read operation, but our approach can be easily extended to synchronous memory that requires two clock cycles. To fully exploit the bus of message memory and achieve high throughput, we consider two different pipelined access schemes: one is to let the functional units read message for the next step during the waiting clock cycle, while the other is to let VNFUs read during the waiting clock cycle of CNFUs. They will be referred to as intra-unit and inter-unit pipelined memory access schemes respectively. Intra-Unit Pipelined Access: For both CNFUs and VNFUs, two adjacent update steps can be pipelined as in Fig. 2. In comparison to non-pipelined access, the throughput gain of the
intra-unit pipelined access is 6/4 = 1.5. Dual-port memory is still needed in this case. However, to facilitate this pipelined access, slightly more complicated addressing mechanisms than those in [6] are needed for CNFUs and VNFUs. Inter-Unit Pipelined Access: The scheduling for inter-unit pipelined message access is depicted in Fig. 3. In the OSP architecture proposed in [4], dual-port memory is required. With inter-unit pipelined message access, they can be replaced by single-port memory to reduce area and routing congestion at the expense of throughput. However, CNFUs and VNFUs need to share the read/write and address ports by simply adding some multiplexers. The scheduling scheme for interunit pipelined message access remains the same as in [6]. Throughput of the inter-unit pipelined access is one half of that of the intra-unit pipelined access due to idle clock cycles.
D. Folded Operations
As in the pipelined memory access schemes, each step of VNFUs and CNFUs may need multiple clock cycles. This enables us to fold operations, leading to hardware savings. If

CNFU

READ 2n-l'

VNFU

READ) 2p-1'

REAC 2n" READ) 2p"h

WRITE 2n-p" WRITE 2p-1'>

WRITE 2n"
WRITE 2p"h

Fig. 2. Intra-unit pipelined message access scheme

CNFU VNFU

READ IDLE

WAIT READ

WRITE WAIT

Fig. 3. Inter-unit pipelined message access scheme

READ nit

CNFU

LOOK-UP and ADD n-1l'

READ mn'

VNFU

LOOK-UP and ADD mn-l'1

WRITE n-l" WRITE M-1'"

READ n+l'h
LOOK-UP and ADD n"
READ m01lD
LOOK-UP and ADD m'"

Fig. 4. The combined access with p = 2

IDLE WRITE
WRlTE n"h WRITE M'

each step of CNFUs and VNFUs takes p clock cycles, the LUTs for b(x) function and q-bit adders (q is the wordlength of messages) in CNFUs and VNFUs can be folded by a factor
of p. Each VNFU requires only Fi/pl LUTs and [J/p] q-bit adders while each CNFU requires Fklp1 LUTs and Fklp1 q-bit
adders. For both LUTs and adders, the total number required
is reduced from k x j + j x k to [k/p] x j + FJ/p] x k by
folding. But at the same time, the folded operations require more registers to store the intermediate results (one extra qbit register is needed to save one LUT) and involve more complicated control. Folding also reduces the critical path. Folding can be combined with the intra-unit pipelined access as depicted in Fig. 4. This combined approach, referred to as the combined access henceforth, not only keeps the high throughput and memory access efficiency from the intra-unit pipelined access, but also reduces hardware by folding.
PPPCs can also take advantage to share hard decisions and PCFUs to save area. By accessing different addresses of hard decision memory, one PCFU can perform p different parity checks in parallel with each step of CNFUs(VNFUs). It reduces the numbers of required PCFUs and dual-port memory
banks from j and jk to [J/p] and [jk/p] respectively.
E. Message Quantization
The quantization scheme affects not only area and power consumption of decoder architectures but also error performance due to the finite precision effect. We assume the messages and intrinsic information have the same wordlength, and consider two types uniform and nonuniform of quantization schemes.
For uniform quantization schemes, there is a tradeoff between dynamic range and quantization step. In [10], the 8-bit uniform quantization scheme uses a quantization step 0.125 so as to obtain a large dynamic range up to 16. This is achieved by dividing eight quantization bits into one sign bit, four integer bits, and three fraction bits. We can also divide them into one sign bit, three integer bits, and four fraction bits. We refer to these quantization schemes as 843bu and 834bu schemes respectively henceforth.
Nonuniform quantization method [11] can provide a different tradeoff between dynamic range and quantization step.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

222

4

In q-bit quantization, a message is denoted as vqvq-1 ... Vl, where vq is the sign and Vq 1 is used as a flag. If the magnitude of the message value is less than 1, then vq-1 is set to 0 and the decimal point lies between vq-1 and Vq-2. When q = 8, in the fraction range the quantization step is 1/64 = 0.0156, smaller than those of the two uniform quantization schemes. If the magnitude of the message is at least 1, vq-1 is set to 1 and the decimal point moves to a proper position for desired dynamic range. In our implementation, the decimal point lies between Vq_4 and Vq-5, and the message value of integer part
is interpreted as
Vq-1 * Vq-2 * Vq_33 Vq_44 2 + Vq2 V 2 +2Vq 2+Vq-4:
where vi represents the bitwise complement of vi. When q = 8, the dynamic range is roughly the same as that of the uniform scheme with 3 integer bits and 4 fraction bits. Though the quantization step is bigger when the message value is greater than 1, it does not matter because b(x) function will be less sensitive to the quantization step when the message value is greater. We also experimented with an nonuniform quantization scheme where the decimal point is between Vq_5 and Vq-6 when the message value is greater than 1. For q = 8, we refer to these two schemes as 833bnu and 842bnu schemes respectively below. The main disadvantage of nonuniform quantization scheme is that it requires more complicated adders than the uniform scheme, leading to bigger area and larger critical path delay as seen below in Section IV.
The BER performance and average iteration numbers of the SP and MS algorithms using different 8-bit uniform and nonuniform quantization schemes are compared with simulation results of full floating point precision in Figs. 5 and 6 respectively. In our simulations, and the maximum iteration number is set to 20. From Figs. 5 and 6, we observe that between the two uniform quantization schemes, 834bu scheme for the SP algorithm and 843bu scheme for the MS algorithm have slightly better error performance in high SNR range and hence they are adopted in our implementations in Section IV. For nonuniform schemes, 833bnu has slightly better performance than 842bnu, and hence is adopted in our implementations in Section IV. In the simulation of the SP algorithm, 834bu scheme has slightly better BER performance than 833bnu and 842bnu schemes. The MS algorithm using uniform quantization has better BER performance than the others in high SNR range, including those with full floating point precision (This was also observed in [12]). On the convergence rate, all simulations are fairly close when SNR is high. We remark that for four curves in Fig. 5, we do not give bit error rates at 4.5dB. Although we are certain bit error rates for these points are all below 10-7, not enough frames are simulated to report reliable bit error rates.
IV. FPGA IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
We implement five different partly parallel OSP decoder architectures proposed above one based on the MS algorithm
and four based on the balanced SP algorithm (using b(x))
using a Xilinx Vertex II xc2v6000-5ff 1152 FPGA, which has 33792 slices and 144 block RAMs (each block RAM is

10o1

wU10

Ms~f~p~~fp s 843bu

'' s'm -834bu ::::::::

.0_5

Sp-fp

sp-843bu

sp

6 10

sp -842bnu

...........

10-7

..+

15

2

25

3

35

SNR

.........

..

4

4.5

Fig. 5. BER performance of a (1536, 768) (3, 6)-regular code

SNR
Fig. 6. Average iteration number of a (1536, 768) (3, 6)-regular code
18 Kbits). The synthesis and implementation are carried out using Xilinx ISE Version 8.1. Our decoder architecture based on the MS algorithm uses the intra-unit pipelined message access, whereas our four decoder architectures based on the balanced SP algorithm use the intra-unit pipelined access and the combined access respectively. Among the four architectures implementing b(x) function, two are using uniform quantization scheme and the other two are using nonuniform quantization scheme. Note that PPPCs are used in all five of our decoder architectures. In Table I, we specify the numbers of occupied slices, flip flops, 4-input LUTs, and block RAMs as well as critical path delays, average iteration numbers, and estimated decoding throughput of our decoder architectures. The first two rows of Table I, reproduced from [10, Table I], itemize implementation details of the two decoder architectures in [10] using the same FPGA. These two architectures, referred to as the MS and HEMS architectures respectively henceforth, are based on the MS algorithm and the highefficiency min-sum algorithm proposed in [10] respectively. The HEMS algorithm in [10], a variant of the MS algorithm, uses extra VNUs so as to achieve better message passing, leading to faster convergence rate. The estimated decoding throughputs for all five decoder architectures are computed based on the same assumptions made in [10]: The input

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

223

5
TABLE I FPGA IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS OF A (1536, 768) (3, 6) -REGULAR CODE (THE FIRST TWO ROWS ARE REPRODUCED FROM [10, TABLE I])

Architecture

Quantization Slice F/F 4-input LUT Block Critical Path Average Iteration

Throughput

logic ROM RAM Delay (ns) Number at 4.5 dB at 4.5 dB (Mbps)

MS [10]

843bu

1144 1089 1705 0

102

9.894

3.4

23

HEMS [10]

843bu 1296 1358 1785 0 102

9.900

2.0

38

intra-unit OSP MS

843bu 1167 664 2066 0

36

10.893

3.0

61.20

intra-unit 4,(x)

834bu 2166 778 1885 2016 36

11.898

3.2

53.65

combinational /(x) 834bu 1919 1141 2227 1176 36

12.645

3.2

50.48

intra-unit /(x)

833bnu 2808 1240 2892 2016 36

12.426

3.3

51.04

combinational b (x) 833bnu 2914 1793 3379 1176 36

15.885

3.3

39.35

interface can get intrinsic information by groups of k nodes from different block columns, and the clock frequency is the inverse of the critical path delay. The decoding throughput of our five decoder architectures is given by

Throughput

kxmx f m + 2 x m x (I + 1)'

(4)

where f is the clock frequency and I is the average number of iterations. The difference between Eq. (4) and [10, (8)] is due to the different scheduling schemes.
Comparing all three MS-based decoder architectures itemized in the first three rows of Table I, it is clear that our OSP decoder architecture requires less hardware and achieves a higher throughput. Although our OSP decoder architecture based on the MS algorithm requires slightly more combinational logic than the two architectures in [10], the number of flip-flops is reduced to 61% of the MS architecture and 49% of the HEMS architecture, and the overall number of slices is less than the HEMS architecture and roughly the same as the MS architecture. Furthermore, our decoder architecture requires 65% fewer block RAMs than those in [10]. Memory efficiency of our decoder architecture will enable implementation on small FPGAs and simplify the placement and routing in ASIC implementation. As shown in Table I, the critical path delay of our decoder architecture based on the MS algorithm is close to those of the MS and HEMS architectures. More than double the throughput of the MS architecture, the throughput of our OSP decoder architecture based on the MS algorithm is
61% higher than that of the HEMS architecture despite fewer
iterations required by the latter. Comparisons among our five decoder architectures illustrate
the advantage of the MS algorithm over the SP algorithm
involving b(x). We note that the extra combinational logic and ROMs required by our decoder architectures using b(x)
are for the implementation of LUTs and adders, which are not needed by our decoder architecture based on the MS algorithm. That is also why our decoder architecture based on the MS algorithm has a shorter critical path delay. We note that the significant difference in the number of flip-flops is mostly due to duplicate registers to reduce fan-out and routing congestion for shorter critical path delay. As shown in Figure 5, the MS algorithm is also less vulnerable to the effects of finite precision implementation, and has better BER performance in high SNR range than the SP algorithm. Our decoder architectures using the combined access require about half as much ROM as their counterparts using the intra-unit

scheme, but they have longer critical path delays and use more combinatorial logic and flip-flops. Also, our decoder architectures with nonuniform quantization scheme are more complex, require more area, and have longer critical path delays than their counterparts with uniform schemes.

*

*

.

.

CNFUs VW^0
VNFUs n iteration

(a)
e I It iteration

CNFUS TCI CNFUS

*

*.

CNFUS W6 4

VNFUS S VNFUl Z

* ..

VNFUS

2nd iteration -
(b)

4 nth iteration -

Fig. 7. Scheduling scheme of optimal OSP decoder

V. NONCOHERENT OSP DECODER
Depending on a quantity w, which is determined by the parity check matrix of a QC LDPC code, the scheduling scheme for the optimal OSP decoder falls into two scenarios [6] shown in Figs. 7(a) and 7(b) respectively. Under the first
scenario where w, > 'i], after finishing CNUs (VNUs) of any iteration, CNFUs (VNFUs) have to wait w, = Wvv= 2w, - m cycles before they can start CNUs (VNUs) of the
next iteration. In this case, the HUE m is clearly smaller
than 1 and the throughput gain of the OSP decoder [6] is less than 2. Under the second scenario that corresponds to
WCV < [,a], Wcc = Wvv = 0, after finishing CNUs (VNUs)
of any iteration CNFUs (VNFUs) can start CNUs (VNUs) of
the next iteration right away. Thus, the HUE is 100%, and the
maximum throughput gain of G - 2 is indeed achieved. Note that wcv and hence the throughput gain as well as
HUE of the optimal OSP decoder in [6] is determined by the given QC LDPC code itself. For LDPC codes with wcv >
we propose noncoherent OSP (NOSP) decoder so as
to achieve high throughput and HUE. The basic idea is to utilize a scheduling scheme as in Fig. 7(a) with wcv = 1 for these codes. Since the starting addresses for CNFUs and VNFUs need to be increased by wcv -1 for each iteration [6], setting the wcv to 1 implies that the starting addresses for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

224

6

CNFUs and VNFUs are the same for each iteration, thereby simplifying control mechanisms. This scheduling scheme is called noncoherent OSP decoding since data dependencies of node updates are no longer guaranteed. That is, some of the variable-to-check messages used in (1) (or (2)) are from the (i -)-th iteration and the rest are from the (i -2)-th iteration. Similarly, some of the check-to-variable messages
used to compute L(i) are from the i-th iteration and the rest
are from the (i -)-th iteration.
SNR [dB]

to converge, then the effective iteration number i' is defined to be
i'=i(lm+-) +m
For a (5,13)-regular QC LDPC code [1, Table I] with wcv
72, we compare the average of both iteration numbers and effective iteration numbers by coherent and noncoherent OSP
decoders (wcv = 1) in Fig. 8. For this code, NOSP decod-
ing improves decoding throughput under any SNR by about 10% (see, or example, isp 6.32 and iosp = 5.76 at SNR= 3.1 dB). Also, the BER performances of coherent and noncoherent OSP decoders for this code, shown in Fig. 9, are very close. Our simulation results with other codes suggest that NOSP decoder improves throughput for all the codes with wcv > m/2 with negligible difference in error performance.
The architectural difference between coherent and noncoherent OSP decoders is their scheduling schemes, including starting addresses and address generation, which are easily configurable in our architectures. Hence, our decoder architectures described above for coherent OSP decoder can be readily adapted to noncoherent OSP decoder. In fact, since the starting addresses of noncoherent OSP decoder are the same for each iteration, noncoherent OSP decoder has simpler control than coherent OSP decoder, leading to reduced hardware cost.

Fig. 8. Average iteration number of a (5,13)-regular QC LDPC code

VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENT

(maximum iteration number is 50)

We thank the authors of [10] for providing details of the

(3, 6)-regular QC LDPC code used in [10].

1 0-1@-

........:

............I.__..

' : : : : : : : :: ' : : :: 1::... ...r.... ... ....
. .. ....

10 ... .... ........ .. ~.... .... ... ... .... ...... Lu10
1025

1.5 1.7 1.9 2.1 2.3 2.5 2.7 2.9 3.1 SNP [dB]
Fig. 9. BER performance of a (5, 13) regular QC LDPC code (maximum iteration number is 50)
NOSP decoder eliminates the idle clock cycles of CNFUs and VNFUs in the OSP decoder of these codes, which obviously improves HUE to 100%. Byw setti. ng to 1, NOSP decoder also reduces the number of clock cycles used to decode a block slightly. These two factors, however, do not necessarily improve throughput gain since NOSP decoding
may need more iterations. To account for all the factors, we define an identity called effective iteration number that is
inversely proportional to the decoding throughput3. Suppose it takes the (coherent or noncoherent) OSP decoder i iterations
3The latency associated with parity checks as described in Section III-B is
not considered for simplicity.

REFERENCES
[1] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja and D. J. Costello, "LDPC Block and Convolutional Codes Based on Circulant Matrices," IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 2966-2984, Dec. 2004.
[2] M. P. C. Fossorier, "Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes From Circulant Permutation Matrices," IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 1788-1793, Aug. 2004.
[3] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, "Low Power VLSI Decoder Architecture for LDPC Codes," in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Low Power Electronics and Design (ISLPED), pp. 284-289, Aug. 2002.
[4] Y Chen and K. K. Parhi, "Overlapped Message Passing for Quasi-Cyclic Low Density Parity Check Codes," IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems, vol. 51, pp. 1106-1113, June 2004.
[5] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey and H. A. Loeliger, "Factor Graphs and the Sum-Product Algorithm," IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498519, Feb. 2001.
[6] Y. Dai and Z. Yan, "Coset-Based Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes for Optimal Overlapped Message Passing Decoding," in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS), Nov. 2005.
[7] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier and X. Hu, "Reduced-Compelxity Decoding of LDPC Codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 1288-1299, Aug. 2005.
[8] Z. Wang, Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, "Area Efficient Decoding of QausiCyclic Low Density Parity Check Codes," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), pp. V49-V52, May 2004.
[9] Xilinx, "Xilinx libraries guide," 2005. [10] K. Shimizu, T. Ishikawa, N. Togawa, T. Ikenaga and S. Goto, "Partially-
Parallel LDPC Decoder Based on High-Efficiency Message-Passing Algorithm," in Proc. Int. Conference on Computer Design (ICCD), pp. 503-510, Oct. 2005. [11] T. Zhang, Z. Wang and K. K. Parhi, "On Finite Precision Implementation of Low Density Parity Check Codes," in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), vol. 4, pp. 202-205, 2001. [12] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari and A. H. Banihashemi, "On Implementation of Min-Sum Algorithm and Its Modifications for Decoding Low-Density
Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, pp. 549554, April 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:54:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

225

