Proceedings of 2006 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW’06)

Adaptive Incremental Redundancy Coding and Decoding Schemes using Feedback Information
Toshiyasu Matsushima School of Science & Engineering
Waseda University Tokyo, Japan
Email: toshimat@waseda.jp

Abstract — If we can use a high capacity feedback channel, the receiver may transmit the indices of unreliable bits in a received sequence instead of ACK/NAK signals. We consider the error correction schemes using the indices of unreliable bits. The suitable parity symbols are incrementally transmitted using the feedback information. The bitwise reliability can be calculated by message passing algorithms on the variable graph constructed by adding the new nodes and arcs corresponding to the received parity bits to a former graph at each stage.
I. Introduction
The discovery of Turbo codes and the rediscovery of LDPC codes have impacted on coding and decoding schemes. In this paper, we concentrated on the following two features of these codes.
The first one is that the codes are constructed by combining simple subcodes, i.e., simple restrictions among symbols. The excellent performance of Turbo codes and LDPC codes can be explained in term of the distance spectrum of the codes. The good distance spectrum is created by suitable combination of subcodes which may not have good distance spectrum.
The second one is that the good approximation of Maximum Posterior Marginal (MPM) decoding of the codes is effectively done by message passing algorithms. The two features relate to each other. Although a total code is represented by a graph with loops, the subcodes are represented by trees. The good approximation of the marginal posterior probabilities can be calculated by the iteration of message passing algorithm, which guarantees the exact marginal posterior probabilities on trees.
In this paper, the two features are applied to the error correction schemes with a feedback channel. Assuming a high capacity feedback channel that can transmit more precise information than ACK/NAK signals of an ordinary automatic repeat request (ARQ ) scheme, we investigate adaptive error correction schemes in which codes are constructed adaptively using the feedback information and the received sequences are decoded by using variable graphs corresponding to the codes.
In the Type-2 hybrid ARQ (HARQ) scheme, parity symbols are incrementally transmitted in compliance with NAK signals. In the reliability-based hybrid ARQ (HB-HARQ) scheme[11], by using the feedback informa-

tion of unreliable bit indices based on the outputs of a soft-output decoder, the transmitter selects information bits to be retransmitted.
In an ordinary hybrid ARQ scheme, the additional parity bits, which are calculated by the transmitter for a NAKed sequence, do not depend on the reliability of the received sequence at the receiver. The transmitter in our scheme, however, can adaptively select the parity bits to be transmitted according to the feedback information of the unreliable bits in the received sequence. The bitwise reliability of a total received sequence can be calculated by suitable message passing algorithms on the variable graph constructed by adding the new nodes and arcs corresponding to the received parity bits to a former graph at each stage.
We propose several procedures for the adaptive error correction scheme. As an example, an adaptive incremental redundancy coding procedure is constructed on punctured Turbo codes and the decoding is done by an iterative procedure based on the BCJR algorithm on the variable graph corresponding to the adaptive code. We show the characteristic of the schemes and the performance of the procedures by comparing them with conventional hybrid ARQ procedures and Turbo codes.
II. The error correction schemes using a
feedback channel
Let U = u1u2...uK (ui ∈ {0, 1}) be an information sequence. We consider sending U by a two-way system, that is, information can be sent in both directions and the transmitter also acts as a receiver, and vice versa. Assuming that the feedback channel has no noise and a high capacity, and that the data channel is a noisy memoryless channel, which is the channel from the transmitter to the receiver.
Let t be the number of transmissions of data packets from the transmitter to the receiver. t also implies a time point of a system. Let X(t) = x(1t)x(2t)...x(Nt)t be a codeword sequence transmitted at time point t, where Nt denotes the length of X(t). X(t) is transmitted over the data channel. Let Y (t) = y1(t)y2(t)...yN(tt) be a received sequence at time point t, which is a noisy version of X(t).
The error correction systems are characterized by feedback information, encoding, decoding and stopping rule. We explain each of them at the following subsection.

1-4244-0067-8/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE.

189

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A Feedback information

D Stopping rules and coding rate

A receiver transmits feedback information Z(t) = µt(Y (1), ..., Y (t)) over a feedback channel. In an ordinary ARQ scheme, the feedback information is ACK/NAK signals, i.e., Z(t) ∈ {ACK, N AK}. If we can use a high capacity feedback channel, the receiver may transmit more precise information than ACK/NAK signals.
Shea [11] proposed the reliability-based hybrid ARQ (RB-HARQ) scheme with a high capacity feedback channel, which one can transmit information other than ACK/NAK signals. Several systems based on the RBHARQ scheme were proposed in [4] [?] and [8]. In RBHARQ systems, the receiver provides a list of positions of unreliable information bits based on the log a-posteriori probabilities (APPs) ratios by outputs of a soft-output decoder.
At each time point t, the receiver calculates the precise/approximate log-APP ratios:

λ(it)

=

log

p(ui p(ui

= =

0|Y 1|Y

(1), (1),

..., Y ..., Y

(t)) (t)) ,

(1)

with a soft-output decoder for all i (1 ≤ i ≤ K). The feedback information Z(t) is a list of positions of the unreliable information bits based on log-APP ratios λ(t). Hence, Z(t) is a subset of the indices for all information bits; that is, Z(t) ⊂ {1, 2, ..., K} . The unreliable in-
formation bits imply that with small absolute values of
log-APP ratios.

B Encoding
The encoder in an error correction system with feedback channel calculates the codeword X(t) = φt(U, X(1), ..., X(t−1), Z(1), ..., Z(t−1)) at stage t. The transmitter in a simple AQR system retransmits the NAKed codeword in compliance with NAK signals. In the Type-2 Hybrid ARQ (HARQ) scheme, check symbols are incrementally transmitted in compliance with NAK signals. Rowitch et al. [9] proposed a HARQ system with rate compatible punctured turbo (RCPT) codes, which fall into the class of incremental redundancy codes.
If the encoder can use rich feedback information such as unreliable bits information, it can add more suitable restriction, i.e., redundancy to the codewords X(1), ..., X(t−1) than the encoder using only ACK/NAK information does.

In ordinary ARQ systems, the retransmission continues until the transmitter receives an ACK signal. So, the coding rate is variable in the ARQ systems using ACK/NAK feedback information. However, we can consider invariable rate error correction schemes using unreliable symbol indices feedback information. In the case that the total code length of the transmitted code is fixed, the transmitter can choose a suitable subcode according to the received unreliable symbol indices feedback information at each stage.
On the other hand, invariant rate ARQ systems are nonsense, because the transmitter only transmits a total code at a time without receiving any ACK/NAK signals. After all, invariant rate ARQ systems are identical with forward error correction (FEC) systems.

III. Error correction schemes using unreliable symbol indices feedback information

First we sum up the basic procedure of error correc-

tion schemes using unreliable symbol indices feedback

information. At the first stage, the transmitter encodes X(1) by φ1(U ) and sends it. The receiver calculates λ(1) and constructs Z(1), which is the set of in-

dices of unreliable bits, and returns it to the transmit-

ter. At stage t ∈ {2, 3, ...}, the transmitter encodes X(t) = φt(U, X(1), ..., X(t−1), Z(1), ..., Z(t−1)) and sends it. The receiver calculates λ(t) and constructs Z(t) and re-

turns it to the transmitter. If predetermined termination

conditions are satisfied, the receiver decode the information bits Uˆ and terminates the exchange of information.

Both variant and invariant rate schemes are available in

this procedure.

A main problem of the schemes is the

design of the coding function X(t)

=

φt(U, X (1), ..., X(t−1), Z(1), ..., Z(t−1)).

Using a set

of indices of unreliable bits Z(t−1), how can we adap-

tively design a subcode or parity bits X(t) for improving

the decoding error probability?

In the following section, we consider recursive system-

atic convolutional (RSC) codes as the base codes, and

BCJR algorithm as a basic element of the decoders in

the schemes. Log-APP ratios λ for a RSC code are easily

calculated by the BCJR algorithm.

C Decoding
The receiver decodes Uˆ = ψt(Y (1), ..., Y (t)). It is regarded as decoding the received sequence of the total code constructed by gathering subcodes X(1), ..., X(t). The bitwise posterior probability of the total code can be calculated by suitable message passing algorithms on the variable graph constructed by adding the new nodes and arcs corresponding to the received parity bits to a former graph at each stage.

A Reputation
A primitive method of encoding φt is that the transmitter retransmits only the information bits in Z(t) with no coding1. The RB-HARQ system proposed in [4] uses this simple encoder. However the decoder of the RB-HARQ system is not optimum, because the log-APP ratios of the systematic bits for the total code are calculated by adding the log-APP ratios of Y (t) to the log-APP ratios λ(t−1).
1No coding is regarded as repetition codes.

1-4244-0067-8/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE.

190

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The optimal decoding for this scheme is given by a suitable message passing algorithm, which is an extension of BCJR algorithm, in our study[6].

B The parity sequence for unreliable bits

We can transmit the parity bits for unreliable bits instead of no coding unreliable bits. Sending the parity bits of an RSC code inputted an interleaving sequence of the unreliable bits as an information sequence is proposed in the study[6]. In this scheme, the total code is regarded as an asymmetric Turbo code. So, the decoding can be done by Turbo decoding algorithm.

Figure 1: Trellis diagram of an RSC encoder with b = 4.
A The interleaving function with feedback information

C The parity sequence for unreliable and reliable bits
We can transmit the parity bits for not only unreliable bits but also reliable bits. Sending the punctured parity bits of an RSC code inputted an interleaving sequence of the information sequence U is proposed in the paper[5]. The interleaving function and the puncturing function are adaptively designed by using unreliable bits indices. In this scheme, the total code is identical with a punctured Turbo code. We precisely explain this error correction scheme at the next section.
Although Rowitch et al. [9] proposed a HARQ system with rate compatible punctured turbo (RCPT) codes, their interleaving function and puncturing function are fixed. The reason is that the transmitter only receives ACK/NAK signals through the feedback channel in their scheme.
IV. Fixed rate error correcting scheme using
unreliable bit indices based on Turbo codes[5]
In this selection, the receiver always sends feedback information to the transmitter only one time, and N1 and N2 are fixed. Thus, the code rate of the system is invariable. We consider that the system rather resembles a FEC system than an ARQ system; that is, implementation and analysis of our system are rather easy than that of systems based on the hybrid ARQ scheme, although our system is not adaptable in terms of the throughput. For that matter, our system is treated as a turbo code system whose encoder can utilize feedback information.
Let φ1(U ) be the RSC encoder?1. λ(1) is calculated by BCJR decoder?1. Let φ2(U, X(1)Z(1)) be the RSC encoder–2 and ψ2(Y (1)Y (2)) the turbo decoder. We regard the interleaving function π(i) and the puncturing rule for the RSC encoder–2 as the key for designing φ2. We need to select the most appropriate interleaving function and the most suitable puncturing rule of parity bits for a given Z(1). Since it is very complex problem, we consider the design of interleaving function and puncturing rule on the basis of a simple criterion as following subsections.

The selection of the interleaving function π(i) in our system is in accordance with a weight-2 input pattern [3] of the RSC encoder–2. Let b denote the minimum distance between the two “1”s for such a weight-2 input pattern of an RSC encoder. For illustrative purposes, we consider that the RSC encoder–2 has b = 4. A part of the trellis diagram of the RSC code is illustrated in Fig. 1. The numbers on branches in Fig. 1 denote input bits corresponding to state transitions. For an RSC encoder with b = 4, the weight-2 input sequence
...001000100...
generates the lowest weight of the parity check sequence. That is, there are two length-5 paths from the all-zero state back to the all-zero state, as in Fig. 1. We denote the positions of two “1”s in the input sequence as j and k, respectively. For a turbo decoder with such a trellis diagram, if both of the absolute values of their extrinsic values of uj and uk by the BCJR decoder–1 are low, it is possible that the post-decoding error rate of the BCJR decoder–2 becomes worse. Because the BCJR decoder–2 uses the values as its prior values, the decoder may cannot grasp which state transitions on the part of the trellis diagram are valid. In our system, the interleaving function can be designed to avoid this problem, because the transmitter knows which extrinsic values of the BCJR decoder–1 are low by Z(1). Accordingly, we define the interleaving function i = π (i, Z(1), b), where i and i are input/output index, respectively. This is a pseudo-random permutation function that satisfies that the distances between all pair of indices in the Z(1) are not b. We can say that π (i, Z(1), b) is one good interleaving function for utilization of feedback information.
B The puncturing rule with feedback information
We consider that the selection of the puncturing rule for the RSC encoder–2 is in accordance with that of the RBHARQ system in [8]. This means that we expect an improvement of the turbo decoder’s capability to add new information in codeword symbols corresponding to unreliable information bits.

1-4244-0067-8/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE.

191

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A The conditions of the experiments

We investigate the performance of our proposed system by simulations, assuming that the data channel is the AWGN channel. The following codes are used:

• (Code A) The turbo code including the two RSC codes with the generator matrix [1, (1 + D3)/(1 + D + D2 + D3)], the interleaver length of 300, and
the inverse of puncturing rate K/P = 3. These
RSC codes have b = 4.

Figure 2: Fixed-rate error correction system using unreliable bits information based on the turbo code.
C The communication procedure
The communication procedure of our system is summarized as follows and is illustrated in Fig. 2.
• The punctured turbo code that includes the same two RSC encoders with C shift registers is used in the system. The interleaver length is K. Only P parity bits are transmitted per one RSC encoder following puncturing rules.
• The transmitter first encodes U by the RSC encoder–1 with trellis termination. With any puncturing rule, the systematic bits and the punctured parity bits are sent as X(1); thus N1 = K + P + 2C.
• The receiver calculates λ(1) with the BCJR decoder–1 and constructs Z(1) and send it.
• At the second stage, U is permutated with the interleaving function π (i, Z(1), B), where the RSC encoder–2 has b = B2. The permutated information sequence is encoded by the RSC encoder–2 without trellis termination. Then the transmitter sends only the parity bits corresponding to the input of i-th information bits for i ∈ Z(1) as X(2); thus N2 = P .
• The receiver calculates λ(2) with the turbo decoder using both Y (1) and Y (2), and decodes the information bits.
In our system, the decoder picking up unreliable information bits is the BCJR decoder. It can calculate precise log-APP ratios for convolutional codes. It is suitable for evaluating “reliability” by log-APP ratios. Additionally, the turbo decoder at the second stage can use λ(1) as the first calculation result of the BCJR decoder–1.
V. Numerical Experiments
2The transmitter and the receiver need to be able to generate the identical permutation function.

• (Code B) The turbo code including the two RSC codes with the generator matrix [1, (1 + D4)/(1 + D + D2 + D3 + D4)] , the interleaver length of 400, and the inverse of puncturing rate K/P = 4. These RSC codes have b = 5.
The puncturing rule for the RSC encoder–1 is to delete all the parity bits that have an index number i, where i mod (K/P ) = 0. We compare the two procedures on our system. One uses a random interleaver for the RSC encoder–2 (denoted by “Procedure 1”); the other uses the π (i, Z(1), b) (denoted by “Procedure 2”). We restrict the range of interleaving function for simplicity, that is, all indices are set out at random satisfying that all distances between adjacent indices in the Z(1) are K/P . The function fulfills the condition as π (i, Z(1), b) because the code A and code B satisfy b = K/P . The number of iterations of the turbo decoder is 10. For each system and Eb/N0, 4 × 105 codewords are transmitted. We also evaluate the performance of the turbo codes including the identical RSC codes for reference. The puncturing rule for the RSC encoder–2 in the turbo codes is to delete all the parity bits that have an index number i, where i mod (K/P ) = (K/P )/2 .
B Simulation results and discussions
Figures 3 and 4 show the bit error rates (BER) for Code A and Code B, respectively. For these results, the BERs of Procedure 1 and Procedure 2 are better than that of the turbo code with the identical RSC codes. If we look on our system as a class of turbo codes with a feedback channel, the results show that the turbo code performance can be improved by using feedback information. The result shows that the interleaving function π (i, Z(1), b) is effective at a moderate noise.
The systems with a puncturing rule as a dynamic encoding parameter were already proposed in [9], [4], and [8]. On the other hand, our system can deal with not only a puncturing rule but also an interleaving function as the parameter. Additionally, pseudo-random permutation functions are generally used as the interleaver in turbo codes, considering the randomness of data channels. However, if the transmitter can use feedback information from the receiver, an interleaver can be designed to improve the performance, considering the characteristic of RSC codes, as in our system. The difference of per-

1-4244-0067-8/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE.

192

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with feedback information. We showed that it is effective for improving the performance. It is interesting that the system is treated as a turbo code whose encoder can utilize the feedback information. We can also construct the similar error correction scheme based on incremental LDPC codes.

Acknowledgments
This research is partially supported by Category No.15560338 of Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research, Japan Society for the Promotion of Science.

Figure 3: Simulation resuls for Code A.
Figure 4: Simulation resuls for Code B. formance between Procedure 1 and Procedure 2 showed that the performance improved by dynamically selecting an appropriate interleaving function.
Although our system is a dynamic system which changes an encoding/decoding method depending on feedback information, a main routine of each method, that is an RSC encoder and a BCJR decoder, is not modified. We consider that this fact makes implementation of our system easily.

References
[1] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.20, pp.284-287, March 1974.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., vol.2, pp.1064-1070, May 1993.
[3] W. Feng, J. Yuan, and B. S. Vucetic, “A code-matched interleaver design for turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol.50, pp.926-937, June 2002.
[4] Hanjo Kim, and John M. Shea, “New turbo-ARQ techniques based on estimated reliabilities,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conf., pp.843-848, vol.4, March 2003.
[5] N. Kobayashi, D. Koizumi, T. Matsushima, and S. Hirasawa, “A Note on Error Correction Schemes with FeedbackChannel,” IEICE Trans. Fundamentals (to be appeared).
[6] D.Koizumi, N.Kobayashi, T.Matsushima, and S.Hirasawa, “The Reliability Based Hybrid ARQ Scheme with both the Encoding Parity Bits Retransmissions and Message Passing Decoding,” In Proc. of 2006 Hawaii, IEICE and SITA Joint Conf. on Inf. Theory, May. 2006.
[7] S. Lin and D. Costello, Jr., Error control coding: fundamentals and applications, Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.
[8] A. Roongta and J. M. Shea, “Reliability-based hybrid ARQ using convolutional codes” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Communications, vol.4, pp.2889-2893, May 2003.
[9] D. N. Rowitch, and L. B. Milstein, “On the performance of hybrid FEC/ARQ systems using rate compatible punctured turbo (RCPT) codes,” IEEE Trans. on Commun., vol.48, pp.948-959, June 2000.
[10] J. M. Shea, “Concatenated parity and turbo codes,” IEE Electronics Letters, vol.37, pp.1029-1030, Aug. 2001.
[11] J. M. Shea, “Reliability-based hybrid ARQ,” IEE Electronics Letter, vol.38, pp.644-645, June 2002.
[12] K. Tsukamoto, T. Matsushima, and S. Hirasawa, “A Study of the Decision of Control Parameters for Adaptive AutomaticRepeat Request Strategy,” Electronics and Communications in Japan, Part 1, vol.84, No.11, pp.61-70, 2001.

VI. Conclusion
We considered the error correcting schemes using feedback information from view points of the codes constructed by combining simple subcodes and message passsing algorithm. We proposed several new error correction systems with a feedback channel. In one of our system, the transmitter dynamically selects an appropriate interleaving function and a suitable puncturing rule

1-4244-0067-8/06/$20.00 ©2006 IEEE.

193

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:03:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

