IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

2561

Structured LDPC Codes With Reversed MTR/ECC for Magnetic Recording Channels
Toshikazu Kanaoka and Toshihiko Morita
Fujitsu Laboratories, Ltd., Storage and Intelligent Systems Laboratories, Atsugi 243-0197, Japan
We propose a system for magnetic recording channels where we use a novel structured low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, called a random interleaved array (RIA) code, combined with a reversed maximum-transition run code/error-correction code. Simulation results show that the RIA code provides a significantly better error-rate floor performance than the conventionally structured LDPC code when applied to perpendicular magnetic recording channels. They also show that the system can achieve a 1.2-dB gain at a sector error rate of 10 5 compared with a PRML system combined with a high-rate run-length-limited code.
Index Terms—Error-correction codes, inter-symbol-interference, low-density parity-check codes (LDPCs), magnetic recording channels, maximum-transition run (MTR) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION
S TRUCTURED low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been studied as practical LDPC codes for magnetic recording channels. These codes, such as array codes [1] and eIRA codes [2], enable matrices to be constructed logically. Their performance, however, is not sufficient for inter-symbol-interference (ISI) channels, especially when the block length is short and the code rate is high. This is due to the structure of the array codes: these codes are constructed using single cyclic shift matrices. When multiple bit errors occur in the channel, they are easily connected through the parity check matrix having many single cyclic shifts, and degrade performance as if the matrix had four-cycles.
In this paper, we explain this special problem in ISI channels which we call a pseudo-cycle, and propose a system using a random interleaved array (RIA) code combined with a reversed maximum-transition run (MTR) code/error-correction code (ECC). The system significantly improves the error-rate floor and waterfall performance in perpendicular magnetic recording channels.
II. PSEUDO-CYCLE IN ITERATIVE DECODING
In magnetic recording channels, an iterative decoder generally consists of a channel posteriori probability (APP) decoder and an LDPC decoder. The equalized signal with the partial response (PR) characteristics is decoded by the channel APP decoder and soft extrinsic information is generated. This information is iteratively updated between the channel APP decoder and the LDPC decoder. When the parity check matrix is constructed of single cyclic shift matrices, such as array codes, the relationship between the channel APP decoder and the LDPC decoder is as shown in Fig. 1, where is a bit space defined by the submatrix size. Some adjacent bits are connected to other adjacent bits by passing through each check. In ISI channels, adjacent

Fig. 1. Relationship between channel APP decoder and LDPC decoder.

bits are strongly correlated and frequently cause multiple bit errors. When such errors occur, they are easily connected through the parity check matrix. These appear as a four-cycle in a bipartite graph, and we call these pseudo-cycles. A pseudo-cycle caused by iterative decoding does not accurately update the extrinsic information and degrades performance.

III. STRUCTURED LDPC CODES WITH REVERSED MTR/ECC

A. Random Interleaved Array (RIA) Code

The proposed parity check matrix has the form

, where submatrix is

with parity

length and information block length and submatrix is

. For this parity check matrix, the generator matrix

is related by

and has the form

,

where is a

identity matrix.

The matrix

which is a source of submatrix is de-

fined by

...

...

...

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2006.878619

where and are two integers such that denotes a prime number and is such that

where . is the

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:56:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2562

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

Fig. 2. Blockdiagram of an LDPC system for a magnetic recording channel.

identity matrix. The

submatrices and have, for

example, the following form:

diagram of the proposed system is shown in Fig. 2. In the encoding process, the user data is sent to the QMTR encoder and the output sequence is encoded by Reed–Solomon (RS) ECC. One sector ( 4 K bits) is divided into four blocks and each is encoded by the LDPC encoder [5]. In the decoding process, the reproduced signal is equalized with the PR characteristics and decoded by an iterative decoder consisting of a noise predictive soft-output Viterbi algorithm (NPSOVA) and an LDPC decoder. The decoded results are corrected by the RS-ECC and then decoded by QMTR. Note that it is important for the NPSOVA to perform the path elimination associated with a ( 3) constraint of the QMTR code to suppress all long error events. Also note that the code rate of the MTR code is almost optimal at 16/17, and so is not necessarily very high.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

A. Perpendicular Magnetic Recording Channel

where is a permutation matrix representing a single cyclic

shift and is a quasi-cyclic matrix defined by the amount of

shift , which is greater than one. The matrix almost randomly

interleaves every column of

and provides better perfor-

mance on ISI channels. Finally, submatrix is constructed as

an

submatrix of the matrix .

Submatrix is a cyclic shift matrix with a column weight

of 3 having, for example, the following form:

We performed a simulation for a perpendicular magnetic

recording (PMR) channel [6], which assumes a hyperbolic-tan-

gent isolated transition of

,

where is half the amplitude and is the time required

for to rise from— to

. Here, the normalized

recording density

is 1.5, where is the user bit

interval. Note that a channel bit interval is defined by

,

where is the code rate of the constraint code and the LDPC

code. The channel noise consists of white Gaussian noise and

media noise including jitter noise, fluctuation noise and

DC erase noise. The ratio of media noise to total noise is 90%.

The power of the jitter, fluctuation, and DC erase noise are

80%, 10%, and 10% of the media noise power, respectively.

The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as

SNR

(1)

where

is the power spectral density of total noise, and

is the Nyquist frequency of the user bit rate

.

The positions of the 1s in the first row are carefully chosen so

that inverse matrix becomes sparse. For example, when is 88 and the positions of the first row are {0, 11, 33}, can be a cyclic matrix with a column weight of 5 and, thus, enabling low-complexity encoding.
By combining and , we obtain a novel structured LDPC code. We call this a random interleaved array (RIA) code.

B. Simulation and Results

We evaluated the performance of the proposed LDPC system

by the sector-error rate (SER) after RS-ECC (16 symbol correc-

tions). The channel was equalized to a (5, 6, 0, 1) target

[7]. In this simulation, parameters of the proposed RIA codes

were set at

1309,

88, 19, column weight

2 3, and 37. As the conventional LDPC code, we used

B. LDPC System With Reversed MTR/ECC

a structured code which consists of a repeat-accumulator (RA) code [2] and an array code [1] which is the same as submatrix

Reverse concatenation of high-rate run-length-limited (HR-

without of the RIA code ( 1309,

88,

2 3,

RLL) codes and ECC is widely used in commercial disk drives. and 37). As shown in Fig. 3, the RIA code significantly im-

However, the channel without MTR coding produces long error proved the error-rate floor compared with the RA array code,

events at a certain probability, which result in error-rate floors at where both codes are combined with a rate-200/201 HR-RLL

the output of the LDPC decoder. In contrast, MTR codes elimi- code. In addition, the system combined with rate-16/17 QMTR

nate all such error events and thus are suitable for LDPC codes showed a 1.2-dB gain over the partial-response maximum-like-

[3]. We propose the use of a rate-

quasi-MTR (QMTR) lihood (PRML) system with HR-RLL at SER 10 , and also

( 3) code [4] with reverse MTR/ECC concatenation. A block showed no error-rate floor over SER 10 . The proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:56:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KANAOKA AND MORITA: STRUCTURED LDPC CODES WITH REVERSED MTR/ECC

2563

Fig. 3. Performance of LDPC systems.
TABLE I NUMBER OF PSEUDO-CYCLES

Fig. 4. Bit-error-rate performance of LDPC codes.
TABLE II ERROR EVENT PROBABILITIES

system thus improves SNR and provides a low error-rate floor performance in magnetic recording channels.
V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
Our simulation shows the superior performance of the RIA code. In the study of LDPC codes, the construction techniques for a parity check matrix generally require a large girth, which refers to the length of the shortest cycle in a Tanner graph, and large minimum distance. The RIA code, however, is not satisfied with these conditions; i.e., the girth is 4 and the minimum distance is 3. In contrast, the conventional RA+array code has no four-cycles (girth 6). In magnetic recording channels, the occurrence of pseudo-cycles significantly affects performance. Table I shows the number of pseudocycles which may be caused by bi-bit errors. The sample A and B codes have parity check matrices constructed by replacing the of the RIA code with and , respectively. That is, these codes have the same weights as the RIA code, but their column arrangement is different. The number of pseudo-cycles with the RIA code was less than with the RA+array code. Table I also shows that this number depends on the arrangement of the parity check matrix. The bit-error-rate performance is shown in Fig. 4. The code clearly improved the bit-error-rate by decreasing the number of pseudo-cycles.
We also confirmed the probabilities of error events after iterative decoding (Table II). In the system combined with an HR-RLL code, the probability of multiple-bit error events with the RIA code was less than with the RA+array code because the occurrence of long error events in iterative decoding was suppressed. In addition, the system combined with a QMTR code further decreased that probability by eliminating all long error events in the channel.

VI. CONCLUSION
The occurrence of pseudo-cycles has an important impact on performance in ISI channels. To improve this problem in magnetic recording channels, we propose the RIA code and a system combining it with reversed MTR/ECC. The RIA code suppresses the occurrence of long error events in iterative decoding and the MTR code eliminates all long error events in the channel. Through these effects, our proposed system performs significantly better than conventional structured codes and systems without an MTR code when applied to perpendicular magnetic recording channels.
REFERENCES
[1] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 543–546.
[2] M. Yang, W. E. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of Efficiently Encodable Moderate-Length High-Rate Irregular LDPC Codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.
[3] H. Song, R. M. Todd, and J. R. Cruz, “Low density parity check codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 2183–2185, Sep. 2000.
[4] T. Nishiya, K. Tsukano, T. Hirai, S. Mita, and T. Nara, “Rate 16=17 maximum transition run (3;11) code on an EEPRML channel with an error-correcting postprocessor,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 4378–4386, Sep. 1999.
[5] T. Morita, M. Ohta, and T. Sugawara, “Efficiency of short LDPC codes combined with long reed-solomon codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 3078–3080, Jul. 2004.
[6] I. Kaitsu, R. Inamura, J. Toda, and T. Morita, “Ultra High Density Perpendicular Magnetic Recording Technologies,” FUJITSU Sci. Tech. J., vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 122–130, Jan. 2006.
[7] M. Madden, M. Oberg, Z. Wu, and R. He, “Read channel for perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 241–246, Jan. 2004.
Manuscript received March 13, 2006 (e-mail: kanaoka@jp.fujitsu.com).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:56:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

