1896

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 54, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

Channel Estimation for MIMO-OFDM Systems by Modal Analysis/Filtering
M. Cicerone, O. Simeone, and U. Spagnolini
Abstract—In this paper, we investigate the benefits of exploiting the a priori information about the structure of the multipath channel on the performance of channel estimation for multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO)-orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) systems. We first approach this problem from the point of view of estimation theory by computing a lower bound on the estimation error and studying its properties. Then, based on the insight obtained from the analysis, efficient channel estimators are designed that perform close to the derived limit. The proposed channel estimators compute the long-term features of the multipath channel model through a subspace tracking algorithm by identifying the invariant (over multiple OFDM symbols) space/time modes of the channel (modal analysis). On the other hand, the fast-varying fading amplitudes are tracked by using least-squares techniques that exploit temporal correlation of the fading process (modal filtering). The analytic treatment is complemented by thorough numerical investigation in order to validate the performance of the proposed techniques. MIMO-OFDM with bit-interleaved coded modulation and MIMO-turbo equalization is selected as a benchmark for performance evaluation in terms of bit-error rate.
The authors are with the Dipartimento di Elettronica e Informazione, Politecnico di Milano, Milano, Italy.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.881401
Sensor Networks With Mobile Access: Energy and Capacity Considerations
Gokhan Mergen, Qing Zhao, and Lang Tong
Abstract—Sensor network with mobile access (SENMA) is an architecture in which randomly deployed low-power sensors are orchestrated by a few powerful mobile access points. This paper considers SENMA from energy-efficiency and information-theoretic perspectives. By allowing sensors to propagate data directly to mobile access points over multiaccess channels and relieving sensors from energy-consuming network functions, SENMA has the potential of offering orders of magnitude of improvement in energy efficiency over the multihop ad hoc architecture, as demonstrated by our analysis on scalability. Optimization configurations of SENMA such as the altitude, the trajectory, and the coverage of access points are considered next, using the sum-rate as the performance metric. Optimal strategies for single and multiple access points are determined. For multiple access points, the possibility of and the gain due to cooperation (i.e., joint decoding of signals received at different access points) are investigated.
G. Mergen and L. Tong are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853 USA.
Q. Zhao is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.881405
Timing Recovery With Frequency Offset and Random Walk: Cramer–Rao Bound and a Phase-Locked Loop Postprocessor
Aravind R. Nayak, John R. Barry, German Feyh, and Steven W. McLaughlin
Abstract—We consider the problem of timing recovery for bandlimited, baud-rate sampled systems with intersymbol interference and a timing offset that can be modeled as a combination of a frequency offset and a random walk. We first derive the Cramer–Rao bound (CRB), which is a lower bound on the estimation-error variance for any timing estimator. Conventional timing recovery is based on a phase-locked loop (PLL). We compare the conventional timing recovery method with the CRB for realistic timing parameters for the magnetic recording channel, and observe a 7 dB signal-to-noise ratio gap between the two. Next, we propose

a PLL postprocessor based on the maximum a posteriori estimation principle that performs to within 1.5 dB of the CRB. This postprocessor performs time-invariant filtering and time-varying scaling of the PLL timing estimates. The refined timing estimates from the postprocessor are then used to get refined samples by interpolating the samples taken at the PLL’s timing estimates. Finally, we present suboptimal implementations that allow a performance-complexity tradeoff.
A. R. Nayak and G. Feyh are with the Agere Systems, Longmont, CO, USA. J. R. Barry and S. W. McLaughin are with Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.881406
Augmented Belief-Propagation Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Nedeljko Varnica, Marc Fossorier, and Aleksandar Kavcic
Abstract—We propose an augmented belief-propagation (BP) decoder for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes which can be used on memoryless or intersymbol-interference (ISI) channels. The proposed method is a heuristic algorithm that eliminates a large number of pseudocodewords that can cause nonconvergence in the BP decoder. The augmented decoder is a multistage iterative decoder, where at each stage, the original channel messages on select symbol nodes are replaced by saturated messages. The key element of the proposed method is the symbol-selection process, which is based on the appropriately defined subgraphs of the code graph and/or the reliability of the information received from the channel. We demonstrate by examples that this decoder can be implemented to achieve substantial gains (compared with the standard locally operating BP decoder) for short LDPC codes decoded on both memoryless and ISI Gaussian channels. Using the Margulis code example, we also show that the augmented decoder reduces the error floors. Finally, we discuss types of BP decoding errors and relate them to the augmented BP decoder.
N. Varnica is with Marvel Semiconductor, Inc., Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA. M. Fossorier is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA. A. Kavcic is with the Division of Engineering and Applied Sciences, Harvard University, Cambridge, MA 02138 USA. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.881402
Constellation Design for Trellis-Coded Unitary Space–Time Modulation
Yi Wu, Vincent Lau, and Matthias Patzold
Abstract—We consider the problem of creating signal constellations for trellis-coded unitary space–time communication links, where neither the transmitter nor the receiver knows the fading gains of the channel. Our study includes design techniques for trellis-coded schemes with and without parallel paths, which allows us to find a tradeoff between low complexity and high performance. We present a new formulation of the constellation design problem for trellis-coded unitary space–time modulation schemes. The two key differences in our approach against those of other authors are that we not only combine the constellation design and mapping by set partitioning into one step, but we also use directly the Chernoff bound of the pairwise error probability as a design metric. By novelly employing a theorem for the Clarke subdifferential of the sum of the largest singular values of the unitary matrix, we also present a numerical optimization procedure for finding signal constellations resulting in high-performance communications systems. To demonstrate the advantages of our new design method, we report the best constellations found for trellis-coded unitary space–time modulation systems. Simulation results show that these constellations achieve 1 dB coding gain against the usually used constellations.
Y. Wu and M. Patzold are with the Department of Information and Communication Technology, Agder University College, NO 4876, Grimstad, Norway.
V. Lau is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Hong Kong.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.881403

0090-6778/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:57:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

