2558

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

Concatenating a Structured LDPC Code and a Constrained Code to Preserve Soft-Decoding,
Structure, and Burst Correction
Yang Han and William E. Ryan
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA
In this paper, we propose a simple method to concatenate a structured low-density parity-check (LDPC) code and a high rate constrained code such that three goals are achieved simultaneously: 1) soft information is available to the LDPC decoder; 2) the structure of the LDPC code is retained after concatenation to facilitate hardware implementation; and 3) the system has the ability to correct long erasure bursts. We consider both a runlength-limited code and a dc-free runlength-limited code. For the RLL case, we use a technique we call parity insertion. For the dc-free case, we apply polarity flipping to a subset of the LDPC code parity bits.
Index Terms—DC-free, low-density parity-check (LDPC), parity-insertion, reverse concatenation, run-length-limited (RLL).

I. INTRODUCTION
E RROR-CONTROL CODEs (ECCs) and run-length-limited (RLL) codes each provide critical roles in maintaining data integrity on storage devices, with ECCs doing so directly by inserting data-dependent redundant bits via some encoding algorithm, and RLL codes doing so indirectly by facilitating timing recovery at the receiver. Their simultaneous presence in a storage system introduces conflicting requirements in the receiver design when soft ECC decoding is a goal. On the one hand, if RLL encoding were to follow ECC encoding, soft ECC decoding would be essentially precluded at the receiver since, for complexity reasons, the RLL decoder must produce hard decisions for the ECC decoder which follows it. On the other hand, if RLL encoding were to precede ECC encoding, the RLL constraint would be lost with the addition of ECC parity bits unless provisions were made to accommodate their addition. Similar comments hold for dc-free codes.
Several recent papers have addressed this dilemma when a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code is used for the ECC code [1]–[3]. Fan [1] considers several such techniques, including a parity-insertion technique which has been used in [4] and [5]. We extend the idea in a manner described in Section II. References [2] and [3] consider “deliberate-error” techniques whereby selected LDPC code bits are inverted in order to ensure runlength-constraint compliance. In [3], this is facilitated by first adding a “guided scrambling” pseudorandom sequence to the LDPC codeword.
In this paper, we add another two requirements to the RLLLDPC concatenation problem. First, we require that the LDPC code possesses structure to facilitate encoder and decoder implementation. Second, the nominal matrix of the LDPC code must be modified to accommodate both the RLL constraint and the ability to correct long erasure bursts. One way to accomplish this is via the deliberate error techniques of [2] and [3], but we believe these techniques result in substantial performance
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2006.880465

Fig. 1. Reverse concatenation of LDPC and RLL code.

losses, especially in the floor region of the LDPC code error-rate curve. We propose a simple reverse-concatenation scheme combined with a structured permutation of to satisfy these additional requirements, at the expense of negligible complexity increase and only the RLL code-rate loss. We also propose a solution which utilizes a dc-free code and conforms to the above requirements at the same time.

II. RLL CODE SOLUTION

The components of our design are a rate-

RLL code

with a (0, 14) runlength constraint [7] and a rate-0.911 (4592,

4182) structured LDPC code [8], corresponding to a combined

code rate of 0.89. The nominal parity-check matrix for the

LDPC code has the form

, where consists

of an array of square

circulant permutation matrices

and is an

“dual-diagonal” matrix ( is the number

of parity bits). A block of 4100 bits, comprising 4096 sector

data bits plus four “dummy” bits, is RLL encoded systemati-

cally to produce 4182 bits at the input to the LDPC encoder,

which in turn yields a 4592-bit LDPC codeword (Fig. 1). The

410 LDPC parity bits can simply be inserted uniformly among

the 4182 systematic bits which relaxes the RLL constraint to (0,

16). This parity-insertion can be realized with no complexity

increase by inserting the parity columns of among its sys-

tematic columns, from which an alternative parity-check matrix

is obtained for encoding and decoding.

Such a modification of is not sufficient, however, to obtain

a code with a large value of , where is the guaranteed

burst-erasure length correction capability corresponding to the

code’s parity-check matrix. An algorithm for calculating

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:52:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HAN AND RYAN: CONCATENATING A STRUCTURED LDPC CODE AND A CONSTRAINED CODE

2559

Fig. 3. Structure of 50=51 RLL Code.

Fig. 2. Performance of the RLL solution on the AWGN channel. (Color version available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.)

can be found in [6]. When possesses the structure described

above, the maximum burst-erasure length that is guaranteed cor-

rectable is only

bit erasures, an efficiency of only

.

can be greatly improved by randomly

permuting the columns of matrix. However, an matrix with

structure is desired as it facilitates both encoder and decoder im-

plementation.

We may modify as

to simultane- Fig. 4. Reverse concatenation of LDPC and dc-free RLL.

ously obtain

near the maximum possible for this code,

accommodate the reverse concatenation with the RLL code by

parity insertion and also keep the structure of the code. In this

expression, is a deterministic (structured) permutation of the

columns of . For the LDPC code we used in this paper,

is a 410 4182 matrix and

, so is a 5 51 array of

(0.83), runlength constraint [(0, 15)], and performance are comparable. However, because the scheme in [2] deliberately adds errors to LDPC codewords prior to recording, we expect our floor to be lower.

82 82 circulant permutation matrices. interleaves such

that the column index of

and the column index of

III. DC-FREE CODE SOLUTION

have this relation:

. is also In this section, we show how to modify the scheme we pro-

a deterministic column permutation of which corresponds posed above to achieve dc-free channel sequences. DC control

to inserting the columns of evenly among the columns of can be divided into two parts: control on the systematic bits and

. Because and are structured, is structured.

control on the parity bits.

corresponds to a code with

(efficiency 0.63) com- DC control on the systematic bits modifies the RLL code to

pared to a maximum of 272 found using random permutations. suppress dc by adding redundancy so that a bounded running

The RLL constraint corresponding to and the above RLL digital sum (RDS) is achieved. To understand how this is done,

code is (0, 16).

we briefly describe the structure of the RLL code [7]. As de-

The performance of this scheme on a binary-input AWGN picted in Fig. 3, the encoding is done in several steps: First, each

channel is shown in Fig. 2 in terms of frame error rate (FER) 50-bit data block is divided into five 10-bit symbols ( to ).

and bit error rate (BER). Both FER and BER refer to errors in Second, one of the symbols, say , is selected for rate

only the systematic bits. We see that the performance gap be- encoding, leaving the four other symbols uncoded. Third, the

tween the LDPC code alone and the RLL/LDPC reverse con- 11 encoded bits are partitioned into 4 parts (

and )

catenation scheme is very small, and can be largely attributed to which consist of 3, 3, 3, and 2 bits, respectively. These are then

the RLL code rate loss:

dB. For FER, mapped to

and to prohibit all-zeros and all-ones

the performance gap should be attributed to rate loss only, since, patterns. Next the ’s are inserted among the four uncoded sym-

if the LDPC decoder corrects all of the errors from the channel, bols. Details about the

encoding and to mapping can

the RLL decoder will definitely succeed; if LDPC decoder fails, be found in [7].

due to the property of the RLL code design, the residual errors Since there are 40 uncoded bits in each RLL codeword whose

will not propagate outside of the RLL code block. Fig. 2 can modification will not change the RLL constraint, these uncoded

be compared to Fig. 5 in [2] where the code length (4096), rate bits together with another three redundant bits will be used to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:52:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2560

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

Fig. 5. Performance of the dc-free RLL solution. (Color version available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.)

control the RDS, hence, the dc content of the bit stream. The dc

control is done by the so-called guided scrambling method [9].

Among the 50 input bits, symbol is encoded and partitioned

as described above. The four uncoded symbols together form a

source word which is then preceded by two bits to produce the

elements of the set (each element has 42 bits). Scramble

all the vectors in with scrambler polynomial

to

produce set . Further, precede the vectors in with one bit

to obtain the set which has eight elements. Then scramble

all vectors in this new set with polynomial

to produce the

selection set , which has eight 43-bit vectors. When transmit-

ting the word , the “ best” vector in is selected for trans-

mission, according to the minimum RDS criterion, which is then

divided into four sub-words with 10, 11, 11, and 11 bits. The

RLL-encoded 11 bits are mapped as before and inserted among

the four subwords. Note that the second scrambler produces a

set consisting of pairs of words of opposite disparity, with which

the RDS can be bounded. Simulation shows this method yields a

rate-

(0,15) RLL constrained code with RDS

. At

the receiver, the dc-free RLL decoder descrambles the received

word followed by the (51,50) RLL decoding.

A certain fraction of parity bits are selected to control the dc

component of the parity bits. Based on the accumulated RDS

of all previously recorded codewords, the systematic bits of the

current codeword, and the unselected parity bits of the current

codeword, the transmitter chooses whether or not to flip the po-

larity of the selected parity bits. Note that this is not a polarity

switch code since no redundancy is added. At the receiver, a

hard-decision parity-polarity detector is added, which calculates

the syndrome with the polarities of the received parity bits

unchanged and the syndrome with the polarities of the se-

lected parities flipped. If

where

is

Hamming weight, the parity detector flips the signs of the sam-

ples corresponding to the selected parities in the received word;

otherwise, the signs are unchanged. In order to have reliable

parity recovery, the selected set of parities needs to be carefully

chosen. Since the LDPC code used in this paper has a dual-di-

agonal sub-matrix corresponding to the parity bits, if we label

all the parity bits as

, the selected parity set is chosen

to be all the parity bits with odd labeling. By doing so, the dif-

ference between the Hamming weight of the two syndromes is

maximized, thus maximizing the correct recovery probability.

At the transmitter, after the entire DC control process is done,

we evenly insert the parity bits among the systematic bits as de-

scribed in Section II.

Fig. 4 shows the diagram of this scheme on both an AWGN

channel and a PR1 channel with precoder

and BCJR

channel detector. As we know for the PR1 channel case, in ad-

dition to the iterations of LDPC decoder, if we exchange soft

information between the BCJR detector and the LDPC decoder

several times (global iteration, shown in Fig. 4 as the loop be-

tween BCJR detector and LDPC decoder), the performance will

be improved. Notice that there needs to be a polarity flipping be-

tween the BCJR detector and the LDPC decoder. The polarity

detector will calculate syndromes only in the first global itera-

tion. Later the syndrome information is stored in the detector/de-

coder and after each iteration the signs of the soft information

of the selected parities will be flipped if the syndromes indicate

a polarity flipping at the transmitter. The precoder relaxes the

RLL constraint to (0,17) and the channel sequence (after pre-

coder) is still dc-free.

The performances of this scheme on both the AWGN

channel and the PR1 channel are shown in Fig. 5. On AWGN

channel, the performance of dc-free RLL/LDPC concatenation

is about 0.4 dB worse than the LDPC-only case. Of this gap,

dB is attributed to rate loss. We

observe the same performance difference on the PR1 channel.

Again, we expect the floor of our scheme to be low.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the INSIC EHDR and Tape Programs.

REFERENCES
[1] J. L. Fan, “Constrained Coding and Soft Iterative Decoding for Storage,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA, Dec. 1999.
[2] B. Vasic and K. Pedagani, “Run-length-limited low-density parity-check codes based on deliberate error insertion,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 1738–1743, May 2004.
[3] Z. Li et al., “Low-density parity-check codes with run length limited (RLL) constraints,” IEEE Trans. Magn., to be published.
[4] A. J. van Wijngaarden and K. A. S. Immink, “Efficient error control schemes for modulation and synchronization codes,” in IEEE Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Boston, MA, 1997, p. 74.
[5] K. D. Anim-Appiah and S. W. McLaughlin, “Constrained-input turbo codes for (0, k) RLL channels,” in Proc. Conf. Inform. Sciences Syst., 1999.
[6] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Performance of efficiently encodable lowdensity parity-check codes in noise bursts on the EPR4 channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 507–512, Mar. 2004.
[7] P. McEwen et al., “High rate runlength limited codes for 10-bit ECC symbols,” U.S. Patent 6259384, Jul. 10, 2001.
[8] Y. Zhang et al., “Structured eIRA codes with low floors,” IEEE Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2005.
[9] K. A. Schouhamer Immink, Codes for Mass Data Storage Systems, The Netherlands: Shannon Foundation, 1999.

Manuscript received March 11, 2006; (e-mail: yhan@ece.arizona.edu).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:52:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

