A REDUCED-COMPLEXITY, SCALABLE IMPLEMENTATION OF LOW DENSITY PARITY CHECK (LDPC) DECODER

Yuming Zhu

Yanni Chen, Dale Hocevar, Manish Goel

Department of Electrical Engineering Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287
Email: yuming 4asu.edu

DSP Solutions R&D Center Texas Instrument, Dallas, TX, 74243
Email: {ynchen, hocevar, goel}d4ji.com

ABSTRACT
In this paper, a reduced-complexity, scalable implementation of LDPC decoder is presented. The decoder architecture in this paper is an improved version of [1, 2]. The new architecture makes the implementation of multiple code rates, multiple block sizes and multiple standards LDPC decoder very straightforward. As an example, we implemented a parameterized decoder that supports the LDPC code in IEEE 802.16e standard, which requires code rates of 1/2, 2/3 and 3/4, with block sizes varying from 576 to 2304. The decoder is synthesized with Texas Instruments' 90 nm ASIC process technology, with a target operation frequency of 100 MHz, 15 decoding iterations, the maximum data rate is up to 256 Mbps.
1. INTRODUCTION
The Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes have recently attracted tremendous interest because of their excellent error correction performance. The LDPC was first introduced by Gallager [3] in 1962. After the invention, LDPC codes have been largely neglected until rediscovered in 1990's. The performance recently breakthroughs to 0.0045 dB ofAWGN-channel Shannon limit with the introduction of irregular LDPC codes in [4]. LDPC codes offer more flexibility in the choice of code parameters, and their decoders require simple processing. These features have made LDPC a serious competitor in many communication scenarios. They have been adopted in worldwide inter-operability for microwave access (WiMAX), next generation digital video broadcasting via satellite (DVB-S2) and IEEE 802.1 In, etc.
Many hardware implementation of LDPC decoders are based on the parity check matrix with structured sub-matrix [1, 2, 5, 6]. The most related work of this paper is presented in [1, 2]. In [1, 2], the authors proposed to group the block columns in a way such that for each block row, there is at most one non-zero element within each group. It has been shown in [2] that this grouping technique is very efficient in hardware implementation under layered belief propagation (BP) decoding. Because the hardware can be reused within each group without sacrificing throughput. However, the practical communication systems often require to support multiple code rates and block sizes which result in multiple parity check matrices. For example, the IEEE 802.16e standard [7] employs 5 different types of codes (Rate 1/2, 213A, 2/3B, 3/4A and 3/4B) and
19 different block sizes 1. Thus there are 19 x 5 = 95 combinations to support in a single LDPC decoder core. In this case, the
1The new IEEE Std 802.16e-2005 published in Feb. 2006 added rate
5/6 code, thus result in 6 different types of codes.

block column grouping is no longer a straightforward technique to implement the decoder.
In this paper, we presented an improved architecture which greatly enhances the scalability and keeps the advantage of low complexity. In the new architecture, the various interconnection functions distributed in the column sum block, router and reverse router in [1] are extracted and restructured such that the column grouping is no longer needed. The hardware complexity of the new architecture is comparable and even smaller than the column grouping method. Furthermore, it is very easy to support multiple parity check matrices and easy to switch among different communication standards with the new architecture. Actually, the decoder implemented with this architecture can be fully controlled by a set of parameters which include parity check matrix definitions, block sizes, parallel factors, bit precisions, maximum iteration numbers, etc. Thus the redeployment of the decoder requires minimal effort.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, the layered BP algorithm is briefly described. In Section 3, an improved LDPC decoder architecture and the related details of an implementation for IEEE 802.16e standard is presented. The synthesis result of the decoder is given in Section 4. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.
2. DECODING OF LDPC CODES
2.1. LDPC code based on structured sub-matrices
The LDPC code can be defined by its parity check matrix H of size M x N. The state-of-the-art implementation oriented of LDPC codes usually utilize the H matrix with structured sub-matrices. The most popular choice of the structured sub-matrix is based on the circularly shifted identity matrix [1, 2, 5, 6, 8]. The parity check matrix H can thus be represented with a block parity check matrix Hb with dimension mb x nb. Each element of Hb is either a zero matrix or a circularly shifted identity matrix with size Z x Z. The shift values of each sub-matrix is determined based on certain design rules such as the algebraic or geometrical structures [9, 6, 10].
2.2. Layered Belief Propagation algorithm
LDPC codes can be effectively decoded by using the iterative beliefpropagation (BP) algorithm in log domain [11]. The layered BP algorithm which schedules the decoding based on the row sequence has the advantage of faster convergence speed and low complexity in hardware. Algorithm 1 shows the layered BP algorithm for LDPC codes based on structured sub-matrices [1, 2].

©2006 1-4244-0383-9/06A/u$t2h0o.r0iz0ed licensedIEuEsEe limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:59:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

83

Algorithm 1 Layered BP algorithm

1: {Initilization: }

Set iteration number i = 0, and for Vj c [1, N], Vm C M(j)

set

Rmj = 0, L(qj) =-2r,rj2

(1)

2: while i < imax and parity check equation not met do

3: for all s C [l,mb] do

4: for all t C [1, Z] do

5:

m = (s -1) x Z + t {m is the index ofcheck node}

6:

for all indices j of bit node, j C N(m) do

7:

{Bit Node Processing: }

L(qmj) = L(qj) -Rm.j

(2)

8:

{Check Node Processing: }

Amj

E: qV(L(qmn)) (3)

nEN(m)\ {}

Smj

Sign(L(qmn))) (4)

nEN(m) {j}

Rmj, = -Smj-(Amj)

(5)

9:

{Bit Update: }

L(qj)New= L(qmj) + Rm,j

(6)

10:

end for

11: end for

12: end for

13: end while

14: The soft information or hard decision of L(qn), Vrn c [1, N]

is output.

a scalable decoder which can be used as a general LDPC decoder prototype and can be reused to fit different applications with minimal re-design effort. There are several things that need to address:
* Modularity: The modularity of functional units is critical because only if we can decouple the different components in the decoder properly will we be able to redeploy the decoder by simply replacing certain components.
* Parameterize: The exploration of different design factors should be easy. To achieve this, the decoder presented here is parameterized with several fundamental parameters such as: parallel factor, bit precision, pipeline stages setting, etc. For example, the pipeline stages in the decoder can be activated or deactivated by simply setting a control word.
The block diagram of the decoder structure is shown in Fig. 1. There are two memory blocks: R memory and column sum mem-
ory which store the Rmj and L(qj) values respectively.
Parallel Adder A

Router

e ibufl N w vRAlvige enanBank

In the description of the algorithm, M(j) is the set of check nodes connected to bit node j and N(m) is the set of bit nodes con-
nected to check node m. The 4(') function is defined as @(x) =
log(l tanh(x/2)1) where tanh(x/2) = (ex 1)1(ex + 1). Note
that '(Q) function is its own negative inverse: 4'(4'(x)) x
2.3. Design challenges
The authors of [1] presented a decoder for irregular LDPC codes whose block-wise parity check matrix can be "grouped" in columns such that there is at most one '1' for each row within a group column. This group structure greatly impacts the decoder structure and reduces hardware complexity because the hardware is shared within each group. However, this method has certain disadvantages: Firstly, the result of the group method is a decoder with irregular structure because the size of each group in terms of number of block columns is different. Secondly, the group scheme, which is very handy for a specific parity check matrix, is not easy to be performed for a decoder supporting multiple parity check matrices. In [7], 5 different code types (rate 1/2, 213A, 2/3B, 314A, 3/4B code) and 19 different block sizes (nb = 24, Z = 24, 28, ... , 96) are required to be supported, which results in 95 combinations. Thus it is very difficult to find such a common group scheme for all matrix. Even if such a scheme exists, the read/write timing control for the input/output data becomes very complex.
3. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE
In this section, the decoder architecture will be presented according to the algorithm described in Section 2.2. Our goal is to design

ed

:

w adr

si;
d......... _ee

Restribution Network

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the decoder
The major computation units in this block diagram are parallel adder (PAA and PAB) and parity check update block (PCUB).
PAA performs the operation in Eqn. (2) with Rmj and L(qj) are
read from R memory and column sum memory (CSM) block respectively. PAB performs the operation in Eqn. (6). PCUB performs the operations in Eqn. (3)-(5), the new Rmj values are stored back to R memory.
The interconnection of different storage and computation units was done by router and reverse router. The router consists of three main functional units: shuffle network, alignment bank and distribution network. The reverse router also consists of three main functional units that perform reverse operation of their counterparts in router. We will describe these components in details in the subsequent sections.
The stopping unit monitors if certain stopping criterion is met and sends out stopping signal to the main control unit. The stop-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:59:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

84

ping criteria can either be the preset maximum number of iterations is reached or the decoding is been done successfully.
The shaded components in Fig. 1 represent the optional programmable pipeline stages (PPS). The PPSs are controlled to either by pass or register the input data. In the early designing stages, they can be activated to evaluate the timing issues of the whole decoder. If the timing is not a problem, some or all PPSs can be deactivated or removed.
The LDPC codes support parallel decoding inherently. In this
paper, we consider parallel factor of np, which means np rows
within a same block row are processed simultaneously. The number of column sum memory blocks is set to the number of block columns in Hb matrix, i.e. nb. The number of alignment (AL) units and reverse alignment (RAL) units in alignment bank and reverse alignment bank is nr, which is the maximum row weight (maximum number of non-zero elements in each row of parity
check matrix). For IEEE 802.16e standard, nb = 24, nr = 15, np
is a parameter that can be set. Fig. 2 shows the detailed configuration of the building blocks.

the sector has a length of nr * WR and a depth of R memory is
Znnpax 1 'mb, where Zmax is the maximum sub-matrix size. Usu-
ally the the number of block columns nb remain constant among different block sizes and code rates, Z is the factor that affects the block size.
3.1.2. Column Sum Memory
The column sum memory contains nb sub-banks with each sub-
bank storing the Lj values of one block column. Denoting the word-length ofthe log-likelihood information Lj as WL, each sub-
bank has a word-length of np * WL and a depth of F Z-npax 1. The
advantage of this sub-banked configuration is the simple memory access pattern when different code definitions are employed.
To increase the decoding throughput, dual memories are adopted
in each sub-bank. While one memory is updating with Lj values of
current decoding codeword, the other memory can work on reading out the previous codeword or storing input values for the next codeword.

Fig. 2. Partial parallel structure. In this figure np is the parallel fac-
tor, nr is the maximum row weight (number of non-zero elements
in parity check matrix) and nb is the number of block columns in
Hb.

3.1.3. Configuration ROM
There are 19 different block sizes and 5 code types (by the time the decoder is designed, only the definition of rate 1/2, 213A, 2/3B, 3/4A, 3/4B codes are available) to be supported in IEEE 802.16e standard, which results in 95 combinations. Our analysis shows that under layered BP algorithm, the behavior of the decoder is determined by the block row information which can be uniquely defined by the code type, Z value (which is called "expansion factor" in IEEE 802.16e standard) and block row number.
Fig. 3 shows the block diagram of the configuration ROM. With the input of code type, expansion factor and block row number, the ROM outputs the shift values for the non-zero sub-matrices in current block row and the current row weight. Note that because
the Z values in the standard are 24, 28,...,96, all of which are multiples of 4, thus the expansion factor input to the ROM can be set to Z/4.

CODE TYPE
C-0 EXP_FACTOR CFG ROOM
BLKROW NUM

SHIFT RWWIH
ROW WEIGHT

3.1. Memory Units

Fig. 3. Configuration ROM

There are several RAM/ROM units in the system. Two RAM units are used to store the data in decoding process: R memory and column sum memory (CSM). To fully utilize the potential of computation units, both of these memory units need to support asynchronous read and synchronous write of the memory in the same
cycle. Thus two-port memories are adopted for both R memory
and CSM. ROM unit is used to store the parity check matrix configurations.
3.1.1. R Memory
Denote the word-length of the check-to-bit information as WR, the word-length of R memory can be divided into np sectors. Each of

3.2. Parity Check Update Block
The PCUB block used in this paper is the same as the one in [1] excepted that the bit precisions of the data are parameterized in
our implementation. Due to the symmetry property of 4(Q) function, the size of look up table (LUT) for 4(Q) can be reduced by
half. To utilize this feature, the data fed in LUT was first converted to the sign magnitude (SM) format and the sign information was processed independent of the magnitude. At the final stage, the SM data were converted back to the two's complement format.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:59:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

85

3.3. Router and Reverse Router
The router and reverse router are the components that handle the interconnections. Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 show the block diagram of the router and reverse router respectively. There are three main components in the router (reverse router), namely, shuffling network (reverse shuffling network), alignment bank (reverse alignment bank) and distribution network (reverse distribution network). To clearly demonstrate the functionality of each component, squares with different shades are used to show the data flow among these components where the same shade means the data for the same
sub-matrix. Here we show the configuration for np = 5 and
nr =3.

start shift_va

4. .

1

Shuffle Networ

G~~~~~

-1> =igm

-A_l-Aiig nigent

Alignment

Aignt Bank

Blk_ro\w

dr I Addr

Ad d

Distrbuto Network

OE= _EE

with np check nodes. Also the inputs have np sectors of data each
of which consists of nr log-likelihood information. After the shuf-
fle network, the data are re-organized to nr word with each word
containing np log-likelihood information.
The reverse shuffle network performs the exact opposite op-
eration which "transpose" nr words each containing np into the
same format with input data of shuffle network.

3.3.2. Alignment/Reverse Alignment
The reason for the alignment and reverse alignment operation in the LDPC decoder is that there exists discrepancy between the se-
quence of data processing and data storage. The L(qj) values are
stored in column order, every np values are organized into one
word, while in the decoding process the data needed are based on the row order.

Sub-matri

Input/Output Word

In CSM Memory

Storage Sequence

np

14

- np

(A)

(B)

(C)

Fig. 6. The need of alignment and reverse alignment. (A) Submatrix structure; (B) Data word for processing; (C) The actual storage in CSM memory.

Fig. 4. Router

A

A

A

A

A

Bik rowI

Reverse Distribution Network

Shift vai stat

Addr

Adr

F

e< verse

R

re

Aligrr nt

A ri rt

Alig n

_Ba

Rees
ig en t
n

Fig. 6 depicts this discrepancy as Fig. 6(A) shows a typical sub-matrix in the Hb matrix, which is the result of circularly shifted identity matrix (size of Z x Z) by a certain shift value. The dashed lines show the position of non-zero items in the sub-matrix. Fig. 6(B) and (C) show how the data are organized in input/output
word and memory accordingly. In parallel decoding, the np bit
nodes processed simultaneously are not necessary to be in the same word in CSM. Actually one input/output word might be stored in two or three different words in CSM.
The alignment and reverse alignment block presented here are designed to support multiple block sizes and multiple parallel factors. There are 5 main building blocks in them: multiplexer, register, left shifter, right shifter and segment select module.
3.3.3. Distribution/Reverse Distribution Network

II

I

Reeverse Shuffle lNetwork

I

. . .. .

Fig. 5. Reverse Router

3.3.1. Shuffle Reverse Shuffle Network
Shuffle network "transposes" the data. The inputs to the shuffle
network are the updated L(qj) information for bit neighboring

The distribution network (reverse distribution) distributes the data and memory write/read addresses between alignment bank (reverse alignment bank) and column sum memories. One advantage of distributing memory addresses along with distribution network is that it integrated the address generation in alignment/reverse alignment bank where the state information is already been kept. Thus the column sum memory can be pure memory block without any control function, which makes it easy to change different memory blocks. Another advantage is that when programmable pipeline stage is placed between router and CSM, the timing for address and data are automatically aligned when both the data and address are connected to the pipeline stage.
Distributing the memory address only slightly increases the size of the distribution/reverse distribution network. In our im-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:59:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

86

plementation for IEEE 802.16e, it increases the size of distribution/reverse distribution network by only 2%. Note that the distribution network is a set of multiplexers (MUX) and de-multiplexers (DEMUX). When implemented with transmission gates, MUX and DEMUX are essentially the same.
3.4. Programmable Pipeline Stage
The block diagram of one element in programmable pipeline stage (PPS) is shown in Fig. 7. The PPSs are controlled by the control enable signal to either by pass or register the input data. In the early designing stages, they can be activated to evaluate the timing issues of the whole decoder. If the timing is not a problem, some or all pipeline stages can be deactivated or removed.
Note that, the pipeline stages in an iterative decoder do not necessary increase the throughput of the system. When PPS is used in the system, special attention should be paid to the control sequence and address generation. Thus we only consider the pipeline stage as a method in controlling the timing of the whole system. Actually, the synthesis result shows that our decoder can support 100 MHz clock rate without any pipeline stage thus the PPSs can be removed.
DIN DOUT
EN

Block Category Interconnection
Datapath Control
Total

80MlHz 59.6% 25.5%0 14.9%
100%

100MHz 60.8% 24.5% 14.7%o
10

Table 1. Synthesis result (in percent) of the main blocks

Parallel Factor: The parallel factor is determined base don the throughput requirement which can be calculated with the following equation:

Throughput

=Z(1

-R)

x

R fl,,k
CyclePerBlkRow

x

IterNum

(7)

where CyclePerBlkRow= [ Z 1 +Overhead. The overhead
is the cycles delay introduced by alignment and reverse alignment blocks. Note that the bottleneck in the throughput lies in low code rate and small block size combinations, where the portion of overhead became dominant. The parallel factors considered in our decoder are 4, 8, 12, 24. We choose parallel factor of 12 in the decoder. The maximum throughput for 100 MHz with 15 decoding iterations is 256 MHz.

Fig. 7. Programmable pipeline stage.
3.5. Stopping Unit
The decoding process will be stopped if any of the following conditions are met: first, preset maximum iteration number is met; second, the codeword is decoded successfully.
In the stopping unit, the signs of all L(qj) are monitored. If no change in sign(L(qj)) and sign(L(qj )New) Vj C N(m) and
H'jGN(m) sign(L(qj)New) 1, the row m is considered pass-
ing the parity check. If all the rows in one block row all passed the parity check, the block row is considered passed the parity check.
If mb consecutive block rows passed the parity check, the decod-
ing process is considered complete successfully and thus the decoding is stopped.
3.6. Choice of Parameters
The parameters are obtained based on the system requirement: Maximum Iteration number: Because the layered BP algo-
rithm converge much faster than the standard BP algorithm [2], much less iterations are required. We choose to use the maximum iteration number of 15.
Bit precision: The bit precision should be selected as the smallest number of bits with acceptable performance. The bit precision chosen in the decoder is 8 bits.
Clock Rate: The clock rate is determined by the overall system requirement rather than LDPC decoder. We have done the synthesis for 80 MHz and 100 MHz. The decoder run well with 100 MHz clock without any pipeline stage.

4. ASIC IMPLEMENTATION RESULT
The proposed architecture with parallel factor of 12 and bit precision of 8 bits (5:3) was synthesized with Texas Instruments' ASIC 90 nm process technology. The percentage of the gate count for different components over the whole decoder target clock rate of 80 MHz and 100 MHz are listed in Table 1. The overall gate count for 100 MHz is only 5.6% more than the 80 MHz result. The dynamic power consumption of the decoder core under 100 MHz clock is 14.8% more than the one for 80 MHz.
5. CONCLUSION
A scalable, reduced-complexity LDPC decoder architecture together with a parameterized LDPC decoder implementation are presented in this paper. The proposed architecture makes the implementation of LDPC decoder for multiple code rates, multiple block sizes very straightforward. The presented decoder can be fully controlled by a set of parameters including parity check matrix definitions, block sizes, parallel factor and bit precision, etc. Synthesis result shows that the decoder can achieve the target operation frequency of 100 MHz. Thus result in the maximum data rate of 256 Mbps (with 15 iterations).
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by Summer Student Program 2005, Texas Instruments Incorporated. The authors would like to thank Dr. Udayan Dasgupta at Texas Instrument for providing the simulation code of IEEE 802.16e standard, help in generating test cases and many helpful discussions.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:59:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

87

7. REFERENCES
[1] Y Chen; D. Hocevar, "A FPGA and ASIC implementation of rate 1/2, 8088-b irregular low density parity check decoder,"
in Proc. of Global Telecom. Conf (GlobeCom), Dec. 2003,
vol. 1, pp. 113-117.
[2] D.E. Hocevar, "A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes," in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SIPS), 2004, pp. 107-112.
[3] R. G. Gallager, "Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," IRE
Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[4] Sae-Young Chung; G.D. Forney; T.J. Richardson; R. Urbanke, "On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58-60, Feb. 2001.
[5] Tong Zhang; K.K. Parhi, "VLSI implementation-oriented (3, k)-regular low-density parity-check codes," in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SIPS), Sept. 2001, pp. 25-36.
[6] M.M. Mansour; N.R. Shanbhag, "Low-power VLSI decoder architectures for LDPC codes," in Proc. ofInt. Symp. on Low Power Elect. and Design (ISLPED), Aug. 2002, pp. 284-289.
[7] "IEEE 802.16e Draft 7 (P802.16e/D7)," available at: http:Hwww.ieee802.org/16/tge/schedule.html, April 2005.
[8] E. Liao; E. Yeo; B. Nikolic, "Low-Density Parity-Check Code Construction for Hardware Implementation," in Proc. ofIEEE Int. Conf on Commun. (ICC), Aug. 2004, pp. 284289.
[9] Y. Kou; S. Lin; M.P.C. Fossorier, "Low density parity check codes: construction based on finite geometries," in IEEE Global Telecomm. Conf (GLOBECOM), Nov. 2000, vol. 2, pp. 825-829.
[10] R.M. Tanner; D. Sridhara; A. Sridharan; T.E. Fuja; D.J Costello, "LDPC Block and Convolutional Codes Based on
Circulant Matrices," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50,
no. 12, pp. 2966-2984, Dec. 2004.
[11] M. Chiani; A. Conti; A. Ventura, "Evaluation of low-density parity-check codes over block fading channels," in IEEE Int. Conf on Commun. (ICC), June 2000, vol. 3, pp. 1183-1187.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:59:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

88

