Design of irregular LDPC Codes for flexible
Encoder and Decoder Hardware Realization
Frank Kienle, Torben Brack, Norbert Wehn Microelectronic Systems Design Research Group
University of Kaiserslautern Erwin-Schroedinger-Strasse, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany
Email: {kienle,brack,wehn}@eit.uni-kl.de

Abstract— Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes are among the best channel codes known today and are in discussion for current and future communications standards. LDPC codes can be efficiently modeled by Tanner-graphs.
In this paper, we present a novel hardware-efficient 2-Vector design method of such graphs. We show communications performance results for an exemplary code created by this approach and corresponding implementation results for a flexible, multirate 2V-LDPC decoder and encoder applicable for hybrid-ARQ.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [5] were introduced in 1963 by Gallager but were largely forgotten. In 1993 the so called Turbo-Codes (TC) [2] were invented. Their decoding is an iterative process which exchanges soft values between two component decoders. But the concept of iterative decoding was already introduced in Gallagers thesis, thus the LDPC codes have experienced a renaissance. Especially the invention of irregular LDPC codes [11] was a step towards the Shannon limit.
The construction of the connectivity of the irregular LDPC codes is still a challenging task. The LDPC codes can be best described by a bipartite graph called Tanner-graph. Two major approaches exist to design a Tanner-graph: The progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [7] constructs the graph in an edge-by-edge manner. Another method is to use permuted identity matrices [9] resulting in structured LDPC codes. Especially these structured codes can lead to efficient partly parallel hardware realizations based on feasible permutation networks [3][10][6], but very often the achievable communications performance and flexibility are neglected during the code construction phase.
In this paper, we will first revise the duality between two different linear encoder structures of irregular LDPC codes. One encoder structure utilizes a puncturing unit which allows a very efficient hybrid-ARQ compatible LDPC code design method.
We present a compact 2-Vector (2V) description of the Tanner-graph which can be efficiently exploited by partly parallel hardware decoder and encoder realizations due to the inherent parallelism provided by this approach. Furthermore, this 2V method simplifies the code construction by reducing calculation complexity while implying regularity in the

Tanner-graph. The actual code is constructed with a new 2VPEG algorithm which places multiple edges under special cyclic permutation constraints, unifying the standard PEG and permutation matrix approaches for Tanner-graph design.
Note that the 2-Vector description is compatible to current standards like DVB-S2 [4] and WiMAX [8]. Therefore the presented architecture template can be utilized for these standards as well.
We present communications performance results for an exemplary rate-adaptive LDPC code as well as 0.13µm ASIC synthesis results for a flexible, multi-rate 2V-LDPC decoder. The corresponding encoder results and extensive throughput results are also provided.

II. IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

An LDPC code is a linear block code defined by its sparse

M × N parity check matrix H. It contains j ones per column

and k ones per row, called row and column weight respectively.

A (j,k)-regular LDPC code has uniform row and column

weights, otherwise the code is called irregular.

An LDPC code can be represented by a Tanner-graph (Fig-

ure 1), with M check nodes (CN) which correspond to parity

check constraints and N variable nodes (VN) representing

the data symbols of the codeword. An edge in the graph

corresponds to a one entry in the parity check matrix.

The VNs can be divided into two parts. In K = N − M

information nodes (IN) which are associated to the information

bits and M parity nodes (PN) representing the transmitted par-

ity bits. The degree distribution f gives the fraction of infor-

mation nodes for a certain degree [11], f (x) :=

dmax i≥1

fixi,

with

f dmax
i≥1 i

=

1

and

dmax

the

maximum

IN

degree.

The

parity nodes have always the same fixed zizag connectivity to

the CNs which is caused by the encoding scheme explained

afterwards. Regarding the check nodes we are only interested

in the number of incident edges coming from the information

nodes. We refer to this as parity grouping a. The parity

grouping grouping

disatriisbaustiounnifiosrmdeansopteodssiabslegf(oxr)al=l CNs.ai≥m Taahm xeinpagriixtyi

with amax and amin the maximum and minimum number of

incident IN edges.

LDPC codes are decoded using a message passing algorithm

[5] which exchanges soft-information iteratively between vari-

able and check nodes. This belief propagation (BP) algorithm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:55:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2

fdmax IN

f3

f2

Permutation (Π)
parity grouping
CN

PN

u

repetition

Π

linear encoding scheme (type 1)

p
+ a
T

u

repetition

Π

equivalent linear encoding scheme (type 2)

+ T

p
punct

Fig. 1. Tanner-graphs of an irregular LDPC code and two (equivalent) corresponding linear encoding scheme with IN (Information Node), CN (Check Node), PN (Parity Node) and fi (fraction of nodes with degree i)
is optimal for cycle free graphs. However, for a finite block length cycles can not be avoided. The shortest cycle in the Tanner-graph is called the girth. Also a local girth of each variable node can be calculated which is referred to as the girth histogram G.
Two possibilities to realize a linear encoding scheme are shown in Figure 1. The type 1 encoder comprises a repetition unit which repeats the information bits in correspondence to its degree distribution. This expanded sequence is interleaved (Π), followed by a parity grouping a. This grouping calculates the parity check sum of a bits (modulo 2). The result is accumulated by a 2-state RSC encoder. The resulting parity sequence p and the systematic information u are transmitted. The Tanner-graph of this encoder yields the fixed zigzag connectivity of the parity nodes of degree 2.
It is well known that a parity check can be seen as a terminated 2-state trellis. An identical trellis is obtained when using a 2-state RSC encoder. Thus we can replace the parity grouping a of the type 1 encoder by a 2-state RSC encoder. The output of this encoder is then fed into the successive 2state RSC encoder unit. Hence, a and the accumulator of the type 1 encoder can be replaced by one accumulator only. The resulting encoder type 2 scheme is shown as well in Figure 1. To obtain identical results for both encoders, a puncturing unit has to be established with a puncturing pattern defined by g(x).
Using such a punctured encoder scheme is especially useful for hybrid-ARQ schemes, where an initial codeword is transmitted and additional punctured bits are sent on request. For the decoding process the Tanner-graph of the corresponding irregular LDPC code is used. This duality of the encoding scheme is efficiently utilized by our hardware realization.
III. HARDWARE MAPPING
As already mentioned only partly parallel architectures are feasible. Hence only a subset P of the nodes are instantiated.

The variable and check nodes have to be mapped on these P functional units. All messages have to be stored during the iterative process, while taking care of RAM access conflicts. Furthermore we need a flexible permutation network which provides the connectivity of the Tanner graph.
To provide code rate flexibility and different degree distributions the functional nodes process all incoming messages in a serial manner. Thus a functional node can accept one message per clock cycle and produces at most one updated message per clock cycle. A RAM is associated for each functional unit to hold the corresponding messages (edges). Figure 2 shows a schematic view of an architecture template with serial functional nodes for the VN and CN processing, the message RAM banks and the permutation network.
An important step is to define an efficient mapping of the VNs and CNs to the functional nodes which is shown as well in Figure 2. To simplify the node mapping and thus the control flow of the resulting decoder architecture, each functional unit has to process the same amount of messages. The VNs are partitioned in INs and PNs as in Section II.
P consecutive INs are mapped to P functional units in an horizontal manner. Note that for each IN of a given degree, appropriate number of storage places have to be allocated to the corresponding RAM, since each incident message has to be stored.
The check nodes and the parity nodes are mapped in a vertical manner. Always Q = M/P CN nodes are mapped to the first functional unit. The next Q CN nodes are mapped to the next functional unit and so on. Again each CN entry refers to storage locations in the amount of the corresponding CN degree. Since the PNs have fixed zigzag connectivity to the CNs it is highly desirable to map the PNs in a vertical manner as well in correspondence to the CN mapping.
Within an iteration each functional unit has to process E/P edges. With E the number of edges between check node and variable nodes. We can split the overall number of edges E connecting the check nodes in two subsets EIN and EP N , indicating the connections between CN/IN nodes and CN/PN nodes respectively. For each code rate we have to satisfy that EIN is a multiple of P , hence

A := EIN /P

A ∈ N.

(1)

The zigzag connectivity of the PNs is straight forward due the identical (vertical) mapping of PNs and CNs. However, the connectivity between INs and CNs has to be realized by an appropriate controlling of the permutation network and an elaborated addressing scheme with A entries. Using a simple shuffling network as a permutation network is of advantage for the hardware realization because a shuffling network ensures that at each cycle P input messages are shifted to P distinct target memories. Hence no write conflicts occur.
The main challenge is the design of a Tanner-graph with an addressing and a shuffling vector which ensures good communications performance. These two vectors constituting the Tanner-graph are derived in the following sections.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:55:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3

permutation values

0

1

Vertical

2 3

Parity Nodes

mapping

Q-1

0

P

Horizontal

2P 3P

Information Nodes

mapping

K-P

VN functional units

VN

permutation network

0

1

2

Vertical

3

Check Nodes

mapping

Q-1

CN functional units

CN

Q Q+1 Q+2 Q+3

P messageRAMs
2Q 2Q+1 2Q+2 2Q+3

2Q-1
1 P+1 2P+1 3P+1

3Q-1
2 P+2 2P+2 3P+2

K-P+1 K-P+2

VN

VN

Q Q+1 Q+2 Q+3

2Q 2Q+1 2Q+2 2Q+3

2Q-1

3Q-1

CN

CN

(P-1)Q (P-1)Q+1 (P-1)Q+2 (P-1)Q+3
PQ-1 P-1 2P-1 3P-1 4P-1
K-1
VN
(P-1)Q (P-1)Q+1 (P-1)Q+2 (P-1)Q+3
PQ-1
CN

writing addresses

Fig. 2. Node and functional unit mapping for an irregular LDPC code

P=5

S02

writing to

S13

the block interleaver

S23

S36

VN

VN

VN

VN

VN

initial DA
S0 S0 S1 S1 S1 S2 S2 S2 S3 S3 S3 S3 S3 S3

initial
CS
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0

3

reading from 3

the block

interleaver

3

3

2

Ψ(DA) Φ(CS)

S0

2

S1

1

S3

3

S3

0

S2

1

S1

0

S3

2

S0

2

S2

3

S3

3

S1

0

S3

1

S2

1

S3

3

IV. 2-VECTOR TANNER-GRAPH DESIGN

Fig. 3. Block interleaver with the writing and reading sequence and the corresponding degree allocation and cyclic shift vector.

As described in the previous chapter, the connectivity between the information nodes and the parity nodes is the difficult part of the graph design. One of the best algorithms to design a Tanner-graph is the progressive edge growth (PEG) construction method [7]. This construction method places the connections between variable and check nodes in an edge-byedge manner. This algorithm maximizes the girth of the graph with respect to the node to which the edge is added.
Other construction methods use blocks of identity matrices (IM ) to place the edges in the Tanner-graph [9]. The positions of these P × P identity matrices in the parity check matrix are prearranged, while each identity matrix is permuted (circularly shifted) under the constraint of a high girth.

A. 2V Methodology

We present a novel 2-Vector (2V) methodology which com-

pletely represents the parity check matrix of an irregular LDPC

code. However, even more important is that this methodology

allows an efficient Tanner-graph construction which can be

seen as a PEG construction method applied on permuted

identity matrices.

The two vectors are denoted as degree allocation (DA)

vector and cyclic shift (CS) vector respectively. The par-

allelization number P as introduced in Section III implies

constraints to the code design: The number of INs of a given

degree has to be a multiple of P .

The K information nodes can be divided into subsets of car-

dinality P . Each subset is labeled as Sid with d the correspond-

ing degree and i the subset number. Thus the set of INs can

be

described

by

a

single

vector

S

:=

[S02

,

S12,

...,

S dmax
(K/P

)−1

],

starting with the smallest degree in a none decreasing order.

The DA vector is an expanded vector S, where each subset Sid is repeated d times.

DA := [S0, S0, S1, S1, ..., S(K/P )−1, ..., , S(K/P )−1]. (2)

The dimension of DA is A according to Equation 1. For each

position in the DA vector there exists one associated cyclic

shift value. These A shift values define the cyclic shift vector

(CS)

CS := [D0, D1, D2, ..., DA−1]

(3)

Thus there is a one to one positional mapping between DA
and CS. Di is a cyclic shift of an identity matrix on position i and can obtain values between 0 to P − 1. For the initial CS vector, all Di are set to 0, resulting in non permuted identity matrices.
To derive the connectivity to the CN, we define two functions: Ψ(DA) and Φ(CS), with Ψ a permutation and Φ a cyclic shift operation of each position. The connectivity between the CN and INs is completely defined by Ψ(DA) and Φ(CS). The resulting interleaver Π for encoding of Section II is defined for each position h = 0, .., EIN − 1 as:

Π(i) = Ψ(DA(mod(i, A))) ∗ P + · · ·

(4)

+mod( i/A − Φ(CS(mod(i, A))), P ).

It is important to mention that this vector description provides a block interleaver construction which can be efficiently mapped to hardware. Thus we describe in the following in more detail the reading and writing procedure of the block interleaver.
Writing of the block interleaver corresponds to filling the block interleaver with the expanded sequence after the repetition unit. The edges incident to one IN are always written in a vertical manner, while successive INs are written in a horizontal manner. Figure 3 shows writing the block interleaver for a small example graph for P = 5 with 5 INs of degree 2, 10 INs of degree 3 and 5 INs of degree 6.
The first two rows in S02 belong to the edges of the first P information nodes with smallest degree of 2. Since the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:55:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4

calculation of a variable node is commutative, each of this rows can be labeled with the identical subset identifier. The rows in the next subsets, depending on the current degree i, are labeled with S1i up to the last dmax rows which all get the last identifier SKdm/Pax−1. This is illustrated exemplary in Figure 3. Here, the corresponding initial DA and CS vectors are also shown next to the block interleaver writing part.
Before the reading process starts the two operations Ψ (permute rows) and Φ (cyclic shifts) on the block matrix take place. One example of the resulting DA and CS vector are shown next to the reading and writing part. The reading of the block interleaver is done in a vertical manner. The starting point is the first column from top to bottom, then the second column from top to bottom and so on. At the reading interleaver part we plotted one possibility of the parity grouping g(x) with dotted lines.
Summarizing, the 2V methodology is set up on
• The Ψ(DA) vector defining which IN sets Sid participate in a check node grouping.
• The Φ(CS) vector which ensures the node connectivity with respect to a high girth and optimal minimum distance.
B. 2V-PEG Algorithm
In this section we describe the progressive edge growth construction principle based on the 2V representation. The starting point is an empty Tanner-graph with a fixed zigzag connectivity of the parity nodes and given f and g distributions. Starting with this setup, we assign always P edges by P edges in a way that the mean of the resulting girth histogram G is maximized.
Since always P INs are described by one entry of the vector S it is possible to calculate the girth histogram of a vector S denoted now as GS. This greatly increases speed of the metric calculation, which scales with N/P instead of the block length N.
The 2V-PEG algorithm starts with the IN subset with lowest degree. Especially these lower degree information nodes have to be protected to ensure a high minimum distance as shown in [7]. Low degree nodes can be protected when edges from
Algorithm 1 2V-PEG algorithm
{A: Number of entries in DA and CS} {P : Possible shifts for Φ} {GS: girth histogram} {bbest: current best cyclic shift value} Create DA = Ψ(DA) (RP interleaver [2] or [12]) Φ := [] for i = 0 to A − 1 do
for b = 0 to P − 1 do Φ(i) = b calculate GS if mean(GS) current max then bbest = b end if
end for Φ(i) = bbest end for

different IN subsets Sid participate in a parity grouping a. This principle to ensure a good connectivity was reported in [12]. The major difference in our approach is that we optimize the basis connectivity determined by Ψ in an independent step. Thus the 2V-PEG algorithm uses two steps: first Ψ is optimized and afterwards Φ.
Ψ can be created in a constructive way which is especially of great interest for a hardware realization. This can be done for example applying a relative prime (RP) interleaver, see references in [2].
A relative prime interleaver is defined by a start value s and an offset value rp which has to be a relative prime to the block length A. Thus the resulting permutation pattern is defined by: Ψ(i) := rp · i + s mod A. By selecting the prime number rp < A/amax, it can be guaranteed that a parity grouping is composed of different subsets Sid.
After the construction of Ψ, Φ is optimized by analyzing each possible cycle shift. The complete 2V-PEG construction method is depicted in Algorithm IV-B.
There is always an ambiguity during PEG construction at which multiple possibilities exist to place an edge. In our case there are different permutation possibilities of bbest. Since we are interested in multi-rate LDPC codes as described in Section II a further condition is applied if such an ambiguity occurs. This condition analyzes GS for different parity groupings g as well.
The advantages of the 2V-PEG algorithm are:
• Very fast construction method since P edges are placed at once.
• Low error floor due to optimized connectivity between IN subsets and the CNs.
• Different code rates can be jointly optimized for construction of multi-rate LDPC codes.
• The created codes can be directly mapped to hardware by using Ψ for RAM addressing and Φ for controlling the shuffling network.
V. RESULTS
This sections shows communications performance of an irregular LDPC codes constructed with the 2V-PEG capable for hybrid-ARQ. Furthermore implementation results are presented for corresponding multi-rate low-complexity LDPC decoder and encoder cores which efficiently utilize the presented 2V scheme.
A. Communications Performance
Figure 4 shows the communications performance of an irregular LDPC code with K=1600 information bit over an AWGN channel. All these LDPC codes share the same connectivity between the INs and CNs described by two vectors Ψ(DA) and Φ(CS) with an IN degree distribution of f[3,4,5,9,31] = {0.52, 0.25, 0.08, 0.04, 0.12}. The different code rates were obtained by using an appropriate puncturing according to the encoding structure of Figure 1. For example the R = 0.5 code uses a regular parity grouping of g[7] = {1.0}. The first 6 parity bits are punctured out the next parity bit is transmitted and so on. To use the R = 0.33 Code for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:55:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5

100

10−1

10−2

FER

10−3

10−4

punctured LDPC Code K=1600 R=0.33

punctured LDPC Code K=1600 R=0.5

punctured LDPC Code K=1600 R=0.66

punctured LDPC Code K=1600 R=0.8

−2

−1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

SNR

Fig. 4. Frame error rate (FER) performance of punctured irregular LDPC Codes. All Codes have K=1600 information bits with an identical IN to CN connectivity applying different puncturing.

hybrid-ARQ, the 3rd parity bit is send as well which results in a parity grouping of g[3,4] = {0.5, 0.5}.
The LDPC code is constructed using the 2V-PEG algorithm assuming P = 100, the given IN distribution, and a parity grouping of g[7] = {1.0}. Thus 100 edges are processed at each clock cycle in the corresponding hardware implementa-
tion. The number of iterations utilized at each code rate are
presented in Table I.

irregular LDPC codes (dmax = 31, amax = 28)

Block Length

1k-10k bit

Code Rate

1/4 - 9/10

Area[mm2] 0.13µm@500MHz

Component

Decoder Encoder

Functional Nodes

1.578

Controller

0.010

0.026

Network

0.191

0.023

Channel and Message RAMs 2.153

0.047

Code Vectors

0.025

0.025

Overall Area

3.957

0.121

Throughput [MBit/s]

R= 9/10 and 10 iterations

522

R= 1/2 and 30 iterations

156

R= 1/4 and 50 iterations

63

3571 1852 1086

TABLE I SYNTHESIS RESULTS
formance results for LDPC codes generated applying this 2VPEG algorithm were presented, supported by implementation results for a flexible low-complexity 2V-LDPC decoder and the corresponding encoder.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The work presented in this paper was supported by the European IST project 4More (4G MC-CDMA multiple antenna system On chip for Radio Enhancements [1]).

B. Implementation
The two vectors Ψ(DA) and Φ(CS) obtained by the 2VPEG algorithm are used for an efficient hardware implementation of the respective codes. In Section III, we presented an abstract decoder architecture and showed the node mapping of the messages to be exchanged during decoding. The realized architecture contains two message networks for single-phase processing, and the actual mapping of the messages to RAM corresponds to the IN and PN mapping of Figure 2.
Table I shows ASIC synthesis results in a STM 0.13µm technology for a 2V-LDPC decoder and the corresponding encoder. This decoder can process coding rates between 1/4 and 9/10, supports all degree distributions f as well as all parity check grouping distributions g with amax ≤ 28, and block lengths up to 10000 bits. The codes presented in the previous subsection thereby demonstrate only a very small subset of all the possibilities.
Throughput calculations for the decoder and encoder are given as well in Table I. The decoder throughput depends largely on the number of iterations used for decoding, the selected coding rate R, yielding a maximum of above 500Mbps. Note that the lower the coding rate the more iterations are needed to reach reasonable communications performance, yielding only around 60Mbps for rate 1/4.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we introduced a hardware efficient 2-Vector (2V) Tanner-graph description for irregular LDPC codes. A modified version of the PEG algorithm utilizing this 2V methodology was derived for the design of hybrid-ARQ capable LDPC codes with low error floors. Communications per-

REFERENCES
[1] 4MORE - 4G MC-CDMA Multiple Antenna System on Chip for Radio Enhancements.
[2] C. Berrou. The Ten-Year-Old Turbo Codes are Entering into Service. IEEE Communications Magazine, 41:110–116, Aug. 2003.
[3] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. Kschischang. Decoder-first code design. In Proc. 2nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Related Topics, pages 459–462, Brest, France, Sept. 2000.
[4] European Telecommunications Standards Institude (ETSI). Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) Second generation framing structure,channel coding and modulation systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and other broadband satellite applications; TM 2860r1 DVBS2-74r8. www.dvb.org.
[5] R. G. Gallager. Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1963.
[6] D. Hocevar. LDPC Code Construction with Flexible Hardware Implementation. In Proc. 2003 International Conference on Communications (ICC ’03), pages 2708–2712, May 2003.
[7] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold. Regular and Irregular Progressive Edge-Growth Tanner Graphs. IEEE Transaction on Information Theory, 51(1):386–398, jan 2005.
[8] IEEE 802.16. Worldwide Interoperability for Microwave Access. www.wimaxforum.org.
[9] D. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. Davey. Comparison of Construction of Irregular Gallager Codes. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 47(10):1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[10] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag. High-Throughput LDPC Decoders. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration Systems, 11(6):976–996, Dec. 2003.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke. The Renaissance of Gallager’s LowDensity Pariy-Check Codes. IEEE Communications Magazine, 41:126– 131, Aug. 2003.
[12] H. Xiao and A. Banihashemi. Improved Progressive-Edge-Growth (PEG) Construction of Irregular LDPC Codes. IEEE Communications Letters, 8(12):715–717, Dec. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 18:55:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

