IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

2555

Performance of Adaptive Belief Propagation
Decoding and Maximum-Likelihood Bounds for
Reed–Solomon Codes on Partial-Response Channels
Richard M. Todd and J. R. Cruz, Fellow, IEEE
School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019-0631 USA
In this paper, we examine the performance of the adaptive belief propagation (ABP) algorithm for decoding Reed–Solomon (RS) codes in conjunction with various partial-response channels used in magnetic recording. We compare the performance of the ABP decoder against the performance of standard hard-decision decoding and against the maximum-likelihood (ML) bounds. We also study the performance of an idealized version of the ABP decoder, one with perfect identification of “good” versus “bad” bits in the codeword. For typical RS codes, we find actual ABP performance about half a decibel worse than the ideal ABP, but even ideal ABP fails to achieve the ML bound by at least 1 dB.
Index Terms—Adaptive belief propagation, error correction codes, iterative decoding, magnetic recording, partial response channels, Reed–Solomon codes, soft-decision decoding.

I. INTRODUCTION: THE ABP DECODER

I N the past decade, the belief propagation (BP) algorithm has become a popular algorithm for soft-decision decoding of

low-density parity-check codes [1], [2]. One could try to use this

algorithm on any linear code, including high-density codes such

as the Reed–Solomon (RS) codes [3] used in current magnetic

recording systems. In practice, however, the high density of the

parity-check matrices of the codes causes so much error propa-

gation that the BP decoder fails to give useful results. In 2004,

Jiang and Narayanan [4] developed a new algorithm, adaptive

belief propagation (ABP), which uses the original BP algorithm

and tries to avoid the problems with error propagation. Let

be the codeword length and dimension of our code, and let

be the (binary) parity-check matrix of the code. Let

be

positive integers and

a constant. Then the ABP algo-

rithm is as follows.

1) Examine the likelihood values

of the bits, and

select at most

bits that we declare to be unreliable;

call these the bad bits, and call all the other bits the good

bits.

2) Perform a series of Gaussian elimination operations on

to create a new matrix such that, if possible, all of the

columns corresponding to bad bits have weight one.

3) Do iterations of regular BP decoding with the likeli-

hood vector and the new matrix, computing a poste-

riori likelihoods

.

4) Compute

(1)

Use these to perform hard-decision decoding. If they produce a valid codeword, we are done, and are our final a posteriori values. If not, take the as priors and go back to Step 1, for a total of at most iterations.

Due to the rather large computational overhead of the ABP de-

coder, one typically employs a conventional hard-decision de-

coder such as the Berlekamp–Massey decoder [3] first, and only

invokes the ABP algorithm on codewords for which hard-deci-

sion decoding fails.

In [5], the authors argue that the choice of algorithms for se-

lecting the bad bits (Step 1 above) is important in determining

the performance of the ABP decoder since failure of the ABP

decoder to decode correctly usually arises from incorrectly in-

cluding a bit that is in error in the “good” set instead of the “bad”

set. Here, we use as a basis for comparison an idealized ABP de-

coder, one that always selects as bad bits precisely the set of bits

that are in error. By comparing the performance of the ideal ABP

decoder to existing ABP implementations, we learn how much

room for improvement there might be from tweaking the Step 1

algorithm. For the simulations we present later, our Step 1 algo-

rithm is to declare as bad all bits for which

is below a

threshold . If more than

bits satisfy

, we

choose the bits with smallest

. Note that increasing

generally increases the computational overhead of the ABP al-

gorithm (due to more columns being involved in the Gaussian

elimination), up until the point at which the number of bits with

equals

.

II. MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD BOUNDS
As with any decoder, it is useful to compare the performance of the decoder against that of the best possible [i.e., the maximum-likelihood (ML)] decoder. Duman and Kurtas [6] derived a union bound for the bit error rate of ML decoding over partial-response channels:

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2006.878618

(2)

Here

is the average number of codewords of our code that

have input weight and output weight

is the noise

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2556

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

Fig. 1. Performance of decoding RS(186,172) over EPR4 channel.

Fig. 2. Performance of decoding RS(440,410) over EPR4 channel.

spectral density, and

is the average number of pairs of

partial-response (PR) channel sequences with input (Hamming)

distance and output (Euclidean) squared-distance . (In [6]

the authors explain in detail how to compute

from the

channel trellis.) To compute bounds, we need the

data for

our RS codes. Unfortunately, we do not know how to compute

this; the best we can do, using equations from El-Khamy and

McEliece [7], is to compute , the number of codewords of

output weight . We can rework the derivation in [6] to compute

a bound on ML frame error rates that only needs :

of hard-decision decoding, of ideal ABP decoding, and of ABP

decoding with various values of the threshold . In Fig. 1, we

chose ABP parameters

and

; for Fig. 2,

we reduced to . Channel decoding is done with the usual

Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [8] and no turbo

equalization.

For the RS(186,172) code, we see that the best ABP run gives a gain of about 0.6 dB over hard-decision decoding,
with the idealized ABP showing a further 0.65 dB improvement,

but even this is more than 1.2 dB short of the ML bound. For

(3) RS(440,410) the best ABP

provides a gain of 0.2 dB,

but is still 1.5 dB away from the ML bound. The ideal ABP is

about 0.9 dB better than

ABP, but still at least 0.6 dB

Note that this union bound on is expected to be a rather loose bound at low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) values; in fact, for sufficiently low SNR values, the bound is greater than one. The true ML performance is always better than what (3) shows, and thus any comparison between the curve from (3) and performance curves from simulations merely tell us that the simulated system is at least so many decibels away from the best possible (ML) performance.
The major difficulty in computing these bounds is computing ; as shown in [6], this computation requires exponen-
tiating a matrix of polynomials times. For over a few hundred and for a channel like EPR4
, this requires computing 64 64 matrices with polynomials with hundreds of thousands of terms. For realistic code lengths, memory limitations force us to discard terms from the computation, preferentially discarding those with the highest
, as these should contribute the least to the bound due to the exponential behavior of the term. We verify that our result is accurate by running a second computation discarding more of the high- terms and seeing that the resulting bound does not change.

short of the ML bound.

We also carried out simulations with the channel , which is a modified GPR3

channel selected by Sawaguchi et al. [9] as a suitable target re-

sponse for perpendicular recording. However, here we run into a

problem. The distance spectrum of the channel (more precisely,

the cardinality of the set

) grows so

rapidly with increasing that we cannot get usable bound computations for corresponding to our codeword lengths within the limits of available computer memory. So we resort to computing bounds for channels with responses approximately equal

to

, but different enough to have more tractable scaling

behavior of . The particular approximate channels we con-

sider are

and

. As one can see,

is a little better approxima-

tion to the original channel than

is, however,

has somewhat worse distance spectrum behavior than

.

To justify the use of these approximate channels, we present

a comparison of bounds computed using the original and ap-

proximate channels for the RS(7,5) code, a code sufficiently short that we can compute the bound for the original channel in Fig. 3. Note that, strictly speaking, we cannot directly com-

III. SIMULATIONS

pare bound curves computed for the different channels as the channel powers, and hence the definitions for SNR for each

Here we present simulation results and ML bounds for de- channel, are not quite identical, e.g., the SNR for the original

coding over the EPR4 channel. Fig. 1 shows results for the channel is

whereas that for

is

RS(186,172) code over

, whereas Fig. 2 shows results

. We get around this by establishing a

for the RS(440,410) code over

. In each case, we com- mapping from SNR values from the other channels to SNR

pute the ML upper bound from (3) and simulate the performance values for the original channel

based on mapping SNRs

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TODD AND CRUZ: PERFORMANCE OF ADAPTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODING

2557

Fig. 3. Bounds for decoding RS(7,5) over original and approximate Fig. 5. Performance of decoding RS(440,410) over Sawaguchi GPR3 channel. Sawaguchi GPR3 channels.
IV. CONCLUSION
We can compute ML bounds for RS decoding performance for realistic choices of channels and codes. Existing ABP implementations gain a fraction of a decibel over hard-decision decoding, and the idealized ABP simulations suggest that further refinement of the ABP Step 1 bit-selection algorithm might provide gains of a fraction of a decibel. However, even this is not enough to get within a decibel or so of the ML upper bound; to achieve this, some algorithm other than ABP seems necessary.

Fig. 4. Performance of decoding RS(186,172) over Sawaguchi GPR3 channel.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. H. Neeman and the OU Supercomputing Center for Education and Research (OSCER) for the use of their facilities for this research.

which give identical channel capacities on both channels (capac-

ities computed by the Arnold–Loeliger method [10]). The ap-

proximate channel curves in Fig. 3 are all processed in this way,

mapping back to the SNR definition over the original channel.

As we can see, the approximate channel bounds agree within

about 0.1 dB with the original channel results.

Having justified the use of these approximate channels to

compute bounds, we return to considering the performance of

RS codes over the

channel. Fig. 4 shows simulation re-

sults for decoding RS(186,172) over this channel, compared

against an ML bound derived from

. We used ABP pa-

rameters

and

, same as in Fig. 1. Here the

best ABP decoding gives a gain of 0.6 dB over hard-decision

decoding, with the idealized ABP giving an additional 0.5 dB

gain, but still falling 1.5 dB short of the ML bound. Fig. 5

shows similar results for decoding RS(440,410) over the

channel. Here because of longer codeword length computing

the ML bounds based on our first approximate channel

became infeasible and we had to fall back on bounds computed

with

. ABP parameters were the same as in Fig. 2, i.e.,

. For this code, the best ABP decoding pro-

vides 0.25 dB of gain over hard-decision decoding, with ideal-

ized ABP providing an additional 0.6 dB–0.75 dB gain. How-

ever, even the idealized ABP still falls short of ML performance

by at least a decibel.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.
[4] J. Jiang and K. R. Narayanan, “Iterative soft decision decoding of ReedSolomon codes based on adaptive parity check matrices,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, 2004, pp. 261–616.
[5] H. Xia and J. R. Cruz, “Performance of reliability-based soft-decision Reed-Solomon decoding on magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., submitted for publication.
[6] T. M. Duman and E. M. Kurtas, “Performance bounds for high rate linear codes over partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 1201–1205, Mar. 2001.
[7] M. El-Khamy and R. J. McEliece, “Bounds on the average binary minimum distance and the maximum likelihood performance of Reed-Solomon codes,” in Proc. 42nd Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, and Coding, 2004.
[8] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[9] H. Sawaguchi, Y. Nishida, H. Takano, and H. Aoi, “Performance analysis of modified PRML channels for perpendicular recording systems,” J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 235, pp. 265–272, 2001.
[10] D. Arnold and H.-A. Loeliger, “On the information rate of binary-input channels with memory,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., pp. 2692–2695, 2001.
Manuscript received March 8, 2006 (e-mail: rmtodd@amonduul.ecn.ou.edu; rmtodd@servalan.servalan.com).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:02:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

