2564

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

Pattern-Dependent Noise Predictive
Belief Propagation
Mustafa N. Kaynak1, Tolga M. Duman2, and Erozan M. Kurtas3
STMicroelectronics, San Diego, CA, 92121-3072 USA Department of Electrical Engineering, Arizona State University Tempe, AZ 85287-5706 USA
Seagate Technology, Pittsburgh, PA 15222-4215 USA
In this paper, we introduce iterative pattern-dependent noise prediction for belief propagation (BP) channel detectors over intersymbol interference channels with correlated noise. The new scheme, called pattern-dependent noise predictive belief propagation, makes use of factor graphs, and it iteratively whitens the noise samples by modifying the edge probability computation of the BP algorithm. To illustrate the benefits of the proposed scheme, specifically, we consider longitudinal recording channels corrupted by the data-dependent media noise. Simulation results and convergence behavior analysis show that the proposed detector leads to significant performance improvements especially when the media noise level is high.
Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), channel detection, pattern-dependent noise prediction.

I. INTRODUCTION
I NTERSYMBOL interference (ISI) channels are encountered in many applications, including wireless communications and magnetic recording systems. Maximum a posteriori (MAP), maximum likelihood (ML), and, more recently, belief propagation (BP) algorithms are proposed for channel detection [1], [2]. When ISI channel factor graph is length 4 cycle free, BP gives a similar performance with the MAP detector, while it has the advantage of a parallel structure.
When additive noise is correlated, a trivial way of improving the detector performance is noise prediction. For ML detection, noise prediction is done by modifying the branch metric computation [3]. The resulting “noise predictive maximum likelihood” (NPML) detector improves the bit error rate (BER) performance significantly compared to ML detector.
In a recent paper [4], we applied noise prediction techniques to belief propagation algorithm and proposed iterative “noise predictive belief propagation” (NPBP) detectors, which improve the BER performance significantly. Unlike the NPML detector which has local decision feedback, the proposed detector has global decision feedback. Furthermore, shorter latency and parallel structure of the iterative NPBP detector are very advantageous for iterative read channel architectures.
Magnetic recording systems suffer from data-dependent media noise (jitter) which is a result of the stochastic fluctuations in the position/width of written transitions. For ISI channels with data-dependent noise, pattern-dependent NPML detector (PD-NPML) is proposed by modifying the branch metric computation of ML algorithm and using data-dependent prediction filters [5], [6]. Furthermore, in [7], pattern-dependent noise prediction (PDNP) is applied to the MAP algorithm resulting in PDNP-MAP detector. In general, both PD-NPML and PDNP-MAP detectors improve the performance significantly especially when the media noise is severe [7].
In this paper, following the footsteps of PD-NPML and PDNP-MAP detectors, we introduce PD-NPBP detectors

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the coded system.

over ISI channels with data-dependent correlated noise. The proposed iterative detector has a parallel structure and a significantly shorter latency. We show that the proposed PD-NPBP detector outperforms both NPBP and BP detectors and it has better convergence characteristics compared to NPBP, BP, and MAP detectors. Furthermore, PD-NPBP detector can generate and make use of soft information, which is very advantageous for iterative read channels.
The paper is organized as follows. In Sections II–V, we discuss the system model, factor graphs and belief propagation algorithm, analyze pattern-dependent noise and discuss convergence behavior analysis. PD-NPBP detector is introduced in Section VI and simulation results are reported in Section VII. The paper is concluded in Section VIII.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

In this paper, a longitudinal magnetic recording system shown

in Fig. 1 is considered. We first obtain the transition sequence

from the encoded/interleaved information bit sequence .

Due to the jitter, transition response, which is modeled as a

Lorentzian pulse, is subject to a random shift, which is mod-

eled as a zero mean truncated Gaussian random variable with

variance

, where is the bit interval and

is the jitter percentage.

At the receiver, the readback signal is first low-pass filtered,

sampled at the symbol rate and then equalized to a target having

an impulse response of

, where is the

delay operator. Equalized samples are then given as

(1)

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2006.878620

where

is composed of the additive white Gaussian

noise (AWGN)

and data-dependent media noise fil-

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KAYNAK et al.: PATTERN-DEPENDENT NOISE PREDICTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION

2565

Fig. 2. Factor graph of the PR4 channel.

patterns with more transitions suffer more from the transition jitter, compared to the patterns with a smaller number of (or, no) transitions.
Regarding the data-dependent noise, we can make the following observations: 1) noise samples are highly correlated, 2) the correlation among the noise samples increases as media noise level increases, and 3) the correlation structures of different data patterns vary.

V. CONVERGENCE BEHAVIOR ANALYSIS

In this paper, we use average mutual information (AMI) be-

tween the recording channel input and the detector output to

analyze the convergence behavior of the proposed PD-NPBP

detector. For this purpose, we first compute the conditional a

posteriori information

using simulations. Then

output mutual information is computed as

Fig. 3. Variance of the total distortion w .

tered through the linear equalizer plus the residual in-

terference. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as

where is the code rate,

is

two sided AWGN power spectral density, and is channel

impulse (dibit) response. Recording density is defined as

, where

is the width of the Lorentzian

pulse at half of its peak value. We also note that, in Fig. 1, the

soft information exchange between the channel detector and

decoder refers to the “outer” iterations, and these are different

than the “inner” iterations of the proposed detector.

III. FACTOR GRAPHS AND THE BELIEF PROPAGATION ALGORITHM
ISI channels can be represented using factor graphs. For instance, Fig. 2 shows the factor graph of the PR4 channel
. In the factor graph, circle shaped variable nodes represent channel inputs and triangle shaped function nodes represent channel outputs. In a factor graph, a “cycle” refers to a loop starting and ending at the same node. Clearly, factor graph of the PR4 channel is cycle free.
Belief propagation algorithm computes the a posteriori probabilities by iteratively exchanging soft information between function and variable nodes [1]. The main advantage of BP is its parallel structure, which is very desirable for practical systems. Furthermore, BP achieves the optimal MAP performance if the factor graph is cycle free and a near optimal performance if the cycles are not short [2].

The mutual information between the channel input

and the channel detector output is defined as

. When channel detector removes

ISI completely,

and

.

However, if the detector cannot remove the ISI completely, then

and

.

VI. PATTERN DEPENDENT NOISE PREDICTIVE BELIEF PROPAGATION DETECTION

In this section, the proposed PD-NPBP detector (with

sum-product algorithm) is described in detail. Let

represent the length

data sequence for some nonnegative (past bits) and (future

bits) and

represent the data-depen-

dent length finite impulse response (FIR) prediction filter.

Since the pattern length is , there exist prediction filters

and corresponding prediction error variances

, i.e.,

one for each pattern.

For BP, the patterns

are represented by the sum-

mation terms of the a posteriori probability computation per-

formed at the function nodes. Let

be the

tentative channel output for a particular data pattern . We can

then estimate the last noise samples as follows:

(2)

For data pattern , whitened channel output is computed as

(3)

using the pattern-dependent prediction filter . Calibration of the data-dependent prediction filters is discussed in [7]. This information along with the prediction error variance is then used in the a posteriori probability computation as follows:

IV. DATA DEPENDENCE AND CORRELATION OF NOISE

Media noise in recording systems depends on the input data.

For instance, Fig. 3 shows the variance of the total distortion

at various media noise levels over

2.85 recording

channel equalized to the PR4 target at SNR 15 dB.

When the media noise is less severe (0% or 3%), the vari-

ance of the noise is almost invariant of the specific data pattern.

However, when the media noise level is higher (9% or 12%),

(4)

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we report simulation results for the proposed

PD-NPBP detector. In particular, we consider longitudinal mag-

netic recording channel with

equalized to the PR4

target. For the PD-NPBP detector, the pattern length is 3

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2566

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 42, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2006

Fig. 4. BER performance of various detectors over D = 2:85 recording channel equalized to the PR4 target.

Fig. 6. BER performance of the coded system.
and are the column and the row weights. As shown in Fig. 6, the outer code introduces significant coding gains and the highest coding gain is achieved when the proposed PD-NPBP detector is used as the channel detector.

VIII. CONCLUSION

Fig. 5. Output mutual information for various detectors.

In this paper, we have proposed a pattern-dependent noise predictive belief propagation detector over ISI channels with data-dependent/correlated noise. Compared to the BP and NPBP detectors, the proposed detector improves the BER performance significantly for both coded and uncoded recording systems which are corrupted by the pattern-dependent media noise. PD-NPBP detector also has a better convergence behavior. Furthermore, the PD-NPBP detector has a shorter latency and its parallel structure is very advantageous for fast hardware implementations.

with 2, 0, and 2 8 length one FIR prediction filters

( 1) are used. Furthermore, the proposed detector is iterated

20 times (inner iterations).

The performance of the proposed PD-NPBP detector along

with NPBP and BP detectors is shown in Fig. 4. When the

recording channel is corrupted by 9% jitter, the PD-NPBP de-

tector improves the performance approximately 0.35 dB com-

pared to the NPBP detector and 1.25 dB compared to the BP

detector (without NP). However, when the media noise is not

present in the system, pattern-dependent noise prediction filters

turn out almost the same; therefore, the PD-NPBP detector per-

forms identical to the NPBP detector. This is an expected result,

as the media noise is the major source of pattern dependency in

the system.

Convergence characteristics of various detectors are shown in

Fig. 5 when jitter is 9%. We observe that 1) MAP and BP detec-

tors (without NP) achieve the same output mutual information,

2) NPBP detector has a higher mutual information compared

to the MAP and BP detectors, and 3) the PD-NPBP detector

achieves the highest output mutual information.

We also study the performance of the proposed detector

over the same channel with 9% media noise, when an outer

(1107,986,123,3,27,0.89) LDPC

code is used.

and denote the number of coded, infor-

mation and parity bits, respectively. is the code rate, and

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was performed when the first author was pursuing the Ph.D. degree at Arizona State University and it was supported by Seagate Technology.
REFERENCES
[1] B. M. Kurkoski, P. H. Siegel, and J. K. Wolf, “Joint message-passing decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1410–1422, Jun. 2002.
[2] G. Colavolpe and G. Germi, “On the application of factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm to ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 818–825, May 2005.
[3] E. Eleftheriou and W. Hirt, “Improving performance of PRML/EPRML through noise prediction,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 3968–3970, Sep. 1996.
[4] M. N. Kaynak, T. M. Duman, and E. M. Kurtas, “Noise predictive belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 12, pp. 4427–4434, Dec. 2005.
[5] A. Kavcic and J. M. F. Moura, “The Viterbi algorithm and Markov noise memory,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 291–301, Jan. 2000.
[6] J. Moon and J. Park, “Pattern-dependent noise prediction in signal-dependent noise,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 730–743, Apr. 2001.
[7] J. Park, “Detection for intersymbol interference channels,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Minnesota, Minneapolis, May 2001.
Manuscript received March 13, 2006 (e-mail: mustafa.kaynak@st.com; mnkaynak@ieee.org).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:03:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

