Check-Irregular LDPC Codes for Unequal Error Protection 
under Iterative Decoding 
Lucile SASSATELLI1,2, Werner HENKEL1, Oavid OECLERCQ2 
1 International University Bremen, Campus Ring 1 28759 Bremen, Germany, w.henkel@iu-bremen.de 
2 ETIS ENSEA/UCP/CNRS UMR-8051, 6 avenue du Ponceau 95014 Cergy, France, 
sassatelli,declercq@ensea.fr 
Abstract 
In many optimization techniques of LOPC codes, the check node irregularity is usually considered as being fixed 
because the profile must contain only two consecutive degrees in order to maximize the overall convergence speed 
of the code. We show in this paper that it is possible to construct bit-regular codes with more than two different 
degrees at check nodes side to speed up the convergence of some parts of the codeword, even if we may decrease 
a little the global convergence. Then, we take advantage of the check irregularity to create unequal error protection 
(UEP) codes, and present a very flexible method to achieve it. This method is based on pruning a mother code, 
thereby creating different subcodes with different UEP properties, but decoded with the same decoder. 
1 
Introduction 
This paper deals with unequal error protection (UEP) 
LOPC Codes, achieved by irregularity on the check 
node profile, the bit node profile is set to be regular. A 
UEP coding scheme could be useful in the transmission 
of multi-media content (voice, fixed image, or video) 
whose characteristics have heterogeneous sensibility to 
errors. The code stream of source-encoded blocks is 
hierarchically structured and contains typically: 
• headers to describe the type and parameters of 
compression, 
• control data for code-stream synchronization, po­
sition, or indexing, 
• compressed data delivered from the source coder, 
e.g., speech encoder coefficients, image texture, 
or motion vectors. 
For such data streams, errors on headers or control data 
generally lead to a source-decoder failure since true 
reconstruction parameters of the compression are miss­
ing. In contrast, errors on high frequency coefficients 
of a OCT may be much less disturbing. Consequently, 
uniform protection for such a code stream would be 
sub-optimal. This highlights the interest of realizing 
unequal error protection by modifying the structure 
of a code. Well-known coding methods adapted to 
heterogeneous sensitivity of data often focus on av­
erage performance over the whole codeword. UEP 
could be achieved by puncturing or pruning (see [1]) 
convolutional codes to adapt the code rate without 
changing the decoder. In our work, we make use of 
LOPC codes [2] as a UEP coding scheme, because 
more and more standards consider these codes thanks 
This work is part of the FP6 / 1ST project M-Pipe and is co-funded 
by the European Commission. 
to their very good performance. We concentrated on 
heterogeneously protecting some bits inside a codeword 
by suitable selection of irregularities of the code. The 
linear problem of hierarchical optimization of variable 
node profile, assuming the check node profile to be 
fixed, has been studied in [3]. We chose to focus on the 
dual case of bit-regular check-irregular LOPC codes. To 
do so, we will start by presenting asymptotical study 
of new codes ensemble minutely represented, i.e., a 
generalized density evolution [4], and we will show in 
particular that a carefully chosen cost function could 
lead to families of UEP LOPC codes which are bit­
regular. We discuss the optimization procedure and the 
advantage of our approach in Section 3. Moreover, in 
real systems, flexibility in terms of types of data that 
can be protected is important, i.e., the parameters of 
the protection should be adaptable dynamically with 
minimum changes in the encoder and/or the decoder. 
In order to achieve this flexibility of our UEP codes, 
we propose a practical and flexible method based on the 
pruning of a mother code. This procedure is presented 
in Section 4. Finally the results are presented and a 
conclusion given. 
2 
Detailed Representation of 
Irregular LDPC Codes 
A very useful parameterization for our work is the 
detailed representation of irregular LOPC codes 
presented by Kasai et al. in [4]. They constructed new 
families of LOPC codes which are sub-ensembles of 
conventional irregular LOPC code ensembles. The 
detailed representation they adopted allows to design 
optimal codes more accurately by restricting the 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:20:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
possible choices for the interleaver. 
2.1 The Parameterization 
These new codes ensembles are introduced by speci­
fYing the fraction of edges connecting sets of variable 
nodes and check nodes with given degree at the same 
time. Let B and D be two sets or irregularity degrees 
of variable and check nodes, respectively. A function 
Jr : E x D --> [0, 1] is said to be the joint degree 
distribution of (E, D) if LbEB LdED Jr (b, d) 
= 1. 
This function describes the connections between the 
different degrees of the code, and is called the detailed 
representation of the code. 
They also defined a marginal degree distributions of 
variable and check blocks with respect to Jr, which are 
the usual polynomials for conventional representation: 
).(x) = 2:: ).bxb-1 
bEB 
with 
Rb = 2:: Jr (b, d) 
dED 
p( x) = 2:: Pdxd-1 
dED 
rid = 2:: Jr (b, d) . 
bEB 
For Jr (b, d), we define two fractions 
A(b, d) = Jr (b: d) 
Pd 
p(b, d) = Jr (b: d) . 
Ab 
It can be verified that p(b, d) equals the fraction of 
edges connecting nodes of degree b and d among all 
edges of degree b. This detailed representation can be 
used, for example, to describe the methods for different 
Poisson constructions explored by MacKay et al. in [5]. 
2.2 Density Evolution with Detailed 
Representation 
In [4], the authors also present a generalized density 
evolution for the newly proposed code ensembles. This 
generalized density evolution can treat density evo­
lution for conventional code ensembles as a special 
case. From Theorem 3 in [4], we can derive a detailed 
evolution of the mutual information of messages on the 
edges under Gaussian approximation. The description 
is "detailed" in the sense that we distinguish the mutual 
information of messages coming from bit nodes or 
checkodes from different degrees. Let s = 2/ (J'2 where 
(J'2 is the noise variance of the additive white Gaussian 
noise (A WGN) channel. The function J is defined by 
J (m) = 1 - lEx(log2(1 + e-X)) , x rv N(m, 2m) . 
Let xJK(d) and xL12 (b) be the mutual information 
between the input of the channel and the messages 
from check nodes of degree d to any bit node at the lth 
iteration, and from bit nodes of degree b to any check 
node, respectively. 
xm (d) = 1-J Cd - 1)J-1 (1 - A(b, d)xLIJ (b)) ) 
x?)(b)  J ( , + (b 
l)r' ( P(b, d)xJ; n(d»)) 
(2) 
From Equation (1), we observe that the smaller d is, the 
greater is the mutual information of messages coming 
out of check nodes of degree d, i.e., the faster is the 
local convergence. In contrast, we see on Equation (2) 
that the mutual information of messages coming out of 
bit nodes of degree b is larger when b is larger. This 
is what we are going to exploit to optimize the local 
convergence speeds of UEP LDPC codes. 
3 
Achieving UEP with 
Check-Irregular LDPC Codes 
3.1 A Cost Function for UEP 
Let us define a sensitivity class by a set of information 
bits in the codeword that will have the same protection, 
i.e., approximately the same error probability at a 
given number of iterations. In practice, the sensitivity 
classes are defined by the source encoder. Band D can 
either be the sets of the degrees over the whole graph, 
and then Equation (1) describes the usual Gaussian 
approximation of density evolution, or the sets of the 
degrees inside the kth sensitivity class called Ck. A 
check node will belong to a class Ck if it is linked 
to at least one bit node of this class. Consequently, a 
check node can belong to several sensitivity classes. 
The average mutual information of messages coming 
out of the check nodes of class Ck to the bit nodes of 
this class can be expressed as 
xm(Ck) 
= 2::: AiCk) 2::: pCcd(b,d)xJK(d) 
(3) 
bECk 
dECk 
. h (Ck) (b d) - 7C(b,d) 
d \ (Cd - '\' 
(b d) 
WIt P 
,
- >,(Ck) an Ab 
- L-dECk Jr , 
, 
b 
then LdECk p(Ck) (b, d) = 1. We denote by dS-l) = 
LdEgmPh PddS-l) (d) the average over the whole graph 
at the (I - 1 )th iteration of the mutual information 
of messages from check nodes to bit nodes, whereas 
dK (Ck) (Equation (3)) is the average mutual informa­
tion only on the part of the codeword corresponding to 
Ck, i.e., on edges that belong to Ck. We can express 
the UEP criterion we have chosen by 
(4) 
If the difference (4) is positive and large, it means that 
the quality of messages arriving to the bit nodes of Ck 
is much better than the average quality of the messages 
in the whole graph. Note that this difference (4) is 
necessarily negative for the least protected classes. In 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:20:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
our particular case of regularity over bit nodes (>.(x) = 
x4), this criterion can be deduced from Equation (3) 
(1)(Gk) 
(lMl) 
_ 
xcv 
- xcv 
-
(5) 
1 - I: p(Ck)(d)J((d -1)JM1(1 -xLIJ)) -XJNMl) 
dECk 
Equation (5) can be lower bounded by 
1-J (( I: p(Ckl(d)d _1)JM1(1-xLIJ)) -XJNMl) 
dECk 
(6) 
We observe that the lower bound depends on the 
average check connection degree of the class Ok: 
dOtJ 
p(Ck) = I: p(Ckl(d)d 
d=dc:."J 
To maximize the difference (4), we have to minimize 
p(Ck). The most protected classes will have the lowest 
average check degrees. p(Ck) will be our cost function, 
that depends also on the minimum connectivity degree 
dU of check nodes of the class. Our algorithm 
presented in Section 4 is directly derived from the 
bound given in Equation (6). We sequentially decrease 
d(Ck) to be able to decrease p-(Ck) and minimize -p(Ck) 
m2n 
' 
at each step. 
3.2 Discussion on Breaking the Concentra-
tion of Check Degrees 
Chung et al. have shown in [6] that a concentrated p(x) 
check degree p(x) = pxd + (1-p)xdMl maximizes the 
speed of convergence of the overall code. This also 
means that concentrated check degrees minimize the 
convergence threshold of the code, expressed in Eb/ No 
for an A WON channel. To achieve UEP properties by 
irregularity in the check profile, we have to increase the 
range of the check degrees, and then break the concen­
tration. Since not obeying concentration increases the 
gap to capacity of the overall code, we must define a 
tolerance on this gap before starting the optimization 
process. The global UEP code will converge slower, 
but its most protected classes faster than the ones 
of the concentrated code. The first solution to limit 
the degradation of the overall convergence threshold 
is to limit the range of the check irregularity around 
p(Ck) in the optimization. Or we could check after the 
optimization process wether the non-concentrated code 
has a threshold that is not too far from the optimum 
(concentrated code) threshold. We have also verified 
by simulations that for short block lengths, the UEP 
designed codes have similar global performance as the 
concentrated code. 
4 
A Practical Means to Achieve 
UEP: Pruning a Mother Code 
The problem in optimizing the check irregularity using 
Equation (6) lies in the fact that the optimization is non­
linear due to the dependence between the irregularities 
of the different sensitivity classes. In [3], the authors 
have proposed a hierarchical procedure to overcome 
this problem. In this section, we present a sequential 
procedure based on "code pruning" which has both the 
advantage of providing UEP codes based on Equation 
(6) and also leads to a practical and flexible scheme for 
various UEP configurations. 
4.1 General Presentation of Pruning 
To achieve irregularity on check nodes, we chose to 
prune a regular mother code in order to build a subcode 
with UEP behavior. Pruning is a well-known method 
for convolutional codes [1], but not so much for LOPC 
codes, for which it has been applied to reduce the 
influence of stopping sets [7]. Pruning away some bits 
of the codeword means to consider them deterministic, 
i.e., fixing the pruned bits, e.g., to zero. Consequently, 
we do not transmit these bits that disappear from the 
graph of the code since their messages are equal to in­
finity. Besides, since the edges connected to the pruned 
bits disappear, the girth (minimum cycle length) of 
the subcode can only be increased. Thus, the columns 
of the parity matrix that correspond to these bits are 
removed. Let Hm and Gm denote the parity-check 
and generator matrices, respectively, of the mother 
code of dimension Ko and length No. To construct a 
subcode of dimension K 1, we prune away K 0 - K 1 
columns of Hm, and obtain the parity-check matrix 
Hs of the subcode. The subcode will have a length of 
Nl = No - (Ko - Kl). The next section deals with 
our sequential pruning procedure. 
4.2 The Sequential Pruning Procedure 
Due to the chosen coding scheme, Kl and the mother 
code are fixed at the beginning of the optimization, 
therefore the code rate is fixed to Rl = NoMV+Kl. 
The Nc sensitivity classes to be optimized are defined 
by the proportions a( k) for k <:: Nc -1. The number 
of info bits in the class Ok is a( k) . Rl . Nl if k = 
1, ... , Nc -1, and LPQRl a( k) = 1. The last class (the 
Ncth class) contains the redundancy. The amount of 
redundancy is the same in the mother code and in the 
subcode, and equals (1-R1)· Nl = (1-Ro)· No. The 
optimization focuses on the two important quantities in 
the bound (6) . -p(Ck) and d(Ck) and is composed of 
. 
mIn' 
two main stages. For a given class Ok: 
• We choose the (akKI) most protected bit nodes. 
• For a given dST, we try to put a maximum 
number of degrees of the check nodes linked to 
these bit nodes near to dST in order to decrease 
pCk. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:20:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Turbo - Coding - 2006 
. 
April 3-7, 2006, Munich 
• The following constraints need to be fulfilled. 
• any pruned bit must not be linked with a 
check node of degree lower or equal to the 
concentration constraint 
• avoid unvoluntary pruning (a column of H 
can become independent from all the others 
and then does not define a code anymore) 
• proportion constraint 
• code rate constraint 
• convergence constraint 
• stability constraint 
If these previous constraints are fulfilled: 
• We decrease dU by one if the tolerance that 
we fixed regarding the concentration is not yet 
reached, and start over again. 
4.3 General Preprocess 
In this section, our goal is to find the generator matrix 
Gs of the subcode obtained by pruning the mother 
code, given Hs which is Hrn without the pruned 
columns. Consequently, the generator matrix Gs must 
fix the pruned bits to zero. A great advantage of the 
pruning method is that it enables us to use the mother 
decoder to decode any subcode created by pruning. 
However, we assume that the encoder of the subcode 
can be different from the encoder of the mother code. 
We observe that for any matrix P of size Kl x Ko, 
we still have HrnGm TpT = O(No-Ko)XKl' Thus, we 
look for a matrix P that is be used at the transmitter 
side as Gs = PGm and such that forall binary vector i 
of size Kl, Gsi = c with elements of c corresponding 
to the pruned bits must be equal to zero. Consequently, 
the matrix P will be called preprocessing matrix, since 
it can be considered as a kind of pre code (see Fig.(l)). 
But we now explicit all the conditions that must be 
fulfilled by P, and how this matrix can be computed. In 
optimization. We then assume that HI is of full rank in 
the following, which ensures that there exist a matrix 
Q and a permutation TI2 such that: 
[HIIO(No-Ko)X(Ko-Kl)] = 
(8) 
Q [I(No-Ko) IR(No-Ko)xK110(No-Ko)x (Ko-K1)] TI2 
where I(No-Ko) denotes the identity matrix of size 
No  Ko and R(No-Ko)xK1 any matrix of size (No  
Ko) x Kl. Using Equation (7), we have 
Q. [I(No-Ko) IR(No-Ko)XKlIO(No-Ko)X(Ko-Kl)]' 
(9) 
.TI2 . TIl' GmT. pT 
= O(No-Ko)XKl 
Let A = TI2TIl Grn T and i be the information word 
of length Kl of the subcode. The information part of 
ApTiT should be associated to R(No-Ko)XKl while 
the part of ApTiT corresponding to pruned columns 
should be associated to all-zero columns. P is therefore 
computed such that 
A(No  Ko + 1: No, :)pT 
= [ 0 
IKI 1 
(Ko-KdxKl 
( 0) 
We can show that if HI is 
full rank then 
A(No  Ko + 1 : No,:) is invertible. With this pro­
cedure, we obtain a preprocessing matrix P which 
is full rank. This method allows to achieve different 
UEP configurations using different subcodes, only by 
changing the preprocessing matrix at the transmitter 
and knowing the indices of the pruned columns of the 
mother code at the receiver. Our scheme thus offers 
some flexibility. However, storing the preprocessing 
matrices can represent a drawback since they are block 
code matrices in front of LDPC encoder. In the next 
section, we present a completely flexible particular case 
of the pruning procedure. 
4.4 A Flexible Particular Pruning Case 
I nfonnation 
length 1(1 
What has been previously explained allows to explore 
Codeword 
. 
. 
length 
all the reachable UEP configuratIOns gIVen the number 
Mother code 
No - 1(0 + 1(1 of pruned columns, but may be too complex for a real 
Subcode 
Fig. I. 
Scheme of the subcode encoder 
the following, Hmprun will denote Hm whose pruned 
columns are replaced by zero columns. Then we have 
(7) 
We can reformulate Hmprun using a permutation ma­
trix TIl on its columns: 
Hmprun = [HIIO(No-Ko)X(Ko-Kl)] TIl 
In order to reach the target code rate Rl = No-T+Kl 
and to have P of full rank, HI must be of full rank. 
This implies to add a constraint at the end of the 
system. An alternative is to restrict ourselves in choos­
ing the pruned columns and the information columns 
of the subcode only among the information columns 
of the mother code. Then Hs and Gs are obtained by 
removing columns in Hm, and the corresponding ones 
in Gm which are columns of the identity part of Gm. 
The corresponding rows of Grn are also removed. Then 
Hs and Gs are of size Mo x No  (Ko  Kd and 
Kl x No  (Ko  Kl)' respectively. They are both of 
full rank and the code rate of the subcode is the target 
rate: 
Rl = 1  
rank(Hs) 
N  (Ko )Kd 
No  (Ko  Kd 
Despite the restriction, this is a very flexible approach 
since we only need to know the indices of the pruned 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:20:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Turbo - Coding - 2006 
. 
April 3-7, 2006, Munich 
columns of the mother code at the transmitter and at the 
receiver, to encode and decode, so almost no memory is 
required to reach different UEP configurations with the 
same mother code. Thus, since the preprocessing matrix 
P has not a neglectible size, if we accept a slight loss 
in optimization, we would prefer the flexible case for 
real-world applications. 
5 
Results 
We present here the results we obtained using the 
general pruning case, that says the optimization ran over 
all the columns of the parity matrix. In the simulations, 
we did not use the preprocessing matrix since we 
worked with the all-zero codeword. We started from a 
regular (3,6) LOPC mother code of length No = 2000 
and code rate Ro = 1/2. The subcode has a length of 
Nl = 1500 and code rate Rl = 1/3. The optimization 
is done for Nc = 3 classes with 0: (1) = 0.1, 0: (2) = 
0.9. We compare the performances of optimized non­
concentrated (degrees of checks between 2 and 6) code 
and almost concentrated (degrees of checks between 4 
and 6) codes. The decoding is done by using only the 
pruned parity-check matrix of the mother code. 
TABLE I 
COMPARISON OF DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS p(Ck) (j) FOR THE 
DIFFERENT CLASSES OF THE CONCENTRATED CODE. 
Check proll Ie ot the almost concentrated code 
j 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
C1 
0 
0 
9.03e-0! 
9.6!e-02 
0 
C2 
0 
0 
6.66e-0! 
3.33e-0! 
0 
C3 
0 
0 
3.55e-0! 
4.86e-01 
1.58e-01 
TABLE II 
COMPARISON OF DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS p(Ck) (j) FOR THE 
DIFFERENT CLASSES OF THE UNCONCENTRATED CODE. 
Check profi Ie of the non-concentrated code 
j 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
C1 
5.66e-0! 
2.60e-0! 
1.53e-0! 
2.00e-02 
0 
C2 
6.44e-02 
1.40e-0! 
3.76e-0! 
3.60e-0! 
5.77e-02 
C3 
1.33e-03 
8.66e-03 
1.60e-01 
4.8!e-01 
3.48e-0! 
Figure (2) shows the EXIT curves defined in equation 
(5) for each class of almost concentrated and non­
concentrated check irregularity codes. The more the 
first class is protected, the more the less protected 
ones are degraded: the best protected class has a 
faster convergence for the non-concentrated code than 
the corresponding one in the concentrated code. The 
intermediate classes are quite equivalent whereas the 
last class of the non-concentrated code has a slower 
convergence than the corresponding one in the concen­
trated one. Figure(3) represents bit error rates of the 
UEP almost concentrated and non-concentrated codes 
after 30 decoding iterations. We observe that the check 
irregularity is a mean to achieve UEP at low number of 
iterations (accelerating the convergence), but also at a 
0.95 
0.9 
0.85 
0.8 
0.75 
i. 
g)(< 0.7 
0.65 
0.6 
0.55 
0.2 
0.3 
0.6 
0.7 
-0- . cone k=1 
-0- . cone k=2 
-0-. cone k=3 
--e-- unconc k=1 
---$- unconc k=2 
--e-- unconc k=3 
0.8 
0.9 
Fig. 2. 
EXIT curves of classes of almost concentrated and non­
concentrated check irregularity codes at Eb/ No = 1.5dB. 
-e- unconc k=l 
---+- unconc k=2 
--e-- unconc k=3 
-0- cone k=l 
-0- cone k=2 
101 L.::-=0::J- cco:: nc::k=:=.3 =---,L,--:-':_---'-_-L._-'-_--'-,-_-'-:---.J 
o 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1 
1.2 
1.4 
1.6 
1.8 
EblNO 
Fig. 3. 
Bit error rates of classes of almost concentrated and non­
concentrated check irregularity codes after 30 iterations. 
high number of iterations since the differences between 
classes are still visible after 30 decoding iterations when 
looking at the bit error rates. In particular, we still 
have better performance at the 30th iteration for the 
first class of the non-concentrated code than for the 
concentrated one, whereas the last class is worse in the 
non-concentrated code than in the almost concentrated 
one. We can see that stretching the check degrees allows 
a stronger difference in the error protection, without 
degradation of total average bit error probability at this 
code length, compared with the concentrated code. 
6 
Conclusion 
In this paper, we have proposed a method to optimize 
the UEP properties of a bit-regular code by optimizing 
its check-irregularity. The so-called detailed representa­
tion of LDPC codes allowed us to define a cost function 
which improves the local convergence of the messages, 
thereby creating UEP behavior. We implemented the 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:20:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
cost function by a highly flexible pruning method, that 
allows to have different UEP configurations with a same 
mother code. The next step of this work would be 
to combine bit and check irregularities to provide the 
best possible UEP with LDPC codes under iterative 
decoding. 
References 
[1) C.-H. Wang and c.-c. Chao. 
Path-Compatible Pruned Con­
volutionnal (PC PC) Codes: A New Scheme for Unequal Error 
Protection. In ISITI998, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1998. 
[2) R.G. Gallager. Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. IRE Trans. 
on Inform. Theory, pages 21-28, 1962. 
[3) C. Poulliat, D. Declercq, and I. Fijalkow. Optimization ofLDPC 
Codes for UEP Channels. In ISIT 2004, Chicago, USA, June 
2004. 
[4) K. Kasai, T. Shibuya, and K. Sakaniwa. Detailedly Represented 
Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. 
IEICE Trans. 
Fundamentals, E86-A(10):2435-2443, October 2003. 
[5) DJ.C. MacKay, S.T. Wilson, and M.C. Davey. 
Comparison 
of Constructions of Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. 
IEEE Trans. on Communications, 47(10):1449-1453, October 
1999. 
[6) S.Y. Chung, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke. Analysis of Sum­
Product Decoding Low-Density Parity-Check Codes using a 
Gaussian Approximation. 
IEEE Trans. on Iriform. Theory, 
47(2):657-670, February 2001. 
[7) T. Tian, C. Jones, J.D. Villasenor, and R.D. Wesel. Construction 
of Irregular LDPC Codes with Low Error Floors. In ICC2003, 
Anchorage, Alaska, USA, 2003. 
[8) J.C. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M.P.C Fossorier, and X­
Y Hu. Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes. IEEE 
Trans. on Communications, 53(8):1288-1299, August 2005. 
[9) T. 
Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. 
Urbanke. 
Design 
of Capacity-Approaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check 
Codes. IEE Transactions on Communications, 47(2):619-637, 
February 2001. 
[10) I.M. Boyarinov and G.L. Katsman. 
Linear Unequal Error 
Protection Codes. IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, 27(2):168-
175, March 1981. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:20:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
