IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2006

829

Low-Voltage CMOS Circuits for Analog Iterative Decoders
Chris Winstead, Member, IEEE, Nhan Nguyen, Member, IEEE, Vincent C. Gaudet, Member, IEEE, and Christian Schlegel, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Iterative decoders, including Turbo decoders, provide near-optimal error protection for various communication channels and storage media. CMOS analog implementations of these decoders offer dramatic savings in complexity and power consumption, compared to digital architectures. Conventional CMOS analog decoders must have supply voltage greater than 1 V. A new low-voltage architecture is proposed which reduces the required supply voltage by at least 0.4 V. It is shown that the low-voltage architecture can be used to implement the general sum-product algorithm. The low-voltage analog architecture is then useful for implementing Turbo and low-density parity check decoders. The low-voltage architecture introduces new requirements for signal normalization, which are discussed. Measured results for two fabricated low-voltage analog decoders are also presented.
Index Terms—Analog decoding, iterative decoding, low-density parity check (LDPC) decoder, low voltage, low power, Turbo decoder.
I. INTRODUCTION
T URBO codes, introduced in 1993, are a class of error control codes which achieve performance very close to a long sought-after limit known as the Shannon bound [1]. The decoding algorithms used in Turbo codes have since been generalized into a class of algorithms operating on graphs [2], [3]. These algorithms are commonly referred to as message-passing algorithms. Turbo-style decoders which employ message passing algorithms are generally referred to as iterative decoders.
An important general form of message passing algorithms is the sum-product algorithm [4], which implements probability propagation on a code’s graph. The sum-product algorithm provides a general framework which describes decoders for many codes, including Trellis codes, low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, block product codes, and Turbo codes. The sum-product
Manuscript received January 24, 2005; revised June 24, 2005, This work was supported by the Alberta Informatics Circle of Research Excellence (iCORE), by Science and Engineering Research Canada (NSERC), by the Canadian Microelectronics Corporation (CMC), by the Canada Foundation for Innovation (CFI), and by the Alberta Science and Research Authority (ASRA). This paper was recommended by Associate Editor G. Cauwenberghs.
C. Winstead is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322-4120 USA (e-mail: winstead@engineering.usu.edu).
N. Nguyen was with with the High Capacity Digital Communications Laboratory (HCDC), Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Alberta, Edmonton AB T6G 2V4, Canada.
V. C. Gaudet and C. Schlegel are with the High Capacity Digital Communications Laboratory (HCDC), Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Alberta, Edmonton AB T6G 2V4, Canada (e-mail: vgaudet@ece.ualberta.ca; schlegel@ece.ualberta.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2005.859773

algorithm is also a form of belief propagation, a class of algorithms used in artificial intelligence [5].
There has been great interest in implementing iterative decoders, but conventional digital implementations are often complex, demanding significant silicon area and power. Analog circuits for iterative decoding have been proposed and demonstrated by various researchers in recent years [6]–[12]. CMOS circuits are of particular interest for some applications because they can be implemented in ordinary (digital) CMOS processes, which are low-cost compared to high-end alternatives such as BiCMOS and SiGe. Because they are implemented in conventional processes, CMOS analog decoders can be more easily integrated with other CMOS components for single-chip receiver solutions.
In many cases, analog decoders offer significant advantages over digital designs. The operations required for implementing the sum-product or algorithms can be implemented in analog with a small number of transistors. Analog circuits also require significantly fewer wire connections between components. Such efficient use of space allows decoding operations to occur completely in parallel, which enables high data throughput. Some example CMOS analog decoders have been recently published, which demonstrate the savings gained by analog decoders as opposed to digital approaches [10], [12]. CMOS analog decoders are also intrinsically low-power, and eliminate the need for high speed analog-to-digital (A/D) conversion in the receiver front-end. A typical A/D converter by itself consumes a significant amount of power and silicon area. An analog decoder may thus be thought of as an “information A/D converter,” specially designed to convert coded analog channel information into decoded bits.
As CMOS process technology advances, feature sizes and oxide thickness are constantly shrinking. This also reduces the “voltage ceiling”—the maximum allowable supply voltage. This is of some benefit to digital designs, because their power consumption is proportional to . Low-power digital circuits are increasingly being designed for very low supply voltages, even below 1 V. At present, CMOS analog decoding architectures must have a supply voltage greater than about 1 V. This requirement may limit their use in the most advanced submicron processes. This is also unattractive in system-on-chip applications in which ultra-low-power digital circuits may be used with sub-1-V supply voltages. Integrating a decoder with a separate, higher supply voltage is an unwanted complication.
CMOS analog decoders also require extra reference voltages which must be generated, regulated, and globally distributed on-chip. There is no exact requirement for what these reference

1057-7122/$20.00 © 2006 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

830

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2006

Fig. 1. Canonical sum-product circuit topology. Fig. 2 provides an explanation of the box notation used in this diagram.

voltages should be, and it is not known how the performance will be affected if the reference voltages are wrong. This is another unwanted design complication. In this paper, we present a low-voltage CMOS analog decoding topology which eliminates the global reference voltages, and reduces by at least 0.4 V, and by as much as 0.56 V. This architecture is expected to be more applicable to low-voltage CMOS processes, and more integrable with low-voltage digital circuits.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we briefly explain code graphs and the sum-product algorithm. In Section III we examine the canonical CMOS analog sum-product topology, and study the effect of eliminating its reference voltages. In Section IV we present a circuit correction which compensates for the zero reference voltages, leading to the lowvoltage topology. In Section V, we study application of the lowvoltage topology to BCJR and LDPC decoder architectures. In Section VI, we present design details and measurement results for two low-voltage analog decoders.

almost always be reduced to a cascade of three-edge nodes [4],

[14].

Each three-edge function node is associated with a func-

tion, , which expresses a relationship between three random

variables , , and , which can take values from discrete

alphabets , , , respectively. We say that

is

a Boolean constraint on

if

for

all , , and . We say that the constraint is satisfied if and

only if

. The random variables

are

characterized by discrete probability mass vectors, written ,

and , respectively.

To implement the sum-product algorithm, the constraint is

mapped to a processing node which receives and . Let

be the set of combinations of

for which

is

satisfied. Let

be the subset of for which , where

. We then compute, for each , the function

II. SUM-PRODUCT ALGORITHM

or equivalently

(1)

The sum-product algorithm [3], [4] is a general framework for expressing probability propagation on graphs. The purpose of the algorithm is to compute global conditional probabilities using only local constraints. Constraints are expressed by factor graphs [3], [4], [13]. Special cases of factor graphs include Trellis graphs and Tanner graphs (a.k.a. constraint graphs). We are interested in implementing the sum-product algorithm on graphs which express Boolean functions on discrete-type variables.

where

and

, is any nonzero constant real

number, and

refers to the th element of the probability

mass vector . The constant is usually chosen so that

. The local computation (1) is the heart of

the sum-product algorithm. A fully-rigorous description of the

algorithm is given elsewhere [4]. The form of (1) is adequate to

describe all or most interesting iterative decoders. A complete

sum-product decoder consists of many interconnected instances

of (1).

A. Constraint Graphs
A constraint graph expresses the logical relationships among the bits in a codeword. The constraint graph contains circles and squares connected by edges. An example constraint graph is shown later in Fig. 9. Circles in the constraint graph are called variable nodes. Each circle represents one bit in a codeword. The squares are referred to as function nodes or constraint nodes. In this work, we restrict our attention to graphs which can be simplified to local Boolean constraints on three variables, i.e., nodes with only three edges. Multi-edge nodes can

III. CANONICAL ANALOG SUM-PRODUCT CIRCUIT
An approach for CMOS analog decoder designs, elaborated in [6], has emerged as a popular topology for analog decoder designs. This topology, which is based on a generalized Gilbert multiplier, is shown in Fig. 1. Because of its popularity, the architecture of Fig. 1 will be referred to as the canonical topology. Fig. 1 uses a simplified “box notation,” explained in Fig. 2, in which an array of source-connected transistors is replaced by a large box.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WINSTEAD et al.: LOW-VOLTAGE CMOS CIRCUITS FOR ANALOG ITERATIVE DECODERS

831

Fig. 2. Box symbol use to indicate a source-connected transistor array.

Fig. 3. Simple renormalization circuit.

In Fig. 1, denotes the ordered sequence of row inputs

(nodes)

, and denotes the ordered sequence

of column inputs (nodes)

. The current inputs

and arrive at input nodes and , respectively.

The diode-connected transistors on the left, corresponding

to transistor labels M1 and M3, perform current-to-voltage

conversion. Each input current is proportional to a probability:

, where is a globally designated unit current

which represents a probability of one.

Intermediate outputs emerge from the top of the source-con-

nected boxes in Fig. 1. There are

such outputs, referred

to as . These outputs represent multiplication of row and

column inputs

(2)

thus performing the “product” portion of (1). To complete the

computation of (1), summation is accomplished by shorting

wires (indicated by the “Connectivity” block). Unused products

(those for which the constraint is not satisfied) must be

shorted to .

In canonical analog decoders, a renormalization stage is usu-

ally required to restore current levels at the circuit’s output.

Let refer to the th output of the Connectivity block in

Fig. 1. For a sum-product circuit,

. This is be-

cause

, but the outputs from the Connectivity

block represent only a subset of the . We refer to the sum

over output currents as the current magnitude, in units of

(3)

To correct for the loss in current magnitude, a simple circuit

such as that of Fig. 3 is often used [6], [14]. The parameters

and are geometry factors, i.e.,

. In

canonical designs, one would typically choose

. In

Section IV-D we show that different geometry constraints apply

to the new low-voltage architecture.

A. Weak-Inversion (Subthreshold) Devices

The Gilbert multiplier consists of MOS transistors biased in

the subthreshold region, meaning

for each transistor

( refers to the voltage between the gate and source of an

MOS device, and is the threshold voltage). In digital design,

subthreshold transistors are usually regarded as turned off. A more precise model of their behavior is given by

where

(4)

and are the device’s width and length, respectively,

is a unitless technology constant [15],

is a

technology constant with units of V , is the nominal

threshold voltage, and

mV is the well-known thermal

voltage. More details of this model are discussed in [16].

Circuits based on this subthreshold model were popularized by

Vittoz, et al. [17]and Mead [15].

The equation for can also be expressed in terms of forward

and reverse components [18]

where

(5)

If is sufficiently large (around 150 mV), then case, the device is said to be in saturation.

. In this

B. Supply Voltage in Canonical Circuits

The canonical topology requires that all devices are in sat-

uration. This imposes a minimum allowed supply voltage on

canonical sum-product circuits. The minimum supply voltage

has been probed experimentally for some designs [19], but an-

alytical bounds are not given in the available literature. Such an

analysis is supplied in this section.

It is common practice to use one canonical circuit made of

nMOS devices, of which the outputs are “folded” into a second

canonical circuit made of pMOS devices. A “slice” of this

folded topology is illustrated in Fig. 4. The pMOS canonical

circuit can perform either a second sum-product operation or

provide renormalization of currents. The pMOS transistors

must also be in saturation, and must have a separate . In

Fig. 4, the voltages are indicated by

and

.

In Fig. 4, the D-S terminals of M5, M4 and M2 are traversed

between

and ground. These three devices must always

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

832

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2006

Using parameters for several CMOS processes, ranging in feature size from 1.5 to 0.18 m, the ratio (10) is found to be within the range of 0.6 to 2 for all processes. The data for these processes is available through MOSIS.
It is therefore reasonable, to a first approximation, to neglect the effect of (10) in (9). Finally, we substitute approximate values for and , and neglect the relatively small term, arriving at the final bound

V

(11)

As a concrete example, a typical 0.18- m CMOS logic

process has

V. For a canonical analog sum-product

decoder implemented in this process, with a 100 nA oper-

ating current, (11) requires

. At best,

V. Therefore,

V is required.

Fig. 4. A “slice” of the canonical topology.

be in saturation for the circuit to function properly. Let us as-

sume that

mV for each device. We further assume

that

is chosen so that

mV. To simplify the

notation, we refer to as the “gap” between and

:

. Then

V. Also

note that and are greatest when

, i.e., when all of

the circuit’s current is steered through a single slice. From (5),

assuming

, we derive an equation for

C. Eliminating

It is clear from Section III-B that the voltage needs of the

canonical circuit can be reduced if

in (11). If

, M2 and related transistors are not in saturation. When this

happens, the reverse current term becomes significant in (5).

This situation is analyzed for ordinary Gilbert multipliers in

[18], and can be immediately applied to the sum-product circuit

of Fig. 1. The resulting behavior is

(12)

(6) The result (12) is almost the same as the normal canonical

output (2), except there is an additional term in the denom-

V

inator. This extra term corrupts the probability calculation.

V

(7)

V

(8)

The result (8) can be arranged in a more useful form by expanding . It is also helpful to express relative to a realistic operating current, such as 100 nA. By expanding the division in the logarithm, and incorporating the device model (4), we arrive at the bound

IV. LOW-VOLTAGE SUM-PRODUCT CIRCUITS To solve the problem posed by the denominator of (12), additional dummy transistors may be added with their sources connected to . If these transistors represent a current
, then the output becomes
(13)
(14)

nA

V nA

In probability terms, the denominator of (14) is a constant and

can be neglected. The addition of redundant transistors therefore

(9) corrects the probability calculation when

. The outputs

of these new transistors are of no use, so we refer to them as

1) Approximations: We now provide an approximation to dummy transistors. The drains of these transistors are connected

the bound (9). Note that

, where and are to .

the permittivity and thickness, respectively, of the oxide dielec-

tric. Then

. If and are expressed in A. General Low-Voltage Sum-Product Topology

units of process values

and m, respectively, then, based on typical Fig. 5 displays a general low-voltage sum-product circuit topology based on these results. In Fig. 5, denotes the set of

column inputs (voltages)

which

excludes the input . The members of have no particular

m

(10) order. The current inputs and are converted into voltage

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WINSTEAD et al.: LOW-VOLTAGE CMOS CIRCUITS FOR ANALOG ITERATIVE DECODERS

833

Fig. 5. Low-voltage sum-product circuit topology, using the box notation of Fig. 2.

inputs and by the diode-connected transistors on the left. All devices have the same dimensions.

B. Supply Voltage in Low-Voltage Circuits

To calculate the minimum allowed supply voltage in the low-

voltage topology, we repeat the analysis of Section III-B with

. To address the worst-case situation, we assume that

both inputs in Fig. 4 are equal to . Then

.

We no longer require M2 to be in saturation, but for proper

function it is necessary to have M4 in saturation. Again applying

the device model (4), we arrive at the equations

(15)

C. Process Scaling and Temperature Effects
A more accurate estimate of minimum supply voltage can be made if we account explicitly for all parameters. The mobility parameter, , the thermal voltage, , and the threshold voltage,
, all depend on temperature. These parameters also depend on a host of other process conditions such as doping concentration and oxide thickness.
A collection of semi-empirical models are given by Mead in [16]. These models relate oxide thickness, impurity doping, threshold voltage, and other process parameters to the scaling of minimum feature-size in sub-micron processes. Using these models, together with models for parametric dependence on temperature, it is possible to evaluate the actual minimum supply voltage of canonical and low-voltage circuits, as a function of temperature and process scaling.
The dependence of mobility on temperature is given by [20]

To solve for , we assume that both devices share the same gate voltage, , and that both devices share the same device current. Then, placing the current through M2 on the left-hand side, and that of M4 on the right-hand side, equating the two currents gives

(19)

where is the temperature in ,

, and is the

total dopant concentration.

According to Mead, the dopant density is approximately

(20)

We now substitute (16) into (15) to obtain V

(16) where is the minimum feature size of the process, specified in units of m. Similarly, the oxide thickness is estimated by

(21)

(17)

The nominal threshold voltage scales as

It is again possible to express this bound in a more usable approximate form. We expand , making the same approximations and adjusting the units as in Section III-B-I. We then arrive at the final form:

The relationship between expressed by

(22) and temperature is approximately
(23)

(18) where is the value of at room temperature, and is

given by Comparing (18) with (11), we find that the low-voltage

topology allows V).

to be reduced by at least 0.4 V (assuming

(24)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

834

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2006

Fig. 6. Allowable supply voltages for canonical and low-voltage topologies, as a function of process feature size and temperature.

Fig. 7. Difference in minimum supply voltage between low-voltage and canonical sum-product circuits, as a function of temperature.

and where is the density of carriers in intrinsic (undoped) given by

. The oxide capacitance is

,

silicon

cm . The subthreshold slope factor, and is defined as the capacitive divider relation between

, is a function of , , , and the gate-to-bulk voltage. We and :

.

approximate by its near-minimum value, which occurs near These equations are collected and solved numerically,

the boundary between weak-inversion and depletion. We begin yielding estimates of (17) and (9) as functions of temperature

with the depletion depth under the gate, which is [16]

and feature size. The results of this calculation are reported

in Fig. 6. The difference in allowable supply voltage between

(25) canonical and low-voltage circuits is shown in Fig. 7 as a function of temperature. The supply-voltage advantage achieved by

where is the permittivity of silicon, and is the charge on the low-voltage circuits is approximately 0.56 V. This difference

electron. The corresponding depletion-layer capacitance is then depends only weakly on temperature.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WINSTEAD et al.: LOW-VOLTAGE CMOS CIRCUITS FOR ANALOG ITERATIVE DECODERS

835

D. Renormalization

In a low voltage circuit described by (14), the denominator is

equivalent to two, substantially reducing the current magnitude

at the output of each module. Renormalization is also imple-

mented with a low-voltage circuit. If the circuit Fig. 3 is used in

the conventional way, with

, then it will only worsen

the attenuation. In this Section it is demonstrated that the atten-

uation is reversed as long as

. It is also shown that the

resulting current amplification does not lead to instability in the

decoder.

In principle, linear attenuation will not change the result

of decoding. The sum-product algorithm only depends on the

relative proportions among input currents (relative to each

other), not on their precise magnitude. Consistent attenuation

in a large network, however, will cause the outputs to approach

zero, causing the decoder to fail. In a practical setting, the

sum-product algorithm is carried out repeatedly in a large net-

work of sum-product nodes. The output of one node provides

input for the next. By “unwrapping” the decoding network, the

decoder may be regarded as a cascaded array of sum-product

nodes. In terms of current magnitude, the circuit becomes an

iteration of attenuation and renormalization.

By inserting a suitably designed renormalization circuit be-

tween modules, the currents are prevented from approaching

zero. We utilize the circuit of Fig. 3 with

. The

circuit is now a form of the low-voltage topology described by

(14), so that the output is

Fig. 8. Current magnitude transfer function for the low-voltage renormalization circuit.
fixed points represented by circles. Fig. 8 demonstrates that, with sufficiently large , the normalized current magnitude can be driven very close to the desired operating point with only one iteration. This ensures that the current magnitude is never far from at the output of any module.
V. DECODER ARCHITECTURES

A. Trellis Decoders (26)
Many codes are constructed from Trellis descriptions. These

include the component codes needed for Turbo codes, as well

It is possible to choose and in Fig. 3 so that upon iter- as convolutional codes that are used in many applications. De-

ation the current magnitude, (defined by (3)), converges to a coding algorithms for these codes are derived directly from their

controlled fixed point greater than zero. This allows us to treat Trellis descriptions. The most powerful Trellis decoding method

(26) as a simple one-dimensional iterated function

is the BCJR algorithm named for the authors who introduced it

in [21], which is often used in Turbo decoders. The BCJR algo-

(27) rithm is a special case of the sum-product algorithm (1) [4].

To determine the dynamic behavior of this system, we iden-

tify the fixed points (where

) and determine whether

they are stable. It is easy to verify that the fixed points occur at

, and

. It is well known that a fixed point

is stable and nonoscillating if the slope of the transfer function,

, is real and satisfies

at the fixed point

. Also, a fixed point is unstable (i.e., it is a repeller) if

. Evaluated at the fixed points, the slopes of the

transfer function (27) are

A Trellis graph for the (8,4) Hamming code is shown in Fig. 9, alongside the structure of the corresponding sum-product decoder. The triangles in Fig. 9 represent comparators. A complete implementation of this decoder is presented in Section VI. Fig. 9 also illustrates how the Trellis is decomposed into distinct sections. A Trellis section is a portion of the Trellis graph which describes a Boolean constraint function. The graph of a Trellis section consists of two columns of states, connected by branches.
Example Trellis sections are shown in Fig. 9 and in the upper

left corner of Fig. 10. In each Trellis section, the states on the left (28) represent the possible values of a random state variable . The

(29) states on the right represent the possible values of the output variable. The labels on branches represent the possible values

The results (28) and (29) show that there is always a stable of a third variable, . If a branch exists for a particular com-

fixed point above zero when

. The canonical renormal- bination

, then the constraint is satisfied for that

izer uses

, in which case there is no fixed point greater combination. Using the constraint specified by the Trellis sec-

than zero, thus driving all currents to zero in a low-voltage net- tion, a sum-product circuit is constructed using the procedures

work. By simply using

this can be avoided. The transfer outlined in Section II-A.

function (27) is shown for various values of in Fig. 8, in A low-voltage sum-product circuit for one Trellis section is

which

. The iterated behavior is also illustrated, with shown in Fig. 10. The branch variable takes values from the set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

836

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2006

Fig. 11. Tanner graph for an (8,4) Hamming code.

Fig. 9. Trellis graph and decoder structure for an (8,4) Hamming code.

Fig. 12. Implementation of equality and parity-check nodes for LDPC-style decoders.
B. LDPC (Tanner Graph) Decoders
Decoders for binary LDPC codes are mapped from the code’s “normalized” Tanner Graph, which is a direct visualization of the code’s binary parity-check matrix [13]. The Tanner Graph contains two types of constraint nodes, parity-check nodes and equality nodes. A variable node denotes a particular bit in a codeword. A parity-check node represents a parity-check equation, which is specified by a single row in the parity-check matrix. All variables in the graph are binary. For implementation, this means that all probability masses have two components. An example Tanner graph is shown in Fig. 11. A corresponding low-voltage analog implementation is reported in Section VI.
For a three-edge parity-check node, the constraint function is a logical XOR operation. Applying this to the sum-product algorithm (1), and labeling the three edges , , and , the required operations are

Fig. 10. Low-voltage circuit for Trellis decoding based on the BCJR algorithm.

(31)

. The sum-product equation for this particular

(32)

Trellis section can be written in matrix form [22], resulting in The sum-product operations for an equality node are

(33)

(30)

(34)

Applying the general circuit of Fig. 5, and varying the con-

Every stage of the Trellis decoder consists of a matrix multipli- nectivity to produce the appropriate functions, we arrive at the

cation of the form (30), which are straightforward to implement circuits of Fig. 12. As before, the “ ” inputs are the column

using low-voltage multipliers.

inputs, and the “ ” inputs are the row inputs. M3 and M4 are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WINSTEAD et al.: LOW-VOLTAGE CMOS CIRCUITS FOR ANALOG ITERATIVE DECODERS

837

Fig. 13. Die micro photograph of chip showing the factor graph decoder, the Trellis decoder, and the I/O interfaces.
TABLE I DECODER IMPLEMENTATIONS SUMMARY

Fig. 14. Serial I/O interface showing input S/H, output comparators, input level shifting and bias generation. Control signals including “Sel,” “Pipe,” and a two-phase nonoverlapping clock are generated by other circuits on chip.

sample-and-hold (S/H) array is 167 MHz. The outputs from the

dummies. Complete decoders for linear binary block codes, including LDPC codes, can be constructed from these three-edge circuits.

S/H chains are fed into level-shifting circuits, which produce voltages suitable for low-voltage sum-product circuits. The chip uses two supply voltages, one for the analog decoder, and the other for I/O. The I/O voltage is fixed at 1.8 V, allowing input

VI. EXAMPLE DECODER IMPLEMENTATIONS

and output levels to meet 1.8-V digital logic requirements. At the output, an array of latched current-comparators is used.

A chip was fabricated in a TSMC 0.18- m 6-M 1.8-V mixed- The comparators are based on a conventional design using a pair

signal process. The chip includes low-voltage implementations of cross-coupled inverters with a flip-flop latch. This design is

of a Trellis decoder and an LDPC-style Tanner graph decoder, also adapted from [23], and full details are provided in [24].

both representing an (8,4) Hamming code. Characteristics and The comparators were found to have poor reliability in the fab-

measured results for the implemented decoders are summarized ricated design. As a result, only one reliable bit position is avail-

in Table I. Both decoders are capable of operating at 0.8-V able. Other bits are corrupted by stuck-at faults and could not be

supply with decoding speeds of up to 3.7 Mbps. The supply can measured. The same pattern of faults is observed across several

be reduced to 0.5 V, reducing the decoding speeds to 69 kbps. chips. This implies a systematic fault in the layout, possibly due

A die micro-photograph of the implemented chip is shown in to inadequate guard-ring isolation of the comparator stages.

Fig. 13. The decoders are pad-separated on the same die. The The signal timing diagram is shown in Fig. 15. Sample

Tanner graph decoder is eleven times larger than the Trellis de- synchronization is accomplished by the FRAME signal, which

coder, occupying 27 500 m and 2,500 m , respectively. Each is input from off-chip. Differential input voltages are sampled

instance of the I/O circuits occupies approximately 16 000 m . one-by-one by the S/H circuits, which are enabled by signals

Both analog decoders use I/O interfaces adapted from [23] SEL1 through SEL8. The samples are then transfered in parallel

and are shown in Fig. 14. Full details of the interface design onto holding capacitors in response to the PIPE signal. The

are reported elsewhere [24]. The analog channel inputs arrive decoder is allowed four and a half clock cycles to settle. The

serially on a differential analog bus. Each sample is encoded as a LATCH signal is then asserted for 2.5 clock cycles, causing the

differential voltage, , which is proportional to the received comparators to latch their data. The LATCH signal is deasserted

log-likelihood ratio. The maximum operating speed of the input just prior to SEL7. When SEL7 is asserted, the comparator data

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

838

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2006

Fig. 15. I/O timing. An off-chip FRAME signal provides synchronization with the first sample. Remaining S/H are activated in succession by the SEL signals, which are generated on-chip. Samples are transfered to holding capacitors by PIPE. Once decoding and compare takes place, decoded bits are shifted out.

regulated voltage source. The analog decoder is mounted on a

second daughter board which mates with the analog test board.

The DAC sample rate is adjustable between 130 kSps and 8.33

MSps. The global unit current is supplied from off-chip by

a Keithley 236 source-measure unit. Power measurements were

made using an HP4155 A semiconductor parameter analyzer.

Measured performance results for both decoders is shown in

Fig. 17, where the decoders are operating at their maximum

tested throughput of 4.17 Mbps. A performance loss of nearly

1 dB is observed for both decoders, relative to maximum-likeli-

hood (ML) performance. In this work, we regard a loss greater

than 1 dB as unacceptable. While the Trellis decoder should ide-

ally be ML-equivalent, a software Tanner graph decoder loses

Fig. 16. Block diagram of the experimental setup.

0.4 dB relative to ML. In the measurements of Fig. 17, the

analog Tanner decoder can therefore be said to lose 0.6 dB

is latched into an array of shift-registers. Subsequently, digital relative to the software model, and can therefore be said to

results are shifted out serially. Only the four information bits have better relative performance in these measurements, while

are shifted out. This timing pattern results in nine clocks per the Trellis decoder requires significantly less power and area.

frame, using one clock cycle for the pipeline operation.

These comparisons are made with caution, since the perfor-

The test setup is shown in Fig. 16. The test is coordinated mance for both decoders is a function of at least three variables:

by a PC, which sends sample frames to an field-programmable supply voltage, the unit current , and the clock speed (i.e., the

gate array (FPGA) board. The FPGA coordinates clock and throughput).

frame signals with the analog samples. The FPGA signals are The observed loss in performance may arise from many fac-

routed through a custom test board which contains a 14-bit dig- tors. These may include thermal noise and clock feedthrough in

ital–analog converter (DAC), analog voltage reference sources, the input interfaces, or noise injected from the power supplies.

fixed 3.3 and 1.8-V regulated voltage sources and a variable Performance loss in analog decoders has also been attributed to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WINSTEAD et al.: LOW-VOLTAGE CMOS CIRCUITS FOR ANALOG ITERATIVE DECODERS

839

Fig. 17. Performance results for the Tanner graph (TG) and Trellis (TR) decoders. The supply voltage and Clock Speed (CS) are also indicated.

Fig. 18. Measured results for the Tanner graph decoder, showing performance Fig. 19. Measured results for Trellis decoder, showing performance as a

as a function of supply voltage and speed.

function of supply voltage and speed.

a “memory effect,” which can be eliminated if the decoder’s in- is observed to react more strongly to supply voltage, although it

ternal nodes are pre-charged to equal voltages before loading a ultimately achieves higher throughput than the Tanner decoder.

new frame of samples. The Tanner graph decoder is equipped These tests only reveal partial information about the de-

with this reset functionality, but the Trellis decoder is not. Also, coders’ performance across the multi-dimensional parameter

in these measurements a large is used, on the order of 10 A. space. Performance measurements are presently very time-con-

This places the decoders in moderate inversion, which is known suming. It is therefore difficult to obtain a complete model of

to contribute some performance loss since the decoders are nom- performance as a function of operating conditions. Based on

inally designed to operate in weak inversion.

the available data, a comparison between the analog Tanner

Measured results showing performance as a function of speed and Trellis decoders is given in Fig. 20. This figure provides

and supply voltage are shown in Fig. 18 for the Tanner graph de- a partial performance profile of the two decoders, and reveals

coder, and in Fig. 19 for the Trellis decoder. These results reveal that the Trellis decoder tends to outperform the Tanner graph

a strong relationship between supply voltage and throughput. In decoder, which is expected on theoretical grounds.

the Tanner graph decoder, when is reduced by 300 mV, the A direct comparison between existing analog and digital de-

speed is reduced by an order of magnitude. The Trellis decoder coders is difficult since they are designed using different tech-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

840

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2006

TABLE II ENERGY EFFICIENCY FIGURES OF DIGITAL (TOP 2) AND ANALOG DECODERS (BOTTOM 4). ADC FIGURES WERE NOT INCLUDED FOR DIGITAL DECODERS, AND
WOULD RESULT IN GREATER ENERGY CONSUMPTION

representing the LDPC and Trellis families. The Trellis decoder was found to have the lowest energy per bit of any reported iterative decoder.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank K. Leung for his assistance with power measurements.

REFERENCES

Fig. 20. Comparison of E =N losses for the Tanner graph (TG) and Trellis (TR) decoders at different V as a function of clock speed. Losses are estimated from performance measurements at E =N = 8 dB.
nologies, operate on different codes, sometimes implement different decoding algorithms, and are intended for a wide range of throughput and applications. A general figure of merit commonly used is the energy efficiency measured in Joules per bit. Table II examines this metric for existing digital and analog decoders. The power consumption has been divided into analog decoder and I/O components to give a better comparison to previously implemented decoders. Comparing our energy efficiency results to existing decoders in Table II, we find the Trellis decoder to be 3 better than the best analog decoder and 30 better than the best digital decoder in terms of energy efficiency.
VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented an overview of low-power CMOS analog circuits for iterative decoding, and developed a new lowvoltage form of the translinear sum-product circuit. The new topology allows the supply voltage to be reduced by at least 0.4 V relative to the canonical approach. We showed how to apply the low-voltage topology to implement a diverse family of iterative error-control codes, including LDPC codes, Trellis codes and, consequently, Turbo codes. We also demonstrated our new method with implementations of two simple decoders,

[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near shannonlimit errorcorrecting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[2] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 3, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[3] N. Wiberg, H. A. Loeliger, and R. Kotter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Eur. Trans. Telecomm., pp. 513–525, Sep./Oct. 1995.
[4] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[5] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems : Networks of Plausible Inference. New York: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[6] H. A. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, and F. Tarkoy, “Probability propagation and decoding in analog VLSI,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 837–843, Feb. 2001.
[7] J. Hagenauer and M. Winklhofer, “The analog decoder,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998.
[8] F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, G. S. Moschytz, H. A. Loeliger, and F. Tarkoy, “All analog decoder for (18,9,5) tail-biting Trellis code,” in Proc. Eur. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ESSCIRC), Sep. 1999, pp. 362–365.
[9] M. Moerz, T. Gabara, R. Yan, and J. Hagenauer, “An analog 0.25 m
BiCMOS tailbiting MAP decoder,” in Proc. Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf., Feb. 2000, pp. 356–357. [10] C. Winstead, J. Dai, S. Yu, R. Harrison, C. J. Myers, and C. Schlegel, “CMOS analog decoder for (8,4) hamming code,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, no. 1, pp. 122–131, Jan. 2004. [11] A. F. Mondragon-Torres, E. Sanchez-Sinencio, and K. R. Narayanan, “Floating-gate analog implementation of the additive soft-input soft-output decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Fundam. Theory Appl., vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 1256–1269, Oct. 2003.
[12] V. C. Gaudet and P. G. Gulak, “A 13.3-Mb/s 0.35-m CMOS analog
Turbo decoder IC with a configurable interleaver,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 38, pp. 2010–2015, Nov. 2003. [13] G. D. Forney, “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001. [14] F. Lustenberger, “On the design of analog VLSI iterative decoders,” Ph.D. dissertation, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, 2000. [15] C. Mead, Analog VLSI and Neural Systems. Reading, MA: AddisonWesley, 1989. [16] S.-C. Liu, J. Kramer, G. Indiveri, T. Delbrück, and R. Douglas, Analog VLSI: Circuits and Principles. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002. [17] E. Vittoz and J. Fellrath, “CMOS analog integrated circuits based on weak-inversion operation,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. SC-12, no. 2, pp. 224–231, Apr. 1977.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WINSTEAD et al.: LOW-VOLTAGE CMOS CIRCUITS FOR ANALOG ITERATIVE DECODERS

841

[18] E. Seevinck, E. Vittoz, M. du Plessis, T.-H. Joubert, and W. Beetge, “CMOS translinear circuits for minimum supply voltage,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Analog Digit. Signal Process., vol. 47, no. 12, pp. 1560–1564, Dec. 2000.
[19] M. Frey, H.-A. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, P. Merkli, and P. Strebel, “Analog-decoder experiments with subthreshold CMOS soft-gates,” in Proc. 2003 Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS’03), Bangkok, Thailand, May 2003, pp. 85–88.
[20] R. S. Muller and T. I. Kamins, Device Electronics for Integrated Circuits. New York: Wiley, 1977.
[21] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[22] J. B. Anderson and S. M. Hladik, “Tailbiting MAP decoders,” IEEE J. Select. Areas in Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 297–302, Feb. 1998.
[23] S. Yu, “Design and test of error control decoders in analog CMOS,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Utah, Logan, 2004.
[24] C. Winstead, “Analog Iterative Decoders,” Ph.D., University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, 2005.
[25] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[26] M. Bickerstaff, D. Garrett, T. Prokop, C. Thomas, B. Widdup, G. Zhou, C. Nicol, and R.-H. Yan, “A unified Turbo/Viterbi channel decoder for
3 GPP mobile wireless in 0.18-m CMOS,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Int.
Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC’02), Feb. 2002, pp. 90–91. [27] D. Vogrig, A. Gerosa, A. Neviani, A. G. Amat, G. Montorsi, and S.
Benedetto, “A 0.35-m CMOS analog Turbo decoder for the 40-bit rate
1/3 UMTS channel code,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 753–762, Mar. 2005.

Nhan Nguyen (S’98–M’06) received a B.App.Sc. (Co-op) degree from the University of Regina, SK, Canada in 2001 (working with various telecommunications companies), and the M.Sc. degree from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 2004.
He served as a Research Assistant with the High Capacity Digital Communications Laboratory, University of Alberta, until June 2005. His research interests include analog and mixed-signal circuits.
Vincent C. Gaudet (S’97–M’03) received the B.Sc. degree in computer engineering from the University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB, Canada, in 1995, and the M.Appl.Sci. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada in 1997 and 2003, respectively.
From February to July 2002, he was a Research Associate in the Department Electronique, Ecole Nationale Superieure des Telecommunications de Bretagne, Brest, France. He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. His research interests include the design of algorithms and integrated circuits for high-speed digital communications. Dr. Gaudet received the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada Postgraduate Scholarship, the Ontario Graduate Scholarship in Science and Technology, and the Walter Sumner Memorial Fund Scholarship, and was awarded the University of Manitoba’s University Gold Medal in 1995.

Chris Winstead (S’96–M’05) received the Ph.D. degree from the University of Alberta in Edmonton, AB, Canada, in 2005.
In 2004, he joined the faculty of Electrical and Computer Engineering at Utah State University in Logan, where he is currently an Assistant Professor. His research interests include low-power VLSI circuits, translinear analog circuits, iterative error-control algorithms, reliable computation and efficient simulation of nonlinear mixed-signal systems.
Dr. Winstead is a member of the Tau Beta Pi.

Christian Schlegel (S’86–M’89–SM’96) received the Dipl. El. Ing. ETH degree from the Federal Institute of Technology, Zurich, Switzerland, in 1984, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN, in 1986 and 1989, respectively.
In 1988, he joined the Communications Group at the research center of Asea Brown Boveri, Ltd., in Baden, Switzerland, where he was involved in mobile communications research. He spent the 1991/1992 academic year as Visiting Assistant Professor at the University of Hawaii at Manoa, HI, before joining the Digital Communications Group at the University of South Australia in Adelaide, Australia from 1992–1994, as head of the Mobile Communications Research Centre. From 1994–1996, he was with the University of Texas at San Antonio, and in 1996 he joined the University of Utah, Salt Lake City. In 2001, he was named iCORE Professor for High-Capacity Digital Communications at the University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada. His interests are in the area of error control coding and applications, multiple access communications, basic digital communications, mobile radio systems and implementations, and analog implementations of digital systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 13:22:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

