arXiv:1510.04954v1 [cs.IT] 16 Oct 2015

1
New Characterization and Efficient Exhaustive
Search Algorithm for Elementary Trapping
Sets of Variable-Regular LDPC Codes
Yoones Hashemi, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract
In this paper, we propose a new characterization for elementary trapping sets (ETSs) of variableregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Recently, Karimi and Banihashemi proposed a characterization of ETSs, which was based on viewing an ETS as a layered superset (LSS) of a short cycle in the code’s Tanner graph. A notable advantage of LSS characterization is that it corresponds to a simple LSS-based search algorithm (expansion technique) that starts from short cycles of the graph and finds the ETSs with LSS structure efficiently. Compared to the LSS-based characterization of Karimi and Banihashemi, which is based on a single LSS expansion technique, the new characterization involves two additional expansion techniques. The introduction of the new techniques mitigates two problems that LSS-based characterization/search suffers from: (1) exhaustiveness: not every ETS structure is an LSS of a cycle, (2) search efficiency: LSS-based search algorithm often requires the enumeration of cycles with length much larger than the girth of the graph, where the multiplicity of such cycles increases rapidly with their length. We prove that using the three expansion techniques, any ETS structure can be obtained starting from a simple cycle, no matter how large the size of the structure a or the number of its unsatisfied check nodes b are, i.e., the characterization is exhaustive. We also demonstrate that for the proposed characterization/search to exhaustively cover all the ETS structures within the (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax, b ≤ bmax, for any value of amax and bmax, the length of the short cycles required to be enumerated is less than that of the LSS-based characterization/search. We, in fact, show that such a length for the proposed search algorithm is minimal. We also prove that the three expansion techniques, proposed here, are the only expansions needed for characterization of ETS structures starting from simple cycles in the graph, if one requires each and every intermediate sub-structure to be an ETS as well. Extensive simulation results are provided to show that, compared to LSS-based search, significant improvement in search speed and memory requirements can be achieved.

2
I. INTRODUCTION
Finite-length low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes under iterative decoding algorithms suffer from the error floor phenomenon. In the error floor region, the slope of error rate curves decreases when the channel quality improves beyond a certain point. It is well-known that errorfloor performance of LDPC codes is related to the presence of certain problematic graphical structures in the Tanner graph of the code, commonly referred to as trapping sets [29]. Graphically, a trapping set (TS) is often seen as the induced subgraph of some variable nodes in the code’s Tanner graph. In such a representation, the TS is commonly characterized by the number of its variable nodes a, and the number of its odd-degree (unsatisfied) check nodes b, and is said to belong to the class of (a, b) trapping sets. Among TSs, the most harmful ones are known to be the elementary trapping sets (ETSs), [37], [23], [27], whose induced subgraphs contain only degree-1 and degree-2 check nodes.
The knowledge of trapping sets and their structure has been used in estimating the error floor of LDPC codes [6], [33], in modifying iterative decoders to have better error-floor performance [5], [12], [21], [38], and in constructing LDPC codes with low error floors [16], [2], [28], [20], [3]. There has also been a flurry of activity in characterization of trapping sets [34], [9], [8], [10], [31], [22], [28], [17], [13], and in developing search algorithms to find them [30], [35], [1], [36], [18], [21]. Most of the works on TSs in the literature are non-exhaustive [1], [18], are limited to structured codes [38], [31], are concerned with relatively small TSs [22], only deal with a certain variable node degree [34], [28], or are applicable to relatively short block lengths [35], [21].
Recently, Karimi and Banihashemi [17] characterized the ETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes. They studied the graphical structure of the ETSs, and demonstrated that a vast majority of the non-isomorphic structures of ETSs are layered super sets (LSS) of short cycles, i.e., each structure S corresponds to a sequence of ETS structures that starts from a short cycle and grows one variable node at a time to reach S. This characterization corresponds to a simple search algorithm that starts from the instances of short cycles in the Tanner graph and can find the ETSs with the LSS property. A shortcoming of this characterization/search, however, is that some of the ETS structures do not lend themselves to the above characterization, i.e., they are not LSSs of any of their cycle subsets. Such structures are labeled as “NA” in [17].

3
In an earlier paper [13], we complemented the results of [17]. By careful examination of NA structures, we demonstrated that they are all LSSs of some basic graphical structures which are slightly more complex than cycles. These basic structures were called prime with respect to the LSS property, or “LSS-prime” in brief, implying that they are not layered super sets of smaller ETSs. Results of [17] (and its corrections in [14]) along with those of [13] provided a simple LSS-based search algorithm that can find all the instances of ETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes, for any range of a and b values, in a guaranteed fashion, starting from the instances of LSS-prime structures.
The LSS-based search algorithm, however, suffers from a major drawback. Although, the search algorithm itself is simple, to find the dominant ETSs in a guaranteed fashion, one may need to enumerate cycles of length much larger than the girth in the Tanner graph of the code, as the input to the search algorithm. The multiplicity of such cycles increases rapidly with the cycle length and thus the enumeration, storage and processing of these cycles pose a practical hurdle in implementing the search algorithm. The same issue applies to non-cycle LSS-prime structures. This becomes particularly problematic for larger variable and check degrees and cases where ETSs with larger a and b values are of interest. In fact, our experimental results show that by increasing the variable and average check degrees, the range of a and b values, the code rate and the block length, the LSS-based search algorithm becomes quickly infeasible to implement.
To the best of our knowledge, the LSS-based search algorithm is the most efficient exhaustive search algorithm for ETSs of a general variable-regular LDPC code. Yet, the complexity of the algorithm is still too high for many practical codes. Motivated by this, in this paper, we develop a new characterization of ETS structures of variable-regular LDPC codes. The new characterization is based on a hierarchical graph-based expansion approach which involves LSS expansion plus two additional expansion techniques. It characterizes each ETS structure with an embedded sequence of ETS structures that starts from a simple cycle and expands, at each step, to a larger ETS using one of the three expansions, until it reaches the ETS structure of interest. The characterization is minimal, in the sense that, none of the expansion steps can be divided into smaller expansions such that the resulting new sub-structures are still ETSs. The new characterization corresponds to an efficient exhaustive search algorithm for ETSs that requires only short-length simple cycles of the graph as the input. The maximum length of the input cycles is often smaller than that of the LSS-based search algorithm, and is, in fact, provably

4
minimal. We develop a general approach to characterize all the non-isomorphic structures of ETSs within a certain range of a ≤ amax, b ≤ bmax, based on the three expansions, for LDPC codes with different variable degrees and girths. We then provide ETS characterization tables for LDPC codes with different variable degrees, girths, and with different rate and block length ranges. These tables are used to devise efficient search algorithms, based on the three expansion techniques, for exhaustively finding ETSs. The search algorithms are then applied to a large number of LDPC codes, both random and structured, and with a variety of degree distributions, girths, rates and block lengths, to demonstrate the strength and versatility of the proposed scheme. Compared to LSS-based search, improvements of up to three orders of magnitude are achieved in the run-time and memory requirements.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Basic definitions and notations are provided in Section II. In this section, we also describe a software that is used to find non-isomorphic structures of ETSs in a given class. In Section III, the LSS-based characterization/search is revisited and its shortcomings are discussed. In Section IV, the new expansion techniques are introduced, the new characterization is developed, and characterization tables are provided. We also present the new search algorithm, and discuss its complexity in this section. Numerical results are presented in Section V, and Section VI is devoted to conclusions.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Definitions and Notations Consider an undirected graph G = (F, E), where the two sets F = {f1, . . . , fk} and E =
{e1, . . . , em}, are the sets of nodes and edges of G, respectively. We say that an edge e is incident to a node f if e is connected to f . If there exists an edge ek which is incident to two distinct nodes fi and fj, we call these nodes adjacent. In this case, we represent ek by fifj or fjfi. The neighborhood of a node f , denoted by N (f ), is the set of nodes adjacent to f . The degree of a node f is denoted by deg(f), and is defined as the number of edges incident to f . The maximum degree and the minimum degree of a graph G, denoted by ∆(G) and δ(G), respectively, are defined to be the maximum and minimum degree of its nodes, respectively.
Given an undirected graph G = (F, E), a walk between two nodes f1 and fk+1 is a sequence of nodes and edges f1, e1, f2, e2, . . . , fk, ek, fk+1, where ei = fifi+1, ∀i ∈ [1, k]. In this definition, the nodes f1, f2, . . . , fk+1 are not necessarily distinct. The same applies to the edges

5
e1, e2, . . . , ek. A path is a walk with no repeated nodes or edges, except the first and the last nodes that can be the same. If the first and the last nodes are distinct, we call the path an open path. Otherwise, we call it a cycle. The length of a walk, a path, or a cycle is the number of its edges. A lollipop walk is a walk f1, e1, f2, e2, . . . , fk, ek, fk+1, such that all the edges and all the nodes are distinct, except that fk+1 = fm, for some m ∈ (1, k). A chord of a cycle is an edge which is not part of the cycle but is incident to two distinct nodes in the cycle. A simple cycle or a chordless cycle is a cycle which does not have any chord. Throughout this paper, we use the notation sk for a simple cycle of length k. Notation ck is used for cycles of length k that do have at least one chord.
A graph is called connected when there is a path between every pair of nodes. A tree is a connected graph that contains no cycles. A rooted tree is a tree in which one specific node is assigned as the root. The depth of a node in a rooted tree is the length of the path from the node to the root. The depth of a tree is the maximum depth of any node in the tree. Depth-one tree is a tree with depth one. A node f is called leaf if deg(f ) = 1. Although this terminology is commonly used for trees, in this paper, we use it for a general graph that may contain cycles. A leafless graph is a connected graph G with δ(G) = 2.
The graphs G1 = (F1, E1) and G2 = (F2, E2) are isomorphic if there is a bijection p : F1 → F2 such that nodes f1, f2 ∈ F1 are joined by an edge if and only if p(f1) and p(f2) are joined by an edge. Otherwise, the graphs are non-isomorphic.
Any m × n parity check matrix H of an (n, k) LDPC code C can be represented by its bipartite Tanner graph G = (V ∪ C, E), where V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} is the set of variable nodes and C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm} is the set of check nodes. The degrees of nodes vi and ci are denoted by dvi and dci, respectively. A Tanner graph is called variable-regular with variable degree dv if dvi = dv, ∀ vi ∈ V . A (dv, dc)-regular Tanner graph is a variable-regular graph in which dci = dc, ∀ ci ∈ C. For a subset S of V , the subset Γ(S) of C denotes the set of neighbors of S in G. The induced subgraph of S in G, denoted by G(S), is the graph with the set of nodes S ∪ Γ(S) and the set of edges {fifj ∈ E : fi ∈ S, fj ∈ Γ(S)}. The set of check nodes with odd and even degrees in G(S) are denoted by Γo(S) and Γe(S), respectively. In this paper, the terms unsatisfied check nodes and satisfied check nodes are used to refer to the check nodes in Γo(S) and Γe(S), respectively. The size of an induced subgraph G(S) is defined to be the number of its variable nodes. We assume that an induced subgraph is connected. Disconnected subgraphs

6
can be considered as the union of connected ones. The length of the shortest cycle in a Tanner graph is called girth, and is denoted by g. We study the variable-regular graphs with dv ≥ 3, that are free of 4-cycles (g > 4). All the induced subgraphs with the same size a, and the same number of unsatisfied check nodes b, are considered to belong to the same (a, b) class.
Given a Tanner graph G, a set S ⊂ V is called an (a,b) trapping set (TS) if |S| = a and |Γo(S)| = b. Alternatively, S is said to belong to the class of (a,b) TSs. Parameter a is referred to as the size of the TS. In the rest of the paper, depending on the context, the term “trapping set” may be used to refer to the set of variable nodes S, or to the induced subgraph G(S) of S in the Tanner graph G. Similarly, we may use S to mean G(S). An elementary trapping set (ETS) is a trapping set for which all the check nodes in G(S) have degree 1 or 2. A set S ⊂ V is called an (a,b) absorbing set (AS) if S is an (a, b) trapping set and all the variable nodes in S are connected to more nodes in Γe(S) than in Γo(S). An elementary absorbing set (EAS) S is an absorbing set for which all the check nodes in G(S) have degree 1 or 2. A fully absorbing set (FAS) S ⊂ V is an absorbing set for which all the nodes in V \S have strictly more neighbors in C\Γo(S) than in Γo(S). A set S ⊂ V is called an (a,b) fully elementary absorbing set (FEAS) if S is an (a, b) EAS and if all the nodes in V \S have strictly more neighbors in C\Γo(S) than in Γo(S).
Elementary trapping sets are the subject of this paper. To simplify the representation of ETSs, similar to [17], [13], we use an alternate graph representation of ETSs, called normal graph. The normal graph of an ETS S is obtained from G(S) by removing all the check nodes of degree one and their incident edges, and by replacing all the degree-2 check nodes and their two incident edges by a single edge. It is easy to see that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the bipartite graph G(S) and the normal graph of S.
Lemma 1. Consider the normal graph of an (a, b) ETS structure of a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable degree dv. The number of nodes and edges of this normal graph are a and (adv − b)/2, respectively. We thus have b = adv − 2e, where e is the number of edges of the normal graph.
We call a set S ⊂ V an (a,b) leafless ETS (LETS) if S is an (a, b) ETS and if the normal graph of S is leafless.

7

c7 v1 c1 v2

f1

f2

c5 c4

c2

v4

c3 v3

f4

f3

c6

(a)

c7 v1 c1 v2

f1

f2

c6

c4

c2

c5 v4 c3 v3

f4

f3

c8 (b)

Fig. 1. (a) A LETS in the (4, 2) class and its leafless normal graph, (b) An ETS in the (4, 4) class and its normal graph which has a leaf (f1).

Example 1. Fig. 1(a) represents a LETS in the (4, 2) class and its leafless normal graph, while Fig. 1(b) represents an ETS in the (4, 4) class and its normal graph with a leaf. Symbols and
are used to represent satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes in the induced bipartite subgraphs,
respectively, and the symbol ◦ is used to represent variable nodes in both the induced subgraphs
and normal graphs.
In general, EASs are a subset of LETSs. For the special case of dv = 3, LETSs and EASs are equal sets. To the best of our knowledge, almost all the structures reported in the literature as error-prone structures of variable-regular LDPC codes are LETSs. LETSs have thus been the subject of many studies including [4], [18], [17], [13] and [28]. In the rest of this paper, also, we focus on LETSs.
In this paper, we characterize the non-isomorphic LETS structures, and also devise search algorithms to find all the instances of LETS structures of a given Tanner graph in a guaranteed fashion. In the part related to characterization, we use the normal graph representation of LETS structures. In the part on search algorithms, on the other hand, we perform the search on a Tanner graph, and are thus concerned with the bipartite graph representation of a LETS structure. Nevertheless, for consistency and to prevent confusion, we still use terminologies corresponding to normal graphs. For example, we use “all the instances of sk” to mean “all the instances of the structure whose normal graph is sk.”

8
B. Nauty Program Nauty [26], is a package of programs for computing automorphism groups of graphs. There is
a program called geng in this package that generates all the non-isomorphic graphical structures with a given number of nodes and edges very efficiently. This program has many input options to generate connected graphs, triangle-free graphs, or graphs with certain minimum and maximum node degrees. In this work, we use geng to generate all the non-isomorphic graphical structures of LETSs in different classes. To simplify this task, we use the normal graph representation of LETSs. Since we are interested in connected LETS structures in variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv that are 4-cycle free, we look for normal graphs with no parallel edges and with minimum and maximum node degrees equal to δ(G) = 2 and ∆(G) ≤ dv, respectively. By setting the range of node degrees to [2, dv], the number of nodes to a, the number of edges to (adv − b)/2, and by choosing the simple connected graph in geng’s input options, this program generates all the non-isomorphic graphical structures of connected LETSs in the (a, b) class for variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv. If we are interested in Tanner graphs with g ≥ 8, we also add the option of “triangle-free.”
III. LSS-BASED (DOT-BASED) CHARACTERIZATION/SEARCH APPROACH In this section, by providing a new perspective, we revisit the LSS-based characterization/search approach, proposed in [17]. The new perspective is based on the normal graph representation of LETS structures, and a graph expansion technique applied to normal graphs, which we refer to as “depth-one tree,” or “dot,” in brief. Characterization and search algorithms based on dot expansion are then provided followed by a discussion on shortcomings of the dot-based approach. All the discussions are in the context of variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, even if this is not explicitly mentioned sometimes.
A. LSS-based Approach To characterize LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes, in [17], Karimi and Banihashemi first
generated all the graphical structures of LETSs in each (a, b) class. They then examined each structure S to find out whether S is a layered super set (LSS) of any of its cycles, i.e., whether S corresponds to a sequence of LETS structures that starts from a cycle and grows one variable node at a time to reach S. It was shown in [17] that a vast majority of non-isomorphic LETS

9

G(S )

m-2

Fig. 2. Expanding a LETS structure S by applying depth-one tree expansion with m edges (dotm).
structures are LSS of cycles. The relatively small number of structures that do not lend themselves to LSS characterization (starting from cycles) are labeled as “NA” in [17]. Subsequently, it was shown in [13] that NA structures, themselves, are also LSSs of some basic graphical structures which are only slightly more complex than cycles. These basic structures are called prime with respect to the LSS property, or LSS-prime in brief, implying that they are not layered super sets of smaller structures. By this definition, cycles that are not LSS of any of their subsets are included in the set of LSS-prime structures, and are called cycle LSS-prime structures. The rest of the prime structures are referred to as non-cycle LSS-prime structures.
B. Dot-based Characterization A careful examination of the LSS property in the space of normal graphs reveals that this
property corresponds to a simple graph-based expansion technique, referred to, here, as depthone tree (dot) expansion. The notation dotm is used for a dot expansion with m edges, as shown
in Fig. 2. In this figure, symbol ◦ is used to represent the m common nodes between the parent structure S and the dotm structure. Symbol •, on the other hand, is used to represent the root
node of dotm structure. For the dotm expansion to result in a valid normal graph for a LETS structure of a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable degree dv, the m edges of the tree will have to be connected to nodes of S with degree less than dv. In addition, the degree m of the root node must be at least 2 and at most dv.
Proposition 1. Suppose that S is an (a, b) LETS structure of variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, where b ≥ 2. Expansion of S using dotm, 2 ≤ m ≤ min{dv, b}, will result in LETS structure(s) in the (a + 1, b + dv − 2m) class.
Proof: In addition to being limited by the upper bound of dv, the maximum value of m is also

10

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

(e)

Fig. 3. LETS structures with ∆(S) ≤ dv = 4: (a) The LETS structure S is in the (4, 8) class, (b)-(c) LETS structures in the (5, 8) class generated from S by dot2 expansion, (d) LETS structure in the (5, 6) class generated from S by dot3 expansion, and (e) LETS structure in the (5, 4) class generated from S by dot4 expansion.

upper bounded by b. Therefore, m ≤ min{dv, b}. In the dotm expansion, only one node is added to S, and thus the size of the new structure is a′ = a+1. Based on Lemma 1, the number of edges in S is |ES| = (adv−b)/2. By the nature of dotm expansion, the number of edges in the expanded structure S′ is |ES′| = |ES| + m. Therefore, based on Lemma 1, the number of unsatisfied check nodes b′ in the new structure is b′ = (a + 1)dv − 2|ES′| = adv − 2|ES| + dv − 2m = b + dv − 2m.

Example 2. Consider the LETS structure S of Fig. 3(a) in a variable-regular Tanner graph with dv = 4 and g = 6. This structure is in the (4, 8) class. The application of dot2 expansion to S generates two non-isomorphic structures shown in Figs. 3(b) and (c) in the (5, 8) class. For each of the two expansions dot3 and dot4 applied to S, only one new structure is generated. This structure belongs to the (5, 6) and the (5, 4) class, respectively, and is shown in Figs. 3(d) and (e), respectively.
Proposition 2. Among the LETS structures with the same size a, the simple cycle of size a in the (a, a(dv − 2)) class has the largest b.
Proof: Since b = adv − 2|E|, the LETS structure with the largest b is the one with the minimum number of edges |E|. Also, in leafless structures, each node has at least two incident edges. Therefore, the simple cycle of size a, in which each node has exactly two incident edges, has the minimum number of edges, a, among all the LETS structures with the same size. The

11
simple cycle of size a is, in fact, the only LETS structure in the (a, adv − 2a = a(dv − 2)) class.
Remark 1. In a Tanner graph with girth g, the smallest LETS structure is the simple cycle of size g/2, denoted by sg/2. The sg/2 structure is the only LETS structure of size g/2.
Given all the non-isomorphic LETS structures of size k, the dot expansion technique is able to generate most of the non-isomorphic LETS structures of size k + 1. The LETS structures which cannot be obtained by the dot expansion from any of their subsets are called dot-prime structures. For brevity, we refer to these structures as being prime, in the rest of the paper. Prime structures can be categorized into: (i) cycle prime structures, and (ii) non-cycle prime structures. In the first category, we have all the simple cycles, and cycles with chord that are out of the reach of the dot expansion. In the second category, we have structures that are slightly more complex than cycles. Non-cycle prime structures are discussed in details in [13].
Dot expansion is a simple recursive technique to generate larger LETS structures from smaller ones. Based on Remark 1, one needs to start from the simple cycle of length g/2 and apply the dot expansion recursively, to obtain non-isomorphic LETS structures in different (a, b) classes with a > g/2. This technique, however, has the limitation of leaving out all the prime structures. Therefore, for a full characterization of LETS structures based on dot expansion, these prime structures will have to be identified and added as new initial building blocks for the dot expansion. The pseudo-code for the dot-based characterization algorithm is provided in Algorithm 1.
In this algorithm, all the non-isomorphic LETS structures in different (a, b) classes in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax = amax(dv − 2) are generated, and identified as being either prime or non-prime. The set L in Algorithm 1 is used to store all the LETS structures that are found so far. In the while loop, first, in Line 4, the non-isomorphic LETS structures in different classes with size k in L are compared with those obtained by the geng program. If there is a discrepancy, the LETS structures that were not generated by the algorithm (missing in L) are chosen as the set of prime structures of size k, Pk. Then, using the pseudo-code of Routine 1, the set of all non-isomorphic LETS structures up to size amax, Lk, is generated using the dot expansion, starting from the structures in Pk.
In Routine 1, set Lak is the set of non-isomorphic LETS structures of size a generated by the recursive application of the dot expansion starting from the structures in Pk. All the non-

12
Algorithm 1 (Dot-based Characterization Algorithm) Finds all the non-isomorphic LETS structures in (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax = amax(dv − 2), for a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable degree dv and girth g. The prime and non-prime structures of size k are stored in sets Pk and Lk, k = g/2, . . . , amax, respectively.
1: Inputs: amax, g, dv. 2: Initializations: L ← ∅, k = g/2. 3: while k ≤ amax do 4: Find the prime LETS structures Pk of size k which are not found in the algorithm (by
comparing the structures in L with those generated by geng). 5: Lk= DotExpansion(Pk, L, amax). 6: L = L ∪ Lk. 7: k = k + 1. 8: end while 9: Outputs: {Pg/2, . . . , Pamax}, {Lg/2, . . . , Lamax}.
isomorphic LETS structures of size a + 1 that are generated by expanding the non-isomorphic LETS structures in Lka using dotm expansions with different values of m are stored in Ltem. A subset of Ltem that is not generated by smaller prime structures will then be identified as the set Lak+1.
Remark 2. Expanding LETS structures with depth-one tree is the same as the LSS-based algorithm proposed in [17]. For the characterization of LETS structures, however, rather than examining each structure in a class to find out its LSS properties, as performed in [17], in this work, the non-isomorphic LETS structures are generated by expanding the prime structures using the dot expansion technique.
Case Study-Characterization of non-isomorphic LETS structures of (a, b) classes for variableregular graphs with dv = 3, g = 6 and a ≤ 9, b ≤ 9:
This characterization is summarized in Table I, where the prime structures are boldfaced. The notations sk, ck, and nk are used to denote the simple cycle, a prime cycle with chord, and a non-cycle prime structure of size k, respectively. As an example of how the entries in Table I

13

Routine 1 (DotExpansion) Recursive expansion of a set of structures Pk of size k, up to size

amax, using dot expansion, excluding the already found structures L, and storing the rest in Lk.

Lk= DotExpansion (Pk, L, amax) 1: Initialization: Lkk ← Pk.

2: for a = k, . . . , amax − 1 do

3:

Ltem ← ∅.

4: for each LETS structure S in Lak do

5:

Find the subset F ′ of nodes in S with degree strictly less than dv.

6:

for m = 2, . . . , dv do

7:

Construct Nm(S) to include all the possible subsets of F ′ with size m.

8:

for each set of m nodes in Nm(S) do

9:

Generate a new structure, S′ using dotm expansion by connecting a new node

to the set of m nodes.

10:

Ltem = Ltem ∪ S′.

11:

end for

12:

end for

13: end for

14:

Lka+1 = Ltem \ L.

15: end for

amax

16: Lk =

Lka.

a=k

17: Output: Lk.

should be interpreted, we consider the (7, 5) class. The entries for this class are: s6(3), c7(1), and n7(2). This means that there are a total of 6 non-isomorphic LETS structures in this class, three of these structures are generated, using dot expansions, starting from s6, one of them is a prime cycle with chord of size 7, and two of them are non-cycle prime structures of size 7. Having the symbol “-” for an (a, b) class means that it is impossible to have any LETS structure in that class. In Table I, the smallest possible LETS structure is the cycle of size 3, s3. The two non-isomorphic LETS structures of size 4 generated in Algorithm 1 by the application of dot expansions to s3 are shown in Fig. 4 (f4 is the new node added to s3). These structures, which

14
TABLE I DOT-BASED CHARACTERIZATION OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR
GRAPHS WITH dv = 3, g = 6 AND a ≤ 9, b ≤ 9

b=0 b=1
b=2
b=3
b=4
b=5 b=6 b=7 b=8 b=9

a=3 -
-
s3(1)
-
-

a=4 s3(1)
-
s3(1)
-
s4(1)
-

a=5 -
s3(1)
-
s4(2)
-
s5(1) -

a=6 s4(2)
-
s4(3), s5(1)
s5(2), c6(1)
n6(1) -
s6(1) -

a=7 -
s4(3), s5(1)
-
s5(6), s6(1) c6(2), n6(1)
-
s6(3), c7(1) n7(2) s7(1) -

a=8 s5(3), s6(1), c6(1)
-
s5(9), s6(5), c6(2) n6(1), c7(1), n7(1)
-
s6(12), s7(2), c7(4) n7(4), c8(2), n8(1)
-
s7(3), c8(2), n8(5) -
s8(1) -

a=9 -
s5(9), s6(5), c6(2) n6(1), c7(1), n7(1)
-
s6(31), s7(9), c7(9) n7(7), c8(3), n8(4)
-
s7(19), s8(2), c8(11) n8(15), c9(2), n9(3)
s8(4), c9(2), n9(7)
s9(1)

f2

f1

f1

f4

f2 f4

f3

f3

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4. LETS structures in (a) (4, 2) and (b) (4, 0) classes in variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6.

belong to (4, 2) and (4, 0) classes, respectively, are the only non-isomorphic LETS structures of size 4 that are generated by the dot expansion. There, however, remains another LETS structure of size 4 in the (4, 4) class that is not generated by the dot expansion. This (4, 4) LETS structure, which is in fact s4, is thus chosen as a prime structure in Step 4 of Algorithm 1.
Fig. 5(a) shows two prime structures in the (6, 6) and (6, 4) classes, respectively, and Fig. 5(b) depicts two prime structures in the (7, 5) class.

15
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5. Prime LETS structures in variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6 (a) a simple cycle in the (6, 6) class and a cycle with chord in the (6, 4) class (b) non-cycle prime structures in the (7, 5) class.
It is worth noting that unlike [17], the simple cycles and prime cycles with chord are distinguished in this paper.
C. Dot-based Search Algorithm Dot-based characterization of LETS structures corresponds to a search algorithm to find all
the instances of LETS structures in the Tanner graph of LDPC codes with different values of dv, g, amax and bmax. First, based on the characterization table, the set of prime structures in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax are identified. For example, for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, g = 6 and bmax = amax = 9, all the prime structures of Table I are needed. As another example, if, for a variable-regular graph with dv = 3 and g = 6, one is interested in bmax = 3 and amax = 8, only 8 prime structures in the (3, 3), (4, 4), (5, 5), (6, 4), (6, 6) and (7, 5) classes are needed. Suppose that T prime structures are needed for a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. The instances of each prime structure are then enumerated in the Tanner graph of the code. Consider IP1, . . . , IPT , to be the sets of all the instances of T prime structures in the graph. These sets are used as the input to the dot-based search algorithm to find all the instances of LETS structures in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. The pseudo-code of the dot-based search algorithm is given in Algorithm 2.
In Algorithm 2, the set Ita is the set of instances of LETSs of size a which are found starting from the instances IPt of the tth prime structure, the set It is the union of sets Ita with different sizes a, and I is the set of instances of all LETSs which are found so far in the algorithm. The

16

Algorithm 2 (Dot-based Search Algorithm) Finds all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures

of a variable-regular Tanner graph G with girth g, for a ≤ amax, starting from all the instances IP1, . . . , IPT , of the T prime structures identified in the characterization table. The set It in the output contains all the instances of LETS in G generated from IPt for t = 1, . . . , T .
1: Inputs: G, {IP1, . . . , IPT }, g, amax. 2: Initializations: Ita ← ∅, for 1 ≤ t ≤ T , g/2 ≤ a ≤ amax, I ← ∅. 3: for t = 1, . . . , T do

4: Itk ← IPt, where k is the size of the instances in IPt. 5: a = k.

6: while a < amax do

7:

Ita+1= DotSrch(Ita, I).

8:

I = I ∪ Ita+1.

9:

a = a + 1.

10: end while

amax

11:

It =

Ita

a=k

12: end for

13: Outputs: {I1, . . . , IT }.

outputs of the search algorithm are the sets of instances of LETSs in all classes starting from instances of T prime structures. Given a set of instances of LETS structures of size a, in Line 7 of Algorithm 2, Routine 2 finds a set of instances of LETS structures of size a + 1, using dot expansions. For each instance S of a LETS structure in Ita, some instances Item of LETS structures with size a + 1 are found. The instances Ita+1 in Item, which were not already found and included in I, are the output of this routine.
The dot-based search algorithm presented here is essentially the same as the LSS-based search algorithm of [17], [13].
D. Shortcomings of Dot-based Search Algorithm To motivate the new characterization/search technique, we start by explaining the main prac-
tical issues in implementing a dot-based search algorithm through a number of examples. In

17

Routine 2 (DotSrch) Expansion of a set of instances Ita of LETS structures of size a using dot expansions to find a set of instances of LETS structures of size a + 1, excluding the already found structures I, and storing the rest in Ita+1. Ita+1= DotSrch (Ita, I)
1: Initializations: Item ← ∅. 2: for each instance of LETS structure S in Ita do 3: Consider V to be the set of variable nodes in V \ S, which have at least two connections

with the check nodes in Γo(S) and have no connection with the check nodes in Γe(S). 4: for each variable node v ∈ V do

5:

Item = Item ∪ {S ∪ v}.

6: end for

7: end for 8: Ita+1 ← Item \ I. 9: Output: Ita+1.

summary, in a given Tanner graph, to exhaustively search for (a, b) LETS instances within the range of interest a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, one needs to initially enumerate instances of prime structures that are needed as parents of the LETS structures under consideration. Some of these prime structures have relatively large a and b values. For practical codes, the multiplicity of instances of such prime structures can be easily in the range of tens of millions. This imposes a huge computational burden and memory requirement on the dot-based search algorithm. The dot-based search algorithm in this case is particularly inefficient, when such prime structures, themselves, are not of direct interest (as they have relatively large a and b values), and when the multiplicity of the instances of the LETS structures, that are children of such prime structures and of interest, is relatively low, or in some cases even zero.
We start by the case of variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6. For such graphs, the dot-based characterization for the range of a ≤ 9 and b ≤ 9, was presented in Table I. In Table II, we have extended the results of Table I to cover LETS structures with a = 10, 11, 12, and b ≤ 5. All the (non-cycle and cycle) prime structures of size less than 10 (those identified in Table I by sk, ck, nk, with k ≤ 9) are used to generate the LETS structures in Table II. For the LETS structures which are not generated using the dot expansion technique starting from any of

18
TABLE II DOT-BASED CHARACTERIZATION OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR
GRAPHS WITH dv = 3, g = 6, 10 ≤ a ≤ 12 AND b ≤ 5

b=0 b=1 b=2 b=3 b=4 b=5

a = 10 s6(12), s7(3), c7(2)
n7(1), n8(1)
-
s6(50), s7(24), c7(10), n7(7) s8(3), c8(8), n8(10), n9(1)
-
s7(75), s8(20), c8(37), n8(37), c9(10), n9(18), NA(1)
-

a = 11 -
s6(50), s7(26), c7(10), n7(7) s8(4), c8(6), n8(9), n9(2) -
s7(211), s8(65), c8(72), n8(65) s9(4), c9(21), n9(41), NA(3) -
s8(172), s9(40), c9(104) n9(139), NA(81)

a = 12 c7(43), s8(15), c8(12) n8(9), s9(1), c9(1), n9(4)
-
s7(350), s8(156), c8(93), n8(73) s9(22), c9(44), n9(77), NA(20)
-
s8(711), s9(202), c9(322) n9(346), NA(311)
-

these prime structures, the notation “NA” is used in Table II. Starting from the prime structures of size 10 and 11, one can also generate (characterize) NA LETS structures of Table II.
Example 3. The (11, 1) class is a potentially dominant LETS class of variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6. Table II shows that among 114 non-isomorphic LETS structures in this class, 50, 26, 10, 7, 4, 6, 9 and 2 structures are generated starting from prime structures s6, s7, c7, n7, s8, c8, n8 and n9, respectively. This means prime structures with size up to 9 need to be enumerated in the Tanner graph to find the instances of all the LETS structures of this class (if any exists). Fig. 6 represents S = ({f1, f2, . . . , f11}, E), a LETS structure in the (11, 1) class which is generated starting from the simple cycle prime structure, s8, in the (8, 8) class (S′ = ({f1, f2, . . . , f8}, E′)). To find all the instances of S in the Tanner graph using a dot-based search algorithm, all the instances of s8 in the graph need to be enumerated.
Example 4. In the (12, 2) class of Table II, in addition to LETS structures that are generated by the dot-based expansion starting from c7, s8, c8, n8, s9, c9 and n9, there are 20 non-isomorphic LETS structures that are generated from prime structures of size 10 and 11 (denoted as NA in the table). Fig. 7 shows the structure S = ({f1, f2, . . . , f12}, E), as one of these NA structures.

19

f9

f2 f3

f11 f1

f4

f8

f5

f7 f6

f10

Fig. 6. A LETS structure in the (11, 1) class of a variable-regular graph with dv = 3 and g = 6.

f3

f8

f12

f2 f4 f5 f6 f7 f9

f11

f1

f10

Fig. 7. A LETS structure in the (12, 2) class of a variable-regular graph with dv = 3 and g = 6.

This structure is generated starting from a non-cycle prime structure of size 10 in the (10, 8) class (S′ = ({f1, f2, . . . , f10}, E′)). Although a certain Tanner graph with dv = 3 and g = 6 may not contain any instance of S, all the instances of the structure S′ in the Tanner graph need to be enumerated for the dot-based search algorithm to guarantee the exhaustive coverage of the (12, 2) class.
Example 5. Consider a (3, 6)-regular LDPC code with g = 6, and n = 20000 [24].1 Suppose that one is interested in LETSs of this code in the range of a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5. The multiplicities of all the instances of prime structures of size 8 and 9 in the Tanner graph of this code in the (8, 4), (8, 6), (8, 8), (9, 5), (9, 7) and (9, 9) classes are listed in Table III. In the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5, the (8, 4), (9, 3), (9, 5), (10, 0), (10, 2), (10, 4), (11, 1), (11, 3), (11, 5), (12, 0), (12, 2), (12, 4) classes are the classes that can have LETS structures starting from these prime structures. To exhaustively search the Tanner graph for LETSs with a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5, the dot-based search algorithm will have to enumerate all the instances of the prime structures listed in Table III (a total of more than 60 million). In all the above classes, however, this code has only 15, 1 and 8
1This code is labeled as C10 in Section V.

20
TABLE III MULTIPLICITIES OF PRIME STRUCTURES OF SIZE 8 AND 9 IN THE CODE OF EXAMPLE 5

Prime structure c8 in (8, 4) class c8 in (8, 6) class s8 in (8, 8) class n8 in (8, 4) class n8 in (8, 6) class

Multiplicity
0 6430 6219941
0 6754

Prime structure c9 in (9, 5) class c9 in (9, 7) class s9 in (9, 9) class n9 in (9, 5) class n9 in (9, 7) class

Multiplicity
15 83392 55181079
1 101777

f1 f2

f8

f7

f3

f6

f5 f4

f9

Fig. 8. A LETS structure in the (9, 8) class of a variable-regular graph with dv = 4 and g = 6.

instances of LETS structures in (9, 5), (10, 4) and (11, 5) classes, respectively, that are generated by the dot-based expansion, starting from the instances of these (more than 60 million) prime structures.
Example 6. Consider a (4, 8)-regular LDPC code with g = 6, and n = 4000 [24].2 Suppose that one is interested in finding all the LETSs of this code in the range a ≤ 9 and b ≤ 8, using the dot-based search algorithm. To do this, based on Table V of [17], one must enumerate all the instances of simple cycle prime structure, s7. The LETS structure in Fig. 8 is an example of a structure in the (9, 8) class that has s7 as its prime sub-structure. It appears that while there are 123, 111, 331 instances of s7 in the Tanner graph of this code, there is not a single instance of a LETS structure in all the classes of interest which has s7 as its prime sub-structure, in the Tanner graph.
2This code is labeled as C22 in Section V.

21
IV. DPL-BASED CHARACTERIZATION/SEARCH APPROACH
To overcome the shortcomings of the dot-based search algorithm, explained in Subsection III-D, in this section, we first propose two new graph expansion techniques, path and lollipop expansions, that are applied to smaller LETS structures to generate larger ones. Similar to dot expansion, the new expansions are also applied in the space of normal graphs. In Subsection IV-B, we then use path and lollipop expansions along with the dot expansion, to formulate a new characterization of LETS structures. In the context of characterizing a LETS structure as a sequence of embedded LETS structures that starts from a simple cycle and expands, step by step, to reach the structure of interest, we introduce the concept of minimal characterizations, as those in which none of the expansions in the sequence can be divided into smaller ones. The proposed characterization in Subsection IV-B is minimal, and describes each and every LETS structure as an expansion of a simple cycle, using a combination of dot, path and lollipop expansion techniques, thus the name dpl-based characterization, or dpl characterization, in brief. In Subsection IV-B, we also prove that any minimal characterization is based only on the expansions dot, path and lollipop, and that the proposed characterization has some optimal properties as related to the corresponding search algorithm. The characterization results for some values of dv, g, amax, and bmax are presented as characterization tables in Subsection IV-C. For a given range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, the maximum length of simple cycles participating in the dpl characterization is often less than that for the dot characterization. Finally, in Subsection IV-D, we develop the search algorithm corresponding to the dpl characterization, and in Subsection IV-E, we discuss the complexity of the search.
A. Path and Lollipop Expansion Techniques Consider an (a, b) LETS structure S of a dv-regular Tanner graph with g ≥ 6. The path
expansion of S is a new LETS structure S′ of size a + m, that is constructed by appending a path of length m + 1 to S. The first and the last nodes of the path are common with S, and can be identical, in that case, the path is closed. Figures 9(a) and (b), show the path expansion of S
using open and closed paths of length m + 1, respectively. In these figures, the symbol ◦ is used to represent the common node(s) between S and the path, and the symbol • is used to represent
the other m nodes of the path. It is clear that for an open-path expansion, the degrees of the two nodes that are common with S must be strictly less that dv (in G(S)), and for the closed-path

22

G(S )

m-1 edges

G(S )

m-1 edges

(a)

(b)

Fig. 9. Expansion of the LETS structure S with (a) an open path of length m +1, pam o (b) a closed path of length m +1, pacm.

G(S )

d edges

c-2 edges

Fig. 10. Expansion of the LETS structure S with a lollipop walk of length m + 1 = d + c, locm.

expansion, the degree of the one common node must be strictly less than dv − 1 in G(S). We use the notations paom and pacm for open and closed paths of length m + 1, respectively. The notation pam is used to include both open and closed paths.
Proposition 3. Suppose that S is a LETS structure in the (a, b) class (b ≥ 2) for variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv. Applying the path expansion pam, with m ≥ 2, to S will result in LETS structure(s) in the (a + m, b − 2 + m(dv − 2)) class.
Proof: The constraint b ≥ 2 is to accommodate the 2 edges of the path that are connected to S. We also note that pa1o is the same as dot2, and that the expansion pac1 will result in a cycle of length 4. We thus focus on m ≥ 2 in the statement of the proposition.
The expanded structure S′ has size a′ = a+m. Based on Lemma 1, the number of edges in S is |ES| = (adv−b)/2. By the nature of expansion, the number of edges in S′ is |ES′| = |ES|+m+1. By combining these and using Lemma 1, we have b′ = a′dv − 2|ES′| = (a + m)dv − (adv − b) − 2m − 2 = b − 2 + m(dv − 2).
The pseudo-code of the path expansion algorithm is given in Routine 3. In Fig. 10, the expansion of a LETS structure S using a lollipop walk of length m + 1 is shown. The notation locm is used for a lollipop walk of length m + 1 (m is number of the nodes added to S), which consists of a cycle of length c (c ≥ 3) and a path of length d (d ≥ 1).

23
Routine 3 (PathExpansion) Expansion of a LETS structure S to all possible LETS structures Lp of size |S| + m, using pam. Lp = PathExpansion(S, m)
1: Initialization: Identify the subset of nodes in S with degree strictly less that dv, and store them in F ′. Identify the subset of nodes in S with degree strictly less than dv − 1, and store them in F ′′. Lp ← ∅.
2: Construct N2(G) to include all the possible subsets of F ′ of size 2. 3: for each set in N2(G) do 4: Generate a new LETS structure S′ by applying paom expansion to S such that the 2 nodes
in F ′ are the first and the last nodes of the new path of length m + 1. 5: Lp ← Lp ∪ S′. 6: end for 7: for each node in F ′′ do 8: Generate a new LETS structure S′′ by applying pamc expansion to S such that the node
in F ′′ is the common node between S and the new path of length m + 1. 9: Lp ← Lp ∪ S′′. 10: end for 11: Output: Lp.
Clearly, the common node between S and the lollipop expansion must have a degree strictly less than dv in G(S).
Proposition 4. Suppose that S is a LETS structure in the (a, b) class (b ≥ 1) for variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv. Applying the lollipop expansion locm, with m ≥ 3 and 3 ≤ c ≤ m, to S will result in LETS structure(s) in the (a + m, b − 2 + m(dv − 2)) class.
Proof: Similar to that of Proposition 3. The pseudo-code for the lollipop expansion is given in Routine 4. In the following, we demonstrate, through a sequence of intermediate results, that any LETS structure of variable-regular Tanner graphs can be generated from simple cycles using a combination of the three expansion techniques: dot, path and lollipop.
Lemma 2. Except the simple cycles, any LETS structure S′ = (F ′, E′) contains at least one

24

Routine 4 (LollipopExpansion) Expansion of a LETS structure S to all possible LETS structures

Lcl of size |S| + m, using locm. Llc = LollipopExpansion(S, m, c) 1: Initialization: Identify the subset of nodes in S with degree strictly less than dv and store
them in F ′. Lcl ← ∅. 2: for each node f in F ′ do

3: Generate a new LETS structure, S′, by expanding S using lomc expansion such that f is the common node between the lollipop and S.

4:

Llc ← Lcl ∪ S′.

5: end for

6: Output: Lcl .

LETS sub-structure S = (F, E) with |F | < |F ′|.
Proof: Since the structure S′ is leafless, it must contain a cycle, and as a result, a simple cycle. The proof then follows from the fact that simple cycles are LETSs.
Lemma 3. Suppose that a LETS structure S′ = (F ′, E′) has a LETS sub-structure S = (F, E), where |F | = |F ′| − 1. Structure S′ can then be generated from S by using the dot expansion.
Proof: Node f in F ′\F must be connected to at least two nodes in S. Based on the definition of dot expansion, structure S′ can then be generated from S by using dotm expansion (m ≥ 2), where the root of the expansion tree is f .
Lemma 4. Consider a LETS structure S′ = (F ′, E′) that is prime with respect to dot expansion, and is not a simple cycle. Then, for the largest LETS sub-structure S = (F, E) of S′, we have (i) |F | < |F ′| − 1, (ii) subgraph induced by F ′\F is connected, (iii) no node in F ′ \ F can have more than one edge connected to the nodes in S.
Proof: Proof of (i) follows from Lemmas 2 and 3, and the definition of a prime structure. For (ii), assume that the subgraph is disconnected. Then removing the nodes in one of the disconnected parts from F ′ results in a new LETS sub-structure of S′, which is larger than S. This contradicts the assumption that S is the largest LETS sub-structure of S′. For (iii), again

25
by contradiction, if such a node exists, by removing all the other nodes in F ′ \ F , we obtain a LETS sub-structure of S′ larger than S.
Proposition 5. Suppose that S′ = (F ′, E′) is a prime structure of dot expansion, but is not a simple cycle. Let S = (F, E) be the largest LETS sub-structure of S′. Structure S′ can then be generated by expanding S using a path or a lollipop walk.
Proof: Based on Lemma 4, in the following, we consider two cases of |F | = |F ′| − 2 and |F | < |F ′| − 2.
Case (1)–|F | = |F ′| − 2: Based on Part (ii) of Lemma 4, the two nodes in F ′ \ F must be adjacent. Moreover, based on Part (iii) of the same lemma, each node in F ′ \ F must have one connection to the nodes in S. The only possible configurations satisfying both conditions are the expansions of S by the closed and open paths of length 3.
Case (2)–|F | < |F ′| − 2: We first prove that in this case, the number of the edges connecting the nodes in F ′ \ F to the nodes in S must be strictly less than 3. Suppose that the number of such edges is at least 3. This means that, based on Part (iii) of Lemma 4, there are at least three nodes in F ′ \ F each connected with one edge to a node in S. Select three such nodes, and call them v1, v2 and v3. Based on Part (ii) of Lemma 4, there is a path between any pair of these nodes in the subgraph induced by F ′ \F . Find the shortest paths between any pair of these nodes in the subgraph. Without loss of generality, assume that among the three shortest paths, the one between v1 and v2 has the smallest length. Clearly v3 cannot be on this path. Add the nodes v1, v2 and all the nodes on the shortest path between v1 and v2 to S. This results in a LETS sub-structure of S′ that is larger than S and strictly smaller than S′, which is a contradiction. Therefore, the number of the edges connecting the nodes in F ′ \ F to the nodes in S must be either two or one.
For the case where there are two edges connecting F ′ \F to S, based on Part (iii) of Lemma 4, these edges must be incident to two distinct nodes in F ′ \ F . Call these nodes v1 and v2. There must be no cycles in the subgraph induced by F ′ \ F . Otherwise, one can find the shortest path between v1 and v2 in the subgraph and by removing all the nodes in F ′ \ F except v1, v2 and all the nodes on the shortest path between them, obtain a LETS sub-structure of S′ that is larger than S but strictly smaller than S′. Therefore, for this case, the only possible configurations are the expansions of S by closed and open paths of length more than 3.

26
For the case where there is only one edge connecting F ′\F to S, for S′ to be a LETS structure, there must exist at least one cycle in the subgraph induced by F ′ \ F . With a discussion similar to the case of two connecting edges, one can prove that there must be exactly one cycle in the subgraph. For this case, the only possible configurations are the expansions of S by lollipop walks lomc with m ≥ 3 (length more than four) and c ≥ 3 (cycles longer than three).
Based on Proposition 5, except the simple cycles, each prime structure of dot-based expansion can be generated by applying path or lollipop expansions to its largest LETS sub-structure. This sub-structure is either a simple cycle or not. If not, then Lemmas 2 and 3, and Proposition 5 show that we can obtain the sub-structure by applying a combination of the three expansion techniques to a simple cycle.
Theorem 1. All LETS structures of variable-regular Tanner graphs for any variable degree dv, and in any (a, b) class (that are not simple cycles), can be generated by applying a combination of depth-one tree (dot), path and lollipop expansions to simple cycles.
Proof: The only LETS structures that are out of the reach of dot expansions are prime structures discussed in Section III-B. These prime structures are either simple cycles or not. Based on Proposition 5, and the above discussions, the prime structures that are not simple cycles can be generated using the three expansion techniques starting from simple cycles.
Compared to the dot-based characterization, Theorem 1 provides a new characterization of LETS structures. Instead of using one expansion technique (dot) and some prime structures (simple cycles plus some other prime structures) to characterize the LETS structures, the new characterization uses more expansion techniques (dot, path and lollipop) but has fewer prime structures (only simple cycles). This new characterization, however, does not provide us with a road-map to a more efficient search algorithm. The reason is that, if we continue to rely on dot-based search algorithm, we still need to enumerate all the instances of the required prime structures as the input to the search algorithm. Having a characterization of the prime structures as expansions of simple cycles, although helpful in such an enumeration, has no effect on the required prime structures with relatively large a and b values, and the (huge) number of the instances of such structures that need to be enumerated.
To use the new expansions in the characterization such that they translate to a more efficient search algorithm, we need to use them for generating not only the prime structures but also the

27

F1 = {f2, f3, f9}

dot

lo33

F2 = {f2, f3, f9, f4} F3 = {f2, f3, f9, f4, f5, f10, f6}

dot

F4 = {f2, f3, f9, f4, f5, f10, f6, f7}

pa2

F5 = {f2, f3, f9, f4, f5, f10, f6, f7, f8, f1}

dot

F = {f1, . . . , f11}

in (3,3) class in (4,2) class in (7,3) class in (8,2) class in (10,2) class in (11,1) class

Fig. 11. Steps of generating the (11, 1) LETS structure of Fig. 6 starting from s3.

other LETS structures of interest. This will, consequently, reduce the prime structures that need to be enumerated to only a few short simple cycles. The following example explains this idea and motivates the dpl characterization of next subsection.
Example 7. Consider the (11, 1) LETS structure S of Fig. 6. The prime sub-structure of S with respect to dot expansion is s8. There are, however, different ways to generate S starting from s3, using a combination of dot, path and lollipop expansion techniques. One approach is explained in Fig. 11. In this figure, Fi is the set of nodes in Si, the LETS sub-structure of S in the i-th step of expansion. A search algorithm based on the sequence of expansions presented in Fig. 11, will start by enumerating all the instances of s3 in the Tanner graph, instead of finding the instances of s8, to find all the instances of S.
As an example, consider the code discussed in Example 5. This code has 161 and 6,219,941 instances of s3 and s8, respectively. In dot-based search algorithm, all the instances of s8 (more than 6 million) need to be enumerated and then dot expansions need to be applied to each instance of s8 three times successively to obtain the instances of S. For this code, however, no instance of S exists in the Tanner graph. On the other hand, following the road-map of Fig. 11, by applying the dot expansion to the 161 instances of s3, as the first step, one obtains no instance of the structure in the (4, 2) class, and thus stops the search process for S (very quickly).
In general, if all the LETS structures of interest, that have s8 as their prime sub-structure in the dot characterization, are generated using prime structures with smaller size, the instances of s8 are no longer needed to be enumerated in the search algorithm.

28
B. Dpl-based Characterization
Our goal in this subsection is to characterize all the non-isomorphic LETS structures of a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable degree dv and girth g, within all the (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. The characterization is based on describing each LETS structure S as a hierarchy of embedded LETS structures that starts from a simple cycle, and expands to S in multiple steps, each step involving one of the three expansion techniques, i.e., dot, path or lollipop. The basic idea behind the new characterization, i.e., dpl-based characterization, is to generate as many LETS structures as possible within the interest range of a and b values by using smaller LETS structures that have a and b values also within the range. When translated to a search algorithm, this has the benefit that we will only search for instances of the structures that are themselves of direct interest to us (have a and b values within the target range). This is unlike the case for the dot-based search algorithm, where we would search for structures that are not of direct interest (have a or b values outside the target range), but happen to be parents of structures of interest in the dot characterization. To achieve the goal of staying within the target range of a and b values, and have an exhaustive characterization for all the LETS structures, we need to use path and lollipop expansions in addition to the dot expansion. For the reasons just explained, one of the important properties of the dpl characterization is to generate a LETS structure in each level of expansion. With this constraint, i.e., all the sub-structures in the embedded sequence are LETSs, it is easy to see that the proposed characterization is minimal, in the sense that, none of the expansion steps can be divided into smaller expansions. We also prove that the three expansion techniques of dot, path and lollipop, are the only expansions that are needed in minimal characterizations.
Given a target range of interest a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, we start from all the simple cycles within this range. Based on Proposition 2, for a given a, a simple cycle of size a has the largest b value of a(dv − 2) among all the (a, b) LETS structures. We thus initiate the characterization by including simple cycles sg/2, . . . , s . ⌊bmax/(dv−2)⌋ We then recursively apply dot expansions to these simple cycles to generate more LETS structures within the range of interest. (We choose the dot expansion in this step of the algorithm, since it can generate the majority of the LETS structures starting from the simple cycles.) If at the end of this process, there are still some LETS structures within the range of interest that are not generated, we try to generate them using the already

29
f6 f1 f2 f5
f7 f4 f3
Fig. 12. A LETS structure in the (7, 3) class of a variable-regular graph with dv = 3 and g = 6.
generated smaller LETS structures by applying the path or lollipop expansions. Propositions 3 and 4, are our guide in this process. After the generation of any new LETS structure in this process, we also recursively apply dot expansions to it to (possibly) generate more new LETS structures in the range of interest. If there are still some structures that are not generated, we will increase the range of b values to bmax + 1 to include some new LETS structures that can generate the missing LETS structures through expansions. This process of including LETS structures with larger b values will continue until all the LETS structures of all the (a, b) classes within the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, are generated.
When the process of generating LETS structures of interest, as described above, is completed, for each LETS structure S in the range, we have the parent simple cycle sj, for some j ≥ g/2, and the sequence of expansions that are applied to sj to generate S. We however, recognize that this minimal characterization of S may not be unique, in the sense that, there may be other combinations of parent and expansion sequences that result in the generation of S. This is explained in the following example.
Example 8. Fig. 12 shows a (7, 3) LETS structure S = ({f1, f2, . . . , f7}, E) of a variableregular graph with dv = 3 and g = 6. Two minimal characterizations of S starting from the simple cycle s4 in the (4, 4) class (S′ = ({f1, f2, . . . , f4}, E′)) are presented in Fig. 13.
To present the dpl characterization in a compact form, instead of providing the above sequence of parent/expansions for each LETS structure, for each (a, b) class of interest, we only provide the dpl-prime structures (simple cycles) that are required to obtain the LETS structures in that class, plus the expansions that need to be applied to the structures within that class to obtain larger LETS structures within the range of interest. This presentation of characterization is particularly helpful for the dpl-based search algorithm.
The pseudo-code of the dpl characterization algorithm is given in Algorithm 3. In this algo-

30

Minimal Characterization 1: F1 = {f1, f2, f3, f4}
dot F2 = {f1, f2, f3, f4, f5}
pa2 F3 = {f1, f2, f3, f4, f5, f6, f7}
Minimal Characterization 2: F1 = {f1, f2, f3, f4}
pa2 F2 = {f1, f2, f3, f4, f6, f7} dot
F3 = {f1, f2, f3, f4, f5, f6, f7}

in (4,4) class in (5,3) class in (7,3) class
in (4,4) class in (6,4) class in (7,3) class

Fig. 13. Two minimal characterizations of the (7, 3) LETS structure of Fig. 12, starting from s4.

rithm, the table EX is used to store the sets of required expansion techniques in different classes. The notation EX (a,b) is used to denote the expansion sets for the (a, b) class. For example, EX (a,b) = {dot, pa2, lo33} means that dot, pa2 and lo33 expansions will need to be applied to all the non-isomorphic LETS structures in the (a, b) class.
The algorithm presented in Routine 5 is responsible for generating LETS structures that are out of the reach of dot expansions, by using path and lollipop expansions.
The following lemma proves that minimal characterizations are based only on the three expansions dot, path and lollipop.
Lemma 5. Consider a characterization of a LETS structure S, based on a hierarchy of embedded LETS structures that starts from a simple cycle and generates S through a series of graph expansions. Assume that the characterization is minimal, in the sense that, none of the expansions can be broken into a sequence of smaller expansions such that the resulting sub-structures are still LETSs. Then, any graph expansion in the series, corresponding to a minimal characterization, is either a dot, a path or a lollipop expansion.
Proof: Consider structures S′ = (F ′, E′) and S′′ = (F ′′, E′′) as two successive embedded LETS structures in a minimal characterization of S (S′′ is generated by applying a graph expansion to S′). If |F ′| = |F ′′| − 1, then it is easy to see that S′′ is obtained from S′ by a dot expansion. For the case of |F ′| = |F ′′| − 2, using discussions similar to those in the proof of Case (1) of Proposition 5, one can prove that the only possible expansions to generate S′′ from S′ are the closed and open paths of length 3. Finally, for the case of |F ′| < |F ′′| − 2,

31

Algorithm 3 (Dpl-based Characterization Algorithm) Finds all the non-isomorphic LETS

structures in (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, for variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv and girth g. The output parameter K is the size of the largest simple cycle required in the characterization. The LETS structures generated from the simple cycle sk are stored in Lk, for k = g/2, . . . , K, and the set of expansions for different classes are stored in EX.
1: Inputs: amax, bmax, dv and g. 2: Initializations: L ← ∅, a = g/2, b′max = bmax, E X (a,b) ←dot, ∀a ∈ {g/2, . . . , amax −
1}, ∀b ∈ {2, . . . , bm′ ax}. 3: K = ⌊bmax/(dv − 2)⌋. 4: for k = g/2, . . . , K do

5: Lk= DotExpansion(sk, L, amax). 6: L = L ∪ Lk. 7: end for

8: while a ≤ amax do 9: if all the LETS structures in classes of size a are not found (check by comparing the

structures of size a in L with those generated by geng) do

10:

for any incomplete (a, b) class, where 1 ≤ b ≤ bmax do

11:

for k = g/2, . . . , K do

12:

(Ltem, E X tem)=PaLoExpan(a, b, Lk, L).

13:

L′tem= DotExpansion(Ltem, L, amax).

14:

L = L ∪ Lt′em, Lk = Lk ∪ L′tem.

15:

E X = E X ∪ E X tem.

16:

end for

17:

end for

18: end if

19: a = a + 1.

20: end while

32

21: while all the LETS structures in all the classes of interest are not found (check by comparing

all the structures in L with those generated by geng) do

22:

bm′ ax = bm′ ax + 1, a = g/2.

23: while a < amax do

24:

E X (a,b′max) ← dot.

25:

if (a, bm′ ax) is the class of a simple cycle then

26:

K = K + 1.

27:

LK= DotExpansion(sK, L, amax).

28:

L = L ∪ LK.

29:

if LK = ∅ then

30:

E X (a,bm ′ ax) = E X (a,b′max) \ dot.

31:

end if

32:

else

33:

for k = g/2, . . . , K do

34:

(Ltem, E X tem)=PaLoExpan(a, b′max, Lk, L).

35:

L′tem= DotExpansion(Ltem, L, amax).

36:

L = L ∪ Lt′em, Lk = Lk ∪ L′tem.

37:

E X = E X ∪ E X tem.

38:

end for

39:

end if

40:

a = a + 1.

41: end while

42: end while

43: Outputs: K, {Lg/2, . . . , LK}, E X .

following similar steps as those in the proof of Case (2) of Proposition 5, we can show that the only possible expansions to generate S′′ from S′ are closed and open paths of length more than 3, or lollipop walks locm with m ≥ 3 (length more than four) and c ≥ 3 (cycles longer than three).
Algorithm 3 obtains minimal characterizations for LETS structures. The following theorem

33

Routine 5 (PaLoExpansion) Finding new LETS structures in the (a, b) class which are out of

the reach of dot expansion by applying path and lollipop expansions to LETS structures already

found in Lk, excluding the already found structures L, and storing all the new structures in

Ltem. The expansions corresponding to the new structures are stored in E X tem. (Ltem, E X tem)=

PaLoExpansion (a, b, Lk, L) 1: Initialization: E X tem ← ∅, Ltem ← ∅.

2: a′ = a − 2.

3: while a′ ≥ g/2 do

4: m = a − a′.

5:

Ltpem ← ∅, Lc,tem ← ∅, 3 ≤ c ≤ m.

6: for any LETS structure S in the (a′, b′ = b + 2 − m(dv − 2)) class of Lk do

7:

Lp = PathExpansion(S, m).

8:

Ltpem = Ltpem ∪ Lp.

9:

for any possible c do

10:

Lcl = LollipopExpansion(S, m, c).

11:

Lc,tem = Lc,tem ∪ Llc.

12:

end for

13: end for

14: if {Ltpem \ L} = ∅ and {Lptem \ Ltem} = ∅ then

15:

Ltem = Ltem ∪ {Lptem \ L}.

16:

E

X

tem (a′ ,b′

)

←

E

X

tem (a′ ,b′

)

∪

pam.

17: end if

18: for any possible c do

19:

if {Lc,tem \ L} = ∅ and {Lc,tem \ Ltem} = ∅ then

20:

Ltem = Ltem ∪ {Lc,tem \ L}.

21:

E

X

tem (a′ ,b′ )

←

E

X

tem (a′ ,b′ )

∪

locm.

22:

end if

23: end for 24: a′ = a′ − 1.

25: end while 26: Outputs: Ltem, E X tem.

34
shows that the algorithm performs this task efficiently and effectively, by making sure that all the intermediate LETS structures generated in each characterization are within the target range of a and b values, if possible.
Theorem 2. For given values of dv, g, amax and bmax, Algorithm 3 provides an optimal minimal characterization of all non-isomorphic (a, b) LETS structures of variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv and girth g, with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, in the sense that, to generate all such structures starting from simple cycles and using dot, path, and lollipop expansions, the maximum length K of the required simple cycles, and the maximum range b′max of the b values of the LETS structures that are generated in the characterization process, are minimized by Algorithm 3.
Proof: Assume that Algorithm 3 fails to characterize all the non-isomorphic (a, b) LETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, in Lines 4–20 of the algorithm. Consider one such structure S. The failure of Algorithm 3 to characterize S implies, based on Lemma 5 and Propositions 1, 3 and 4, that there is no minimal characterization of S that starts from a simple cycle in the range of interest with all the sub-structures also in the range. To obtain a minimal characterization for S, one has thus no choice other than increasing the range of b values beyond bmax. In Lines 21-42, Algorithm 3 performs this task step by step, increasing the range of b values only by one, at each step, ensuring that the range increase is the minimum required to obtain a minimal characterization for all the LETS structures in the range.
C. Dpl-based Characterization Tables Given the values of dv and g, and a target range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, Algorithm 3 can be
used to characterize all the LETS structures of variable-regular Tanner graphs in (a, b) classes of interest. For a given graph (code), the target values amax and bmax, however, need to be selected such that the classes that have the main contribution in the error floor of the code, the so-called dominant classes, are included in the range. The proper selection of the range would depend on the code’s rate and block length. In this section, a number of characterization tables for different values of dv, g, amax and bmax are provided. The information regarding these tables are summarized in Table IV. Table IV shows that there are in total 11 characterization tables (Tables V-XV), covering variable node degrees 3, 4, 5, and girths 6 and 8. The fifth and sixth

35
rows of Table IV show amax and bmax for each characterization table, respectively. Row seven of the table contains the maximum b value of the LETS structures that need to be generated for the exhaustive coverage of the classes of interest. This corresponds to b′max in Algorithm 3. This row should be compared to the last row of the table that shows the similar parameter when dot characterization is used. The comparison of the two rows demonstrates the advantage of the dpl-based approach compared to the dot-based approach in covering the same range of LETS classes but by generating LETS structures with smaller b values.
Example 9. In dot-based (LSS-based) approach, to find all the LETS structures of variable regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6, in the interest range of a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 3, all the LETS structures within the range a ≤ 8, b ≤ 8, need to be generated. However, in the proposed approach, only the LETS structures with b ≤ 5 need to be generated to guarantee the generation of all the LETS structures in the interest range. This corresponds to Characterization Table VII.
Rows eight and nine of Table IV contain the simple cycles and the expansion techniques that are used in each characterization table, respectively.
Example 10. Consider the case discussed in Example 9. Table IV shows that for this case, to characterize all the LETS structures in the range of interest, simple cycles of length 3, 4 and 5, and expansions dot, pa2, pa3, lo33, lo43 and lo44 are needed.
We note that while the study of the relative harmfulness of different LETS structures is beyond the scope of this work, our experimental results, as well as those reported in the literature, show that the dominant LETS structures/classes depend not only on dv and g, but also on the rate R and block length n of the code. As a result, the values of interest for amax and bmax would also depend on all these parameters (dv, g, R and n). In the fourth row of Table IV, we have indicated the ranges of rates and block lengths for which a characterization table can be useful, i.e., for a code within the specified range of rate and block length, the table is likely to cover the dominant classes of LETSs. Since the characterization tables are used as guidelines for dplbased search algorithm to find instances of LETS structures in a given code (graph), one is interested in selecting the smallest values for amax and bmax to minimize the search complexity while ensuring that the dominant LETS structures are covered (found) in the search process. While this has been the main motivation for providing Characterization Tables V-XV, we make

36

TABLE IV A LIST OF (AND SOME INFORMATION ABOUT) CHARACTERIZATION TABLES PROVIDED IN THIS PAPER

Table

V VI

VII

VIII

IX

X XI XII

XIII

XIV XV

dv

3

3

3

3

3

3 44

4

4

5

g

6

6

6

Rate†-Length‡ h-s h-s,h-m m-s,m-m

6 m-m,m-l

8

8 66

6

8

6

h-l,m-s m-m,m-l h-s h-m,h-l m-m,m-l m-m,m-l h-l,m-s

h-m h-l,m-s

l-s,l-m

l-s

m-s

l-s

l-s m-m

amax

6

8

10

12

10

12 6 8

10

11

9

bmax

3

3

3

5

4

4 46

10

10

11

bm ′ ax(dpl)

4

4

5

6

5

6 68

12

12

13

Cycle Primes s3, s4 s3, s4 s3, s4, s5 s3, s4, s5, s6 s4, s5 s4, s5, s6 s3 s3, s4 s3, s4, s5 s3, s4 s3, s4

Expansion Techniques dot
pa2

bm ′ ax(dot)

5

dot dot, pa2 dot, pa2, pa3 dot, pa2 dot, pa2

dot dot, pa2, pa3 dot, pa2 dot

pa2

pa3

pa4, pa5

pa3 pa3, pa4 dot pa2 pa4, pa5, lo33 pa3

pa2

pa3 lo33, lo34 lo33, lo43, lo44, lo53 pa4

lo44

pa3 lo43, lo44, lo53 pa4

pa3

lo33

lo44 lo36, lo64, lo65, lo66 lo44 lo54, lo55

lo33

lo45, lo55

lo44

lo33

6

8

9

8

9 6 12

16

16

18

† For Rate: l = low (R < 0.3), m = medium (0.3 < R < 0.7), h = high (R > 0.7). ‡ For Length: s = short (n < 2000), m = medium (2000 < n < 8000), l = large (n > 8000).

no claim that these tables are necessarily optimal in the sense just explained, nor we assert that such universally optimal tables even exist for codes with the same dv, g, rate and block length. These tables should thus be only treated as suggestions rather than definite guidelines.
Example 11. Consider the Characterization Table VII. The information in Table IV indicates that Table VII is likely to contain the dominant LETS classes of medium-rate codes (0.3 < R < 0.7) with short to medium block length (n < 8000), with dv = 3, and g = 6.
In each characterization table, columns and rows correspond to different values of a and b, respectively. For each (a, b) class of LETSs, the top entries in the table (separated by a dashed line from the bottom entries) show the prime simple cycles that are parents of the LETS structures within that class, and the multiplicity of non-isomorphic structures in the class with those parents (multiplicity is given within brackets). The bottom entries show the expansion techniques applied to all the LETS structures within the class. For example, si(x), sj(y), as upper entries in a class means that there are x + y non-isomorphic LETS structures in that class, x number of such structures are generated from si and y of them are generated from sj. Having dot, pam, locm, as

37

TABLE V CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3 AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 6 AND
b ≤ bmax = 3

b=0 b=1 b=2 b=3

a=3 -
-
s3(1)
dot

a=4 s3(1)
−
-
s3(1) dot, pa2
-

a=5 -
s3(1) − -
s4(2) dot

a=6 s4(2)
−
-
s3(1), s4(3) −
-

s4(1)

b=4 -

-

dot

−

TABLE VI CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3 AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 8 AND
b ≤ bmax = 3

b=0 b=1 b=2 b=3 b=4

a=3 -
-
s3(1) dot, pa3, lo33
-

a=4 s3(1)
−
-
s3(1) dot, pa2, pa3
-
s4(1) dot, pa2

a=5 -
s3(1) lo33 s4(2) dot
-

a=6 s4(2)
− s3(1), s4(3) dot, pa2 -
dot

a=7 -
s3(3), s4(1) − -
s3(6), s4(4) dot
-

a=8 s3(3), s4(2)
− s3(11), s4(8) − -
−

38
lower entries in a class means that all the possible dotm expansions, both closed and open path expansions (pamo , pacm), and lomc are used to expand all the LETS structures of that class. Having the symbol “-”, as the only entry for a class means that it is impossible to have LETS structures in that class. Having the symbol “-” as the only bottom entry means that no expansion technique is applied to the structures in that class. In each characterization table, the simple prime cycles that are needed to generate all the structures within the table are boldfaced.
Example 12. Consider the LETS class (7, 5) of Table VIII. There are 6 non-isomorphic LETS structures in this class. Three, two and one of these structures are generated starting from s3, s4 and s5, respectively. To obtain all the LETS structures in the table, one needs to apply dot, pa2, pa3 and lo33 expansions to each one of the 6 structures in this class. This results in the generation of LETS structures in (8, 2), (8, 4), (9, 5) and (10, 6) classes (based on Propositions 1, 3 and 4).

TABLE VII CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-GRAPHS AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3 AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 10 AND
b ≤ bmax = 3

a=3

b=0

-

a=4 s3(1)
−

a=5 -

a=6 s4(2)
−

a=7 -

a=8 s3(3), s4(2)
−

a=9 -

a = 10 s3(13), s4(5), s5(1)
−

b=1

-

s3(1)

s3(3), s4(1)

s3(15), s4(4)

-

-

-

-

lo43, lo44

lo33

−

b=2

-

s3(1)

s3(1), s4(3)

s3(12), s4(7)

s3(75), s4(36), s5(2)

-

-

-

dot, pa2, pa3

dot, pa2, pa3

dot, pa2

−

s3(1)

s3(40)

s4(2)

s3(6), s4(4)

b = 3 dot, pa3

-

-

-

s4(21), s5(2)

-

lo33, lo43, lo44

dot, pa3

dot, pa2

dot

s4(1)

b=4

-

-

-

-

dot, pa2

dot, pa2

dot

−

s5(1)

b=5

-

-

-

-

-

pa2

dot

−

As discussed in Subsection IV-B, to cover a given range of a and b values exhaustively, it is sometimes required to generate LETS structures with b values larger than bmax and up to some

39

TABLE VIII CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3 AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 12 AND
b ≤ bmax = 5

a=3

a=4

a = 5 a = 6 a = 7 a = 8 a = 9 a = 10 a = 11 a = 12

b=0

-

s3(1) −

s3(13)

s3(63)

s3(3)

s4(2)

s4(5)

s4(20)

-

-

s4(2)

-

-

−

s5(1)

s5(2)

−

−

−

b=1

-

s3(91)

s3(1)

s3(15)

s3(3), s4(1)

s4(22)

-

lo36, lo64 lo56, lo66

-

lo53, lo54, lo55

-

s4(4) −

-

s5(1)

-

−

s3(1)

s3(1)

s3(14)

s3(85)

s3(641)

b=2

-

dot, pa2, pa3

s4(3)

s4(5)

-

-

-

pa4, pa5, lo55

dot, pa4

dot, pa4

s4(27) s5(1)

lo36, lo46, lo65, lo66

lo55, pa5

lo43, lo44

dot

s3(1)

s3(44)

s4(2)

s3(6), s4(4)

dot, pa2, pa3 b=3
pa4, pa5, lo33 lo43, lo44, lo53, lo45

-

dot lo44, lo45

- dot, pa4, lo33 lo34, lo44

s4(17)

-

-

s5(2)

dot, pa3, lo33

b=4

-

s4(1) dot, pa2 pa3, pa4

s3(14)

s3(2)

s3(129)

s4(10)

s4(2)

s4(63)

-

-

s5(1)

-

dot, pa2

s5(6)

dot

pa3, pa4

dot, pa2

pa2, pa3

-
s3(355) s4(120)
s5(7) dot
-

s4(184) s5(10)
−
-
s3(1315) s4(524) s5(52)
s6(1) −

b=5

-

s3(3)

s3(30)

s3(328)

s5(1)

s4(2), s5(1)

s4(18)

s4(180)

-

dot, pa2 -

-

-

-

dot, pa2

s5(4)

s5(27), s6(1)

pa3

pa3, lo33

dot, pa2

dot

b=6

-

s6(1)

-

-

-

-

-

dot, pa2

dot, pa2

dot

−

b′max > bmax. In the characterization tables, the LETS classes with b > bmax are separated from the rest by a double-line. For classes with b > bmax, the multiplicity of non-isomorphic LETS structures are not reported in the tables.
Remark 3. Note that in Lines 21-42 of Algorithm 3, if an expansion technique does not generate

40
a new LETS structure within the range of interest, it will not be added to EX . For example, consider the characterization of the non-isomorphic LETS structures of (a, b) classes for variableregular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6, in the range a ≤ amax = 10 and b ≤ bmax = 3 (Table VII). In Line 34 of Algorithm 3, pa4 is applied to the simple cycle s3 in the (3, 3) class and generates one new LETS structure in the (7, 5) class. However, the new LETS structure in the (7, 5) class does not generate any new non-isomorphic LETS structure in the interest range of a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 3. Therefore, pa4 expansion can be removed from the list of expansion techniques applied to s3 in the (3, 3) class.

TABLE IX CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3 AND g = 8 FOR a ≤ amax = 10 AND
b ≤ bmax = 4

b=0 b=1 b=2 b=3 b=4 b=5

a=4 -
-
-
s4(1) dot, pa2, pa3
-

a=5 -
-
s4(1) dot, pa4, lo44
s5(1)
pa2

a=6 s4(1)
−
-
s4(1) dot, pa3, pa4
-
s4(2) dot, pa2, pa3
-

a=7 -
s4(1) − -
s4(3) dot
-
dot, pa2

a=8 s4(2)
−
-
s4(5) dot
-
s4(9), s5(1) dot, pa2
-

a=9 -
s4(4) − -
s4(16), s5(1) dot -
dot

a = 10 s4(5), s5(1)
−
-
s4(27), s5(1) −
-
s4(57), s5(6) −
-

Remark 4. In Lines 21-42 of Algorithm 3, if there are still some LETS structures within the range of interest that are not generated, the range of b values will be increased to include some new LETS structures that can generate the missing LETS structures through expansions. We note that, in this process, some LETS structures, which are already generated in Lines 8-20 of Algorithm 3, may be regenerated. In such cases, some path or lollipop expansions, which were added in Lines 8-20 of Algorithm 3, could be removed. For example, consider the characterization of the

41
non-isomorphic LETS structures of (a, b) classes for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6, in the range a ≤ amax = 6 and b ≤ bmax = 3 (Table V). In Lines 8-20 of Algorithm 3, pa2 is applied to the simple cycle s3 in the (3, 3) class and generates one new LETS structure in the (5, 3) class. However, since there are still some structures missing by the time that the algorithm reaches Line 21, the range of b values will be increased to b′max = 4. In Lines 21-42 of Algorithm 3, by applying the dot expansion to the simple cycle s4, both of the non-isomorphic LETS structures in the (5, 3) class will be generated. Therefore, pa2 expansion can be removed from the list of expansion techniques applied to s3 in the (3, 3) class.

TABLE X CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3 AND g = 8 FOR a ≤ amax = 12 AND
b ≤ bmax = 4

a=4 a=5 a=6

a=7

a = 8 a = 9 a = 10

a = 11

a = 12

s4(1)

b=0 -

-

-

−

s4(2)

s4(5), s5(1)

-

-

s4(20), s5(2)

−

−

b=1 -

-

-

s4(1)

b=2 -

- dot, pa3

pa4

s4(1)

b = 3 - dot, pa4 -

lo44, lo54

s4(1)

s4(2)

b = 4 dot, pa2 - dot, pa2

pa3

pa3, lo44

s4(1) lo54, lo55
-
s4(3) dot, pa4
-

s4(4) -
−

s4(22), s5(1)

-

-

−

s4(5) dot, pa3 pa4, lo44

s4(27), s5(1) -
dot
s4(16)

s4(115)

s4(179) s5(11)
−

-

s5(1)

-

s5(7)

-

dot, pa3

dot

s4(481)

s4(9), s5(1)

s4(57), s5(6)

-

-

s5(48), s6(10)

dot, pa2

dot, pa2

−

s5(1)

b=5 -

-

-

-

-

pa2

dot, pa2, pa3

dot, pa2

dot

s6(1)

b=6 -

-

-

-

-

pa2

dot, pa2

dot

−

Remark 5. In characterization tables for the same values of dv and g, but different ranges of a and b values, there may be some classes, for which, in different tables, different expansion

42

TABLE XI CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 4 AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 6 AND
b ≤ bmax = 4

b=0 b=1 b=2 b=3 b=4

a=3 -

a=4 -
-
s3(1) dot

a=5 s3(1)
− s3(1) dot s3(2) dot

a=6 s3(1)
− s3(3) − s3(7) −

b=5 -

-

-

-

s3(1) b=6

dot dot dot

−

TABLE XII CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 4 AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 8 AND
b ≤ bmax = 6

b=0 b=1 b=2 b=3 b=4 b=5 b=6

a=3 -
s3(1) dot

a=4
-
-
-
s3(1) dot, lo33
s3(1) dot, pa2

a=5 s3(1)
− s3(1) dot, pa3 s3(2) dot s3(3) dot, pa2

a=6 s3(1)
− s3(3) dot s3(7) dot, pa2 s3(10), s4(1) dot

a=7 s3(2)
− s3(9) dot s3(27), s4(1) dot s3(43), s4(1) dot

a=8 s3(5), s4(1)
− s3(34), s4(1) − s3(122), s4(2) − s3(226), s4(5) −

b=7 -

-

-

-

-

-

b=8 -

s4(1)

dot

dot

dot

dot

−

43
TABLE XIII CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 4 AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 10 AND
b ≤ bmax = 10

a=3

a=4

a=5

a=6

a=7

a=8

a=9

a = 10

b=0

-

s3(1)

s3(1)

s3(2) s3(5), s4(1)

s3(16)

s3(57), s4(2)

-

−

−

−

−

−

−

b=1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

b=2

-

s3(1)

s3(3)

s3(9) s3(34), s4(1) s3(152), s4(2) s3(840), s4(5)

-

dot, pa5

dot

dot

dot

dot

−

b=3

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

b=4

s3(1)

s3(7)

s3(26)

s3(122)

s3(656)

s3(4140)

s3(2)

-

dot, pa4

dot, pa3 s4(1), s5(1) s4(2)

s4(7)

s4(33)

dot

lo53, lo54, lo55

pa4, lo44

dot

dot

dot

−

b=5

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

s3(1)

s3(1)

s3(3)

s3(10)

s3(42)

s3(224)

s3(1360)

s3(9382)

b = 6 dot, pa2, pa3 dot lo33, lo43, lo44 pa3, pa4

dot, pa3

s4(1)

s4(2)

pa4, lo43 dot, pa2, pa3 dot, pa3

s4(7) dot, pa2

s4(19) dot

s4(111) −

b=7

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

b=8

-

s4(1) dot, pa2

s3(2), s4(1) s3(7)

s3(39)

dot, pa2 s4(2), s5(1) s4(4), s5(1)

pa3

dot, pa2 dot, pa2

s3(236) s4(14) dot, pa2

s3(1561) s4(52) dot

s3(11719) s4(286) −

b=9

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

b = 10

-

s3(3)

s3(21)

s3(142)

s3(1060)

s3(8767)

s5(1)

-

s4(2)

s4(6) s4(19), s5(1) s4(82), s5(2) s4(476), s5(1)

dot, pa2

dot, pa2

dot

dot

dot

−

b = 11

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

b = 12

-

-

-

−

dot

dot

dot

−

techniques are used. For example, for the class of (6, 2) LETS structures in Tables VI and VII, the expansions are different, and are respectively, {dot, pa2} and {dot, pa2, pa3}. Similarly, there may be cases where a LETS structure is generated starting from a different prime simple cycle. For example, comparison of the entries of the (8, 2) class in Tables VI and VII reveals that such LETS structures exist in this class.

44
TABLE XIV CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 4 AND g = 8 FOR a ≤ amax = 11 AND
b ≤ bmax = 12

b=0 b=1 b=2 b=3 b=4 b=5 b=6 b=7 b=8 b=9 b = 10

a=4 -
s4(1) dot, pa2, pa3
-

a=5 -
-
-
-
s4(1) dot
s5(1)
pa2

a=6
-
-
-
-
-
s4(1) dot
s4(2) dot, pa2
s4(2) dot

a=7
-
-
-
s4(1) dot, pa4, lo44
s4(1) dot, pa3
s4(3) dot
s4(6) dot

a=8 s4(1)
− s4(1) dot s4(2) dot s4(5) dot, pa3 s4(14) dot, pa2 s4(19) dot

a=9
-
s4(2) dot
s4(7) dot
s4(19) dot, pa2
s4(50) dot, pa2
s4(82)
dot

a = 10 s4(2)
− s4(5) dot s4(33) dot s4(111) dot s4(286) dot s4(475), s5(1) dot

a = 11 s4(2)
− s4(19) − s4(164) − s4(706) − s4(1902) − s4(3223) −

b = 11

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

b = 12

-

-

−

dot

dot

dot

dot

−

Remark 6. When Algorithm 3 will have to go beyond LETS structures with b ≤ bmax, and to use simple cycles of size larger than ⌊bmax/(dv − 2)⌋, it may happen that the new cycle does not result in any new LETS structure in the range of interest. In such cases, the new cycle is not included as a prime structure in the table. An example of this can be seen in Table XIII, where s6 does not generate any new non-isomorphic LETS structure in the interest range of a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 10, and is thus not added as a prime structure in the table.

45

TABLE XV CHARACTERIZATION (CYCLE PRIME SUB-STRUCTURES AND EXPANSION TECHNIQUES) OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b) CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 5 AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 9 AND
b ≤ bmax = 11

b=0 b=1 b=2 b=3 b=4 b=5 b=6 b=7 b=8 b=9 b = 10 b = 11

a=3 -
s3(1) dot, pa2
-

a=4 -
-
-
-
-
-
-
s3(1) dot
s3(1) dot
-

a=5 -
-
-
-
s3(1) dot, pa3, lo33
s3(1) dot, pa2
s3(2) dot, pa2
s3(3) dot

a=6 s3(1)
−
-
s3(1) dot, pa3
-
s3(2) dot, pa3, lo33
-
s3(5) dot
-
s3(8) dot, pa2
-
s3(12) dot -

a=7 -
s3(1) − -
s3(6) dot
s3(18) dot, pa2
s3(37) dot, pa2
s3(62)
dot -
s3(81), s4(1) dot

a=8 s3(3)
− -
s3(16) dot -
s3(75) dot -
s3(223) dot -
s3(460), s4(1) dot -
s3(691), s4(2) dot -

a=9 -
s3(28) − -
s3(289) − -
s3(1356), s4(1) − -
s3(3786), s4(1) − -
s3(7086), s4(6) − -
s3(9527), s4(19) −

s4(1)

b = 12

-

-

-

-

dot

dot

dot

b = 13

-

-

-

-

dot

dot

−

46
D. Dpl-based Search Algorithm
The characterization of LETS structures described in Subsections IV-B and IV-C corresponds to an efficient search algorithm to find the instances of all (a, b) LETS structures of a variableregular Tanner graph for a given range of a and b values in a guaranteed fashion. The efficiency of the search is implied by Theorem 2. The pseudo-code of the proposed search algorithm is given in Algorithm 4. The algorithm is similar to Algorithm 2, except that, in addition to the dot expansion, path and lollipop expansions are also used to find the instances of some of the LETS structures. The search algorithm starts by the enumeration of simple cycles of length up to K. These are the cycles that are identified in the characterization table as the required prime structures. For the sake of completeness, the pseudo-code for cycle enumeration is provided in Routine 6.
After the enumeration of all instances of a simple cycle, these instances are expanded in the while loop (Lines 10-24) to find instances of other LETS structures up to size amax, Ik. Notation Ika is used for the set of instances of size a found by starting from the instances of the simple cycle of length k, and I is the set of instances of all LETSs which are found so far in the algorithm. Finding the instances of LETS structures using dot, path and lollipop expansion techniques are explained in Routines 2, 7 and 8, respectively.
E. Complexity of the dpl-based Search Algorithm
The complexity of the search algorithm depends, in general, on the multiplicity of different instances of LETS structures and the expansion techniques used in different classes. The total complexity of the proposed algorithm can be divided into two parts: 1) complexity of finding the instances of prime simple cycle structures, and 2) complexity of expanding the instances of prime structures to find all the instances of every (a, b) LETS structure within the interest range of a and b values. In this subsection, we assume that the LDPC codes are regular.
1) Complexity of finding the instances of prime structures: The proposed dpl-based search algorithm uses Routine 6 to find the instances of simple cycles. Based on this approach, the order of complexity for finding the instances of a simple cycle of size k is O(n(dvdc)k). This complexity increases linearly, polynomially and exponentially with the block length, n, the check and variable degrees, dc, dv, and the size of the cycle, respectively. The complexity of finding the instances of a simple cycle thus becomes quickly impractical as the cycle length increases.

47

Algorithm 4 (Dpl-based Search Algorithm) Finds all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures

of a variable-regular Tanner graph G with girth g, for a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. The inputs are the maximum size K of the simple cycles, and the table EX of expansion techniques required in

dpl characterization. The outputs are the sets Ik, k = g/2, . . . , K, which contain all the instances
of LETS structures of size up to amax that are expansions of simple cycles of length k in G. 1: Inputs: K, E X , g, amax, bmax.
2: Initializations: I ← ∅.

3: for k = g/2, . . . , K do

4: for a = k, . . . , amax do

5:

Ika ← ∅.

6: end for

7: end for

8: for k = g/2, . . . , K do

9: Ikk= CycSrch(sk), a = k.

10: while a < amax do

11:

Itae+m1= DotSrch(Ika, I).

12:

for any pam in the characterization table do

13:

Itae+mm=PathSrch(Ika, I, E X , m).

14:

end for

15:

for any lomc in the characterization table do

16:

I′=LolliSrch(Ika, Icc, I, E X , m).

17:

Itae+mm = Itae+mm ∪ I′.

18:

end for

19:

for t = a + 1, . . . , amax do

20:

Ikt = Ikt ∪ Ittem.

21:

I = I ∪ Ittem.

22:

end for

23:

a = a + 1.

24: end while

amax

25:

Ik =

Ika

a=k

26: end for

27: Outputs: {Ig/2, . . . , IK}.

48

Routine 6 (CycSrch) Finds all the instances Ikk of simple cycles of length k in a given Tanner

graph. Ikk= CycSrch(sk) 1: Initializations: Ikk ← ∅.

2: for each variable node vl in the Tanner graph do

3: for each check node ci in the neighborhood of vl do

4:

Find all the paths PAi,l of length k − 1 in the Tanner graph, starting from ci that do

not contain vl.

5: end for

6: for any pair of check nodes ci and cj in the neighborhood of vl, where i = j do

7:

for any path pa ∈ PAi,l, and any path pa′ ∈ PAj,l do

8:

if the two paths end with the same node and that node is their only common

node do

9:

Let v and v′ denote the last variable nodes of pa and pa′, respectively.

10:

if variable nodes in pa \ v and pa′ \ v′ do not have any common check node

do

11:

S = vl∪{set of variable nodes in pa ∪ pa′}.

12:

Ikk = Ikk ∪ {S}.

13:

end if

14:

end if

15:

end for

16: end for

17: end for

18: Output: Ikk.

Let Nk denote the multiplicity of the instances of the simple cycle sk of length k in the Tanner graph. Clearly, the complexity of finding the instances of a LETS structure that is an immediate child of sk is proportional to Nk. Moreover, all the instances of the prime cycles need to be stored for further processing throughout the search algorithm. The memory required to store all the instances of sk is also proportional to Nk. To the best of our knowledge, there is no theoretical result on how Nk scales with n, k, or the degree distribution of the Tanner graph.

49

Routine 7 (PathSrch) Expanding the LETS instances of size a in Ika using pam to find instances of LETS structures of size a + m, excluding the already found instances I, and storing the rest

in I′. Only instances in Ika whose structures in accordance to the expansion table EX need to

be expanded by pam are expanded. I′= PathSrch(Ika, I, EX , m) 1: Initializations: Item ← ∅.

2: for each LETS instance S in Ika that based on EX requires pam do

3: for each unsatisfied check node ck ∈ Γo(S) do

4:

Find all the paths PAk of length m in the Tanner graph, starting from ck.

5: end for

6: for any pair of unsatisfied check nodes ck and cj in Γo(S), where k = j do

7:

for any path pa ∈ PAk and any path pa′ ∈ PAj do

8:

if pa and pa′ end with the same node and this node is their only common node,

and if variable and check nodes of pa and pa′ are not in G(S) do

9:

Item ← Item ∪ {S ∪ {set of variable nodes in pa ∪ pa′}}.

10:

end if

11:

end for

12: end for

13: end for

14: I′ ← Item \ I. 15: Output: I′.

Empirical results in [19], however, suggest that Nk is rather independent of n and increases rather rapidly as the variable and check degrees, or k are increased. We note that, in comparison with the dot-based (LSS-based) search algorithm, the proposed dpl-based search algorithm requires smaller size prime cycles to be enumerated. This translates to less computational complexity and memory requirements as will be discussed in details in Section V.
2) Complexity of expansions: Based on the characterization tables, a few expansion techniques (those in EX (a,b)) are used to expand the instances of LETS structures within each (a, b) class. The complexity of this part of the algorithm depends on the expansion techniques, and the multiplicity of LETSs in each (a, b) class, Na,b. To the best of our knowledge, there is no

50

Routine 8 (LolliSrch) Expanding the LETS instances of size a in Ika using locm to find instances of LETS structures of size a + m, excluding the already found instances I, and storing the rest

in I′. Only instances in Ika whose structures in accordance to the expansion table EX need to be expanded by lomc are expanded. The set of instances of simple cycles of length c, Icc, is also an input. I′= LolliSrch (Ika, Icc, I, EX , m)
1: Initializations: Item ← ∅, d = m + 1 − c.
2: for each LETS instance S in Ika that based on EX requires locm do 3: Find all the paths PA of length 2(d − 1) in the Tanner graph, starting from check nodes

c′ in Γo(S) that have no common nodes with G(S) other than c′. 4: for each structure S′ ∈ Icc, for which G(S′) has no common node with G(S), let Γo(S′)
denote the set of unsatisfied check nodes of G(S′) and do

5:

for each path, pa ∈ PA do

6:

if pa ends with a check node c′ in Γo(S′) and if c′ is the only common node

between pa and Γo(S′) do

7:

Item ← Item ∪ {S ∪ {set of variable nodes in pa ∪ G(S′}}.

8:

end if

9:

end for

10: end for

11: end for

12: I′ ← Item \ I. 13: Output: I′.

theoretical result on how Na,b changes with a and b, or with different code parameters. In the following, we discuss the complexity of the three expansion techniques. The expansion
of an instance of a LETS structure in an (a, b) class using dot expansion is explained in Routine 2. For each instance, bdc variable nodes should be checked to find the set V in Routine 2. The complexity for the expansion of all the instances of LETSs in an (a, b) class using dot is thus O(Na,bb2dc2). The expansion of an instance of a LETS structure in an (a, b) class using the path expansion technique is explained in Routine 7. Based on the approach of Routine 7, it is easy to see that the complexity of expanding all the instance of LETS structures in an (a, b) class

51
using pam is O(Na,bb2(dvdc)m). Similarly, the complexity of expanding all the instance of LETS structures in an (a, b) class using locm, based on Routine 8, is O(Na,bNcbc(dvdc)d), where Nc is the multiplicity of simple cycles of size c in the Tanner graph, and d = m + 1 − c.
Finally, we note that the memory required to store all the LETS instances of an (a, b) class is O(aNa,b). The main advantage of using the dpl-based search algorithm, compared to dot-based search, is to avoid dealing with classes with large a and b values. Searching for LETS instances in these classes and expanding them imposes huge computational complexity and memory requirements on the search algorithm. Instead, in the dpl-based search algorithm, expansions are used in classes with relatively small Na,b values. Our experimental results in Section V show that the dpl-based search algorithm is significantly faster and requires much less memory compared to the dot (LSS)-based search algorithm, for different codes with a wide range of variable degrees, rates, block lengths and girths.
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
We have applied the dot-based and dpl-based search algorithms to a large number of variableregular random and structured LDPC codes with a wide range of variable degrees, rates and block lengths. These codes are listed in Table XVI. For all the runtimes reported in this paper, a desktop computer with 2.4-GHz CPU and 8-GB memory is used. Except codes C1-C3, C11, C14 and C15-C19, which are structured codes, the other LDPC codes are all randomly constructed. For structured codes, their structure is not used to simplify the search, and all the runtimes are based on exhaustive search of the code’s Tanner graph without taking into account the automorphisms that exist for structured codes.
Tables XVII-XXVII list the multiplicity of instances of LETSs in different classes for these codes, found by the dpl-based search algorithm, starting from the instances of simple cycles. Each row of a table corresponds to a LETS class, and for each class, the total number of instances of LETSs, EASs and FEASs are listed. We note that for the codes with dv = 3, the multiplicities of LETSs and EASs are the same. We have also listed the break down of the LETS multiplicity of each class based on the prime structure involved in the LETS structure. For example, in Table XVII, for Code C1, and for the (6, 2) class, we notice that there are a total of 142, 974 instances of LETS in this class, from which 54, 756 are children of s3, and the remaining 88, 218 are children of s4. The symbol “-” as an entry of an (a, b) class for a specific

52
TABLE XVI LIST OF LDPC CODES USED IN THIS PAPER

Code C1

C2

C3

C4

C5

C6

C7

C8

C9

C10

C11

C12

n 169 361 529 1057 16383 504 816 1008 4000 20000 155 504

R 0.78 0.84 0.87 0.77 0.87 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.5

0.5 0.4 0.5

dv

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

3

g

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

8

8

Ref. [11] [11] [11] [24] [24] [24] [24] [24] [24] [24] [32] [15]

Code C13 C14 C15 C16

n 1008 2640 49 169

R 0.5 0.5 0.49 0.71

dv

3

3

4

4

g

8

8

6

6

Ref. [15] [24] [11] [11]

C17 289 0.77 4 6 [11]

C18

C19

C20

C21

C22

C23

C24

361 529 4095 16383 4000 8000 816

0.8 0.83 0.82 0.87 0.5 0.5 0.5

4

4

4

4

4

4

5

6

6

6

6

6

6

6

[11] [11] [24] [24] [24] [24] [24]

sk means that, based on the characterization table, sk is not a prime sub-structure of any LETS structure in the (a, b) class. In the last two rows of each table, the runtime of the dpl-based and the dot-based search algorithms is reported for comparison. The symbol “-” for the runtime of the dot-based search algorithm means that the search takes more than one day, or needs more than 8-GB memory to be completed. For fair comparison, both algorithms are run to find all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures within the range of interest for a and b values, exhaustively.
Table XVII lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 6 and b ≤ 3, for the codes C1, C2 and C3. These are high-rate array-based codes [11] with dv = 3 and g = 6. Absorbing and fully absorbing sets of these structured codes were studied in [10]. The search algorithm to find the instances of LETSs in the range a ≤ 6 and b ≤ 3, is based on the information provided in Table V. Since the variable degree is 3, all the instances of LETSs found by the search algorithm are EASs. Therefore, FEASs were found by examining the LETSs, and testing them for the definition of a fully elementary absorbing set. While it takes the proposed search algorithm 38, 196 and 424 seconds to find all the instances of LETS structures of Table V for these three codes, respectively, it took the dot-based search algorithm 181, 1447 and 5749 seconds to find the same set of LETSs for the three codes, respectively.
Table XVIII lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs and FEASs in all the nonempty

53
TABLE XVII MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODES C1, C2 AND C3 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 6 AND b ≤ 3

C1

C2

C3

(a, b) Primes Total Total

Primes

Total Total

Primes

Total Total

class s3 s4 LETS FEAS s3

s4 LETS FEAS s3

s4

LETS FEAS

(3,3) 2028 - 2028 0

6498 - 6498 0 11638 -

11638 0

(4,2) 3042 - 3042 3042 9747 - 9747 9747 17457 -

17457 17457

(5,3) - 83148 83148 0

- 422370 422370 0

- 942678 942678 0

(6,0) - 3718 3718 3718

- 18411 18411 18411

- 40733 40733 40733

(6,2) 54756 88218 142974 142974 292410 458109 750519 750519 663366 1029963 1693329 1693329

dpl

38 sec.

196 sec.

424 sec.

dot

181 sec.

1447 sec.

5749 sec.

TABLE XVIII MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODES C4 AND C5 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 8 AND b ≤ 3

(a, b) class (3,3) (4,2) (5,1) (5,3) (6,2) (7,1) (7,3) (8,0) (8,2) dpl dot

C4

Primes

Total

s3

s4

LETS

2288

-

2288

296

-

296

29

-

29

-

17320 17320

650 2435 3085

246

23

269

146694 89023 235717

16

0

16

25452 13658 39110

3 min.

-

Total FEAS 1740 267
29 12847 2813
269 175759
16 35524

C5

Primes

Total

s3

s4

LETS

14291

-

14291

404

-

404

10

-

10

-

43904 43904

343 1284 1627

34

3

37

156742 93724 250466

0

0

0

5913 3084 8997

27 min.

-

Total FEAS 13491 394
10 41382 1590
37 235926
0 8824

classes within the range a ≤ 8 and b ≤ 3, for the codes C4 and C5. Both codes have dv = 3 and g = 6. Code C4 is a high-rate code (R = 0.77) with short block length (n = 1057), and code C5 is a high-rate code (R = 0.87) with large block length (n = 16, 383). The search to find the instances of LETSs in the range a ≤ 8 and b ≤ 3, is based on the information provided in Table VI. It takes the proposed search algorithm only about 3 and 27 minutes to find LETSs reported

54
in this table for codes C4 and C5, respectively. To obtain the results of Table VI, the dpl-based search algorithm only needs to enumerate the instances of s3 and s4 in the Tanner graph of the codes. The dot-based search algorithm, on the other hand, needs to enumerate the instances of s3, s4, s5, s6, c6, n6, s7, c7, and n7, to find all the instances of LETSs in the range a ≤ 8 and b ≤ 3, in a guaranteed fashion. It took the dot-based search algorithm 43 minutes to only find the 16,710,009 instances of s5, and more than a day to find all the instances of LETSs reported in this table for code C4.
The examination of Table XVIII shows that for two classes with the same size, the class with a larger b value has more instances of LETSs. For example, for C5, the instances of LETS structures in the (7, 1) and (7, 3) classes are 37 and 250,466, respectively. Following a similar trend, this code probably has millions of instances of LETSs in the (7, 5) class, and it would take the search algorithm a long time to find them. These trapping sets, however, would not be dominant in the presence of those in the (7, 1) and (7, 3) classes. This highlights the importance of having a flexible and efficient search algorithm that can be easily tailored to different values of amax and bmax.
Multiplicities of instances of LETSs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 3, for Codes C6, C7 and C8 are listed in Table XIX. These are three (3, 6)-regular LDPC codes, all with g = 6, and with short block lengths: 504, 816, and 1008, respectively. The search algorithm to find all the instances of LETSs in the range a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 3, is based on the information provided in Table VII. For each code, all the instances of LETSs and FEASs in this range are enumerated in less than 20 seconds. In comparison, the runtime for dot-based search is larger by a factor of about 45. It is worth mentioning that [39] only reports the multiplicity of FEAS structures in the (3, 3), (4, 2) and (5, 3) classes of C7 and C8. The results of [39] match the results reported in the first three rows of Table XIX.
Table XX lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5, for Codes C7 and C8. It takes the proposed search algorithm 16 and 14 minutes to find all the instances of LETSs in the range of a ≤ 12, b ≤ 5, for Codes C7 and C8, respectively. This is versus about 20 seconds that takes the algorithm to find all the instances of LETSs of these codes in the range of a ≤ 10, b ≤ 3. In Table XX, we have also reported the multiplicity of instances of FASs obtained by the exhaustive search algorithm of [21]. There are only four cases in Table XX, where the multiplicity of FEAS classes obtained

55
TABLE XIX MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODES C6, C7 AND C8 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 10 AND b ≤ 3

(a, b) class (3,3) (4,2) (5,3) (6,2) (7,3) (8,2) (9,1) (9,3) (10,2) dpl dot

C6

Total Total

LETS FEAS

169 159

5

5

214 180

20

20

418 374

24

23

1

1

1127 992

71

69

20 sec.

948 sec.

C7

Total Total

LETS FEAS

132 126

3

3

90

86

2

2

110 108

1

1

0

0

195 166

15

15

18 sec.

918 sec.

C8

Total Total

LETS FEAS

165 153

6

6

100 92

5

5

116 110

3

3

0

0

169 161

4

4

20 sec.

942 sec.

here differ from the multiplicity of FAS classes reported in [21]. These cases are boldfaced in the table. We believe that the source of these differences are either typographical error, or some FASs that are not elementary. In addition, it took the exhaustive search of [21] more than 5 hours to generate the fully absorbing sets of each of the two codes on a desktop computer with an Intel Core2 2.4 GHz CPU with 2GB memory [21].
Table XXI lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5, for Codes C9 and C10. These codes are (3, 6)-regular, both with g = 6, and with medium and large block lengths: 4000 and 20, 000, respectively. The search algorithm to find instances of LETSs in the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5, is based on the information provided in Table VIII. For each code, all the instances of LETSs in this range are enumerated in less than 9 minutes. From these examples, it can be seen that the dpl-based search algorithm is able to enumerate the instances of dominant LETSs of codes with large block length in a guaranteed fashion, efficiently. Interestingly, despite the large difference between the block lengths of the two codes, the runtimes of the dpl-based search for the two codes are not very different. In comparison, for the dot-based algorithm to search the instances of LETS structures of these codes with a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5, in an exhaustive fashion, the algorithm requires the enumeration

56

TABLE XX MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODES C7 AND C8 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 12 AND
b≤5

C7

C8

(a, b)

Primes

Total Total [21]

Primes

Total Total [21]

class s3 s4 s5 s6 LETS FEAS FAS s3 s4 s5 s6 LEAS FEAS FAS

(3,3) 132 -

- - 132 126 126 165 -

- - 165 153 153

(4,2) 3

-

-- 3

33

6-

-- 6

6

6

(4,4) - 1491 - - 1491 1350 1350 - 1252 - - 1252 1130 1130

(5,3) - 90 - - 90 86 86 - 100 - - 100 92 8388

(5,5) -

- 9169 - 9169 7286 7286 -

- 10019 - 10019 8388 8388

(6,2) 0

2

--

2

22

1 4 -- 5

5

5

(6,4) 1084 1379 - - 2463 2235 2236 1011 874 - - 1885 1666 1668

(7,3) 54 56 - - 110 108 108 74 42 - - 116 110 111 (7,5) 13372 15957 4077 - 33406 26688 nr † 13462 12148 4126 - 29736 24876 24876

(8,2) 1

0

--

1

11

2

1

-- 3

3

3

(8,4) 2145 2020 34 - 4199 3769 nr 1793 1136 32 - 2961 2617 nr

(9,3) 111 89 0 - 195 166 nr 122 47 - - 169 161 nr

(9,5) 39306 39304 5768 - 84378 67558 nr 35996 23149 4642 - 63787 53596 nr

(10,2) 8

7

0 - 15

15 15

31

0- 4

4

4

(10,4) 4389 3446 130 - 7965 7277 nr 3163 1609 97 - 4869 4421 nr

(11,3) 184 103 3 - 290 270 nr 154 64 1 - 219 209 nr

(11,5) 104491 95600 11066 116 211273 168214 nr 78596 47962 7619 59 134236 112213 nr

(12,2) 10

5

- - 15

15 15

5

1

0- 6

6

6

(12,4) 10163 7207 467 1 17838 15970 nr 6140 2669 231 1 9041 8168 nr

dpl

16 min.

14 min.

dot

-

-

† “nr” stands for not reported.

of s10 and s11 structures. This imposes huge computational complexity and memory requirements on the dot-based search algorithm (more than a day of runtime and 8-GB memory). On the other hand, the dpl-search only needs to enumerate prime cycles up to s6. Moreover, in the dpl-based search, for finding the instances of potentially dominant LETSs, most of the expansion techniques with relatively high complexity (large m) are needed to be applied to the instances of LETS in classes with small b, where such classes happen to be usually empty. For example, in C10, there is no LETS in the (4, 2), (5, 1), (6, 2), (7, 1) and (8, 2) classes.
Multiplicities of instances of LETSs and FEAS in all the nonempty classes within the range

57
TABLE XXI MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODES C9 AND C10 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 12 AND b ≤ 5

(a, b) class (3,3) (4,2) (4,4) (5,3) (5,5) (6,4) (7,3) (7,5) (8,4) (9,3) (9,5) (10,4) (11,3) (11,5) (12,4) dpl dot

s3 171
1 278 5 3708 109 2 2316 45 0 1371 26

C9

Primes

s4

s5 s6

-

--

-

--

1219 - -

21

--

- 9935 -

198 - -

5

--

2911 1042 -

74

0-

2

0-

1360 325 -

29

0-

1

0-

781 123 3

10

00

7 min.

-

Total LETS 171
1 1219 21 9935 476 10 7661 183
4 4001 74
1 2278 36

Total FEAS 169
1 1192 21 9526 456 10 7359 173
4 3847 71
1 2189 36

C10

Primes

s3

s4

s5

s6

161 -

-

-

-

-

-

-

- 1260 -

-

-

2

-

-

-

- 10046 -

49 46

-

-

0

0

-

-

729 609 202 -

2

2

0

-

0

0

0

-

79 71

17 -

1

0

0

-

0

0

0

-

2

6

0

0

0

0

0

0

9 min.

-

Total LETS 161
0 1260
2 10046
95 0 1540 4 0 167 1 0 8 0

Total FEAS 161
0 1256
2 9952 95
0 1528
4 0 165 1 0 8 0

a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 4, for Codes C11, C12 and C13 are listed in Table XXII. These codes have dv = 3 and g = 8. The search algorithm to find all the instances of LETSs in the range of interest is based on the information provided in Table X.
Code C11 is the Tanner (155, 64) code [32] with dc = 5. The error-prone structures of this code have been widely investigated [18], [38], [21], [7], [17]. It is well-known that the LETS structures in the (8, 2) and (10, 2) classes are the dominant LETS structures of this code. It takes the dpl-based search algorithm 442 seconds to find all the instances of LETS structures reported in Table XXII for this code. However, it took the dot-based algorithm 45 minutes to find almost all the instances of LETS structures of C11 within this range (prime structures of size 10 are not considered), and more than a day to find the exhaustive list of instances of LETS structures in this table. If we limit the range of search to a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 4, it takes the proposed algorithm only 28 seconds to find all the instances of LETS structures of C11 within this range, based on

58

TABLE XXII MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODES C11, C12 AND C13 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 12 AND
b≤4

C11

C12

C13

(a, b)

Primes

Total Total [21]

Primes

Total Total [21] Primes Total Total [21]

class s4 s5 s6 LETS FEAS FAS s4 s5 s6 LETS FEAS FAS s4 s5 s6 LETS FEAS FAS

(4,4) 465 - - 465 0 0 802 - - 802 760 760 2 - - 2 2 2

(5,3) 155 - - 155 155 155 14 - - 14 14 14 0 - - 0 0 0

(6,4) 930 - - 930 0 0 985 - - 985 849 849 1 - - 1 1 1

(7,3) 930 - - 930 0 0 57 - - 57 47 47 0 - - 0 0 0

(8,2) 465 - - 465 465 465 5 - - 5 4 4 0 - - 0 0 0

(8,4) 4650 465 - 5115 1395 1395 2414 215 - 2629 2270 2270 2 47 - 49 46 nr

(9,1) 0

--

0

00

1 - - 1 1 1 0- - 0 0 0

(9,3) 1860 0 - 1860 930 930 152 4 - 156 146 146 0 1 - 1 1 nr

(10,2) 1395 0 - 1395 1395 1395 6 0 - 6 6 6 0 0 - 0 0 0

(10,4) 25575 3720 - 29295 17670 17670 7311 1557 - 8868 7399 nr 0 173 - 173 148 nr

(11,3) 6200 0 - 6200 5270 5270 551 77 - 628 577 nr 0 9 - 9 9 nr

(12,2) 930 0 - 930 930 930

(12,4) 144615 30225 6045 180885 115320 nr†

dpl

442 sec. / 28 sec. *

25 2 - 27 26 26 24857 7062 630 32549 26936 nr
561 sec. / 38 sec.

00 - 0 0 0 1 461 50 512 466 nr
157 sec. / 17 sec.

dot

- / 392 sec.

- / 1563 sec.

- / 1466 sec.

† “nr” stands for not reported. * Runtime to find all the instances of LETS structures reported in this table/runtime to find instances in the first 10
classes reported in this table.

the information provided in Table IX. However, it took the dot-based algorithm 392 seconds to find all the instances of LETS structures of C11 within the range a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 4.
Codes C12 and C13 are (3, 6)-regular LDPC codes constructed by the PEG algorithm [15]. The dpl-based search algorithm finds all the instances of LETSs for codes C12 and C13 within the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 4, in 561 and 157 seconds, respectively. Again, the exhaustive search of LETSs for both codes within the range a ≤ 12, b ≤ 4, is out of the reach of the dot-based search algorithm. If we limit the range of search to a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 4, it takes the proposed algorithm only 38 and 17 seconds to find all the instances of LETSs of C12 and C13 within this range, respectively. It, however, takes the dot-based algorithm 1563 and 1466 seconds to find all the instances of LETSs of C12 and C13, respectively, within the range a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 4.
In Table XXII, we have also reported the multiplicity of instances of FASs obtained by the

59
TABLE XXIII MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF C14 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 14 AND b ≤ 6

(a, b) class (4,4) (5,5) (6,6) (7,5) (8,6) (9,5) (10,6) (11,5) (12,4) (12,6) (13,5) (14,4) dpl dot

s4 1320
5280 80520 0 100320 5280 1320 73040 2640 1320

Primes s5 -
11088 -
2640 51480 2640 39600
0 0 52800 0 0

C14

Total

s6

LETS

-

1320

-

11088

106920 106920

-

7920

14520 146520

-

2640

7920 147840

0

5280

0

1320

9240 135080

0

2640

0

1320

42 min.

-

Total FEAS 1320 11088 104280 7920 138600 2640 129360
0 1320 128480
0 1320

exhaustive search algorithm of [21]. It can be seen that the results of [21] match those obtained here. One should, however, note that while the range of classes reported in Table XXII is much larger than the range of classes reported in [21], it took the exhaustive search of [21] more than 5 hours, compared to only a few minutes for the proposed algorithm, to generate the fully absorbing sets of each of these codes on a desktop computer with an Intel Core2 2.4 GHz CPU with 2GB memory [21].
Code C14 is the Margulis (2640, 1320) code [25], with g = 8. It is well-known that the most dominant LETS structures of this code are in (12,4) and (14,4) LETS classes. The proposed search algorithm finds all the instances of LETSs in Table XXIII for this code in about 42 minutes. It is worth mentioning that [21] only reports the multiplicity of FAS structures in the (4, 4), (5, 5) classes of C14. The results of [21] match the results reported in the first two rows of Table XXIII.
Table XXIV lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs, EASs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 6 and b ≤ 4, for Codes C15-C19. These are five high-rate array-based

60
TABLE XXIV MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS, EAS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODES C15 , C16, C17, C18 , C19 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 6 AND
b≤4

C15

C16

C17

C18

C19

(a, b) Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total Total

class LETS EAS FEAS LETS EAS FEAS LETS EAS FEAS LETS EAS FEAS LETS EAS FEAS

(4,4) 294 294 0

000

000

0 00

000

(5,4) 1176 0 0

000

0 0 0 12996 12996 0

000

(6,2) 588 588 588 0 0 0

000

0 00

000

(6,4) 4116 1764 0 30420 30420 0 23120 23120 18496 110466 32490 25992 58190 58190 46552

dpl

1 min.

2 min.

4 min.

7 min.

11 min.

dot

1 min.

2 min.

4 min.

7 min.

11 min.

codes with g = 6, dv = 4, and dc = 7, 13, 17, 19, 23, respectively. It was shown in [10] that array-based codes with dv = 4 and dc > 7, do not contain any absorbing sets (ASs) in the (4, 4) class. This is matched with our results for (4, 4) EASs. Moreover, from Table XXIV, one can see that the array-based code with dv = 4 and dc = 7, has 294 EASs, but no FEAS in the (4, 4) class. Lemmas 6 and 7 in [10] indicate that for the array-based codes with dv = 4 and dc > 19, there is no (5, b) and (6, 2) absorbing sets. Based on Table V of [17], for a variable-regular code with dv = 4 and g = 6, the (5, 0), (5, 2) and (5, 4) classes are the only classes with size 5 that can have elementary absorbing sets (EASs). The results of Table XXIV thus reveal that C18 with dc = 19 is the only array-based code with EASs of size 5, and that the only class of size 5 for which this code has some EASs is the (5, 4) class. Also, our results in Table XXIV complement those of [10], and demonstrate that the array-based codes with dv = 4 and dc > 7 do not contain any EASs in the (6, 2) class. Since the dot expansion is the only expansion technique used in the dpl-based search algorithm for the array-based codes, this algorithm is the same as the dot-based search algorithm for these codes.
Table XXV lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs, EASs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 8 and b ≤ 6, for Codes C20 and C21. These are two high-rate codes with dv = 4, g = 6 and block lengths n = 4096 and n = 16, 383, respectively. The search algorithm to find all the instances of LETSs in the range a ≤ 8 and b ≤ 6, is based on the information provided in Table XII. All the instances of LETS structures in this range for C20 and

61
TABLE XXV MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS, EAS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODES C20 AND C21 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 8 AND b ≤ 6

(a, b) class (3,6) (4,4) (4,6) (5,4) (5,6) (6,4) (6,6) (7,4) (7,6) (8,4) (8,6) dpl dot

C20

Primes

Total Total

s3

s4 LETS EAS

43531 - 43531 0

15

-

15

15

21383 - 21383 0

9

-

9

7

14622 - 14622 0

10

-

10

7

11553 1403 12956 913

10

0

10

6

10941 1837 12778 1779

12

1

13

11

11479 2659 14138 2612

68 min.

-

Total FEAS
0 13 0 4 0 5 246 5 476 6 741

C21

Primes

Total

s3

s4 LETS

119233 - 119233

10

-

10

29001 - 29001

5

-

5

9796 -

9796

2

-

2

3815 530 4345

2

0

2

1859 337 2196

1

0

1

970 188 1158

133 min.

-

Total EAS
0 10 0 1 0 2 307 0 288 0 191

Total FEAS
0 6 0 1 0 0 161 0 167 0 102

C21 are enumerated in about 68 and 133 minutes, respectively. For the dot-based search algorithm to find all the instances of LETSs in the range of interest in a guaranteed fashion, it requires to enumerate s6 structures. This enumeration alone imposes huge computational complexity and memory requirements to the dot-based search algorithm (more than a day of runtime and 8-GB of memory).
Table XXVI lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs, EASs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 10 and b ≤ 10, for C22 and C23. These are (4, 8)-regular LDPC codes, with g = 6, and with block lengths of n = 4000 and n = 8000, respectively. The search algorithm to find all the instances of LETSs in this range is based on the information provided in Table XIII. It can be observed that C22 and C23 have one and no instance of EAS in this range, respectively. The dominant LETSs of C23, which are included in those reported in Table XXVI, are used in [33] to accurately estimate the error floor under quantized iterative decoders. The accurate estimation reveals that error-prone structures of this code are not absorbing sets. If we limit the range of interest to a ≤ 9 and b ≤ 8, it takes the proposed search algorithm only 4 minutes to find all the LETSs of C22 within this range. It is worth mentioning that to find all the

62
TABLE XXVI MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS, EAS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODES C22 AND C23 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 10 AND b ≤ 10

C22

C23

(a, b)

Primes

Total Total Total

Primes

Total Total Total

class s3 s4 s5 LETS EAS FEAS s3 s4 s5 LETS EAS FEAS

(3,6) 1563 -

- 1563 0 0 1620 -

- 1620 0 0

(4,6) 91 -

-

91 0 0

55 -

-

55 0 0

(4,8) - 24269 - 24269 0 0

- 24107 - 24107 0 0

(5,6) 2

-

-

2 00

2-

-

2 00

(5,8) 4080 560 - 4640 0 0 2011 292 - 2303 0 0

(5,10) -

- 402513 402513 0 0

-

- 406289 406289 0 0

(6,8) 495 28 65 588 0 0 164 5 27 196 0 0

(6,10) 111540 74004 - 185544 0 0 50073 37172 - 96525 0 0

(7,8) 51 2

0

53 0 0

10 0

0

10 0 0

(7,10) 33205 6589 - 39794 0 0 9009 1689 - 10698 0 0

(8,8) 5

0

-

5 00

00

-

0 00

(8,10) 6248 754 4 7006 0 0 1030 84 2 1116 0 0

(9,8) 1

0

-

1 00

00

-

0 00

(9,10) 1038 107 0 1145 0 0

96 5

0

101 0 0

(10,10) 170 15 0

185 1 1

13 0

0

13 0 0

dpl

63 min.

51 min.

dot

-

-

instances of LETSs of C22 within the range a ≤ 9 and b ≤ 8, by the dot-based search algorithm, all the instances of s6, s7 and s8, need to be enumerated. It takes more than 7 hours to only enumerate instances of s7 in the Tanner graph of this code, and enumerating instances of s8 is not even feasible on the desktop computer.
Table XXVII lists the multiplicity of instances of LETSs, EASs and FEASs in all the nonempty classes within the range a ≤ 9 and b ≤ 11, for C24. This is a (5, 10)-regular LDPC code with g = 6, and block length n = 816. All the instances of LETSs of this code in the range a ≤ 9 and b ≤ 11, are enumerated in about 6 minutes. It can be seen that for this code, as a result of relatively large dv, no LETS with b < a exists in the range of interest. Moreover, there is no FEAS for this code in the range b < a. It is reported in [33] that using dominant LETSs of C24, included in Table XXVII, one can obtain a more accurate estimation of the error floor in comparison to using only EASs.

63
TABLE XXVII MULTIPLICITIES OF LETS, EAS AND FEAS STRUCTURES OF CODE C24 WITHIN THE RANGE a ≤ 9 AND b ≤ 11

(a, b) class (3,9) (4,8) (4,10) (5,9) (5,11) (6,8) (6,10) (7,9) (7,11) (8,8) (8,10) (9,9) (9,11) dpl dot

Primes

s3

s4

7876 -

30 -

8446 -

98 -

14873 -

1

-

321 -

5

-

1132 9

1

0

31 0

4

0

165 2

C24

Total Total

LETS EAS

7876 0

30

30

8446 0

98

36

14873 0

1

1

321 118

5

1

1141 371

1

1

31

20

4

1

167 76

6 min.

-

Total FEAS
0 30 0 34 0 1 116 1 337 1 18 1 68

To the best of our knowledge, there are only two exhaustive search algorithms in the literature for finding the error-prone structures of variable-regular LDPC codes which cover a relatively wide range of trapping set classes, rates, block lengths and variable degrees: the algorithm of [21], and that of [17], [13]. The work in [21] is limited to only fully absorbing sets (FASs). Also, the regular LDPC codes which were studied in [21] are all codes with dv = 3, short block lengths (n < 2000) and rates equal to or less than 0.5. The variable-regular LDPC codes studied in [21] are Codes C7, C8, C11, C12, C13 and C14 in this paper. While, it takes the dpl-based search algorithm less than 42 minutes to find all the dominant LETSs and FEASs of each of these codes, the runtime to find FASs of these codes in [21] (in smaller ranges of a and b values than those considered in this work) ranges from 5 to 48 hours using a desktop computer with an Intel core2 2.4-GHz CPU with 2-GB memory. Compared to the LSS- or dot-based algorithm of [17], [13], as we discussed in the tables, the runtime and memory requirements of dpl-based search are up to three orders of magnitude smaller.

64
To the best of our knowledge, the most versatile algorithm for finding LETSs of LDPC codes is that of [18]. This algorithm, however, is not exhaustive in the sense that it does not provide any guarantee that all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures with a and b values within a given range of interest are found. For example, Codes C11, C12, and C14 have also been studied in [18], and their LETSs (EASs) are presented in Tables II, I and III of [18], respectively. The comparison of the multiplicity of LETSs in different classes reported in this paper, and that reported in [18], for each of these codes, reveals that for each code, there are some classes for which the multiplicity reported in [18] is smaller than that of this work. This means that for such classes, the algorithm of [18] has not been able to find all the LETSs in that class. These classes for Codes C11, C12, and C14 are {(9, 3), (11, 3)}, {(8, 4), (10, 4), (11, 3), (12, 2), (12, 4)}, and {(8, 6), (10, 6)}, respectively.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a novel hierarchical graph-based expansion approach to characterize leafless elementary trapping sets (LETS) of variable-regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The proposed characterization is based on three basic expansion techniques, dubbed, dot, path and lollipop, used in the space of normal graphs. Each LETS structure S is characterized as a sequence of embedded LETS structures that starts from a simple cycle, and grows in each step by using one of the three expansions, until it reaches S. It was demonstrated that the new characterization, called dpl, is minimal, in that, none of the expansions in the sequence can be divided into smaller expansions and still maintain the property that all the embedded sub-structures are LETSs. Moreover, it was proved that any minimal characterization based on embedded LETS structures must only use one of the three expansions, dot, path and lollipop, at each step. The minimality of the characterization, allowed us to devise search algorithms that are provably efficient in finding all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, for any choice of amax and bmax, in a guaranteed fashion. The efficiency of the search is a consequence of the fact that to enumerate the instances of larger LETS structures, the proposed algorithm searches for instances of smaller LETS structures that are of interest themselves, i.e., their a and b values are in the range of interest. This is unlike the so-called LSS-based search algorithm of [17], where a large number of instances of LETS structures with large b values need to be enumerated, not because they are of direct interest, but because they

65
happen to be parents of other LETS structures of interest. As shown through extensive numerical results, this reduces the search complexity of the dpl-based approach compared to LSS-based approach significantly.
To the best of our knowledge, the proposed dpl-based algorithm is the most efficient exhaustive search algorithm available for finding LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes. It is also the most general, in that, it is applicable to codes with any variable degree, girth, rate and block length.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Abu-Surra, D. DeClercq, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Trapping set enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), 2010, SanDiego, CA, USA, Jan./Feb. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[2] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[3] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Design of Finite-Length Irregular Protograph Codes with Low Error Floors over the Binary-Input AWGN Channel Using Cyclic Liftings,” IEEE Trans. Comm., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 902 907, Apr. 2012.
[4] B. Butler and P. Siegel, “Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, pp. 7416–7441, Dec. 2014.
[5] E. Cavus and B. Daneshrad, “A performance improvement and error floor avoidance technique for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 16th IEEE Int. Symp. Personal, Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., Los Angeles, CA, USA, Sep. 2005, pp. 2386–2390.
[6] C. Cole, S. Wilson, E. Hall, and T. Giallorenzi, “A general method for finding low error rates of LDPC codes,” [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0605051.
[7] D. Declercq, B. Vasic, S. K. Planjery, and E. Li, “Finite alphabet iterative decoderspart ii: Towards guaranteed error correction of LDPC codes via iterative decoder diversity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4046–4057, Oct. 2013.
[8] Q. Diao, Y. Y. Tai, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Trapping set structure of finite geometry LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory (ISIT), Davis, CA, USA, Jul. 2012, pp. 3088–3092.
[9] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Glasgow, Scotland, Jun. 2007, pp. 6261–6268.
[10] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[11] J. L. Fan, “Array-codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 543–546.
[12] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “LDPC decoder strategies for achieving low error floors,” in Proc. Inform. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Jan. 2008, pp. 277–286.
[13] Y. Hashemi and A. Banihashemi, “On characterization and efficient exhaustive search of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 323–326, Mar. 2015.

66
[14] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Corrections to on characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 1508–1508, Mar. 2015.
[15] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[16] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[17] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5188–5203, Sep 2014.
[18] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[19] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Message-passing algorithms for counting short cycles in a graph,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 485–495, Feb. 2013.
[20] S. Khazraie, R. Asvadi and A. H. Banihashemi, “A PEG Construction of Finite-Length LDPC Codes with Low Error Floor,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 16, pp. 1288 - 1291, Aug. 2012.
[21] G. B. Kyung and C.-C. Wang, “Finding the exhaustive list of small fully absorbing sets and designing the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1487–1498, Jun. 2012.
[22] S. Laendner, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “Characterization of small trapping sets in LDPC codes from steiner triple systems,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Iterative Inf. Process., Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 93–97.
[23] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “The trapping redundancy of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 53–63, Jan. 2009.
[24] D. Mackay, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes,” URL: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html. [25] G. A. Margulis, “ Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no.
1, pp. 71–78, 1982. [26] B. D. McKay and A. Piperno, “Practical graph isomorphism, II,” J. Symbolic Computation, vol. 60, pp. 94–112, 2013. [27] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code
ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007. [28] D. V. Nguyen, S. K. Chilappagari, M. W. Marcellin, and B. Vasic, “On the construction of structured LDPC codes free of
small trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2280–2302, Apr. 2012. [29] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41th annual Allerton conf. on commun. control and computing,
Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435. [30] E. Rosnes and O. Ytrehus, “An efficient algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4167–4178, Sep. 2009. [31] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the dynamics of the error floor behavior in (regular) LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3248–3264, Jul. 2010. [32] R. M. Tanner, T. D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun.
Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370. [33] S. Tolouei and A. H. Banihashemi, “Fast and accurate error floor estimation of quantized iterative decoders for variable-
regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 18, pp. 1283–1286, Aug. 2014. [34] B. Vasic, S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, and S. K. Planjery, “Trapping set ontology,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Allerton
Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Sep. 2009, pp. 1–7.

67
[35] C.-C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all small error-prone substructures in LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1976–1999, May 2009.
[36] C.-C. Wang, “On the exhaustion and elimination of trapping sets: Algorithms & the suppressing effect,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 2271–2275.
[37] Y. Zhang and W. E. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: a case study,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1566– 1573, Jun. 2009.
[38] S. Zhang and C. Schlegel, “Controlling the error floor in LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 3566– 3575, Sep. 2013.
[39] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient algorithms to find all small error-prone substructures in LDPC codes,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., Houston, TX, USA, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.

