2025 59th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS) | 979-8-3315-1326-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CISS64860.2025.10944695

Sparse parity random linear codes for URLLC in channels with memory

Steven Jones Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21218 sjones27@jhu.edu

A. Brinton Cooper III Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Johns Hopkins University Baltimore, MD 21218 abcooper@jhu.edu

Abstract— The use of short error-correcting codes is vital for achieving an Ultra-Reliable Low Latency Communications capability for supporting the Internet of Things with minimal decoding complexity. Here we examine the performance and decoding complexity of two code-agnostic decoders for a new class of full-rank sparse random linear codes derived from the MacKay-Neal LDPC construction. We consider decoding by a noise guessing decoder such as GRAND-MO and by a binary matching pursuit decoder to which list decoding is added. Comparisons are made in the context of error correction performance and computational complexity.
Keywords—random linear code, sparse parity random linear code, matching pursuit, list decoding, noise guessing decoding, URLLC
I. INTRODUCTION
The emerging Internet of Things (IoT) demands UltraReliable Low-Latency Communication (URLLC) [1] support. For example, current 5G standards require that the end-to-end transmission delay cannot exceed 1ms and the packet loss probability should not exceed 10 to 10 . Since the total delay includes physical layer propagation time plus time for channel estimation and decoding, the requirements for decoding complexity are even tighter due to the modest computing resources of URLLC devices.
Traditionally, low latency and high reliability have been seen to work in opposition. However, short block length errorcorrecting codes offer less latency than longer, more traditional codes but can still offer low error probabilities when used with new and more efficient decoding schemes. Finally, to meet the several requirements of signaling protocols, code design flexibility at the bit level may call for equally flexible decoders, suggesting an examination of universal decoders [2], and scalability in the number and diversity of users may require code-agnostic decoders.
Signal fading, user terminal motion, interference, and the use of higher-order modulation symbols often result in channels
1 This is at variance with Gilbert’s original Markov model [3] where the noise bit in State B is 1 with probability ℎ, a reasonable value of which is 0.5.

that induce correlated error bursts across the received symbols. For short block lengths, we consider the two-state Markov channel model [3] in which the channel is either in a good (G) state or a bad (B) state. In State G, the channel noise symbol is always 0, while, in State B, it is always 11. This is in keeping with the model used by [4]. Markov channels exhibit memory because the likelihood of an error in the next bit is subject to the current state of the channel. Furthermore, the Markov channel is known in the sense that the transition probabilities between states are known. When a channel is not known there is a penalty of increased complexity in the decoder to achieve maximum likelihood decoding [2].
A modest literature exists [1, Ch 5] on short block length codes for URLLC, including BCH, LDPC, Tail-biting Convolutional Codes, Turbo Codes, and Polar codes. Binary LDPC codes with iterative belief propagation (BP) decoding do not perform well at short block lengths due to the existence of many short cycles in the code’s bipartite graph. Protographbased LDPC codes are one candidate short length block code [5]. LDPC codes are also being incorporated into the data channels of the 5-th generation wireless communications (5G) [1]. Successive Cancellation List (SCL) decoding has also been studied for URLLC [1].
Each of these code families (and most others) has a unique decoder design. In this work, we examine two decoders, the designs of which do not require knowledge of the code structure. These decoders will, however, accept as input data the parity check matrix of the code actually in use. In what follows, we will refer to these as 'code-agnostic' decoders, which are designed to estimate the channel noise directly. The decoders discussed here are fully parallelizable, thus offering support for strict latency requirements.
Section II discusses short code constructions used to evaluate the proposed decoders. We depart from previous constructions of random linear codes to build a class of sparse parity random linear (SPRL) codes with properties suitable for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

this study. Section III proposes two code-agnostic hard decision decoders, matching pursuit (MP) with list decoding and guessing random noise decoding (GRAND), both for the two-state Markov channel for URLLC, and discusses complexity and error rates. A comparison of the performance of MP and GRAND decoders for the SPRL codes is given in Section IV followed by conclusions in Section V.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
A. Sparse RLC Construction
In [6] the author describes MacKay-Neal (MN) codes and revisits “Gallager codes” (i.e., LDPC codes). Both the MN codes and Gallager codes may be decoded using various methods including the sum-product decoder.
We demonstrate that codes derived from MN codes (and possibly MN codes themselves) can be decoded using MP and GRAND-MO noise guessing decoders. In particular, we examine the case where the channel is a two-state Markov model, which exhibits memory.
In [7] the authors describe three methods of construction of the parity check matrix for MN codes. In these constructions, it is not guaranteed that the parity check matrix is of full rank. The elimination of columns is used to gain full rank but reduces the code rate to less than .
This is contrasted with our construction of sparse parity random linear (SPRL) code as follows: SPRL code construction: We construct the SPRL codes by generating an initial random row of the parity check matrix with a specified weight. We then add a second random row of the same weight ensuring that the rank increases by one. Additional rows are added in kind until a matrix of full rank NK is obtained. In so doing, no columns are deleted and the code rate remains . SPRL code modification: The SPRL code parity check matrix constructed above can then be modified to eliminate up to length 4 cycles in the Tanner graph by identifying the columns with overlap and modifying the first column to eliminate the cycle. As the cycle is eliminated, a 1 is added to the column in a new location, ensuring a new cycle of length 4 is not introduced and ensuring that the parity check matrix remains full rank.
The advantage of our SPRL code approach is that the desired code rate of is maintained and that the parity matrix is of full rank. The modification removes cycles of length 4 and less. A disadvantage is that cycles of length greater than 4 are not eliminated; however, it may be possible to eliminate longer cycles by iteratively applying the modification approach to longer cycles (this has not been tested). The conjecture is that while the sum-product decoder performance is sensitive to the presence of short cycles in the parity check matrix, the MP and GRAND decoders are not. We empirically explore this issue.

B. Review of the Tanner Graph Cycles Short cycles in the Tanner graph have a detrimental impact
upon the performance of the sum-product algorithm (SPA) decoder [8, p.559] because the cycles impact the posteriori probabilities in the parity check matrix. However, the same may not be true of the noise guessing decoder or the MP decoder since neither of these employs a sum-product through a series of nodes. Instead, both of these decoders employ error identification through use of the syndrome. The noise guessing decoder approaches the decoded codeword by subtracting the current most likely channel noise word from the noisy codeword and testing the syndrome for zero, while the MP algorithm calculates a residual based upon the syndrome. Thus, the sensitivity that SPA decoding has to code construction is not apparent in noise guessing decoding nor MP decoding. However, these decoders are affected by the distance properties of the code.
We experiment with the presence of cycles of length four in the Tanner graph. We compare decoding in the presence of length four cycles with decoding in the absence of length four cycles, for noise guessing and MP decoders.
C. Channel Model A two-state Markov channel model is employed. The two
states represent a bad state (B) and a good state (G), as described in [4], and inspired by [3]. In State G, no errors are generated, while in State B, Gilbert [3] modeled the symbol error probability as ℎ 0.5. For this reason, Gilbert’s Markov state diagram cannot be used to predict the likelihood of channel error sequences. In our Markov model, State B is defined as the channel state which produces an error with probability 1 . State B is exited with probability when the first correct symbol is received. Thus, in State B, every received symbol is in error. This models well the use case represented by a strong, intermittent interferer and supports considering hard-decision decoding.
Figure 1. Two-State Markov Model
It is assumed that the transition probabilities between states can be characterized due to the predictable nature of the activity in a household or factory. Such a channel model can be justified in IoT or machine-to-machine (MtM) applications where interference is due to industrial processes. Binary errors occur in the bad state and transitions between states occur with probability (good state to bad state), and (bad state to good state).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. DECODING METHODS
Two code-agnostic decoding methods are described for the SPRL codes. These are based upon “guessing” the channel noise and sparse recovery [9], to which list decoding is added, respectively.
A. Noise guessing decoding
Guessing Random Additive Noise Decoding (GRAND) [4,10] uses knowledge of the channel to guess the noise sequence. The GRAND-MO decoder [10] is specified by its codeword length n, and the transition probabilities of a twostate Markov process as described in Section II. Expressions are presented to calculate the probability associated with a noise sequence of length n, containing m bursts and l total bit flips. In [11] we describe the generation and ordering by likelihood of the noise sequences for the two-state Markov channel.
GRAND sorts the sequences characterized by a specific (m,l) pair by probability P(m,l) [11], and, starting with the most likely (m,l) pair, determines the error sequences that result from specific combinations of m and l.
B. MP List Decoder
The MP list decoder is motivated by [9]. The matching pursuit decoder employs a binary version of the matching pursuit algorithm [12]. The matching pursuit algorithm recovers a sparse vector, in this case an error vector that perturbs the received codeword . The algorithm iteratively identifies the atom of the vector that maximizes the dot product of the columns of the parity check matrix with the residual error from the prior iteration, in which the error is represented by the syndrome ̂,where is the parity check matrix of the code and ̂ is the perturbed codeword. The iterations continue until the residual error is below a threshold or a maximum number of iterations have occurred.
Like the GRAND-MO decoder, the MP list decoder is a hard decision decoder. Each iteration identifies the atom that minimizes the residual error. Thus, at the completion of the algorithm, those atoms (bits) that most contribute to the error (syndrome) are identified.
In the context of decoding a binary code, MP is constrained because each atom can only take binary values. As a result, the contribution of multiple atoms can have an equivalent impact to the residual. Such a binary MP hard decision decoder is described in [9], where a measure of reliability is developed to select the atom that most consistently contributes to the residual in the event of ties among atoms impacting the residual.
To deal with ties among the atoms, our MP decoder includes a list decoder, so that each of the tied atoms may be evaluated as a noise source alone or in combination with other atoms. We compile these contributors and develop a list of possible bit errors to be corrected. Taking the contributors, we develop combinations of the contributing atoms as possible bit error sequences. We then evaluate the syndrome for each combination to find the positions of the bit errors in the received

codeword. Much like the noise guessing decoder, we can order the combinatorial error contributing bits by likelihood of occurrence. In this way we may start with a single error case, and progress to larger numbers of errors. These error sequence probabilities can be calculated in a manner similar to those of the noise guessing decoder, but drawing only on the bits that the MP residual minimization algorithm identifies. Thus, the scale of the noise sequence generation for the list decoder is smaller than that of the noise decoder.
We can decide on the maximum weight of any noise sequence used to correct the received codeword. Selecting the number of bits in error, we then produce every ordered combination of that number of errored bits. Thus, the number of noise sequences that must be evaluated is based on the number of atoms identified by the MP algorithm. This will vary with every codeword to be decoded
C. Complexity of Decoding
The noise guessing decoder evaluates the most probable noise sequences up to some abandonment threshold [4], after which attempts to decode are stopped and a decoding error is declared. Depending upon the Markov channel model statistics, a large majority of noise probabilities may be represented by relatively modest number of sequences [11]. Each sequence is considered in order of probability by adding the prospective noise sequence to the received signal and then evaluating the syndrome. Thus, whereas one would expect that a large number of binary noise sequences might be possible, i.e., up to 2n sequences, a very limited number of sequences actually need be considered and still recover the actual noise sequence with high probability. The low decoding latency supports the requirements of URLLC.
In [10] the computational complexity of the GRAND-MO noise guessing decoder scheme is shown to be dominated by parity checking which entails multiplying a prospective codeword by a parity check matrix. The candidate binary noise sequences are ordered by likelihood according to the knowledge of the channel statistics, e.g., Markov channel model parameters. The set of noise sequences can be generated offline and thus their generation would not impact the complexity of the decoder. Found in [10] is a representation of the computation needed to conduct the parity checking over a number of noise sequences. The number of parity check operations is given in (1):
1
!"
Here each operation is an O(n2) parity check and $%&' is the expected maximum number of noise sequences that must be checked, which can be taken as one half the Hamming distance of the codewords.
(1) describes the expected number of noise sequences that must be checked and the order of operations in the parity check (O(n2)). The addition of the noise sequence and the received word also entails an XOR operation of O(n). Note that the application of noise sequences to a received word and the parity check can be parallelized in a noise guessing decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The MP list decoder first identifies the codeword bits that can influence the syndrome-based residual. Due to the binary nature of the MP algorithm, some bits will tie with one another in computing the residual. However a relatively fewer number of bits will be identified as possible contributors to the error word. Hence the computational cost of considering all of the resulting list error contributors can be less than that of the noise guessing decoder.

The binary matching pursuit algorithm [9] uses integer addition, XOR, and integer comparison [9], all of which are O(n). As described earlier, the dot product in the binary matching pursuit algorithm can result in ties in its residual calculation, making the winning atom in each iteration unclear. Hence the list decoding approach allows combinations of the bits that result in the ties to be evaluated as errors. The number of parity check operations ( is given in (2),

+,/. $

(

)*

2

!"
where each operation is an O(n2) parity check just as in the noise guessing decoder of (1). But here $ represents the number of atoms that maximize the dot product in the MP algorithm over all iterations, including ties. That is, $ 0 in equation (1) since the MP algorithm will only select at most atoms (bits) from the codeword to be corrected.

Comparing (1) and (2) indicates a similarity due to the commonality of defining noise sequences in each decoder. However, in the MP decoder the atoms contributing to the noise sequences are limited to those that have maximized the dot product in some iteration of the greedy pursuit. By contrast the noise decoder may compose the noise sequence from any of the n positions in the codeword. Hence we can bound the complexity of the improved binary MP algorithm with list decoding by comparing equations (1) and (2) as follows:

+,/. $

$234

) *0

3

!"

0

Which is true because $ 0 . That is the MP list decoder will always produce fewer noise sequences than the noise guessing decoder because it draws from a smaller (no greater than) set of atoms (bits). Hence the computational complexity of the MP list decoder is less than that of the noise guessing decoder.

The improved binary matching pursuit (IBMP) algorithm [9] entails several O(n) operations as well. One of which is an XOR which the noise guessing also uses. Thus the complexity of the IBMP combined with list decoding is generally bounded above by that of the noise guessing decoder, with a possible exception when the O(n) computations are significant in relation to the O(n2) computations. Like the noise guessing algorithm, the IBMP can be parallelized by performing the iterative MP algorithm over successive codewords independently. The IBMP in [9] also suffers from a mismatching which is overcome by the list decoding approach (although with the inherent complexity cost in equation (2)).

IV. DECODING PERFORMANCE

In comparing the noise guessing decoder with the binary MP
list decoder, it is observed that the noise guessing decoder
develops the set of noise sequences using knowledge of the
statistics of the channel, such as and [10]. Following the approach in [4], is obtained from and 56 using the stationary
7
probability of the bad state ( and the bit error rate expression of binary phase-shift keying in additive white Gaussian noise. Hence we need only define and 56.
7

(

8 89:

;<= >?2@A8/ BC

(4)

When is small, the tendency of the channel is to remain in the bad state and generate longer bursts of errors. Conversely a larger reduces burst errors by returning to the good state with higher probability.

Performance using two (32,16) SPRL codes is shown in the following figures. One code has cycles of length 4 in its Tanner graph, whereas the other code does not. The row weights of the parity check matrices of both codes are always 4. Observe in Figure 2 that the noise guessing decoder outperforms the MP list decoder when the channel is bursty ( 0.4 .

Figure 2. BER comparison of MP list decoder and noise guessing decoder (GRAND-MO) in a highly bursty channel (g=0.4)
While the decoder performance differs, note that in this limited example there is no appreciable difference in the BER performance of the two codes for a given decoder, lending support to the conjecture that the MP list decoder and the noise guessing decoder are not prone to cycles of length 4.
The noise guessing decoder accounts for the channel statistics in the noise generation process and thus can better predict the presence of error bursts. The MP list decoder in contrast does not account for bursts of errors, instead focusing on the greatest amplitude impact, by a single atom at a time. Thus the MP list decoder can fail to recognize burst errors. As the channel tends toward sparser error bursts, the MP list

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decoder improves as shown in Figure 3 and is comparable to the noise guessing decoder at some points.

the Markov channel. Although the noise sequences are generated offline, this is a step that the MP list decoder does not require. Moreover, if the Markov process defining the channel is not stationary the noise guessing decoder must adapt the ordering of its set of noise sequences to the changing channel statistics. This adaption is not needed in the MP list decoder which is thus better suited to the non-stationary channel.

Figure 3. BER comparison of MP list decoder and noise guessing decoder (GRAND-MO) in a less bursty channel (g=0.9)

Figure 4. BLER comparison of MP list decoder and noise guessing decoder (GRAND-MO) in a highly bursty channel (g=0.4)
Block error performance is shown in Figures 4 and 5 for =0.4 and 0.9, respectively. Here the noise guessing decoder performance again performs better than the MP list decoder. It is noteworthy that the URLLC goal of 10-5 is more readily attained by the noise guessing decoder but can also be achieved by the MP list decoder for about ½ dB added Eb/No for the channel where errors occur more sparsely ( 0.9 .
Whereas the noise guessing decoder uses a set of noise sequences ordered by probability, the MP list decoder does not. This set of noise sequences is based upon the statistics of the channel, in our case the transition probabilities between states in

Figure 5. BLER comparison of MP list decoder and noise guessing decoder (GRAND-MO) in a less bursty channel (g=0.9)
V. CONCLUSIONS
The development of SPRL codes for URLLC in channels with memory has been motivated by the MacKay-Neal (MN) code construction [7]. We offer a variation on the MN code construction to maintain a fixed code rate. We have empirically considered the impact of cycles in the Tanner graph on binary MP list and noise guessing decoders and found the presence or absence of cycles of length 4 to be inconsequential. More work on this matter is suggested.
The occurrence of ties in the dot product of the binary MP decoder has motivated our development of a list decoder using the MP algorithm. The MP list decoder generally matches the performance of the noise guessing decoder in low to moderate burst noise environments, but it is less effective in highly bursty conditions. As the channel tends toward greater sparsity of errors (i.e., increasing ), the MP decoder performance more closely approaches that of the noise guessing decoder as can be seen by comparing Figure 2 and 3 (or Figures 4 and 5).
It was found that by virtue of its employment of channel statistics, the noise guessing decoder is better able to address burst errors than the MP list decoder. It was noted that the MP list decoder would be better able to perform in non-stationary channels since the MP identifies the atoms contributing most to the syndrome, whereas the noise guessing decoder would ideally adapt its ordered set of noise sequences to the changing channel statistics. Generally the noise sequences employed by a noise guessing decoder such as GRAND-MO allow for bursts of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

arbitrary length, which will only be achieved by the MP list decoder in extreme instances.
Finally, we have upper-bounded the complexity of the MP list decoder by that of the noise guessing decoder. This is based on the number of noise sequences developed by the respective decoders (the noise guessing method being more comprehensive in that regard). As the MP list decoder is modified to address longer bursts, its complexity increases, as its BER and BLER performance improves.
REFERENCES
[1] Duong, Trung Q., et al., eds. Ultra-reliable and Low-Latency Communications (URLLC) theory and practice: Advances in 5G and beyond. John Wiley & Sons, 2023..
[2] Feder, Meir, and Amos Lapidoth. "Universal decoding for channels with memory." IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 44.5 (1998): 17261745.
[3] Gilbert, Edgar N. "Capacity of a burst‐noise channel." Bell system technical journal 39.5 (1960): 1253-1265.
[4] An, Wei, Muriel Médard, and Ken R. Duffy. "Keep the bursts and ditch the interleavers." GLOBECOM 2020-2020 IEEE Global Communications Conference. IEEE, 2020.

[5] Dolinar, Sam, et al. "Bounded angle iterative decoding of LDPC codes." MILCOM 2008-2008 IEEE Military Communications Conference. IEEE, 2008
[6] MacKay, David JC. "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices." IEEE transactions on Information Theory 45.2 (1999): 399431.
[7] MacKay, David JC, and Radford M. Neal. "Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes." Electronics letters 33.6 (1997): 457-458.
[8] MacKay, David JC. Information theory, inference and learning algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2003.
[9] Guo, Jianzhong, et al. "Hard-Decision Decoding Algorithms for LDPC Codes Based on Matching Pursuit." IEEE Communications Letters (2023).
[10] An, Wei. Guessing random additive noise decoding (GRAND), from performance to implementation. Diss. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2022.
[11] Jones, Steven, and A. Brinton Cooper. "On the determination of GRAND noise sequences by employing integer compositions." 2023 57th Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS). IEEE, 2023.
[12] Mallat, Stéphane G., and Zhifeng Zhang. "Matching pursuits with timefrequency dictionaries." IEEE Transactions on signal processing 41.12 (1993): 3397-3415.
.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:09:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

