IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 1, MARCH 2025

81

Rate-Compatible Length-Scalable Quasi-Cyclic Spatially-Coupled LDPC Codes
Zhitong He , Student Member, IEEE, Kewu Peng , Senior Member, IEEE, and Jian Song , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The capability of QC-SC-LDPC codes to be employed in broadcasting systems has been studied in previous research. However, the implementation-oriented features such as rate-compatibility and length-scalability for QC-SC-LDPC codes have not been well studied yet. In this paper, we first propose a new implementation-oriented structure of QC-SC-LDPC codes for broadcasting systems, with support for rate-compatibility and length-scalability. Then, the three-dimensional (3D-) gridbased (G-) progressive edge growth and lifting (PEGL) method is proposed to construct QC-SC-LDPC codes with that structure, which can achieve desirable performance across different code rates and code lengths within the given design complexity. Finally, a family of rate-compatible length-scalable QC-SCLDPC codes are constructed via the 3D-G-PEGL method, and simulation results demonstrate the effectiveness of that method. Furthermore, the scaling behaviors of QC-SC-LDPC codes are observed from the provided simulation results.
Index Terms—LDPC, spatially-coupled, rate-compatibility, length-scalability, progressive edge growth and lifting.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE RAPID development of broadcasting systems brings new challenges to forward error control (FEC) coding schemes. For instance, the channel conditions and receiver types are complex and can vary quickly, requiring universally capacity-approaching channel codes. To provide differentiated quality of service (QoS), a wider range of code rates and code lengths and flexible switching among these code rates and code lengths should be supported. Additionally, the emerging large-volume content services, such as ultra-high definition television [1], require higher transmission rates and thus higher throughput of hardware decoders.
Quasi-cyclic (QC-) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, as FEC codes with capacity-approaching performance under low-complexity decoding algorithms, have been successfully employed in current digital terrestrial television
Received 22 September 2024; revised 19 November 2024; accepted 25 November 2024. Date of publication 12 December 2024; date of current version 6 March 2025. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFB2906203, and in part by the Shenzhen Municipal Government under Grant SZXJP20230703093002006. (Corresponding author: Kewu Peng.)
Zhitong He and Kewu Peng are with the Department of Electronic Engineering, and the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: hezt20@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Jian Song is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, and the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: jsong@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2024.3511916

broadcasting (DTTB) broadcasting standards, such as DVBT2/NGH [2], [3], ATSC 3.0 [4], advanced ISDB-T [5], [6] and DTMB-A [7]. However, the channel codes in DVB-T2 or ATSC 3.0 are designed individually for each code rate and code length, and the bit-mapping schemes are optimized individually for each constellation order, code rate, and code length for ATSC 3.0 [8], leading to potentially higher implementation complexity for future broadcasting systems. Note that the implementation complexity includes the hardware encoding complexity and decoding complexity in this paper, and would be detailedly explained in the following sections.
Recently, spatially-coupled (SC-) LDPC codes have been widely considered. An SC-LDPC code could be constructed by coupling the Tanner graphs of L uncoupled codes with smoothing parameter w, i.e., memory is introduced into the (w+1) neighbored uncoupled codes. The structural irregularity at both ends results in the threshold saturation of SC-LDPC codes [9], i.e., the belief propagation (BP) threshold of SCLDPC codes asymptotically saturates to the maximum a posteriori (MAP) threshold of the underlying uncoupled codes, and SC-LDPC codes are thus capacity-achieving. Moreover, SC-LDPC codes are proven universally capacity-approaching over all the binary-input memoryless symmetric channels (BMSC) [10], and similar phenomenons are validated over bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) scenarios [11] and Gaussian multiple access channels (GMAC) [12]. Then SCLDPC codes are naturally suitable to maintain near-capacity performance under varying channel conditions and receiver types in future broadcasting systems. In the recent work [13], QC-SC-LDPC codes with compact base graphs are successfully employed in broadcasting scenarios, with similar decoding performance compared with conventional LDPC codes, and the bit-mapping need not be individually optimized. With implementation-oriented sliding window decoding algorithms [14], [15], [16], QC-SC-LDPC codes could attain similar decoding complexity as conventional LDPC codes. In addition, due to the near-regular row degree distributions, QCSC-LDPC coded transmission schemes could achieve high throughput with the aid of low-width quantized decoding algorithms [17], [18]. Hence QC-SC-LDPC codes are promising to be employed in future broadcasting systems.
To facilitate the employment of QC-SC-LDPC codes in future broadcasting systems, rate-compatibility and lengthscalability are crucial features, since they could simplify the implementation of hardware encoders and decoders. Additionally, these features are essential for the potential future combination of broadcasting and communication

1557-9611 c 2024 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

82

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 1, MARCH 2025

systems [19], since LDPC codes with these characteristics have already been adopted in current communication standards. Rate-compatible SC-LDPC codes have been adopted in [20], [21] based on uncoupled codes with graph extension, or equivalently parity puncturing/parity extension. However, the base graph would not be compact employing these structures, which is not good for hardware implementation. Since QC-SC-LDPC codes can approach capacity with simple edge spreading patterns [22], simpler rate-compatible techniques such as information node extension might be better choices since they could maintain the compact structure and the performance of not extremely low code rates at the same time.
Furthermore, for simpler implementation, other features of QC-SC-LDPC codes should be considered. Firstly, the time-invariant structure could simplify the design of QC-SCLDPC codes [23]. However, the decoding performance would degrade when employing one-step lifting with the compact base graph, since the design freedom is seriously constrained. The two-step lifting technique is employed in [13], [24] to offer large design freedom and improve the performance, but it may lead to extra implementation complexity. The periodically time-variant QC-SC-LDPC codes with one-step lifting can lower the implementation complexity and offer larger design freedom at the same time, and thus are promising substitutions. With a proper choice of the period T, the cycle distribution [25], the minimum distance property [26], and the implementation complexity would achieve a good trade-off. Secondly, a large amount of methods have been proposed to mitigate the rate loss, such as row removal [13], folding [27], and edge deletion [24]. However, when employing sliding window decoders, the structure of windows at the end of the code might be changed and lead to extra expense of hardware resources for some of these methods. Thus a method to reduce the rate loss that maintains the structure of each window is required. Thirdly, the error propagation needs to be mitigated when the number L of uncoupled codes is large. The doping techniques [28] include variable node (VN) or check node (CN) doping are proposed to degrade the error propagation. Nevertheless, when employed in actual broadcasting systems, the simpleness of these techniques should be considered as well.
Moreover, how to construct rate-compatible length-scalable QC-SC-LDPC codes with an ideal performance trade-off of each code rate and code length is worthy investigating. Circulant progressive edge growth (cPEG) algorithms [29] and its variations are widely employed to construct QCLDPC codes. However, cPEG directly generates multiple candidates of a single code rate and code length, and select a candidate with better performance trade-off of the nested code rates and code lengths in general. When the number of code rates and code lengths is huge, the trade-off of the performance for each code rate and code length might become difficult. The multi-layer progressive tree-structured edge growth (ML-PTG) method was proposed in [30] to construct the rate-compatible length-scalable 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes. However, the layer division based on code lengths severely constrains the design freedom and is not beneficial for better performance trade-off. Therefore, an improved

method is required to construct QC-SC-LDPC codes with rate-compatibility and length-scalability.
To guide the application of finite-length SC-LDPC codes in both communication systems and broadcasting systems, the scaling behavior of SC-LDPC codes is required, i.e., how the performance of SC-LDPC codes scales with the number of uncoupled codes L, the smoothing parameter w, and the length of each uncoupled code nunc. The scaling law of SC-LDPC codes over bit erasure channels (BEC) has been proposed in [31], and the refined scaling laws of SC-LDPC codes under sliding window decoding and with limited number of iterations are proposed in [32], [33], respectively. These scaling laws are generally constrained over BEC, and focus on the average waterfall region performance of a given ensemble. Due to the existence of trapping sets and the divergence from the average performance at finite block length, the scaling behavior of the actual constructed SC-LDPC codes might be slightly different. By simulating the performance of a family of length-scalable QC-SC-LDPC codes, the scaling behavior of actual SC-LDPC codes might be further revealed and validated.
Based on the discussions above, the contributions of this paper are concluded as follows.
1) We propose a new implementation-oriented structure of QC-SC-LDPC codes for broadcasting systems, with support for rate-compatibility and length-scalability. Specifically, multiple code rates are supported via information node extension, while multiple code lengths are supported via modulo lifting. Meanwhile, the one-step periodically timevariant structure of QC-SC-LDPC codes is employed with the carefully chosen period T. The information nodes at the right end of QC-SC-LDPC codes are shortened to mitigate the rate loss, while the information nodes are periodically shortened to degrade the error propagation when the number of uncoupled codes L is large. These features could ensure the simple hardware implementation while maintaining the decoding performance. Then a rate-compatible length-scalable QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme is presented for broadcasting systems.
2) We propose a three-dimensional (3D-) grid-based progressive edge growth and lifting (G-PEGL) method to construct QC-SC-LDPC codes with rate-compatibility and length-scalability. In the 3D-G-PEGL method, the growing path could be flexibly chosen in the 3D grid, which could notably improve the design freedom, to better reserve candidates with desirable decoding performance among all the code rates, code lengths and smoothing parameters w. Meanwhile, the improved cycle classification criterion for QC-SC-LDPC codes is employed to prune the candidates at each grid node, together with the actual block error rate (BLER) performance evaluation criterion. These combined criteria improve the efficiency to select the candidates with better decoding performance under the constraint of design complexity.
3) We construct a family of rate-compatible length-scalable QC-SC-LDPC codes via the proposed 3D-G-PEGL method, and the decoding performance is simulated. It can be observed from the simulation results that the decoding performance of multiple supported code rates and code lengths is desirable,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE QC- SC- LDPC CODES

83

and is comparable with conventional LDPC block codes and previously provided QC-SC-LDPC codes [16] at certain code rates and code lengths. Furthermore, the scaling behaviors are observed based on the decoding performance of QC-SC-LDPC codes with different numbers of uncoupled codes L, smoothing parameter w, and uncoupled code length nunc. These scaling behaviors could better guide the design and employment of QC-SC-LDPC codes in the broadcasting systems.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The proposed implementation-oriented structure of QC-SC-LDPC codes and the corresponding QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme are introduced in Section II. In Section III, the 3D-G-PEGL construction method is presented. The simulation results and the discussion of scaling behaviors of SC-LDPC codes are shown in Section IV. The conclusions are drawn in Section V with possible future research.

II. CODE STRUCTURE AND SYSTEM MODEL
In this section, the implementation-oriented structure of QC-SC-LDPC codes and the corresponding QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme are introduced. To be specific, the basic structures of LDPC codes and QC-SC-LDPC codes are introduced in Section II-A, and the implementationoriented features of QC-SC-LDPC codes are introduced in Section II-B. In Section II-C, the new rate-compatible lengthscalable structure is presented. Finally, the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme is introduced in Section II-D.

A. Preliminaries

An LDPC block code can be represented by a sparse parity-

check matrix H with size m × n or its equivalent Tanner

graph. The m rows, n columns and non-zero entries in H

correspond to the m check nodes, n variable nodes and edges

in the Tanner graph, respectively. For protograph-based LDPC

block codes, H is lifted from a smaller base matrix B with

size M × N, where m = MZ, n = NZ and Z is called the

lifting factor. Specifically, all the zero entries in B are lifted

to Z × Z zero matrices, and all the non-zero entries are

lifted to permutation matrices or the summation of permutation

matrices with size Z × Z. The corresponding bipartite graph

of the base matrix is called the base graph. QC-LDPC codes

are a sub-class of protograph-based LDPC codes, for which

the Z × Z permutation matrices are further limited to Z × Z

circulant permutation matrices. The parity-check matrix H of

each QC-LDPC code could be equivalently represented by the

polynomial matrix B(x) with given Z, where each entry bij in

B is substituted by a polynomial bij(x) =

bij γ =1

xsij(γ

)

with

bij terms in B(x). It means that the entry bij in B would be

lifted to the summation of bij circulant permutation matrices with size Z × Z and lifting values sij(1), . . . , sij(bij). Here the lifting value 1 ≤ s ≤ Z of a Z × Z circulant permutation

matrix means the position of 1 in its first row. For each

QC-LDPC code whose base matrix B is binary matrix with

entries 0, 1, or equivalently without parallel edges, it can be

uniquely represented with the exponent matrices P, where

each entry bij(x) is substituted by 0 if bij(x) = 0 (which is equivalent to bij = 0), and bij(x) is substituted by sij =

sij(1) if bij(x) = xsij(1) is a monomial. The columns related to information bits in B, P, or H are denoted as information

columns. These information columns are related to information

nodes in the equivalent bipartite graph representation. The

number of information columns in B and H are denoted as K

and k, respectively, with k = n − m = KZ.

SC-LDPC codes can be viewed as a type of LDPC con-

volutional codes [34] with one-side or two-side termination.

An SC-LDPC block code could be constructed by coupling

together L disjoint LDPC block codes Hu1nc, . . . , HLunc, where all the uncoupled codes H1unc, . . . , HuLnc are assumed with the

same size munc × nunc in this paper. Specifically, part of the

edges in the uncoupled code Hul nc(1 ≤ l ≤ L) are spread to

reconnect with the check nodes of the adjacent w uncoupled

codes Hul+nc1, . . . , Hul+ncw, which results in the edge spreading

pattern Hpl attern = [(H0l ) , . . . , (Hwl ) ] , where (·) denotes the

matrix transposition. with the size munc ×

It can be nunc and

observed Hlunc =

that
w λ=0

Hl0, . . . , Hlw are Hλ due to edge

spreading. Here the parameters L, w are called coupling length

and smoothing parameter, respectively. Then the final parity-

check matrix HSC could be represented as

⎡ H10

⎤

HSC = ⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢HH...w111

H20 H...21 H2w

... ... ... ...

H0L H...L1

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦

. (1)

HLw (L+w)munc×Lnunc

For QC-SC-LDPC codes, the parity-check matrices of the uncoupled codes, the edge spreading patterns Hlunc, Hpl attern and the final parity-check matrix HSC all have the quasi-cyclic
structure. Specifically, the base matrix and the exponent matrix related to Hul nc are denoted as Bul nc and Plunc, respectively. The base matrix and the exponent matrix related to Hpl attern = [(H0l ) , . . . , (Hlw) ] are called Blpattern = [(B0l ) , . . . , (Bwl ) ] and Ppl attern = [(Pl0) , . . . , (Pwl ) ] , respectively, where Hλl corresponds to Bλl and Pλl for any 0 ≤ λ ≤ w. The base matrix and exponent matrix related to HSC are BSC and PSC,
respectively, which has the similar structure as shown in (1). The size of Bul nc and Plunc are both Munc × Nunc, and it could be observed that munc = MuncZ, nunc = NuncZ. The number
of information columns in Bunc and Hunc are Kunc and kunc, respectively, with kunc = KuncZ.

B. Implementation-Oriented Structures
To simplify the implementation of QC-SC-LDPC codes, the base matrices of each uncoupled code are assumed the same, i.e., Bul nc = Bunc and Bpl attern = Bpattern = [B0, . . . , Bw] for each 1 ≤ l ≤ L. The base matrices of each uncoupled code are also assumed compact, i.e., the size of Bunc is extremely small, such as 1 × a(a > 1) for medium to high rates, and a × (a + 1)(a > 1) for low to medium rates. The density of non-zero entries in Bpattern are high with the compact base matrices, to keep the asymptotic decoding performance while

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

84

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 1, MARCH 2025

reducing the smoothing parameter w as well. The description

complexity would be largely reduced since there are less edges

in the base matrices, and the hardware encoder and decoder

structure would be largely simplified. Moreover, compared

with conventional SC-LDPC codes with large w [23], the

smaller w might also lead to smaller window size Nw, which is beneficial for reducing the complexity of sliding window

decoding.

The lifting of each uncoupled code could be designed the same as well, i.e., Ppl attern = Ppattern, to further simplify the implementation. QC-SC-LDPC codes with this feature are

called time-invariant. Nevertheless, the time-invariant structure

and the compact base graphs are commonly not compatible,

since the design freedom of QC-SC-LDPC codes with these

two features could largely decrease, and the trapping sets

are hard to optimize. For instance, the harmful inevitable

length-6 cycles might appear for time-invariant QC-SC-LDPC

codes with compact base graphs, as shown in Fig. 1(a). Two-

step lifting has been employed in [13], [24] to offer larger

design freedom. However, the base graph after first-step lifting

is no longer compact, and the design of two-step lifting is

generally harder. Furthermore, the smaller lifting size Z at

the same uncoupled code length would reduce the decoder

parallelism as well. One-step periodically time-variant lifting

is another promising choice to provide larger design freedom

with only slightly increasing description and implementation

complexity. Specifically, the lifting of the l-th uncoupled code Ppl attern is the same as that of the (l + T)-th uncoupled code Ppl+atTtern, where T is denoted as the lifting period. Then it is sufficient to describe a periodically time-variant QC-SC-LDPC
code with the parameters L, T and the exponent matrices of edge spreading patterns Pp1attern, . . . , PpTattern, or equivalently the exponent matrix of a macro edge spreading pattern

⎡ P10

⎤

Pmacro = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢PP...w111

P02 P...12 Pw2

... ... ... ...

PT0 P...T1

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

, (2)

PwT (T+w)Munc×TNunc

which is defined as the T continuous edge spreading patterns. In Pmacro, the matrix Ppt attern = [(P0t ) , (Pt1) , . . . , (Ptw) ] is the exponent matrix of the t(1 ≤ t ≤ T)-th uncouple code. Note that the base matrix and exponent matrix corresponded to Pmacro are denoted as Bmacro and Hmacro, respectively.
For QC-SC-LDPC codes with one-step periodically timevariant lifting, the selection of lifting period T is crucial for the trade-off of the decoding performance and the implementation complexity. On one hand, the number of lifting values needed to describe a QC-SC-LDPC code is proportional to T according to (2). According to Fig. 2, for the sliding window decoder in [16] with window size Nw, it is sufficient to maintain a bigger window with size Nw + T − 1, which could result in the space complexity growing to approximately

Fig. 1. Periodically⎡time⎤-variant QC-SC-LDPC codes with the edge spreading 11
pattern Bpattern = ⎣1 1⎦ and different lifting period T. The black dots and 11
black crosses denote 1 and 0 in the base matrix, respectively. The values s1, s2, s3, s4 denote the lifting values of the edges in the base matrix. (a) An example of inevitable length-6 cycles for the time-invariant case, (b) An example of inevitable length-8 cycles with T < w + 1.
Fig. 2. A sketch of the space structure of the sliding window decoder for QC-SC-LDPC codes with lifting period T.
(Nw + T − 1)/Nw times compared with time-invariant QCSC-LDPC codes. Furthermore, the number of different layers grows to T times for periodically time-variant QC-SC-LDPC codes. Thus the hardware area occupation of sliding window decoders would grow to no more than T times in general. On the other hand, the cycle distribution and weight profile are closely relevant to T [25], [26] as well. For example, harmful inevitable length-8 cycles might appear when T < w + 1, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Besides, the minimum distance of the periodically time-variant QC-SC-LDPC codes is upper bounded by the minimum distance upper bound of Bu∗nc, where B∗unc denotes the underlying uncoupled code of the larger edge spreading pattern Bmacro, as shown in Fig. 3. Thus the weight profile performance generally improves when T increases. Then T is notably relevant to the error floor performance of QC-SC-LDPC codes. In practical construction, T is empirically chosen and T ≥ w + 1 is a proper condition.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE QC- SC- LDPC CODES

85

Fig. 3. The base matrix B∗unc of the underlying uncoupl⎡ed co⎤de of the larger 11
edge spreading pattern Bpattern. The case of Bpattern = ⎣1 1⎦ and T = 2 is 11
shown as an example.
SC-LDPC block codes suffer from the rate loss problem that the true rate Rtrue = 1 − (L + w)Munc/LNunc of the entire block code BSC is reduced from the design rate Rdesign = 1 − Munc/Nunc of the uncoupled codes Bunc. That rate loss
R = wMunc/Nunc would lead to an extra signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) gap from the Shannon limit at Rtrue. To mitigate the rate loss, a direct way is to remove the last few rows [13]. In [24], the edges are gradually removed for the last few uncoupled codes, to make the code structure more smooth. In [27], the base matrix of the last uncoupled codes are folded up, to maintain the decoding performance while mitigating the rate loss. Nevertheless, all these methods require changing the window structure at the end of block codes, resulting in extra expense of hardware resources. Hence we employ the information node shortening technique at the right end of QCSC-LDPC codes to mitigate the rate loss. Specifically, all the information bits of the last L uncoupled codes are assumed fixed frozen bits, which are not transmitted. Then the true rate increases to R∗true = 1 − LMunc/(LNunc − LKunc). For the sliding window decoder, these frozen bits are known and the amplitudes of their log-likelihood-ratio (LLR) values saturate to the maximum value. Then the window structure at the end of block codes would not changed, which is beneficial for hardware implementation.
Moreover, the error propagation phenomenon severely influence the decoding performance of SC-LDPC codes when the coupling length L is large. Specifically, the bit errors at the first several uncoupled codes might propagate along the coupled chain, resulting in decoding failures of the following uncoupled codes. A family of doping-based techniques [28] are proposed to mitigate the error propagation. However, some of these techniques might be complex for implementation. In this paper, the periodically information node shortening technique is employed to degrade the error propagation, i.e., the information bits of the last L0 uncoupled codes are assumed fixed frozen bits in each group of T0 uncoupled codes. This technique is similar to the systematic VN doping method in [28], but it can be combined with the information node shortening termination technique above and would not lead to the change of window structures as well. An example of the information node shortening method is shown in Fig. 4.
Note that a QC-SC-LDPC code with one-step periodically time-variant lifting and both information node shortening termination and periodically information node shortening could be uniquely represented by the matrix Pmacro and the

Fig. 4. An example of QC-SC-LDPC codes with both periodically information node shortening and information node shortening termination method employed. The parameters T0 = 3, L0 = 1, and L = 4. Only the BSC are shown and the gray columns denote the shortened columns corresponding to the fixed frozen information bits.
parameters L, T, T0, L, L0. When constructing a QC-SCLDPC code, the base matrix Bpattern is constructed first, then Bmacro is obtained according to the parameter T, and finally Pmacro is constructed by determining the lifting values of each edge in Bmacro. The parameters L, T0, L, L0 can be flexibly decided according to the requirements of transmission after the code construction.
C. Rate-Compatibility and Length-Scalability
In this subsection, a rate-compatible and length-scalable structure of QC-SC-LDPC codes with changeable smoothing parameters is proposed. Specifically, a family of QC-SC-LDPC codes with that structure are represented as a set of exponent matrices of the macro edge spreading patterns {Pmα,aqc,rλo}α,q,λ, where the parameter α is the index of lifting factor Zα whose value is taken from the set 1 = {Zα = Z12α−1}αA=1, the parameter q is the index of the information column number Kq in Pmα,aqc,rλo, whose value is taken from the set 2 = {Kq}Qq=1, and the parameter λ is the index of the smoothing parameter wλ, whose value is taken from the set 3 = {wλ}λ=1. Note that in 2 and 3, we have
1 ≤ Kq1 < Kq2 ≤ KQ, ∀1 ≤ q1 < q2 ≤ Q, 1 ≤ wλ1 < wλ2 ≤ w , ∀1 ≤ λ1 < λ2 ≤ .
Furthermore, Pαm1a,cqr1o,λ1 is nested in Pαm2a,cqr2o,λ2 for any 1 ≤ α1 < α2 ≤ A, 1 ≤ q1 < q2 ≤ Q, 1 ≤ λ1 < λ2 ≤ , which is the core feature of our QC-SC-LDPC codes. Specifically, the details of the nested relations are explained as follows.
Different from the existing rate-compatible structures [20], [21] of QC-SC-LDPC codes, the rate-compatible structure in this paper is based on the simple information node extension technique. In other words, the rate-compatible structure of our QC-SC-LDPC codes corresponds to the nested relations at the dimension of q. Specifically, we denote the corresponding base matrix of Pαm,aqc,rλo as Bmq,aλcro, which is not relevant to the index α of lifting factor Zα. For given λ, the information columns of BQ,λ with the maximum q = Q are indexed as 1, 2, . . . , KQ, which could be not relevant to λ, as shown in the following parts. Then Bmq,aλcro could be derived by directly deleting the information columns indexed Kq + 1, . . . , KQ in BQm,aλcro. Then for given α, λ, the exponent matrix Pαm,aqc,rλo could be derived from directly deleting the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

86

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 1, MARCH 2025

Fig. 5. An example of the macro edge spreading patterns with the proposed rate-compatible structure with changeable smoothing parameters w. Each blue square mark a single edge spreading pattern in the macro edge spreading pattern.

information columns indexed Kq + 1, . . . , KQ in Pmα,aQc,rλo as well. Suppose the number of columns in Bqm,aλcro is denoted as Nq, it could be observed that the number of parity columns M = Nq − Kq is not related to q, and the design rate of Bmq,aλcro is Rdesign,q = Kq/(M+Kq). Thus smaller Kq means lower code rates, and the exponent matrix with lower code rate Rdesign,q1 could be derived from deleting the information columns of the exponent matrix with higher code rate Rdesign,q2 . The benefit of information node extension is that the compact base graph structure of higher code rates could be maintained for lower code rates, which is suitable for simple implementation. The rate-compatibility could save the hardware area of the encoder and decoder, since the structures of hardware encoders and decoders could be reused for different code rates Rdesign,q.
Changeable smoothing parameters w are supported by our QC-SC-LDPC codes as well, which corresponds to the nested relations at the dimension of λ. Specifically, the lifting period of BQm,aλcro with the highest code rate Rdesign,Q is denoted as TQ, and the edge spreading pattern corresponding to BmQ,aλcro is denoted as BQpa,tλtern, then BQpa,tλtern has smoothing parameter wλ, and for any λ1 < λ2, BpQa,tλte1rn is nested in BQpa,tλte2rn, which commonly means BpQa,tλte1rn is formed by the first several rows of BpQa,tλte2rn. Then BmQ,aλc1ro is nested within BQm,aλc2ro. For smaller q < Q, since Bqm,aλcro are derived by deleting the information columns indexed Kq + 1, . . . , KQ for any λ, Bqm,aλc1ro is nested within Bmq,aλc2ro as well. Furthermore, for given α, q, it could be observed that Pαm,aqc,rλo1 is nested in Pαm,aqc,rλo2 as well. The changeable smoothing parameters w are majorly beneficial for reducing the design complexity for the 3D-G-PEGL method in Section III, but decreasing w for short code lengths might be beneficial for the decoding performance as well since it could reduce the number of short cycles.
An example of the proposed rate-compatible structure with changeable smoothing parameters is shown in Fig. 5. The

highest design rate supported is Rdesign,40 = 5/6, while the smoothing parameter is w3 = 4 and the edge spreading

pattern is

⎡

⎤

111111

Bp4a0t,t3ern = ⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢111

1 1 1

1 1 1

1 1 1

1 1 1

111⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥.

(3)

111111

The lifting period of Bp4a0t,t3ern is chosen as T40 = 8 ≥ w3 + 1 = 5. The sets of parameters q, λ are chosen as 2 = {Kq = q, 1 ≤ q ≤ 40} and 3 = {wλ = λ + 1, 1 ≤ λ ≤ 3}. The base matrices Bm40a,c2ro, Bm24a,c2ro, and B4m,a1cro are shown in Fig. 5. It can be observed that Bp4a0t,t2ern marked by the blue square in Bm40a,c2ro is derived by deleting the last row in Bp4a0t,t3ern, and Bm24a,c2ro could be derived by deleting the information columns indexed 25, . . . , 40 in Bm40a,c2ro. Furthermore, though the lifting period of Bm24a,c2ro is still T24 = 8, the lifting period of B4m,a1cro reduces to T4 = 4 and actual smoothing parameter of B4m,a1cro is smaller than w1 = 2, where the reduced smoothing parameter can be negative for the decoding performance. Thus though there are totally Q = 40 potential design rates, only some of them are commonly employed, such as q = 4, 8, 16, 24, 32, 40, i.e., Rq = 1/3, 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, 5/6, since the given index order ensures a relatively regular structure of Bmq,aλcro and a large lifting period Tq for these code rates. Moreover, it can be seen that the base graphs of these rates are still compact.
Similar as state-of-the-art length-scalable LDPC codes such
as 5G-NR LDPC codes, the QC-SC-LDPC codes are length-
scalable via modulo lifting, which corresponds to the nested relations at the dimension of α. Specifically, for given q, λ and any α1 < α2, the exponent matrix Pmα1a,cqr,oλ is nested in the exponent matrix Pmα2a,cqr,oλ, which means

Pmα1a,cqr,oλ ≡ Pmα2a,cqr,oλ mod Zα1 ,

(4)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE QC- SC- LDPC CODES

87

Fig. 6. System model of the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme.
i.e., each entry in Pmα1a,cqr,oλ and Pmα2a,cqr,oλ are congruent with respect to lifting factor Zα1 . The length-scalability could facilitate the hardware implementation of encoders and decoders, since the structures of hardware encoders and decoders could be reused for different lifting factors Zα.
Combining the three types of nested relations above, the exponent matrices of the macro edge spreading patterns satisfy Pαm1a,cqr1o,λ1 is nested in Pmα2a,cqr2o,λ2 for any α1 < α2, q1 < q2 and λ1 < λ2. Given the parameter sets 1, 2, 3, the potential tuples of (α, q, λ) form a 3D-grid, where each tuple of (α, q, λ) is called a grid node and corresponds to the exponent matrix Pαm,aqc,rλo. The rate-compatibility, length-scalability and changeable smoothing parameters of our QC-SC-LDPC codes correspond to the nested relations of exponent matrices in the 3D-grid, which would be further described and employed in Section III.

D. QC-SC-LDPC Coded Transmission Scheme
Based on the implementation-oriented features of the QCSC-LDPC codes mentioned above, the QC-SC-LDPC coded transmission scheme is shown in Fig. 6. The parameter configurator firstly selects the parameters of the encoder and decoder, according to users’ requirements. These parameters include the QC-SC-LDPC code configuration parameters L, Zα, Kq, wλ, the window size Nw and the maximum iteration number within each window Imax, and the parameters for information node shortening L, w, L0. When these parameters are received, the QC-SC-LDPC encoder and sliding window decoder only need to activate the given parts to match these parameters. Then at the transmitter side, the information bits are firstly encoded by the QC-SC-LDPC encoder. Then the coded bits are interleaved by the pseudo-random intra-uncoupled-code interleaver similar to [13]. Finally, the interleaved bits are consecutively mapped to the constellation symbols x.
The memoryless equivalent baseband model can be described as

y = hx + v,

(5)

where x, y are the normalized transmitted symbol and received symbol, respectively. h is the complex channel gain and v is the noise which is subject to the complex Gaussian distribution CN (0, 1/ρ), where ρ denotes the SNR at the receiver.
At the receiver side, the demapper converts received symbols y into the output extrinsic information of interleaved bits, according to the channel state information and a priori

information. Then the output extrinsic information of interleaved bits is de-interleaved and sent to the sliding window decoder as a priori information. For independent demapping systems, the output is obtained from a posteriori information from the sliding window decoder. For iterative demapping systems, the output extrinsic information of coded bits is interleaved again and then sent to the demapper as a priori information, which is illustrated via the dashed line in Fig. 6.
Due to the rate-compatibility, length-scalability and various smoothing parameters supported, the hardware structures of the QC-SC-LDPC encoder and decoder are based on the QC-SC-LDPC code with the largest parameters KQ, w , zA, and for other parameters Kq, wλ, zα, only partial structures need to be activated, which make the implementation simpler. Moreover, the QC-SC-LDPC encoder and decoder could easily support different coupling length L. Besides, the information node shortening parameters L, T0, L0 would not influence the basic structure of the QC-SC-LDPC encoder and decoder. Thus the implementation complexity of the total transmission scheme is largely reduced.

III. 3D-G-PEGL CONSTRUCTION METHOD
To construct QC-SC-LDPC codes with the implementationoriented structures mentioned in Section II, the 3D-G-PEGL method is proposed in this section. To be specific, in Section III-A, the basic settings of the 3D-G-PEGL method are introduced. The main process of the 3D-G-PEGL method is then presented in Section III-B. The new combined pruning criteria are introduced in Section III-C. A simple example of the 3D-G-PEGL method is shown in Section III-D to show the construction flow. The design complexity of our 3D-G-PEGL method is analyzed in Section III-E.

A. Basic Settings of 3D-G-PEGL

The general construction methods of QC-LDPC codes

include two steps, i.e., base matrix design and lifting design.

For the base matrix design, according to the multi-edge-

type (MET-) density evolution (DE) analysis results in [13],

a large proportion of edge spreading patterns have similar

asymptotic decoding performance. Thus regular edge spread-

ing patterns are employed in this paper, which is suitable

for the employment of the rate-compatible structure and

could potentially improve the parallelism of sliding window

decoders. Specifically, the edge spreading pattern with the

highest design rate R40 = 5/6 and the largest smoothing

parameter w3 = 4 is selected as (3), with lifting period T40 =

8. The parameter sets are 2 = {Kq = q}q40=1 and 3 = {wλ =

pλa+tt1e}r3λn=s 1a, raen{dBthmq,eaλcsroe}tqo,λf

base matrices of , some of which

macro edge spreading are shown in Fig. 5.

Given the set of lifting factors 1 = {Zα = Z12α−1}αA=1,

the potential tuples (α, q, λ) forms a 3D-grid, and each tuple

(α, q, λ) relates to a grid node, as described in Section III-C.

The lifting design is to construct a family of exponent matrices {Pαm,aqc,rλo}α,q,λ, such that each (α, q, λ) lies in the 3D-grid, and the nested relations of these exponent matrices are valid, i.e., Pαm1a,cqr1o,λ1 is nested in Pαm2a,cqr2o,λ2 , for any α1 < α2, q1 < q2, and λ1 < λ2. In other words, when the exponent matrix Pαm,aqc,rλo

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

88

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 1, MARCH 2025

has been constructed, all the exponent matrices Pαm1a,cqr1o,λ1 with α1 < α, q1 < q and λ1 < λ are determined, and we finally need to construct the exponent matrix PAm,aQc,ro with the largest α = A, q = Q and λ = . Nevertheless, directly constructing PmA,aQc,ro requires large complexity and is not beneficial for the performance trade-off of different (α, q, λ). Thus we employ

the progressive extension and lifting technique on the 3Dgrid to construct PmA,aQc,ro . The core idea is that we start from the initial grid node (1, 1, 1) and construct the candidate set of the exponent matrices Pm1,a1c,1ro. Then at each time we go forward a small step from the constructed grid nodes in the

3D-grid and construct the corresponding candidate set of the

exponent matrices according to the nested relations, and finally we get the constructed PAm,aQc,ro . Compared with the method in [30], a growing step could be from small lifting factor

Zα−1 to big lifting factor Zα, i.e., progressive lifting, and thus the growing path could be chosen more flexibly. Moreover,

the design complexity is limited for each growing step and

the performance would be desirable for different Zα, Kq, and wλ, since the nested exponent matrices have highly relative decoding performance. This construction method is called 3D-

G-PEGL and the details are described as follows.

In the entire construction process, a 3D-grid is maintained

to reserve the intermediate results. Specifically, the grid nodes

(α, q, λ) in are classified into constructed grid nodes and

not-constructed grid nodes. Intermediate results of the current

construction step are saved distributively in all the constructed

grid nodes (α, q, λ), which would result in less occupation of

storage resources. In other words, the candidate set (α, q, λ)

of the exponent matrices Pmα,aqc,rλo are grid nodes (α, q, λ). Each candidate

saved Pαm,aqc,rλo

in the constructed in (α, q, λ) is a

valid each

candidate exponent

that can lead matrix Pmα,aqc,rλo

to the final in (α, q,

PmA,aQc,ro . Equivalently, λ) should satisfy the

partial nested relations, i.e., for each constructed grid node

(α , q , λ ) such that α < α, q < q, λ < λ, there exists an exponent matrix Pαma,qcro,λ in (α , q , λ ) that is nested in Pmα,aqc,rλo. The not-constructed grid nodes are empty and their related exponent matrices have not been constructed yet.

Moreover, the parent nodes or child nodes of the grid nodes

in the 3D-grid are defined for the convenience of description.

To be specific, all the parent nodes (α1, q1, λ1) of (α, q, λ)

should satisfy

(α − α1) + (q − q1) + (λ − λ1) = 1, 1 ≤ α1 ≤ α, 1 ≤ q1 ≤ q, 1 ≤ λ1 ≤ λ,

and all the child nodes (α2, q2, λ2) of (α, q, λ) should satisfy

(α2 − α) + (q2 − q) + (λ2 − λ) = 1, α ≤ α2 ≤ A, q ≤ q2 ≤ Q, λ ≤ λ2 ≤ .

Thus a grid node (α, q, λ) might have 0 ∼ 3 parent nodes and 0 ∼ 3 child nodes. In each construction step, the candidate set (α, q, λ) of a current not-constructed grid node (α, q, λ) is constructed from the candidate sets (α1, q1, λ1) of all its parent nodes (α1, q1, λ1). That operation might be progressive lifting, progressive extension, or jointly progressive extension,
as shown in the next subsection. Then the entire construction process could be represented as a growing path χ in , which

Fig. 7. An example of 3D-grid with A = 3, Q = 3, = 4. The arrow a → b means grid node a is the parent node of grid node b, and grid node b is the child node of grid node a conversely. The grid node (1, 1, 1) has 0 parent nodes and 3 child nodes, the grid node (2, 2, 3) have 3 parent nodes and 3 child nodes, while the grid node (3, 3, 4) have 3 parent nodes and 0 child nodes.
is a bijection from the set of all the grid nodes to the index set {1, 2, . . . , AQ }, such that χ (α1, q1, λ1) < χ (α, q, λ) when (α1, q1, λ1) is the parent node of (α, q, λ). An example of 3D-grid is shown in Fig. 7.
For the convenience of description, the exponent matrices Pαm,aqc,rλo can be equivalently represented as a vector of lifting values f(α, q, λ). We assume that the edges of BmQ,acro could be indexed as 1, 2, . . . , J, then the edge indexes of Bqm,aλcro is denoted as q,λ ⊆ {1, 2, . . . , J}. Hence f(α, q, λ) is a Jdimension vector, and the j-th dimension of f(α, q, λ) is the lifting value of the edge indexed j when j ∈ q,λ, while the j-th dimension is 0 when j ∈/ q,λ.

B. Main Process of 3D-G-PEGL

The main process of the 3D-G-PEGL construction method is

shown in Algorithm 1, and the details are explained as follows.

The growing path χ determine the order of construction, which

can be ensured before or during the construction process. Since

all the operations in Algorithm 1 are for constructed grid

nodes, χ is assumed known before the construction process,

without loss of generality. Then we define (s) = (α, q, λ)

for the grid node (α, q, λ) indexed s (i.e., χ (α, q, λ) = s) for

simplicity. The major operations of the 3D-G-PEGL method

include beginning operation, grid growth, grid update and grid

pruning, which are explained as follows.

For the beginning operation, the candidate set (1, 1, 1) of

the grid node indexed 1 is constructed. Note that we always

have χ (1, 1, 1) = 1. Using vector representation of exponent matrices, Z1| 1,1| candidates of vectors are produced. For these vectors, the j-th dimension is 0 for j ∈/ 1,1, and range from 1 to Z1 for j ∈ 1,1.
For the grid growth operation, the candidate set (s) of the

current grid node indexed s is constructed from the candidate

sets (s1) of all the parent grid nodes s1 of s. Using vector

representation of exponent matrices, the details of grid growth

is shown as follows. For each parent node s1 of grid node s,

suppose χ −1(s1) = (α1, q1, λ1) and χ −1(s) = (α, q, λ). If s1

and s satisfy α1 = α − 1, we could construct a new candidate

set f in

(s)s1 (s1

from (s1) by progressive lifting. ) is lifted to 2| q,λ| vectors in

Specifically, each (s)s1 . We denote

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE QC- SC- LDPC CODES

89

Algorithm 1 3D-G-PEGL Construction Method

Input: The parameter sets patterns {Bmq,aλcro}q,λ and

1, edge

2, 3, the indexes {

macro edge q,λ}q,λ.

spreading

Output: The exponent matrices {Pmα,aqc,rλo}α,q,λ.

1: Construct the 3D-grid and ensure the growing path χ , such

that all the grid nodes are indexed as 1, 2, . . . , AQ .

2: Initialize the BLER tested grid node indexes as ← ∅.

3: for s ← 1 to AQ do

4: if s = 1 then

5:

← BeginningOp( ).

6: else

7:

← GridGrowth( , s).

8: end if

9: while σ ( , s) > σth,1 do

10:

← CyclePruning( , s).

11:

← GridUpdate( , s).

12:

← DiversityPruning( , s).

13:

← GridUpdate( , s).

14: end while

15: for s0 ← 1 to s do

16:

if σ ( , s) < σth,2 and s0 ∈/ then

17:

← BLERPruning( , s0).

18:

← GridUpdate( , s).

19:

← ∪ {s0}.

20:

end if

21: end for

22: 23:

{ePnαmd,aqfc,orλor}α,q,λ

← FinalSelect(

).

Suppose the current constructed grid nodes are 1, 2, . . . , s, we

called the grid node s1 is nested in the grid node s2 if and only if χ −1(s1) = (α1, q1, λ1), χ −1(s2) = (α2, q2, λ2) and α1 ≤

α2, q1 ≤ q2, λ1 ≤ λ2. Then for any pair of grid nodes s1, s2

such that s1 is nested in s2, for any Pmα2a,cqr2o,λ2 in (α2, q2, λ2),

there should exist nested in Pαm2a,cqr2o,λ2

.

Pmα1a,cqr1o,λ1 in The 3D-grid

(s1) such that Pαm1a,cqr1o,λ1 is is called valid when the

conditions above are valid. Then grid update operation should

be employed after each grid pruning operation to make the

grid valid again.

After all the grid nodes s are constructed, the final select

operation is employed to select the finally chosen candidate

with the best trade-off of decoding performance for each grid

node (α, q, λ). The final select operation might employ more

precise BLER performance simulation or other criteria. Then from the final constructed exponent matrices {Pαm,aqc,rλo}α,q,λ we could get the final constructed QC-SC-LDPC codes. From

the process of 3D-G-PEGL method, it could be seen that the

design complexity is controlled by limit the maximum number

of exponent matrices in each grid node, and with proper grid

pruning criteria in the next subsection, the exponent matrices

with better decoding performance in each grid node would be

selected more precisely. Thus the 3D-G-PEGL method could

construct QC-SC-LDPC codes with desirable performance for

different tuples (α, q, λ), under limited design complexity.

the j-th dimension of f as fj. Then for j ∈/ q,λ, fj remains 0

after lifting, while for j ∈ q,λ, fj could be changed to either

fj or fj + 2α1 after lifting. If s1 and s satisfy q1 = q − 1 or

α1 = α − 1, we could construct a new candidate set (s)s1

from (s1) by progressive edge extension. Specifically, each f

in

(s1)

is

extended

to

|
Zα

q,λ \

q1,λ1 | vectors in

(s)s1 , where

the operator \ denotes the difference of two sets. For j ∈

q1,s1 and j ∈/ q,s, fj remains fj after extension, while for j ∈ q,s \ q1,s1 , fj changes from 0 to any integer in range [1, Zα] after extension. Then we could get the final candidate
set (s) = ∩s1 (s)s1 , and this entire operation is also called
jointly progressive extension when the number of parent nodes

of s is bigger than 1. In all, for the grid growth operation, a

new grid node s is constructed based on the constructed parent

nodes of s.

For the grid pruning operation, the candidate set (s) of

the given grid node s is pruned according to given criterion.

To be specific, for the cycle pruning criterion in Algorithm 1,

the candidates with more harmful cycles are pruned. Then for

the BLER pruning criterion, the candidates with worse BLER

performance are pruned. For the diversity pruning criterion, the

candidates are pruned to keep the diversity of the candidate set

for the parent nodes. The details of these criteria are shown in

Section III-C. The aim of grid pruning operation is to control

the construction complexity while achieving a better trade-off

of the decoding performance of different grid nodes s.

Since the grid pruning operation is for a single grid node,

the 3D-grid might no longer be valid after grid pruning, i.e.,

the current 3D-grid and the exponent matrices in is not a

valid distributively saved intermediate results of construction.

The conditions of a valid 3D-grid is defined again as follows.

C. 3D-Grid Pruning Criteria
In this subsection, all the grid pruning criteria are introduced in detail. Firstly, the improved cycle classification criterion is employed for grid pruning. Specifically, besides the cycle length g, the uncoupled code interval η is employed as another dimension to classify the cycles more precisely. The uncoupled code interval η is defined as the maximum interval of variable nodes related to the cycle at the measure of uncoupled codes. For example, a length-6 cycle is related to 3 different variable nodes, which is at the l-th uncoupled code, (l+1)-th uncoupled code and (l + 2)-th uncoupled code, respectively. Then η = (l + 2) − l = 2. The length-6 cycle shown in Fig. 1 is with η = 2 as well. Generally, for a (g, η)-cycle, i.e., a cycle with length g and uncoupled code interval η, the smaller g and η is, the more harmful the cycle is. Qualitatively, the reason can be explained as follows. For sliding window decoders with size Nw, a (g, η)-cycle appear in Nw − η continuous windows, and thus a cycle with larger η would appear less times. Moreover, when a cycle slides into the window, the variable nodes firstly entering the window might carry more extrinsic information outside the window, and thus is hard to lead to a trapping set. For a candidate exponent matrix, the number of (g, η) cycles can be computed as ng,η, and then a weight wg,η is added to (g, η)-cycles, and finally we can compute the weighted number of cycles n = g,η ng,ηwg,η. An instance of the weight selection is

wg,η = θ g0−gκ−η, ∀g ≤ g0; wg,η = 0, ∀g > g0,

(6)

where 1 < κ < θ . In the practical construction, the parameters could be empirically chosen as θ = 64, κ = 2, g0 = 10 or g0 = 12. Then in the cycle pruning operation, a threshold nth

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

90

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 1, MARCH 2025

is flexibly determined and all the candidates with n > nth is pruned.
To deal with the case that the number of candidates is too
large after cycle pruning, the diversity criterion is employed
to reduce the number of candidates while maintaining the
diversity of the candidates for parent nodes. Specifically, for a lifting value vector f in (s), suppose the grid node s has τ parent nodes s1, . . . , sτ , and the lifting value vector in (sτ0 ) that is nested in f is denoted as fτ0 . Moreover, there are totally nτ0 vectors in (s) that fτ0 is nested in. Then each lifting value vector f are related to a tuple (n1, . . . , nτ ). A threshold nτ0,th is assigned to each nτ0 , and all the candidates f in (s) are ordered. The lifting value vectors f are then traversed in the given order, and if nτ0 ≥ nτ0,th for all the 1 ≤ τ0 ≤ τ , then f are pruned and the tuples (n1, . . . , nτ ) are updated. The diversity pruning terminates till for all the f, there exists τ0 such that nτ0 < nτ0,th. The order might be according to the weighted number of cycles, or the BLER performance, etc. It
can be observed that the diversity pruning could maintain the size of (sτ0 ) for each parent node sτ0 , and thus the diversity of the candidates for parent nodes are maintained.
Finally, the BLER performance evaluation criterion is
employed to prune the candidates with poor BLER
performance that the improved cycle classification criterion
cannot detect. A QC-SC-LDPC code is recovered from the exponent matrix with the given parameters L, L, T0, L0, and then the BLER performance of the QC-SC-LDPC code
at given SNR over the given channel is detected. Then the candidates with BLER > BLERth are pruned, where BLERth is the threshold that can be flexibly changed in each pruning operation. By combining the improved cycle
classification criterion, the diversity criterion and the BLER
performance evaluation criterion, the candidates with better
decoding performance could be selected more precisely, as
shown the simulation results of Section IV.

D. A Simple Example

In this subsection, a simple example of the proposed 3D-

G-PEGL method is provided to show the construction flow

briefly. We consider a simple 3D-grid with A = Q = = 3

and totally AQ = 27 grid nodes. The parameter set of lifting factors is assumed as 1 = {Zα = 3 × 2α−1, 1 ≤ α ≤ 3}.
The total AQ = 27 grid nodes are indexed according to the

bijective mapping χ : (α, q, λ) → s. The construction flow of

our 3D-G-PEGL method is illustrated by the following three

small steps.

1) As shown in Fig. 8(a), the grid node (1, 1, 1) is con-

cstarnudcitdeadteinexthpeonbeengtinmnaintrgiceospeorfaPtim1o,na1c,,1roanadreZo1|bt1a,1in| e=d.3T10he=n

6561 since

the threshold value of cycle pruning is set as σth,1 = 1000,

the cycle pruning and grid update operations (row 9-14 in

Algorithm 1) are repeatedly done till the number of candidate

exponent matrices σ ( , 1) = 897 < σth,1. Note that since the grid node (1, 1, 1) has no parent nodes, the diversity pruning

and corresponding grid update operations are equivalent to

empty operations.

Fig. 8. A simple example of the proposed 3D-G-PEGL method with A = Q = = 3. (a) The beginning operation to construct the grid node (1, 1, 1) with χ (1, 1, 1) = 1, and the corresponding cycle pruning and grid update operations. (b) The grid update operation to construct the grid node (2, 2, 2) with χ (2, 2, 2) = 14, and the corresponding cycle pruning, diversity pruning, BLER pruning and grid update operations.
2) Then we construct the grid node s = 2, . . . , 13 according to the grid growth operation and employ the 3D-grid pruning criteria to prune the candidates repeatedly. As shown in Fig. 8(b), the grid nodes s ≤ 13 have been already constructed and the numbers of candidate exponent matrices in each grid node σ ( , s) are marked near the grid nodes. Then the grid node (2, 2, 2) with χ (2, 2, 2) = 14 are constructed by the grid growth operation. Specifically, the candidate set (2, 2, 2) are constructed by joint progressive extension of the candidate sets
(1, 2, 2), (2, 1, 2) and (2, 2, 1). Then since the number of candidate exponent matrices σ ( , 14) = 2310 > σth,1, the cycle pruning, diversity pruning and grid update operations (row 9-14 in Algorithm 1) are repeatedly done till the number of candidate exponent matrices σ ( , 1) = 991 < σth,1. Note that the cycle pruning, diversity pruning operation are only aimed at the grid node (2, 2, 2), and the candidate numbers of the grid node s < 14 changes only in the grid growth operation. Then since the grid node s = 2, 3, 4 has candidate number σ ( , s) < σth,2 = 50, BLER pruning and grid update operations are employed at grid nodes s = 2, 3, 4 in order and s = 2, 3, 4 are saved in the set of BLER tested grid nodes.
3) The grid nodes s = 15, . . . , 27 are constructed by the grid growth operation and the 3D-grid pruning criteria are employed repeatedly. Finally, the final selection is employed to get the final exponent matrices {Pαm,aqc,rλo}α,q,λ.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE QC- SC- LDPC CODES

91

E. Design Complexity Analysis
The design complexity of the 3D-G-PEGL method could be roughly divided into the storage complexity and the computational complexity. To be specific, the storage complexity is proportional to the total number of candidate vectors in the 3D-grid. After the beginning operation, there would be Z1| 1,1| candidates of vectors in the 3D-grid, which is commonly large. Thus in the practical construction, the beginning operation is divided into several small steps, and candidates are pruned after each small step employing the improved cycle classification criteria, to keep the number of candidates less than β1,1,1σth,1. After the grid pruning operation, the number of candidates is less than σth,1 for each constructed grid nodes. Thus after the grid growth operation, the number of candidates at the current constructed grid node (α, q, λ) is less than βα,q,λσth,1, where according to the grid growth operation, the parameter βα,q,λ has the following upper bound βα,q,λ ≤ β0.
τ0 = min Zα| q,λ|−max{| q,λ−1|,| q−1,λ|}, 2| q,λ|−| q−1,λ−1| , (7)
where | q ,λ | = 0 for any q = 0 or λ = 0. Then the total number of candidates c1 in the 3D grid is

c1 ≤

AQ

+

max
α,q,λ

βα,q,λ

σth,1.

(8)

In the practical construction, σth,1 could be flexibly chosen according to the actual storage resources and the computational resources. In our given instance, σth,1 has the order of 106, and the maximum detected c1 has the order 107 ∼ 108, which is acceptable for current computers.
The grid pruning operation takes the domination part of the computational complexity of the 3D-G-PEGL method, in which detecting the cycle distribution and evaluate the actual BLER of each candidate is the most time-consuming. Suppose the average complexity of detecting the cycle distribution of each candidate is c2,1, and the average complexity of evaluate the actual BLER of each candidate is c2,2. Then the total computational complexity c2 is bounded by

c2 ≤ AQ

c2,1σth,1

max
α,q,λ

βα,q,λ

+

c2,2σth,2

.

(9)

In the practical construction, σth,2 could be flexibly chosen according to the actual storage resources and the computational resources as well. In our given instance, σth,2 has the order of 102 ∼ 103, and it takes up to ten days to construct the entire large family of rate-compatible length-scalable QCSC-LDPC codes. Compared with conventional cPEG-based methods, our 3D-G-PEGL method have generally higher but acceptable design complexity, and our 3D-G-PEGL method could achieve better decoding performance among multiple code rates and code lengths than conventional cPEG-based methods.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, a family of rate-compatible length-scalable QC-SC-LDPC codes with changeable smoothing parameters w are constructed via the 3D-G-PEGL method. The macro edge spreading patterns {Bqm,aλcro}q,λ are the same as Section III-A.

The set of lifting factors is 1 = {Zα = 3 × 2α−1}α11=1,

while the set of smoothing parameters and information column

numbers are 2 = q}4q0=1, respectively.

{wλ Thus

= λ + 1}λ3=1 and there are totally

3
AQ

= {Kq = = 1320

grid nodes in the 3D-grid. To demonstrate the effectiveness

of our 3D-G-PEGL method, the BLER performance of our

QC-SC-LDPC codes are simulated and compared with other

state-of-the-art LDPC codes or SC-LDPC codes. Moreover,

how the performance of our QC-SC-LDPC codes scales with

the parameters L, nunc, w, Rdesign could be observed, which

could guide the design and employment of QC-SC-LDPC

codes.

Firstly, we compare our QC-SC-LDPC codes of given code

rate and code length with the QC-SC-LDPC code in [13] and

the ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes [4]. The design rates of constructed

QC-SC-LDPC codes and the QC-SC-LDPC code in [13] are

both selected as Rdesign = 2/3, while the code rates of ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes are also chosen as R = 2/3. The parameters

of our QC-SC-LDPC codes are chosen as Kq = 16, Zα = 768, wλ = 5, L = 44, L = 4, and periodically information node shortening technique is not considered, i.e., L0 = 0.
The total block length and the true rate of our QC-SC-LDPC

codes are n = 92160 and Rtrue = 20/31, respectively, which is similar to the QC-SC-LDPC code in [13] with n = 92160

and Rtrue = 39/60. The BLER performance of long and short ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes with n = 64800, 16200 are

simulated for comparison. The sliding window decoder in [16]

with the window size Nw = 16 and the iteration number within each window Imax = 3 is employed for both the QC-

SC-LDPC codes, while the layered BP decoder is employed

for ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes with the iteration number I =

24. Then the simulations are conducted over both AWGN

channels and Rayleigh fading channels with both QPSK and

64NUC in [8]. The bit interleaver and bit mapping are selected

as the basic random bit interleaver and bit mapping within

each uncoupled code for QC-SC-LDPC codes, while they

are selected as the optimized ones for ATSC 3.0 LDPC

codes.

As shown in Fig. 9, the BLER performance of the con-

structed QC-SC-LDPC code is similar to the QC-SC-LDPC

code in [13] and the long ATSC 3.0 LDPC code over both

AWGN and Rayleigh fading channels with both QPSK and

64NUC. It shows that the proposed one-step periodically time-

invariant structure could achieve similar decoding performance

compared with the two-step lifting structure, and the univer-

sality is maintained since the bit interleaver and bit mapping

is still not optimized for given code rates and constellation

orders. Moreover, the effectiveness of proposed 3D-G-PEGL

method is demonstrated as well, since the QC-SC-LDPC code

in [13] is optimized for a single code rate and code length,

while our QC-SC-LDPC codes are optimized for multiple code

rates and code lengths.

To further demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed

3D-G-PEGL method and observe the scaling behavior of

QC-SC-LDPC codes, the relations between the decoding

performance and the coupling length L, the information

column number Kq, the lifting factor Zα and the smoothing

parameter wq are explained as follows. The finite block-length

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

92

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 1, MARCH 2025

Fig. 10. The l-BLERl curves of different Kq and Zα over AWGN channels with QPSK at given SNR. We denote dSNR as the SNR gap from the Shannon
limit at the design rates. (a) Kq = 8, Zα = 3, dSNR = 4.54dB, (b) Kq = 40, Zα = 3, dSNR = 2.85dB, (c) Kq = 8, Zα = 768, dSNR = 0.60dB, (d) Kq = 40, Zα = 3, dSNR = 0.32dB.

Fig. 9. BLER simulations of ATSC-3.0 LDPC codes and QC-SC-LDPC codes over AWGN and Rayleigh fading channels with (a) QPSK and (b) 64NUC. The blue square curves are the performance of QC-SC-LDPC codes in [13], while the green diamond curves are the performance of constructed QC-SC-LDPC codes in this paper.

bound [35], [36] and the BLER performance of ratecompatible length-scalable 5G-NR LDPC codes are selected as the benchmark.
The relation between the BLER performance and the coupling length L for constructed QC-SC-LDPC codes is shown first. Equivalently, we keep a relatively long maximum coupling length L, and record the position of the first erroneous uncoupled code l, which means error information bits appears at the l-th uncoupled code while the first l−1 uncoupled codes are correct. We further denote BLERl as the rate that the first erroneous uncoupled code appears before the l-th uncoupled code. Then we change l and observe the curve between BLERl and l. It could be found that when L is large and the effect of termination at the right end can be nearly neglected, then

BLERl ≈ 1 − e−εl,

(10)

where ε is the parameter that indicates the underlying decoding
performance of the macro edge spreading pattern and is not related to l. Several typical pairs of Kq, Zα, wλ of the constructed QC-SC-LDPC codes are chosen for BLER simulation, such as Kq = 8, 40, wλ = 5 and Zα = 3, 768. The sliding window decoder with Nw = 16 and I = 3 is employed and the BLER simulation is conducted over AWGN channel
with QPSK. The l-BLERl curves are observed at given SNR. The maximum coupling length is chosen as L > 4000. As
shown in Fig. 10, the l-BLERl curves exactly fit the theoretical curve 1 − e−εl for all the cases. We can then infer that the equation (10) holds for almost all the pairs of Kq, Zα, wλ.

Actually, these results coincide with the scaling law for SCLDPC codes over BEC [31]. Moreover, the equation (10) has

deeper meanings, since it shows that the position of the first erroneous uncoupled code is memoryless, i.e., the conditional probability that the first erroneous uncoupled code appears between the (l0 +1)-th and the (l0 +l)-th uncoupled code when the first l0 uncoupled code is correct is equal to BLERl. In other words, the uncoupled codes that are successfully decoded have little influence of the errors of the latter uncoupled codes. Furthermore, the equation (10) means that neglecting the small effect of termination at the right end, the BLER performance for QC-SC-LDPC codes with the same macro edge spreading pattern Pmacro but with different coupling lengths L can be converted, and we could then compute the BLER of a single

uncoupled code BLERunc from BLERL, i.e.,

BLERunc = 1 − (1 − BLERL)1/L.

(11)

It can be observed that BLERunc means the probability that an error occurs at the L-th uncoupled code when the former L −1 uncoupled codes are successfully decoded. BLERunc is useful to represent the BLER performance of QC-SC-LDPC codes and thus employed for the following results. The reason is that BLERunc is not relevant to the coupling length L, and with the aid of sliding window decoders, the coded bits of QC-SCLDPC codes can be transmitted at the unit of an uncoupled code. Furthermore, the latency of sliding window decoder is proportional to Nw times the uncoupled code length. Thus the BLERunc is a proper performance indicator when comparing with traditional LDPC block codes, especially in the streaming applications which is common in broadcasting scenarios.
Then the BLER performance of constructed QC-SC-LDPC codes with different lifting factor Zα is shown, to demonstrate that the 3D-G-PEGL method could achieve desirable performance among different uncoupled code lengths nunc, and to indicate how the BLER performance scales with the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE QC- SC- LDPC CODES

93

Fig. 11. The BLER performance of QC-SC-LDPC codes with different Zα. (a)(b) are the cases with Kq = 40, and (c)(d) are the cases with Kq = 16. For (a), the red dotted curves are with nunc = 18, 72, 288, 1152, 4608 from right to left, respectively, and the blue square curves are with n = 18, 72, 288, 1152, 4608
from right to left, respectively. For (c), the red dotted curves are with nunc = 9, 36, 144, 576, 2304 from right to left, respectively. The blue square curves are
with n = 9, 36, 144, 576, 2304 from right to left, respectively, and the cyan diamond curves are with n = 36, 144, 576, 2400 from right to left, respectively.

uncoupled code length nunc for the constructed QC-SC-LDPC codes. The parameters Zα is selected as Zα = 3 × 2α−1, 1 ≤ α ≤ 11, and the uncoupled code length nunc for each Zα can be computed as

nunc = NuncZα = M + Kq Zα/Tq.

(12)

The information column numbers are selected as Kq = 16, 40, and for both Kq the lifting periods are Tq = 8. The other parameters are selected wλ = 5, Nw = 12 and Imax = 4. The simulations are conducted over AWGN channels with
QPSK, and the SNR-BLERunc curves are shown in Fig. 11. The SNR-BLER curves for 5G-NR LDPC codes and finite
block-length bound with the same code length as each nunc are shown as the benchmark. Since the block length majorly affect
the descending rate of SNR-BLER curves for block channel codes, and BLER between 10−2 and 10−4 is of concern for a large proportion of scenarios, the SNR gap between BLER = 10−2 and BLER = 10−4 is computed for each SNR-BLER
curve. For constructed QC-SC-LDPC codes, we further define
the effective code length as the code length n such that the SNR gap between BLERunc = 10−2 and BLERunc = 10−4 for QC-SC-LDPC codes is the same as the SNR gap between BLER = 10−2 and BLER = 10−4 for the finite block-length
bound with code length n. It can be observed that the effective
code length is a rough indicator for how the performance of
QC-SC-LDPC codes scales with the uncoupled code length
nunc. As shown in Fig. 11, the ratio of the effective code length to nunc generally increases with nunc, and the ratio is larger than 1 when nunc is larger than a given threshold. Thus how the performance of QC-SC-LDPC codes scales with

nunc is not similar to how the performance of conventional block codes scales with n. Qualitatively, it can be explained as
that the threshold saturation phenomenon enhances with the
increasing of nunc, and thus the effective code length increases non-linearly with nunc. Furthermore, it could be observed that the SNR-BLERunc performance outperforms that of 5G-NR LDPC codes with code lengths equal to nunc or several times of nunc, when nunc is large enough, and that is valid for both Kq = 16 and Kq = 40. Hence the 3D-G-PEGL method could achieve desirable decoding performance among different code
rates and code lengths, and QC-SC-LDPC codes could have
notable performance advantage compared with conventional
LDPC codes when nunc is large enough, especially for special scenarios such as streaming data inputs.
Furthermore, the performance of constructed QC-SC-LDPC
codes with different wλ is shown in Fig. 12. The parameters are selected as Kq = 8, wλ = 3, 5, Zα = 12, 768, Nw = 16 and Imax = 3. The simulations are conducted over AWGN channels with QPSK. As shown in Fig. 12, QC-SC-LDPC
codes with larger wλ generally have better performance when Zα is large, since the spatial coupling is stronger for large wλ. However, when Zα is small, QC-SC-LDPC codes with smaller wλ might have better BP performance instead. The reason is that for compact edge spreading patterns, smaller wλ leads to less dominant trapping sets which majorly influence the BP
decoding performance. To further exploit the potential of QC-
SC-LDPC codes with small Zα, near ML decoding algorithms such as [37] could be employed. With good weight profiles,
the near-ML algorithms could reduce the effect of trapping
sets and improve the performance of QC-SC-LDPC codes with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

94

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 71, NO. 1, MARCH 2025

Moreover, we would study how to employ the QC-SC-LDPC codes with the proposed implementation-oriented structures in other scenarios, such as non-orthogonal multiple access.

Fig. 12. BLER Simulations of QC-SC-LDPC codes with wλ = 3, 5 and Zα = 12, 768.
small Zα. Then QC-SC-LDPC codes with larger wλ can show performance advantages again.
The scaling behaviors of QC-SC-LDPC codes mentioned above would better guide the design and employment of QCSC-LDPC codes. For instance, when the total block length n is required to be the same, the coupling length L and the uncoupled code length nunc could be properly chosen to trade-off the rate-loss and BLER performance of the entire QC-SC-LDPC block code. Moreover, when the latency of a system is fixed, it might exist a threshold of code length such that when nunc is larger than that threshold, QC-SC-LDPC codes would perform better than conventional LDPC codes.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a new implementation-oriented structure for QC-SC-LDPC codes is firstly proposed for broadcasting systems. The features of that structure include rate-compatibility, length-scalability, one-step periodically time-variant lifting, information node shortening at the end for rate loss reduction, and periodically information node shortening for error propagation mitigation. Then the 3D-GPEGL method is proposed to construct QC-SC-LDPC codes with these features, which can achieve desirable performance among different code rates and code lengths under limited design complexity. Finally, the effectiveness of the 3D-GPEGL method is demonstrated via simulation. From the simulation results, the scaling behaviors of our QC-SC-LDPC codes are observed, including how the performance scales with the coupling length L, the smoothing parameters w, and the uncoupled code length nunc. The results show that the position of the first erroneous uncoupled code is memoryless, and the effective code length of QC-SC-LDPC codes changes nonlinearly with the uncoupled code length, which means how the performance of QC-SC-LDPC codes scales with the uncoupled code length is exactly different from the scaling behaviors of conventional LDPC codes. These scaling behaviors could better guide the design and employment of QC-SC-LDPC codes in the broadcasting systems.
In the future, how to further improve the decoding performance of QC-SC-LDPC codes with short uncoupled code lengths would be studied. Furthermore, we would study how to design a rate-compatible structure for QC-SC-LDPC codes which maintains the compact base graph and shows good performance for small code rates at the same time.

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Shishikui and Y. Sawahata, “Quality of 8K ultra-high-definition television viewing experience in practical viewing conditions,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 2–12, Mar. 2022.
[2] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame Structure Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), ETSI Standard EN 302 755, Apr. 2012.
[3] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Next Generation Broadcasting System to Handheld, Physical Layer Specification (DVB-NGH), ETSI Standard EN 303 105, Jun. 2013.
[4] K.-J. Kim et al., “Low-density parity-check codes for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, Mar. 2016.
[5] F. Jerji and C. Akamine, “Advanced ISDB-T and ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes performance and complexity comparison,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 254–262, Mar. 2022.
[6] L. H. Gonsioroski, A. B. dos Santos, N. C. Fernandes, P. V. G. Castellanos, L. J. de Matos, and L. A. R. da Silva Mello, “Evaluation of the field-test results of advanced ISDB-T system with low-rate LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 69, no. 3, pp. 675–690, Sep. 2023.
[7] Error-Correction, Data Framing, Modulation and Emission Methods for Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting, ITU Rec. BT.1306-7, Int. Telecommun. Union, Geneva, Switzerland, Jun. 2015.
[8] L. Michael and D. Gómez-Barquero, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 181–188, Mar. 2016.
[9] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[10] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[11] A. Yedla, M. El-Khamy, J. Lee, and I. Kang, “Performance of spatiallycoupled LDPC codes and threshold saturation over BICM channels,” 2013, arXiv:1303.0296.
[12] A. Yedla, P. S. Nguyen, H. D. Pfister, and K. R. Narayanan, “Universal codes for the Gaussian MAC via spatial coupling,” in Proc. 49th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), 2011, pp. 1801–1808.
[13] Y. Zhang, K. Peng, J. Song, and Y. Wu, “Quasi-cyclic spatially coupled LDPC code for broadcasting,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 187–194, Mar. 2020.
[14] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[15] A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, R. L. Urbanke, and J. K. Wolf, “Windowed decoding of spatially coupled codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2277–2292, Apr. 2013.
[16] Z. He, K. Peng, J. Song, and Y. Zhang, “Sliding window decoding for QC-SC-LDPC codes under the constraint of implementation complexity,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 68, no. 2, pp. 305–316, Jun. 2022.
[17] F. Steiner, E. Ben Yacoub, B. Matuz, G. Liva, and A. G. i. Amat, “One and two bit message passing for SC-LDPC codes with higher-order modulation,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 37, no. 23, pp. 5914–5925, Dec. 1, 2019.
[18] X. An, C. Zhang, K. Peng, Z. He, and J. Song, “Adaptive quantized and normalized MSA based on modified MET-DE and its application for 5G-NR LDPC codes,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 101123–101133, 2023.
[19] S.-K. Ahn et al., “Evaluation of ATSC 3.0 and 3GPP Rel-17 5G broadcasting systems for mobile handheld applications,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 338–356, Jun. 2023.
[20] Z. Si, R. Thobaben, and M. Skoglund, “Rate-compatible LDPC convolutional codes achieving the capacity of the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 4021–4029, Jun. 2012.
[21] W. Hou, S. Lu, and J. Cheng, “Rate-compatible spatially coupled LDPC codes via repeat-accumulation extension,” in Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), 2014, pp. 87–91.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: RATE-COMPATIBLE LENGTH-SCALABLE QC- SC- LDPC CODES

95

[22] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[23] M. Battaglioni, A. Tasdighi, G. Cancellieri, F. Chiaraluce, and M. Baldi, “Design and analysis of time-invariant SC-LDPC convolutional codes with small constraint length,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 918–931, Mar. 2018.
[24] S. V. S. Ranganathan, K. Vakilinia, L. Dolecek, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Some results on spatially coupled protograph LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), 2016, pp. 1–6.
[25] M. Battaglioni, F. Chiaraluce, M. Baldi, and M. Lentmaier, “Girth analysis and design of periodically time-varying SC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 67, no. 4, pp. 2217–2235, Apr. 2021.
[26] M. Battaglioni, M. Baldi, and F. Chiaraluce, “Bounds on the free distance of periodically time-varying SC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 2419–2429, Apr. 2024.
[27] H.-Y. Kwak, D.-Y. Yun, and J.-S. No, “Rate-loss mitigation of SC-LDPC codes without performance degradation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 55–65, Jan. 2020.
[28] M. Zhu, D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Error propagation mitigation in sliding window decoding of spatially coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Inf. Theory, vol. 4, pp. 470–486, Sep. 2023. doi: 10.1109/JSAIT.2023.3312656.
[29] M. Diouf, D. Declercq, M. Fossorier, S. Ouya, and B. Vasic´, “Improved PEG construction of large girth QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), 2016, pp. 146–150.
[30] Z. He, K. Peng, and J. Song, “Multi-layer progressive tree-structured edge growth algorithm for nested lifting design of 5G-NR-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 12, pp. 2836–2840, Dec. 2022.
[31] P. M. Olmos and R. L. Urbanke, “A scaling law to predict the finitelength performance of spatially-coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 3164–3184, Jun. 2015.
[32] R. Sokolovskii, A. G. i Amat, and F. Brännström, “Finite-length scaling of spatially coupled LDPC codes under window decoding over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 5988–5998, Oct. 2020.
[33] R. Sokolovskii, A. Graell i Amat, and F. Brännström, “Finite-length scaling of SC-LDPC codes with a limited number of decoding iterations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 4869–4888, Aug. 2023.
[34] A. Jimenez Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[35] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Channel coding rate in the finite blocklength regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2307–2359, May 2010.
[36] T. Erseghe, “Coding in the finite-blocklength regime: Bounds based on laplace integrals and their asymptotic approximations,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6854–6883, Dec. 2016.
[37] Q. Wang, S. Cai, L. Chen, and X. Ma, “Semi-LDPC convolutional codes: Construction and low-latency windowed list decoding,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 411–419, Dec. 2021.

Zhitong He (Student Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. degree in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2020, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree. His research area is wireless/mobile communication, and his current research interests include channel coding and coded modulation.
Kewu Peng (Senior Member, IEEE) was born in Hefei, China. He received the B.E. degree in electronics engineering from the Hefei University of Technology, in 1993, the M.E. degree in electronics engineering from Tsinghua University, in 1996, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, in 2003. He was a Researcher and a Lecturer with the Department of Electronics Engineering, Tsinghua University, from August 1996 to August 1999, where he has been a Research Staff with the Digital Television Research Center since January 2005, an Assistant Researcher in 2006, and an Associate Professor in 2009. His recent contributions focus on SC-LDPC codes and NOMA. He has published more than 90 journals and conference papers. He holds more than 80 China patents. His main research interests include mobile/wireless communications, digital terrestrial/television broadcasting, and embedded image/video transmission.
Jian Song (Fellow, IEEE) received the B.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Tsinghua University, in 1990 and 1995, respectively. He was a Postdoctoral Researcher with The Chinese University of Hong Kong and the University of Waterloo, Canada, in 1996 and 1997, respectively. Then, he worked for industry in USA for seven years. He joined the Faculty Team, Tsinghua University, as a Professor, in 2005, where he is currently the Director of the DTV Technology Research and Development Center. He has published over 300 peer-reviewed journals and conference papers. He has coauthored several books and book chapters in the aforementioned areas. He holds two U.S. and over 80 Chinese patents. His research interests include digital television terrestrial broadcasting, wireless communication, power line communication, and visible light communications. He was a recipient of the IEEE Scott Helt Memorial Award in 2015. He is a Fellow of IET, CIC, and CIE.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:08:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

