IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 72, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

479

Constraint-Aware Annealing for CMOS-Based Ising Machine LDPC Decoder
Eslam Elmitwalli , Member, IEEE, Zeljko Ignjatovic, Member, IEEE, and Selçuk Köse , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Ising machines are efficient hardware solvers for combinatorial optimization problems (COPs). In CMOS-based Ising machines, the annealing process is crucial for efficiently navigating complex energy landscapes in mapped COPs such as Max-Cut and low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoding. QuBRIM, a CMOS-based Ising machine, has recently been utilized to solve LDPC decoding problems using multi-body interactions. A constraint-aware annealing schedule is proposed that increases the efficiency of solving the mapped COP. The proposed annealing method uses knowledge of the LDPC decoding problem to guide the annealing process. The annealing schedule is demonstrated through high-level simulations. The proposed methodology demonstrates a normalized energy efficiency (NEE) of 0.68 pJ/bit/iteration, which is a 1.8x improvement over random bit-flip annealing, and an 80% increase in throughput.
Index Terms—Annealing, combinatorial optimization, Ising machine, LDPC decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE ISING model describes the interactions between coupled spins in a lattice, with the system’s energy governed by the Ising Hamiltonian [1], [2], [3]. At high temperatures, the orientation of the spins is disordered, however, as the temperature cools down during annealing, the spins align themselves to minimize the Hamiltonian. While finding the minimum of the Ising Hamiltonian using conventional algorithms for large problems is challenging, physical systems naturally minimize their Hamiltonian. Ising machines are specialized hardware solvers designed to determine the global minimum, or a corresponding approximate solution, for the Ising model. Many NP-hard combinatorial optimization problems (COPs) have been mapped to the Ising Hamiltonian [4], allowing their solution to be read out as the final state of the Ising machine.
Several implementations of Ising machines exist, such as D-wave’s quantum-based annealers [5] and coherent Ising machines based on optical cavities [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. A CMOS-based design is proposed in QuBRIM [12],

which is potentially more scalable. In the formulation of the LDPC COP, higher-than-quadratic terms exist that are challenging to map to an Ising machine. In [3], a methodology is proposed for implementing the LDPC COP that allows the direct mapping of higher-order terms to the QuBRIM. To escape local minima, random spin flips are introduced in the annealing schedule in [3], which cause perturbations in the system that can help escape local minima in search of the global minimum. However, this approach’s efficiency can be improved regarding decoding time and energy because, due to its random nature, the machine might walk away from the desired global minimum half of the time. The efficiency of random perturbations can be greatly improved when coupled with a constraint-aware perturbation heuristic to escape local minima. In this brief, a constraint-aware QuBRIM (CAQB) is proposed which implements more efficient constraint-aware annealing for LDPC decoding.
The rest of this brief is organized as follows. A brief background on implementing LDPC decoding on QuBRIM is provided in Section II. The proposed constraint-aware annealing methodology is demonstrated in Section III. In Section IV, the results are summarized and compared with the state-of-the-art. Conclusions are offered in Section V.

II. BACKGROUND
In the absence of an external magnetic field, the Hamiltonian H(σ ) for the Ising model can be written as [2]

H(σ ) = − Jijσiσj

(1)

i,j

where Jij represents the coefficient of coupling interaction between the spins σi and σj, and σ ∈ {−1, 1}. In the case of
QuBRIM [12], each spin is represented as a voltage vi on a capacitor which is quantized as Q(vi) through a comparator where Q(vi) = −1 if vi < 0 and Q(vi) = 1 if vi ≥ 0. For
QuBRIM, a Lyapunov function exists in the form

Received 16 October 2024; revised 20 December 2024; accepted 18 January 2025. Date of publication 22 January 2025; date of current version 28 February 2025. This work was supported in part by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) Quantum-Inspired Classical Computing (QuICC) Program through Air Force Research Laboratory (AFRL) under Contract FA8650-23-C-1034, and in part by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under Award 2233378. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor S. Taneja. (Corresponding author: Eslam Elmitwalli.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Rochester, Rochester, NY 14620 USA (e-mail: eslam.m.elmitwalli@gmail.com; zignjato@ur.rochester.edu; selcuk.kose@rochester.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2025.3532665

H(v) = − JijQ(vi)Q vj .

(2)

i<j

This Lyapunov function in (2) has the same form as the Ising Hamiltonian in (1). In QuBRIM, because the node variables are quantized as Q(vi), multi-body interactions are carried out by using either XOR or XNOR gates [3]. The choice of logic gate depends on the number of spin variables in each term and the polarity of the term, as shown in Table I.
In LDPC, the signals are represented as base-band signals under binary phase-shift keying, where each bit xi is defined

1549-7747 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

480

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 72, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

TABLE I XOR/XNOR TRUTHTABLE AFTER TRANSFORMING BITS {0, 1} TO SPINS {−1, 1} RESPECTIVELY TO CARRY OUT ELEMENTARY MULTIPLICATION

Fig. 1. Illustration of Node 1 of QuBRIM for LDPC decoding [3].

as xi ∈ {+1, −1}. The received signal r is transmitted through an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel where bits are distorted according to ri = xi + ni, where ni is the noise sample. An (n,k) LDPC is an error-correcting code in
which a codeword w of length n is generated from a message b of length k, with parity bits m = n − k. An m-by-n parity matrix P is defined such that

Pw = 0.

(3)

Codewords are generated from a generator matrix G such that

PGT = 0m×k.

(4)

The codeword w is obtained from the message b as

w = GT b.

(5)

The goal of LDPC decoding is to obtain a codeword w that satisfies (3) and is closest (in Euclidean distance sense) to the noisy received signal r (transmitted codeword affected by channel noise). The process of obtaining this codeword is known as maximum likelihood decoding, which is NP-hard [13], [14].
The Lyapunov function for LDPC decoding is [3]

m−1 n−1

n−1

H(s) =

Pj,isi (−1)l(j)+1 + α (si − ri)2, (6)

j=0 i=0

i=0

H(constraint)

H(objective)

where each spin si represents a bit in the codeword w as

si =

−1, wi = 0 1, wi = 1,

(7)

and l(j) =

n−1 i=0

Pj,i,

where

Pj,i

are

elements

of

P

and

α

is

a

scale factor.

For illustration purposes, this methodology is applied to a

(6,3) LDPC with the parity matrix

⎡

⎤

111100

P = ⎣ 0 0 1 1 0 1 ⎦.

(8)

100110

The Tanner graph for this code has 6 variable nodes (VNs) and 3 check nodes (CNs). The codeword for this LDPC is of the form

v = v1 v2 v3 v4 v5 v6 T .

(9)

The Lyapunov function that has local minima for the permitted codewords is [3]

H(v) = −v1v2v3v4 + v3v4v6 + v1v4v5 + α (vi − ri)2. (10)
i

By

equating

dvi dt

=

−k

∂

H(v) ∂ vi

,

the

derivative

of

v1

after

quantization is

dv1 dt

=

k(Q(v2)Q(v3)Q(v4) − Q(v4)Q(v5)) + kαr1.

(11)

where kα = 2kα and k ∝ 1/RC. This operation is repeated for v2 : v6 to obtain a system of differential equations. The QuBRIM node v1 as described by (11) is shown in Fig. 1. For more details on the circuit implementation, the reader is

referred to [3].

The system diagram for QuBRIM is shown in Fig. 2. The

QuBRIM’s nodes carry out the VN processing, while the XOR

network carries out the CN processing. At the bottom of the

figure, current steering DACs receive the noisy signal r to be decoded. Then, the spin capacitors (storing node voltage vi) in each VN are charged by the current steering DACs to an initial

state proportional to that noisy signal. Once the capacitors

are charged, they are disconnected from the DACs, while the

DACs remain connected to the XOR network. The stored

value in each capacitor Ci is quantized by the comparators into Q(vi). CNs then process the outputs of these comparators through the XOR network. The processed result from each CN

(i.e., the output from the XOR gates) is fed back to the current

summing node to charge or discharge the capacitors Ci, thus updating VN. The exchange between CN and VN repeats until

the system reaches a stable state (equilibrium). This back and

forth (referred to as iterations in standard LDPC algorithms)

is carried out in a single iteration in QuBRIM thanks to its

analog nature. The equilibrium state is not guaranteed to be

a valid codeword because the system can converge into local

minima (i.e., an equilibrium state that does not satisfy (3)),

hence the need for a perturbation mechanism to destabilize the

system. This process can be restarted several times, which is

referred to as QuBRIM iteration in this brief.

III. CONSTRAINT-AWARE ANNEALING
The proposed idea of CAQB is to use knowledge of the problem constraints to implement directed perturbations. Refer to the parity condition in (3), which is represented in (6) as a Hconstraint in the Lyapunov function. To satisfy the parity condition, each term resulting from the summation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELMITWALLI et al.: CONSTRAINT-AWARE ANNEALING FOR CMOS-BASED ISING MACHINE LDPC DECODER

481

S2 = XOR(N3, N4, N6) = +v3v4v6

S3 = XOR(N1, N4, N5) = +v1v4v5.

(12)

Fig. 2. QuBRIM LDPC decoder for the parity matrix (8). Coupling resistors Rc at the output of each XOR gate are omitted for clarity. The labels N1 : N6 represent the quantized node voltages Q(v1) : Q(v6).
in Hconstraint should be equal to −1 (−1 is due to the transformation from bit 0 to −1 as in (7)). In the LDPC example using the parity matrix in (8), the terms representing the parity condition are the terms outside the summation in (10). For each row in the LDPC parity matrix (8), there is a term in (10) representing the parity condition associated with that row when it undergoes matrix multiplication with the codeword. The system is stuck in a local minimum when some or all of these terms are not equal to −1, and the system has reached stability. Terms that are equal to −1 represent satisfied parity conditions, while terms that are equal to 1 are unsatisfied parity conditions. In CAQB, satisfied parity conditions are periodically unenforced and then reenforced with a probability that decreases over time until the system reaches equilibrium. When satisfied parity conditions are unenforced, this results in a smaller search space, which allows the system to focus on resolving unsatisfied parity conditions with greater ease due to the reduced problem size. Re-enforcing previously unenforced parity conditions results in sufficient perturbations that push the system outside local minima. Each row of XOR gates in Fig. 2 corresponds to a row in the LDPC parity matrix (8), which corresponds to one of the parity condition terms in (10). Disabling a row of XOR gates (i.e., by disconnecting XOR gates’ outputs from nodal inputs) will unenforce the corresponding parity condition for that particular row.
The XOR network in Fig. 2 implements the system of differential equations as in the v1 example in (11). An additional XOR gate per row is required to compute the parity condition from these XOR gates, which can be thought of as reversing the differentiation. The parity condition Si for each row i can be calculated by XORing the output of one of the XOR gates in that row with the spin variable in the column connected with it, as shown on the left side of Fig. 2. It should be noted that any XOR gate in a given row can be chosen to calculate the parity condition corresponding to that row. Determining the parity condition in each row in the XOR network in Fig. 2 requires the following gates:
S1 = XOR(N1, N2, N3, N4) = −v1v2v3v4

The equivalence between the parity condition terms in (10) and the XOR operations in (12) can be derived from Table I. If the output of any of the XOR operations in (12) is 0, then the parity condition for that row is satisfied. However, if the output is 1, the parity condition is unsatisfied. The system can detect the global minimum when all the XOR gates in (12) have an output of 0. Early termination signal can be generated by NORing all the parity condition XOR gates in (12), which can be used to trigger spin/solution sampling and as an indicator of the decoding process completion.
In CAQB, two states are defined in the annealing schedule. A state where all parity conditions are enforced, which is termed CARE (C) state, where the machine ‘cares’ about all parity conditions (outputs from all XOR gates are connected to the nodes). A state where satisfied parity conditions are unenforced (ignored), which is termed DO NOT CARE (DNC) state. The constraint-aware annealing schedule proceeds as follows. The spin variables are initialized with the received noisy codeword and the circuit is allowed to settle towards the closest local minimum while in the C state. Then periodically, following a linearly decreasing probability (Pb), the circuit is switched to the DNC state for a few cycles to escape local minima and then switched back to the C state. Initially, the circuit is highly likely to switch to DNC, but towards the end of the annealing, the probability drops to 0. One caveat regarding the DNC state is that not all satisfied parity conditions are unenforced, but a predetermined percentage of them. If all parity conditions are unenforced, the circuit may oscillate between sub-optimal solution states toward the end of the annealing. Therefore, a limit of up to 80% of the parity conditions, selected randomly, are unenforced at any given time. The choice of 80% is made through optimization for the LDPC code implemented. The proposed annealing schedule based on high-level simulations is summarized in Fig. 3. As shown in Fig. 3, the DNC state is entered when an m-bit random number generated in an LFSR is less than an m-bit threshold Pb, where the two values are compared with an m-bit digital comparator. An m-bit counter, whose value decrements over the annealing time, could be used to generate Pb enabling a linearly decreasing probability of entering the DNC state. The annealing schedule implemented for decoding one message using a 1/2 coding rate (672,336) LDPC matrix based on IEEE802.11ad is shown in Fig. 4. The top plot shows the node voltages for all 672 nodes, with one node for each bit in the received codeword. The bottom plot shows the Hamiltonian according to (6) while switching between the DNC and C state.
Each QuBRIM iteration is independent and can be run in parallel with the correct codeword being detected based on which iteration successfully reaches the global minimum. The parameters for each iteration, such as the strength of the coupling (k and kα), DNC probability, and percentage of satisfied parity conditions ignored in the DNC state, can be varied in each iteration to cover a larger solution space and increase the chances of finding the global minima.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

482

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 72, NO. 3, MARCH 2025

TABLE II COMPARISON WITH IEEE802.11AD LDPC DECODERS [3]

Fig. 5. Histogram for the number of simulation steps used to decode 100k noisy received codewords with 4dB SNR.

Fig. 3. Flowchart summarizing the CAQB annealing schedule. The t = 4 steps and the 80% limit on the DNC state are optimization parameters.
Fig. 4. Constraint-aware annealing schedule applied for decoding a received noisy codeword with 4dB SNR using a 1/2 coding rate (672, 336) LDPC code.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION To show the proposed CAQB LDPC decoder, each codeword is transmitted with an SNR of 4dB to simulate an AWGN channel. The annealing schedule in Fig. 4 is used with an upper limit of 2000 simulation steps for each noisy received codeword in the decoding process. The simulation steps are discrete high-level solver steps as defined in Section V in [3], where each step corresponds to ∼106ps in a circuit simulator.

Using high-level simulation, 100K random noisy codewords are decoded using CAQB to generate a histogram of the number of steps needed to find the global minimum and trigger the early termination signal, as shown in Fig. 5. According to the results, the average number of steps needed is 101, which translates to an 88% reduction as compared to random bit-flip annealing in [3].
The BER vs SNR for CAQB using high-level modeling of a 1/2 coding rate (672,336) LDPC code is compared with several state-of-the-art algorithms in Fig. 6. Several decoding algorithms from literature are implemented, including Normalized Min-Sum (NMS), Offset Min-Sum (OMS) [20], Propagation Belief (BP) [21] and Layered Propagation Belief (LBP) [22]. QuBRIM with random bit flips annealing schedule [3] is labeled as (QB). Each decoding algorithm is implemented with either one iteration (1) or four iterations (4), as indicated by the number between brackets in the plot legend. For algorithms implementing one iteration only, CAQB (1) and QB (1) both perform better than the other algorithms, with a significant advantage for CAQB. Algorithms implementing four iterations have comparable BER except for BP (4), which is lower. However, CAQB (4) maintains significant speed improvement on QB (4). For QB (4) and CAQB (4), each iteration is an independent sample and can be run concurrently. Therefore, their iterations could be implemented in parallel on different QuBRIM modules, creating a trade-off between throughput, area, and power.
The implementation of the QuBRIM LDPC decoder is compared with state-of-the-art decoders from literature in Table II. The parameters used for QuBRIM are based on circuit-level simulations and estimates. The average throughput for CAQB

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELMITWALLI et al.: CONSTRAINT-AWARE ANNEALING FOR CMOS-BASED ISING MACHINE LDPC DECODER

483

Fig. 6. BER vs. SNR for a 1/2 coding rate (672, 336) LDPC matrix based on IEEE802.11ad.

with early termination and 4 iterations is estimated to be

14.1Gbps after accounting for 1 ns overhead consumed by the DACs [3] according to

Throughput =

n

,

(avg. # of steps) ∗ (time per step) ∗ Imax

where n is the code length 672, and Imax is the maximum number of iterations. The average power is estimated from circuit-level simulations but does not account for the annealing control circuitry. The normalized energy efficiency (NEE) is normalized to 45nm CMOS technology according to [19]. CAQB demonstrates a significant advantage over [3] in throughput and NEE due to the improved annealing schedule.

The CAQB annealing is also less complex and requires fewer RNG sources compared to the annealing schedule in [3]. In [3], each spin requires an RNG source (totaling n sources) to carry out the random bit flips. In contrast, CAQB requires a random bit per row (totaling k sources). This results in a lower area

requirement for CAQB compared to [3]. Compared to the state-of-the-art, CAQB has considerable power, throughput,

and NEE advantages.

V. CONCLUSION
High-level behavioral simulations of the QuBRIM-based LDPC decoder are presented using a novel constraint-aware annealing mechanism. The proposed methodology demonstrates significant improvements in speed and efficiency compared to random-bit-flip-based annealing. The results are benchmarked against state-of-the-art methods, showing accuracy rates comparable to those achieved by the Normalized Min-Sum, Offset Min-Sum, and Layered Belief Propagation decoders. Constraint-aware annealing presents a more guided mechanism for implementing Ising machine perturbations that are tailored to the COP being solved. This allows for higher efficiency compared to random non-problem-specific perturbations, which are usually implemented in literature.

REFERENCES
[1] E. Ising, “Beitrag zur theorie des ferromagnetismus,” Zeitschrift für Physik, vol. 31, no. 1, pp. 253–258, 1925.
[2] T. Wang and J. Roychowdhury, “OIM: Oscillator-based ising machines for solving combinatorial optimisation problems,” 2019, arXiv:1903.07163.
[3] E. Elmitwalli, Z. Ignjatovic, and S. Kose, “Utilizing multi-body interactions in a CMOS-based ising machine for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 40–50, Jan. 2024.
[4] A. Lucas, “Ising formulations of many NP problems,” Front. Phys., vol. 2, pp. 1–15, Feb. 2014.
[5] Z. Bian, F. Chudak, W. G. Macready, and G. Rose, The Ising Model: Teaching an Old Problem New Tricks, D-Wave, Burnaby, BC, Canada, 2010.
[6] H. Takesue, T. Inagaki, K. Inaba, T. Ikuta, and T. Honjo, “Large-scale coherent ising machine,” J. Phys. Soc. Japan, vol. 88, no. 6, 2019, Art. no. 61014.
[7] T. Inagaki et al., “A coherent Ising machine for 2000-node optimization problems,” Science, vol. 354, no. 6312, pp. 603–606, 2016.
[8] Y. Yamamoto et al., “Coherent Ising machines—Optical neural networks operating at the quantum limit,” npj Quantum Inf., vol. 3, no. 1, p. 49, 2017.
[9] P. L. McMahon et al., “A fully programmable 100-spin coherent Ising machine with all-to-all connections,” Science, vol. 354, no. 6312, pp. 614–617, 2016.
[10] K. Takata et al., “A 16-bit coherent Ising machine for one-dimensional ring and cubic graph problems,” Sci. Rep., vol. 6, no. 1, 2016, Art. no. 34089.
[11] F. Böhm, G. Verschaffelt, and G. Van der Sande, “A poor man’s coherent Ising machine based on opto-electronic feedback systems for solving optimization problems,” Nat. Commun., vol. 10, no. 1, p. 3538, 2019.
[12] Y. Zhang, U. K. R. Vengalam, A. Sharma, M. Huang, and Z. Ignjatovic, “QuBRIM: A CMOS compatible resistively-coupled Ising machine with quantized nodal interactions,” in Proc. 41st IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Comput.-Aided Design, Dec. 2022, pp. 1–8.
[13] E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. van Tilborg, “On the inherent intractability of certain coding problems (corresp.),” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 384–386, May 1978.
[14] J. Bruck and M. Naor, “The hardness of decoding linear codes with preprocessing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 381–385, Mar. 1990.
[15] H. Lopez, H.-W. Chan, K.-L. Chiu, P.-Y. Tsai, and S.-J. J. Jou, “A 75-Gb/s/mm2 and energy-efficient LDPC decoder based on a reduced complexity second minimum approximation min-sum algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 926–939, Apr. 2020.
[16] M. Milicevic and P. G. Gulak, “A multi-Gb/s frame-interleaved LDPC decoder with path-unrolled message passing in 28-nm CMOS,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 26, no. 10, pp. 1908–1921, Oct. 2018.
[17] S. Ajaz and H. Lee, “Multi-Gb/s multi-mode LDPC decoder architecture for IEEE 802.11ad standard,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circuits Syst. (APCCAS), Nov. 2014, pp. 153–156.
[18] C.-H. Lin, H.-H. Su, T.-S. Chen, and C.-K. Lu, “Reconfigurable low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder for multi-standard 60 GHz wireless local area networks,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 5, p. 733, 2022.
[19] R. Ghanaatian et al., “A 588-Gb/s LDPC decoder based on finitealphabet message passing,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 329–340, Feb. 2018.
[20] J. Chen, R. Tanner, C. Jones, and Y. Li, “Improved min-sum decoding algorithms for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2005, pp. 449–453.
[21] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 2005.
[22] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., 2004, pp. 107–112.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:06:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

