2025 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC) | 979-8-3503-6836-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/WCNC61545.2025.10978369

2025 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)

Packet Superposition HARQ Scheme Enabled by LDPC Coupled Codes

Yiyun Jian IHP – Leibniz Institute for High Performance Microelectronics 15236 Frankfurt (Oder), Germany jian@ihp-microelectronics.com

Lukasz Lopacinski IHP – Leibniz Institute for High Performance Microelectronics 15236 Frankfurt (Oder), Germany lopacinski@ihp-microelectronics.com

Eckhard Grass IHP – Leibniz Institute for High Performance Microelectronics 15236 Frankfurt (Oder), Germany Humboldt-University of Berlin Unter den Linden 6, Berlin, Germany grass@ihp-microelectronics.com

Abstract—In this paper, we propose an improved Hybrid Automatic Repeat reQuest (HARQ) scheme based on crosspacket superposition retransmission by employing dedicated low-density parity-check (LDPC) matrices. Simulation results demonstrate that the scheme improves Bit Error Rate (BER) and Packet Error Rate (PER) performance up to 0.4 dB at the cost of increased packet handling complexity. The key element of our system is the combination of the systematic part of a codeword with the parity part of another codeword without any reductions in the code rate. Thus, to some extent, retransmission can be performed without any need to send additional parity bits.
Index Terms—HARQ, LDPC, packet superposition
I. INTRODUCTION
Hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) schemes employ forward error correction (FEC) combined with packet retransmissions to provide reliable data delivery in wireless communications systems. The typical HARQ consists of four main operations: information combining, FEC, error detection, and, if needed, retransmissions [1]. HARQ systems with fixed FEC scheme and static packet structure are usually denoted as type-I HARQ. In HARQ-I, the same data packet with static redundancy is sent in the initial transmission as well as in all retransmissions. An improved HARQ version, denoted as type-II HARQ [2], modifies the retransmitted information. If the initial transmission is error-free, the FEC redundancy is never sent. In case of detected bit errors, a variable portion of redundancy is transmitted so that the following retransmissions can be combined, and the information collected from all retransmissions can be used. In HARQ type-III, FEC retransmissions can be additionally self-decodable, i.e., each retransmission can be decoded individually without any dependencies on previous transmissions [2]. For example, a unique convolutional code puncturing pattern can be used for every retransmission, and a unique sequence of bits is sent in every retransmission [3]. It is also possible to mix all the schemes and do an individual HARQ scheme according to the expected channel characteristics, performance, and available hardware resources.

A. Related Work
Recently, research on next-generation HARQ systems based on packet combining and cross-packet coding has been gaining attention. For multi-channel or multi-packet HARQ, multiple coded packets can be transmitted in the same time slot [1]. In multiple transmission channels, packets are produced in parallel by multiple channels and are transmitted in parallel [4]. These packets can be combined using linear superposition techniques in retransmission, and a different power and transmission rate under a fixed total power constraint can be allocated. The receivers employ successive interference cancellation to extract their information from the superimposed received packet [5]. Moreover, in [6], [7], a multi-packet HARQ system is proposed, which supports three modes of operations, i.e., conventional HARQ, HARQ with time-sharing, and superposition coding. The transmitter comprises two layers, and the encoder is capable of jointly encoding both packets simultaneously. In [8], the information bits of an interleaved version of the first packet and the bits in the second packet appear alternately at the input of a channel encoder. The two codewords are concatenated at the transmitter and then interleaved [9]. To increase the throughput in hybrid ARQ (HARQ) transmission over a block fading channel, the transmitter jointly encodes a variable number of bits for each round of HARQ [10].
The Spatially Coupled (SC) LDPC codes, also known as LDPC convolutional codes, were first introduced in [11]. Later, a new class of spatially coupled codes was proposed, which are constructed by sending LDPC codewords in a block Markov superposition transmission manner [12]. In [13], [14], [15], this scheme was successfully integrated within a dedicated HARQ, where the data link layer retransmissions are embedded in the following packet’s transmission. Such a solution allows for the partial reduction of throughput degradation imposed by retransmissions.
B. Our Contributions
In this paper, we propose a packet superposition HARQ scheme based on an improved variant of SC-LDPC codes as compared to [13], [14], [15]. For the superposition re-

979-8-3503-6836-9/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:07:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2025 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)

transmission, a cross-packet scheme is proposed, and those unsuccessfully decoded codewords are binary added onto the subsequent codewords similarly as in [13], [14], [15]. The main contributions of the paper are as follows:
• The gain in view of PER of the proposed scheme is improved by at least 0.8 dB as compared to traditional HARQ based on 5G-NR LDPC codes, and by 0.4 dB as compared to methods in [14] and [15].
• The conversion of the standard 5G-NR generator and parity matrices to the cross-packet oriented SC-LDPC codes is presented.
• Compared to the original 5G-NR LDPC codes, the derived HARQ does not introduce any rate losses at the FEC level and allows the incorporation of some of the retransmitted information in the following data transfers.
• Two different variants of parity matrices are proposed and simulated.

II. ALGEBRAIC DESCRIPTION
In this chapter, we firstly define the symbols and matrices naming convention used for standard LDPC coding and then use those symbols to describe our system.

A. Introduction to LDPC Codes
For a rate R = k/n binary linear block code, let G and H be the generator matrix and the parity-check matrix of the basic code. In general, the matrix G can be represented as:

G= I P ,

(1)

where I is the identity matrix of the size of (k, k), and P is the redundancy generator matrix with the size of (k, n-k).
A sparse (n-k, n) matrix H of a LDPC code is a matrix with n columns and n-k rows. It constructs a code with n-k check nodes and n variable nodes. We determine the parity check matrix as follows:

H = PT I ,

(2)

where I is the identity matrix of the size of (n-k, n-k). The parity check matrix H and the generator matrix G satisfy:

G × HT = 0,

(3)

where × is the symbol of modulo 2 multiplication. Thus, symbol × used in this manuscript defines a general vector by matrix, or matrix by matrix binary multiplication.

B. Introduction to Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes
Spatially coupled (SC) codes originate from LDPC convolutional codes [11], a generalization of LDPC codes with a superimposed convolutional structure. The SC-LDPC encoder generates a series of codewords vt, and the codeword vt at time t does not only depend on a message ut at time t, but also on L previous codewords vt−1, vt−2, . . . , vt−L. The encoding is terminated after L codewords [16]. Inspired by SC-LDPC, the strategy of linear combination of codewords can be used in a HARQ scheme, where the lost packet can be

encoded with the next packet, and decoded at the receiver like a linearly dependent series of SC-LDPC codewords. In this paper, we assume that one data packet consists of precisely one codeword.

C. Coupled LDPC Codes for the Proposed HARQ Scheme

For the sake of simplicity, we describe a half-rate LDPC code, where the length of information vector u is k, and the length of codeword v after LDPC encoding is n = 2k. Please note that operation:

v1 v2 = u1 u2 × G G .

(4)

It would lead to an independent encoding of u2 to v2, and encoding u1 to v1, which can also be done in two independent steps: v1 = u1 × G, and v2 = u2 × G.
We modify the standard G matrix to generate the coupled

LDPC codewords, in which the first codeword is the same as

the original codeword generated by the G matrix, and the sec-

ond codeword used for retransmissions is superimposed with

the previous packet. The coupled codewords are generated

by:

G2 = G

C G

,

(5)

where C = Z I , Z is the zero-matrix, and I is the

identity matrix, both of the size of (k, k). The HARQ encoder

generates a retransmission-codeword v2+1, which contains the next codeword v2 superimposed with the previous data u1 as follows:

v1 v2+1 = u1 u2 × G2.

(6)

This operation is equivalent to encoding u1 to v1, and encoding u2 to v2 with adding the end xor operation of parity bits of v2 with the data of u1, due to the C sub-matrix, which enables the superposition. Because we add the C submatrix in the right-upper corner of G2, the parity bits of v2 are mixed with the data bits of u1. Also, the part of v2+1 where the v1 is stored can be removed – this functionality is especially
important for our HARQ system, where we use the data coupling to recover the information bits for u1, but we do not retransmit the elements of the retransmitted codeword v1. This is the main novelty of our system.
At the decoder, we use the dependency of G2 caused by C, and we combine and try to decode v1 and v2+1 by employing the H2 parity matrix, which is created as follows. We reorganize G2 according to (1):

G2 = I2 P2 ,

(7)

where I2 and P2 are in the forms of:

I2 = I I ,

(8)

P2 = P

I P

,

(9)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:07:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2025 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)

thus, the parity check matrix H2 is:

H2 = PT2 I2 .

(10)

After step in (10), the sparsity of H2 is fixed by Gaussian elimination and reordering of the rows to lower triangular form. Matrix H2 can be used to decode the two coupled codewords together in a standard belief propagation LDPC decoder. The general format for GL that superimposes L number of packets is as follows:

GL = IL PL ,

(11)

where PL is:

P I



 PI 

PL

=

 

...

 

.

(12)

 

P

I

 

P

The parity-check matrix for decoding L codewords, in which

every codeword is coupled with its previous packet, is defined

as:

HL = PTL IL .

(13)

After Gaussian elimination and reordering the H to lower triangular form, we get the final low-density parity check matrix. HL introduces dependencies between the neighboring blocks H, so that they are coupled during decoding. The rate of this block code scheme is Lk/(Lk+Lk) = 1/2, which is identical to the original LDPC code defined by G and H. Therefore, there is no redundancy or any rate loss in the LDPC codes and the proposed HARQ scheme. Thus, until there is enough SNR in the received codewords, the retransmission made by using GL and HL does not cause any spectral efficiency degradation, which is not possible in the standard ARQ and HARQ schemes. The only overhead is in the energy consumption of the LDPC decoder, which needs to handle larger L-time parity matrices. Thus, we improve the efficiency of the retransmission mechanisms at the cost of higher computation complexity and memory overhead. However, if the initial decoding using the original G and H is successful, then no overhead is induced in the system. Thus, the memory and computation overhead are needed only in the case of retransmissions.

D. Proposed HARQ Scheme
The basic principle of the proposed HARQ scheme is a case when a packet is decoded incorrectly, and the retransmission packets are superimposed into the next packet(s) scheduled for transmission. We denote the original data as u1. The initial (first) transmission of a packet is encoded with a standard G matrix and decoded with a standard H matrix. The original coded packet can be expressed as v1 = u1G. If a NACK is received or the packet is lost, the G at the encoder is replaced with G2 as defined in (5) and is used for generating retransmission data, which is superimposed into the v2 transmission. The encoding operation can also

directly use the coupled version, where Greduced =

C G

and v2+1 = u1 u2 × Greduced. During the retransmission, to the parity part of v2, the data of u1 is added by a xor operation. This retransmission codeword contains all bits of

v2 and some ‘hidden’ information of u1, but the length of v2+1 is identical to the length of v2. Thus, the dependencies are introduced across the coupled packets so that they can

help each other during decoding, but no spectral efficiency

overhead is generated. If a packet needs to be retransmitted

more times, then G3 and H3 are created. The proposed rules can be repeated L times, and GL and HL, as defined in

(11) and (13), can be used. If the presented retransmission

algorithm fails, then a normal packet repetition strategy can

be used.

Based on this cross-packet superposition retransmission

HARQ scheme, the generated packet vL+(L−1) is always the same length as vL = uL × G, but it contains the codeword vL superimposed with the previous bits uL−1. The

superposition helps the incorrectly decoded codewords by

creating additional check nodes in the decoding graph due

to the dependencies generated in HL.

Fig. 1 depicts one example where our scheme is compared

to type-I and type-II HARQ or type-III HARQ. For type-I

HARQ, the same coded packet v1 is retransmitted. For type-

II HARQ and type-III HARQ, the incremental redundancy or different puncturing pattern of the coded packet v1′ is retransmitted. Our proposed HARQ will transmit the coded

packet v2+1 that superimposes the lost coded packet with

the next packet, and then decodes the two received packets

together at the receiver. Thus, in a similar amount of time,

we transmit three packets, while the other techniques only

transmit two.

Fig. 1. Classic type-I HARQ (a), type-II HARQ or type-III HARQ (b), and the proposed HARQ (c).
III. RESULTS A. BER Performance of the Proposed Coupled LDPC Codes
The 5G LDPC code is a class of rate-compatible quasicyclic (QC) LDPC codes with raptor-like construction [14].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:07:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2025 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)

Two base graphs, BG1 and BG2, with sizes of 46∗68 and 42∗52, respectively, have been designed for different ranges of block lengths and code rates [17]. We choose BG1, lifting size Z=16, and generate an NR LDPC code with a rate of 1/2, where the H and G matrices have sizes of 352∗704. Based on those two matrices, we construct our own GL and GH matrices, where the sparsity patterns of Greduced, G4, and H4 are shown in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3.

To illustrate the error rate performance, BPSK modulation in AWGN is considered. Fig. 4 demonstrates the decoding performance of various L for HL matrices, where L=1 is identical to the original LDPC code. The belief propagation algorithm with normalized min-sum approximation is used for LDPC decoding, and the maximum iterations are set to 10. The proposed LDPC codes perform better with the increase of L because of the larger length of block codes. We achieve only up to 0.2 dB coding gain over the 5G-NR LDPC at the BER of 10−5 for L=8, but the coding gain alone in our system is not the critical factor. The most important thing is that we transmit some fractional information in a separate frame and combine this fractional information with the initially transmitted packets by using HL matrices in the decoder. Thus, we are more oriented on the resulting HARQ protocol throughput after performing all operations, but not on the BER statistics of the created FEC code.

Fig. 2. Sparsity pattern of Greduced matrix.
G4
H4
Fig. 3. Sparsity pattern of G4 and H4 matrix.

Fig. 4. LDPC BER performance based on GL and HL matrices.
B. PER Performance and Optimizations of the Proposed HARQ Scheme
The PER of HARQ with the proposed LDPC codes is shown in Fig. 5. The performance increases up to L=8, and setting the L parameter above 8 improves the performance only marginally at the high increase in the decoding complexity.
From the GL matrix construction, it can be deduced that the superposition of uL−1 on vL improves the successful decoding probability for uL−1, but also couples the bit errors from uL−1 to vL. Thus, there must be a tradeoff for the combining ratio between those two packets. In Fig. 6, we test the superposition rate a in the range of [0, 1]. For example, a=1 means we add all bits of uL−1 to the parity of vL, while a=0 means that both codewords are independent. Parameter a=0.8 means that 80% of uL−1 bits are mixed with vL, and this value is the best choice for our scheme.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:07:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2025 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)
solutions in [14] and [15]. G4

H4
Fig. 5. HARQ PER performance based on GL and HL matrices of LDPC codes.
Fig. 7. A case of sparsity pattern of G4 and H4 matrix for dynamic HARQ, a=0.8.

Fig. 6. HARQ PER performance of different superposition rates based on G4 and H4 matrix of LDPC codes for L = 4.

One more optimization is to adopt the combination dynamically pattern according to the packet where unrecoverable bit errors occur. Fig. 3 depicts a combination of codewords, where u1 is combined with parity bits of v2, while u2 is combined with parity bits of v3, and u3 is combined with v4. However, by knowing the location of a faulty codeword, it is possible to encode this codeword to, e.g., four following codewords. Fig. 7 depicts such a situation, where the first codeword is not correctly delivered, and its content is combined into four following codewords. Thus, the decoding probability is improved, as shown in Fig. 8, where the gain of ∼0.4 dB is visible in the higher SNR region. Fig. 8 also compares our method with [14] and [15], where a randomly generated permutation matrix [14] and a rowcolumn interleaved matrix [15] are employed. Our method achieved ∼0.4 dB higher gain at PER = 10−6 than the

Fig. 8. HARQ PER performance of different HARQ schemes with L=4, a=0.8.
C. Throughput Analysis The HARQ throughput of systems is evaluated in terms
of bits per second (bps), packets per second (pps), frames per second (fps), and bps per hertz, which is the spectral efficiency. In general, the throughput of HARQ systems can be defined as [14]:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:07:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2025 IEEE Wireless Communications and Networking Conference (WCNC)

K

η = lim ,

(14)

t→∞ N

where K is the total number of successfully decoded information bits, and N is the total number of transmitted symbols up to the time t. The simulation results in Fig. 9 depict and compare the throughput (η) of our proposed HARQ to the state-of-the-art solutions. The newly presented methods achieved the best results from all solutions. The complexity of our method at the transmitter is increased only by binary additions to superimpose the uL−x to vL. At the receiver, it is required to save all the lost packets in temporal memory and start LDPC decoding with HL matrix. At the lower SNR region, our HARQ can also be integrated with type-II or type-III HARQ by sending additional redundancy, if L-th retransmission is reached and the data still cannot be decoded. Those extra redundancy bits can be incorporated directly into the HL matrix. There are no restrictions on using different sub-matrices and different matrix sizes in the combined GL and HL.

Fig. 9. HARQ throughput performance of different HARQ schemes with L=4, a=0.8.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this work, we propose a HARQ approach based on cross-packet superposition using coupled LDPC codes. The proposed HARQ schemes can be easily implemented from the basic components of the existing 5G LDPC matrices. The diagonal matrix with binary addition is used at the transmitter, and the HL parity matrix is used for combined packet decoding at the receiver. The BER of the combined LDPC codes is compared, and ∼0.2 dB coding gain is achieved over the 5G-NR LDPC at the BER of 10−5. However, when the complete HARQ system built on those codes is tested, the proposed scheme shows ∼0.8 dB gain at PER of 10−4 over the classic type-I HARQ, and up to ∼0.4 dB gain compared with related HARQ work presented in [14] and [15]. The

throughput improvements reach up to 9% compared to type-I HARQ, and 3% compared to type-II HARQ.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the financial support by the
Federal Ministry of Education and Research of Germany in
the program of “Souvera¨n. Digital. Vernetzt.” joint project
6G-RIC, project identification number: 16KISK026 and by
the German Research Foundation (DFG) project PSSS-FEC,
project no.: 442607813.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Ahmed, A. Al-Dweik, Y. Iraqi, H. Mukhtar, M. Naeem, and E. Hossain, “Hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) in wireless communications systems and standards: A contemporary survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2711–2752, 2021.
[2] M. W. El Bahri, H. Boujernaa, and M. Siala, “Performance comparison of type I, II and III hybrid ARQ schemes over AWGN channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Industrial Technol. (ICIT), vol. 3. IEEE, 2004, pp. 1417–1421.
[3] L. Lopacinski, “Improving goodput and reliability of ultra-high-speed wireless communication at data link layer level,” Ph.D. dissertation, Brandenburg Univ. of Technol. Cottbus–Senftenberg, Germany, 2017.
[4] Q. Li and C. X. Chen, “A hybrid ARQ protocol for the communication system with multiple channels,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Technol. Converg. (ICTC). IEEE, 2018, pp. 222–227.
[5] A. N. Assimi, C. Poulliat, and I. Fijalkow, “Packet combining for multilayer hybrid-ARQ over frequency-selective fading channels,” in Proc. 17th Eur. Signal Process. Conf. IEEE, 2009, pp. 671–675.
[6] M. Jabi, A. El Hamss, L. Szczecinski, and P. Piantanida, “Multipacket hybrid ARQ: Closing gap to the ergodic capacity,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 12, pp. 5191–5205, 2015.
[7] A. El Hamss, L. Szczecinski, and P. Piantanida, “Increasing the throughput of HARQ via multi-packet transmission,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM). IEEE, 2014, pp. 1485–1491.
[8] C. Hausl and A. Chindapol, “Hybrid ARQ with cross-packet channel coding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 434–436, 2007.
[9] J. Chui and A. Chindapol, “Design of cross-packet channel coding with low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop Inf. Theory Wireless Netw. IEEE, 2007, pp. 1–5.
[10] M. Jabi, A. Benyouss, M. Le Treust, E. Pierre-Doray, and L. Szczecinski, “Adaptive cross-packet HARQ,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 65, no. 5, pp. 2022–2035, 2017.
[11] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, 1999.
[12] X. Ma, C. Liang, K. Huang, and Q. Zhuang, “Block Markov superposition transmission: Construction of big convolutional codes from short codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 3150–3163, 2015.
[13] Q. Wang, S. Cai, W. Lin, S. Zhao, L. Chen, and X. Ma, “Spatially coupled LDPC codes via partial superposition and their application to HARQ,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, vol. 70, no. 4, pp. 3493–3504, 2021.
[14] Q. Wang, S. Cai, L. Chen, and X. Ma, “A throughput-enhanced HARQ scheme for 5G system via partial superposition,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 2162–2166, 2020.
[15] Q. Wang, L. Chen, and X. Ma, “A new HARQ scheme for 5G systems via interleaved superposition retransmission,” China Commun., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1–11, 2023.
[16] S. Miao, C. Kestel, L. Johannsen, M. Geiselhart, L. Schmalen, A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, G. Liva, N. Wehn, and S. ten Brink, “Trends in channel coding for 6G,” Proc. IEEE, 2024.
[17] 5G;NR;Multiplexing and channel coding, 3GPP Std. TS 38.212 version 18.3.0 Release 18, 2024-08.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:07:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

