IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

1613

Read and Write Voltage Signal Optimization for Multi-Level-Cell (MLC) NAND Flash Memory
Chaudhry Adnan Aslam, Student Member, IEEE, Yong Liang Guan, Member, IEEE, and Kui Cai, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash channel exhibits nonstationary behavior over increasing program and erase (PE) cycles and data retention time. In this paper, an optimization scheme for adjusting the read (quantized) and write (verify) voltage levels to adapt to the nonstationary flash channel is presented. Using a model-based approach to represent the flash channel, incorporating the programming noise, random telegraph noise (RTN), data retention noise and cell-to-cell interference as major signal degradation components, the write-voltage levels are optimized by minimizing the channel error probability. Moreover, for selecting the quantization levels for the read-voltage to facilitate soft LDPC decoding, an entropy-based function is introduced by which the voltage erasure regions (error dominating regions) are controlled to produce the lowest bit/frame error probability. The proposed write and read voltage optimization schemes not only minimize the error probability throughout the operational lifetime of flash memory, but also improve the decoding convergence speed. Finally, to minimize the number of read-voltage quantization levels while ensuring LDPC decoder convergence, the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) analysis is performed over the MLC flash channel.
Index Terms—MLC NAND flash memory, read-voltage, write-voltage, LDPC code, error performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE NAND flash memory is the ubiquitous storage medium in many consumer electronic products. With multi-level-cell (MLC) technology, flash memory can store multiple bits over a single memory cell, leading to significant growth in its storage capacity. Using advanced chip manufacturing processes, it has become viable to replace magnetic storage disks with NAND flash memory based solid-state drives (SSD) for large enterprise data applications.
In flash memory, a cell can either be represented with the erased state (no electrons stored over the floating-gate) or with the programmed state (electrons stored over the floating-gate). Initially, all memory cells are in the erased state. The programming operation shifts the threshold voltage (voltage required to turn-on the transistor) of a memory cell to a particular
Manuscript received December 5, 2014; revised May 8, 2015, September 29, 2015, and December 21, 2015; accepted February 16, 2016. Date of publication February 24, 2016; date of current version April 13, 2016. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was L. L. Szczecinski.
C. A. Aslam and Y. L. Guan are with the School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 649492 (e-mail: ad0001ry@e.ntu.edu.sg; EYLGuan@ntu.edu.sg).
K. Cai is with the Department of Science, Singapore University of Technology and Design, Singapore 117608 (e-mail: cai_kui@sutd.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2016.2533498

write-voltage level. Considering an example of 2−bit per cell flash memory, a memory cell can be configured to four distinct voltage levels, say Vmin, V1, V2, Vmax, for representing data symbols ‘11’, ‘10’, ‘00’ and ‘01’, respectively, where Vmin is the mean threshold voltage of the erased cells and Vmax is the mean threshold voltage of programmed cells configured with the highest write-voltage level. It is observed that the probability distribution functions for these distinct voltage levels are not identical due to the presence of some non-stationary and asymmetric channel noise. In this scenario, Vmin, V1, V2 and Vmax should not be equally-spaced but determined based on some optimization criteria.
To read a flash memory cell, the amount of stored electrical charge is measured by applying the read-voltage in discrete steps. For a memory cell configured to threshold voltage Vth, a read-voltage greater than Vth is required to measure the stored electric charge. For 2−bit per cell flash memory, we need at least 3 read-voltage levels R1, R2 and R3, where R1 can be set between Vmin and V1 to distinguish between symbols ‘11’, ‘10’, R2 can be set between V1 and V2 to distinguish between symbols ‘10’, ‘00’ and R3 can be set between V2 and Vmax to distinguish between symbols ‘00’, ‘01’, as shown in Fig. 1. Since the write-voltage levels are not equally-spaced, the readvoltage levels should also be appropriately designed so that the error-rate is minimized.
For a state-of-the-art flash memory, only 3-level memory sensing scheme may not be sufficient to achieve the satisfactory error performance. This is because the modern flash memory chips experience severe voltage level distortions due to some circuit-level noise and interference effects. As a consequence, flash data reliability is degraded [1],–[3]. To overcome the reliability issues, strong error correcting codes (ECCs), such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, are seriously considered [4], [5]. To reap full benefits of LDPC code, it is desirable to have LDPC decoder’s input values quantized as finely as possible. This requires high-precision memory sensing, and consequently more reading latency, which may not be acceptable for time-critical applications. Against these background, we analyze two research problems associated with flash memory readvoltage signal design; identifying the minimum number of readvoltage levels required under the given flash channel condition, and then finding the ideal values for these read-voltage levels.
A. Related Work
To the best of our knowledge, the write-voltage optimization over a non-stationary MLC flash channel has not been

0090-6778 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:46:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

Fig. 1. Illustration of four write-voltage levels (Vmin, V1, V2 and Vmax) and three read-voltage levels (R1, R2 and R3) for 2-bit per cell flash memory.
reported in the open literature. In [6], the write-voltage levels are optimized based on a simple flash channel by considering random telegraph noise (RTN) as the only source of voltage signal degradation. Another relevant work is reported in [7] where the write-voltage levels are optimized assuming an AWGN channel for flash memory. Our paper presents the optimization of write-voltage signals using a more comprehensive flash channel model that includes the effects of programming noise, cell-to-cell interference as well as non-stationary RTN and data retention noise.
In [8], an ECC scheme is jointly designed with write-voltage levels, relating the code’s error correction capability with the voltage signal magnitude. A constrained coding scheme is presented in [9] for mitigating the effect of cell-to-cell interference in which certain voltage levels of neighboring cells are forbidden so that a wider gap between adjacent voltage distributions is assured.
In addition to MLC technology, where discrete write-voltage levels are used to store information, relative value (ordering) of charge levels can also be used to represent flash data, as discussed in rank modulation scheme [10]. In this scheme, non-overlapping voltage regions are required to represent data symbols. In [11], these optimal continuous voltage regions are designed. The rank modulation scheme can increase the cell storage capacity and overcome the programming overshoot errors. However, to implement this scheme, a large number of read operations are required to learn the voltage-level ordering. Thus, in this paper we focus on MLC technology and strive to optimize its discrete write-voltage levels.
In the conventional MLC flash, to avoid the effect of voltage overshoot errors, memory cells are configured on desired write-voltage levels in multiple rounds of programming. In [11],–[13], for both MLC and rank modulation schemes, the optimal programming step size has been investigated, keeping the number of programming rounds constant and assuming fixed write-voltage levels. In this paper, we address the problem of finding the optimized write-voltage levels to ensure that the flash channel error probability is minimized.
With regards to the read-voltage quantization for softdecision decoding, multiple memory read operations are typically performed. In this direction, a simplistic approach is to apply equally spaced read-voltage levels (uniform memory

sensing). However, this is not suitable for flash channel and yields poor error performance [14]. For this reason, a nonuniform quantization scheme is adopted in [14], where the quantization levels are obtained at the intersecting region between two adjacent distribution functions by using constant ratio method. Alternative to enhanced precision, hard-decision based dynamic quantization schemes are also reported in [15], [16] where the read-voltage levels are adjusted according to the non-stationary behavior of flash channel.
Another important work related to quantization design is presented in [17] in which the quantization levels are obtained by maximizing the mutual-information (MMI) between flash channel’s input and output voltage signals. In this paper, we propose a read-signal quantization scheme based on a novel voltage entropy function that is able to give better decoding error performance than the MMI scheme.
B. Contributions
In this paper, we present a novel analytical approach to optimize the write-voltage signals for 2−bit per cell flash memory. The proposed principles can be readily extended to 3−bit or 4−bit per cell flash technology. In view of the varying flash memory channel, which causes the threshold voltage distribution function to change over the number of PE cycles and data retention time (the duration of time since the memory cell was last programmed), we propose to adapt the write-voltage signals on-the-fly such that the channel error probability is minimized. Furthermore, we present a voltage entropy-based quantization scheme for reading the flash memory cells, so that the dominating error regions (erasure) are enclosed within the designed quantization levels. Finally, based on the given flash channel condition, we recommend to use the EXIT curves to identify the minimum number of quantization levels required for the convergence of soft LDPC decoding.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present the flash channel model. In Section III, we formulate the probability of error expression for flash channel and find optimum write-voltage levels. In Section IV, we discuss the read-voltage signal design scheme using voltage entropy function. In Section V, we analyze the error performance of the proposed read-voltage scheme. In Section VI, we discuss the improvements in decoding convergence speed as a consequence of optimized write-voltage levels. In Section VII, we compare the impact of write-voltage optimization between the flash memory’s early and end-of-retention times. In Section VIII, we describe the usage of EXIT curves for the selection of memory sensing precision for LDPC decoder convergence. In Section IX, we draw conclusions.
II. MLC FLASH MEMORY CHANNEL MODEL
We model the MLC flash memory channel by incorporating the effects of programming noise, random telegraph noise (RTN), data retention noise and cell-to-cell interference (CCI). Channel models similar to ours are extensively reported in the open literature [18]–[24].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:46:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASLAM et al.: READ AND WRITE VOLTAGE SIGNAL OPTIMIZATION

1615

A. Initial Threshold Voltage Distribution

In flash memory array, the threshold voltage distribution for
erased cells, ps11 , can be modeled with Gaussian distribution [18]–[25]. given by

ps11

(x)

=

1
σe√2π

−
e

(x −Vmin )2
2σe2

(1)

where Vmin and σe are the mean and standard deviation of

cell’s threshold voltage. Using a 2-bit per cell flash memory,

we represent the data symbol 11 with voltage Vmin, and 10,

00, and 01 with three programmed voltage levels V1, V2 and

Vmax, respectively. To configure the memory cells on one of

these programmed voltage levels, an iterative incremental step

pulse programming (ISPP) [26] technique is used. This causes

the voltage distribution for programmed cells to follow uniform

distribution [18]–[24], given by

⎧

pup

(x)

=

⎨1
Vpp
⎩0,

,

for Vp ≤ x ≤ Vp + otherwise

Vpp

(2)

where Vp is the desired write-voltage level and Vpp is the programming voltage step size. In this paper, we fix the value of
Vpp to 0.3, however, it can be optimized to increase the cell storage capacity [11]–[13]. Furthermore, the programmed cells
are also affected by the programming noise, pt, which can be modelled using Gaussian distribution [20]–[23] with zero mean and σp standard deviation. The overall voltage distribution for programmed cells can then be represented as the convolution integral (∗) of uniform and Gaussian distribution functions, given by

psp (x) = pup (x) ∗ pt(x)

(3)

where psp ∈ { ps10 , ps00 , ps01 } for Vp ∈ {V1, V2, Vmax}.

Fig. 2. Illustration of cell-to-cell interference in an even-odd bit-line architecture: even and odd bit-line cells are interfered by five and three neighboring cells, respectively.

using cell pre-coding technique. However, this technique cannot mitigate the interference effect from the erased state cells. Thus, we can still approximate the voltage distribution of programmed cells using (3). However, for the erased state cells, we model their threshold voltage using Gaussian distribution function with shifted mean V˜min, given as

V˜mevinen = Vmin + Vave(2μγ x + μγ y + 2μγ xy)

(5)

V˜modind = Vmin + Vave(μγ y + 2μγ xy)

(6)

where Vave = (Vmin + Vmax)/2 − Vmin. Here (5) and (6) are used for even and odd bit-line cells, respectively.

C. Random Telegraph Noise (RTN)
In flash memory, the RTN is a non-stationary noise component whose effect is related with memory PE cycles1. According to [18]–[24], [31], it can be modeled using a symmetric exponential distribution function. However, for mathematical tractability, we approximate the RTN distribution by a zero-mean Gaussian distribution function, given by

B. Cell-to-Cell Interference (CCI)

The cell-to-cell interference (CCI) is induced as a result of parasitic capacitive-coupling between the adjacent memory cells. According to [14], [18]–[20], [22], [24], [27], the threshold voltage shift due to CCI, VCCI, can be given as

VCCI =

Vk γk

(4)

k

where Vk is the change in the threshold voltage of interfering (neighboring) cells due to their programming and γk is the capacitive coupling ratio. A victim cell can be interfered by three or five neighboring cells. For an even-odd bit-line architecture, where the even bit-lines cells are programmed before the odd bit-lines cells, there are five interfering cells for each even bit-line cell and three interfering cells for each odd bitline cell, as shown in Fig. 2. Alternatively, in the all bit-line architecture, where all word-line cells are programmed simultaneously, a victim cell is interfered by three neighboring cells located on the next word-line. According to [28], the strength of CCI can be estimated before the cell programming operation and can be removed from the desired write-voltage level

pn (x) =

1 √

e−

x2 2σn 2

(7)

σn 2π

where the RTN variance, σn2, is a non-stationary parameter
which varies with respect to the PE cycles in a power-law fashion. In this paper, we set σn = 0.00025(P E)0.62.

D. Data Retention Noise

Data retention noise is also recognized as a non-stationary and data-dependent effect related to the memory PE cycles and data retention time. According to [18]–[24], the retention noise can be approximated with Gaussian distribution, given as

pr (x) =

1 √

e−

(x

−μr s )2
2σr2s

(8)

σrs 2π

We set the data-dependent mean μrs and variance σr2s parameters according to [20], as given by

1The effect of random telegraph noise (RTN) on threshold voltage signal is less significant as compared to other noise components present in the flash channel [29], [30]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:46:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

μrs = (Vs − x0) . At.(P E)αi + Bt.(P E)αo . log (1 + T ) (9)

σrs = 0.4|μrs|

(10)

where μrs ∈ {μrs11 , μrs10 , μrs00 , μrs01 } and σrs ∈ {σrs11 , σrs10 , σrs00 , σrs01 } for Vs ∈ {V˜min, V1, V2, Vmax}. Here, T is the data retention time. For all our simulations, we set the
following flash parameters: Vmin = 1.4, σe = 0.35, V1 = 2.6, V2 = 3.2, Vmax = 3.93, σp = 0.05, μγy = 0.08, μγxy = 0.006, x0 = 1.4, At = 0.000055, Bt = 0.000235, αi = 0.62 and αo = 0.32.
The final threshold voltage distribution can be computed as

(e.g. T = 1 year, representing flash’s end-of-retention). Given
these two flash channel parameters, the four distribution func-
tions (11)–(14) can be evaluated, paving the way for finding the optimal write-voltage levels. In other words, given V˜min and Vmax (based on the device physics), and the PE count, we next want to assign the intermediate write-voltage levels (V1 and V2). To answer this question, we formulate the probability of error expression Pe for the flash channel. This expression can be defined using the error probability of individual symbols, P(e|sp), given as

1

Pe

=

{P 4

(e|s11)

+

P

(e|s10)

+

P

(e|s00)

+

P

(e|s01)}

(15)

the convolution integral of initial voltage distribution function with RTN and data retention noise. Thus, we have

ps11 (v) =

1

−

√e

σs11 2π

v−

V˜min −μr s11 2σs211

2

where σs211 = σe2 + σn2 + σr2s11

ps10 (v) =

1

erf V1 + V√pp − v − μrs10

Vpp

2σs10

(11)

where 1/4 models the equi-probable input data symbols. To express P(e|sp), we need the decision boundaries R1, R2 and R3 between adjacent distribution functions as shown in Fig. 1. Following this figure, we can define

P (e|s11) = ps11 (v > R1)

(16)

P (e|s10) = ps10 (v < R1) + ps10 (v > R2)

(17)

P (e|s00) = ps00 (v < R2) + ps00 (v > R3)

(18)

P (e|s01) = ps01 (v < R3)

(19)

−1

erf

V1

−v √

−

μrs10

Vpp

2σs10

where σs210 = σp2 + σn2 + σr2s10

ps00 (v) =

1

erf V2 + V√pp − v − μrs00

Vpp

2σs00

−1

erf

V2

−v √

−

μrs00

Vpp

2σs00

where σs200 = σp2 + σn2 + σr2s00

ps01 (v) =

1

erf Vmax + √Vpp − v − μrs01

Vpp

2σs01

−1

erf

Vmax

− √

v

−

μrs01

Vpp

2σs01

where σs201 = σp2 + σn2 + σr2s01 , and erf (x) = √2 x e−v2 dv
π0

(12) These decision boundaries can also be considered as harddecision levels on individual symbols. To get these decision
boundaries, we equate the adjacent distribution functions and
solve for the common intersecting point. Thus, for R1, R2 and R3, we solve the following three equations

ps11 (v = R1) = ps10 (v = R1)

(13)

ps10 (v = R2) = ps00 (v = R2)

ps00 (v = R3) = ps01 (v = R3)

By simplifying these expressions we get R1 ∈ (V˜min, V1), R2 ∈ (V1, V2) and R3 ∈ (V2, Vmax), respectively. Given the individual symbol error probabilities (16)–(19), we can re-write (15) in-terms of V1, V2, P E and T and optimize the desired (14) parameters V1 and V2. In this section, we perform the voltage optimization for T = 0. The end-of-retention optimization will be discussed in the following section. Thus, instead of keeping the write-voltage levels fixed throughout the operational lifetime of flash memory, we propose to adjust them according to the current channel condition such that the error probability is minimized. From the practical implementation perspective,

III. WRITE-VOLTAGE SIGNAL DESIGN

the write-voltage levels can be pre-computed as a function of PE cycles and stored into a look-up table to preclude the run-

For a non-stationary flash memory channel, varying w.r.t. PE time optimization complexity. To formulate the optimization

cycles and data retention time T , it is important to optimize problem, we define the objective function using (15) as

and update the write-voltage levels for the optimal error-rate performance. For write-voltage optimization, it is assumed that the flash memory controller knows about the current PE count

(V1∗, V2∗)

=

min
(V1 ,V2 )

Pe(V1, V2, P E, T

=

0)

(20)

of individual memory blocks. The PE count history is mostly This optimization function behaves as a convex function over

recorded inside the memory controller for performing the flash V1 and V2 and can be solved by using any convex optimization wear-levelling operation [32]. However, as the data retention technique. Since the write-voltage levels are optimized offline,

time is generally difficult to predict at the time of cell pro- the complexity of the chosen optimization algorithm is inconse-

gramming, the retention time can either be set to zero (T = 0, quential. In this paper, we apply the gradient-descent (GD) [33] representing the early retention time) or to some large value method to find the optimal V1∗ and V2∗ that yield the minimum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:46:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASLAM et al.: READ AND WRITE VOLTAGE SIGNAL OPTIMIZATION
TABLE I OPTIMIZED WRITE-VOLTAGE LEVELS OVER PE CYCLES

1617

Fig. 4. Illustration of uniform interval Du based quantization scheme: vertical lines represent quantization levels (R1 to R6).

Fig. 3. Comparison of channel error probability, Pe, between the proposed
write-voltage optimization scheme and the conventional channel invariant write-voltage scheme: solid curve (V1∗, V2∗ from Table I, dotted curve (V1 = 2.6, V2 = 3.2).

Pe. The GD method minimizes the objective function Pe by

iteratively solving the following equation

⎡⎣VV12((kk

+1) +1)

⎤⎦=⎡⎣VV12((kk

) )

⎤⎡ ⎦−η⎣

∂ ∂ ∂ ∂

Pe VP1e V2

⎤ ⎦

Pe

V1(k),V2(k),P E,T =0

(21)

where ∂ denotes the partial derivative, and k and η are the GD iteration count and step size, respectively.
The optimized write-voltage levels along with the corresponding minimum Pe values over different PE cycles are enumerated in Table I. To make comparison between the proposed optimal write-voltage scheme and the conventional channel invariant (fixed) write-voltage scheme, we plot the Pe function as shown in Fig. 3. Here, the solid curve represents the minimized Pe values as given in Table I, whereas the dotted curve shows the Pe values computed against channel invariant writevoltage levels fixed at V1 = 2.6 and V2 = 3.2. As expected, the proposed scheme yields lower error probability, particularly at low-to-medium PE count. In addition to improved error performance, the optimal write-voltage levels also help to reduce the ECC decoding latency, as discussed in the subsequent section.

IV. QUANTIZATION DESIGN FOR THE READ-VOLTAGE
In this section, we present a novel quantization scheme, using the voltage entropy function, to read flash memory cells. For 2−bit per cell flash memory, we require at least three quantization levels to detect four possible stored data symbols. However, when LDPC code is used as ECC for flash channel, we may need to perform high precision memory sensing for more accurate computation of log-likelihood-ratios (LLRs) for LDPC

decoding. To achieve this, one straightforward approach is to set the quantization levels between V˜min and Vmax with equispaced separation Du. Fig. 4 shows a pictorial representation of 6-level uniform quantization scheme, where each vertical
dashed-line (R1 to R6) represent a particular quantization level. Since each flash symbol represents 2 bits, we compute the LLR
values correspond to the most significant bit, Lmsb, and the least significant bit, Llsb, positions. Given the threshold voltage v, when Rn−1 ≤ v ≤ Rn for n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, where R0 = −∞ and R7 = +∞, we have

Rn

{ ps00 (v) + ps01 (v)}dv

L msb

=

log Rn−1
Rn

(22)

{ ps10 (v) + ps11 (v)}dv

Rn−1

Rn

{ ps00 (v) + ps10 (v)}dv

L lsb

=

log Rn−1
Rn

(23)

{ ps01 (v) + ps11 (v)}dv

Rn−1

However, for a given memory sensing precision (e.g. 6-level,

9-level, 12-level), the uniform quantization scheme is shown

to be ineffective as compared to the non-uniform quantiza-

tion schemes [14]. The objective of a non-uniform quantization

scheme is to set the memory sensing levels closer to the era-

sure (intersection) regions where adjacent distribution functions

are overlapped. Since the symbol error probability is domi-

nant in this region, it requires more accurate memory sensing.

Furthermore, for a non-uniform quantization scheme, it is cru-

cial to identify the optimum width of erasure region so that

the resultant soft-information (LLR values) achieves the best

decoder error performance. For this purpose, we first define the

entropy of cell’s threshold voltage, H (v), given by

H (v) =

i

⎡ ⎣⎢

⎛

psi (v) psi (v)

log2

⎝

i

psi (v) psi (v)

⎞⎤ ⎠⎥⎦

i

(24)

where i ∈ {11, 10, 00, 01}. An example of voltage entropy function is illustrated in Fig. 5. It can be observed that the voltage entropy is only dominant within the erasure region, denoted as high-entropy-region. This should be the targeted memory

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:46:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

H(R2)=

Fig. 5. Illustration of entropy-based quantization scheme for 2-bit per cell
flash memory: quantization levels (R1 to R6) are placed closer to the erasure (overlapping) regions.

Fig. 6. Comparison of mutual information obtained through 6-level entropy (proposed) and MMI [17] quantization schemes.

sensing region as it incurs high error probability. Therefore, we
set the quantization levels closer to the erasure region, instead of setting them uniformly from V˜min to Vmax. With 3 erasure regions in-place, we require atleast 6 quantization levels in
order to enclose them within the quantization boundary. To this end, we define a parameter θ ∈ [0, 1] to select the width of each erasure region. To be precise, we set each quantization level
such that

H (Rn) = θ

(25)

for n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. In other words, the memory sensing levels are designed where the voltage entropy is equal to θ . By varying the entropy parameter θ , we can obtain the desired width for erasure regions. We refer to this memory sensing scheme as entropy-based quantization scheme. Besides, another well-known non-uniform quantization scheme for MLC flash is reported in [17], where the quantization levels are obtained by maximizing the mutual-information (MMI) between the input and output of flash channel. This scheme involves solving a multi-variable optimization problem to get the quantization levels. However, with MMI quantization, it is not possible to select the width of erasure regions. This constraint affects the resultant error-rate performance of LDPC decoder, which is further discussed in the following section. Since both proposed and MMI schemes use an entropy like function to optimize the quantization levels, we mainly treat MMI quantization as the benchmark for comparison.
To observe the error-rate performance, we simulate two binary LDPC codes, referred to as 4K-code and 8K-code, over the model-based 2-bit per cell flash memory. The 4K-code is an irregular LDPC code with input and output block-length (frame size) of 4096 and 4544 bits, respectively, and code-rate of 0.90. The degree distribution of this code is as follows:

λ (x) = 0.0682x + 0.1822x2 + 0.1329x3 + 0.6167x4 ρ (x) = 0.22x38 + 0.78x39

where λ (x) and ρ (x) are the variable-node and checknode degree distribution pairs, respectively, optimized through density-evolution [34]. The 8K-code is chosen as a regular

LDPC code with uniform column-weight of 4. It has input and output block-length of 7360 and 8000 bits, respectively, and code-rate of 0.92. Both LDPC codes are constructed using progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [35], and decoded using column-weight based shuffled belief-propagation decoder [36], with maximum iteration count, Imax, set to 25. We apply the proposed entropy-based quantization scheme (6-level) and compare with MMI (6-level) [17] and uniform (12-level) quantization schemes. The entropy parameter is set to θ = 0.35 as it leads to optimum error-rate performance.
We first notice that, contrary to MMI quantization, the entropy-based scheme does not maximize the mutual information as shown in Fig. 6. Next, we plot the frame-error-rate (FER) curves for LDPC 4K-code and 8K-code with retention time set to zero (T = 0) as shown in Fig. 7. In this figure, we show the error performance of MMI and uniform quantization schemes by using both channel invariant (conventional) and channel optimized (proposed) write-voltage levels. We observe that the proposed entropy-based quantization outperforms the former schemes. Furthermore, as stated earlier, the uniform quantization scheme is not very effective as the 12-level quantization is, surprisingly, worse than the 6-level non-uniform quantization schemes.
In order to simulate the flash memory under data retention scenario, we need to estimate the voltage distribution functions prior to memory sensing operation. This is required because the retention noise shifts the voltage distribution functions over increasing retention time T . In this work, we rely upon the prior-art schemes [37], [38] to estimate the shifted distribution functions. Based on that, we compute new set of entropybased quantization levels and derive the corresponding LLRs using (22) and (23). In Fig. 8, we illustrate the frame-errorrate (FER) performance of LDPC 4K-code, where the retention time is set to 6 months, 12 months and 24 months, respectively. It is evident that the proposed entropy-based quantization scheme has superior error-rate performance as compared to the MMI scheme, substantiating the effectiveness of the proposed quantization under data retention scenario.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:46:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASLAM et al.: READ AND WRITE VOLTAGE SIGNAL OPTIMIZATION

1619

Fig. 9. Plot of cell storage capacity using 3-level, 6-level, 9-level, 12-level and soft quantization schemes.
Fig. 7. Frame-error-rate (FER) performance of LDPC 4K-code (top) and LDPC 8K-code (bottom) using entropy (proposed), MMI [17] and uniform quantization schemes: solid curves are plotted for optimized write-voltage levels and dotted curves are plotted for channel invariant write-voltage levels.
Fig. 10. Comparison of 6-level memory sensing between the entropy (proposed) and MMI [17] quantization schemes: entropy quantization levels contribute to wider erasure regions.

Fig. 8. Frame-error-rate (FER) performance of LDPC 4K-code using entropy (proposed) and MMI [17] quantization schemes, setting retention time (T ) at 6, 12 and 24 months.

It should be noted that, in this paper, we strive to optimize the 6-level quantization scheme. This is because the channel capacity with 6-level quantization registers a big jump from 3-level quantization (hard decision), while further increase in the quantization levels registers diminishing returns towards the infinite-precision limit, as shown in Fig. 9.
V. CONTROLLED ERASURE DECODING USING ENTROPY BASED QUANTIZATION
In this section, we investigate the reason behind the improvement in error performance achieved by using the proposed entropy-based quantization scheme over the MMI quantization

Fig. 11. BER/FER performance of LDPC 4K-code over varying entropy parameter θ at PE = 21K: values of θ corresponding to optimal error-rate performance and MMI quantization levels are marked with vertical arrows.
scheme [17]. We first draw attention to the fact that the entropybased quantization levels (given by the optimal value of θ ) tend to produce wider erasure regions than the MMI quantization levels, as depicted in Fig. 10. In this figure, we observe that the threshold voltage range is split into 3 erasure regions E1, E2 and E3, and 4 data regions D1, D2, D3 and D4, respectively. Here, it must be realized that adjusting the width of erasure regions affects the error performance of the code, as shown in Fig. 11. This plot shows the error performance of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:46:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1620
TABLE II WIDTH OF ERASURE REGIONS E1 , E2 AND E3 OVER
VARYING ENTROPY PARAMETER θ

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

LDPC 4K-code over a range of θ values for PE = 21K. The width of erasure regions corresponding to different θ values are shown in Table II. Observing Fig. 11 and Table II reveals that if the erasure region is too narrow, the decoder will not be able to determine sufficient erasures; while if the erasure region is too wide, it will get too many erased symbols which exceed the code’s error correcting capability; and the entropy parameter θ allows the erasure region width to be optimized. With MMI quantization, it is not possible to alter the width of erasure region as it is optimized (fixed) over a given channel (for a fixed channel noise), irrespective of the type of code and decoding algorithm used. Fig. 11 also marks the entropy parameter value corresponding to the MMI quantization levels, which clearly does not coincide with the minimum error-rate point. This is because the MMI quantization optimization attempts to achieve zero error probability while assuming infinite channel code length, but in practical systems this assumption is violated as only finite block-length codes can be adopted. On the contrary, in entropy-based quantization, changing the value of θ influences the symbol error probability, Perror, and the symbol erasure probability, Perasure, of the flash channel, and consequently alters the magnitude of input LLRs used for BP decoding. Here, Perror refers to the uncoded error probability computed in 4 data regions and Perasure refers to the erasure probability computed in 3 erasure regions. These two quantities are mathematically written as

Fig. 12. Comparison of symbol error probability, Perror, and symbol erasure probability, Perasure, between the entropy (proposed) and MMI [17] quantization schemes: entropy quantization produces lower Perror at the cost of higher Perasure .
We evaluate and plot these two expressions for different PE cycles in Fig. 12. In this figure, compared to MMI, the proposed entropy-based quantization reduces the symbol error probability by having a higher erasure probability. It should be noted that the LLR values associated with erasure regions are the least reliable LLRs and therefore reset to zero (erased). To be precise, the LSB LLRs correspond to E1 and E3, and the MSB LLRs correspond to E2 are erased. Thus, with entropy-based quantization scheme, we perform a controlled erasure decoding by means of optimizing the parameter θ , in such a way that some LLR values are erased to ensure that the symbol error probability is reduced. This adjustment between the symbol error and symbol erasure probability helps the entropy scheme to perform better than the MMI scheme.
As a future work, it is of great interest to analytically evaluate the optimum value of θ for which the decoded error probability is minimized. Apart from entropy function, it is compelling to investigate other non-linear functions to see if the error performance can be further improved.

Perror =

ps10 (v) + ps00 (v) + ps01 (v) dv

v∈D1

+

ps11 (v) + ps00 (v) + ps01 (v) dv

v∈D2

+

ps11 (v) + ps10 (v) + ps01 (v) dv

v∈D3

+

ps11 (v) + ps10 (v) + ps00 (v) dv

(26)

v∈D4

Perasure =

ps11 (v) + ps10 (v) + ps00 (v) + ps01 (v) dv

v∈E1

+

ps11 (v) + ps10 (v) + ps00 (v) + ps01 (v) dv

v∈E2

+

ps11 (v) + ps10 (v) + ps00 (v) + ps01 (v) dv

v∈E3

(27)

VI. WRITE-VOLTAGE OPTIMIZATION FOR FASTER DECODING CONVERGENCE
In the previous section, we mainly analyze the improvement in error-rate performance that comes as a result of using optimal write-voltage signals, as shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 7. It should be noted that the need for write-voltage optimization is not critical in the initial state of flash memory as compared to its end-of-life (EOL). This is because the error-rate in the initial state typically does not exceed the error correction capability of ECC decoder. However, as the LDPC code is becoming the mainstream ECC in flash memory controller, its long decoding latency starts to deteriorate the system performance. In this situation, the proposed optimization method to reduce the errorrate, and consequently to reduce the decoding latency, becomes important. It other words, we can improve the decoding convergence in the initial state of flash memory by optimizing the write-voltage levels. It should be noted that the total read

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:46:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASLAM et al.: READ AND WRITE VOLTAGE SIGNAL OPTIMIZATION

1621

Fig. 13. Bit-error-rate (BER) performance of LDPC 4K-code plotted versus decoding iterations (Imax) for different PE cycles: solid and dotted curves represent channel optimized and channel invariant (fixed) write-voltage schemes, respectively.

Fig. 14. Comparison of flash memory endurance between optimizing write-
voltage for early retention, Twrite = 0 (solid curves), and end-of-retention (EOR), Twrite = 12-months (dotted curves), respectively, keeping the FER fixed at 10−3 and 10−5: using LDPC 4K-code and 6-level entropy quantization.

latency of NAND flash memory based devices is composed of firmware processing, memory sensing, and DMA (data transfer from controller to NAND flash memory) times, and the most time consuming process is the memory sensing operation. The LDPC decoding latency in included in the DMA time.
In Fig. 13, we plot the BER curves versus the maximum iteration count, Imax, for different PE cycles. It can be observed that the decoding latency is reduced by up to 16% in the initial state, even though the BER at these early states are low and typically have enough margins from ECC failures, and up to 22% in the EOL. Therefore, in comparison with conventional flash memory system where the write-voltage levels are fixed, our approach is more effective in-terms of error performance and decoding latency for both early and late stages of flash memory usage.
VII. WRITE-VOLTAGE OPTIMIZATION FOR FLASH END-OF-RETENTION (EOR) TIME
Previously, we performed the write-voltage optimization for the early retention time of flash memory, by setting the retention time to zero. However, in this section, we address the write-voltage scheme optimized for the flash memory’s end-ofretention (EOR) time, and compare between the two voltage design schemes. In this direction, we set the retention time to some large value and then minimize the objective function (20). As a case study, we set the retention time to 12 months and optimize the write-voltage levels over varying PE cycles. The optimization for EOR is recommended if the flash data is expected to be stored for a long period of time without reading/re-writing. We use Twrite = 0 and Twrite = 12-months to distinguish between optimizing the write-voltage schemes for early retention and end-of-retention times, respectively.
In Fig. 14, we plot the flash memory endurance (PE cycles) versus the data retention time (T ) for the two voltage design schemes, Twrite = 0 and Twrite = 12-months, keeping the FER fixed at 10−3 and 10−5. We observe that if the data retention

time is relatively short, under 4 months, the write-voltage scheme optimized for early retention time outperforms the EOR optimization scheme by providing longer flash memory endurance. Conversely, as the data retention time increases, the write-voltage scheme optimized for EOR time yields better endurance performance. In summary, the problem of write-voltage optimization for MLC flash is a design tradeoff between the achievable endurance performance and the expected retention time of stored flash data.
VIII. MINIMUM MEMORY SENSING PRECISION FOR LDPC DECODER CONVERGENCE
Until now, we perform simulations using 6-level memory sensing precision. Since the flash memory channel is nonstationary, even the number of quantization levels should not be fixed but should instead be optimized in conjunction with soft LDPC decoding. For instance, it is intuitive to expect that when flash memory is relatively fresh and has gone through small number of PE cycles, we can use fewer quantization levels, say 3-level. However, as the channel noise variance increases due to larger number of PE cycle, we must switch to higher quantization levels, e.g. 6-level. This adaptive memory precision approach has been reported in [20] in which the author has used the minimum quantization levels (1-level for 1−bit per cell, 3-levels for 2−bit per cell flash memory, and so on) to initiate the LDPC decoder and progressively increased the memory precision if the lower-precision sensing fails to produce successful LDPC code-word. However, this method is not optimal in terms of decoding latency since the flash read-out data is decoded for different quantization levels until the codeword is successfully produced. Ideally, we should not always start the decoding process from the minimum quantization levels, but should select the memory sensing precision based on the knowledge of the current flash channel status (PE count).
In this direction, we propose to select the minimum required number of quantization levels based on the extrinsic

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:46:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

successfully transferred. At this point, we observe in Fig. 15 that the BER is around 10−6. Therefore, if we want to operate the flash memory beyond 14K PE cycles, we must switch to higher precision memory sensing. This can be verified from Fig. 16, which shows that 6-level quantization can be employed between 14K to 20K PE cycles, beyond which we again require higher quantization levels. Thus, EXIT analysis can be used as a reliable tool to choose the required number of read-voltage levels.

Fig. 15. FER (dotted curves) and BER (solid curves) performance along with EXIT limit (vertical lines) of LDPC 4K-code for 3-level and 6-level quantization schemes.

IX. CONCLUSION
This paper investigates the optimization of read and write voltage signals for MLC NAND flash memory. Based on a non-stationary flash channel model, considering programming noise, random telegraph noise, cell-to-cell interference and data retention noise, the write-voltage levels are optimized by minimizing the channel error probability. The trade-off between write-voltage optimization based on early retention time versus end-of-life retention time of the stored data is discussed. The proposed write-voltage optimization scheme is validated to have superior error-rate performance over the conventional channel-invariant write-voltage scheme.
Besides, a novel read-voltage quantization scheme based on the voltage entropy function is proposed to find the right balance between the flash channel symbol error and symbol erasure probability through controlled erasure decoding. This quantization scheme enables the LDPC decoder to achieve soft BP decoding performance improvement over prior-art quantization schemes. By virtue of both write and read voltage optimization, the overall error-rate performance and decoding convergence are improved. Finally, a method to minimize the number of quantization levels based on EXIT curve is proposed to enable the flash memory controller to reduce the memory sensing latency while guaranteeing the LDPC decoder convergence.

REFERENCES

Fig. 16. EXIT curves for LDPC 4K-code using 3-level (upper plot) and 6-level (lower plot) entropy quantization schemes over different PE cycles.
information transfer (EXIT) curves [39]. For a given LDPC code, we plot the EXIT diagram using Monte-Carlo simulations for different quantization levels over varying PE cycles and select the smallest number of read levels which successfully transfer the mutual-information curve. This EXIT curve based quantization selection approach seems to be more reliable as the simulations take into account the effect of LDPC finite block-length, providing more accurate prediction of the errorrate performance. Alternatively, relying on the channel capacity curve to choose the number of quantization levels may not be accurate enough because of its infinite block-length assumption. In Fig. 16, using the same LDPC 4K-code, we plot the EXIT curves for 3-level (θ = 1) and 6-level (θ = 0.35) quantization schemes for different PE cycles, keeping the retention time fixed at T = 0. For 3-level quantization, we may notice that beyond 14K PE cycles, the mutual-information curve is not

[1] K. Kim, “Future memory technology: Challenges and opportunities,” in Proc. Int. Symp. VLSI Technol. Syst. Appl., San Jose, CA, USA, 2008, pp. 5–9.
[2] L. M. Grupp, J. D. Davis, and S. Swanson, “The bleak future of NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 10th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST’12), Berkeley, CA, USA, 2012, p. 2.
[3] Q. Li, A. Jiang, and E. Haratsch, “Noise modeling and capacity analysis for NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2014, pp. 2262–2266.
[4] K. Zhao et al., “LDPC-in-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. 11th USENIX Conf. File Storage Technol. (FAST’13), San Jose, CA, USA, 2013, pp. 243–256.
[5] C. Aslam, Y. Guan, and K. Cai, “Non-binary LDPC code with multiple memory reads for multi-level-cell (MLC) flash,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Asia Pac. Signal Inf. Process. Assoc. Annu. Summit Conf. (APSIPA), Dec. 2014, pp. 1–9.
[6] C. Aslam, Y. Guan, and K. Cai, “Dynamic write-level and read-level signal design for MLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Commun. Syst. Netw. Digit. Signal Process., Manchester, U.K., Jul. 2014, pp. 336–341.
[7] Y. Kim et al., “Verify level control criteria for multi-level cell flash memories and their applications,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2012, no. 1, p. 196, 2012.
[8] Y. Cassuto et al., “Codes for multi-level flash memories: Correcting asymmetric limited-magnitude errors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1176–1180.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:46:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASLAM et al.: READ AND WRITE VOLTAGE SIGNAL OPTIMIZATION

1623

[9] A. Berman and Y. Birk, “Constrained flash memory programming,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Saint Petersburg, Russia, Jul. 2011, pp. 2128–2132.
[10] J. Anxiao et al., “Rank modulation for flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 6, pp. 2659–2673, Jun. 2009.
[11] A. Jiang, H. Li, and J. Bruck, “On the capacity and programming of flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 1549–1564, Mar. 2012.
[12] A. Jiang and H. Li, “Optimized cell programming for flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Pac. Rim Conf. Commun. Comput. Signal Process. (PACRIM), Victoria, BC, Canada, Aug. 2009, pp. 914–919.
[13] M. Qin, E. Yaakobi, and P. Siegel, “Optimized cell programming for flash memories with quantizers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 2780–2795, May 2014.
[14] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I Regul. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[15] F. Sala, R. Gabrys, and L. Dolecek, “Dynamic threshold schemes for multi-level non-volatile memories,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 2624–2634, Jul. 2013.
[16] Y. Cai et al., “Data retention in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, optimization, and recovery,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit., San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2015, pp. 551–563.
[17] W. Jiadong et al., “Enhanced precision through multiple reads for LDPC decoding in flash memories,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 32, no. 5, pp. 880–891, May 2014.
[18] X. Wang, G. Dong, L. Pan and R. Zhou, “Error correction codes and signal processing in flash memory,” in Flash Memories, P. I. Stievano, Ed., ISBN: 978-953-307-272-2, InTech, 2011, doi: 10.5772/19083.
[19] D. Guiqiang et al., “Estimating information-theoretical NAND flash memory storage capacity and its implication to memory system design space exploration,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1705–1714, Sep. 2012.
[20] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Enabling NAND flash memory use softdecision error correction codes at minimal read latency overhead,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I. Regul. Papers, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2412–2421, Sep. 2013.
[21] T.-Y. Chen, A. Williamson, and R. Wesel, “Increasing flash memory lifetime by dynamic voltage allocation for constant mutual information,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, San Diego, CA, USA, Feb. 2014, pp. 1–5.
[22] G. Dong, Y. Pan, and T. Zhang, “Using lifetime-aware progressive programming to improve SLC NAND flash memory write endurance,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 22, no. 6, pp. 1270– 1280, Jun. 2014.
[23] H. Wang, T.-Y. Chen, and R. Wesel, “Histogram-based flash channel estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2015, pp. 283–288.
[24] X. Quan et al., “Modelling and characterization of NAND flash memory channels,” Measurement, vol. 70, pp. 225–231, 2015.
[25] K. Takeuchi, T. Tanaka, and H. Nakamura, “A double-level-vth select gate array architecture for multilevel NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 602–609, Apr. 1996.
[26] S. Kang-Deog et al., “A 3.3 V 32 Mb NAND flash memory with incremental step pulse programming scheme,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 1149–1156, Nov. 1995.
[27] J.-D. Lee, S.-H. Hur, and J.-D. Choi, “Effects of floating-gate interference on NAND flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264–266, May 2002.
[28] G. Dong, S. Li, and T. Zhang, “Using data postcompensation and predistortion to tolerate cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I Regul. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2718–2728, Oct. 2010.
[29] Y. Cai et al., “Error patterns in MLC NAND flash memory: Measurement, characterization, and analysis,” in Proc. Des. Autom. Test Eur. (DATE’12), San Jose, CA, USA, 2012, pp. 521–526.
[30] Y. Cai et al., “Error analysis and retention-aware error management for NAND flash memory,” Intel Technol. J., vol. 17, no. 1, p. 140, 2013.
[31] C. M. Compagnoni et al., “Random telegraph noise effect on the programmed threshold-voltage distribution of flash memories,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 984–986, Sep. 2009.
[32] K. M. Lofgren et al., “Wear leveling techniques for flash EEPROM systems,” U.S. Patent 6,850,443, Feb. 1, 2005.

[33] J. A. Snyman, Practical Mathematical Optimization : An Introduction to Basic Optimization Theory and Classical and New Gradient-Based Algorithms. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2005.
[34] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[35] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[36] C. Aslam, Y. Guan, and K. Cai, “Improving the belief-propagation convergence of irregular LDPC codes using column-weight based scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1283–1286, Aug. 2015.
[37] D. H. Lee and W. Sung, “Estimation of NAND flash memory threshold voltage distribution for optimum soft-decision error correction,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 440–449, Jan. 2013.
[38] Y. Cai et al., “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in Proc. Des. Autom. Test Eur., Grenoble, France, Mar. 2013, pp. 1285–1290.
[39] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. T. Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
Chaudhry Adnan Aslam (S’13) received the B.E. degree from Mehran University of Engineering and Technology, Jamshoro, Pakistan, and the M.S. degree from the University of Southern California (USC), Los Angeles, CA, USA, in 2005 and 2009, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at the School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests include coding theory and signal processing for data storage and wireless communications systems.
Yong Liang Guan (M’99) received the bachelor of engineering degree (with first class Hons.) from the National University of Singapore, Singapore, and Ph.D. degree from the Imperial College of London, London, U.K. He is now an Associate Professor with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. His research interests include modulation, coding and signal processing for communication systems, and information security systems.
Kui Cai (SM’11) received the B.E. degree in information and control engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, the M.Eng. degree in electrical engineering from the National University of Singapore, Singapore, and the joint Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Technical University of Eindhoven, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, and the National University of Singapore. Currently, she is an Associate Professor with Singapore University of Technology and Design (SUTD), Singapore. Before joining SUTD, she had been with Data Storage Institute (DSI), Singapore, since 1999, where she was the Program Leader of nonvolatile memory (NVM) coding and signal processing. Her research interests include coding theory, communication theory, and signal processing for various data storage systems and digital communications. She is the Vice-Chair (Academia) of the IEEE Communications Society, Data Storage Technical Committee (DSTC). She was the recipient of the 2008 IEEE Communications Society Best Paper Award in Coding and Signal Processing for Data Storage.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:46:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

