IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

1293

A 520k (18 900, 17 010) Array Dispersion LDPC Decoder Architectures for NAND Flash Memory
Kin-Chu Ho, Chih-Lung Chen, and Hsie-Chia Chang

Abstract— Although Latin square is a well-known algorithm to construct low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for satisfying long code length, high code-rate, good correcting capability, and low error floor, it has a drawback of large submatrix that the hardware implementation will be suffered from large barrel shifter and worse routing congestion in fitting NAND flash applications. In this paper, a top-down design methodology, which not only goes through code construction and optimization, but also hardware implementation to meet all the critical requirements, is presented. A two-step array dispersion algorithm is proposed to construct long LDPC codes with a small submatrix size. Then, the constructed LDPC code is optimized by masking matrix to obtain better bit-error rate (BER) performance and lower errorfloor. In addition, our LDPC codes have a diagonal-like structure in the parity-check matrix leading to a proposed hybrid storage architecture, which has the advantages of better area efficiency and large enough data bandwidth for high decoding throughput. To be adopted for NAND flash applications, an (18 900, 17 010) LDPC code with a code-rate of 0.9 and submatrix size of 63 is constructed and the field-programmable gate array simulations show that the error floor is successfully suppressed down to BER of 10−12. An LDPC decoder using normalized min-sum variable-node-centric sequential scheduling decoding algorithm is implemented in UMC 90-nm CMOS process. The postlayout result shows that the proposed LDPC decoder can achieve a throughput of 1.58 Gb/s at six iterations with a gate count of 520k under a clock frequency of 166.6 MHz. It meets the throughput requirement of both NAND flash memories with Toggle double data rate 1.0 and open NAND flash interface 2.3 NAND interfaces.
Index Terms— Channel coding, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, NAND flash memory, sequential scheduling.
I. INTRODUCTION
N OWADAYS, the NAND flash memory is the main storage component in mobile applications, such as mobile phones, tablet, flash drive, and solid-state disk. Its advantages include high program/read speed, shock-resistance, lightweight, and small form-factor. As the applications of multimedia grow explosively, the demand of larger storage capacity keeps increasing. To satisfy the demand, the memory vendors continue boosting the capacity by technology scaling and storing the multiple-bit-per-cell technique. Several stateof-the-art works [1], [2] achieve 128-Gb storage capacity by scaling technology toward 2Xnm and storing 3-bit data in
Manuscript received November 16, 2014; revised February 13, 2015, April 24, 2015, and June 27, 2015; accepted July 11, 2015. Date of publication August 18, 2015; date of current version March 18, 2016. This work was supported by the National Science Council of Taiwan under Project NSC 101-2628-E-009-013-MY3.
The authors are with the Department of Electronics Engineering, Institute of Electronics, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: chu.ee97g@nctu.edu.tw; hcchang@mail.nctu.edu.tw).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2015.2464092

one memory cell. However, these aggressive techniques come along with unavoidable drawbacks. Due to the physical limitation and reduced noise margin, the raw bit-error-rate (RBER) keeps increasing and this severely degrades the reliability of NAND flash memory. Error correction code (ECC) is an efficient approach to recover the user data from errors. In current applications, BCH code [3], [4] is the most commonly used ECC which can guarantee t-error correcting capability. For a BCH code, the size of parity bits is almost linearly proportional to its t-error correcting capability. As the storage space for parity bits in flash memory is limited, the correcting capability of BCH code cannot be increased unlimitedly. To overcome the increasing RBER, advanced ECC, such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [5], is widely researched and considered as the next-generation ECC for flash memory application due to its excellent correcting capability.
LDPC codes were first proposed by Gallager in 1962 and then rediscovered in the late 1990s [6], [7]. An LDPC code is defined by an m × n parity-check matrix H with m check nodes (CNs) and n variable nodes (VNs). The parameters column degree (dv) and row degree (dc) represent the number of CNs/VNs connected to each VN/CN. LDPC codes can be decoded using belief propagation (BP) algorithm, which iteratively exchanges the messages between the CNs and the VNs. The two most famous BP decoding algorithms are sum–product algorithm [7] and min-sum algorithm (MSA) [8]. Chen and Fossorier [9] presented a normalized MSA, which compensates the performance loss of MSA by multiplying a scaling factor in CN update. In these few years, many researchers and industrial companies are working on how to employ LDPC codes in flash memory applications [10]–[12]. The research topics mainly focus on the code construction, hardware implementation, and the methods of getting soft information from flash memory.
To be adopted for NAND flash application, the LDPC codes must satisfy the critical requirements, such as long code length, high code-rate, good correcting capability, and low error-floor. Latin square [13], [14] is one of the most famous algebraic algorithms [13]–[16] to construct LDPC codes for satisfying the requirements above. In addition, Latin codes are quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes, which are famous for simply controls in the routing network. However, it has critical drawbacks in the aspect of hardware implementation. For NAND flash applications, the code length and the code-rate of ECC is suggested to be 1 or 2 kB, and 0.9, respectively [17]. Such Latin codes come along with large row degree and large submatrix size. In general, VN-centric sequential scheduling [18] (VSS; also known as

1063-8210 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

column-based shuffle decoding [19]), turbo decoding message passing (TDMP) algorithm [20], and row-based shuffle decoding [21]–[24] are the mainstream of LDPC decoder architecture. Their partial parallel updating procedure and architecture not only greatly reduce the hardware complexity, but also have fast convergence speed of decoding and good BER performance. In this paper, we adopt the VSS algorithm since it can overcome the large row degree issue practically [18], [25], [26]. Although large row degree issue is solved, VSS algorithm with large submatrix size will suffer from large barrel shifter and worse routing congestion in implementation. Besides large submatrix size, high data bandwidth is another critical issue to be concerned. SRAM-based decoder architecture [25] is famous since SRAMs consume less silicon area than registers do. However, this advantage may be vanished if the aspect ratio of SRAM changes due to the increase in data bandwidth. The storage elements in decoder will occupy a huge amount of silicon area. As a short conclusion, large barrel shifters, worse routing congestion, and large storage elements are the critical issues to be solved.
In this paper, we present a top-down design methodology, which consists of code construction, code optimization, and hardware implementation to overcome the issues above. In code construction, a two-step array dispersion code construction algorithm is proposed to construct LDPC codes for NAND flash application. We adopt Latin square algorithm to construct a small LDPC code with good correcting capability. Then, the small code is expanded to a larger LDPC code by array dispersion [15]. Besides the requirements, such as long code length, high code rate, good correcting capability, and low error floor, the constructed LDPC codes also have small submatrix size in parity-check matrix. Therefore, the issues of large barrel shifters and worse routing congestion are easily solved. In the optimization, masking [27] is adopted to improve the BER performance and also lower the error-floor. The process of searching good masking matrix is performed on the small LDPC code before array dispersion, and it is speeded up by field-programmable gate array (FPGA) searching platform. After the code construction and optimization, an (18 900, 17 010) LDPC code with a submatrix size of 63 and a column degree of 4 or 5 is proposed. The error floor is investigated by an FPGA emulation platform and not observed down to BER of 10−12. Furthermore, there is a diagonal-like structure in the parity-check matrix benefiting from the array dispersion technique. Based on this structure, we propose a hybrid register-memory-based storage architecture, which has better area efficiency and large enough data bandwidth for CN unit (CNU) update process. Implemented in UMC 90nm CMOS process, the postlayout result shows that the proposed decoder can achieve a throughput of 1.58 Gb/s with a gate count of 520k under a clock frequency of 166.6 MHz. The mainstream interfaces of NAND flash memory include toggle double data rate (DDR) and open NAND flash interface (ONFI). The proposed LDPC decoder meets the throughput requirements of both Toggle DDR 1.0 [28] and ONFI 2.3 [29] NAND interfaces.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present the VSS and its challenges of hardware implementation for flash memory application. In Section III, we will present the two-step array dispersion code construction algorithm and the code optimizations. In Section IV, we present the overall LDPC decoder architecture with the proposed hybrid register-memory-based architecture, implementation results, and comparison. Finally, the performance analysis of the proposed decoder on real NAND flash memory and the conclusions are given in Sections V and VI, respectively.
II. VARIABLE-NODE-CENTRIC SEQUENTIAL SCHEDULING AND ITS CHALLENGES
In hardware implementation, we adopt the normalized min-sum VSS [18] (NMS-VSS; also known as shuffled decoding [19]) in implementation due to large row degree. The NMS-VSS algorithm not only reduces the hardware overhead of CNU by completing its update process in several subgroups, but also provides faster convergence speed of decoding process. In this section, we will present the NMS-VSS algorithm and its challenges of hardware implementation for flash memory application in detail.

A. Review of NMS-VSS Algorithm

An LDPC code is defined by an m × n parity-check
matrix H with m CNs and n VNs. Two parameters column
degree (dv ) and row degree (dc) represent the number of CNs/VNs connected to each VN/CN. Notice that Lcwv denotes the check-to-variable (CV) message from CN c to VN v, and Lvwc denotes the variable-to-check (VC) message from VN v to CN c at the wth decoding iteration. Let N(c) be the set of VNs connected to CN c and let M(v) be the set of CNs
connected to VN v. The VSS divides n VNs into G groups that each group contains n/G = NG VNs. Let Ng be the set of VNs located in the gth groups for g = 0, 1, . . . , G − 1.
The following shows the updating process in gth group at
wth decoding iteration using NMS-VSS.

1) Operation of Variable Node Unit: Let Linit,v to be the

channel value of VN v. For each VN v in gth group,

L

w vc

is

updated

as

L

w vc

=

L init,v

+

Lwc v−1.

(1)

c ∈M(v)\c

2) Operation of Check Node Unit: For each CN c connected

with

VNs

in

group

g,

L

w cv

is

updated

as

L

w∗ cv

= min

min
v ∈N(c)∩NL

L

w vc

,
v

min
∈N(c)∩NR \v

L

w−1 vc

(2)

Scwv∗ =

sgn

L

w v

c

sgn

L

w−1 vc

v ∈N(c)∩NL

v ∈N(c)∩NR \v

(3)

L

w cv

=

Scwv∗

·

L

w∗ cv

·α

(4)

where α is the scaling factor for 0 < α < 1, NL is the union of N0, N1, . . . , Ng−1, and NR is the union

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: 520k (18 900, 17 010) ARRAY DISPERSION LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURES

1295

of Ng , Ng+1, . . . , NG−1. One complete iteration represents that G groups of VNs are updated in a
sequential order. At the end of each iteration, the a posteriori probability Lapp,v value of each VN v is computed by

Lapp,v = Linit,v +

L

w−1 cv

(5)

c ∈M(v)

and is used for hard decision and syndrome check.

The NMS-VSS updates the messages between NG VNs and the connected CNs at each subgroup. As a result, the number of messages received by each CN in one cycle is greatly reduced, resulting in lower hardware complexity and routing congestion. In addition, the VN units (VNUs) in each subgroup can receive the updated CV messages during the decoding process, and therefore, the number of decoding iteration can be reduced. It is worth mentioning that the difference between VSS-, TDMP-, and row-based shuffle decoding is the updating procedure, where the VSS algorithm partitions the CNs vertically, while the TDMP- and row-based shuffle decoding partition the CNs horizontally. Both TDMP- and row-based shuffle decoding algorithms are more suitable for LDPC codes with small row degree or large column degree. The VNU update processes are completed by several cycles, while the CN update processes are completed in one cycle.

application standards. The QC parity-check matrix with a submatrix size z is rearranged into z column groups. Each new column group is cyclic-shift with one position to the column group at its left-hand side. During the decoding process, the decoder processes one column group in each cycle. This decoding sequence does not require any barrel shifter since all messages are shifted by a constant number of 1. However, in order to prevent from memory access collision, the CV messages are stored in the FIFO-based storage elements. When implementing large LDPC codes, the FIFO-based storage elements will consume large silicon area and have large power consumption.
The discussions above reveal that an LDPC code with small submatrix size and efficient storage architecture is desired for many applications, such as wireless and wire communications, and NAND flash application. In this paper, we present a top-down design methodology to overcome these challenges. We propose a two-step hardware-friendly code construction algorithm to construct large LDPC codes with small submatrix-size. Therefore, the issues of large barrel shifter and worse routing congestion are solved. In addition, the constructed LDPC codes have hardware-friendly features, which lead to a hybrid storage architecture with better area efficiency. We will introduce the proposed algorithm and architecture in Section III.

B. Hardware Implementation Challenges

As mentioned before, there are several challenges of

implementing large LDPC codes with NMS-VSS algorithm

for flash memory application. They include large barrel shifters

and severe routing congestion due to large submatrix size, and

larger storage elements due to increase in data bandwidth.

Chen et al. [18] propose a register-based architecture to

achieve high throughput performance. CNUs are implemented

in

fully

parallel

and

all

CV

messages

L

w cv

are

stored

in

registers. Although registers can provide high data bandwidth,

they consume larger area than SRAMs. A 2-kB-length

LDPC code requires a huge amount of registers, which will

consume too large silicon area and is very power consuming.

Ueng et al. [25] present a simplified CNU which only

keeps k smallest CV messages. It efficiently reduces the

data bandwidth and capacity of storage elements. Based on

the QC structure, the decoder processes the submatrix block

one by one. The decoder architecture is memory-based and

the bandwidth of memory is determined by the messages

processed in one block. During the decoding process, the

CV and VC messages are shifted to corresponding processing

units by barrel shifters. When implementing LDPC codes with

large submatrix size, this architecture will suffer from severe

routing congestion due to large barrel shifters and large data

bandwidth of memory. For example, we assume submatrix

size (z), dc, and k to be 128, 50, and 2, respectively, the bandwidth of memory is equal to z × k × (6-bit min. value +

log2(dc) ) = 128 × 2 × (6 + 6) = 3072 bits. An SRAM with such large data bandwidth will have inefficient aspect ratio,

and therefore occupies large silicon area.

Ueng et al. [26] present a first-input first-output

(FIFO)-based CN architecture supporting multiple

III. TWO-STEP CODE CONSTRUCTION ALGORITHM
In this section, we introduce the proposed two-level array dispersion code construction algorithm and advantages on hardware implementation. The goal of presented algorithm is to construct large LDPC codes with good correcting capability, low error floor, and small submatrix size. The two-step algorithm combines two algorithms, namely, Latin square [13], [14] and array dispersion [15]. First, it constructs a small base matrix by Latin square algorithm. Then, we apply the array dispersion to expand the base matrix into a 2-kB-length LDPC code. The expanded LDPC codes have a diagonal-like structure of nonzero submatrices with the same submatrix size as that of the base matrix. Notice that the masking technique is applied to the base matrix before array dispersion in order to improve BER performance and suppress the error-floor. After the demonstration of code construction algorithm, we present an example to construct the proposed (18 900, 17 010) LDPC codes and the simulation results.
A. Code Construction Algorithm
In the first step of code construction, we adopt the Latin square algorithm [13], [14] to construct a base matrix based on Galois fields (GFs) of 2q . The Latin square algorithm will construct a large Latin square matrix with size of 2q × 2q . The entries of matrix are the zero or nonzero elements in GF (2q ). Then, we build a small base matrix by selecting r × s entries from the large matrix, where r ≤ 2q and s ≤ 2q . LDPC codes which are constructed from different selections of entries have average good performance [13]. In this paper, we select the upper left corner of large matrix for simplicity. Each entry is then mapped to a vector having only one 1 at corresponding location over GF (2). The size

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1296

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

Fig. 1. Base parity-check matrix HB,binary constructed by Latin square algorithm.

of vector is 2q − 1 relating to the number of elements in GF (2q ) without zero element. Furthermore, each binary vector is expanded to a (2q −1)×(2q −1) cyclic submatrix where each row is a right cyclic-shift of the row above it. Notice that the detailed explanation and the property analysis of Latin square code can be referenced from [13]. Fig. 1 shows the binary base matrix HB,binary consisting of r ×s submatrices. Ai, j represents a submatrix with a size z of 2q − 1, for 0 ≤ i < r and 0 ≤ j < s. Ai, j can be a zero matrix or a cyclic-shift of an identity matrix. If the HB,binary contains no zero submatrix, the column degree dv of HB,binary will be r . Since the Latin square matrix has a diagonal of zero submatrix, the column degree of HB,binary will be r or r − 1. The null space of HB,binary gives a QC-LDPC code with the guarantee of no cycle-4.
Then, we apply the masking technique [27] to the base matrix before going to the second step of code construction. Masking refers to the replacement of a set of submatrices by zero submatrices. Since short cycles and small trapping sets [30] are the root cause of error-floor, using the masking technique can efficiently reduce the short cycles and small trapping sets to further improve the BER performance and suppress the error-floor. As the correcting capability of LDPC codes depends on several factors, such as code length, degree distribution, length of girth, and connection of nodes, it is hard to come out an optimized methodology for searching masking matrix. The research of the masking technique is still open and challenging [31]–[33]. In this paper, we apply two rules on the random searching process. One rule is to suppress error floor by generating masking matrices, which guarantee the masked parity-check matrix has no column degree less than 4. Another one is to keep column degrees as close as possible for better hardware utilization of VNU design. To speed up the process of searching the masking matrices, we build up an FPGA platform for fast emulation and over hundreds of masked LDPC codes are simulated. We evaluate and compare the BER of each masked code and the one with the best BER performance is chosen.
In the second step of code construction, we adopt the array dispersion [15] to expand the masked base LDPC code to a large one. LDPC codes constructed by this dispersion technique not only have good erasure-burst-correction capabilities, but also perform well over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and binary random erasure channels [15]. Fig. 2 shows the array dispersion. A matrix A(t,t) with t × t submatrices is divided into an upper matrix AU(t,t) and a lower matrix AL(t,t). Then, we construct a large matrix by combining the AU(t,t) and AL(t,t) in a diagonal structure with a expand factor of l. Finally, we have a large matrix H(lt,lt) which consists of lt × lt submatrices. The column degree

Fig. 2. Demonstration of array dispersion.
Fig. 3. FER and BER performances of masked (3780, 3402) LDPC code and unmasked (3780, 3459) LDPC codes.
distribution and the submatrix size of H(lt,lt) are the same as those of the matrix A(t,t). It is obvious that the matrix has a diagonal-like structure consisting of AU(t,t) and AL(t,t).
LDPC codes satisfying row-column-constraint [27], which defines that no two rows (columns) that have more than one place where they both have 1 in a matrix, are guaranteed that the parity-check matrix contains no cycle-4. Latin code is one of them and this property is preserved after array dispersion. As shown in Fig. 2, there is only one upper triangle AU and one lower triangle AL in each column or row group in the expanded matrix. Since AU and AL are decomposed from the Latin square matrix, grouping them horizontally or vertically will not violate the RC-constraint. Therefore, the property of having no cycle-4 is preserved in the LDPC codes after array dispersion.
B. Proposed LDPC Code and Simulation Results In this paper, we propose an (18 900, 17 010) LDPC code
with a code-rate of 0.9 for NAND flash memory applications. In the first step, we construct a HB,binary with 6 × 60 submatrices based on GFs of 26. The null space of HB,binary gives

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: 520k (18 900, 17 010) ARRAY DISPERSION LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURES

1297

Fig. 4. Parity-check matrix of the proposed LDPC code.

Fig. 5. FER and BER performances of two different LDPC codes. Assume z as dv denoted as the submatrix size and the column degree. Code A is the two-step constructed (18 900, 17 010) LDPC code with z of 63 and dv of 4 or 5. Code B is the conventional (17 850, 16 065) Latin LDPC code with z of 255 with dv of 4 or 5.
an (3780, 3459) LDPC code with 57 redundant rows and a code-rate of 0.915. The submatrix size is 63 and the column degree is 5 or 6. Next, a masking matrix is applied to HB,binary to improve its performance. To preserve the column degree of each column group as close as possible, only one submatrix in each column group will be masked, leading to the column degree of the masked matrix to be 4 or 5.
After generating about 500 sets of masking matrices randomly with the above criteria, we evaluate and compare the BER of each masked code at a specified SNR point around BER of 10−7 and then the code with the lowest BER will be chosen. The FPGA simulations of about 500 codes take about two weeks. The null space of the masked parity-check matrix gives an (3780, 3402) LDPC code with no redundant rows and a code-rate of 0.9. Fig. 3 shows the frame error rate (FER) and BER performances of both masked and unmasked base LDPC codes.

In the second step, the base matrix will be divided into multiple submatrices and expanded by array dispersion. Note that using the masking technique will affect the number of redundant rows, but the existence of redundant rows does not affect the procedure of array dispersion. The base matrix is always consisted of 6 × 60 submatrices and no row redundant elimination is performed. The masked base matrix HB,binary is then divided into ten 6×6 matrices HB,binary,q for 0 ≤ q < 10 by dividing columns into ten groups and it can be presented as HB,binary = {HB,binary,0, . . . , HB,binary,9}. Each HB,binary,q consisting of 6 × 6 submatrices is expanded with a factor of 5 separately by array dispersion and then grouped together to form a larger matrix. The resultant matrix consists of 30 × 300 submatrices with a size of 63. The null space of the matrix gives an (18 900, 17 010) LDPC code with a code-rate of 0.9 and column degree of 4 or 5. Fig. 4 shows the paritycheck matrix of the proposed LDPC code without using the masking technique. It should be noticed that applying array dispersion on square matrix can produce a smooth diagonal structure—the locations of nonzero submatrices are shifted by one position between adjacent column groups of submatrices. It is the reason that we divide the masked base matrix HB,binary into ten square matrices.
In the meanwhile, we construct a large LDPC code with a large submatrix size for comparison. Code A is the proposed LDPC code described above. Code B is an (17 850, 16 065) LDPC code constructed by Latin square algorithm with GF(28). The parity-check matrix of code B consists of 7 × 70 submatrices with a size of 255, and is masked by a masking matrix with the same degree distribution of the proposed LDPC code. Fig. 5 shows the FER and BER performances of two LDPC codes and the simulation results show that they have similar performances. Although our proposed LDPC code is expanded from a small code, there is no degradation in correcting capability. Therefore, LDPC codes constructed by the proposed code construction algorithm not only have similar performances with the conventional Latin square codes, but also have hardware advantages over them.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1298

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

IV. PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE AND ITS IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
In this section, we will introduce the hardware implementation of NMS-VSS LDPC decoder. The proposed (18 900, 17 010) LDPC code, constructed by the two-level code construction algorithm, has hardware-friendly features, such as small submatrix size and diagonal-like structure. The small submatrix size allows a small barrel shifter for shifting the messages between the CNUs and the VNUs, which prevents from severe routing congestion. The diagonal-like structure simplifies the accessing sequences of messages from and to the storage elements. By utilizing this feature, we propose hybrid register-memory storage architecture with better area efficiency. We will review the parity matrix of the proposed LDPC code and introduce the hybrid storage architecture. Then, the overall decoder architecture will be presented in detail.
A. Hybrid Storage Architecture for CNU Update Process
The parity-check matrix of our proposed LDPC code without masking is shown in Fig. 4. It consists of 30 × 300 submatrices with a submatrix size (z) of 63. There are six successive nonzero submatrices in each column block. Due to the second level array dispersion, the locations of nonzero submatrices are downward cyclic shift by one position between each column group. Based on the NMS-VSS decoding algorithm, the parity-check matrix is divided into 300 groups (G = 300). In other words, one group is equivalent to one column block. The proposed decoder has one VNU block and six CNU block processing units. At each cycle, the VNU and CNU blocks process the six successive nonzero submatrices in one column block. Let us define hi, j as the submatrix located at i th row block and j th column block for 0 ≤ i < 30 and 0 ≤ j < 300. Bk is denoted as kth CNU block processing unit for 0 ≤ k < 6, and mi is denoted as the messages belong to i th row block. At pth decoding cycle, the six CNU blocks B0, . . . , B5 will process six nonzero submatrices, such as h(p)mod30,(p)mod300, h( p+1)mod30,( p)mod300, . . . , h(5+p)mod30,( p)mod300 for p = 0, 1, 2, . . .
As shown in Fig. 6, the proposed hybrid storage architecture consists of six blocks of registers and a large two-port SRAM. The registers in each block store the messages, which are going to be updated by VNUs and CNUs at each cycle. After the update, the messages that will be processed in the next decoding cycle are stored in the registers again. This kind of messages is denoted as the immediate-use data. At the same time, the messages that are not needed in the next decoding cycle are stored in the SRAM for later use. This kind of messages is denoted as the nonimmediate-use data. Fig. 6 shows more details of the access behavior of the registers and SRAM. Consider at decoding cycle 0, B0, . . . , B5 will process h0,0, . . . , h5,0. The current data in SRAM is invalid and we denote it as X in Fig. 6. When the invalid data are read from SRAM, it is replaced by predefined initial value (the infinite sign) and stored in the registers. After message update, the nonimmediate-use messages will be stored

in SRAM, while the immediate-use messages will be stored in the registers for next-cycle use. Since B0, . . . , B5 will process h1,1, . . . , h6,1 in the next cycle, messages m1, . . . , m5 will be stored in the registers in CNU blocks B0, . . . , B4, respectively. On the other hand, m0 will be stored in SRAM at address 0 since it is not needed in the next decoding cycle. At the same time, message m6 is supposed to be read from SRAM and stored in the register group B5. Since m6 in SRAM is an invalid data at this moment, it will be set to initial value. Then, the VNU and CNU blocks can update the messages m1, . . . , m6 at decoding cycle 1.
Considering that the decoder keeps decoding up to cycle 24, the VNU and CNU blocks will process submatrices of h24,24, . . . , h29,29. Messages m24, . . . , m29 are already stored in the registers and to be updated. Since the 29th row block is the last row block to be updated for the first time, message m29 is set to initial value and no more messages will be reset to initial value in the remaining decoding process. According to the access behavior, messages m25, . . . , m29 will be stored in the register in B0, . . . , B4 after updating and m24 will be written to SRAM at address 0 [Fig. 7 (blue diamonds)]. During the same cycle, m0 is read from SRAM at address 0 and will be stored in the registers in B5 [Fig. 7 (red circles)]. A timing diagram of the two-port SRAM access behavior is also provided in Fig. 7(a). Once the data at address i is read, a new data will be written to address i . This access behavior fully utilizes the SRAM storage capacity. No redundant storage capacity is necessary and the depth of SRAM is (30−6) = 24.
Since two-port SRAMs occupy larger silicon area, they are replaced by single-port SRAMs and the SRAMs are operated at double clock frequency. The read and write operations occur at the first and second half cycles, respectively. Fig. 7(b) shows the timing diagrams of the single-port SRAM. As the registers in each CNU block are still operated at original clock frequency, the timing margin of the critical paths is not affected. Simultaneously, the input to registers in B5 is always the output of SRAM and there is no combinational circuits on this data path, operating SRAM at double frequency will not make the read operation of SRAM as a critical path. Finally, it should be noticed that the accessing addresses of SRAM is very simple. The write and read addresses are generated by simple add-one counters with modulo 24.
Let us recall the CNU from [18], there is a local sorter to get the minimum value from VNs located in one column group. Since our parity-check matrix is divided into 300 groups, there are 63 VNs in one column group. Each CNU out of 63 CNUs in one CNU block will receive the messages from one VN accordingly. In the other words, there is only one new message taken as an input to the sorter in each CNU. We can remove the local sorter from the CNU. It is not surprised that the CNU is now equivalent to the CNU with k = 2 in [25]. For each CNU, the registers store the min-and-index messages and 1-bit global sign bits. Meanwhile, the min-and-index message refers to the first and second minimum values and their indices. The number of quantization bits q in our proposed decoder is assumed as 4 and the row degree dc is around 50. The min-and-index message is 2 × ((q − 1) + log2(dc) ) = 2 × (3 + 6) = 18 bits in total. The data bandwidth of one

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: 520k (18 900, 17 010) ARRAY DISPERSION LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURES

1299

Fig. 6. Data flow between CNUs and the storage elements, and the access behavior of the proposed hybrid storage architecture.

Fig. 7. (a) Two-port SRAM. (b) Single-port SRAM operated at double clock frequency.
CNU block is 63 × (18 + 1) = 1197 bits. The total storage sizes of register and SRAM are 6 × 1197 = 7182 bits and 24 × 1197 = 28 728 bits, respectively. In a conventional SRAM-based decoder, the data bandwidth of SRAM is at least 1197 × 6 = 7182 bits since six submatrices are processed at the same time. However, the data bandwidth of SRAM in the proposed architecture is only 1197 bits, which is reduced by 5/6. Moreover, about 24/30 block messages are stored in SRAM for better area efficiency compared with a conventional register-based architecture. The proposed hybrid architecture enjoys both high data bandwidth from register and better area efficiency from SRAM.
B. Overall Architecture
Fig. 8 shows the overall decoder architecture and the details of one CNU block. There are one VNU block and six CNU blocks, where a VNU block includes 63 VNUs and each CNU block includes 63 sorters, 63 sign operation units, and two barrel shifters for messages and global sign bit. The data flows start from registers, then go through VNUs, CNUs, and barrel shifters. Finally, the data are written back to registers or SRAMs. As presented in Section II, the CV message includes the min-and-index message and global sign bit. MCNU,Bk represents the 63 min-and-index messages stored in the registers of block Bk for 0 ≤ k < 6. It is sent to the sorters in block Bk. Then, the min message LC X,m,BK is selected from MCNU,Bk by the first/second min selector and sent to VNU.

After the VNU process, the absolute value of VC messages L XC,m,BK is sent to sorters in CNU block Bk . The sorters update the min-and-index messages from L XC,m,BK and MCNU,Bk . The new min-and-index messages MCNU,Bk after shifting by barrel shifters are then stored in the registers or SRAMs. The global sign bits are updated in the same manner as the min-and-index messages.
One may notice that the proposed parity-check matrix has maximum column degree of 5, but the hardware architecture adopts six CNU blocks. The reason of using six CNU blocks is to avoid serve global routing among CNU blocks. As shown in Fig. 8, the updated messages from each CNU block are stored in a corresponding register block. Despite the number of nonzero elements in each column group, six register blocks are required for storing messages of six successive row groups in order to implement the proposed hybrid storage architecture. Since the routing congestion is one of the critical challenges when implementing a large LDPC code, the hardware architecture adopts six CNU blocks to avoid additional multiplexers for selecting messages from and to the six register blocks before and after the update in CNU blocks.
Since the decoder updates 63 VNs of one column block at each cycle, the data bandwidth of SRAM storing the channel values is (63 × 2 bit) = 126 bits. All the channel values are stored in a 300 × 126 single-port SRAM. In the beginning of the decoding process, the hard or soft-2-bit channel values are mapped to predefined log-likelihood ratio (LLR). The hard decision of VNU is written to a 300 × 63 single-port SRAM at each cycle. Finally, the two-port SRAMs storing min-andindex messages and global sign bits are replaced by singleport SRAMs to reduce silicon area by operating the SRAMs at double frequency. Note that the ECC protection for SRAM is not adopted in this paper. The NAND flash controller usually adopts the read retry technique [12] to reread and redecode the data multiple times if correction fails. In addition, the failure of decoding due to soft error in SRAM will not lead to a system crash. In general, the NAND flash controller will report a read failure to the OS system and the system will handle the failure as an exception case.
Fig. 9 shows the correcting capabilities of the proposed NMS-VSS decoder using hard and soft-2-bit channel

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1300

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

Fig. 8. LDPC decoder architecture and details of one CNU block.

values over AWGN channel. Two quantization sets Q(6, 2) and Q(4, 2) of both hard and soft-2-bit NMS-VSS decoders are simulated. Q(a, b) represents the message bit width in decoder with a-bit in total and b-bit for fractional part. Therefore, the hard (1-bit) or soft-2-bit (2-bit) channel values will be mapped to 4-bit or 6-bit messages in VNU update. The simulation results show that the soft-2-bit channel value can further improve the correcting capability of hard NMS-VSS by 1 dB. In addition, there is almost no performance loss of Q(4, 2) compared with Q(6, 2). Therefore, 4-bit quantization is adopted for hardware implementation. Furthermore, we compare the FER and BER performances of both NMS-VSS and TDMP decoding algorithms. The simulations in Fig. 10 show that both algorithms have similar correcting capability.
We implement the proposed decoder architecture on FPGA and investigate the error-floors of (18 900, 17 010) LDPC code with and without masking for comparison. The early termination technique is adopted and the maximum iteration is set to 20. The decoding throughput of the presented decoder implemented on Xilinx Virtex-5 LX330FPGA FPGA board is ∼187 Mb/s under a clock frequency of 66 MHz. Fig. 11 shows the FER and BER performances of both LDPC codes with soft-2-bit channel values over AWGN channel. We also provide the FER and BER performances of the proposed LDPC codes over AWGN channel with x-axis of RBER in Fig. 12. The error-floor of our designed LDPC code with column degree of 4 or 5 is not observed down to BER of 10−12. In contrast, the error-floor of LDPC code without masking is observed at BER of 10−10. The simulation results show that removing short cycles and trapping sets by masking matrix can efficiently suppress the error-floor.

Fig. 9. FER and BER performances of an (18 900, 17 010) LDPC code decoded by NMS-VSS with different quantizations over AWGN channel. Hard and S2b represent 1-bit and soft-2-bit channel value, respectively. NMS-VSS: normalized min-sum variable-node-centric sequential scheduling decoding algorithm.

C. Implementation Results and Comparison
Finally, we implement the proposed decoder architecture using UMC 90 nm. The input quantization and message quantization in decoder are soft-2-bit and 4-bit, respectively. The maximum number of iteration is 20 and early termination is adopted. The postlayout simulation shows that the presented decoder can achieve a throughput of 1.58 Gb/s with

Fig. 10. FER and BER performances of an (18 900, 17 010) LDPC code decoded by both NMS-VSS and TDMP decoding algorithms.
six iterations under a clock frequency of 166.6 MHz. Notice that the simulation in Section V will show that the average number of iteration is about 6 at the early life of NAND

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: 520k (18 900, 17 010) ARRAY DISPERSION LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURES
TABLE I COMPARISON TABLE

1301

Fig. 11. FER and BER performance of the proposed (18 900, 17 010) soft-2-bit LDPC code over AWGN channel. The maximum iteration is 20 and the number of quantization bit in decoder is Q(4, 2).
flash memory. The gate count is reported as 520k gates as we resynthesis the postlayout net-list (including SRAMs). Fig. 13 shows the place-and-route result and gate count of major modules. The FER and BER performances over AWGN channel are provided in Fig. 11.
Table I lists the comparisons with several state-of-the-art works implementing NMS-VSS algorithm [18], [25], [26] and they are designed for wireless communication application. Meanwhile, Kim and Sung [34] present an LDPC decoder designed for NAND flash application with a very long code length, but the decoding algorithm is not NMS-VSS. In addition, we compare our work with two designs [23], [24] implementing row-based shuffle decoding algorithm for IEEE 802.3an [36]. The LDPC codes adopted in IEEE 802.3an have similar properties, such as high code-rate and low error floor, with the codes adopted for NAND flash application. For fair comparison, the area of all LDPC decoders is normalized to 90 nm. The throughput-to-area ratio (TAR) [35] is computed as TAR = throughput (in Gb/s)/scaled area

Fig. 12. FER and BER performance of the proposed (18 900, 17 010) soft-2-bit LDPC code over AWGN channel with x-axis of RBER. The maximum iteration is 20 and the number of quantization bit in the decoder is Q(4, 2).
Fig. 13. (a) Place-and-route result. (b) Gate count of major modules.
(in mm2). The energy efficiency is defined by energy per bit = power (in mW)/throughput (in Gb/s). Both the registerbased decoders in [18] and [23] achieve better TAR and energy

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1302

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

efficiency since registers can provide a large data bandwidth for high throughput design. However, the full use of registers comes along with a large silicon area and causes worse routing congestion when implementing large LDPC codes. Our decoder occupies less gate count and silicon area even the code length is nine times longer.
In [25], the decoder has moderate TAR but low decoding throughput. The large number of decoding iteration may result from the performance requirement of application. In [26], the FIFO-based decoder supports multiple communication standards and achieves high decoding throughput. The code lengths among the multiple communication standards range from 336 to 8640. Additional hardware cost due to the support of multiple standards, and the FIFO-based storage element are the major reasons leading to larger layout area. Compared with these two decoders, the presented decoder achieves better TAR and energy efficiency even a longer LDPC code is implemented.
Kim and Sung [34] present the implementation of an (68 254, 65 536) LDPC code. The huge layout area results from a large parity-check matrix and a high column degree. Although the code length of our decoder is 3 times shorter, our decoder achieves 12 times larger TAR and energy efficiency with similar decoding throughput.
Ueng et al. [24] present a multimode decoder supporting Reed Solomen-based LDPC codes. The decoder in [24] has better TAR and similar energy efficiency but larger silicon area. In general, doubling decoding throughput will not double the silicon area and power consumption. Therefore, the TAR and the energy efficiency of our decoder architecture can be improved if we implement for higher throughput. However, such decoder is not implemented in this paper since higher throughput is over designed for NAND flash application. When the moderate throughput is needed, our architecture only occupies 520k gate count and 2.56 mm2 even a longer code is implemented. It is worth noting that our contribution in this paper not only includes the efficient hardware implementation, but also the code construction algorithm for satisfying the requirements of NAND flash application.
V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS ON REAL NAND FLASH MEMORY
In this section, we will present some studies and measurements of NAND flash memory. We aim at understanding the decoding performances of our proposed LDPC decoder on real NAND flash memory. NAND flash memory is a nonvolatile memory that can preserve the programmed data when the power is OFF. Before programming new data, the NAND flash memory must be erased first. One program operation followed by an erase operation is called a program/erase (P/E) cycle. Fig. 14 shows the measured RBER of 2Xnm 3-bit-per-cell NAND flash memories. The x-axis is P/E cycle in arbitrary unit (a.u.). The measurement results show that the RBER keeps growing as P/E cycles increases. This observation leads to an idea that a weak LDPC code is enough for correcting errors in the early life of the NAND flash memory. The LDPC codes can provide different levels of correcting capability when the

Fig. 14. Measured RBER of a 2Xnm 3-bit-per-cell NAND flash memories at different P/E cycles (a.u.).
number of quantization bit of channel values from NAND flash memory varies. In NAND flash memory application, the maximum number of quantization bit is usually soft-2-bit due to the limitation of long data transfer time [10], [12]. Depending on the current RBER level, the NAND controller may acquire hard (1-bit) or soft-2-bit (2-bit) channel values from flash memory to LDPC decoder. It should be noticed that both hard or soft-2-bit channel values are mapped to LLR by the algorithm in [37] before the decoding process.
Ho et al. [12] present a dynamic sensing approach whose concept is to acquire more accurate channel values on demand. We adopt this concept in our simulation. In read operation, the 1-bit hard channel values are read from NAND flash memory and decoded by hard NMS-VSS. If the hard NMS-VSS fails to decode, the controller will acquire the second-bit channel value from flash memory. The controller will update the LLRs from both the old hard 1-bit and the new second-bit channel values and then enable the soft-2-bit NMS-VSS for enhanced correction. We simulated about 10 000 noise patterns to analyze the usage percentage of the hard and soft-2-bit NMS-VSS at various P/E cycles. The noise patterns are measured from 2Xnm 3-bit-per-cell NAND flash memories at different P/E cycles. Fig. 15 shows the simulated results with a.u. in x-axis. The usage percentages vary along the lifetime of a NAND flash memory. For example, the hard NMS-VSS decoder can correct all the noise patterns up to P/E cycle of 3 (a.u.). At P/E cycle of 4 (a.u.), the hard NMS-VSS corrects ∼95% patterns, while the soft-2-bit NMS-VSS corrects the remaining patterns.
Generally speaking, the flash memory can be operated at a very high throughput at the early stage of life. The data rate of flash memory is almost the same as the decoding throughput of LDPC decoder since only hard channel value is read. As the RBER keeps increasing, the percentage of patterns requiring second-bit channel value for enhanced correction increases. Once the second-bit channel value is read, the data rate of NAND flash memory must be decreased. Although the data rate degrades, the lifetime is extended due to the stronger protection from LDPC codes. Obviously, it is a tradeoff between the lifetime and the data rate of NAND flash memory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HO et al.: 520k (18 900, 17 010) ARRAY DISPERSION LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURES

1303

Fig. 15. Usage percentage of the three decoding algorithms at various P/E cycles by simulating 10 000 patterns.

VI. CONCLUSION
We have demonstrated the proposed design methodology consisting of code construction, optimization, and hardware implementation. The presented two-step approach can construct LDPC codes not only satisfy long code length, high code-rate, good correcting capability, and low error floor, but also have hardware-friendly features, such as small submatrix size and diagonal-like structure of nonzero elements. The code optimization adopts masking to further improve the BER performance and suppress the error-floor. In hardware implementation, the small submatrix size efficiently solves the issues of large barrel shifter and worse routing congestion. Meanwhile, hybrid storage architecture is proposed based on the diagonal-like structure of nonzero elements. The implementation results show that the proposed decoder can achieve a throughput of 1.58 Gb/s with a gate count of 520k only. In addition, the proposed LDPC decoder meets the throughput requirements of both Toggle DDR 1.0 and ONFI 2.3 NAND interfaces.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank S. Lin for the valuable discussions and suggestions on code construction, and NCTU–Liteon Research Center for the support.

Fig. 16. Average number of decoding iterations, decoding throughput, and power consumption of the proposed LDPC decoder at different P/E cycles.
Fig. 16 shows the average number of decoding iterations, average throughput, and power consumption of the proposed LDPC decoder at different P/E cycles. The throughput of decoder is linearly proportional to the number of decoding iterations. The simulation results show that the throughput of hard NMS-VSS decoder ranges from 1.89 to 0.87 Gb/s between P/E cycles of 1 ∼ 4 (a.u.). The NAND flash memory with Toggle DDR 1.0 or ONFI 2.3 NAND interfaces has a maximum data rate of 200 MHz × 8 bit = 1.6 Gb/s. Thus, the proposed hard NMS-VSS LDPC decoder can meet the throughput requirement at the early lifetime. As the RBER keeps increasing, the decoding throughput degrades and reaches 0.87 Gb/s at P/E cycle of 4 (a.u.). Starting from P/E cycle of 5 (a.u.), almost all patterns require the second-bit channel values, so that the maximum data rate of flash memory will be reduced to 0.8 Gb/s due to double read operations. As the throughput of soft-2-bit NMS-VSS decoder ranges from 1.7 to 1.05 Gb/s between P/E cycles of 4 ∼ 6, the decoding throughput will not be the bottleneck. In conclusion, the data rate of NAND flash memory degrades from 1.6 to 0.8 Gb/s between P/E cycles of 1 ∼ 4 (a.u.) and then keeps at 0.8 Gb/s up to P/E cycle of 6 (a.u.). In addition, the decoder adopts the early termination technique [27] to avoid redundant time. The decoder achieves the highest throughput by starting to decode the next codeword immediately when the current codeword satisfies all check equations. Since the decoder is always in operation without idle time, the changes in the power consumptions are very small at different P/E cycles.

REFERENCES
[1] Y. Li et al., “128 Gb 3 b/cell NAND flash memory in 19 nm technology with 18 Mb/s write rate and 400 Mb/s toggle mode,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers (ISSCC), Feb. 2012, pp. 436–437.
[2] G. Naso et al., “A 128 Gb 3 b/cell NAND flash design using 20 nm planar-cell technology,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers (ISSCC), Feb. 2013, pp. 218–219.
[3] R. C. Bose and D. K. Ray-Chaudhuri, “On a class of error correcting binary group codes,” Inf. Control, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 68–79, 1960.
[4] A. Hocquenghem, “Codes correcterus d’erreurs,” Chiffres, vol. 2, pp. 117–156, Sep. 1959.
[5] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[6] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Proc. 5th IMA Conf. Cryptogr. Coding, Oct. 1995, pp. 100–111.
[7] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[8] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[9] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[10] J. Yang, “High-efficiency SSD for reliable data storage systems,” presented at the Flash Memory Summit, 2011.
[11] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Over-10×-extendedlifetime 76%-reduced-error solid-state drives (SSDs) with errorprediction LDPC architecture and error-recovery scheme,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers (ISSCC), Feb. 2012, pp. 424–426.
[12] K.-C. Ho, P.-C. Fang, H.-P. Li, C.-Y. M. Wang, and H.-C. Chang, “A 45 nm 6 b/cell charge-trapping flash memory using LDPC-based ECC and drift-immune soft-sensing engine,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers (ISSCC), Feb. 2013, pp. 222–223.
[13] L. Zhang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and I. F. Blake, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: An algebraic construction, rank analysis, and codes on latin squares,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 3126–3139, Nov. 2010.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1304

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 24, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

[14] R. Lidl and H. Niederreiter, Introduction to Finite Fields and Their Applications. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1994.
[15] Y. Y. Tai, L. Lan, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Algebraic construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for the AWGN and erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 1765–1774, Oct. 2006.
[16] L. Zeng, L. Lan, Y. Y. Tai, B. Zhou, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of nonbinary cyclic, quasi-cyclic and regular LDPC codes: A finite geometry approach,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 378–387, Mar. 2008.
[17] J. Yang, “Low-power error correction for mobile storage,” presented at the Flash Memory Summit, 2014.
[18] C.-L. Chen, K.-S. Lin, H.-C. Chang, W.-C. Fang, and C.-Y. Lee, “A 11.5-Gbps LDPC decoder based on CP-PEG code construction,” in Proc. IEEE ESSCIRC, Sep. 2009, pp. 412–415.
[19] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[20] M. M. Mansour, “A turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm for sparse parity-check matrix codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4376–4392, Nov. 2006.
[21] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[22] S.-W. Yen, S.-Y. Hung, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, S.-J. Jou, and C.-Y. Lee, “A 5.79-Gb/s energy-efficient multirate LDPC codec chip for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 2246–2257, Sep. 2012.
[23] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10GBASE-T Ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[24] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-J. Yang, K.-C. Wang, and C.-J. Chen, “A multimode shuffled iterative decoder architecture for high-rate RS-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2790–2803, Oct. 2010.
[25] Y.-L. Ueng, C.-J. Yang, and C.-J. Chen, “A shuffled message-passing decoding method for memory-based LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2009, pp. 892–895.
[26] Y.-L. Ueng, B.-J. Yang, C.-J. Yang, H.-C. Lee, and J.-D. Yang, “An efficient multi-standard LDPC decoder design using hardwarefriendly shuffled decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 743–756, Mar. 2013.
[27] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. New York, NY, USA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[28] H. Kim et al., “A 159 mm2 32 nm 32 Gb MLC NAND-flash memory with 200 Mb/s asynchronous DDR interface,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers (ISSCC), Feb. 2010, pp. 442–443.
[29] ONFI 2.3. [Online]. Available: http://www.onfi.org/specifications [30] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu.
Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435. [31] J. Xu, L. Chen, I. Djurdjevic, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar,
“Construction of regular and irregular LDPC codes: Geometry decomposition and masking,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 121–134, Jan. 2007. [32] L. Lan, L. Zeng, Y. Y. Tai, L. Chen, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for AWGN and binary erasure channels: A finite field approach,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2429–2458, Jul. 2007. [33] J. Li, K. Liu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Algebraic quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: Construction, low error-floor, large girth and a reducedcomplexity decoding scheme,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 2626–2637, Aug. 2014. [34] J. Kim and W. Sung, “Rate-0.96 LDPC decoding VLSI for soft-decision error correction of NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1004–1015, May 2014.

[35] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.
[36] IEEE Standard for Information Technology—Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems—Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Specific Requirements Part 3: Carrier Sense Multiple Access With Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications—Corrigendum 2: IEEE Std 802.3an-2006 10GBASE-T Correction (Corrigendum to IEEE Std 802.3-2005), Aug. 2007, pp. 1–2.
[37] J. Wang, T. Courtade, H. Shankar, and R. D. Wesel, “Soft information for LDPC decoding in flash: Mutual-information optimized quantization,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.
Kin-Chu Ho received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronics engineering from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2008 and 2010, respectively, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electronics engineering.
His current research interests include VLSI design and implementation for error control codes, and signal processing algorithm for storage system.
Chih-Lung Chen received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2004, 2006, and 2012, respectively, all in electronics engineering.
His current research interests include VLSI implementation of error control codes and wireless communication systems.
Hsie-Chia Chang received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1995, 1997, and 2002, respectively, all in electronics engineering.
He was with OSP/DE1, MediaTek Corporation, Taipei, Taiwan, from 2002 to 2003, where he was involved in decoding architectures for combo single chip. In 2003, he joined the faculty of the Department of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, where he has been a Professor since 2010. He has committed himself to designing high code-rate ECC schemes for flash memory and multi-Gb/s chip implementations for wireless communications. He has served as the Deputy Director General with the Chip Implementation Center, Tainan, Taiwan, since 2014. His current research interests include algorithms and VLSI architectures in signal processing, in particular, for error control codes and crypto-systems. Dr. Chang was a recipient of the Outstanding Youth Electrical Engineer Award from the Chinese Institute of Electrical Engineering in 2010, and the Outstanding Youth Researcher Award from the Taiwan IC Design Society in 2011. He has also served as an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS I: REGULAR PAPERS since 2012, and was a Technical Program Committee Member of the IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference from 2011 to 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

