640
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, APRIL 2016
A Generator-Matrix-Based Approach for Adaptively Generating Cut-Inducing
Redundant Parity Checks
Hossein Falsafain and Sayyed Rasoul Mousavi
Abstract—A
generator
matrix
(GM)-based
approach
for
adaptively
deriving
cut-inducing
redundant
parity
checks
(RPCs) during the adaptive linear programming decoding
algorithm is presented. More precisely speaking, if the decoder
gets stuck in a non-integral pseudocodeword, then the resulting
RPCs are likely to provide violated forbidden-set inequalities that
can separate this non-integral optimal solution from the feasible
region. The described approach can be viewed as a GM-based
counterpart of the approach proposed by Zhang and Siegel in
2012. For binary linear codes of low rate, while providing the
same error-correcting performance, our approach requires much
less computational time compared to its analogue.
Index Terms—Adaptive linear programming (ALP) decoding,
cut-inducing redundant parity check (RPC), cutting plane algo-
rithm, heuristic separation algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
I
T HAS long been known that the maximum likelihood
(ML) decoding problem of binary linear codes is NP-
hard in general. In a seminal work, Feldman et al. provided
three different but equivalent 0-1 integer linear programming
(ILP) formulations of the problem [1]. In this work, they intro-
duced the linear programming (LP) decoding problem, which is
a computationally efficient approximation to the ML decoding
problem. An LP decoding problem instance was indeed the LP
relaxation of a 0-1 ILP instance constructed by using either of
these three formulations.
Several strategies have been suggested in the literature for
improving the error-correcting performance of the basic version
of the LP decoding algorithm. Amongst the most significant
ones are cutting plane-based approaches (see, e.g., [2]–[6]) and
approaches of branch-and-bound nature (see, e.g., [4], [7]).
Another line of research is devoted to reducing the computa-
tional complexity of LP decoding. This can be done by, for
example, more concise ILP formulation of the ML decoding
problem (see, e.g., [8], [9]), or by adaptive incorporation of the
constraints describing the parity check equations into the LP
problem instance at hand in an ad hoc fashion [3].
Several works in the literature suggest that augmenting a
parity check matrix (PCM) with its redundant parity checks
(RPCs) can improve the error-correcting capability under LP
decoding [1], [6], [10]. This is due to the fact that the
Manuscript received December 1, 2015; revised January 19, 2016; accepted
February 8, 2016. Date of publication February 16, 2016; date of current ver-
sion April 7, 2016. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper
and approving it for publication was M. Baldi.
H. Falsafain is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan 84156-83111, Iran (e-mail:
h.falsafain@ec.iut.ac.ir).
S. R. Mousavi is with the Department of Computer Engineering
and Information Technology, Amirkabir University of Technology, Tehran
1591634311, Iran (e-mail: srm@aut.ac.ir).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2016.2530706
forbidden-set (FS) inequalities corresponding to these RPCs
can strengthen (tighten) the LP relaxation. As an effective and
promising strategy, one can enhance an adaptive LP decoder
with a subroutine for adaptively generating RPCs whose cor-
responding FS inequalities are likely to cut off (separate) a
fractional optimal solution, so-called as a non-integral pseu-
docodeword, from the feasible region. There are several heuris-
tic techniques proposed in the literature for adaptively gener-
ating cut-inducing RPCs [2]–[6]. The method presented in [2]
can be regarded as the most effective technique available. In this
correspondence, we describe a novel generator matrix (GM)-
based method for obtaining cut-inducing RPCs that is based on
the same rationale as the method of [2] and, while providing the
same error-correcting performance, performs faster for binary
linear codes of low rate.
The rest of this letter is organized as follows. In the next
section, some preliminaries on the LP decoding algorithm
and its adaptive version are given. Our GM-based approach
for generating cut-inducing RPCs, which can be viewed as
an alternative to the technique presented in [2], is given in
Section III. Experimental results demonstrating the effective-
ness of the algorithm are presented in Section IV. Finally,
Section V concludes the letter.
II. BASIC DEFINITIONS, NOTATIONS, AND FACTS
A binary linear code C of length n is a subspace of the vec-
tor space Fn
2. The dimension (rank) of C is its dimension as
a vector space over F2. Let us call by an (n, k) code, a k-
dimensional binary linear code of length n. Such a code can
be specified as the row space of a generator matrix G ∈Fk×n
2
or as the null space of a rank-(n −k) parity check matrix
H ∈Fm×n
2
, where m ≥n −k. As stated earlier, the ML decod-
ing problem of binary linear codes is NP-hard in general. In
[1], Feldman et al. described some different but equivalent 0-1
ILP formulations of the ML decoding problem, the LP relax-
ation of each of which yields an LP decoding problem instance.
All of these formulations employ the same objective function
⟨γ , x⟩, where ⟨·, ·⟩denotes the inner (dot) product, and the cost
vector γ is in fact the vector of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs or
L-values). If c ∈C is the transmitted codeword and r ∈Rn is
the received vector, then we have γ j = log
 Pr(r j|c j=0)
Pr(r j|c j=1)

. The
distinction between the formulations lies in the approach they
take to describe a parity check equation. In one of the afore-
mentioned formulations, a parity check constraint of Hamming
weight w is described by using 2w−1 linear inequalities each
of which is called a forbidden-set inequality. The present work
is based on this FS-inequalities-based description of the parity
check constraints. According to this formulation, the ith row of
1558-2558 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
FALSAFAIN AND MOUSAVI: GENERATOR-MATRIX-BASED APPROACH FOR ADAPTIVELY GENERATING CUT-INDUCING REDUNDANT PARITY CHECKS
641
the parity check matrix H, which we denote by Hi•, is described
by the following set of constraints (1 ≤i ≤m):
⎧
⎨
⎩

j∈V
(1 −x j) +

j∈supp(Hi•)\V
x j ≥1 :
V ⊆supp(Hi•), |V| ≡1 mod 2
⎫
⎬
⎭.
Therefore, given γ ∈Rn and H ∈Fm×n
2
, the ILP problem
instance specifying our ML decoding problem instance is
Minimize ⟨γ , x⟩,
subject to

j∈V
(1 −x j) +

j∈supp(Hi•)\V
x j ≥1,
for all 2|supp(Hi•)|−1odd-size subsets V of supp (Hi•)
and every 1 ≤i ≤m;
x ∈{0, 1}n.
By dropping (relaxing) the integrality restrictions on x, i.e., by
allowing the coordinates of x to take any value in the range
[0, 1], we obtain an LP decoding problem instance. Before
proceeding further, we need the following definition. Let h
be a parity check constraint in the row space of H. A vector
u ∈[0, 1]n is said to violate an FS inequality corresponding
to h if there exists an odd-size subset V of supp(h) such
that 
j∈V (1 −u j) + 
j∈supp(h)\V u j < 1. The parity check
equation h itself is then said to be cut-inducing.
The difficulty we face in our description of parity check
constraints by FS inequalities is that the number of linear
constraints describing ⟨x, Hi•⟩≡0 mod 2 grows exponentially
with |supp(Hi•)|. One elegant and effective way to avoid this
trouble is to incorporate FS inequalities into the problem in an
adaptive manner [3]. More strictly speaking, in the initial step,
the LP problem instance we consider is to minimize the objec-
tive function ⟨γ , x⟩over the polyhedron specified by the set of
linear inequalities

1≤j≤n
γ j≥0
{x j ≥0} ∪

1≤j≤n
γ j<0
{x j ≤1}.
(1)
Let x∗∈[0, 1]n be the optimal solution. Now, we have to exam-
ine the rows of H to determine whether or not there exists any
violated FS inequality. If there exists no such an FS inequality,
then we are done; x∗is also an optimal solution to the LP decod-
ing problem instance that comprises all the m
i=1 2|supp(Hi•)|−1
possible FS inequalities. Otherwise, we include all the violated
FS inequalities in the instance at hand and try to solve this new
LP problem instance. The process is repeated iteratively until
no further violated FS inequality can be found. If the solution
to this final LP problem instance is integral, then it is guaran-
teed to be an ML codeword, since the LP decoding algorithm
admits the ML certificate property [1]. Otherwise, the decoder
declares failure and halts. Thus, starting from the initial inequal-
ities (1), the constraint set is progressively expanded by adding
the violated FS inequalities. The above-described procedure is
known as the adaptive linear programming (ALP) decoding
algorithm [3]. There are two points that should be noted here.
Firstly, if a vector v ∈[0, 1]n violates an FS inequality imposed
by a parity check constraint h ∈C⊥, then it satisfies all the other
FS inequalities corresponding to h with strict inequality [2], [3].
Secondly, for a given vector v ∈[0, 1]n and an arbitrary parity
check equation h ∈C⊥, using an algorithm presented in [2],
[11], [12], which is dubbed as cut search algorithm (CSA) in
[2], one can efficiently ascertain whether or not the given par-
ity check constraint h can provide a violated FS inequality on
v. If h confirmed as cut-inducing, CSA returns the violated FS
inequality.
We conclude this section with the following definitions from
elementary linear algebra. A matrix is said to be in row-echelon
form if, firstly, all the all-zero rows occur at the bottom of the
matrix; secondly, for every non-all-zero row, the first nonzero
entry is one, which is called the leading entry (or the leading
one); and lastly, for every two successive non-all-zero rows, the
leading entry of the lower row lies farther to the right than the
leading entry of the row above. A matrix in row-echelon form
is said to be in reduced row-echelon form if every column con-
taining a leading one, which is called as a pivot column, has
zeros elsewhere.
III. ADAPTIVELY DERIVING CUT-INDUCING RPCS:
A GM-BASED APPROACH
One definite advantage of the ALP decoding algorithm is that
its error-correcting performance can be boosted by a subroutine
for generating cut-inducing RPCs [2]–[5]. Indeed, if the rows
of H fail to provide violated FS inequalities, then the subrou-
tine is invoked. Suppose that our LP problem instance at hand
attains its minimum at the fractional extreme point v ∈[0, 1]n.
Our aim is to find an RPC that can separate v from the current
feasible region. Thus, for v to be cut off from the current fea-
sible region, our RPC has to provide a violated FS inequality.
Finding such an RPC is an intractable task [5]. However, there
are various inexact (incomplete) heuristic approaches suggested
in the literature for deriving RPCs that are likely to provide vio-
lated FS inequalities. Before briefly surveying these heuristic
methods, it should be pointed out that it is not the case that for
any given v ∈[0, 1]n there always exists an RPC in C⊥that can
provide a violated FS inequality for separating v [10].
In the approach proposed by Taghavi and Siegel in [3], firstly,
a randomly chosen cycle in the Tanner graph corresponding
to the PCM H all of whose variable nodes have non-integral
values is considered. Such a cycle is known as a fractional
cycle. Next, the rows of H corresponding to the check nodes
of this cycle are summed up modulo 2. If the resulting RPC
provides a violated valid inequality, then the subroutine is
done. Otherwise, another, not necessarily distinct, arbitrary ran-
domly selected fractional cycle is chosen, and the process is
repeated until some stopping criterion is met. In the heuristic
technique described in [6], the goal is to find an RPC h that
provides the violated FS inequality x j∗≤
j∈supp(h)\{ j∗} x j,
where j∗= arg max j∈supp(h) v j. The columns of the submatrix
consisting of all the rows of H which are adjacent to at least one
nonzero component of v are permuted in a certain prescribed
manner, and the resulting matrix is put into row-echelon form.
The rows of this final matrix tend to provide an FS inequality
of the above form. The approach offered in [5] tries to obtain
an RPC that is adjacent to exactly one non-integral coordinate
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
642
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 20, NO. 4, APRIL 2016
of v. Such an RPC assuredly yields a violated valid inequality
separating v from the feasible region. Some other conditions,
which if satisfied guarantee that the given RPC is cut-inducing,
are also investigated (see Propositions 3.4 and 3.5 in [5]). In a
method given in [4], the columns of H are permuted by permu-
tations taken from the automorphism group of its null space.
The method then takes advantage of these different alternative
representations of H for deriving cut-inducing RPCs.
Finally, Zhang and Siegel in [2] described a method that
can be regarded as the most promising heuristic available for
generating cut-inducing RPCs. Their technique is based on the
observation that an RPC with fewer number of non-integral
neighbors is more likely to provide a violated FS inequality
separating v from the feasible region. In other words, if h is
an element in the row space of the PCM H, then the smaller
the size of the set { j ∈supp(h) : v j /∈{0, 1}} is, the more prob-
able h can yield an FS inequality for which 
j∈V(1 −v j) +

j∈supp(h)\V v j < 1, where V is an odd-size subset of supp(h).
Furthermore, to increase the chance of the RPC h being cut-
inducing, its non-integral neighbors should be as far away from
0.5 as possible. We reorder the columns of H and, as well, the
coordinates of v using a permutation, say σ, so that if for two
indices 1 ≤j1, j2 ≤n, |v j1 −0.5| > |v j2 −0.5|, then H• j1 is
positioned to the right of H• j2 (and v j1 is positioned to the
right of v j2), where H• j denotes the jth column of the PCM
H. Let us denote the permuted PCM as H′ and the permuted
vector as v′. Now, if Nfrac(v) denotes the number of fractional
entries of v, then we put the submatrix comprised of the left-
most Nfrac(v) columns of H′ into reduced row-echelon form.
Hence, the above-mentioned observation indicates that the rows
of this final matrix, call it H′′, are very likely to provide cut-
inducing RPCs. We permute back the columns of H′′ using σ −1,
and employ CSA to determine whether or not the obtained rows
can provide violated FS inequalities.
In the sequel, we present a fundamentally similar approach
for deriving cut-inducing RPCs that is based on a generator
matrix G of the code C. Our GM-based adaptive cut generation
procedure embedded within the ALP algorithm is outlined in
Algorithm 1 (lines 10–17). First step is to permute the columns
of G in such a way that if |v j1 −0.5| < |v j2 −0.5|, then G• j1 is
positioned to the right of G• j2. Let τ denote the corresponding
permutation. We then bring the resulting matrix G′ into reduced
row-echelon form. If G′′ denotes this final matrix, then the same
observation as in [2] indicates that the non-pivot columns of G′′
are very likely to yield cut-inducing RPCs. To see how, assume
that G′′
• j is a non-pivot column (1 ≤j ≤n), and let c be an
arbitrary vector in the row space of G′′. If c = uG′′, for some
u ∈Fk
2, then
c j = ⟨u, G′′
• j⟩=

i∈supp(G′′
• j)
ui
mod 2.
(2)
On the other hand, if η is the mapping that maps each i to
the index of the pivot column whose (unique) nonzero entry
appears in the ith row, then it can readily be seen that cη(i) = ui.
Now, by (2) we have c j = 
i∈supp(G′′
• j) cη(i) mod 2. Hence,
x j =

i∈supp(G′′
• j)
xη(i)
mod 2,
(3)
Algorithm 1. The ALP decoding algorithm equipped with a
GM-based adaptive cut generation subroutine
Input: A parity check matrix H of the code C, a generator
matrix G of it, and the vector of LLRs γ ∈Rn
Output: An ML codeword in the row space of G or Failure
1: Initialize an LP problem instance whose objective function
is ⟨γ , x⟩and whose constraint set L is as in (1).
2: Obtain an optimal solution x∗of the LP problem instance
at hand.
3: C ←⊘
4: Apply CSA to the rows of H and include the resulting
violated FS inequalities in the set C .
5: if C ̸= ⊘then
6:
Set L ←L ∪C and goto 2.
7: else if x∗is integral then
8:
return x∗
9: else
10:
Rearrange the columns of G by the permutation τ,
which is defined according to the current optimal solu-
tion x∗, and call the resulting matrix G′.
11:
Put the matrix G′ into reduced row-echelon form and let
G′′ denote the resulting matrix.
12:
for j ←1 to n do
13:
if G′′
• j is a non-pivot column then
14:
Permute back the indices of the variables in
the equation x j = 
i∈supp(G′′
• j) xη(i) mod 2 by
τ −1 and call the resulting parity check equation
h. // η(i) is the index of the pivot column whose
unique nonzero entry occurs in the ith row.
15:
Apply CSA to h. If it provides a violated FS
inequality, then add this resulting cutting plane
to C .
16:
end if
17:
end for
18: end if
19: if C ̸= ⊘then
20:
Set L ←L ∪C and goto 2.
21: end if
22: return Failure
gives us an RPC of the desired form, i.e., an RPC most of
whose neighbors in v are integer or near-integer. Note that if
we permute the coordinates of v by the permutation τ, call
the resulting vector v′, then the entries of v′ corresponding to
the variables involved in the right-hand side of equation (3)
are indeed the leftmost ones, which are, by the nature of the
permutation τ, integer or near-integer. As the final step, after
permuting back the variable indices in (3) by τ −1, we employ
CSA to derive the possible violated FS inequality.
As will be demonstrated in the next section, for low-
rate binary linear codes, while providing the same error-
correcting capability, the above-described algorithm can per-
form much faster than its PCM-based counterpart. Indeed,
although Algorithm 1 and Algorithm 2 in [2] are of a similar
nature, when it comes to deriving cut-inducing RPCs for low-
rate linear codes, Algorithm 1 requires much less computational
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
FALSAFAIN AND MOUSAVI: GENERATOR-MATRIX-BASED APPROACH FOR ADAPTIVELY GENERATING CUT-INDUCING REDUNDANT PARITY CHECKS
643
Fig. 1. BLER versus Eb/N0 (in dB) for a (150, 30) and a (256, 64) girth-8
PEG LDPC code.
TABLE I
AVERAGE SIMULATION TIME (IN SECS.) FOR DECODING ONE CODEWORD
OF A (150, 30) AND A (256, 64) GIRTH-8 PEG LDPC CODE
burden. This improved average decoding time can be attributed
to the fact that for such codes, the generator matrix has far
fewer rows than the PCM. Thus, putting the generator matrix
into reduced row-echelon form is of less computational cost
than transforming the PCM into (partial) reduced row-echelon
form, which indicates that Algorithm 1 is more effective for
binary linear codes of low rate. Based on the same reasoning,
the PCM-based method performs faster than our Algorithm 1
for binary linear codes of high rate.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we present a simulation study to compare the
presented algorithm (Algorithm 1) with its PCM-based coun-
terpart (Algorithm 2 in [2]). The comparison is made using
two random-like progressive edge growth (PEG) low-density
parity check (LDPC) codes of girth 8. The first code is a
length-150 rate-0.2 LDPC code and the second is a length-256
rate-0.25 LDPC code. The simulations have been performed
over the AWGN channel, and at least 100 error frames have
been collected per point. For the comparison of the decoding
algorithms to be fair, by using the same random seed, we trans-
mitted exactly the same set of nonzero codewords. The two
algorithms have been implemented in C++ language, and the
experiments have been carried out on an Intel Core i7-2670QM
CPU at 2.20 GHz laptop with 4 GB of RAM running Windows
7 (64-bit) OS. We employed GUROBI [13] as the LP solver.
Block error rate (BLER) versus Eb/N0 curves are depicted in
Figure 1. From this figure (and from several other experiments
not presented here) it can be verified that the two algorithms
provide the same error-correcting performance. The average
simulation time (in seconds) for decoding one codeword using
the presented method and its PCM-based counterpart is given
in Table I. As is evident from the table, for low-rate LDPC
codes, employing the generator matrix instead of the parity
check matrix for deriving cut-inducing RPCs can considerably
improve the decoding time. This improvement is more pro-
nounced for linear codes of lower rate. As has been pointed
out in [2], the application of the PCM-based approach to codes
of large block length is computationally prohibitive. This is
also the case for our approach. Empirically, we observed that
in terms of statistics such as the average number of iterations
needed to decode one codeword and the average number of
cuts found per iteration, the behavior of our method is the same
as that of its PCM-based counterpart. Generally, both methods
have the same scope of applicability. They are only applicable
to short to moderate length codes. This means that further stud-
ies are required to develop practical methods for enhanced ALP
decoding of longer linear codes.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We proposed a novel approach for deriving cut-inducing
RPCs during the ALP decoding algorithm that can be con-
sidered as a GM-based analogue of the PCM-based method
described by Zhang and Siegel [2]. The error-correcting capa-
bility of the presented algorithm is the same as that of its
PCM-based version. However, our algorithm can perform much
faster for linear codes of low rate.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, M. Wainwright, and D. Karger, “Using linear programming
to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3,
pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[2] X. Zhang and P. Siegel, “Adaptive cut generation algorithm for improved
linear programming decoding of binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 6581–6594, Oct. 2012.
[3] M.-H. Taghavi and P. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming
decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec.
2008.
[4] A. Yufit, A. Lifshitz, and Y. Be’ery, “Efficient linear programming decod-
ing of HDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 758–766,
Mar. 2011.
[5] A. Tanatmis, S. Ruzika, H. Hamacher, M. Punekar, F. Kienle, and
N. Wehn, “A separation algorithm for improved LP-decoding of linear
block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3277–3289, Jul.
2010.
[6] M. Miwa, T. Wadayama, and I. Takumi, “A cutting-plane method based
on redundant rows for improving fractional distance,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas
Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1005–1012, Aug. 2009.
[7] K. Yang, J. Feldman, and X. Wang, “Nonlinear programming approaches
to decoding low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE J. Select. Areas
Commun., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1603–1613, Aug. 2006.
[8] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “A new linear programming approach
to decoding linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 3,
pp. 1061–1072, Mar. 2008.
[9] X. Jiao and J. Mu, “Improved check node decomposition for linear pro-
gramming decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 377–380,
Feb. 2013.
[10] J. Zumbragel, V. Skachek, and M. Flanagan, “On the pseudocodeword
redundancy of binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58,
no. 7, pp. 4848–4861, Jul. 2012.
[11] M. H. Taghavi, A. Shokrollahi, and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient implementa-
tion of linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57,
no. 9, pp. 5960–5982, Sep. 2011.
[12] T. Wadayama, “Interior point decoding for linear vector channels based
on convex optimization,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10,
pp. 4905–4921, Oct. 2010.
[13] GUROBI Optimization, Inc., GUROBI Optimizer Reference Manual, ver.
6.0, 2014.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
