IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

1357

Informed Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Dynamic Selection Strategy
Xingcheng Liu, Senior Member, IEEE, Zhenzhu Zhou, Ru Cui, and Erwu Liu, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Among most of the message scheduling strategies for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, the dynamic scheduling strategy behaves best in error correction performance. Dynamic selection is an integral part of dynamic scheduling decoding, which plays a decisive role throughout the decoding process. Usually, the dynamic selection strategy based on the message residuals only is employed in dynamic decoding algorithms, while other potentials of the dynamic selection strategy are rarely cared about. In this paper, we propose the triple judgment dynamic selection strategy combined with a Stability Criterion. Interestingly, the new strategy can be well applied to two different dynamic algorithms, namely, the V-VCRBP and the V-CVRBP algorithms. The proposed strategy has a great advantage: locating the message to be preferentially updated is extremely quick and accurate. Simulation results demonstrate that the V-VCRBP algorithm outperforms existing decoding algorithms in terms of BER performance and convergence speed, while the V-CVRBP algorithm has good error correction performance with a lower computational complexity.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, dynamic scheduling algorithms, Stability Criterion, dynamic selection strategy, triple judgment.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have become a research hotspot in the field of channel coding since first introduced in 1962 [1]. They can approach the Shannon-limit error correction performance when using the belief-propagation (BP) decoding algorithm [2]. As for the BP algorithm, all variable nodes or check nodes can be updated simultaneously, but the updated messages can only be used in the next iteration. To make better use of the updating messages, many methods have been devoted to the research such as construction of LDPC codes with few dominant trapping sets [3], symbol flipping with multiple votes [4], (q + 1)-bit quasi-uniform quantization method [5], dynamic scheduling strategy [6]. As is well known, reducing the number of decoding iterations does well to speed up the decoding process, because we can make better
Manuscript received July 7, 2015; revised October 28, 2015 and January 28, 2016; accepted January 31, 2016. Date of publication February 11, 2016; date of current version April 13, 2016. The work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant Nos. 61572534, 61173018). The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was E. Paolini.
X. Liu, Z. Zhou, and R. Cui are with the School of Electronics and Information Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: isslxc@mail.sysu.edu.cn; zhouzhzh6@mail2.sysu.edu.cn; cuirukecy@gmail.com).
E. Liu is with the School of Electronics and Information, Tongji University, Shanghai 200092, China (e-mail: erwu.liu@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2016.2527642

use of more new messages in one iteration. An efficient stopping criterion was proposed to avoid unnecessary iterations in the first stage, which can improve the decoding performance while reducing the number of decoding iterations [7]. In this paper, we focus on the dynamic scheduling decoding, which is another way to obtain good error correction performance through less decoding iterations. The demand for reducing the number of decoding iterations continuously drives the design of decoding schedules. The importance of the scheduling strategy in decoding algorithms of LDPC codes was highlighted in [6]. Serial scheduling strategy was addressed, where messages were updated in a fixed order [8], [9] and the latest available information can be used in the consecutive iterative decoding. It has been proved that the serial scheduling strategy converged twice as fast as the flooding strategy [10]. Fast convergence is an importance research topic in LDPC coding theory and practice. In addition to designing and improving decoders, there are other possible approaches to obtain excellent performance of LDPC codes, among which are designing LDPC codes with fast convergence properties [11] and employing iteration-constrained method similar to the case of designing IRA codes [12]. Or more comprehensively, the previous two designing methods of LDPC decoding with fast convergence properties and the code designing with the iteration-constrained method are taken into consideration as a whole. In our work, we focus on the former, designing and improving LDPC decoders.
The dynamic scheduling strategy was proposed to make use of the characteristic of dynamic change of messages throughout the decoding process. Prominent examples are the residual belief propagation (RBP) algorithm [13] and the node-wise RBP (NWRBP) algorithm [14] [15]. In these algorithms, messages were updated in a dynamic way based on the checkto-variable (C2V) edge residual. Since then, more algorithms with the dynamic scheduling strategy aroused much attention for their outstanding performance. Variable-to-check RBP (VC RBP) presented in [16] was a simple dynamic scheduling strategy, where the variable-to-check (V2C) message with the maximum V2C edge residual was first updated. In the efficient dynamic scheduling for layered BP (EDS-LBP) [17], the messages are updated based on the relative residuals of variable nodes. The informed variable-to-check RBP (IVC RBP) [18], the quota-based RBP (Q-RBP) [19] and the silent-variablenode-free RBP (SVNF-RBP) [19], they were the improved versions of the RBP and VC RBP algorithms. Moreover, decoding for non-binary LDPC codes with dynamic scheduling strategy [20] was also presented. A novel algorithm named lazy queue residual decoding (LQRD) algorithm was proposed in [21]. Furthermore, a maximum mutual information increase

0090-6778 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1358

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

(M2 I 2)-based algorithm can be used to arrange LDPC decoding schedules for faster convergence, where the maximum mutual information increase is used to guide the arrangement of the fixed decoding schedule [22]. All these algorithms described above improved the decoding performance by focusing on the scheduling strategy, namely, the strategy to make different updating orders but ignore the dynamic selection strategy throughout the decoding process. In this paper instead, much attention is paid to the potentials of the dynamic selection strategy.
The dynamic selection strategy hints that the order of the nodes or edges to be first updated can be determined, because these nodes or edges can be updated with the reliable messages collected from adjacent nodes or edges in different ways. Meanwhile, the whole message updating order in the process of dynamic decoding can be changed by considering the diversities of the dynamic selection strategy. Most dynamic decoding algorithms just take the residual (including the V2C edge residual and C2V edge residual as well as the node residual) as the criterion of message updating, which has some limitations and tends to incur a lose in accuracy to some extent, because some nodes or edges may be chosen again. Generally, the message with the maximum residual can be updated first. For example, in this research, we considered the dynamic selection strategy based on the variable node residual. It is assumed that variable node v1 could be wrong and variable node v2 could be right at current iteration. After an update, variable node v1 would get corrected and generates a residual r1. However, variable node v2 would turn into an error due to node oscillations or some other reasons, and thus generates a residual r2 in a similar way. If r1 is the maximum residual, then variable node v1 may be updated first in the subsequent iteration. Obviously, variable node v1 is a correct message. Hence, updating v1 once more is a waste of computation resources. What is more, it is hard to accelerate the convergence of decoding algorithms when doing so. A few studies have shown that the dynamic selection strategy is appealing and can be well applied to different updating orders leading to different decoding algorithms. For example, the twofold RBP (T-RBP) [23] combined the C2V edge residual [13] and the relative node residual [17]. The oscillating variable nodes based residual belief propagation (OV-RBP) [24] considered the change of the log likelihood ratio (LLR) values and the parity check equations to improve the reliability of variable nodes.
In this paper, we propose a new dynamic selection strategy combined with the Stability Criterion to assist in finding a better sequence of messages to be first updated. In the proposed algorithm, the Stability Criterion is used to make a judgment for all variable nodes and then classify them into two categories, the stable and unstable variable nodes. After that, the maximumnode-residual is chosen from one of the two categories. In this way, we locate the most unreliable variable node. It is worth noting that the proposed strategy can be well combined with the two proposed decoding algorithms, the V-CVRBP and the V-VCRBP algorithms. The biggest difference between the two proposed algorithms is how to choose the maximum-edgeresidual introduced below. After finding the maximum-noderesidual, we choose the maximum-edge-residual (including

maximum-C2V-residual and maximum-V2C-residual) in a less scope. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed algorithms based on the new dynamic selection strategy have better error correction performance than the existing decoding algorithms while providing appealing convergence speed. For the block-length 576 and rate 3/4 LDPC code, the V-VCRBP algorithm can gain about 0.5 dB compared with V-CVRBP algorithm at FER (frame error rate) of 2.0×10−5.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II briefly revisits the LLR BP decoding algorithm and describes the triple-judgment-based dynamic selection strategy in details. Section III introduces the two different dynamic decoding algorithms with the new strategy. Section IV presents the simulation results and further analyzes the complexities of the proposed algorithms. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.

II. PRELIMINARY WORK
A. LLR BP Decoding for LDPC Codes
Generally speaking, a binary LDPC code can be described with Tanner graph that consists of N variable nodes, v j , and M check nodes, ci , where j = 1, 2, . . . , N , i = 1, 2, . . . , M. The LLR BP decoding algorithm is performed by computing the information reliability in the log domain and exchanging messages between variable nodes and check nodes. Before decoding, every variable node v j is initialized with the channel information, Cv j , which is computed as

Cv j = log

p y j |v j = 0 p y j |v j = 1

,

(1)

where y j is the received signal level. In LLR BP decoding, the C2V and V2C messages are updated simultaneously in the

way of flooding scheduling. There are two message-generating

functions as follows

⎛

⎞

mci →v j = 2tanh−1 ⎝

tanh mvb→ci ⎠ , (2) 2

vb∈N (ci )\v j

mv j →ci =

mca→v j + Cv j ,

(3)

ca ∈N (v j )\ci

where, N (ci )\v j denotes the set of all the variable nodes connected to check node ci except variable node v j , and N (v j )\ci denotes the set of all the check nodes connected to variable node
v j except check node ci . After updating all the C2V and V2C messages, a binary decision is made based on the LLR values
of variable node v j according to

L vj =

mca→v j + Cv j ,

(4)

ca ∈N (v j )

where L v j is the LLR value of variable node v j . The LLR BP decoding is an iterative algorithm that propagates the messages until either all the parity check equations are satisfied or the maximum number of iterations is reached.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: INFORMED DECODING ALGORITHMS OF LDPC CODES

1359

B. Dynamic Selection Strategy for Dynamic Scheduling
The dynamic scheduling strategy updates messages in a dynamic sequence and the most unreliable message is updated preferentially. Actually the dynamic selection strategy tends to determine the updating sequence to some extent before the next update, because these most unreliable nodes or edges can be updated with the reliable messages collected from adjacent nodes or edges in different ways. Most of the dynamic decoding algorithms in [15] and [17] only take the residual as the measure of the dynamic selection strategy, where the residual is computed as

r (mk) = f (mk) − mk ,

(5)

where r (mk) denotes the residual, f (mk) and mk denote the messages of an edge or a node after and before an update, respectively. In general, the larger the residual is, the lower the reliability is. This is to say, if the residual of a node/edge is larger than others, the volatility of the amplitude of the node/edge will become more obvious and it hints that the reliability of the node/edge is lower than others. However, whether the message is the most unreliable or not should not be measured just by the residual. The shortcomings of the dynamic selection strategy just based on single residual were discussed before in Section I. To solve this problem, the triple-judgmentbased dynamic selection strategy is proposed, with which the most unreliable message can be located quickly and accurately by narrowing the search range of the most unreliable variable node under multiple conditions. To facilitate the description of the triple-judgment-based dynamic selection strategy, we give the Stability Criterion first:
Stability Criterion In the iterative decoding of LDPC codes, if the LLR sign of a variable node remains the same in three consecutive iterations, the variable node is said to be stable.
The procedure of the triple judgement is as follows. First, we make a decision to all variable nodes by using the Stability Criterion condition. Second, we estimate whether we have chosen the most unreliable node. Finally, we estimate whether we have chosen the most unreliable edge. So we call the scheme the triple judgment. In addition to the Stability Criterion, the triple-judgment-based dynamic selection strategy fully utilizes the variable nodes residuals and the edge residuals (both the C2V edge residuals and the V2C edge residuals included). For the calculation of the residual, (5) is applied. Therein, r (mk) denotes the edge residual, f (mk) and mk denote the edge messages after and before an update, respectively. Besides, when r (mk) denotes the residual of a variable node, f (mk) and mk denote the LLR value of the variable node after and before an update, respectively.
In the triple-judgment-based dynamic selection strategy, the Stability Criterion is used to make a judgment for all variable nodes and partition all variable nodes into two sets, the stable and unstable variable nodes. In this way, we can choose the most unreliable variable node easily in a narrow range. With the help of the Stability Criterion, we make a judgment for all variable nodes and get two kinds of important sets, namely N1 and N2. First, N2 is initialized to be empty, but N1 is initialized to be the set of the variable nodes in the process of the

first iteration because all the variable nodes are not updated at the beginning. To be more precise, N1 denotes the set of the variable nodes that dissatisfy the Stability Criterion and N2 denotes the set of the variable nodes that satisfy the Stability Criterion after the first iteration. If N1 is not empty, then the most unreliable variable node is found from N1, which has the maximum-node-residual. The residual of variable nodes in N1 only is calculated. The residual of variable nodes in N2 does not need to be calculated. If and only if N1 is empty, the variable node with the largest residual is chosen from N2 as the most unreliable variable node. Similarly, the residual of variable nodes in N2 only is calculated. Finally, we find the edge with the largest residual among all the edges connected to the most unreliable variable node and take it as the most unreliable edge. The most unreliable variable node and edge found above have the privilege to be first updated. Since the edge residuals can be divided into the C2V and V2C edge residuals, two different dynamic decoding algorithms are accordingly proposed, which are termed the variable-node and variable-to-check-edge residual belief propagation (VVCRBP), and variable-node and check-to-variable-edge residual belief propagation (V-CVRBP), respectively. The details of choosing the most unreliable edge will be discussed in the next section.
As is well known, the change of the LLR of a variable node can reflect the change of the residual. We choose three consecutive iterations in order to demonstrate the stability of reliable variable nodes and to ease the burden of the storage space. The reason why we do not choose 2 consecutive iterations is that false judgments may occur under some circumstances. More detailed explanations are as following. For the most unreliable variable node, it is preferentially processed after being chosen. Specifically, for the case of the most unreliable variable node that turns right from wrong, it can be only fairly dealt with after being chosen. For the specific case, such node (the correct variable node) would become wrong again, possibly leading to consuming more decoding resources. In fact, the correct variable node for the specific case does not need to be dealt with preferentially. Therefore, 3 consecutive iterations are employed in the proposed algorithms.
The changes of the LLR sign and the residual value indicate that the exchange of important messages happens during the previous decoding. This is to say, some right variable node turned to be wrong, meanwhile some wrong variable node became right. Therefore, how to elegantly deal with this change can make a significant contribution to the decoding process. In our proposed strategy, we can locate unreliable variable nodes, including this type of variable nodes that became wrong from right with the Stability Criterion condition employed. Furthermore, the messages (node and edge messages) from the three consecutive updates with the help of the Stability Criterion can be well utilized, while the two types of residuals (the residuals of nodes and edges) can also be obtained in the previous two updates. These advantages can make full use of the characteristic of the dynamic change of messages in the process of decoding and narrow the search scope gradually so as to provide a better update order for the dynamic decoding algorithms and obtain better performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1360

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

Algorithm 1. V-VCRBP

1: Initialize all mc→v = 0
2: Initialize all mvi →c = Cvi 3: Initialize all r (vi ) = |Cvi | 4: Initialize all r (mvi →c) = |Cvi | 5: Find the largest r (vi ) and r (mvi →c j ) with the V-VC
DSS shown in Fig. 1

6: for every check node ca ∈ N (vi )\c j do

7: Generate and propagate mca→vi 8: end for

9: Calculate L(vi )

10: Generate and propagate mvi →c j 11: Set r (vi ) = 0, r (mvi →c j ) = 0 12: for every variable node vb ∈ N (c j )\vi do

13: Generate and propagate mc j →vb

14: for every check node cd ∈ N (vb)\c j do

15:

Compute r (mvb→cd )

16: Calculate r (vb)

17: end for

18: end for

19: if stopping rule is not satisfied then

20: Go back to line 5

21: end if

III. INFORMED DECODING ALGORITHMS BASED ON TRIPLE-JUDGMENT
The V-VCRBP and V-CVRBP decoding algorithms are proposed based on the triple-judgment-based dynamic selection strategy in this paper. The main difference of the dynamic selection strategies in both V-VCRBP and V-CVRBP decoding is on the methods of searching the most unreliable edge. The maximum-edge-residual among V2C edge residuals is chosen as the most unreliable edge in V-VCRBP decoding, while the maximum-edge-residual among C2V edge residuals is chosen as the most unreliable edge in V-CVRBP decoding. We will particularly introduce the two different decoding algorithms with the triple-judgment-based dynamic selection strategy in this section.

Fig. 1. Chart of the variable-node and variable-to-check-edge dynamic selection strategy (V-VC DSS).
Fig. 2. Key decoding procedure for V-VCRBP algorithm of LDPC codes.

A. V-VCRBP Decoding for LDPC Codes
The dynamic selection strategy of V-VCRBP algorithm relies on the variable node residual and V2C edge residual with the aid of the Stability Criterion. The most unreliable variable node is selected with the conditions of the Stability Criterion and the variable node residual as is described in Section II. Without loss of generality, we assume the most unreliable variable node is vi , and the degree of variable node vi is dv. Calculate the vi 2C edge residuals and select the maximum-edge-residual among V2C edge residuals as the most unreliable edge, denoted by vi 2c j ∗. The vi 2C denotes the edge from variable node vi to check nodes C, namely, N(vi ), which means the set of all the check nodes connected to variable vi . Fig. 1 shows the detailed process of the dynamic selection strategy in V-VCRBP algorithm named as the variable-node and variable-to-check-edge dynamic selection strategy (V-VC DSS). The most unreliable variable node vi

and the most unreliable edge vi 2c j ∗ will be updated first in the V-VCRBP decoding.
The main decoding process of V-VCRBP algorithm can be illustrated with a code graph, as shown in Fig. 2. The black cycles and boxes are respectively denoted as the variable nodes and check nodes that have been updated. It is assumed that the most unreliable variable node and the most unreliable edge are vi and vi 2c j , respectively. Firstly, for every check node ca ∈ N (vi )\c j , the corresponding ca2vi messages are updated, and then variable node vi becomes an updated one and contains higher reliability. Secondly, the message from variable node vi to check node c j is updated and the residuals of vi and vi 2c j are set to zero in order to avoid choosing the same variable node repeatedly in the next iteration (for consideration of fair updating during decoding). Finally, for every variable node vb ∈ N (c j )\vi , the corresponding c j 2vb messages are updated in order to calculate the new residuals for the next iteration. The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: INFORMED DECODING ALGORITHMS OF LDPC CODES

1361

Algorithm 2. V-CVRBP

1: Initialize all mc→v = 0
2: Initialize all mvi →c = Cvi 3: Initialize all r (vi ) = |Cvi | 4: Compute all r (mc→v)
5: Find the largest r (vi ) and r (mc j →vi ) with the V-CV
DSS shown in Fig. 3

6: for every variable node vb ∈ N (c j ) do

7: Generate and propagate mc j →vb 8: r (mc j →vi ) = 0 9: Calculate L(vi )
10: Set r (vi ) = 0
11: for every check node ca ∈ N (vi ) do

12: Generate and propagate mvi →ca

13: for every variable node vd ∈ N (ca)\vi do

14:

Compute r (mca→vd )

15: end for

16: end for

17: end for

18: if stopping rule is not satisfied then

19: Go back to line 5

20: end if

detailed decoding process for V-VCRBP algorithm is described in Algorithm 1.

B. V-CVRBP Decoding for LDPC Codes

Unlike the V-VC DSS, the dynamic selection strategy in
V-CVRBP algorithm, named the variable-node and the check-
to-variable-edge dynamic selection strategy (V-CV DSS), is
made up of the Stability Criterion and residuals computations
of the variable-node and the check-to-variable-edge as shown
in Fig. 3. The selection method of the most unreliable variable
node is the same as that of the V-VCRBP algorithm. Similarly,
we assume that the most unreliable variable node is vi . The set of the check nodes that are connected to variable node vi is denoted with S j . Vk is the set of the variable nodes that are connected with the check nodes in S j . Obviously, vi ∈ Vk. Calculate the c j 2vk edge residuals, where c j ∈ S j and vk ∈ Vk, and select the edge with the maximum-edge-residual as the most unreliable check-to-variable-edge denoted by c j 2vk∗, as shown in Fig. 3. The c j 2vk denotes the edge from c j to vk. The search scope of the most unreliable edge in the V-CVRBP algo-
rithm is a little bigger than that in the V-VCRBP algorithm. The
enlarged search scope in the V-CVRBP can improve the search
greediness to some extent.
In V-CVRBP, the main decoding process is described in
Fig. 4. Assume that vi and c j 2vi are the most unreliable variable node and the most unreliable edge, respectively. Firstly, for every variable node vb ∈ N (c j ), the corresponding c j 2vb messages are updated and the residuals of vi and c j 2vi are set to zero. Secondly, the messages from variable node vi to its neighbors are updated. Finally, for each check node ca that is connected to variable node vi except c j , the residuals of check

Fig. 3. Chart of the variable-node and the check-to-variable-edge dynamic selection strategy (V-CV DSS).
Fig. 4. Key decoding procedure for V-CVRBP of LDPC codes.
node ca to variable nodes that are connected to ca excluding vi are computed for the next iteration. In the first step of V-CVRBP decoding, the V-CVRBP algorithm updates all the C2V messages that are connected with check node c j instead of the single most unreliable edge c j 2vi , which can improve the greediness to some degree.
IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION In this section, we investigate the performance of the proposed V-VCRBP and V-CVRBP algorithms through a large number of simulations and then evaluate the complexity for decoding LDPC codes consisting of N variable nodes and M

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1362

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

Fig. 5. BER vs. Eb/N0 performance of LLR BP, CSBP, VC RBP, NWRBP, LQRD, IVC RBP, OV-RBP,V-CVRBP and V-VCRBP algorithms for rate 1/2
block-length 576 LDPC code.

Fig. 7. FER vs. Eb/N0 performance of BP, NWRBP, LQRD α = 0.5 [19], V-CVRBP and V-VCRBP algorithms for rate 1/2 block-length 576 LDPC code.

Fig. 6. BER vs. Eb/N0 performance of LLR BP, CSBP, VC RBP, NWRBP, LQRD, IVC RBP, OV-RBP, V-CVRBP and V-VCRBP algorithms for rate 3/4
block-length 576 LDPC code.

Fig. 8. BER vs. Eb/N0 performance of LLR BP, CSBP, VC RBP, NWRBP, LQRD, IVC RBP, OV-RBP, V-CVRBP and V-VCRBP algorithms for rate 1/2
block-length 1152 LDPC code.

check nodes. To preferably illustrate the advantages of the proposed algorithms, the error correction performance of the algorithms, LLR BP [1], CSBP [10], VC RBP [13], NWRBP [14], IVC RBP [18], OV-RBP [24] over the AWGN channel with BPSK modulation is also demonstrated for comparison. The LDPC codes used in the simulations are constructed based on the IEEE 802.16e standard [25] with different code rates and block lengths. The maximum number of iterations is set to 5, unless otherwise noted. At the same time, the decoding complexities of different algorithms are also introduced later.
A. Simulation Results
Figures 5 and 6 show the bit error rate (BER) performance of the decoding algorithms discussed above for block-length 576 LDPC codes with different code rates. It can be observed that the BER of V-CVRBP is similar to that of OV-RBP, and better than that of IVC RBP, NWRBP, VC RBP, CSBP and LLR BP. The V-VCRBP algorithm achieves the best BER performance at medium to high (signal noise ratio) SNR region among the algorithms of interest. When the code rate of blocklength 576 LDPC code increases to 3/4, the BER performance

of OV-RBP, V-VCRBP and V-CVRBP is almost the same and better than the one of the other decoding algorithms. Fig. 7 indicates the frame error rate (FER) vs. Eb/N0 performance of the different algorithms for block-length 576 LDPC codes. We can see that the V-VCRBP algorithm obtains the best FER performance among the algorithms. The V-CVRBP algorithm can own similar FER like the LQRD algorithm. Fig. 8 indicates the BER vs. Eb/N0 performance of the different algorithms for block-length 1152 LDPC codes. It can be clearly observed that the V-VCRBP algorithm has the best BER performance among the algorithms for comparison. The BER performance of V-CVRBP is very close to that of OV-RBP, and the V-CVRBP algorithm has a superior performance to the OVRBP algorithm at Eb/N0 = 2.7d B. When BER is 6.0×10−7, the V-VCRBP algorithm can obtain about 0.3dB gain compared with the OV-RBP algorithm. The simulation results for a larger block size are shown in Fig. 9. The figure clearly shows that the V-VCRBP roughly obtains the best BER performance among the algorithms of interest. The performance in terms of BER vs. the number of iterations for block-length 576 LDPC codes at Eb/N0 = 2.5d B and 1152 LDPC codes at Eb/N0 = 2.2d B is presented in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: INFORMED DECODING ALGORITHMS OF LDPC CODES

1363

Fig. 9. BER vs. Eb/N0 performance of LLR BP, CSBP, NWRBP, LQRD, IVC RBP, OV-RBP, V-CVRBP and V-VCRBP algorithms for rate 1/2 block-length
2304 LDPC code.

Fig. 12. Performance of throughput vs Eb/N0 decoding with (576, 288) LDPC code for the algorithms, LQRD, IVC RBP, V-CVRBP, and V-VCRBP.

Fig. 10. BER vs. the number of iterations performance of LLR BP, CSBP, VC RBP, NWRBP, IVC RBP, OV-RBP, V-VCRBP and V-CVRBP algorithms for rate 1/2 block-length 576 LDPC code at Eb/N0 = 2.5d B.
Fig. 11. BER vs. the number of iterations performance of LLR BP, CSBP, VC RBP, NWRBP, IVC RBP, OV-RBP, V-VCRBP and V-CVRBP algorithms for rate 1/2 block-length 1152 LDPC code at Eb/N0 = 2.2d B.
To investigate the convergence speed of the algorithms, the BER vs. the number of iterations is simulated. Fig. 10 shows that the V-VCRBP algorithm converges as fast as the the OVRBP, while the V-CVRBP algorithm behaves as well as the

OV-RBP in error correction performance after about 25 iterations with the (576, 288) LDPC code at Eb/N0 = 2.5d B. As the block-length of the LDPC codes increases to 1152 at Eb/N0 = 2.2d B, the performance is shown in Fig. 11. It is demonstrated that the convergence speed of the two proposed algorithms is faster than other algorithms while the error correction performance of the two algorithms is also best among the decoding algorithms of interest. To discriminate a bit further among the proposed algorithms, the convergence of the V-VCRBP algorithm behaves better than that of the V-CVRBP algorithm.
After analyzing the BER and FER of various algorithms, we also provide the throughput as a function of the SNR. Simulations were performed over the AWGN channel with BPSK modulation with Visual C++ 2005 programming. The maximum number of iterations was set to five. Here, we define the throughput as the number of the processed frames divided by the total running time, which means the total number of simulated frames per unit time at a fixed SNR. The results are shown in Fig. 12. From the figure we can see that the throughput of all the algorithms of interest, LQRD, IVCRBP, V-CVRBP, and V-VCRBP, increases as the SNR increases. By further comparison, we found that the throughput of the proposed V-CVRBP algorithm surpasses the LQRD and IVCRBP, and the proposed V-VCRBP algorithm has the biggest throughput at SNR=3.0 dB. In addition, the increasing trends (slopes) of the proposed algorithms, V-CVRBP and V-VCRBP, steepen comparing with those of the LQRD and IVC RBP algorithms.
The excellent performance of the V-VCRBP and V-CVRBP algorithms in both the BER and the convergence speed owes to the proposed triple-judgment-based dynamic selection strategy and the two optimal updating orders. Instead of just relying on the residual as single measurement, the triple-judgmentbased dynamic selection strategy further considers the edge messages and the LLR values of variable nodes in several consecutive updates, which can make full use of the characteristic of dynamic change of messages in the process of decoding. To our excitement, the proposed dynamic selection strategy can be well applied to two different dynamic decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1364

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016
TABLE I COMPUTATION COMPLEXITY TABLE OF DIFFERENT DECODING ALGORITHMS

TABLE II AVERAGE NUMBER OF ITERATION (ANI) OF DIFFERENT DECODING ALGORITHMS

algorithms, namely the V-VCRBP and V-CVRBP algorithms. The optimal updating orders of the two algorithms are provided for V-VCRBP algorithm and the V-CVRBP algorithm, which can help them allocate the computing resources more reasonably. By comparison, the V-CVRBP algorithm can distribute the computing resources more reasonably with the aid of the triple-judgment-based dynamic selection strategy than the conventional strategies, in which the updates are just only based on the residuals. Moreover, the associated messages are propagated after the most unreliable variable node and edge become reliable, which can also improve the error correction performance.
B. Complexity Analyses
In this subsection, we analyze the decoding complexity of the V-VCRBP algorithm and V-CVRBP algorithm in one iteration. As we all know, the degrees of irregular LDPC codes are not fixed. For irregular LDPC codes, variable nodes with low degrees are updated more frequently than the others, then the complexity becomes (on average) lower than that shown in Table I. Conversely, if large-degree variable nodes are updated more frequently, the complexity becomes slightly higher. Therefore, we assume that dv and dc denote the average degrees of variable nodes and check nodes. The total number of all edges is E, and E = dc · M = dv · N is valid for all regular and irregular LDPC codes. If we call the procedure from line 5 to line 19 in Algorithm 2 (the V-CVRBP) an update, then there are N updates in one iteration. From Fig. 4, we can observe that the V-CVRBP algorithm generates and propagates dc C2V messages and dv V2C messages in an update. Thus, there are N · dc C2V messages and E V2C messages generated and propagated in one iteration. For convenient comparison, the computation complexity of different decoding algorithms is presented in Table I.
From Table I, we can see that C2V messages and V2C messages generated and propagated in one iteration are both E in LLR BP and CSBP algorithms. The number of V2C

messages generated and propagated in one V-VCRBP iteration and in one V-CVRBP iteration are E, which is the same as that of LLR BP, CSBP, IVC RBP and OV-RBP algorithms. The LQRD algorithm has the same computation complexity as the NWRBP algorithm in C2V messages and V2C messages generation and propagation. However, the computations during the V2C nodes updating for the NWRBP and LQRD algorithms are much bigger than those for the V-CVRBP algorithm. In terms of residual computation complexity, LLR BP, CSBP and VC RBP have no residual computation. The algorithms, LQRD, NWRBP, IVC BP, have the same residual computation complexity. The V-VCRBP and the V-CVRBP algorithms have higher residual computation complexity because of the triplejudgment-based dynamic selection strategy, among which the residual computation complexity in V-VCRBP is a little higher than V-CVRBP.
However, for the C2V messages generated and propagated in one iteration, the computation complexity in V-CVRBP is lower than that of the IVC RBP and the V-VCRBP algorithms. Generally speaking, dc is a little bigger than dv. Therefore, N · dc is a little bigger than E. We can see that the total computations of the V-CVRBP algorithm are less than those for the algorithms, NWRBP and LQRD, in one iteration. The LQRD algorithm has a less computation complexity than the NWRBP algorithm, since the former reduces the number of search operations needed in one iteration. Though the computation for residuals in OV-RBP is lower than V-CVRBP, OV-RBP has extra computation for counting the number of unsatisfied parity check equations of each variable node. It is worth mentioning that the V-CVRBP algorithm has lower computation complexity compared with other dynamic decoding algorithms except the VC RBP, LLR BP, CSBP and OV-RBP algorithms, while maintaining better performance than most of the other decoding algorithms.
From Table II, we compare the average number of iterations (ANI) of the OV-RBP, the IVC RBP, the V-CVRBP and the V-VCRBP algorithms for block-length 576 LDPC codes. The maximum number of iterations of all above algorithms

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: INFORMED DECODING ALGORITHMS OF LDPC CODES

1365

is set to five. Obviously, the ANI of V-VCRBP algorithm is smaller than that of other algorithms. We can see that the ANI of the V-VCRBP algorithm is 1.04 when Eb/N0 is 3.00 dB, which means that our V-VCRBP algorithm can reduce the amount of ANI computation immensely. The OV-RBP algorithm updates E C2V messages and E V2C messages in one iteration. The number of updated messages in one iteration is the same as the initial BP algorithm. The reduced ANI percentage of the V-VCRBP algorithm compared to the OV-RBP algorithm is 30.67% when Eb/N0 is 3.00 dB. It indicates that the ANI of the V-VCRBP algorithm is the lowest. Although the complexity of our V-VCRBP algorithm is highest in one iteration among algorithms addressed above, the algorithm outperforms other algorithms and behaves better in convergence speed. Nevertheless, this increased complexity is within the acceptable range.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, the importance of the dynamic selection strategy is analyzed and the triple-judgment-based dynamic selection strategy is proposed to assist in quickly and accurately locating the most unreliable message. By combining the Stability Criterion and the two different residuals, the proposed dynamic selection strategy makes full use of the characteristic of dynamic change of messages in the process of decoding, which is well applied to two different dynamic decoding algorithms, namely, the V-VCRBP algorithm and the V-CVRBP algorithm. Two optimal updating orders are provided for the V-VCRBP algorithm and the V-CVRBP algorithm, which help allocate the computing resources more reasonably. By incorporating the triple-judgment-based dynamic selection strategy with the Stability Criterion, both the convergence speed of the V-VCRBP algorithm in the waterfall region and the error rate in the error-floor region are significantly improved. Meanwhile, the V-CVRBP algorithm can not only outperform the NWRBP and the IVC RBP algorithms, but exhibit lower computational complexity.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of lowdensity parity-check codes,” IET Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[4] F. Garcia-Herrero, D. Declercq, and J. Valls, “Non-binary LDPC decoder based on symbol flipping with multiple votes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 749–752, May 2014.
[5] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Quantized iterative message passing decoders with low error floor for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Jan. 2014.
[6] Y. Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with probabilistic scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 414–416, Oct. 2001.
[7] X. Zhang and S. Chen, “A two-stage decoding algorithm to lower the error-floors for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 517–520, Apr. 2015.

[8] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[9] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 2, no. 53, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[10] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial message passing schedule for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076–4091, Nov. 2007.
[11] I. P. Malholland, E. Paolini, and M. F. Flanagan, “Design of LDPC code ensembles with fast convergence properties,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE Int. Black Sea Conf. Commun. Netw. (BlackSeaCom), Constanta, Romania, May 2015, pp. 53–57.
[12] A. Grant, I. Land, and G. Wang, “Iteration-constrained design of IRA codes,” in Proc. Int. Zurich Seminar Commun., Zurich, Switzerland, Feb. 29–Mar. 2, 2012, pp. 67–70.
[13] G. Elidan, I. McGraw, and D. Koller, “Residual belief propagation: Informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing,” in Proc. 22nd Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., Cambridge, MA, USA, Jul. 2006, pp. 165–173.
[14] A. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Glasgow, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 923–937.
[15] A. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470– 3479, Dec. 2010.
[16] J. H. Kim, M. Y. Nam, and H. Y. Song, “Variable-to-check residual belief propagation for LDPC codes,” IET Electron. Lett., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 117– 118, Jan. 2009.
[17] G. J. Han and X. C. Liu, “An efficient dynamic schedule for layered belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 950–952, Dec. 2009.
[18] Y. Gong, X. C. Liu, W. C. Ye, and G. J. Han, “Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683–2691, Oct. 2011.
[19] H. C. Lee, Y. L. Ueng, S. M. Yeh, and W. Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886–896, Mar. 2013.
[20] G. J. Han, Y. L. Guan, and X. M. Huang, “Check node reliability-based scheduling for BP decoding of non-binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 877–885, Mar. 2013.
[21] M. Beermann and P. Vary, “A generalization of residual belief propagation for flexible reduced complexity LDPC decoding,” in Proc. Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC-Fall), San Francisco, CA, USA, Sep. 2011, pp. 1–5.
[22] H. Lee and Y. Ueng, “LDPC decoding scheduling for faster convergence and lower error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3104– 3113, Sep. 2014.
[23] H. C. Lee and Y. L. Ueng, “Informed dynamic schedules for LDPC decoding using belief propagation,” in Proc. 24th Int. Symp. Pers. Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., London, U.K., Sep. 2013, pp. 321–325.
[24] X. C. Liu, Y. B. Zhang, and R. Cui, “Variable-node-based dynamic scheduling strategy for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 147–150, Feb. 2015.
[25] LDPC Coding for OFDMA PHY, IEEE C802.16e-05/0066r3, Jan. 2005.
Xingcheng Liu (SM’12) was born in Anfu, Jiangxi, China. He received the B.E. and M.E. degrees in electrical engineering from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, and the Ph.D. degree from Sun Yat-sen University (SYSU), Guangzhou, China. He received the Royal Society KC Wong Fellowship of the U.K. to do postdoctoral research at the University of Southampton, Southampton, U.K., from May 2002 to May 2003. He was a Visiting Scientist at Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA, from 2004 to 2005. He is currently a Full Professor with the Department of Communications Engineering, School of Electronics and Information Technology, SYSU. He has authored over 100 peer-reviewed papers in journals and conferences. His research interests include channel coding theory and applications, mobile communications, wireless sensor networks, and Internet of Things. He is now the primary Investigator of several projects on wireless communications and networking. He is a Senior Member of the China Institute of Communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1366

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 64, NO. 4, APRIL 2016

Zhenzhu Zhou was born in Hengyang, Hunan, China. She is currently pursuing the M.S. degree in information and communication engineering at Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Her research interests include channel coding theory and their applications to communication systems.
Ru Cui was born in Cangzhou, Hebei, China. She received the M.S. degree in information and communication engineering at Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. Her research interests include mobile communications and coding theory.

Erwu Liu (SM’11) received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Opto-Electronic Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China, in 2001. He started his career at Alcatel-Lucent (now a part of Nokia) as a Project Manager in 2001, and then a Senior Research Scientist with the Research and Innovation (R&I) Center there. In 2007, he left Alcatel-Lucent and joined the Imperial College London, London, U.K., as a Researcher, working on wireless networks. Since 2011, he has been a Full Professor with the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. His research interests include complex networks, big data and the Internet of Things, through-the-earth communications, stochastic geometry, network utility maximization, wireless resource allocation, and cross-layer optimization. He is an IET Fellow, and an ACM Senior Member.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:45:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

