IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 3, MARCH 2013

1563

Iterative Coding for Network Coding
Andrea Montanari and Rüdiger L. Urbanke

Abstract—We consider communication over a noisy network under randomized linear network coding. Possible error mechanisms include node- or link-failures, Byzantine behavior of nodes, or an overestimate of the network min-cut. Building on the work of Kötter and Kschischang, we introduce a systematic oblivious random channel model. Within this model, codewords contain a header (this is the systematic part). The header effectively records the coefficients of the linear encoding functions, thus simplifying the decoding task. Under this constraint, errors are modeled as random low-rank perturbations of the transmitted codeword. We compute the capacity of this channel and we define an error-correction scheme based on random sparse graphs and a low-complexity decoding algorithm. By optimizing over the code degree profile, we show that this construction achieves the channel capacity in complexity which is jointly quadratic in the number of coded information bits and sublogarithmic in the error probability.
Index Terms—Network coding, probabilistic channel models, Shannon channel capacity, sparse graph codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
C ONSIDER a wire-line communication network modeled as a directed acyclic (multi)graph with edges of unit capacity. A source wants to communicate information to a set of receivers. If we allow processing of information at nodes in the network, then the achievable throughput is in general higher than what can be achieved by schemes that only allow routing [1], [14]. Schemes that employ processing are referred to as network coding schemes.
The standard assumption in the network coding literature is that no errors are introduced within the network or, equivalently, that sufficiently powerful error-correcting codes are employed on the links at the physical layer. However, a number of error sources (e.g., malicious or malfunctioning nodes) cannot be neglected. We consider a probabilistic model for transmission errors that builds upon the work of Kschischang and Kötter [12], [20], as well as on earlier work on rank-metric channels by several authors [6], [8]. We compute the information theoretic limit on point-to-point communication for this model (the channel capacity) and define a coding scheme based on a sparsegraph construction and a low-complexity iterative decoding algorithm. We show that the parameters of the construction can be
Manuscript received January 31, 2009; revised November 01, 2012; accepted November 01, 2012. Date of publicatoin December 28, 2012; date of current version February 12, 2013. A. Montanari was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under CAREER Award CCF- 0743978.
A. Montanari is with the Departments of Electrical Engineering and Statistics, Stanford University, Stanford CA 9305 USA (e-mail: montanari@stanford.edu).
R. L. Urbanke is with the School of Computer and Communication Sciences, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland (e-mail: ruediger.urbanke@epfl.ch).
Communicated by H.-A. Loeliger, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2236912

optimized analytically and, remarkably, the optimized scheme achieves the channel capacity. This is the second channel model for which iterative schemes can be shown to achieve capacity (the first one being the binary erasure channel; this was shown in the seminal work of Luby et al. [15]).

II. NETWORK CODING: BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK

Assume that an information source generates symbols per

unit time. The integer is referred to as the source rate. Informa-

tion is encoded at the sender in packets of length with entries

from a finite field . The network is assumed to be synchronous

and without delay. As a consequence, packets are aligned at the

destination at regular time intervals.

The most common scenario studied in this context is a mul-

ticast one in which the source aims at communicating the same

information to a set of receivers (distinct nodes in the same

network.) The fundamental theorem of network coding states

that this is possible using network coding (i.e., processing at the

nodes) if the values of the min-cuts from the source to any of the

receivers is at least [1]. Moreover, linear network coding suf-

fices [14]. This means that processing at the nodes can be limited

to forwarding packets which are linear (over ) combinations

of incoming packets. Finally, it is not necessary to choose the

local encoding functions at the nodes carefully. Random linear

combinations are sufficient with probability close to one, pro-

vided the cardinality of the field is large enough [10], [13]. For

a general introduction to network coding, we refer the reader to

[7], [23], and [24].

The preferred method to implement random linear network

codes is to include “headers” in the packets of length [3]. The

role of the headers is to “record” the coefficients used in the local

encoding functions so that the receiver can be oblivious to the

network topology and to the specific local encoding functions

used. In more detail, assume that we send packets. The header of

each packet is then an element of

, where the header of the

th source packet,

, is the all-zero tuple, except for an iden-

tity element at position . Recall that nodes forward packets that

are linear combinations of the incoming packets. Therefore, if the

header of a packet somewhere in the network reads

,

, then we know that this packet is the linear combi-

nation of the original source packets, where the th original

source packet has “weight” . The significant advantage of such

a scheme is that the receivers can be oblivious to the topology

and the local encoding functions. Of course, we pay some price;

if we use headers, then only

of the symbols of

each packet are available for information transmission. Our sub-

sequent discussion assumes this systematic and oblivious model,

under which packets are constrained to contain headers.

So far, we assumed that errors neither occur during transmis-

sion nor during processing. If the channel or the processing is

noisy, one can use coding to combat the noise. Note that if we

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1564

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 3, MARCH 2013

stack the source packets of length on top of each other, then

we get an

matrix over whose, lets say, left

sub-

matrix (the collection of headers) is the identity matrix.

Formally, a code is a collection of

matrices with ele-

ments in , such that each

takes the form

.

Here, is the

identity matrix and is an

matrix

. We say that is in normal form. The code

is thus equivalently described by a collection of

matrices

. The rate of the code is defined as the ratio of the number of

information -bits that can be conveyed by the choice of code-

word

to the number of transmitted symbols

Fig. 1. Comparison of

(solid line) with

(dotted line)

for

. The points on the curve

that are achievable by the low-

complexity iterative scheme are shown as dots.

(1)

Before the source packets are transmitted, we multiply from

the left by an

random invertible matrix with components

in . This “mixes” the rows of and ensures that regardless

of the network topology and the location where the errors are

introduced, the effect of the errors on the normalized form is

uniform. We then transmit each resulting row as one packet.

Upon transmission of , a “corrupted” version of the

codeword is received. Without loss of generality, we assume

that is brought back into normal form

by Gaussian

elimination.1 Following Kötter and Kschischang [12], we model

the net effect of the transmission- and the processing-“noise” as

a low-rank perturbation of . More precisely, we assume that

(2)

where is an

matrix over of

,

.

We call the weight of the error, and the normalized weight.

Define the distance of two codewords and as

and the minimum distance

of the code as

the minimum of the distances between all distinct pairs of code-

words. The normalized minimum distance is

. It

is elementary to show [8] that

is a true distance metric;

in particular, it fulfills the triangle inequality. Therefore, given

a code of minimum distance , a simple bounded distance

decoder can correct all errors of weight

or

less. A bounded distance decoder is an algorithm that, given a

received word , decodes to the unique word within distance

if such a word exists and declares an error otherwise. Bounded

distance decoders are popular since a suitable algebraic struc-

ture on the code often ensures that bounded distance decoding

can be accomplished with low complexity.

The bounded-distance error-correcting capability of a code

is defined as

. Kötter and Kschis-

chang [12] considered a somewhat different error model in

which no header is prepended to the packets. They showed that

the optimal tradeoff between

and

is given by an

appropriate generalization of the “singleton bound.” In the limit

, with

, the maximal achievable rate for the

parameters

, call it

, is given by

Fig. 2. Coding scheme. The last rows of are zero. The first obey a set of linear constraints represented by the bipartite graph shown on the right-hand side.

Note that

is the maximum achievable rate

for a guaranteed error correction in an adversarial channel

model. It is also the maximal achievable rate in a probabilistic

setting if we are limited to bounded distance decoding. Re-

markably, Kötter and Kschischang found a generalization of

Reed–Solomon codes that achieves this bound.

In this paper, we are interested in a probabilistic (as opposed

to adversarial) channel model. More precisely, we assume that

in (2) the perturbation is chosen uniformly at random from all

matrices in

of rank .

After this paper appeared as a preprint, Silva et al. [21]

studied a more general probabilistic error model. In the

model of [21], codewords do not necessarily take the form

, and is corrupted both by matrix multiplication and

by low-rank addition. They proved that capacity is increased if

one does not assume that a header is prepended to the packets.

We refer to Section III-C for a more detailed discussion.

The same paper develops a simple and efficient coding

scheme for such channels. The coding scheme of [21] corre-

sponds to introducing an appropriate number of zero columns

in the

block of Fig. 2. Information is conveyed by the

nonzero entries of the same block without further coding. The

zero columns (error traps) play the same role as the sparse

graph code in our approach.

Differences with respect to the scheme in this paper are dis-

cussed in Section III-C.

III. MAIN RESULTS

We will assume that the parameters and are fixed and

consider the behavior of the channel as we increase . We refer

to our channel model as the systematic network coding channel

with parameters and , denoted by

.

Proposition 3.1 (Channel Capacity): The capacity of is

(4)

(3)
1In principle, it might be that the received matrix cannot be brought in this form because its first columns have rank smaller than . However, within the probabilistic model, which we discuss in the following, the rank deficiency is small with high probability and can be eliminated by a small perturbation.

Discussion: In the definition of capacity, we implicitly as-

sume that the error probability is not a function of . De-

pending on the underlying physical error mechanism, this may

or may not be the case. Note that for small ,

, whereas

. Fig. 1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTANARI AND URBANKE: ITERATIVE CODING FOR NETWORK CODING

1565

compares

with

and shows the points

that are achievable according to Theorem 3.2.

Theorem 3.2 (Capacity-Achieving Iterative Code Con-

struction): For any

such that

is an

integer multiple of , any

, and any

there exists an error correcting code and a decoding algorithm

that achieves symbol error probability smaller than , with

decoding complexity.

Discussion: The complexity of the scheme is given as

.

But note that the number of transmitted information symbols is

. Therefore, if we measure the complexity per transmitted

information symbol, then it is only quadratic.

Note also that the complexity scales much better with the

target error probability than for usual sparse graph codes (where

it is at least linear in

).

A. Code Construction

To see this, note that the matrix is of dimension

and

has entries in . Since the last rows have to be zero, this re-

duces the degrees of freedom by . Further, there are

linear constraints, taking away at most that many fur-

ther degrees of freedom (and possibly less because of linear de-

pendences). We get the claim by dividing the remaining degrees

of freedom by , in accordance with (1).

So far, we have explained how to construct a code. We define

an ensemble of codes by 1) picking a matrix uniformly from

all matrices that have degree profile

according to the con-

figuration model and, 2) picking the labels (the

invertible

matrices) for all edges uniformly and independently for each

edge. We denote the resulting ensemble by

.

Our main theorem III.2 will show that this construction is ca-

pacity achieving under iterative decoding if

,

and

where

Fig. 2 shows our coding scheme. Each row corresponds to a

packet of length . The

identity matrix is shown on the

left-hand side, whereas the

matrix on the right-hand side

represents . Each corresponds to a codeword of . Not all

are allowed. Here are the constraints that must fulfill to be

a codeword. The bottom rows are identical to zero. The top

rows are constrained by a linear system of equations.

These are indicated by the bipartite graph on the right-hand side,

according to the standard graphical representation used for low-

density parity-check (LDPC) codes [9], [19]. The resulting code

allows one to communicate with vanishing error probability on

an

channel for any

.

More precisely, we have

Discussion: In Fig. 2, all linear constraints are on the rows of

. An entirely equivalent formulation is to apply the linear con-

straints to the columns of instead; i.e., set the last columns

of to zero and apply a set of linear constraints on the first

columns of . All subsequent statements apply also

to this case and yield identical results if we let tend to infinity.

For the sake of simplicity, we limit our discussion to the scheme

of Fig. 2. In a practical implementation, however, there can be

reasons to prefer one scheme over the other. For instance, the

iterative decoder discussed in the next section might be more

effective on a larger Tanner graph. This suggests to use the con-

struction in Fig. 2 if

and the “transposed” one otherwise.

...

(5) B. Encoding and Decoding Algorithm

Assume that the parameters of the model ( , , , and )

are fixed and that we have chosen one particular code from the

The matrix has the following structure. Start with a “sparse” ensemble

. At the source, we are given

-valued matrix . The matrix symbols over (the information we want to transmit). We need

has exactly two nonzero entries along each column. Further, the to map each of these

possible information vectors to a dis-

fraction of rows that contain exactly nonzero entries is equal tinct codeword . This is the encoding task. In principle, this can

to , where

is a given degree distribution (in be done by solving a linear system of equations, starting with

particular, it fulfills

and

.) In the following, we (5). A brute force approach, however, has complexity

.

shall say that has bounded support if

for larger than Fortunately, one can exploit the sparseness of the matrix to

some

or, equivalently, if

is a polynomial.

reduce the encoding complexity to

. The basic idea is to

The matrix is represented by the graph. Circles (on the bring into an upper triangular form by using only row and

right-hand side in Fig. 2) correspond to the columns of and column permutations but no algebraic operations. As proved in

squares (on the left-hand side) correspond to the rows of . [18], this can be done with high probability if

.

There is an edge between a circle and an edge iff there is a We will see in Section IV, cf., Lemma 4.5, that this condition

nonzero entry at the corresponding row and column of . Fol- is always fulfilled. We will therefore focus onto the decoding

lowing the iterative coding literature, we refer to the circles as problem.

the variable nodes, to the squares as the check nodes, and we call The receiver sees the perturbed matrix . An equivalent de-

this graph a Tanner graph. To get the matrix , we “lift” by scription of our channel model is the following. Each row of

replacing each of its nonzero elements by an

invertible is the result of adding to the corresponding row of a uniformly

matrix with elements in . We can visualize this by attaching random element of a subspace of

. The subspace

these invertible matrices as labels to the corresponding edges. We claim that for any choice of the matrix compatible with
the degree distribution , the rate of the code is at least

2As discussed in the introduction, the underlying physical process is the fol-

lowing: we add the headers to the rows of ; we scramble the rows of mul-

tiplying it by a random invertible matrix in

; we send the resulting

packets; the channel perturbs these packets; the receiver collects the perturbed

(6)

packets, stacks them up to a matrix , brings the matrix back into normal form, and “strips off” the headers.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1566

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 3, MARCH 2013

is itself uniformly random under the condition

, Our main Theorem 3.2 affirms that, for given parameters

with

.2

and , the degree distribution

can be chosen in such a

Recall that by assumption the last rows of are zero. Since way that the rate of the overall code approaches the capacity ar-

the perturbation has dimension , with

, the last

bitrarily closely and that the decoder succeeds with high proba-

rows of will span with high probability as

. A bility when the packet size tends to infinity.

basis of is then obtained by reducing these rows via Gaussian

elimination.

C. Comparison With the Silva–Kschischang–Kötter Scheme

We therefore assume hereafter that is known. The de- In [21], Silva et al. consider a slightly more general setting in

coding task consists in finding the perturbations for the first which headers are not necessarily added to information packets

rows of . If we subtract these perturbations from , we as in the standard scheme of [3]. In order to compare the present

have found . Throughout the description, given two sets of vec- scheme with the one of [21], let us agree that such headers

tors and , we let

(forming the identity matrix in Fig. 2) are indeed used. The ef-

and, for a given vector ,

. Finally, given a fective matrix channel on the remaining block is of the form (2).

matrix

,

(vectors are al- This is called “additive matrix channel” in [21].

ways thought as row vectors).

As mentioned previously, coding scheme of [21] corresponds

We proceed in an iterative fashion. The basic principle is to introducing an appropriate number of zero columns in the

easily understood. We know that

. In words,

block of Fig. 2. Both schemes achieve the same reliable

we know that lies in a given affine subspace. Consider a rates.

check node and, without loss of generality, let its neighbors While the error-traps approach has undoubtedly the appeal

be

. Let ,

, denote the corresponding of simplicity, the scheme studied here can provide additional

edge labels. As we discussed earlier, each such edge label is an robustness.

invertible matrix with entries in . By the definition 1) The sparse graph approach is reliable also in a setting in

of the code, this implies that

. In particular, this means that

. Since we know that

,

which

while is fixed. Considering Fig. 2, we ex-

pect that there exists a rank

such that, if

, the error probability under iterative decoding goes to 0

as

. A similar property is proved in [21] for the dif-

ferent channel model studied there.

Since we also know that

, this implies that

While a complete proof of this statement goes beyond the scope of the present discussion, let us outline the basic

argument. Fix for simplicity

. Then,

(7)

The actual decoder is most conveniently described (and

analyzed) as a “message-passing” algorithm, with messages

being sent along the edges of the Tanner graph. Messages are

affine subspaces of

. They are sent in rounds. First, we

send messages from the variable nodes to the check nodes. We

the first

rows of the received message read

,

.

Here,

are the first rows of the

codeword,

is a vector, and

are scalars.

In decoding, we need to reconstruct these scalars from the

received symbols. The th parity check implies

process the incoming messages at the check nodes and then send messages on all edges from the check nodes to the variable

(9)

nodes. This concludes one iteration of message passing.

In more detail, the message sent from variable node to check

Fixing

, the factors

are uni-

node in the th iteration is an affine subspace

of

.

If variable node is connected to check node , let denote the

second check node that is connected to (recall that each vari-

able node has exactly two neighbors). Variable nodes do not per-

form any nontrivial processing of the messages, and check-to-

variable node messages coincide with variable-to-check ones

.

For

, we have

for all variable nodes

and all check nodes . Further, let denote all neighbors of a

check node . According to the aforementioned discussion, we

apply for

the recursion

formly random nonvanishing vectors in

. Also,

. If the vectors

are linearly indepen-

dent, there exists a unique solution to the aforementioned

equation, and hence, the coefficients are uniquely de-

termined by a single parity-check node. Since the graph

degree

is bounded, by taking a large enough

constant, we can ensure that (with high probability) this

happens for all but a fraction

of the variable nodes.

We are left with the task of determining

coeffi-

cients . The subgraph induced by these nodes is uni-

formly random subgraph of the original Tanner graph, i.e.,

a graph with given degree distribution in its subcritical

(8)

regime. A simpler argument consists in recalling a known

random graph theory fact that is used in the analysis of

If, after some iterations,

, then we have

cyclic LDPC codes [19]. This subgraph consists (with high probability) of the disjoint unions of trees and loops of size

determined the th row of , namely

.

.

This algorithm is in some ways analogous to iterative algo-

To conclude the argument, first assume that all the coeffi-

rithms for solving constraint satisfaction problems [16].

cients have been determined except a subset inducing

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTANARI AND URBANKE: ITERATIVE CODING FOR NETWORK CODING

1567

a tree in the Tanner graph. Obviously, these can be determined as well starting from the leaves. Indeed, since each variable node has degree 2, variables on the leaves have an adjacent check node for which (9) holds with all but one of the ’s determined. Finally, assume that all coefficients have been determined except a subset inducing a loop in the Tanner graph. We claim that those can be determined as well. Indeed, assume by contradiction that there are two distinct ways of assigning coefficients on the loops, i.e., two distinct solutions to the corresponding equations

(10)

where we denoted by

and

the neighbors

of factor node along the loop. Two distinct so-

lutions would be possible if only if the products

is equal to 1 for each

component

. This product only depends

on the random matrices

and is equal to 1 only with

vanishing probability.

2) The minimum (rank) distance of the error trapping codes

is 1: an error that affects only one entry of the matrix,

containing an information symbol, cannot be corrected.

The sparse graph codes discussed here have minimum dis-

tance diverging as

. The basic reason can be

understood by proving that the minimum distance is at

least 2. Assume there is a rank 1 solution of (5). Then,

there must exist a vector

, and coefficients

such that, for each parity-check node

(11)

where

is a labeling of the neighbors of . Due to the

randomness of , it is easy to show that for , bounded,

the kernel of has dimension 0 with probability larger than

where is a constant depending on and . (Several

computations of this type are done in the following.)

Notice that each variable is covered by at least two parity

checks. If there is a nonzero codeword

as earlier,

necessarily

is nontrivial in at least

indices ,

which happens with probability smaller than

.

Until now, we assumed to be a fixed subspace of

.

The claim “for all” follows from a simple union bound, since

there are at most such spaces and

. Finally,

we have to deal with possible codewords

such

that

for at least

row indices . By standard

graph theory [11], [19], with high probability, any bounded size

subgraph of a sparse random graph is the disjoint union of cycles

and trees. The claim then follows by an argument analogous to

the one at the previous point.

D. On the Implementation of the Message-Passing Scheme

The message-passing algorithm described previously uses

messages

that are affine subspaces of

. Intersec-

tion and sum operations are performed at the check and variable

nodes.

In practice, a convenient way to encode such messages is

through pairs

where

is a vector

and

is a matrix whose rows form a basis

for the linear space

. Both the intersection and

sum operations can be performed efficiently using linear algebra

methods. For instance, if Gaussian elimination is used, the com-

plexity of each such operation is

. The complexity can in

fact be lowered if structured matrices are used.

In other words, must be in the kernel of

IV. PROOFS

for each parity check . On the other hand (excluding the In the next section, we state a few auxiliary lemmas on the

trivial case

, for

), such a kernel is a uni- behavior of the message-passing decoder and prove Theorem

formly random subspace of

, and has, with high 3.2. The lemmas are then proved in Section IV-B. Finally,

probability, bounded dimension. Further, for any two dis- the capacity of the network coding channel is computed in

joint parity checks, the corresponding subspaces are inde- Section IV-C.

pendent. Hence, their intersection is trivial with high prob-

ability, thus proving the claim.

A. Auxiliary Results and Proof of the Main Theorem

Let us see how the argument is generalized to show that the

minimum distance cannot be bounded. Assume by contradiction

that there exists a linear space

, with

bounded, and vectors

such that for each parity-

check node

To start, we can simplify our proof in two ways. First, by sym-

metry of the channel and the message-passing rules, we can as-

sume that the all-zero matrix was transmitted and we need

only analyze the behavior of the decoder for this case. Notice

that, under this assumption, the messages

are linear sub-

(12)

spaces (as they must contain the transmitted vectors

.)

Second, as we discussed in Section III-B, the first step of the

decoding procedure consists of learning the perturbing subspace

We further assume that

for at least

indices

, with

the maximum check node degree

(the other case is treated in the following), which we assume

for simplicity bounded.

Next, for a parity-check node of degree , consider the

linear mapping

defined by

. Because of the special structure of the matrix (the last

rows are zero), this is accomplished by a simple inspection. We

therefore assume in all that follows that is known and that

the all-zero matrix was transmitted.

Throughout this section, we let be a distribution over the

integers and let be a random multigraph over

nodes

with degree distribution . The graph is drawn according

(13) to the configuration model and the code is constructed from as described in the previous section. Since variable nodes have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1568

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 3, MARCH 2013

degree 2, we can think of either as a multigraph over the check for

with

, define

.

nodes or as a bipartite graph over check and variable nodes. Then, the distribution of

is given by

It is also useful to define the “edge perspective” degree dis-

tribution

(18)

(14)

For a uniformly random edge in , let

be the associated

message (that, we recall, is an affine subspace in

). The

key step in the analysis is to notice that the dimension of

satisfies a simple recursion.

First, consider independent and uniformly random linear

subspaces

of dimensions

,

respectively. Let be a fixed subspace of

, and

define

(15)

The probability kernel

admits an explicit albeit cumber-

some expression in terms of Gauss polynomials. Fortunately,

we do not need its exact description in the following.

We define a sequence of integer-valued random vari-

ables

recursively as follows. For

, we let

identically. For

, choose with distribution

, and draw

i.i.d. copies of . Then,

the probability of

, conditioned on the values

coincides with (15) where

. In formulae

We will prove that the rescaled dimensions rately tracked by .

are accu-

Lemma 4.2 (Density Evolution Versus Rescaled Density Evo-

lution): For any , , and , there exists

such that

for any degree distribution with support in

(19)

The previous lemma shows that it suffices to consider the

behavior of for which we have the explicit simple recur-

sion (18). Even so, finding a degree distribution which re-

sults in codes of large rates and so that converges to 0 for

large values of seems challenging. The key to our analysis is

the observation that the recursion (18) simplifies significantly

if

is an integer multiple of . In this case, the dis-

tribution of trivializes: only takes on the values 0 or 1

regardless of the degree distribution . Density evolution there-

fore collapses to a scalar recursion, making it possible to find

the optimum degree distribution .

Lemma 4.3 (Capacity-Achieving Degree Distributions

for Rescaled Density Evolution): Let

be

such that

is an integer multiple of and let

. Then, there exists with

bounded support and

, and two constants

,

such that for any ,

(20)

Proof of the Main Theorem 3.2: Let , , be as in

(16)

the statement of the theorem and

,

. We claim that there exists a degree

The sequence

accurately tracks the dimension of

as stated in the following.

distribution with support in

, with

(equivalently, from the edge perspective,

)

such that the iterative decoder achieves error probability

Lemma 4.1 (Density Evolution on a Graph Versus Density

Evolution on a Tree): For any degree distribution with

bounded support (i.e., such that

for all large enough)

and any

, there exists a sequence

with

as

, such that for any and

smaller than in

iterations. Let us check that

this indeed proves the theorem. As mentioned previously, the

perturbation subspace (i.e., the linear subspace of

spanned by the rows of ) can be inferred with high probability

by the last of the output . This requires Gaussian elimina-

tion of an

matrix with elements in , which can be

(17)

accomplished at a cost of The rest of the codeword

operations. is decoded by message passing.

Each iteration requires updating

messages (because

where we recall that

has bounded support). Each update, cf. (8), requires finding a

.

basis for a space spanned by at most

vectors in

.

Controlling the sequence of random variables

is This can be done, again via Gaussian elimination, in

quite difficult. Luckily, its behavior simplifies considerably if operations. We thus get

operations per iteration. Since

we let

and consider the scaled dimensions

. running

iterations achieves error probability

More precisely, we define the sequence of random variables smaller than , this implies the thesis.

with values in

recursively as follows. We let Let us now prove this claim. First, we fix the degree distribu-

identically. For any

, let be drawn with dis- tion in such a way that Lemma 4.3 holds for some

,

.

tribution , and

be i.i.d. copies of . Further, We let

be such that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTANARI AND URBANKE: ITERATIVE CODING FOR NETWORK CODING

1569

for any

. Then, for any

fixed

, the decoded error probability is upper bounded

by if is large enough.

Indeed, can be chosen in such a way that Lemma 4.2

holds, and therefore, for large enough,

. The th row of codeword is

decoded correctly if any of the two messages

or

has dimension . Therefore, the symbol error probability is

upper bounded by

. By Lemma 4.1, for

large enough, this is at most

, which

proves the theorem.

model. Consider the tree

and condition on the off-

spring number at the root

. Denote by

the corresponding messages toward the root and condition on

. Then, the distri-

bution of

is given by the kernel (15) with

by uniformity of the subspace. The claim follows from the fact

that

are i.i.d. because of the tree structure.

In the proof of Lemma 4.2, we require an estimate of the probability that true density evolution deviates significantly from the rescaled density evolution.

B. Proofs of Lemmas

Proof of Lemma 4.1: The proof is based on the “density

evolution” technique [19], and on some remarks that allow one

to simplify the resulting distributional recursion. A similar result

appeared already in the context of erasure decoding for nonbi-

nary codes [17]: in order to be self-contained, we nevertheless

sketch the proof here.

Let be a uniformly random directed edge in and let

the associated message after iterations of the message-passing

algorithm. Denote by

the “directed neighborhood” of

with radius , i.e., the induced subgraph containing all nonre-

versing walks in of length at most that terminate in . We

regard this as a labeled graph with variable node labels given

by the received vectors and edge labels by the

matrices

that define the code. It is well known that such a neighborhood

converges to a (labeled) Galton–Watson tree .

More precisely,

is a -generations tree rooted in a di-

rected edge and with offspring distribution . We have

(21)

for some

as in the statement of Lemma 4.1. (This is a

standard fact in random graph theory, and the simplest example

of local weak convergence [2]. Applications in the analysis of

message-passing algorithms are discussed at length in [16] and

[19]. A detailed derivation using elementary tools can be found

in [5].)

Note that the message

is a function only of the neigh-

borhood

. Suppose that we apply the message-passing al-

gorithm to and let

be the message passed through the

root edge after iterations. It follows from the definition of total

variation distance that

Proposition 4.4 (Deviations From Asymptotic Density Evolu-

tion): Let be a subspace of dimension in , and a

uniformly random subspace of dimension . Define

, and

. Then

(23)

(24)

Further, let be a subspace of dimension and let

be uniformly random subspaces of dimensions (respectively)

and

. Then

(25)

Proof: Notice that (24) follows from (23) together with the

identity

. Further,

for any two subspaces , of the

given dimensions.

We are left with the task of bounding the probability

of

. If either

or

, then

for any

. For

, notice that this event is identical to

(we denote by the cardinality of the

set ). By the Markov inequality, we have

(26)

where second inequality follows by multiplying the number of

(22)

The proof is completed by showing that

is dis-

tributed as the random variable defined recursively by (16).

First, note that

is a uniformly random subspace, condi-

nonzero vectors in (that is

) with the probability that

one of them belongs to (by uniformity this is

). The last inequality is an easy consequence of

.

Equation (25) follows by applying the previous bound recur-

sively bounds. Explicitly, we define

,

tional on its dimension

. This follows from the mes-

, and

.

sage-passing update rule (8) together with the remark that, given The corresponding (typical) dimensions are

any fixed subspace and a uniformly random full-rank

.

matrix ,

is a uniformly random subspace with the same By the union bound, with probability at least

, we

dimension as .

have

and

We prove that

is distributed as by recursion.

for

. The thesis

The statement is true for

by definition of our channel follows by the triangle inequality.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 3, MARCH 2013

Proof of Lemma 4.2: We will first prove that there exists a

coupling between and such that

with high probability as ,

(with , fixed). Subse-

quently, we shall prove that this claim implies the thesis.

The coupling is constructed recursively. For

, we have

deterministically. This defines the cou-

pling of and for . Assume we have shown how to

construct a coupling of and for some

. To define

the coupling for

, we draw an integer with distribution

. We then generate coupled pairs

. From

those, we generate a coupled pair

via the recursions

(16) and (18), respectively.

In order to prove the claim, it is sufficient to show the fol-

lowing. If

are uniformly random subspaces of di-

mensions

in , and if has dimension

, then with high probability,

for any

. This in turns follows from Proposi-

tion 4.4 (25) together with the observation that the degree is

bounded.

Let us now consider the thesis of the lemma (19). We can as-

sume without loss of generality that

and

,

whence

follows. Let

be the largest

integer in the support of and take

small enough so

that

for some

. Draw

i.i.d. copies of , denoted

.

Since under the coupling

with high prob-

ability

Proof: By a reordering of the terms in the sum

In a similar manner, we have

The claim

follows since

,

, and since

only contains powers of of order

at least . In order to prove the last assertion, we recall the iden-

tity [22]

(29)

We then obtain (here

)

(27)

Now, draw with distribution and

conditional on

according to the kernel (15). Namely,

is the dimension of

when

and

are uniformly random subspaces of with

dimensions Let

. . Then, is uniformly random

conditioned on its dimension

with probability lower bounded as in

(27). Assume this to be the case. By Proposition 4.4, (23), and

recalling that

, the probability that

is at most

. This proves the thesis.

In order to prove our last auxiliary result, Lemma 4.3, we need some algebraic properties of the edge-perspective capacity-achieving degree distribution and of the corresponding generating function

(28)

where we applied the identity obtained by integrating (29) twice with respect to .

Proof of Lemma 4.3: Let

,

. Then,

.

It is clear from the recursive definition (18) together with the

initial condition

that, for any

, only takes

values 0 and 1. Let

. Then,

, and (18)

implies that

(30)

Lemma 4.5 (Basic Properties of Capacity-Achieving

Degree Distribution): Let

and define

. Then,

,

where

is defined as in the statement of Lemma 4.5 (note

that

). We claim that for any

, there ex-

ists an edge-perspective degree distribution of bounded sup-

,

, and port such that (i)

; (ii)

for any

.

; (iii)

as

. Then the lemma

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONTANARI AND URBANKE: ITERATIVE CODING FOR NETWORK CODING

1571

follows by standard calculus, with

and sufficiently

small.

In order to exhibit such a degree distribution, fix

,

, and define

, where

except

for

,

, and

.

Then

(31)

On the other hand,

is upper bounded by

summing over all subsets of rows (there are

such

subsets), the probability that such rows are independent and that

the other rows are in the span generated by these. Such an upper

bound is at most larger than the above lower bound. By taking

with

,

and

, we get

(34)

By Lemma 4.5, the right-hand side converges to

as

Therefore,

. Therefore, we can chose large enough so that the afore-

, whence the thesis follows.

mentioned claim (i) is fulfilled. Consider now claim (ii). We write

REFERENCES

where the last identity follows from Lemma 4.5. The claim is

implied by the remark that

for

and

.

Finally, claim (iii) is a consequence of the fact that

together with .

C. Capacity
Proof of Proposition 3.1: By standard information-theoretic arguments [4], the channel information capacity is given by
(32)

Here,

is the mutual information between and and the supremum

is taken over all possible input distributions.

Writing the mutual information in terms of entropy and

conditional entropy, and using our channel model (2), we have

. Since

does not depend on the input distribution, the mutual informa-

tion is maximized when the latter is uniform. This implies that

the output is uniform as well, and we get

.

Finally,

is the logarithm of the number

of

matrices of rank

. We have

where denotes prob-

ability with respect to a uniformly random matrix . Assume

without loss of generality that

. If

be the

rows of , then the first rows are independent with probability

. Then,

we have

(33)

[1] R. Ahlswede, N. Cai, S.-Y. R. Li, and R. W. Yeung, “Network information flow,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 4, pp. 1204–1216, Jul. 2000.
[2] I. Benjamini and O. Schramm, “Percolation beyond , many questions and a few answers,” Elect. Commun. Probab., vol. 1, pp. 71–82, 1996.
[3] P. A. Chou, Y. Wu, and K. Jain, “Practical network coding,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, 2003.
[4] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 1991.
[5] A. Dembo and A. Montanari, “Gibbs measures and phase transitions on sparse random graphs,” Braz. J. Probab. Statist., vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 137–211, 2010.
[6] P. Delsarte, “Bilinear forms over a finite field, with applications to coding theory,” J Comb. Theory. Series A, vol. 25, pp. 226–241, 1978.
[7] C. Fragouli and E. Soljanin, Network Coding Fundamentals. Delft, The Netherlands: Now, 2007.
[8] E. M. Gabidulin, “Theory of codes with maximum rank distance,” Probl. Peredachi Inf., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 3–16, 1985.
[9] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[10] T. Ho, M. Medard, R. Koetter, D. R. Karger, M. Effros, J. Shi, and B. Leong, “A random linear network coding approach to multicast,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 4413–4430, Oct. 2006.
[11] S. Janzon, T. Luczak, and A. Rucinski, Random Graphs. New York, NY, USA: Wiley, 2000.
[12] R. Kötter and F. R. Kschischang, “Coding for errors and erasures in random network coding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3579–3591, Aug. 2008.
[13] R. Kötter and M. Medard, “An algebraic approach to network coding,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 11, no. 5, pp. 782–795, Oct. 2003.
[14] S.-Y. R. Li, R. W. Yeung, and N. Cai, “Linear network coding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 2, pp. 371–381, Feb. 2003.
[15] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 1997, pp. 150–159.
[16] M. Mézard and A. Montanari, Information, Physics, and Computation. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2009.
[17] V. Rathi and R. Urbanke, “Density evolution, threshold and the stability condition for non-binary LDPC codes,” in IEE Proc. Commun., 2005, vol. 152, pp. 1069–1074.
[18] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[19] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, MA, USA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2007.
[20] D. Silva, R. Kötter, and F. R. Kschischang, “A rank-metric approach to error control in random network coding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 3951–3967, Sep. 2008.
[21] D. Silva, F. R. Kschischang, and R. Kötter, “Capacity of random network coding under a probabilistic error model,” in Proc. 24th Biennial Symp. Commun., Kingston, ON, Canada, Jun. 2008, pp. 9–12.
[22] H. S. Wilf, Generatingfunctionology, 2nd ed. New York, NY, USA: Academic, 1994.
[23] R. W. Yeung, S.-Y. R. Li, N. Cai, and Z. Zhang, Network Coding Theory: Multiple Sources. Delft, The Netherlands: Now, 2005.
[24] R. W. Yeung, S.-Y. R. Li, N. Cai, and Z. Zhang, Network Coding Theory: Single Sources. Delft, The Netherlands: Now, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 3, MARCH 2013

Andrea Montanari is an associate professor in the Departments of Electrical Engineering and of Statistics, Stanford University. He received the Laurea degree in physics in 1997, and the Ph.D. degree in theoretical physics in 2001, both from Scuola Normale Superiore, Pisa, Italy. He has been a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Laboratoire de Physique Théorique of Ecole Normale Supérieure (LPTENS), Paris, France, and the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute, Berkeley, CA. From 2002 to 2010 has been Chargé de Recherche at LPTENS. In September 2006, he joined the faculty of Stanford University. Dr. Montanari was co-awarded the ACM SIGMETRICS Best Paper Award in 2008. He received the CNRS Bronze Medal for Theoretical Physics in 2006 and the National Science Foundation CAREER award in 2008. His research focuses on algorithms on graphs, graphical models, statistical inference and estimation.

Rüdiger L. Urbanke received the Diplomingenieur degree from the Vienna Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria, in 1990 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Washington University, St. Louis, MO, in 1992 and 1995 respectively. From 1995 to 1999, he held a position at the Mathematics of Communications Department at Bell Labs. Since November 1999, he has been a faculty member at the School of Computer and Communication Sciences of EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland. Dr. Urbanke is a recipient of a Fulbright Scholarship. From 2000–2004 he was an Associate Editor of the IEEE Transactions on Information Theory and he is currently on the board of the series “Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory.” He is a co-recipient of the IEEE Information Theory Society 2002 Best Paper Award and of the 2011 IEEE Koji Kobayashi award. He co-authored the book ‘Modern Coding Theory’ published by Cambridge University Press.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:20:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

