1320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, MARCH 2013

Multi-Layer Iterative LDPC Decoding for Broadband Wireless Access Networks: A Recursive Shortening Algorithm
Bo Rong, Member, IEEE, Yiyan Wu, Fellow, IEEE, and Gilles Gagnon

Abstract—This paper presents a novel multi-layer iterative decoding scheme using deterministic bits to lower the decoding threshold of LDPC codes in wireless multimedia communication systems. These deterministic bits serve as known information in the LDPC decoding process to reduce the redundancy during data transmission. Unlike the existing work, our proposed scheme addresses the controllable deterministic bits, such as MPEG null packets, rather than the widely investigated protocol headers. In particular, our multi-layer scheme integrates deterministic bit identification into LDPC decoding process. This integration is able to make significant performance improvement if adequate deterministic bits are discovered. We find that the length of deterministic bits may vary from time to time, and the exploring of deterministic bits is associated to a series of shortened parity matrices during the decoding iterations. Accordingly, we develop a recursive LDPC shortening algorithm to match the dynamic length and facilitate the iterative identification of deterministic bits. Simulation results show that our proposed scheme can achieve considerable gain in today’s most popular broadband wireless access networks such as WiMAX.
Index Terms—Broadband wireless access networks, LDPC codes, multi-layer iterative decoding, deterministic bits, recursive shortening.
I. INTRODUCTION
T ODAY’S wireless networks have to face an increasing demand of high data rate and reliability, which significantly depends on the error correction schemes with near Shannon limit performance. Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes are among the best candidates for this need. For example, Quasi-Cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC), a class of LDPC codes, has been widely adopted by the most advanced wireless communication systems, such as IEEE 802.16e, 802.11n, and DVB-S2/T2 [1-4].
LDPC codes have two major features differentiating themselves from other block codes, i.e., the low-density paritycheck matrix and the belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm. An m × n parity-check matrix H = [hij ] can be associated to a bipartite graph with each column (each component of a codeword) corresponding to a bit node and each row (a parity-check constraint) corresponding to a check node. An edge connects the j-th bit node and the i-th check node, if the j-th codeword component participates in the i-th
Manuscript received June 23, 2012; revised September 24, 2012; accepted November 17, 2012. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was A. Ghrayeb.
The authors are with Communications Research Centre Canada, Ottawa, ON K2H 8S2, Canada (e-mail: {bo.rong, yiyan.wu, gilles.gagnon}@crc.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TWC.2013.011713.120914

constraint equation, i.e., hij = 1. In this way, the BP decoding process can be interpreted to be the exchange of information iteratively between the two kinds of nodes over edges.
Unlike the maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding algorithm that seeks for the global optimization over the whole codeword space, BP algorithm seeks only for the local optimization, which means a bit node in the bipartite graph can only make use of the information flowing into it without the knowledge of other bit nodes. This local optimization of BP lowers the decoding complexity at the expense of the decoding performance. In recent years, many modified BP decoding algorithms have been proposed to alleviate this problem, such as layered BP algorithm [5], joint row and column (JRC) algorithm [6], oscillation based algorithm (OSC) [7], and so on. These improvements in decoding algorithms refine the updating process of the extrinsic information between the bit nodes and check nodes to some extent.
Other than previous work, we develop in this paper a novel multi-layer iterative LDPC decoding scheme to further improve the performance of bit error rate (BER) in a multimedia communication system. Our scheme aims at achieving extra decoding gain using deterministic bits, which may be exploited at any layers above the physical layer. These deterministic bits may involve the widely investigated packet headers [8] as well as our first proposed null packets and service information. We especially address the null packets and service information, since they are more controllable, explorable, and efficient than the packet headers.
Deterministic bits can be gradually identified and used in the iterative decoding process to improve the decoding performance. Our scheme explores as many deterministic bits as possible from all the layers according to the unique feature of a given communication system. Then, these deterministic bits are used to substitute the corresponding received bits iteratively to help the decoding. In terms of coding theory, our scheme is equivalent to achieving a series of sub-codes, whose codes rates are lower than the original. There exist two critical issues in the implementation of our multi-layer iterative LDPC decoding. First, the number of deterministic bits may change drastically from time to time, since some deterministic bits, such as MPEG null packets, are highly dependant on the content. Without special design, the transmitter and receiver have to store a considerable number of shortened parity check matrices according to predefined protocols. Second, the iterative identification process of controllable deterministic

1536-1276/13$31.00 c 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RONG et al.: MULTI-LAYER ITERATIVE LDPC DECODING FOR BROADBAND WIRELESS ACCESS NETWORKS: A RECURSIVE SHORTENING ALGORITHM 1321

bits is closely related to the LDPC shortening pattern. In this

paper, we develop a recursive LDPC shortening algorithm to

overcome these two problems.

The proposed multi-layer iterative decoding is different

from the conventional joint source-channel coding (JSCC)

[9]. JSCC addresses the information redundancy in source

coding process, whereas our scheme addresses the transmis-

sion and packetization redundancy. JSCC has never been

widely deployed in practical systems so far, since it requires a

complicated combination of special source coding and channel

coding algorithms that current protocol stacks do not support

well. JSCC could be adopted by future standards due to its

high theoretical performance with a condition of fully updated protocol stacks. Our scheme, on the other hand, addresses the Fig. 1. The data rate variation of an H.264 video encoder over 1 minute exploiting of information redundancy in currently deployed period (encoder output rate: 5 Mbps).

communication systems with a variety of source and channel

coding configurations. With this respect, it has more engineering significance and can benefit wireless users right away.
The proposed multi-layer iterative decoding is also different from the newly emerging joint protocol-channel decoding (JPCD) [10]. JPCD exploits the redundancy present in the protocol stack to facilitate packet synchronization and header recovery at receiver side. This redundancy is due to the presence of CRCs and checksums at various layers of the protocol stack, as well as from the structure of these headers. Our scheme, however, aims to improve physical layer error correction by applying deterministic bits to LDPC codes. Deterministic bits involve much more than packet headers, and could be manipulated at both transmitter and receiver sides.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the transmission redundancy in wireless communication systems, as well as the LDPC code decoding and shortening. Section III introduces our multi-layer iterative decoding scheme for LDPC codes using deterministic bits. Section IV proposes our recursive LDPC shortening scheme for flexible length of deterministic bits. Section V presents numerical results to justify the performance of the proposed scheme, followed by Section VI to conclude the paper.

2) Null Packets: Video encoders usually output variable bit rate data depending on the video content, whereas most communication and broadcasting channels are set at fixed rate. A data buffer is always implemented at the video encoder output to smooth out the data rate. When there is a buffer underflow, the transport layer at the multiplexer will fill the output data with deterministic null packets. Null packets widely exist in constant bit rate (CBR) video streams such as MPEG. Our study reveals that there are a considerable number of null packets in today’s MPEG transport stream as well as other CBR video transmission. Fig. 1 illustrates the data rate fluctuation of an H.264 or MPEG AVC encoder with an output setting of 5 Mbps. Over 1 minute observation time, the maximum data rate is 4.66 Mbps, the minimum data rate is 4.60 Mbps, and the average data rate is 4.64 Mbps. That means that up to 7.2% of null packets need to be inserted by the transport layer to keep a 5 Mbps constant data rate.
3) Service Information: In Internet Protocol television (IPTV) or other services of broadcasting nature, one of the most useful parts of a transport stream (TS) is the service information (SI). SI provides information to enable automatic configuration of the receiver to de-multiplex and decode the

various streams of programs within the TS. SI may go far

II. DETERMINISTIC BITS IN WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FOR LDPC DECODING
A. Transmission Redundancy in Wireless Communication

beyond simply describing the structure of the stream. For instance, schedule information, detailed information about the elements of a service, language information and network information is all available. SI have to be sent repetitively

There exists tremendous information redundancy in the packetized multimedia transmission over today’s wireless communication systems. For example, some bits are constant or predictable during the transmission, and thus defined as deterministic bits in our work. Those bits can be gradually identified and recursively fed back in the iterative decoding process to improve the decoding performance.
As shown in the following, deterministic bits may come

and periodically for the start-up terminals, and thus contains plenty of information redundancy.
In this work, we mainly address the controllable deterministic bits , such as MPEG null packets and service information, which are easy to be re-located in the encoding buffer of transmitter side. As demonstrated below, controllable deterministic bits are more controllable, explorable, and efficient than the uncontrollable deterministic bits such as packet headers.

from three sources, including 1) packet headers, 2) null packets, and 3) service information.

• Easy to be identified by location: MPEG null packets and service information usually have constant length,

1) Packet Headers: An advanced wireless communication

and thus could be placed at fixed positions, such as the

system usually resorts to RTP/UDP/IP protocol stack to trans-

beginning or end of a data frame. As a result, they are

mit multimedia data. It has been found that packet headers in

easy to be detected and identified by a receiver. Packet

each protocol are highly repetitive and thus predicable, due to

headers, however, are not able to be placed at fixed

the intra-layer and inter-layer redundancy [8].

positions, since they are always followed by the payload

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1322

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, MARCH 2013

of a variable length.

Information Part

Parity Part

• Easy to be identified by content: MPEG null packet is an MPEG TS packet of 188 bytes filled mostly by 0x00.

In case of errors, say 10% of 0x00s become non-zeros,

we can still identify the null packet with the rest of 90%

G

0x00s by cross correlation. Packet headers, on another

hand, are not that easy to be identified by the content.

For instance, it is difficult to recognize an error if an IP

address ”198.101.10.8”is blurred as ”198.101.20.3”.

• High efficiency: As stated above, an MPEG null packet

can easily provide a bunch of 188-byte deterministic bits.

H

From a packet header, it is not possible to obtain so many

deterministic bits one time. Moreover, each field in an IP

header must be compared and analyzed independently, Fig. 2. G and H with deterministic bits (shaded area) removed. which significantly increases the computational cost.

• Stable decoding gain: As shown in the rest of the paper, controllable and uncontrollable deterministic bits correspond to the LDPC shortening at fixed and random positions, respectively. As a result, controllable deterministic bits are able to contribute constant decoding gain, whereas the uncontrollable ones produce different gains case by case.

[11-13]. These works show that decoding with deterministic bits is equal to the shortening of information bits, and extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart can be applied for performance evaluation.
In general, we have the following principles on deterministic bits.

1) Deterministic information is equivalent to deleting

B. Deterministic Bits for LDPC Decoding
With respect to LDPC decoding, deterministic bits are equivalent to putting infinite reliability on some variable nodes, whose positions are assumed to be known to both encoder and decoder. In the standard log-likelihood ratio (LLR) BP algorithm, the updating process on check nodes and bit nodes involves the following two steps:
1) For each check node in the tth decoding iteration:

columns in the information part of the parity-check matrix. 2) Deterministic bits result in the decrease of code rate and length. That is, having p bits known in a (n, k) code will achieve a (n − p, k − p) code. 3) Decoding will be performed on the residual bipartite graph, which corresponds to a column-reduced matrix. 4) Deterministic bits will change the degree distribution of variable and check node.

Ui(jt) = 2tanh−1

V (t−1) tanh ij ,
2

j ∈N (i)\j

Given the number of deterministic bits, the shortening (1) pattern has to be optimized regarding the performance of
residual code. In other words, the degree distributions of

where N (i) = {j : hi,j = 1}, Ui(jt) and Vi(jt) are the LLRs of bit j sent from check node i to bit node j and
from bit node j to check node i, respectively.
2) For each bit node in the tth decoding iteration:

Vi(jt) = Uch,j +

U (t), ij

(2)

i ∈M(j)\i

where M(j) = {i : hi,j = 1}.
To reduce the decoding complexity, min-sum (MS) algorithm utilizes the odd property of the function tanh() and simplifies the updating rule on check nodes in Equation (1) to

Ui(jt) =

sgn(V (t−1)) · min |V (t−1)|.

(3)

ij

j ∈N (i)\j ij

j ∈N (i)\j

Regarding the equations above, deterministic bits mean to set Vmn to be ∞ or −∞ in the decoding. In practice, an even easier approach is available, i.e., to remove the columns corresponding to deterministic bits from parity check matrix.
Using deterministic bits in decoding is widely known as shortening from the perspective of channel coding theory. This

shortened code need to be optimized for a low decoding threshold.
Fig. 2 demonstrates that deterministic information changes the structure of both parity-check and encoding matrices. The systematic encoding matrix, denoted by G, is of size k by n, with the information part of a k by k square matrix and the parity check part of a k by (n − k) matrix. The rows of G and H span two orthogonal n-dimensional vector spaces, i.e., GHT = 0. As shown in Fig. 2, having p known bits in the codeword is equivalent to deleting p columns in H and both p columns and p rows in G. In general, suppose the deleted columns from H are indexed by Cdel = {ci, i = 1, . . . , p}, then the columns and rows deleted from G are indexed by the same set. In case of repeat-accumulate (RA) and irregular repeat-accumulate (IRA) codes, there is no need for G, and the encoding can be done using the column deleted H matrix.
III. MULTI-LAYER ITERATIVE LDPC DECODING WITH DETERMINISTIC BITS ARRANGEMENT
A. Multi-layer Iterative LDPC Decoding

topic can be traced back to the shortened BCH and RS codes, There exists tremendous information redundancy in today’s

especially the latter which can be shortened almost at will. wireless communication system. A conventional communi-

For LDPC codes, only a few studies were published recently cation system has a simple model of three components:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RONG et al.: MULTI-LAYER ITERATIVE LDPC DECODING FOR BROADBAND WIRELESS ACCESS NETWORKS: A RECURSIVE SHORTENING ALGORITHM 1323

Video Data Audio
Presentation Layer

34

Shannon Limit

32

LDPC Codes

30

Data Rate (Mbps)

Session Layer

Input

Session Layer
Transport Layer
Network Layer
Data Link Layer Physical Layer Iterative Decoder

Fig. 3. Multi-layer iterative decoding.

Deterministic Bits Analyzer
Deterministic Bits Controller
Deterministic Bits Inserter

28

26
* Information

24

Redundancy

**

Iterative Decoding

22

with Known Symbols

20 Gain

18

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

C/N (dB)

Fig. 4. C/N gain of multi-layer iterative decoding.

Repositioning-1

Repositioning-2

Noisy Channel

source, channel, and destination. As a result, previous studies Input mainly addressed using information redundancy in a single Data upper layer to improve FEC decoding. With the prosperity

Frame Buffer

x

FEC

FEC

Buffer Encoder

x

of networking technology, it now becomes advantageous to

take into account multiple layers to make further improvements to a wireless communication system. In particular, we

Data Bits

Uncontrollable Known Bts

Parity Bits

propose a novel approach that can improve the performance Fig. 5. Repositioning the controllable deterministic bits at transmitter side.

of FEC iterative decoder with deterministic information from

all possible layers as shown in Fig. 3. During each decoding iteration, the decoded symbol from the physical layer is passed to upper layer packet analyzers to find the deterministic bits. Then, these deterministic bits are fed back for the next round of decoding iteration.
Fig. 4 illustrates where the gain of our multi-layer iterative decoding comes from. Modern channel coding technology

to achieve maximum decoding gain [13]. Accordingly, we propose to reposition the controllable deterministic bits in the transmitter buffers before performing LDPC encoding. Fig. 5 illustrates that the re-positioning of controlled deterministic bits involves two steps: 1) repositioning in the frame buffer; 2) repositioning in the FEC encoding buffer.

makes it possible to closely approach the Shannon limit There are two types of LDPC codes, i.e., regular and

with long code length. However, there does exist information irregular. An LDPC code is regular if the rows and columns redundancy inside the transmitted symbols before channel of parity check matrix H have uniform weight; otherwise, it is

coding, i.e., sync, pilot, training sequence, upper layer headers, irregular. For regular LDPC Codes, only Step-1 is necessary;

signaling bits, null packets, service information, etc. Our for irregular LDPC codes, both Step-1 and Step-2 are critical.

approach of multi-layer iterative decoding can make use of Most existing standards, such as IEEE 802.16e, 802.11n, and

the information redundancy to reduce the receiver carrier-to- DVB-S2/T2, adopt irregular codes.

noise ratio (C/N) threshold and improve coverage or signal 1) Step-1: In practice, there are several ways to transmit

robustness.

the controllable deterministic bits for an easy detection at

Notably, multi-layer iterative decoding involves the feed- receiver side. Its worth noting that some deterministic bits,

back from higher levels to physical layer, which may result in such as service information, have fixed total length, whereas complexity and delay. However, all the upper layer protocol others, such as null packets, have fixed packet size, but

stacks already exist in the receiver and have to be executed variable number of packets, resulting in a variable total length

to decode application data sooner or later. Our scheme is to eventually.

efficiently organize them with physical layer to improve error correction performance. The processing becomes fast after the establishment of first round of protocol analysis, which must be done even in legacy receivers without multi-layer iterative decoding function.

1) By time interval: For example, service information can be transmitted periodically, like once a second, so that receiver can easily detect them based on fixed time.
2) By location: Fig. 6 shows a data frame with locationsensitive structure for wireless transmission. It specifies

B. Arranging Deterministic Bits at Transmitter Side

that the deterministic bits of fixed total length, like service information, are inserted at the beginning of a

Study showed that the shortening pattern or the position

frame. A pointer could also be added to indicate the

of deterministic bits in an LDPC block can be optimized

end of the service information in a frame. Moreover,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1324

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, MARCH 2013

pointer1
Service Information

Data Frame Main Data

pointer 2
Null Packets

LDPC Encoding Block
. . . r1 r2 r3 r4 r5 r6 r7 r8 r9 r10 r11 r12 r13 r14 r15 r16
By Optimization Algorithm

Fig. 6. An example of deterministic bits in frame buffer. LDPC Encoding Block
. . . r1 r2 r3 r4 r5 r6 r7 r8 r9 r10 r11 r12 r13 r14 r15 r16

deterministic bits

unknown bits

Fig. 8. Smart insertion of the controllable deterministic bits in LDPC encoding block (FEC buffer).

Following the Transmission

Clearly, Extrinsic-Sum is a heuristic or empirical concept

Frame Randomly

that achieves low computational complexity at the cost of

compromised performance. As high speed hardware becomes

deterministic bits

unknown bits

more affordable, it is reasonable to improve the performance with a slight increase of algorithm complexity. Decoding

Fig. 7. Random insertion of the deterministic bits in LDPC encoding block. threshold is one of the most important performance indicators

for shortened LDPC codes [13]. In case of irregular codes,

the deterministic bits of variable total length, like null packets, should be appended at the end of a frame as paddings. An optional pointer could also be added to indicate the start of null packets. 3) 1 and 2 work together.

decoding threshold is closely related to degree distribution pair and can be estimated by Exit-Chart [14].
The argument above leads to a straight forward solution of brute-force searching, i.e., looking for the shortening pattern with the lowest decoding threshold using Exit-Chart. Bruteforce searching can land on an optimal solution with the

2) Step-2: Conventionally, the FEC encoder follows the computational cost varying with the size of parity check

transmission frame to organize the encoding block and gen- matrix H. For example, it has a computational complexity

erate parity bits. As shown in Fig. 7, the controllable deter- of O(n!/p!), if (p < k) information bits are removed from a

ministic bits are inserted randomly and may not be in the best (n, k) LDPC codes.

position from the perspective of decoding gain.

However, brute-force searching is not appropriate for the

We propose to place the controllable deterministic bits in scenario of deterministic bits. First, the number of determinis-

specific positions in the encoding block (FEC buffer) before tic bits may vary significantly from time to time. For example,

generating parity bits. The specific positions mentioned above some deterministic bits, such as MPEG null packets, are

are related to the shortening property of the error correction highly dependant on the content, and thus even the transmitter

code used, and able to be located by certain algorithms. This can hardly anticipate their number beforehand. As a result,

step, as shown in Fig. 8, aims at achieving as much decoding the transmitter and receiver have to store a considerable

gain as possible by manipulating the positions of controllable number of shortened parity check matrices to handle different

deterministic bits during the FEC encoding but not the data situations, leading to intractable complexity. Second, brute-

transmission.

force searching assumes that all the deterministic bits can be

identified. As discussed in the next subsection, the discovery

IV. RECURSIVE LDPC SHORTENING

of deterministic bits largely depends on the iterative bit identification and LDPC decoding process, which is closely

A. Existing LDPC Shortening Algorithms

related to the parity check matrix shortening patterns. Brute-

Applying deterministic bits to decoding is equivalent to force searching algorithm is optimal for LDPC decoding but shortening from the perspective of code design. The shortening not deterministic bit identification.

of LDPC codes was first discussed in [11] to enlarge the girth of array codes, with further investigation from different B. A Recursive Shortening Algorithm for Deterministic Bit aspects, such as H-ARQ [12] and manipulating code rates [13]. Discovery

In particular, the authors of [13] proposed an algorithm of Fig. 9 illustrates a joint process of deterministic bit iden-

maximal extrinsic-sum (MES) that takes the degree distribu- tification and LDPC decoding. It is clear that step-3 involves

tion of LDPC parity check matrix into consideration for the a series of shortened parity matrices as more deterministic

first time. Let ρ(i) be the weight of the ith row of H (check bits are fed back from step-5. The performance of shortened

node i), then we define the extrinsic-sum of the jth column parity matrix in step-3 could also influence the deterministic

of H (bit node j) as

bit identification in step-5. Inspired by the mutual impact

E(j) = (ρ(i) − 1), i ∈ Λj ,
i

between step-3 and step-5, we develop next a recursive LDPC (4) shortening algorithm aiming to explore more deterministic
bits.

where

Λj = {i : hi,j = 1 & 0 ≤ i ≤ m}.

Given p deterministic bits, let Hp be a shortened matrix (5) with p columns removed from parity check matrix H. We

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RONG et al.: MULTI-LAYER ITERATIVE LDPC DECODING FOR BROADBAND WIRELESS ACCESS NETWORKS: A RECURSIVE SHORTENING ALGORITHM 1325

Received Signal r(x)
1. Calculate Log-likelihood ratio (LLR) from r(x)
2. Run a number of BP iterations

deterministic bits at receiver side, which MES and brute-force algorithms cannot handle.
Assume that the size of parity check matrix H is m × n, and p out of the k = n − m information columns are to be shortened. Our proposed recursive shortening algorithm is summarized in the following, with C = {1, 2, ..., k} representing the information columns.

3. LDPC hard-decision decoding

4. Successful ?

Yes 6.Store potential derministic bits for future use

No
5. Explore derministicbits from upper layer

7. Stop decoding process

Fig. 9. Integrated bit identification and LDPC decoding.

Algorithm 1 Recursive Shortening Algorithm
1: calculate the Eb/N0 threshold for each element in candidate set C = {1, 2, ..., k} using Exit-Chart [14].
2: group the ones of smallest Eb/N0 into set F . 3: if (F has more than one element) then
4: keep the element of smallest column index and remove all others from F .
5: end if 6: remove one column from H according to F . 7: p = p − 1; k = k − 1; 8: if (p = 0) then 9: return H as the shortened matrix. 10: else
11: go to Step-1. 12: end if

define recursive shortening as a column removing strategy that satisfies

Hp+q = (Hp)q, for any integers p, q > 0.

(6)

Recursive shortening is tailored for the multi-layer LDPC decoding scheme with a number of specific features. Even better, our simulation study shows that this algorithm can reach sub-optimal decoding threshold as well.

This definition implies a recursive searching of Hp, i.e.,

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS

H ⇒ H1 ⇒ H2 ⇒ ...Hk ⇒ Hk+1 ⇒ ... ⇒ Hp,

(7) In this section, numerical results are presented to demon-

where Hk+1 = (Hk)1 for any 1 < k < p. By intuition, recursive shortening algorithm means a mother matrix removes only one column to generate another mother matrix for further removal. We define the optimal recursive searching as a special case of recursive searching where each iteration of column removal reaches the lowest decoding threshold possible. Optimal recursive searching can optimize the deterministic bit discovery, if it has the most easily identified deterministic bits shortened first.
Let Hpo and Hpro be the optimal p-column shortened parity matrix achieved by brute-force searching and recursive searching, respectively, p and p (p ≥ p ) be the real number of deterministic bits at transmitter and the detected number of deterministic bits at receiver, respectively. Then, we have

strate the performance of our proposed multi-layer iterative decoding scheme using deterministic bits. There are a number of different irregular QC-LDPC codes in 802.16e standard, including the code rates of 1/2, 2/3A, 2/3B, 3/4A, 3/4B, 5/6 with possible lengths of 576, 1440, 2304 bits. In our simulation, we take the rate 1/2 and 2/3A codes with length 2304 as examples to compare different combinations of deterministic bit arrangement. Our study shows that the results obtained from these examples can also be applied to other WiMAX LDPC configurations.
Let R be the code rate, then the parity check matrix of 802.16e QC-LDPC is defined by a 24(1 − R) × 24 base or mother matrix M with each entry representing the shift of a circulant permutation sub-matrices. The base matrices of 1/2 and 2/3A codes are sized of 12 × 24 and 8 × 24 , respectively,

Hpo = (Hpo )op−p Hpro = (Hpro)rpo−p

.

with 12 information columns for 1/2 code and 16 information (8) columns for 2/3A code. In our simulation, we shorten the QC
LDPC codes at the level of base matrix, instead of parity check

To correctly decode the data, a receiver has to choose the matrix, to keep the Quasi-Cyclic property.

parity check matrix completely matched to the generator One prominent innovation of our work is the transmitter-

matrix used in the transmitter. Equation (8) implies, when side technique to place the controllable deterministic bits in

p = p, a receiver may choose an unmatched parity check special locations using optimized LDPC shortening scheme.

matrix from brute-force searching, but always a matched parity Previous work, such as JPCD, which exploits the redun-

check matrix from recursive shortening. Brute-force searching dancy present in the protocol stack, is limited to receiver-

has a weakness that there is no relationship amongst its side technique. From the perspective of channel coding, our

optimal LDPC shortening patterns with different number of proposed scheme corresponds to recursive shortening, whereas

deterministic bits. The recursive searching algorithm above JPCD corresponds to random shortening. Next, we demon-

has a low computational complexity of O(p(2n − p + 1)/2), strate the advantage of our proposed scheme over JPCD by

with resilience to incomplete or inaccurate knowledge of the comparing the performance of different shortening algorithms

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1326

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 12, NO. 3, MARCH 2013

100 origin

brute−force

recursive shortening

10−1

MES

10−2

FER FER

10−3

100

origin

10−4

brute−force

recursive shortening

10−1

MES

10−5

10−2

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Eb/No (dB)

10−3
Fig. 11. 802.16e-2/3A code FER comparison–deleting 4 columns

10−4

10−5

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

Eb/No (dB)

VI. CONCLUSIONS
This paper presents a new scheme of multi-layer iterative decoding to address the controllable deterministic bits

Fig. 10. 802.16e-1/2code FER comparison–deleting 4 columns

with both transmitter-side and receiver-side techniques. Our scheme can effectively explore the information redundancy

hiding inside the transmitted bits to improve LDPC decoding

on 802.16e QC-LDPC codes. Notably, our simulation study mainly focuses on the LDPC performance without a full WiMAX implementation. We consider that our innovation mainly comes from channel coding aspect, whereas a real WiMAX network is a complicated system with many other intricacies.

performance. As for the implementation, we recognize the iterative identification of dynamic length deterministic bits as a key problem and further develop a recursive LDPC shortening scheme to solve it. Numerical results show that our scheme can adapt to a variety of application scenarios and achieve considerable decoding gain with slight cost of memory storage and computational complexity.

We first evaluate the asymptotic performance of different

LDPC shortening algorithms by EXIT chart [14], while removing 4 columns out of all the possible 12 or 16 information columns using different algorithms. Exit chart is accurate to predict the performance of LDPC codes that have long code length and can approach Shannon limit with infinite iterations. However, our Exit chart based recursive shortening algorithm is also applicable to the short-length codes with finite iterations, which are used often in practice. Although Exit chart cannot exactly predict the decoding threshold of each short-length code, it is able to measure the decoding threshold gaps of different short-length codes and pick up the optimal one. Table-I articulates the index of eliminated column in base matrix, the weight of deleted column (in parentheses) and the asymptotic decoding threshold. Specially, the algorithm of random shortening represents the average performance when removing columns arbitrarily. Numerical results show that our proposed recursive shortening performs near brute force searching and better than MES algorithm and random shortening.
We next simulate the shortened LDPC codes over binary input additive white Gaussian noise (BAWGN) channel. Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 illustrate that the performance of AWGN frame error rate (FER) follows the asymptotic trend predicted by EXIT chart. As a conclusion, our recursive shortening algorithm can achieve sub-optimal decoding threshold, in addition to its unique feature to handle the dynamic length and iterative identification of controllable deterministic bits.

REFERENCES
[1] “IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems,” IEEE Std 802.16TM-2005.
[2] “IEEE Standard for Information technology-Telecommunications and information exchange between systems-Local and metropolitan area networks-Specific requirements Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer Specifications,” IEEE Std 802.11n TM-2009.
[3] A. Morello and V. Mignone, “DVB-S2: The second generation standard for satellite broad-band services,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 210–227, Jan. 2006.
[4] “Frame structure channel coding and modulation for a second generation digital terrestrial television broadcasting system (DVB-T2),” DVB document A122.
[5] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, pp. 107–112.
[6] Z. He, S. Roy, and P. Fortier, “Lowering error floor of LDPC codes using a joint row-column decoding algorithm,” in Proc. 2007 IEEE ICC, pp. 920–925.
[7] S. Gounai, T. Ohtsuki, and T. Kaneko, “Modified belief propagation decoding algorithm for low-density parity check code based on oscillation,” in Proc. 2006 IEEE VTC – Spring, vol. 3, pp. 1467–1471.
[8] C. Marin, Y. Leprovost, M. Kieffer, and P. Duhamel, “Robust MAC-lite and soft header recovery for packetized multimedia transmission,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 775–784, Mar. 2010.
[9] M. Fresia, F. Perez-Cruz, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Joint source and channel coding,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 104–113, Nov. 2010.
[10] M. Kieffer and P. Duhamel, “Joint protocol and channel decoding: an overview,” in Proc. 2010 Future Network and Mobile Summit, pp. 1–16.
[11] O. Milenkovic, N. Kashyap, and D. Leyba, “Shortened array codes of large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3707–3722, Aug. 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

RONG et al.: MULTI-LAYER ITERATIVE LDPC DECODING FOR BROADBAND WIRELESS ACCESS NETWORKS: A RECURSIVE SHORTENING ALGORITHM 1327

[12] T. Okamura, “A hybrid ARQ scheme based on shortened low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2008 IEEE WCNC, pp. 82–87, Apr. 2008.
[13] X. Liu, X. Wu, and C. Zhao, “Shortening for irregular QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 8, pp. 612–614, Aug. 2009.
[14] S. T. Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.

networks.

Bo Rong (M’07) received the B.S. degree from Shandong University in 1993, the M.S. degree from Beijing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in 1997, and the Ph.D. degree from Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications in 2001. He is currently a Research Scientist with Communications Research Centre Canada, Ottawa, ON. He is also an Adjunct Professor at Ecole de technologie superieure (ETS), Universite du Quebec, Canada. His research interests include modeling, simulation, and performance analysis of next-generation wireless

Yiyan Wu (S’85-M’90-SM’95-F’01) is a Principal Research Scientist with the Communications Research Center, Ottawa, Canada. He is an Adjunct Professor of Carleton University in Ottawa, Canada, a member of the IEEE Broadcast Technology Society Administrative Committee, and a member of the Advanced Television Systems Committee (ATSC) Board of Directors, representing IEEE. His research interests include broadband multimedia communications, digital broadcasting, and communication systems engineering.
Gilles Gagnon received his B.Sc.App. in Electrical Engineering from the Universite Laval in Quebec city. In 1979 he joined Communications Research Center Canada to work on the projects related to Videotex and Teletext. He helped create the Video Systems Group laboratory at CRC and worked on video source coding. He later was the manager of Television Networks and Transmission group involved in research on digital television broadcasting and related applications. He is now the manager of the Performance Evaluation group.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:18:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

