SIGNAL ?OCESSING 
ALGORITHMS, ARCHITECTURES, ARRANGEMENTS, AND ApPLICA liONS 
S?A 2015 
THE INSTITUTE OF ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONICS ENGINEERS INC. 
September 23-25"', 2015, Poznan, POLAND 
Complexity Reduced Turbo Differential Decoding 
Based on Layered LDPC Decoding 
Christian Cabirol 
Chair for Communications Engineering 
University ofKaiserslautem 
Kaiserslautem, Germany 
Cabirol@eit.uni-kl.de 
Wolfgang Sauer-Greff 
Chair for Communications Engineering 
University ofKaiserslautem 
Kaiserslautem, Germany 
Abstract- In case of unknown carrier phase andlor imperfect 
channel estimation in communication systems using QPSK it is 
well known that phase and channel uncertainty can be resolved 
by differential modulation at the expense of doubling the bit 
error ratio. Such a differentially modulated QPSK approach has 
to be applied in wavelength division multiplexing (WDM) fiber 
optical communication systems using coherent transmission due 
to the phase ambiguity of carrier phase estimation (CPE) and 
potential cycle slips. However, this penalty can be diminished by 
using an iterative decoding procedure which passes information 
between the differential decoder and the decoder of a low-density 
parity-check (LDPC) code, a powerful state-of-the art forward 
error correction (FEC) code. In addition, it is shown that by 
applying a layered decoding schedule in the LDPC decoder, the 
number of required iterations can be reduced by up to 50%. 
Keywords: 
LDPC; DQPSK, 
iterative decoding, 
layered 
decoding, belief propagation 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
To 
fulfill 
the 
increasing 
demand 
for 
higher 
data 
transmission rate, modern high-speed optical communication 
systems use coherent transmission to enable the application of 
advanced modulation schemes such as quadrature amplitude 
modulation (QAM) and to allow for removing the linear signal 
distortions by equalizers in the electric domain. Each channel 
uses both states of polarizations for data transmission and in 
addition, WDM with up to 88 channels per fiber is employed to 
achieve highest aggregated data rates on the fiber [1]. To 
enable coherent transmission, the unmodulated phase of the 
transmitting laser has to be recovered at the receiver side, as 
this information is not contained in the modulated QAM signal. 
Blind CPE such as the Viterbi&Viterbi algorithm [2] 
suffers from the occurrence of cycle slips due to phase noise 
from cross phase modulation (XPM) in WDM systems, 
resulting in a permanent rotation of the received constellation. 
Differential encoding, which is also denoted as differential 
119 
Andreas Bisplinghoff 
Cisco Optical 
Nuremberg, Germany 
Ralph Urbansky 
Chair for Communications Engineering 
University ofKaiserslautern 
Kaiserslautern, Germany 
modulation [3], provides a robust mitigation of slip-induced 
error events by converting permanent phase errors into single 
symbol errors at the expense of an error doubling for single 
erroneously received bits. Using state-of-the-art soft-decision 
(SD) FEC codes for optical communications with an coding 
overhead of up to 25% [4], this approach introduces a signal to 
noise ratio (SNR) penalty of more than IdB. 
By using a double-iterative decoding scheme which passes 
information between a SD differential decoding and an 
iterative SD FEC decoding, this differential penalty can be 
significantly reduced [3][5], provided that the slip rate is below 
10-4 [6]. 
In this contribution, we propose a method for a significant 
reduction of the number of required outer turbo iterations 
between the differential decoder and the FEC decoder by up to 
50% by introducing layered decoding [7] for LDPC codes 
while still achieving the same decoding performance. The 
reduced number of iterations can be translated to reduced 
complexity. 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: First, 
the transmission system is sketched, followed by a more 
detailed description of the LDPC decoder. After that, the used 
model for optical transmission with impairments due to fiber 
nonlinearity is presented and simulation results are given. 
Finally, the paper concludes with a summary. 
II. 
SYSTEM DESCRIPTION 
The proposed system, depicted in Fig. 1, consists of a serial 
concatenation of differential QPSK modulation and FEC 
coding where the FEC overhead is mainly spent for an LDPC 
code to achieve a large net coding gain and a 2% overhead is 
reserved for a Reed-S olomon (RS ) code to remove the 
potential error floor of the iterative decoding scheme to enable 
the required output bit error ratios (BER), typical below 10-15 
for optical communications. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
RS 
-
LDPC r-
Differential 
Encoder 
Encoder 
-
Modulator 
Channel 
.,'\ 
RS 
LDPC 
MAP 
Decoder 14-
Decoder 
-Differential 14-
Decoder 
I 
f 
"-
Turbo Loop 
Figure I: Sketch of the transmission system with channel, turbo 
differential coding, and RS coding for removing a potential error 
floor. Effects of demodulation and equalization are included in the 
channel. 
On the receiver side, first the differential encoding is 
removed by using a maximum a-posteriori (MAP) soft-input 
soft-output (S IS O) differential decoder [8] which is able to 
process a-priori information in order to enable the iteration 
loop together with the LDPC decoder. A-priori information is 
knowledge of the value of a transmitted bit independent of 
channel observation. The LDPC decoder performs Ninner 
iterations of LDPC decoding and passes the resulting 
reliabilities as a-posteriori information back towards the 
differential decoder. By subtracting the a-priori information of 
the LDPC decoder, extrinsic information is generated which is 
used as a-priori information for the differential decoder as is 
extrinsic infonnation 
from LDPC decoder 
a- osteriori infonnation 
from LDPC decoder 
output 
Figure 2: Information transfer between differential and LDPC decoder. 
shown in Fig. 2. Extrinsic information can be regarded as new 
information generated by the LDPC decoder. The iteration loop 
between LDPC decoder and differential decoder is repeated 
Nouter times or until a valid codeword is found. 
III. 
LDPC DECODrNG 
LDPC codes were introduced by Gallagher in 1962 as a class 
of channel capacity achieving block codes which are 
characterized by large codewords resulting from a sparse 
parity-check matrix. The sparsity enables an iterative soft-input 
soft-output 
decoding 
procedure 
which 
is 
called 
belief 
propagation (BP) decoding [9). 
The decoding procedure can be viewed as a message 
passing between variable nodes (VN) and check nodes (CN) of 
variable nodes 
120 
check nodes 
Figure 3: Tanner graph of LDPC codes 
a Tanner graph. In this graph, the VNs correspond to the 
columns of the check matrix and the bits of the codeword 
whereas the CN correspond to the rows of the parity-check 
matrix and the parity checks, compare Fig. 3. 
For decoding, LDPC codes can be seen as a concatenation 
of a repetition code and a parity check code [lO). Therefore, in 
each iteration i, the VN to CN messages 
Ai 
= Achan + '\' Ai-1 
vAc 
v 
L c'--.,.v 
c',*c 
and the CN to VN messages 
AB-+v 
= 2 arctanh (n tanhCAVI-+c/2)) 
v'::;tv 
(1) 
(2) 
are computed alternatingly [9], where AChan is the input 
from the differential decoder. In the first half-iteration, all VN 
send messages to neighbored CN whereas in the second half­
iteration, all CN send messages to their neighbored VN. To 
simplifY the computation, (2) can be approximated [9] as 
AB-+V 
= C!DIAEI-+cl n sign(AE,-+J 
(3) 
v'::;tv 
These steps are repeated until either a valid codeword is found 
or a maximum allowed number of iterations is exceeded. 
As a fully parallel implementation which computes all VN to 
CN messages or all CN to VN messages, respectively, is not 
feasible for long LDPC codewords required for a large net 
coding gain, the algorithm is serialized by introducing layered 
decoding [7). The CNs are updated one by one and all 
influenced VN are immediately updated according to 
where 
AF-+c 
= Ov - AB=.lv 
( 4 ) 
(5) 
Ov is initialized with the input from the differential decoder and 
represents the reliability of variable node v. 
By using this decoding schedule, the information exchange 
inside the LDPC decoder is speed up and the decoder 
converges up to 50% faster at the cost of slightly more 
complex single iterations [7). Employing structured quasi­
cyclic LDPC codes, a partial parallelization is possible to meet 
the throughput requirements of 100Gbitls typical for optical 
communications without sacrificing the increased convergence 
speed. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
IV. 
CHANNEL MODEL FOR OPTICAL TRANSMISSION WITH 
NONLINEAR IMPAIRMENTS 
To take the phase noise effects of optical channels into 
account, the channel model of [6], depicted in Fig. 4 is used. 
This noise model consists of three parts, namely a random walk 
random 
walk 
Figure 4: Model for nonlinear optical fiber channel (* denotes 
convolution, WGN: white Gaussian noise) 
process to consider the laser linewidth, colored phase noise for 
XPM resulting from nonlinear fiber effects in WDM systems 
and an additive white Gaussian noise (A WGN) term. 
The random walk process is modelled using Gaussian 
distributed step sizes of variance CTlw = 2rr:T ilv, where ilv is 
the combined laser linewidth of transmitting and receiving 
laser and T is the symbol period. The XPM induced phase 
noise can be modelled by white Gaussian noise samples of 
variance CTtorr filtered by a rectangular impulse response Wcorr 
to approximate the typical auto-correlation function [11]. The 
additive noise sources, such as amplified spontaneous emission 
(ASE) noise originating from fiber amplifiers and thermal 
noise are subsumed into the final A WG noise term. 
A detailed description of the carrier phase estimation which 
was used for simulations can be found in [6]. Note that due to 
the inherent phase ambiguity of this class of algorithms, a 
phase unwrapping is necessary. Erroneous phase unwrapping 
results in cycle slips of the estimated carrier phase resulting in 
a mis-interpretation of the received constellation of multiples 
of 90°. It consists of two Viterbit& Viterbi CPEs with different 
filter lengths to reduce the cycle slip rate so far that it is 
possible to apply a turbo decoding scheme. 
V. 
SIMULATION RESULTS 
For performance analysis, two regular LDPC codes with 
variable node degree dv = 3 and RLDPC = 0.5 as well as 
RLDPC = 0.85 for a more realistic scenario of optical 
transmission with a total coding overhead of 20%, were 
considered for a block length of 19200. The number of outer 
turbo iterations was set to N;er = 10 for layered decoding. 
The number of inner LPDC iterations within each outer 
iteration was set to Ninner = 2. The number of outer turbo 
iterations for standard BP decoding, Nger was chosen to 
achieve the same BER performance as for layered LDPC 
decoding. 
In all shown performance evaluations, due to the time 
constrained simulations and the steepness of the curves, no 
LDPC decoding errors were found in more than 1010 
transmitted bits for the respectively best SNR point. To 
illustrate the slope of the BER curves, the last point is drawn 
in a way that the true BER is lower than the shown BER with 
a probability of 0.99. 
The results in Fig. 5 for an A WGN channel indicate for the 
code of rate RLDPC = 0.5 a possible reduction from Nger = 
20 to N;er = 10 turbo loop iterations for the same number 
Ninner of inner LDPC iterations while still achieving the same 
decoding performance if the decoding algorithm of the LDPC 
Figure 5: AWGN Perfonnance of turbo decoding system with layered and standard BP LDPC decoding for Rwpc = 0.5 and Rwpc = 0.85. and 
comparison with non-turbo system for Rwpc = 0.85. 
121 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
10° 
10.2 
% 
:; 
% 10-4 
0 
	 

 
; 
<!) 
"" 
0 
Q 
<!) 
"" 
U 
: 
Cl 
,.l 
., 
~ 
U.l 
CO 
10-6 
10.8 
10.10 
'\ 
-+-N1ay yIO 
\ 
outer 

 __ NSld 
y 15 
outer 
\ 
10.12 
n 
3.6 
3.65 
3.7 
3.75 
3.8 
3.85 
3.9 
3.95 
4 
SNR[dB] 
Figure 6: GPGPU-based simulation to find possible error floors. The 
arrows at the respective last points indicate that no bit errors could be 
found for this SNR value. 
is changed to layered decoding. 
For the higher rate RLDPC = 0.85 code, the number of 
outer turbo iterations can only be decreased from Nger = 15 
to Ner = 10, indicating that the possible gain which can be 
achieved by switching to layered LDPC decoding is rate­
dependent and decreases with increasing code rate. 
To investigate the performance gain due to turbo decoding, 
the BER performance of a differentially modulated LDPC 
coded system without a turbo loop in the receiver was also 
simulated using optimum channel metrics [12], showing a 
turbo gain of almost IdB at an output BER of 10-B. 
Due to the limited simulation throughput using CPU 
simulations and to assess the performance of the proposed 
approach for very low BERs, a 5-bit quantized general 
purpose graphics processing unit (GPGPU) based simulation 
using Nvidias CUDA programming language was run to show 
10° 
10.2 
10.4 
10.6 
10.8 
10.10 
0.03 
/" 
if" 
.... 
/ 
,/ Ii 
I 
/ 
I 
I 
J 
-+-cr 
z 0.025 
corr 
__ cr 
z0.2 
corr 
0.034 
0038 
0.042 
BER at input of LDPC decoder 
0.046 
0.05 
Figure 7: Performance for medium and high XPM-induced phase noise 
122 
the absence of an error floor at least down to BER 10-12 for 
RLDPC = 0.85, Nouter = 10 and Nouter = 15 for layered and 
standard LDPC decoding, respectively, as can be seen in Fig. 
6. Almost 1014 bits were simulated for layered decoding and 
1015 bits were simulated for standard decoding. Comparing 
Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 it can also be seen that the loss due to 
quantization is negligible. 
In an additional simulation, the impact of a typical optical 
channel was studied by using the more detailed channel model 
introduced above. The variance for the random walk phase 
noise samples was chosen to CTlw = 0.02 and a medium and 
high variance for correlated phase noise was considered. For 
error correction, a LDPC code of RLDPC = 0.85 was used with 
Ner = 15 iterations of turbo decoding with Ninner = 2 
iterations of layered LDPC decoding within each outer turbo 
iteration. The results presented in Fig. 7 are shown as BE Rin 
vs. BE Rout as for phase noise channel, the signal to noise ratio 
Eb/ No is not an appropriate measure anymore since the 
decoder is strongly affected by the non-Gaussian distribution 
of the input samples. In terms of SNR, the nonlinearity comes 
along with a loss of 1.7dB compared to the A WGN 
simulations. The loss can be attributed to the non-Gaussian 
noise at the input of the decoding system. 
VI. 
CONCLUSIONS 
With the proposed scheme, the performance penalty due to 
differential modulation is reduced by almost IdB. Compared to 
prior work, the complexity can be decreased due to the 
introduction of layered LDPC decoding. If, after introducing 
layered decoding, the number of LDPC iterations in each cycle 
of the turbo loop is kept constant, however the total number of 
outer turbo loop iterations can be reduced by up to 50%. 
As further work, the used LDPC codes can be optimized for 
the optical channel to decrease the performance penalty due to 
the fiber nonlinearity. 
REFERENCES 
[I] 
Xtera, "Up to 24-Tb/s Capacity: Raman Amplification for Terabit 
Optical Networking Today and Tomorrow", August 2011 
[2] 
A. J. Viterbi, A. M. Viterbi, "Nonlinear estimation of PSK-modulated 
carrier phase with application to burst digitial transmission", IEEE 
Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 29, pp. 543-551, 1983 
[3] 
M. Franceschini, G. Ferrari, R. Raheli, and A. Curtoni, "Serial 
concatenation of LDPC codes and differential modulations", IEEE 
Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, Vol. 23, pp. 1758-1768, 
2005 
[4] 
Optical lnternetworking Forum, OIF-FEC-I OOG-O 1.0, "100G Forward 
Error Correction White Paper", May 2010 
[5] 
F. Yu et aI., "Soft-Decision LDPC Turbo Decoding for DQPSK 
Modulation in Coherent Optical Receivers", 37th European Conference 
and Exhibition on Optical Communications (ECOC), pp. 1-3, 20 II 
[6] 
A. Bisplinghoff, C. Vogel, T. Kupfer, S. Langenbach, and B. Schmauss, 
"Slip-reduced carrier phase estimation for coherent transmission in the 
presence of non-linear phase noise", Optical Fiber Communication 
Conference and the National Fiber Optice Engineers Conference 
(OFCINFOEC), pp. 1-3,2013 
[7] 
M. M. Mansour, and N. R. Shanbhag, "High-throughput LDPC 
decoders", IEEE Transactions on VLSI Systems", Vol. II, pp. 976-996, 
2003 
BER at LDPC decoder output
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[8] 
L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and 1. Raviv, "Optimal decoding of linear 
codes for minimizing symbol error rate", IEEE Transactions on 
Information Theory, Vol. 20, pp. 284-287, 1974 
[9] 
T. K. Moon, "Error Correction Coding", Wiley, 2005 
[10] T. Schorr, M. Matuszak, W. Sauer-Greff, R. Urbansky, "LOPC Code 
Optimization 
for 
Diversity 
Reception 
and 
turbo 
Equalization", 
Proceedings IEEE Signal Processing Algorithms, Poznan, pp. 63-68, 
2007 
123 
[11] Z. Tao, W. Yan, S. Oda, T. Hoshida, J. C. Rasmussen, "A simplified 
model for nonlinear cross-phase modulation in hybrid optical coherent 
system", Optics Express, Vol. 17, pp. 13860-13868,2009 
[12] A. Bisplinghoff, C. Cabirol, S. Langenbach, W. Sauer-Greff, R. 
Urbansky, "Soft decision metrics for differentially encoded QPSK", 37th 
European Conference and Exhibition on Optical Communications 
(ECOC), pp. 1-3,2011 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:32:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
