1508

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

Efficient Puncturing Scheme for Irregular LDPC Codes Based on Serial Schedules
Hua Li and Linhua Zheng

Abstract—In practice, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are usually decoded by serial schedules. However, the existing schemes for rate-compatible puncturing LDPC codes are proposed on the assumption that the flooding schedules are employed in decoding algorithm. In this letter, an efficient puncturing scheme is proposed for irregular LDPC codes based on serial schedule. The scheme selects variable nodes to be punctured one at a time. At each time, a check node is selected firstly based on the idea that the punctured variable nodes are allocated evenly to all the check nodes. Then the puncturing variable node is selected among its neighbors. Furthermore, the order of the check nodes in the selection serves as the updating order in the serial schedule, which ensures that all the punctured codes can be recovered at the first iteration. Simulation results demonstrate that the scheme performs better for a wide range of code rates compared with the existing puncturing scheme, especially for high-rate punctured codes.
Index Terms—Rate-compatible punctured LDPC codes, highrate punctured codes, serial schedules, approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE).
I. INTRODUCTION
R ATE compatible codes, which allow coding across a range of rates using a common encoder/decoder infrastructure, are essential for many communication applications operating over time variant channels. The most common way to generate rate-compatible codes is puncturing, i.e., starting with a low-rate mother code and then selectively discarding some of the coded bit to arrive at higher rate codes. The puncturing technique was firstly applied to convolutional codes by Hagenauer [1].
Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have been gained increasing attention in recent years because of their good performance over a range of rate [2]–[11]. Theoretically, The puncturing distributions for punctured LDPC codes were investigated and their theoretical performance was analyzed [3]. In [4], the maximum achievable rate of punctured LDPC codes was identified. For practical issues, the punctured LDPC codes with finite length was studied in [5], where the locations of punctured nodes were selected randomly. Nevertheless, randomly punctured LDPC codes may suffer severe performance loss. To overcome the performance loss, the popular grouping/sorting algorithm was proposed by Ha et al. [6]. This algorithm punctured finite-length LDPC
Manuscript received April 13, 2015; revised June 22, 2015; accepted July 2, 2015. Date of publication July 8, 2015; date of current version September 4, 2015. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was H. Saeedi.
The authors are with the School of Electronic Science and Engineering, National University of Defense Technology, Changsha 410073, China (e-mail: hjhylihua@126.com; lhzheng@nudt.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2015.2453314

codes based on the classification of variable nodes. Later in [7], an efficient puncturing algorithm was presented for ratecompatible LDPC codes based on the proposed cost function. Both the algorithms yielded better performance than the random puncturing in their simulation results. To further improve the performance of punctured LDPC codes, the distances of punctured variable nodes away from each other were regarded as the criteria to select punctured nodes [8]. In [9], the number of short cycles with low approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE) played an important role in selecting punctured nodes. These schemes performed well over a wide range of code rates. However, they were proposed on the assumption that the belief propagation (BP) algorithm employs flooding schedules. When the decoder of punctured codes utilizes serial schedules, they are not optimal. In [10], [11], the LDPC codes were designed to be well-suited for puncturing and encoding, which were referred as efficiently-encodable rate-compatible LDPC codes. Although good performance was obtained in high-rate punctured codes, these methods can not be generalized to other types of LDPC codes.
In this letter, we propose an efficient puncturing scheme for irregular LDPC codes. The punctured codes obtained by this scheme have faster convergence in the decoding process than these obtained by existing schemes. In practice, the maximal number of the allowed decoding iterations is usually limited due to latency or throughput constraints. Hence, faster convergence means better error rate performance. This scheme selects variable nodes to be punctured one at a time. Before selecting each puncturing node, the scheme selects a check node firstly. In this way, the proposed scheme not only selects the set of the punctured variable nodes but also provides check-nodes order for updating in the serial schedule. Although serial schedules can be operated by serially updating variable-node messages and check-node messages, in this letter the serial schedules are specifically referred to as the latter. Besides, there are two criteria to be considered: (1) minimizing the degree of the punctured nodes, (2) minimizing the number of punctured variable nodes involved in short cycles with low ACE. Criterion (1) only works in the former selection of puncturing codes. While criterion (2) plays an important role in the later selection.
II. LDPC CODES AND SERIAL SCHEDULES
A LDPC code, which is defined by a sparse parity-check matrix H with M × N size, can be equivalently expressed by a Tanner graph G = {C ∪ V, E}, where C = {c1, c2, · · · , cM} and V = {v1, v2, · · · , vN } are the sets of the variable nodes and the check nodes, respectively, and E is the set of the edges. For an arbitrary node w, the neighbors set N(w) is defined as the set

1558-2558 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licensSeede uhsttep:li/m/witwedwt.oie: eYeo.onrsge/ipUubnlivic. aDtioownnsl_osatdaneddaorndsJ/upnuebl2ic4a,2ti0o2n6s/aritg1h6t:s3/i1n:d02exU.hTtCmlfrofomr mIEoErEe Xinpfloorrme.atRioens.trictions apply.

LI AND ZHENG: EFFICIENT PUNCTURING SCHEME FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES BASED ON SERIAL SCHEDULES

1509

of nodes that can be reached from w by traversing only one edge. The cardinality of N(w) is called the degree of w, denoted as d(w).
ACE is proposed as the metric to measure the cycle connec-

r2 in the sequence. The indices of the np2 punctured nodes are contained in P2. This process continues until npm variable nodes for the code with rate rm are punctured. Pm contains the indices of the npm punctured nodes.

tivity in Tanner graph of LDPC codes and has an important The proposed scheme assumes that the decoding algorithm

effect on the error-floor performance [12]. Consider the ACE
of a 2l-length cycle. If no variable nodes in the cycle share
check nodes outside of the cycle, then the ACE of the cycle is il=1(d(vi) − 2), where d(vi) is the degree of the ith variable
node in this cycle. Since short cycles with low ACE lead to

of the punctured LDPC codes uses serial schedule. The updating order of check nodes is denoted as the set O = {c1, c2, · · · , cM}, which is provided by the proposed puncturing
scheme. At the begining O is an empty set. In the puncturing
process, we select a check node to the set O before selecting

performance degradation [12], it is desirable to avoid punctur- each puncturing node. To select the i-th puncturing node, we ing the variable nodes of such cycles. To evaluate the extent in first select the i-th check node ci from the set C \ O. ci is the

which different variable nodes participate in short cycles with check node with minmum p(c) among the set C \ O, where p(c)

low ACE values, similar to [9], the ACE score spectrum of a

variable node is defined as follows: Let Cv(l) denote the set of

the length 2l cycles in which variable node v participates.

SηvACE (l) represents the number of cycles with the ACE val-

ues more than ηACE in set Cv(l). The ACE score spectrum

SvηACE tuple

(lmax) {SηvACE

of variable node v is then defined (2), SηvACE (3), · · · , SηvACE (lmax)}.

as

the

(lmax

−

1)-

LDPC codes can be efficiently decoded by iterative message-

passing decoding algorithm, such as belief propagation (BP)

is denoted as the cardinality of the set N(c) ∩ Pk (1 ≤ k ≤ m). Then we find the set Vi = N(ci) \ Pk (1 ≤ k ≤ m) and select a puncturing node from it. If |Vi| = d(ci), the variable node v with minimum d(v) is selected to Pk from Vi. If |Vi| < d(ci), find the ACE score spectrum SηvACE (lmax), v ∈ Vi, for given values of ηACE and lmax. The variable node v with the minimum
number of short cycles with low ACE is selected to Pk from Vi.
We continue the process until npm variable nodes are selected.
In the selection, if there are more than one variable node with

algorithm. These algorithms operate on the Tanner graph rep- minimum d(v) or ACE score spectrum, select one at random.

resentation of the code by iteratively exchanging messages The Proposed Scheme:

between the variable and check nodes along the edges of the graph. The order of passing messages along the graph edges is referred to as a schedule. Conventionally, flooding schedule is widely used in BP algorithm, but serial schedule is proved to be a more efficient schedule because the propagation of messages on the graph is much faster [13]. In this letter serial schedules are specifically referred to the serial schedules which are done by serially updating check-node messages. Thus, serial schedule can be defined by a bijection:{c1, c2, · · · , cM} → {1, 2, · · · , M}. Besides, serial schedule can be partially parallelized, where the {c1, c2, · · · , cM} is divided into the subsets, such that each check node appears in exactly one subset and no two check nodes in a subset are connected to the same variable node. The proposed puncturing scheme can be also performed with partially serial schedules. However, in the part III and part IV, we will mainly concentrate on the serial schedule.

Step 0.0 [Inputs] Parity-check matrix H with size M × N;

sequence of rates r0, r1, · · · , rm; ηACE; lmax. Step 1.0 [Initialization] P0 = P1 = P2 = · · · = Pm = ∅,

O = ∅, k = 0, j = 0.

Step 2.0 [Iteration] k = k + 1, calculate npk by (1), Pk =
Pk−1, δnp = npk − |Pk−1|. Step 2.1.0 j = j + 1. Select cj from C \ O, such that P(cj) ≤

p(c) for all c ∈ (C \ O). If there are multiple such

nodes, select one randomly as cj. O = O ∪ {cj}.

Step 2.1.1 Make Vj = N(cj) \ Pk, if |Vj| = |N(cj)|, go to

step 2.1.2, else go to 2.1.3. Step 2.1.2 Pick the node v∗ from Vj such that d(v∗) ≤ d(v) for
all v ∈ Vj. If there are multiple such nodes, pick one randomly as v∗, then go to step 2.1.4.

Step 2.1.3 Set l = 2 and = ∅;

(a) (b)

If

= |

{v |=

∈ 1,

Vsej|tSvηv∗AC=E (l)

≤ SηvACE and go

(l), ∀v to step

∈ Vj}. 2.1.4.

III. THE PROPOSED PUNCTURING SCHEME
Consider a LDPC mother code with rate r0 and the paritycheck matrix H with size M × N. To obtain the sequence of rate-compatible LDPC codes with rates rm > · · · > r1 > r0, the required number of punctured nodes is given by

(c) If l < lmax, set l = l + 1 and go to (a); else pick v∗ from randomly and go to step 2.1.4.
Step 2.1.4 Pk = Pk ∪ {v∗}, δnp = δnp − 1, if δnp = 0, go to step 2.1.0, else go to step 2.2.
Step 2.2 If k = m, stop the iteration, else go to step 2.0.
In the proposed scheme, O will contain row indices of the

npk =

N(rk − r0) rk

check nodes whose order would be used as the updating order in (1) serial schedule. As the size of O is npm at the end of the scheme.
Thus the rest of the check nodes (M − npm) are randomly

where 1 ≤ k ≤ m. Let Pk denote the set of punctured nodes to located in the set O. In Step 2.0, Pk inherits the column indices

obtain punctured code with rate rk. The proposed puncturing from Pk−1, and δnp accounts for the number of additional nodes

scheme starts by puncturing np1 variable nodes to obtain the which are needed to puncture besides the ones in Pk−1. The

first punctured code with rate r1 in the sequence. P1 contains loop between Step 2.1.0 and Step 2.1.4 continues until δnp = 0.

the indices of the np1 punctured nodes. It then continues by In Step 2.1.0, the number j is the index of the puncturing order

puncturing np2 − np1 more variable nodes, for a total of np2 of the punctured nodes. In Step 2.1.3, for v ∈ Vj, calculate the punctured nodes, to obtain the second punctured code with rate ACE score spectrum SηvACE (lmax) for given values of ηACE and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:31:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1510

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2015

lmax. Select the variable node with the smallest ACE scores

SSηηvvAACCEE

(2). (2),

If there are more select the one with

than one nodes with the smallest SηvACE (3).

the same Continue

the process by going through the components of the ACE

score spectrum in the increasing order until a variable node is

selected. If there are still a number of variable nodes with the same SηvACE (l) when l = lmax, select one randomly. When k increases to m (k = m in Step 2.2), the algorithm stops.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we present the results on puncturing two

irregular LDPC mother codes of rate r0 = 1/2 with the proposed scheme described in Section III. The one is randomly

constructed by progressive edge-growth (PEG) algorithm with

block length N = 1008 and the other is structured LDPC code specified in 802.16e systems with block length N = 1152. Simulations are conducted with binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) chan-

Fig. 1. BER performance of punctured LDPC codes with rate 0.6, 0.7, 0.8 and 0.9 derived from proposed puncturing scheme and the scheme of [9]; the mother LDPC codes is (1008, 504).

nel. Notations Eb and N0 denote the average energy per information bit and the one-sided power spectral density of the

AWGN respectively. To guarantee statistical confidence, the

BER performances are measured after observing at least 100 er-

roneous code bits at each Eb/N0 value. The BP algorithms with serial schedules are used for decoding the rate-compatible

punctured codes. The updating order of check nodes is {c1, c2, · · · , cM} (M = 504 and 576 in the two examples respectively),
which is provided by the proposed puncturing scheme.

We firstly implement the randomly constructed LDPC code

(1008, 504) defined in [14] and use the proposed scheme to

obtain a rate-compatible sequence of codes with rates 0.5, 0.6,

0.7, 0.8 and 0.9. At the proposed scheme, we select punctured

variable nodes one at a time along the order of parity-check

nodes in serial schedule. Then the locations of punctured bits are determined by two criteria: d(c) and ACE score spectrum SηvACE (lmax). Fig. 1 compares the proposed scheme with the scheme in [9]. In the both scheme, we set lmax = 10 and ηACE = 4 (referred to as ηmax in [9]). The maximum number of iterations is set to 15. It is obvious that the punctured codes derived

Fig. 2. The required Eb/N0 values for BER of 10−4 with code rate 0.8 and 0.9 for given maximum number of iterations; the punctured LDPC codes
derived from proposed scheme and the scheme of [9] with mother codes
(1152, 576).

from the proposed scheme outperform those from the existing scheme at all the simulated rates. At the rate 0.6, the number of punctured variable nodes is 168 and the proposed scheme performs better with a margin of 0.25 dB at the BER of 10−4. As the rate increases, the performance gap between the two schemes grows steadily. At the rate 0.9, the number of punctured variable nodes is 448 and the gap reaches 0.8 dB at the BER of 10−4.
In the second example, we implement a mother code defined in 802.16 e systems to compare the performance gain of the proposed scheme and the scheme of [9]. First, set lmax = 8 and ηACE = 4 (referred to as ηmax in [9]) for the two schemes. The required Eb/E0 values for achieving BER of 10−4 at the code rate 0.8 and 0.9 are shown in Fig. 2. The maximum number of iterations range from 10 to 20. When the maximum number of iterations is set to 10, the performance gains of the proposed scheme are 1.2 dB and 1.8 dB over the scheme of [9] at code rate 0.8 and 0.9 respectively. These gains reduce to 0.5 dB and 0.7 dB when the maximum number of iterations increase to 20.

V. CONCLUSION
An efficient punctured scheme is proposed for irregular LDPC codes with serial schedule. The updating order of check nodes in the serial schedule is provided by the puncturing scheme, which accelerates the convergence rate of the decoding process and improves the performance of the punctured codes. Besides, the degree and the ACE score spectrum are used to minimize the performance loss of the punctured codes in decoding process. The proposed scheme performs very well for a wide range of code rates, especially in the high-rate scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 389–400, Apr. 1988.
[2] D. Elkouss, J. Martinez-Mateo, and V. Martin, “Untainted puncturing for irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 1, no. 6, pp. 585–588. Dec. 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:31:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI AND ZHENG: EFFICIENT PUNCTURING SCHEME FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES BASED ON SERIAL SCHEDULES

1511

[3] J. Ha, J. Kim and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
[4] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “Results on punctured low-density paritycheck codes and improved iterative decoding techniques,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 599–613, Feb. 2007.
[5] M. R. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On construction of ratecompatible low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 159–161, Mar. 2004.
[6] J. Ha, J. Kim, D. Klinc, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check codes with short block lengths,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 728–738, Feb. 2006.
[7] H. Y. Park, J. W. Kang, K. S. Kim, and K. C. Whang, “Efficient puncturing method for rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 6, no. 11, pp. 3914–3919. Nov. 2007.
[8] B. N. Vellambi and F. Fekri, “Finite-length rate-compatible LDPC codes: A novel puncturing scheme,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 297–302, Feb. 2009.

[9] R. Asvadi and A. H. Banihashemi, “A rate-compatible puncturing scheme for finite-length LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 147–150, Jan. 2013.
[10] J. Kim, A. Ramamoorthy, and S. W. McLaughlin, “The design of efficiently-encodable rate-compatible LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 365–375, Feb. 2009.
[11] C. Shi and A. Ramamoorthy, “Design and analysis of E2RC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 889–898, Aug. 2009.
[12] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC codes construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247. Aug. 2004.
[13] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial message-passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076–4091, Nov. 2007.
[14] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graph,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:31:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

