2015 Fifth International Conference on Advances in Computing and Communications

A Novel Approach for Design, Implementation and Construction of Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Memory

Harshitha B
Asst. Professor, Department of E&C B.M.S. College of Engineering Bengaluru, India
e-mail: harshithab.ece@bmsce.ac.in

Karthik M
M.Tech (Electronics), Department of E&C B.M.S. College of Engineering Bengaluru, India
e-mail: karthik.raj016@gmail.com

Vinayak Tambralli
M.Tech (Digital Communication), Department of E&C B.M.S. College of Engineering Bengaluru, India e-mail: vinaypk7t@gmail.com

Abstract—Memory is an important part of any digital circuit in which data is stored and retrieved. Technology scaling, lower operating voltages and high integration densities leads for failures in the reliability of memories. The main problem is Single Event Upsets (SEUs) that alters the memories from its normal way of functioning. This paper presents design and implementation of Majority Logic (ML) detecting/decoding on different cyclic codes for error detection and correction. ML decoding method is more capable to detect and correct large number of errors but it takes same high access time for both error and error free codes which impacts memory performance. In this paper, the proposed advanced ML method reduces decoding cycles when there is no error in the data read. The error detection and correction method is done by majority logic decoding and is made effective for Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes. This method lowers the power consumption and latency for wide range sizes of code words.
Keywords- cyclic-codes, decoding, encoding, error, fault, lowdensity parity check (LDPC), majority-logic, memory
I. INTRODUCTION
The different types of memory such as SRAM, DRAM, ROM, flash memory etc. is used in all digital circuits. Memory failure rates are increasing in SRAM which is becoming a major reliability concern for memory applications. There is a need to determine the bit flips to increase the reliability. There are two types of error or failures: Soft errors and Hard errors. Soft errors are not permanent and are due to upset of a semiconductor device. Hard errors are permanent and are due to physical characteristics of the device [1], [3] and [6].
Error detection in soft errors consists of adding a single bit to store the parity (odd or even) of each data word. When data is retrieved, a check is run which compares parity bit to the stored bit. This allows the detection of a soft error with less complexity and memory width. The disadvantages in this method are: Detected error cannot be corrected and the

check will not reveal if a double error has occurred. In a single error it changes odd parity to even parity but for second error, it changes the parity again to odd which is nondetectable error [2]. To overcome this issue, Error Correction Codes (ECC) are employed which meets the requirements of higher error detection and low decoding complexity.
Among Error Correction Codes (ECC), cyclic block codes are used due to their property of being majority logic (ML) decodable [7], [8]. The ML decoding has following advantages:
1. It is very practical. 2. Low complexity. 3. Simple to implement. The disadvantage of ML decoding is that it takes as many cycles as the number of bits in the decoding process even if there is no error, which slightly increases complexity and power consumption. This has motivated the use of fault detector module to detect error containing code words only. Thus the memory access rate is speeded up and lowers the power consumption.
II. SCHEMATIC VIEW OF THE SYSTEM
A schematic of the memory system is shown in Fig.1. The data words are encoded first and then stored in memory. During reading, code word is passed through the decoder and the output of the decoder is processed. The data word is corrected from all bit flips during the decoding process that it might have undergone while being stored in the memory. Consider M(x) as message bits.

M(x)

Encoder

Memory

Majority Logic
Decoder

M(x)

Read/Write
Fig.1. Memory system schematic with MLDD

978-1-4673-6994-7/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE

4753

DOI 10.1109/ICACC.2015.63

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:33:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. EXISITING ML DECODER
The schematic of ML decoder is shown in Fig.2. It consists of cyclic shift register, XOR matrix, majority gate and XOR for correct code word bit. Initially, the input is stored into the cyclic shift register and shifted through all taps. The output of XOR matrix is calculated from the intermediate values in each tap. ‘y’ is the decoded output signal of ‘x’ obtained in the Nth cycle [4].
Input x might have got corrupted due to soft error. During this situation, initial data is loaded into the shift registers and the XOR matrix output is obtained. It is passed to the majority gate. If the number of 1’s is greater than the number of 0’s, it means the current bit is corrupt and it should be corrected. Otherwise the current bit is correct and no other operations are needed [5].
The procedure is repeated for all N code word bits by rotating the content of the registers. The flow chart of the ML decoder is shown in Fig.3. This method requires as many cycles as the number of input signal bits. It slightly increases the time and affects the performance of the system depending on the length of the code. For example, for a 73 code word bits, decoding would take 73 cycles which takes maximum computation time.

IV. ADVANCED ML DECODER
A novel version of ML decoder is presented here. The proposed ML detector/decoder has been implemented using low-density parity check (LDPC) codes. The flow chart of Advanced ML decoder is shown in Fig.4. It is almost same as that of ML decoder. The main difference is that, instead of decoding all code word bits, advanced ML decoder stops processing after the third cycle if the data read from the memory is not corrupt. After processing for first 3 cycles, if the output of XOR matrix is ‘0’, then the code word is error free and forwarded directly to the output. If in any one of the 3 cycles the output is ‘1’, then normal ML decoding process will happen to correct the bits [4].

Fig.2. Schematic of the ML decoder

Fig.4. Flow diagram of the Advanced ML algorithm
The schematic of the Advanced ML decoder is shown in Fig.5. It contains all the components of normal ML decoder shown in Fig.2. with additional component called control unit. Control unit sends finish message if no errors are detected after 3rd cycle. The schematic of the control unit is shown in Fig.6. It contains a counter that counts up to 3. In the first 3 cycles, it evaluates the output of XOR matrix by combining with OR1 function and then it is fed to 3-stage shift register which holds last 3 cycle’s results. If the output of OR2 gate is ‘0’, then FSM sends finish signal indicating the bits are error free. If OR2 output is ‘1’, then the normal ML decoding process runs.

Fig.3. Flowchart of the ML algorithm

4764 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:33:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig.8. shows the input code vector contains an error. Actual code vector V(x) = 1100101 Error code vector V(x) = 1110101 Error bit is corrected

Fig.5. Schematic of the Advanced ML decoder

Fig.8. ML decoder with error

Fig.7 and Fig.8 shows the ML decoder takes N cycles (7 cycles) for both with error and without error conditions.

B. Advanced ML decoder:

Message vector is decoded at 4th cycle

Fig.6. Schematic of the Control Unit
This shows the performance improvement compared to the normal ML decoder. Most of the words would take only three cycles and only those with errors would need to perform the whole decoding process.
V. RESULTS
A. Normal ML Decoder: Normal decoder requires N number of cycles to decode
the message bits. For (7,3) cyclic code, it takes about 7 cycles to decode the data from the memory.
Fig.7. shows the simulation of ML decoder without error, where the output message vector M(x) is generated at Nth cycle for the input code vector V(x).
V(x) = 1100101

Fig.9. Advanced ML decoder without error
Fig.9 shows Advanced ML decoder simulation output that takes just 3 cycles for decoding as there is no error in the input code vector. Message vector is decoded at 4th cycle (first cycle is used to put data into the decoder).
Fig.10 shows Advanced ML decoder simulation output for error containing code vector. It takes 7 cycles for decoding. Actual code vector V(x) = 1100101. Error code vector V(x) = 1110101

Fig.7. ML decoder without error

Fig.10. Advanced ML decoder with error.

4757 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:33:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VI. COMPARISION OF ML AND ADVANCED ML METHOD

A. Memory Read Access Delay Comparision
The proposed Advanced ML decoder is compared with the existent normal ML decoder. A summary on memory read access delay is given in Table 1.
Access delay in normal ML decoder depends on the code size and two extra cycles are needed for I/O. The access delay in proposed Advanced ML decoder depends only on word error rate (WER).
Normal ML decoder requires N+2 cycles for the detection of errors in all cases. Advanced ML decoder requires just three cycles (plus two for I/O) to detect errors.

TABLE 1. COMPARISON OF NO. OF CYCLES NEEDED

No. of Cycles needed

Method

I/O

Error detection

Without error

With error

Existing ML

2

N

N+2

N+2

Advanced ML

2

3

3+2=5

N+5

TABLE 2. SPEEDUP COMPARISON FOR ERROR FREE CODE WORDS

Method
Advanced ML
Existing ML

Time at which output is obtained (ns) 1934 3033

The Table 2 gives the details about speed of operation of the normal ML and advanced ML methods. When the code word does not suffer from errors, the proposed advanced ML method takes less time to produce output when compared to existing ML method. It gives an idea of how much speed up can be obtained in an ideal solution.

B. Delay Comparison

Method
Existing ML
Advanced ML

TABLE 3. DELAY COMPARISON

Gate Delay

Delay (ns) Net Delay

Total Delay

3.836

9.17

14.006

3.983

8.595

12.578

The Advanced ML decoder has less delay when
compared to existing ML decoder. When the code word does not suffer from errors, it can produce the output in the 4th cycle without any shifting. The delay comparison table is
given in Table 3.

C. Power Comparison
The power consumption comparison is given in table 4. Lower power consumption can be achieved in the case of advanced ML decoder as it detects the errors in just three cycles. Xilinx Power Analyzer is used to obtain the power consumption for normal ML and advanced ML method.

TABLE 4. COMPARISON OF TOTAL POWER CONSUMPTION

Method
Advanced ML
Existing ML

Total Power Consumption (mW) 47 49

Therefore, there is a great advantage for Advanced ML method in terms of delay, power consumption, speed and performance.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, Advanced ML decoder is presented which overcomes the disadvantages of traditional normal ML decoder. Cyclic codes were simulated and the resulted waveforms show that the proposed Advanced ML decoder is capable of detecting bit errors and if there are no bit-flips, it finishes the decoding process in just three cycles.
The proposed Advanced ML decoder has 4% low power consumption than the normal ML decoder method. Therefore, a large number of clock cycles are saved and hence reduction in power is achieved. This improves the overall performance of the system compared to normal ML decoder.
REFERENCES
[1] R.C.Baumann, “Radiation-induced soft errors in advanced semiconductor technologies”, IEEE Trans. Device Mater. Reliabil., vol.5, no. 3, pp. 301-306, Sep. 2005.
[2] R. Naseer and J. Draper, “DEC ECC design to improve memory reliability in sub- 100 nm technologies,” in Proc. IEEE ICECS, 2008, pp.586-589.
[3] M.A. Bajura et al., “Models and algorithmic limits for an ECC based approach to hardening sub-100-nm SRAMs,” IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 935-945, Aug. 2007.
[4] Shih-Fu Liu, Revingo, and Juan Antonio Meastro “Efficient majority faylt detection with difference set codes for memory applications,” IEEE Trans, vol. 20, no. 1, pp. 148-156, Jan. 2012.
[5] H. Naeimi and A. DeHon, “Fault secure encoder and decoder for NanoMemory applications,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 473-486, Apr. 2009.
[6] C. W. Slayman, “Cache and memory error detection, correction, and reduction techniques for terrestrial servers and workstations,” IEEE Trans. Vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 397-404, Sep. 2005.
[7] Reviriego.P, Maestro.J.A and Flanagan.M.F, “Error detection in majority logic decoding of euclidean geometry low density parity check (EG-LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. pp. 156-159, Jan. 2012.
[8] Ngatched.T.M.N and Jun Cai, “ Near optimum majority logic based decoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Pp. 1-5, June. 2011.

4768 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:33:08 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

