arXiv:1801.02028v1 [cs.IT] 6 Jan 2018

1
Characterization and Efficient Search of
Non-Elementary Trapping Sets of LDPC Codes
with Applications to Stopping Sets
Yoones Hashemi, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract In this paper, we propose a characterization for non-elementary trapping sets (NETSs) of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes. The characterization is based on viewing a NETS as a hierarchy of embedded graphs starting from an ETS. The characterization corresponds to an efficient search algorithm that under certain conditions is exhaustive. As an application of the proposed characterization/search, we obtain lower and upper bounds on the stopping distance smin of LDPC codes. We examine a large number of regular and irregular LDPC codes, and demonstrate the efficiency and versatility of our technique in finding lower and upper bounds on, and in many cases the exact value of, smin. Finding smin, or establishing search-based lower or upper bounds, for many of the examined codes are out of the reach of any existing algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION Finite-length LDPC codes under iterative decoding algorithms suffer from the error floor phenomenon. It is well-known that the error-floor performance of LDPC codes is related to the presence of certain problematic graphical structures in the Tanner graph of the code, commonly referred to as trapping sets (TS) [19]. Empirical results demonstrate that over the binary symmetric channel (BSC) and the additive white Gaussian noise channel (AWGNC), the majority of error-prone structures are elementary TSs (ETS) [15], [7], [8]. These are TSs whose induced subgraphs contain only degree-1 and degree-2 check nodes. In particular, the leafless ETSs (LETSs), in which each variable node is connected to at least two even-degree (satisfied) check nodes, are recognized as the main culprit in the error-floor of variable-regular LDPC codes [7]. Most recently, in [9], for variable-regular LDPC codes, lower bounds on the size of the smallest ETSs and TSs that are non-elementary (NETS) were established. It was shown in [9] that

2
NETSs are generally larger than ETSs with the same number of odd-degree (unsatisfied) check nodes. This provided a theoretical justification, though not quite conclusive, for why ETSs often happen to be more harmful than NETSs. From a practical viewpoint, the “elementary” property simplifies the analysis and search of ETSs compared to NETSs, see, [15], [7], [8], and the references therein. In particular, ETSs lend themselves to an alternate graphical representation, dubbed normal graph [15], that is simpler than the commonly used bipartite graph representation. Normal graphs have been used to develop the most efficient search algorithms for ETSs [15], [7], [8].
While empirical results have shown that the majority of harmful TSs over BSC and AWGNC are elementary, there are still some smaller NETSs that can trap iterative decoders over these channels in the error floor region. To the best of our knowledge, the branch-&-bound algorithm of [30] is the only exhaustive search algorithm in the literature capable of finding both ETS and NETSs of LDPC codes. The branch-&-bound technique is a systematic enumeration of all candidate solutions that is commonly used to solve NP-hard integer programming problems. Being a branch-&-bound algorithm, the algorithm of [30] is thus only capable of finding relatively small TSs with relatively small number of unsatisfied check nodes, and is only applicable to codes with short block lengths (the block lengths of all the reported codes are less than 1008). In this work, we propose an efficient search algorithm for NETSs of LDPC codes that has a much wider reach than branch-&-bound-type algorithms in terms of both the code’s block length and the size of TSs. The proposed search algorithm is graph-based, and relies on the characterization of a NETS as an embedded sequence of graphs that starts from an ETS, and expands one variable node at a time to reach the NETS. The relatively low computational complexity of the proposed algorithm is a result of the simplicity of the expansions, and the fact that efficient algorithms already exist for finding ETSs [7], [8]. One of the main contributions of this paper is to determine theoretically the range in which the proposed algorithm finds an exhaustive list of NETSs.
As an important application of the proposed characterization/search of NETSs, we derive lower and upper bounds on the stopping distance, smin, of LDPC codes. Stopping sets (SS) are known to be the error-prone structures of LDPC codes over the binary erasure channel (BEC) under the belief propagation algorithm [3], and stopping distance is the size of the smallest stopping set(s). It is well-known that, in general, finding smin of an arbitrary LDPC code is an NP-hard problem [13]. Nevertheless, much research has been devoted to estimating/finding smin, and to obtaining a list of small stopping sets, for LDPC codes [20], [11], [10], [31], [22], [23], [24],

3
[4], [1]. These results are mostly limited to codes with short to moderate block lengths and/or low to moderate rates and/or small variable degrees. In [31], the authors proposed a branch-&bound search algorithm to find small stopping sets. The proposed algorithm, however, becomes quickly infeasible to use as the block length, n, and smin are increased. All the three LDPC codes studied in [31] are structured regular codes with variable degree 3 and rate less than or equal to 0.5. Using the Stern’s probabilistic algorithm [25], the authors in [11], [10] proposed search algorithms for computing smin of LDPC codes. Their search algorithms, however, are also applicable only to short block length random codes or medium block length structured codes. Moreover, all the LDPC codes studied in [11], [10] have variable degree 3 and rate less than or equal to 0.5. Authors in [22] and [23] proposed branch-&-bound algorithms to find the stopping sets of LDPC codes. To the best of our knowledge, this is the most efficient exhaustive search of stopping sets available in the literature. Similar to all the other branch-&-bound algorithms, however, the computational complexity of these algorithms increases very rapidly with block length and thus the approach is only limited to short block lengths. In particular, except for two random regular codes with rate 0.5 and block length of 504, all the codes studied in [22] and [23] are structured codes1 with length less than or equal to 4896. Also, all the regular codes studied in [22] and [23] have variable degree 3 and rate 0.5.
In this paper, we use the graphical structure of stopping sets within the Tanner graph of an LDPC code to devise our search algorithm, and to derive bounds on smin. The subgraph induced by a stopping set in the Tanner graph of an LDPC code contains only check nodes with degree two or larger. We consider two categories of stopping sets depending on the check node degrees in their subgraph. If all the check nodes have degree two, we call the stopping set elementary (ESS). Otherwise, the stopping set is referred to as non-elementary (NESS). Considering that an ESS is a LETS with no unsatisfied check node, we use the highly efficient algorithms of [7], [8], to search for ESSs. NESSs, on the other hand, are a subset of NETSs. To search for NESSs, we thus use the proposed search algorithm for NETSs. Despite the fact that the proposed algorithms here are highly efficient, the exhaustive search of stopping sets of large size for longer LDPC codes may still happen to be too complex to perform. For a manageable complexity, we thus derive a bound L on the size of stopping sets that can be searched exhaustively. If the exhaustive search within this range results in finding at least one stopping set, then the smallest size of such
1The structural properties of the codes were used in [22] and [23] to speed up the search.

4
stopping sets is smin. Otherwise, we establish the lower bound of L on smin. In this case, we modify our search algorithms to further reduce their complexity but at the expense of sacrificing the exhaustiveness. We then use the modified algorithms to search for stopping sets of size larger than L. The smallest size of such stopping sets is used as an upper bound on smin. In general, if we succeed in finding the exact stopping distance of an LDPC code, we do so in much higher speed than existing algorithms. If we fail, and establish the lower bound of L ≤ smin, our algorithm for finding an upper bound is often much faster than the existing algorithms, for example, those in [20], [11], [10], [31]. We provide extensive numerical results that demonstrate the application of our technique to a variety of regular and irregular LDPC codes with block lengths as large as more than 16, 000. In fact, one of the main advantages of our search algorithms is that, unlike the existing algorithms in the literature such as [10], [11], [22], the complexity does not change much by increasing the block length.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Basic definitions and notations are provided in Section II. We also briefly explain the search algorithms of [7] and [8] for finding LETSs/ETSs in this section. Section II ends with revisiting the lower bounds derived in [9] on the smallest size of ETSs and NETSs. In Section III, we present the characterization of NETS structures and propose an efficient exhaustive/non-exhaustive search of NETSs for regular and irregular LDPC codes. In Section IV, we discuss the derivation of lower and upper bounds on the stopping distance of LDPC codes. Finally, numerical results are provided in Section V, followed by concluding remarks in Section VI.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Definitions and Notations Consider an undirected graph G = (F, E), where the two sets F = {f1, . . . , fk} and E =
{e1, . . . , em}, are the sets of nodes and edges of G, respectively. We say that an edge e is incident to a node f if e is connected to f . If there exists an edge ek which is incident to two distinct nodes fi and fj, we represent ek by fifj or fjfi. The degree of a node f is denoted by df , and is defined as the number of edges incident to f . The minimum degree of a graph G, denoted by δ(G) is defined to be the minimum degree of its nodes. A node f is called leaf if df = 1. A leafless graph G is a graph with δ(G) ≥ 2.
Given an undirected graph G = (F, E), a walk between two nodes f1 and fk+1 is a sequence of nodes and edges f1, e1, f2, e2, . . . , fk, ek, fk+1, where ei = fifi+1, ∀i ∈ [1, k]. A path is a

5

walk with no repeated nodes or edges, except the first and the last nodes that can be the same.

If the first and the last nodes are distinct, we call the path an open path. Otherwise, we call the

path a cycle. The length of a walk, a path, or a cycle is the number of its edges. A lollipop walk

is a walk f1, e1, f2, e2, . . . , fk, ek, fk+1, such that all the edges and all the nodes are distinct, except that fk+1 = fm, for some m ∈ (1, k). A chord of a cycle is an edge which is not part of the cycle but is incident to two distinct nodes in the cycle. A chordless or simple cycle is a

cycle which does not have any chord. The length of the shortest cycle(s) in a graph is called

girth, and is denoted by g. A graph is called connected when there is a path between every pair

of nodes in the graph. A tree is a connected graph that contains no cycles. A rooted tree is a

tree in which one specific node is assigned as the root. The depth of a node in a rooted tree is

the length of the path from the node to the root. The depth of a tree is the maximum depth of

any node in the tree. Depth-one tree (dot) is a tree with depth one.

Any m × n parity check matrix H of a binary LDPC code C can be represented by its

bipartite Tanner graph G = (V ∪ C, E), where V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn} is the set of variable nodes

and C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm} is the set of check nodes. If there is an edge e ∈ E between the

nodes vi and cj in the Tanner graph, then, correspondingly, there is a “1” in the (j, i)-th entry

of matrix H. A Tanner graph is called variable-regular with variable degree dv if dvi = dv, ∀ vi ∈ V . A Tanner graph is called irregular if it has multiple variable and check node degrees.

An irregular LDPC code is usually described by its variable and check node degree distributions,

dvmax

dcmax

λ(x) =

λixi−1 and ρ(x) =

ρixi−1, respectively, where λi and ρi are the fractions of

i=dvmin

i=dcmin

edges in the Tanner graph that are incident to degree-i variable and check nodes, respectively.

The terms d , d vmax vmin (dcmax, dcmin) are the maximum and minimum degrees of variable nodes (check nodes), respectively. For variable-regular Tanner graphs, we have dv ≥ 2, and for irregular ones, we assume dvmin ≥ 2. The girth of a Tanner graph is an even number and in this work, we study Tanner graphs that are free of 4-cycles (g > 4).

For a subset S of V , the subset Γ(S) of C denotes the set of neighbors of S in G. The

induced subgraph of S in G, denoted by G(S), is the graph with the set of nodes S ∪ Γ(S)

and the set of edges {fifj ∈ E : fi ∈ S, fj ∈ Γ(S)}. The set of check nodes with odd and even degrees in G(S) are denoted by Γo(S) and Γe(S), respectively. In this paper, the terms unsatisfied check nodes and satisfied check nodes are used to refer to the check nodes in Γo(S) and Γe(S), respectively. The size of an induced subgraph G(S) is defined to be the number of

6
its variable nodes. We assume that an induced subgraph is connected. Disconnected subgraphs can be considered as the union of connected ones.
Given a Tanner graph G, a set S ⊂ V is called an (a,b) trapping set (TS) if |S| = a and |Γo(S)| = b. Alternatively, S is said to belong to the class of (a,b) TSs. Parameter a is referred to as the size of the TS. An elementary trapping set (ETS) is a trapping set for which all the check nodes in G(S) have degree 1 or 2. To simplify the representation of ETSs, similar to [15], [6], [7], we use an alternate graph representation of ETSs, called normal graph in variable-regular graphs. The normal graph of an ETS S is obtained from G(S) by removing all the check nodes of degree one and their incident edges, and by replacing all the degree-2 check nodes and their two incident edges by a single edge. We call a set S ⊂ V an (a,b) leafless ETS (LETS) if S is an (a, b) ETS and if the normal graph of S is leafless. Otherwise, the set S is called an ETS with leaf (ETSL). A non-elementary trapping set (NETS) is a trapping set which is not elementary. A stopping set (SS) is a trapping set for which G(S) has no check node of degree one. In general, similar to the TSs, SSs can be partitioned into two categories of elementary SSs (ESSs) and non-elementary SSs (NESSs).
The following lemma shows that for variable-regular LDPC codes, depending on dv being odd or even, some classes of trapping sets cannot exist.
Lemma 1. [9] In a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable degree dv, (a) if dv is odd, then there does not exist any (a, b) TS with odd a and even b, or with even a and odd b; and (b) if dv is even, then there does not exist any (a, b) TS with odd b.
B. Exhaustive Search of ETSs
In [7], a hierarchical graph-based expansion approach was proposed to characterize LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes. It was proved in [7] that any LETS structure of variable-regular Tanner graphs for any variable degree dv, and in any (a, b) class, can be generated by applying a combination of depth-one tree (dot), path and lollipop expansions to simple cycles. Figs. 1 (a)(c) show the three expansions in the space of normal graphs. (Notations paom and pamc are used for open and closed paths of length m + 1, respectively. The notation locm is used for a lollipop walk of length m + 1 that consists of a cycle of length c.) The characterization, dubbed as dpl, was then used as a road map to devise search algorithms that are provably efficient in finding all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, for any choice of amax

7

G(S )

m-2

(a)

G(S )

m-1 edges

G(S )

m-1 edges

(b)

G(S )

d edges
(c)

c-2 edges

Fig. 1. Expansion of the LETS structure S with (a) a depth-one tree with m edges, dotm, (b) an open and closed path of length m + 1, paom, pacm, respectively, (c) a lollipop walk of length m + 1 = d + c, lom c .

and bmax, in a guaranteed fashion. The dpl search algorithm starts by enumerating short simple cycles in the graph and then searches for the children (descendants) of those cycles through the three expansion techniques recursively, until it reaches the targeted structure.
In [8], LETSs and ETSLs were studied in irregular Tanner graphs. It was shown that these structures in irregular graphs can also be characterized and searched using a dpl-based technique in any interest range, efficiently and exhaustively. In the dpl characterization/search algorithm of [7] and [8], to exhaustively cover all the (a, b) LETS structures in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, the algorithm sometimes needs to also cover auxiliary structures with their b values larger than bmax, and up to b′max > bmax.
To the best of our knowledge, the dpl-based algorithms of [7] and [8] are the most efficient exhaustive search algorithms available for finding ETSs of LDPC codes.
C. Lower bounds on the size of TSs Theorem 1. [9] Consider a variable-regular Tanner graph G with variable degree dv and girth g. A lower bound on the size a of an (a, b) trapping set in G, whose induced subgraph contains a check node of degree k (≥ 2) is given in (1), where b′ = b − (k mod 2), T = k(dv − 1) − b′, and b is assumed to satisfy b < k(dv − 1) + (k mod 2). (Notation mod is for modulo operation.)
The proof of the above result, presented in [9], is based on considering the tree-like expansion of the induced subgraph of the TS starting from the degree-k check node w as the root with g/2

8



⌊g/4−2⌋

 

k+T

(dv − 1)i,



a≥

i=0 ⌊g/4−2⌋

  

k+T

(dv − 1)i + max{⌈(T (dv − 1)⌊g/4−1⌋)/dv⌉, (dv − 1 − ⌊b′/k⌋)(dv − 1)⌊g/4−1⌋},

i=0

for g/2 even, for g/2 odd,
(1)

Layer 1 (L1 ) Layer 2 (L2 ) Layer 3 (L3 )
Layer g/2 (Lg/2 )
Fig. 2. A tree-like expansion of a TS rooted at a check node of degree k.

layers (depth g/2 − 1). Fig. 2 shows such an expansion. (Variable nodes, satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes are represented by circles, empty and full squares, respectively.) In this tree, node w, in layer one (L1), is connected to k variable nodes in layer two (L2), and each variable node in L2 is connected to dv − 1 check nodes in L3. Also, to minimize the size of TSs, it is assumed that the degree of all the other check nodes in the subgraph is either 2 or 1. From Theorem 1, one can see that for any given values of b, g and dv, by increasing k, the lower bound on the size of the smallest TS is increased.
Remark 1. Based on Lemma 1, for odd values of dv, there is no TS in the (a, 0) class with an odd value of a. In such cases, therefore, the lower bound of Theorem 1 can be improved, if the value in (1) happens to be an odd number.
Corollary 1. [9] Theorem 1 with k = 3 (k = 4) provides a lower bound on the size of the smallest possible NETSs with b > 0 (b = 0).
It was shown in [9] that the lower bounds of Corollary 1 are often tight. The size of the smallest ETSs was also compared in [9] with the lower bounds of Corollary 1. The following result follows from Table I of [9].
Remark 2. For any given b ≤ 5, dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, and g = 6, 8, 10, the smallest possible TSs with cycles are LETSs.
The following lemma is easy to prove based on an approach similar to the one used to prove

9
Theorem 1.
Lemma 2. The lower bound of Theorem 1 also applies to the size a of an (a, b) NETS whose induced subgraph contains at least one check node of degree k (≥ 3).
III. CHARACTERIZATION/SEARCH OF NON-ELEMENTARY TSS (NETSS) IN LDPC CODES A. Characterization and Exhaustive Search of NETSs in Variable-Regular LDPC Codes
The characterization of ETSs (LETSs and ETSLs) for variable-regular graphs, provided in [7] and [8], is based on normal graph representation of structures. This approach, however, is not applicable to NETSs. In this work, to develop the characterization of NETSs, we investigate the parent-child relationships between ETSs and NETSs. As natural candidates for the expansion of ETSs to reach NETSs, we consider dot, path and lollipop expansions. One can see that the application of path and lollipop expansions to a TS increases the b value of the structure rather rapidly. For NETSs with relatively small b values, we thus limit the expansions to dot in the rest of the paper. Due to the low computational complexity of dot expansion [7], this results in an efficient NETS search algorithm starting from ETSs. Using only the dot expansion limits the variety of NETS structures that can be generated starting from ETS structures. In the following, we first discuss the (successive) application(s) of dot expansions to ETS structures and then describe the NETS structures that are out of reach.
Suppose that S is an (a, b) TS structure of variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, where b ≥ 1. The notation dotm is used for a dot expansion with m edges, connecting a new variable node to m check nodes of S. Similar to [7], we assume that the new variable node in dotm is connected to at least two check nodes of S, i.e., 2 ≤ m ≤ dv. However, unlike the dotm used in [7], the m edges can be connected to both satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes of S. The following result is simple to prove.
Lemma 3. Suppose that S is an (a, b) TS structure of variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, where b ≥ 1. Expansion of S using dotm, 2 ≤ m ≤ dv, will result in NETS structure(s) in the (a + 1, b + dv − 2q) class, where m = p + q and p ≥ 0 and q ≥ 0 are the number of edges connecting the new variable node to the satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes of S, respectively.
Remark 3. One should note that in Lemma 3, if S is an ETS, then p > 0.

10

Layer 1 (L1 )

Layer 2 (L2 )

Sk

S1

Si

Fig. 3. A NETS with k disconnected subgraphs.
Lemma 4. Consider the induced subgraph G(S) of a NETS S in a variable-regular Tanner graph G with variable degree dv. Further, consider the expansions of this subgraph in a layered tree-like fashion starting from one of the check nodes w with degree k, where k ≥ 3. If any such expansion can be partitioned into k subgraphs, where the only connection of the subgraphs is through w, as shown in Fig. 3, then the NETS structure S cannot be generated by (successive) application(s) of dotm expansions, 2 ≤ m ≤ dv, to any ETS structure.
Proof. Consider a NETS structure S whose subgraph satisfies the condition of the lemma, i.e., there is a tree-like expansion of G(S) rooted at a degree-k check node (k ≥ 3) with k disconnected subgraphs S1, ..., Sk, as shown in Fig. 3. In Fig. 3, the degree-k check node at the root (first layer L1) is connected to k variable nodes at layer L2. Those variable nodes are each connected to dv −1 other check nodes at L3 and so on. It is straightforward to see that a structure with the subgraph of Fig. 3 cannot be generated through successive applications of dotm, m ≥ 2, to an ETS structure S′. The reason is that to create the check node w (with degree k ≥ 3) in the process of expansion, there are two possibilities: (i) Node w belongs to S′, or (ii) it is added in the expansion process. In Case (i), the degree of w in S′ is either one or two. For the degree of w to be increased to k in the expansion process, through one or more dotm expansions, one or more variable nodes will have to be added to the subgraph, each with one connection to w and with one or more connection(s) to the other check nodes of the existing (connected) subgraph. This is in contradiction with the structure in Fig 3, where otherwise disconnected subgraphs S1, ..., Sk are only connected through w. The proof for Case (ii) is similar.
In the following lemma, we investigate the smallest size of NETS structures with induced subgraphs of the form discussed in Lemma 4 and presented in Fig. 3, for different values of dv, g, and b ≤ 4. Similar results may be derived for other variable degrees, girths and b values.
Lemma 5. For variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, g = 6, 8, 10, and for b ≤ 4, the size

11

TABLE I THE SMALLEST SIZE a OF NETSS IN THE (a, b) CLASS (b ≤ 4) WITH DISCONNECTED SUBGRAPHS FOR TANNER GRAPHS
WITH dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, g = 6, 8, 10

dv = 3

dv = 4

dv = 5

dv = 6

g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10

b = 1 15 21 27

not possible

21 39 93

not possible

b = 2 14 20 26

not possible

20 38 92

not possible

b = 3 11 15 19

not possible

19 37 91

not possible

b = 4 10 14 18 15 24 57 18 36 90 21 36 90

a of the smallest possible NETS in the (a, b) class containing disconnected subgraphs (as shown in Fig. 3) is listed in Table I.
Proof. Suppose that S∗ is the smallest NETS structure with disconnected subgraphs. Based on Corollary 1, the structure S∗ contains a degree-3 check node at L1. Consider each subgraph S1, S2 and S3 as a TS containing the degree-3 check node at L1 as a degree-1 (unsatisfied) check node (Fig. 3). Let aSi and bSi be the size and the number of unsatisfied check nodes of Si, respectively. Clearly, bSi > 0. We also have

bS1 + bS2 + bS3 = b + 2,

(2)

For S∗ to have the smallest size, we look for Sis with smallest aSi whose bSi values satisfy bSi > 0, and the constraint (2). It is easy to see that the most favorable candidate for TSs Sis is an ETSL with no cycle. These structures are denoted by ET SL2 in [8], and exist only in the (a, b = a(dv − 2) + 2) class. If an ET SL2 structure is not possible (due to the specific choice of bSi), then based on Remark 2, a LETS structure is the next favorable choice. To find the size of S∗, therefore, one needs to consider all the possible combinations of positive integers bS1, bS2 and bS3 that satisfy (2), and for each combination finds the smallest values of aSis using the aforementioned guidelines. In the following, we prove the result for the case of dv = 3, g = 8 and b = 2, 3. The proof for the other cases listed in Table I is similar.
For b = 2, using (2), we have bS1 + bS2 + bS3 = 4. The only positive integers satisfying this equality are {1, 1, 2}. Since, for dv = 3, there does not exist any ET SL2 with b < 3, then we

12
look for LETS structures of minimum size with these b values. From Table I in [9], the size of the smallest LETSs with bSi = 1 and bSi = 2 is 7 and 6, respectively. We thus conclude that the size of S∗ is 7 + 7 + 6 = 20.
For b = 3, we have bS1 + bS2 + bS3 = 5. The only solutions to this equation are {1, 2, 2} and {1, 1, 3}. Again for the first set, no ET SL2 structure exists, and based on LETS structures of minimum size, we obtain 7 + 6 + 6 = 19 as the size of the corresponding NETS structure. For the second set of bSi values, we select an ET SL2 structure for the bSi value 3. This corresponds to aSi = 1. For the other two TSs, the minimum size LETS structures have size 7, and thus the size of the corresponding NETS structure in this case is 1 + 7 + 7 = 15. Since 15 is the smaller value between 19 and 15, it is in fact the size of S∗.
To obtain the entries in Table I for even values of dv, one should note that based on Lemma 1, it is not possible to have a TS with even dv and odd b. Therefore, for even values of dv, the minimum value of bSi is 2, and in (2), the smallest value of b for NETS structures under consideration is strictly larger than 3.
In the following, we investigate the parent-child relationships between ETSs and NETSs based on dotm expansions. Since the NETS structures discussed in Lemmas 4 and 5 are excluded, in the rest of the paper, we use the expression “interest range of a and b” or “(a, b) class of interest” to mean the b values that satisfy b ≤ 4, and for a given b value in this range, the value of a being strictly less than the entry provided in Table I.
Proposition 1. Any NETS structure S of variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv in an (a, b) class of interest, containing only one degree-3 check node (the rest of the check nodes have degree 2 or 1) can be characterized by the application of a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) to an ETS substructure, S′, in the (a − 1, b + 2m − 2 − dv) class, where m is number of edges connecting the variable node in S/S′ to one degree-2 and m − 1 degree-1 check nodes of S′.
Proof. The structure S contains only one check node w of degree 3. We consider the tree-like expansion of S from w as the root at L1. Based on the knowledge that this expansion of S does not consist of disconnected subgraphs as shown in Fig. 3, there must exist two variable nodes, say v1 and v2 at L2 that are connected through a path that does not pass through w. Now, consider removing one of these two variable nodes, say v1, and all its incident edges from S. The remaining graph S′ is still connected and has no check node with degree larger than 2,

13
i.e., S′ is an ETS. It is easy to see that S can be obtained by expanding S′ by v1 through a dotm (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) expansion. The class of S′ can be obtained by using Lemma 3, assuming p = 1.
The following corollary describes the exhaustive search of NETSs with only one degree-3 check node.
Corollary 2. In variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, all the (a, b) NETSs containing only one degree-3 check node in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax (amax less than the value in Table I and bmax ≤ 4) can be found by applying dotm expansions to all the ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ b′max = bmax + dv − 2.
Proposition 2. Any NETS structure S in an interest class of (a, b) for variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv, that contains two degree-3 check nodes (the rest are degree-2 or -1) can be characterized by a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) applied to one of the two following substructures S′: (i) an ETS in the (a−1, b+ 2m−4 −dv) class, where from m edges connecting the variable node in S/S′ to S′, two and m − 2 are connected to degree-2 and degree-1 check nodes of S′, respectively; or (ii) a NETS containing one degree-3 check node in the (a − 1, b + 2m − 2 − dv) class, where from m edges connecting the variable node in S/S′ to S′, one and m − 1 are connected to degree-2 and degree-1 check nodes of S′, respectively.
Proof. Consider the expansion of the NETS structure starting from one of the degree-3 check nodes w at L1. In the expansion, the other degree-3 check node is located either at L3 or at L2i+1, where i > 1. With an argument similar to the one presented in the proof of Proposition 1, there exist two variable nodes v1 and v2 at L2 such that there is a path between them that does not pass through w. Therefore, by removing one of these two variable nodes, say, v1, and all its incident edges from S, the resulted subgraph S′ remains connected. Now if the second degree-3 check node was at L3 and connected to v1, then there remains no check node with degree larger than 2 after the removal of v1, i.e., the subgraph S′ is an ETS. On the other hand, if the other degree-3 check node was at L3 but not connected to v1 or it was at L2i+1 with i > 1, then the resulted subgraph S′ is a NETS containing one degree-3 check node. In either case, structure S can be obtained by applying a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) to S′. The class of S′ can be determined in each case by using Lemma 3, assuming p = 2 and p = 1, respectively.
The following result is a generalization of Proposition 2.

14
Proposition 3. Any NETS structure S in an interest class of (a, b) for variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv, that contains f ≥ 2 degree-3 check nodes (the rest are degree-2 or -1) can be characterized by a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) applied to one of the η = min{m, f } following substructures S′: For any value of p in the range 1 ≤ p ≤ η, substructure S′ is in the (a − 1, b + 2(m − p) − dv) class, where from m edges connecting the variable node in S/S′ to S′, p and m − p are connected to degree-2 and degree-1 check nodes of S′, respectively.
Based on the above results, it is easy to see that a NETS structure with f degree-3 check nodes can be generated through successive applications of dotm expansions to ETS structures. For this to correspond to an exhaustive search of such NETSs, the following corollary, that generalizes Corollary 2, provides the range of ETSs that need to be included.
Corollary 3. In variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, all the NETSs containing f degree-3 check nodes (the rest are degree-2 or -1) in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax (amax less than the value in Table I and bmax ≤ 4) can be found by f successive applications of dotm expansions to all the ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − ⌈f /dv⌉ and b ≤ bm′ ax = bmax + f (dv − 2).
The following results can all be proved similar to the cases involving NETSs with only degree3 check nodes. The proofs are thus omitted to avoid redundancy.
Proposition 4. Any NETS structure S in an interest class of (a, b) for variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv, that contains only one degree-4 check node (the rest are degree-2 or -1) can be characterized by a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) applied to a NETS substructure S′ containing only one degree-3 check node in the (a − 1, b + 2m − dv) class. From m edges connecting the variable node in S/S′ to S′, one and m − 1 are connected to degree-3 and degree-1 check nodes of S′, respectively.
Corollary 4. In variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, all the NETSs containing only one degree-4 check node (the rest are degree-2 or -1) in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax (amax less than the value in Table I and bmax ≤ 4) can be found by two successive applications of dotm expansions to all the ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 2 and b ≤ b′max = bmax + 2dv − 2.
Proposition 5. Any NETS structure S in the interest class of (a, b) for variable-regular graphs

15
with variable degree dv, that contains one degree-4 and one degree-3 check nodes (the rest are degree-2 or -1) can be characterized by a dotm expansion (2 ≤ m ≤ dv) applied to one of the following substructures S′: (i) a NETS substructure, containing only one degree-3 check node, in the (a − 1, b + 2m − 2 − dv) class, where out of m ≥ 2 edges connecting the variable node in S/S′ to S′, one is connected to a degree-3 check node, one to a degree-2 check node and m − 2 to degree-1 check nodes of S′. (ii) a NETS substructure, containing two degree-3 check nodes, in the (a − 1, b + 2m − dv) class, where out of m ≥ 2 edges connecting the variable node in S/S′ to S′, one and m − 1 are connected to degree-3 and degree-1 check nodes of S′, respectively.
Corollary 5. In variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, all the NETSs containing one degree-4 and one degree-3 check nodes (the rest are degree-2 or -1) in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax (amax less than the value in Table I and bmax ≤ 4) can be found by three successive applications of dotm expansions to all the ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 2 and b ≤ b′max = bmax + 3dv − 4.
Remark 4. Note that in all cases discussed in Corollaries 2-5, successive applications of dotm expansions to the ETSs can result in finding structures in addition to the ones that are of interest in these corollaries.
Corollaries 2-5 demonstrate that by increasing the multiplicity of check nodes with degrees larger than 2 and the degrees of such check nodes, the range of b values for ETSs that are needed to provide an exhaustive search of such NETSs is increased. To have an efficient NETS search algorithm based on successive dotm expansions of ETSs, we limit the multiplicity and the degrees of such check nodes to the following cases in the rest of this paper: NETSs containing at most four degree-3 check nodes, or containing only one degree-4 and at most one degree-3 check nodes. We use notations N3, N3,3, N3,3,3, and N3,3,3,3, to denote NETS structures with only one up to four check nodes of degree 3. Notations N4 and N4,3 are used for NETS structures that contain only one degree-4 check node and those with only one degree-4 and one degree-3 check nodes, respectively.
Corollary 6. In variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, all the N3 ,N3,3 ,N3,3,3 ,N3,3,3,3, N4, and N4,3 in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax (amax less than the value in Table I and bmax ≤ 4) can be found by up to four successive applications of dotm expansions

16
to all the ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bm′ ax = bmax + max{(3dv − 4), (4dv − 8)}.
By restricting the NETS structures to those discussed above, we limit the maximum size amax of NETSs that can be exhaustively covered. The following theorem provides the value of amax for Tanner graphs with different dv and g values.
Theorem 2. For a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable-degree dv and girth g, consider the union of sets N3 ,N3,3 ,N3,3,3 ,N3,3,3,3, N4, and N4,3, obtained by successive applications of dotm expansions (m ≥ 2) to ETSs within the range indicated in Corollary 6. For dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, and g = 6, 8, 10, Table II provides the value of amax such that such a union gives an exhaustive list of NETSs of the Tanner graph within the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax = 4.
Proof. Based on the sets of NETSs that are covered, it is easy to see that the exhaustive search is limited by the size of the smallest structure in sets N3,3,3,3,3, N4,3,3, N4,4 and N5. The structures in N3,3,3,3,3, however, have b ≥ 5, and thus not in the range of interest of the theorem. We thus find the size a4∗,3,3, a4∗,4 and a5∗ (or a lower bound on the size) of the smallest structure in sets N4,3,3, N4,4 and N5, respectively, and list amax = a∗ − 1 in Table II, where a∗ = min{a4∗,3,3, a∗4,4, a5∗}.
For structures in N5, we use Theorem 1 with different values of b ≤ 4, and choose the smallest lower bound as a∗5. For structures in N4,3,3 and N4,4, we use the tree-like expansion of the NETS structure as in Fig. 2, starting from a degree-4 check node at the root in L1. The tree thus has four variable nodes in L2. The idea is to grow this tree into a NETS structure of smallest size with no cycle of length smaller than g and with the given b value, where out of b unsatisfied check nodes in the case of N4,3,3, two of them have degree 3. To minimize the size, one needs to select the check nodes to have the minimum degree within the above constraints. For structures in N4,3,3, this means selecting all the satisfied check nodes (other than the root) to have degree 2 and all the b − 2 unsatisfied check nodes to have degree 1. For structures in N4,4, it means that all the satisfied check nodes, except for the root and one other check node with degree 4, the rest must have degree 2. The b unsatisfied check nodes in this case all have degree 1. To satisfy the girth constraint, all the variable and check nodes in the first g/2 layers of the tree must be distinct (i.e., no cycle should appear in the subgraph). Moreover, in the tree, there are four subgraphs, each starting from one variable node at L2. To avoid having cycles shorter than g in these subgraphs, any new variable (check) node at Lg/2+1, for g/2 odd (even), can only be connected to the check (variable) nodes of each such subgraph at most once. Therefore, for

17
odd values of g/2, at Lg/2+1, we need, at least, as many variable nodes as the number of edges emanating from the check nodes at Lg/2 of each subgraph to Lg/2+1. Also, for even values of g/2, if the number of variable nodes in a subgraph at Lg/2 times dv − 1 is larger than the number of the rest of variable nodes at Lg/2 (in the other k − 1 subgraphs), more variable nodes are needed to be added at Lg/2+2 to complete the connections required for check nodes at Lg/2+1.
Considering the above constraints, for both cases of structures in N4,3,3 and N4,4, and for each value of b, we find the structure with the smallest number of variable nodes. The values a∗4,3,3 and a4∗,4 are then obtained by taking the minimum among the smallest sizes corresponding to five different values of b = 0, . . . , 4. In the following, we discuss in more details, the proof for one entry of Table II. Proofs for other entries are similar.
Consider Tanner graphs with dv = 3, g = 8 and NETSs with bmax = 4. Based on Theorem 1, we have a5∗ = 12.
For N4,3,3, to minimize the size of a NETS, the two degree-3 check nodes must be located at L3 and be connected to two different variable nodes at L2. This minimizes the number of variable nodes needed in the higher layers of the tree while satisfying the girth constraint. All the remaining b − 2 unsatisfied check nodes with degree 1 must also be located at L3. The remaining check nodes at L3 are thus 8 − b degree-2 check nodes. This means there must be 4 + (8 − b) variable nodes at L4, and 4 + 4 + 8 − b = 16 − b variable nodes in the whole structure up to L4. It appears that by proper addition of check nodes in L5, no more variable node is needed in L6. The smallest size of structures in N3,3,4 for different values of b ≤ 4 is thus obtained by b = 4, and we have a4∗,3,3 = 12. As two examples, the smallest NETS structures for b = 3 and b = 4 are given in Fig. 4.
For N4,4, to minimize the size of NETS, the second degree-4 check node must be located at L3. All the b degree-1 check nodes must also be at L3. Out of 4(dv − 1) = 8 check nodes in L3, one is degree-4, b are degree-1 and 7 − b are degree-2. This means there are 3 + (7 − b) variable nodes at L4. If b ≥ 1, to satisfy the girth constraint with minimum number of variable nodes, one degree-1 check node in L3 is connected to the same variable node in L2 that has also a connection to the degree-4 check node in L3. If b > 1, the rest of degree-1 check node(s) are each connected to another (different) variable node in L3. Now, for b > 1, consider a variable node v1 in L2 that is connected to one degree-4 and one degree-1 check node in L3 and call the subtree rooted at v1 as subtree 1. This subtree has 3 variable nodes at L4 that must be connected to 3(dv − 1) = 6 distinct check nodes at L5. To complete the connections of these check nodes,

18

TABLE II THE MAXIMUM SIZE amax OF (a, b) NETSS THAT CAN BE SEARCHED EXHAUSTIVELY WITHIN THE RANGE b ≤ bmax = 4 BY
SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS OF dotm EXPANSIONS TO (a′, b′) ETSS WITH SIZE UP TO amax − 1 AND b′ ≤ b′max. (THE LOWER BOUND ON THE SIZE OF SMALLEST POSSIBLE NETS WITH b ≤ 4 IS GIVEN IN BRACKETS.)

dv = 3

dv = 4

dv = 5

dv = 6

g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10

amax 6(4) 11(6) 16(8) 6(5) 15(9) 24(15) 8(6) 19(12) 43(24) 8(7) 21(15) 46(35)

b′max 9

9

9

12 12 12 16 16 16 20 20 20

a) An N4 3 3 structure in the (13; 3) class
;;

b) An N4 3 3 structure in the (12; 4) class
;;

c) An N4 4 structure in the (13; 1) class
;

d) An N4 4 structure in the (14; 4) class
;

Fig. 4. Four examples of smallest possible NETS structures in N4,3,3 and N4,4 for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, g = 8, in the range b ≤ 4.

at least six variable nodes should exist at L4 of the rest of the subtrees (excluding subtree 1), otherwise, more variable nodes are needed at L6. By considering all the cases of b ≤ 4, we conclude that a∗4,4 = 13. As two examples, the smallest NETS structures for b = 1 and b = 4 are shown in Fig. 4.
Based on the above, for dv = 3, g = 8, we have amax = min{12, 12, 13} − 1 = 11.
Using Corollary 6, one can find the bm′ ax value which indicates the range of b values for ETSs that are required for the exhaustive search of the desired NETSs. The bm′ ax values for graphs with different dv values are also provided in Table II. In Table II, we have also included the lower bound on the size of the smallest possible NETS with b ≤ 4 in brackets. As an example,

19
the entries corresponding to dv = 3, and g = 8 in Table II show that, for such variable-regular graphs, we can exhaustively search all the NETSs with a = 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and b ≤ 4.
The pseudo-code of the proposed search algorithm is given in Algorithm 1. In the proposed dot-based NETS search algorithm, the input is the exhaustive list of ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and bm′ ax. In the search process, dot expansion is applied to any instance of TSs (ETSs and NETSs) in the interest range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ b′max. The sets ITaS and IEa T S are the sets of all the instances of TSs and ETSs in the (a, b) classes with b ≤ b′max, respectively. The set INa ET S is the set of all the instances of NETSs in the (a, b) classes with b ≤ bmax.
Remark 5. We note that if in Algorithm 1, we increase the value of amax beyond that of Table II (but less than the one in Table I), by exhaustive search of ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bm′ ax, we can still find all the N3, N3,3, N3,3,3, N3,3,3,3, N4, N4,3 structures in the new range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ 4, but there is no guarantee to find the other NETS structures in the new range exhaustively.
B. Non-Exhaustive Search of NETSs in Variable-Regular LDPC Codes
The exhaustive search of NETSs proposed in Subsection III-A has two limitations. First, the value of bm′ ax obtained in Subsection III-A, is rather large which implies a high complexity for the exhaustive search of ETSs. Moreover, for the given values of dv, g and bmax, the value of amax is relatively small. For these two reasons, we propose a non-exhaustive search of NETSs in a wider range of a and b values based on setting b′max = bmax + t, where t ≥ 1, instead of the value indicated in Table II. Our experimental results show that by increasing bm′ ax beyond bmax + 2, the number of new NETSs that can be found in the interest range is negligible.
The NETS search algorithm proposed in Algorithm 1 can also be used for the non-exhaustive search of NETSs. As the input, in this case, one should find and provide all the ETSs in the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bm′ ax. However, since the bm′ ax is less than the value given in Table II, the list of NETSs, INET S, would be non-exhaustive. One should also note that since the algorithm imposes no restriction on the degree of check nodes of searched NETSs, by increasing amax, some other NETSs with combination of different check node degrees can be found as well.
C. Search Algorithm to Find NETSs in Irregular LDPC Codes
Due to the variety of variable degrees in variable-irregular LDPC codes, we are not able to provide results similar to those in Subsection III-A in relation to exhaustive search of NETSs in

20

Algorithm 1 (NETS Search) Finds list of the instances of (a, b) NETS structures of a variable-

regular Tanner graph G = (V, E) with girth g and variable degree dv, for a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax

(amax is obtained from Table II for bmax = 4). The input is all the instances of (a, b) ETS structures, in the range a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bm′ ax, IET S (bm′ ax is obtained from Table II). The output is the set INET S, which contains the instances of NETSs in the interest range. INET S=

NetsSrch (IET S, amax, bmax) 1: Inputs: G, g, dv, IET S (amax, bmax = 4).

2: Initializations: INa ET S ← ∅; ITaS = IEa T S, ∀ a ≤ amax; bm′ ax is obtained from Table II.

3: for a = g/2, . . . , amax − 1 do

4: for any structure S ∈ ITaS do

5:

Consider V to be the set of variable nodes in V \S which have at least two connections

to the check nodes in Γ(S).

6:

for each variable node v ∈ V do

7:

S′ = {S ∪ v} \ ITa+S1.

8:

b = |Γo(S′)|.

9:

if b ≤ bm′ ax then

10:

ITa+S1 = ITa+S1 ∪ S′.

11:

if b ≤ bmax then

12:

INa+E1T S = INa+E1T S ∪ S′.

13:

end if

14:

end if

15:

end for

16: end for

17: end for

18: Output: INET S = {INa ET S, ∀ a ≤ amax}.

irregular codes. Algorithm 1 can, however, be still used for the non-exhaustive search of NETSs in irregular graphs. To obtain an exhaustive list of ETSs as the input to Algorithm 1 in this case, one can use the search algorithms of [8].

21
IV. BOUNDS ON THE STOPPING DISTANCE OF LDPC CODES Stopping sets can be viewed as a subset of TSs, where any check node has a degree of at least two. Elementary SSs (ESSs) and non-elementary SSs (NESSs) are thus subsets of ETSs and NETSs, respectively. In the following, we tailor/modify the results established for ETSs and NETSs for ESSs and NESSs, respectively.
A. Lower Bound on the Stopping Distance of Variable-Regular LDPC Codes By definition, an ESS is a TS for which the degree of all the check nodes is 2. Any ESS thus
corresponds to a LETS with b = 0. The following lower bound on stopping distance is simple to prove.
Proposition 6. The result of Theorem 1 with k = 2 and b = 0 provides a lower bound, LSS1, on smin for variable-regular LDPC codes.
Remark 6. We note that the result of Proposition 6 is essentially the same as the lower bound obtained in [18] on the stopping distance of variable-regular LDPC codes.
To potentially improve the lower bound of Proposition 6, LSS1, we use the fact that ESSs, as a special case of LETSs, have a graphical structure that lends itself well to the efficient exhaustive dpl search algorithm of [7]. Using the dpl search algorithm with bmax = 0, we can efficiently and exhaustively find all the ESSs of a variable-regular LDPC code with a maximum given size amax. In the following, we establish a lower bound, LSS2 (LSS2 > LSS1) , on the size of smallest NESSs. We then perform an exhaustive dpl-based search of ESSs of maximum size amax = LSS2 − 1. If this search does not find any ESS, then we establish LSS2 ≤ smin. Otherwise, the smallest size of found ESSs is the exact value of smin.
Proposition 7. The result of Theorem 1 with k = 3 and b = 1 provides a lower bound, LSS2, on the size of NESSs.
To further improve the lower bound of Proposition 7 on smin, if possible, we need to perform an exhaustive search of NESSs. This can be performed, by using the NETS search algorithm of Section III with some modifications as described below.

22

TABLE III THE MAXIMUM SIZE amax OF SSS THAT CAN BE SEARCHED EXHAUSTIVELY BY SUCCESSIVE APPLICATIONS OF dotm
EXPANSIONS TO (a′, b′) LETSS WITH SIZE UP TO amax − 1 AND b′ ≤ b′max .

dv = 3

dv = 4

dv = 5

dv = 6

g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10

amax 7 13 19

bm′ ax 9

9

9

8 17 29 12 12 12

8 19 43 16 16 16

10 22 56 20 20 20

We first note that, compared to Subsection III-A, here, we are not interested in NETSs with unsatisfied check nodes of degree-1. This implies that the range of exhaustive search for NESSs, as a subset of NETSs, can be potentially increased.
We use notations SS3, SS3,3, SS3,3,3, SS3,3,3,3, to denote NESSs with only one up to four check nodes of degree 3, respectively. Notations SS4 and SS4,3 are used for NESSs that contain only one degree-4 check node and only one degree-4 and one degree-3 check nodes, respectively. Similar to Subsection III-A, we limit the search of NESSs to the following configurations: SS3,SS3,3, SS3,3,3, SS3,3,3,3, SS4, and SS4,3. The following result is in parallel with Corollary 6.
Corollary 7. In variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv, all the SS3,SS3,3, SS3,3,3, SS3,3,3,3, SS4, and SS4,3 in the interest range of a ≤ amax (amax less than the value in Table I) can be found by up to four successive applications of dotm expansions to all the LETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ bm′ ax = 4 + max{(3dv − 4), (4dv − 8)}.
The following result (parallel to Theorem 2) provides the range in which the NESS search is exhaustive.
Theorem 3. For a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable-degree dv and girth g, consider the union of sets SS3,SS3,3, SS3,3,3, SS3,3,3,3, SS4, and SS4,3, obtained by successive applications of dotm expansions (m ≥ 2) to LETSs within the range indicated in Corollary 7. For dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, and g = 6, 8, 10, Table III provides the value of amax such that such a union gives an exhaustive list of NESSs of the Tanner graph within the range of a ≤ amax.
Proof. The proof is similar to the proof of Theorem 2 with the following differences: (i) Despite the case of Theorem 2, where NETSs with only b ≤ 4 were studied, here, for NESSs, there is no

23

a) An SS4 4 structure of size 16
;

b) An SS5 structure of size 15

c) An SS4 3 3 structure of size 14
;;

d) An SS3 3 3 3 3 structure of size 15
;;;;

Fig. 5. Four examples of smallest NESS structures in variable-regular graphs with dv = 3, g = 8.

such limitation, and we are interested in NESSs with any value of b (including those with b > 4), (ii) Since there exists no degree-1 check node in a SS, the degree of all the unsatisfied check nodes of NESSs should be odd values greater than or equal to 3, (iii) Due to (i), in addition to minimum-size structures in SS4,3,3, SS4,4, SS5, one needs to also consider the minimum-size structures in SS3,3,3,3,3 as potentially limiting the range of exhaustive search, (iv) In the tree-like expansion of the subgraph, to minimize the size of the NESS and due to the non-existence of degree-1 check nodes, one needs to assume that except the few check nodes with degree larger than 2, all the rest of check nodes have degree-2.
Fig. 5 shows four examples of smallest NESS structures of SS4,3,3, SS4,4, SS5 and SS3,3,3,3,3 for graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8.
Remark 7. Note that the values of amax in Table III are generally larger than those in Table II. For example, while the range of exhaustive search of NESSs for variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8 is 13, this value for the exhaustive search of NETSs is 11.
If the exhaustive search of SSs (ESSs and NESSs) up to size amax listed in Table III fails to find any SS, then LSS3 = amax + 1 is a lower bound on smin. Otherwise, the smallest size of found SSs gives the exact value of smin.
In Table IV, we have listed LSS3, as well as the values of LSS1 and LSS2, obtained from

24

TABLE IV VALUES LSS3 ,LSS2 AND LSS1 (AS POTENTIAL LOWER BOUNDS ON smin) FOR CODES WITH dv = 3, 4, 5, 6, AND g = 6, 8, 10

dv = 3

dv = 4

dv = 5

dv = 6

g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10 g = 6 g = 8 g = 10

LSS3 8 14 20

9 18 30

9 20 44 11 23 57

LSS2 5

9

13

7 12 21

7 15 31

8 18 43

LSS1 4

6

10

5 8 17

6 10 26

7 12 37

Propositions 6 and 7, for Tanner graphs with different values of dv and g.
Example 1. In variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 8, while the size of smallest possible ESSs (from Proposition 6) is 6, by the exhaustive search of ESSs, one can potentially improve the lower bound on smin to 9. Moreover, by considering NESSs, the bound can be potentially improved further to 14.
The pseudo code for obtaining a lower bound sm(l)in on smin is presented in Algorithm 2. The algorithm starts by exhaustively searching for ESSs of size at most LSS3 −1 in Lines 5-9. During the search of ESSs, if any ESS is found, the size of that ESS is assigned as the temporary value for sm(l)in. (Since the search of LETSs is hierarchical, if any SS is found in Line 6, it is the smallest one in the range of interest.) If this temporary sm(l)in is larger than LSS2, then the NETS search algorithm of Subsection III-A (Algorithm 1) is used to find NESSs with size less than this temporary sm(l)in. If such a NESS is found, the size of that NESS is assigned as the new and final value for sm(l)in. (Since the search of NETSs is hierarchical, if any NESS is found in Line 13, it is the smallest one in the range of interest.)
Remark 8. In Subsection III-A, the input of Algorithm 1 for the search of NETSs in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ 4 was the list of all ETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ b′max. However, NESSs are leafless, i.e., each variable node is connected to at least two check nodes. Therefore, for finding the NESSs in Line 13 of Algorithm 2, the input is just the list of LETSs in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ b′max, that has already been found in Line 4.
Remark 9. We note that by removing the conditions that stop the algorithm when an ESS or a NESS is found, one can find the list of all stopping sets with size less than or equal to

25

Algorithm 2 Finding a lower bound sm(l)in on the stopping distance of a variable-regular Tanner graph G with variable degree dv and girth g.
1: Inputs: G, g, dv.
2: Initializations: Set amax = LSS3, and select bm′ ax from Table III. 3: sm(l)in = amax. 4: Run the exhaustive LETS search algorithm in the range of a ≤ amax − 1 and b ≤ b′max.
5: while the dpl search is running do

6: if a LETS in an (a, 0) class is found then

7:

Stop the search, and set sm(l)in = a, amax = a.

8: end if

9: end while 10: if sm(l)in > LSS2 then 11: INET S= NetsSrch(ILET S , amax, bmax = 4) 12: while the NETS search is running do

13:

if a NESS of size a is found, where a < amax, then

14:

Stop the search, and set sm(l)in = a.

15:

end if

16: end while

17: end if 18: Output: sm(l)in.

amax = LSS3 − 1 exhaustively.
B. Upper Bound on the Stopping Distance of LDPC Codes If we fail to find the exact stopping distance of an LDPC code (variable-regular) based on the
approach described in Subsection IV-A, then, we have established that smin ≥ LSS3. For such cases, in this subsection, we also find an upper bound on smin. To obtain this upper bound, we find a stopping set with size larger than or equal to LSS3. We do this by devising a non-exhaustive search algorithm for SSs with a range that can go well beyond LSS3. This search algorithm is also applicable to irregular LDPC codes and can provide an upper bound on smin for such codes.
The new algorithm also searches for both ESSs and NESSs, and to search for both categories,

26
it requires to search for LETSs. The LETS search can be performed through the exhaustive dpl searches of [7] and [8], for regular and irregular graphs, respectively. The problem, however, is that the complexity of such a search increases rather rapidly, if the range of search, indicated by the value of amax, is increased much beyond the value of LSS3. To overcome the problem of high complexity of the exhaustive dpl search, in cases where the smallest size of stopping sets is well above LSS3, we modify the search such that it can handle larger values of amax. This however, comes at the expense of losing the exhaustiveness of the search, and thus we are not guaranteed to find the stopping sets with the lowest weight in our search. In this part of the work, rather than selecting the b′max as in the original dpl characterization/search, we choose it to be a smaller value. To compensate for the detrimental effect that this new choice will have on the exhaustiveness of the dpl search, rather than using the specific expansion techniques that the original dpl characterization determines for each LETS class, we apply all the possible expansions from the set of dot, path and lollipop expansions to LETS structures in each class in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ b′max. The only constraint for the application of a certain expansion technique to LETS structures within a specific class is that the expanded structure must still remain within the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bm′ ax. Given the values amax and bm′ ax, Routine 1 provides a pseudo code for finding the list of expansion techniques that are required to be applied to all the LETSs in each (a, b) class. These expansions are stored in the (a, b) entry of table EX , EX (a,b). The expansion dot is applied to all the (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax − 1. Also, pam and locm are applied to all the (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax − m. The only constraint for using an expansion technique is that the b value(s) of the new LETS structure(s) need to remain in the range identified by bm′ ax.
A pseudo code for obtaining an upper bound sm(ui)n on stopping distance is presented in Algorithm 3. To start the algorithm, one can select amax to be initially a rather large value a0, say three or four times LSS3. The procedures of searching for ESSs and NESSs are generally similar to those in Section IV-A, with some differences explained in the following. In Algorithm 2, for the exhaustive search of LETSs (Line 4), the set of expansions EX , and b′max are obtained by the characterization algorithm of [7]. Also, in Algorithm 2, for the exhaustive search of NETSs in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ 4 (Line 11), the value of b′max for the exhaustive search of LETSs is obtained from Table III. In Algorithm 3, however, for both non-exhaustive search of LETSs and NETSs, b′max is chosen to be a rather small value. This value for variable-regular codes is set at b′max = g/2(dv − 2), in Algorithm 3. This covers the class of shortest simple

27

Routine 1 (Expansions) Finds all the possible expansions EX (a,b) for the (a, b) classes of LETS
structures, g/2 ≤ a < amax, 1 ≤ b ≤ bm′ ax, for a Tanner graph with girth g and variable degree dv (for irregular graphs, dv = dvmin). E X =Expansions(amax, bm′ ax, g, dv)
1: Initialization: a = amax − 1.
2: while a ≥ g/2 do

3:

E X (a,b) ← dot, ∀ b ≤ bm′ ax.

4: for b = 1, . . . , b′max do

5:

m = 2.

6:

while a + m ≤ amax do

7:

if b ≤ b′max − 2 + m(dv − 2) then

8:

E X (a,b) ← pam, locm.

9:

end if

10:

m = m + 1.

11:

end while

12: end for

13: a = a − 1.

14: end while

15: Output: E X .

cycles of the graph. Also, for the search of NETSs (NESSs) in Algorithm 1, bmax = bm′ ax. For irregular graphs, the value is chosen as b′max = 4 in Algorithm 3. Also, when the values of amax and bm′ ax are set, the expansions EX needed for all the relevant classes of LETS structures are determined through Routine 1.
If an ESS of size a is found, then a is a temporary upper bound for the stopping distance of
the code. Then the NETS search is used to find any possible NESS with size less than the size
of the smallest ESS. If such a NESS is found, then its size is an upper bound on the stopping
distance of the code. If the search terminated without finding any stopping set, or if one is interested in tightening the upper bound, one can increase the value of b′max in a new search, to allow for covering more structures. In the latter case, where a stopping set of weight sm(ui)n has already been found, one should set amax = sm(ui)n − 1, for the new search.

28

Algorithm 3 Finding an upper bound sm(ui)n on the stopping distance of Tanner graph G with
variable degree dv and girth g. 1: Inputs: G, g, dv.
2: Initializations: Set amax = a0, b′max = g/2(dv − 2) for variable-regular codes, or bm′ ax = 4 for irregular codes, and sm(ui)n = ∞. (For irregular codes, dv = dvmin.)
3: E X =Expansions(amax, bm′ ax, g, dv) (Routine 1).
4: Run the LETS search algorithm ( [7], [8]) based on the expansions in EX .

5: while the LETS search is running do

6: if the run-time exceeds T , then

7:

Stop the LETS search, and go to Step 25.

8: end if

9: if a LETS in an (a, 0) class is found, where a < sm(ui)n, then

10:

Stop the LETS search, set sm(ui)n = a, amax = a.

11: end if

12: end while

13: INET S= NetsSrch(ILET S , amax, b′max)

14: while the NETS search is running do

15: if a NESS of size a is found, where a < sm(ui)n, then

16:

Stop the NETS search, set sm(ui)n = a.

17: end if

18: end while

19: if sm(ui)n = ∞, then

20: b′max = bm′ ax + 1, and go to Step 3.

21: end if

22: if sm(ui)n < ∞, but looking for a tighter bound, then

23:

bm′ ax = bm′ ax + 1, amax = sm(ui)n − 1, and go to Step 3.

24: end if

25: Output: sm(ui)n.

29
V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
We have applied our technique to find lower and upper bounds on the stopping distance of a large number of variable-regular and irregular LDPC codes. These include both random and structured codes with a wide range of rates and block lengths. Here, we present the results for 20 variable-regular and 8 irregular codes. These codes and their parameters can be seen in Tables V and VI, respectively. For all the run-times reported in this paper, a desktop computer with 2.4GHz CPU and 8-GB RAM is used, and the search algorithms are implemented in MATLAB. In Tables V and VI, for the cases where the exact smin is found, this value is reported in the column corresponding to the lower bound, and we have “-” in the upper bound column. Otherwise, the value LSS3 is reported as the lower bound, and the upper bound is obtained using the nonexhaustive dpl search algorithm. In such cases, the value bm′ ax that has been used to provide the upper bound is reported in the last column of the table. For all cases, the run-time to obtain the lower and upper bounds are also reported. For structured codes, their structural properties are used to simplify the search. These codes are C10, C13 − C20 in Table V, and C21 − C26, in Table VI. Also, for all cases, the letter e or n is reported in brackets to indicate whether the smallest SS found in the search algorithm is elementary or non-elementary, respectively.
We note that the lower bounds (or the exact stopping distances) are all obtained in times that are at most about 16 minutes, and in many cases, only in a few seconds. The upper bounds are obtained in at most about 35 minutes, and in many cases, less than 4 minutes. Using a computer with Core 2 Duo E6700 2.67GHz CPU and 2 GB of RAM, it took the search algorithm of [10], about 600 and 3085 hours to provide an upper bound on the stopping distance of C1 and C3, respectively. In comparison, it has taken the non-exhaustive dpl search algorithm of this paper only 5 and 34 minutes to find the same upper bounds for C1 and C3, respectively. Also the exact stopping distance of C1 has been reported in [22], which is matched with the bound reported here (the run-time has not been reported in [22]).
To the best of our knowledge, the upper bound for random codes C2 and C4 has not been reported in the literature. It takes our algorithm only 43 seconds to find the exact stopping distance of C4, a random high rate code with block length 1057.
We believe that the run-times reported here would be much less than those of any existing search algorithm. In fact, in our opinion, no existing algorithm would be able to handle C9, which is a code of rate 0.87 and block length 16383. It takes our algorithm only about 2 and 3

30

TABLE V STOPPING DISTANCE OR BOUNDS ON THE STOPPING DISTANCE OF SOME VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES

Code dv Girth Rate Length Lower Bound Upper Bound bm′ ax

C1 [16] 3 6 0.5 504

smin ≥ 7

16(n)

4

5 sec.

5 min.

C2 [16] 3 6 0.5 816

smin ≥ 7

24(n)

4

6 sec.

6 min.

C3 [16] 3 6 0.5 1008 smin ≥ 7

26(n)

5

6 sec.

34 min.

C4 [16] 3 6 0.77 1057

7(n) 43 sec.

-

-

C5 [17] 3 6 0.75 2000

6(e) 15 sec.

-

-

C6 [17] 3 6 0.77 3000 smin ≥ 7

8(e)

4

48 sec.

1 min.

C7 [17] 3 6 0.8 5000

6(e) 28 sec.

-

-

C8 [17] 3 6 0.81 8000 smin ≥ 7

14(e)

4

51 sec.

23 min.

C9 [16] 3 6 0.87 16383 smin ≥ 7

9(n)

3

209 sec.

3 min.

C10 [26] 3 8 0.41 155 smin ≥ 13

18(n)

4

6 sec.

45 sec.

C11 [12] 3 8 0.5 504 smin ≥ 13

19(n)

5

363 sec. 10 min.

C12 [12] 3 8 0.5 1008 smin ≥ 13

37(n)

5

245 sec. 35 min.

C13 [29] 3 8 0.88 4000

8(e) 73 sec.

-

-

12(e)

C14 [27] 3 8 0.82 5219

-

-

913 sec.

C15 [28] 3 10 0.5 546

14(e) 42 sec.

-

-

24(e)

C16 [21] 3 12 0.5 4896

-

-

729 sec.

C17 [29] 4 8 0.69 1274

8(e) 10 sec.

-

-

C18 [29] 4 8 0.77 2890

smin ≥ 17 468 sec.

20(e) 10
9 min.

C19 [29] 5 8 0.23 210

10(e) 4 sec.

-

-

C20 [29] 5 8 0.75 8000 smin ≥ 19

-

-

154 sec.

31
minutes to provide the lower and upper bounds of 7 and 9 on the smin of this code, respectively. Codes C5-C8 are four high-rate random codes with variable degree 3 and girth 6 constructed
by the program of [17].2 These random high-rate codes with large block lengths are challenging codes for all the existing approaches in the literature. One can see that the exact stopping distance or the lower and upper bounds of these codes have been found by the proposed algorithms in most cases in a few seconds. To the best of our knowledge, except a few structured medium length codes with rate 0.5, no result has been reported in the literature for codes with relatively large block length and high rate.
Also, an upper bound of 18 on the stopping distance of C10 (Tanner (155, 64)) has been found in just 45 seconds. The obtained upper bound matches the exact value of smin reported in [22]. Among seven variable-regular LDPC codes reported in [22], the run-time for finding the stopping distance of only two structured small block length codes, including C10, has been reported. The stopping distance of C10 has been found in about 1 minute on a standard desktop computer [22].
Codes C11 and C12 are two variable-regular codes constructed by PEG algorithm [12] (available in [16]). It takes 10 and 35 minutes to find upper bounds of 19 and 37 on the stopping distance of C11 and C12, respectively. For the purpose of comparing the run-times, we note that, it took the algorithm of [10], about 25 hours to find the same upper bound for C11. This bound also matches the exact stopping distance reported in [22]. Also, to the best of our knowledge, the upper bound of 37 on the smin of C12 has not been reported in the literature so far.
Moreover, the exact stopping distance of C14, a high-rate structured code with block length 5219 has been found in just 913 seconds.
In [28], the authors constructed QC-LDPC codes that are cyclic liftings of fully-connected 3 × n protographs, and have the shortest block length for a given girth. Code C15 is the shortest cyclic lifting of the 3 × 6 fully-connected base graph with girth 10, reported in [28]. We find smin of this code to be 14 in 28 seconds. Code C16 is the Ramanujan (4896, 2448) code with g = 12. For this code, we find the exact value of smin to be 24, in about 12 minutes. For the purpose of comparing the run-times, we note that, it took the algorithm of [10], about 162 hours to find the same upper bound for C16.
Recently, QC-LDPC codes with girth 8, whose parity-check matrices have some symmetries, and are in many cases shorter than previously existing girth-8 QC-LDPC codes, were constructed
2Using code6.c with seed= 380 in [17].

32
in [29]. We tested the codes of [29], and observed that our proposed algorithm can find the exact smin, or obtain lower and upper bounds on smin, for many of them in a matter of seconds or minutes. For example, we have found the stopping distances of all 18 codes with dv = 3, g = 8, R ≤ 0.88 and n ≤ 4000 (Table I of [29]), each in less than or about one minute. The last code in that table is C13 in Table V.
While most of the variable-regular codes studied in the literature, see, e.g., [22], have dv = 3, the algorithms proposed here can find the exact stopping distance, or provide lower and upper bounds on stopping distance of variable-regular codes with dv > 3. As an example, we are able to provide lower bounds on, or obtain the exact value of, smin for all the variable-regular LDPC codes provided in Tables II and III of [29], in just a few minutes. These are codes with variable degrees 4 and 5, respectively, and with R ≤ 0.84 and n ≤ 14750. In many cases, also, we find upper bounds on smin for these codes. Four examples of the codes in Tables II and III of [29] are listed as the last entries of Table V.
Based on the value of stopping distance, block length, rate and degree distribution of the reported codes in the literature [22], [20], [11], [10], we believe finding the exact (or bounds on the) stopping distance of codes such as C3, C8, C9, C12, C14, C18 and C20 are out of the reach of their algorithms or the run-times will be significantly larger than ours.
We have used Algorithm 3 to provide an upper bound on the stopping distance of eight irregular codes listed in Table VI. Codes C21 − C26 have been adopted in standards, and Codes C27 and C28 are random codes constructed by the PEG algorithm. In [23], the exact stopping distance of all the IEEE 802.16e LDPC codes [33] was reported. Our upper bound search algorithm can also find the same stopping distance in each case, most of the time in just a few seconds (no run-time for obtaining these results was reported in [23]).
In this paper, we propose an efficient search algorithm to provide an exhaustive/non-exhaustive list of NETSs. The results obtained from this search algorithm along with the theoretical results in [9] support the assertion that in the harmful classes of TSs, there is no NETS (otherwise, they could potentially be harmful). For example, Table VII shows the list of TSs of Tanner (155,64) code [26] (dv = 3, g = 8) in the wide range of a ≤ 13 and b ≤ 4. The multiplicities of LETS, ETSL and NETS structures are also shown separately in the table. One can compare the number of LETS, ETSL and NETS in this code to see that in the classes believed to be most harmful (with relatively small a and b values), the only TSs are LETSs. Based on the value amax = 11 from Table II, the results of NETSs presented in Table VII for the classes with a ≤ 11 and

33

TABLE VI UPPER BOUNDS ON THE STOPPING DISTANCE OF SOME IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

Code Girth Rate Length C21 [34] 6 0.5 128 C22 [32] 6 0.83 648 C23 [33] 6 0.83 1824 C24 [33] 6 0.75 2304 C25 [33] 6 0.67 2304 C26 [32] 6 0.75 1944 C27 [12] 8 0.5 1008 C28 [12] 8 0.5 2048

Upper Bound bm′ ax 11(n) 8
118 sec. 7(n) 7
24 sec. 8(e) 7
203 sec. 12(e) 8
165 sec. 15(e) 7
184 sec. 12(e) 8
289 sec. 13(e) 10
21 min. 15(e) 10
20 min.

TABLE VII MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) TSS CONSISTING OF LETSS, ETSLS AND NETSS OF C10 WITHIN THE RANGE OF a ≤ 13 AND
b≤4

(a, b) class (4,4) (5,3) (6,4) (7,3) (8,2) (8,4) (9,3) (10,2) (10,4) (11,3) (12,2) (12,4) (13,3)

Total LETS 465 155 930 930 465 5115 1860 1395 29295 6200 930 180885 34875

Total ETSL
0 0 1860 0 0 9300 3720 0 48360 9300 0 134850 5580

C10 Total NETS
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5580 1860 0 47895 2790

Total TS 465 155 2790 930 465 14415 5580 1395 83235 17360 930 363630 43245

Total TS [30]
465 155 2790 930 465 14415 5580 1395 83235 17360 930 36280 43245

34
b ≤ 4 are exhaustive. For finding NETSs beyond this range, in Algorithm 1, the exhaustive list of ETSs within the range a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 5 has been used. In [30], authors used the branch&-bound approach to propose an exhaustive search algorithm for finding TSs. However, similar to the other branch-&-bound algorithms, this approach is only applicable to codes with short block lengths. The multiplicity of TSs in different classes found by our algorithm for Tanner (155,64) code is matched with the one reported in [30], except for the (12, 4) class. While our search algorithm has found 363630 TSs in the (12, 4) class, only 36280 TSs have been reported in [30].3 The run-time of the algorithm of [30] to find the exhaustive list of TSs is not reported. However, while it took the algorithm of [30] 59 minutes4 to find the TSs of a PEG code in the range of a ≤ 5 and b ≤ 5, our dpl search algorithm finds the same set of TSs in less than 20 seconds.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a hierarchical graph-based expansion approach to characterize non-elementary trapping sets (NETS) of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The proposed characterization is based on depth-one tree (dot) expansion technique. Each NETS structure S is characterized as a sequence of embedded NETS structures that starts from an ETS, and grows in each step by using a dot expansion, until it reaches S. The characterization allowed us to devise efficient search algorithms for finding all the instances of (a, b) NETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, in a guaranteed fashion. The exhaustive search of NETSs along with the theoretical results provided in [9] support the assertion that in the harmful classes of TSs, there is no NETS (otherwise, they could potentially be harmful). We also devised a low-complexity non-exhaustive search algorithm for finding NETSs within a much wider range compared to the range for the exhaustive search.
Moreover, in this paper, we derived tight lower and upper bounds on the stopping distance smin of LDPC codes. The bounds, which were established using a combination of analytical results and search techniques, are applicable to LDPC codes with a wide range of rates and block lengths. To derive the bounds, we partitioned the stopping sets into two categories of elementary and non-elementary. We noted that elementary stopping sets (ESSs) and non-elementary stopping
3We believe that the result reported in [30] should be a typographical error. 4This is the only run-time reported in [30]. The run-time is for a standard desktop computer with a 2.67-GHz processor.

35
sets (NESSs) are subset of leafless ETSs (LETSs) and NETSs, respectively. Using exhaustive LETS and NETS search algorithms, we searched the stopping sets of size less than L. If the search happened to find a stopping set, then the smallest size of such a stopping set was smin. Otherwise, if the search failed, then a lower bound of L ≤ smin was established on smin. For the upper bound, the LETS and NETS search algorithms were modified to increase the range of search for stopping sets with larger size at the expense of losing the exhaustiveness of the search. The proposed technique was applied to a large number of LDPC codes, and lower and upper bounds on smin, and in many cases the exact value of smin, were obtained in a matter of seconds or minutes. Many of such codes are out of the reach of the existing search-based algorithms that often have practical constraints on the block length, rate or the degree distribution of the codes that they can handle.
REFERENCES
[1] B. k. Butler, and P. H. Siegel, “ Bounds on the minimum distance of punctured quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 7, pp. 4584–4597, Jul. 2013.
[2] A. Dehghan and A. H. Banihashemi, “ On the Tanner graph cycle distribution of random LDPC, random protograph-based LDPC, and random quasi-cyclic LDPC code ensembles,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Jan. 2017, available online at: https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.02379
[3] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke,“Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes,” in IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[4] M. Esmaeili and M. J. Amoshahy, “On the stopping distance of array code parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 3488–3493, Aug. 2009.
[5] H. Falsafain and S.R. Mousavi, “Stopping set elimination by parity-check matrix extension via integer linear programming,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1533–1540, May. 2015.
[6] Y. Hashemi and A. Banihashemi, “On characterization and efficient exhaustive search of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 19, pp. 323–326, Mar. 2015.
[7] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713–6736, Dec. 2016.
[8] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for elementary trapping sets of irregular LDPC codes,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Oct. 2016, available online at: http://arxiv.org/abs/1611.10014
[9] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Lower bounds on the size of smallest elementary and non-elementary trapping sets in variable-regular LDPC codes,” to appear in IEEE Comm. Lett., May 2017.
[10] M. Hirotomo, M. Mohri, and M. Morii, “ On the probabilistic computation algorithm for the minimum-size stopping sets of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. on Inf. Theory (ISIT), Toronto, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 295–299.
[11] X. Y. Hu, and E. Eleftheriou, “ A probabilistic subspace approach to the minimal stopping set problem,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006, pp. 295–299.

36
[12] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[13] K. M. Krishnan and P. Shankar, “Computing the stopping distance of a Tanner graph is NP-hard,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 2278–2280, Jun. 2007.
[14] G. B. Kyung and C.-C. Wang, “Finding the exhaustive list of small fully absorbing sets and designing the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1487–1498, Jun. 2012.
[15] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5188–5203, Sep. 2014.
[16] D. Mackay, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes,” URL: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html. [17] [Online] Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/. [18] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “ Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in Proc. Int.
Symp. on Inf. Theory (ISIT), Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002, pp. 2. [19] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41th annual Allerton conf. on commun. control and computing,
Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435. [20] G. Richter, “Finding small stopping sets in the Tanner graphs of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41th Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes,
Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006, pp. 1–5. [21] J. Rosenthal, and P.O. Vontobel “Construction of LDPC codes based on Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in
Proc. 38th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2000, pp. 248–257. [22] E. Rosnes and O. Ytrehus, “An efficient algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices,”
IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4167–4178, Sep. 2009. [23] E. Rosnes, O. Ytrehus, M. A. Ambroze, and M. Tomlinson, “Addendum to “An efficient algorithm to find all small-size
stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices”,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 164–171, Jan. 2012. [24] E. Rosnes, M. A. Ambroze, and M. Tomlinson, “On the minimum/stopping distance of array low-density parity-check
codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5204–5214, Sep. 2014. [25] J. Stern, “ A method for finding codewords of small weight,” in Coding Theory and Applications, G. Cohen and J.
Wolfmann, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1989, pp.106–113. [26] R. M. Tanner, T. D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun.
Theory Appl., Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001, pp. 365–370. [27] R. M. Tanner, T. D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. Fuja, and D. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on
circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004. [28] A. Tasdighi, and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient search of girth-optimal QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62,
no. 4, pp. 1552–1564, Apr. 2016. [29] A. Tasdighi, and A. H. Banihashemi, “Symmetrical constructions for regular girth-8 QC-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans.
Commun., vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 14–22, Jan. 2017. [30] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient algorithms to find all small error-prone substructures in LDPC codes,” in Proc.
Global Telecommun. Conf., Houston, TX, USA, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6. [31] C.-C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all small error-prone substructures in LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1976–1999, May 2009. [32] IEEE standard for information technology local and metropolitan area networks specific requirements part 11: wireless
LAN medium access control (MAC) and physical layer (PHY) specifications amendment 5: enhancements for higher throughput, IEEE Std. 802.11n-2009, Oct. 29, 2009.

37
[33] IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks Part 16: air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems amendment 2: physical and medium access control layers for combined fixed and mobile operation in licensed bands and corrigendum 1, IEEE Std. 802.16e-2005 and 802.16-2004/Cor 1-2005, Feb. 28, 2006.
[34] TM Synchronization and Channel Coding. Reston, VA, Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems, Recommended Standard 131.0-B-2, Aug. 2011 [Online]. Available: http://public.ccsds.org/publications/archive/131x0b2ec1.pdf

