2024 Asia Communications and Photonics Conference (ACP) and International Conference on Information Photonics and Optical Communications (IPOC) | 979-8-3503-7926-6/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ACP/IPOC63121.2024.10809952

Designing Polar Code and LDPC Code for Reduction of Decoder Complexity

Zhiyuan Song Graduate School of Engineering,
Osaka University Osaka, Japan
songzhiyuan@opt.comm.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp

Koji Igarashi Graduate school of Engineering Science
Osaka University Osaka, Japan
iga.koji.es@osaka-u.ac.jp

Abstract—We show a method for designing polar code and LDPC code to reduce the SD-FEC decoder complexity. The proposed method determines the appropriate LDPC code for polar encoder and estimates the BER performance.
Keywords—forward error correction, power consumption
I. INTRODUCTION
Forward error correction (FEC) technique is essential for recovering bit error ratio (BER) performance in optical coherent transmission systems. Recently, low density parity check (LDPC) codes have been practically introduced as softdecision (SC) FEC [1]. Although SD-FEC decoders require high computational complexity to process the soft information, the iterative decoding is effective in the real-time implementation. The power consumption of the iterative decoding is increased in proportion to the signal bit rate [2]. It is indispensable to reduce the power consumption in the SDFEC decoders for feature ultra-high-bitrate optical transmission systems with higher-order quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM).
To reduce complexity of SD-FEC decoders, an offloading method using coded modulation and multistage decoding is effective [3-7]. Using coded modulation, the more reliable bitchannel and the less reliable bit-channel are polarized. The SD-FEC protects only the less-reliable bit-channel. The morereliable bit-channel is not processed by SD-FEC, but is offloaded to a low-complex multistage decoder whose error correction capability is enhanced using the SD-FEC-decoded bits. Although the bit errors after the multistage decoder remain, they are perfectly corrected by an outer hard-decision (HD) FEC, which is usually introduced in optical communications. The offloading method decreases the number of the bits processed in the SD-FEC decoder, reducing the decoder complexity. There have been reports on the offloading methods using multilevel coding based on set partitioning of the QAM constellation [3-5], and using bitinterleaved coded modulation (BICM) with bit-wise XOR operation [6]. Recently, the authors proposed a BICM method with a polar coding, and demonstrated to both reduce the complexity by half and suppress the BER performance degradation by less than 0.6 dB with high tunability on the FEC overhead [7].
In the offloading method, it is required to decide the SDFEC appropriate for the coded modulation and the multistage decoder. In the receiver, the decoded bits from the SD-FEC decoder and those from the multistage decoder are launched into the outer HD-FEC decoder. To maximize the performance of the offloading method, it is essential to suppress the mismatch between the output BERs of two decoders for pre-FEC BER of HD-FEC. However, there has never been reports on designing the SD-FEC decoder and multistage decoder in the offloading method.
In this work, we show a method for designing polar code and LDPC code to reduce computational complexity of SDFEC decoders. The proposed designing method enables to

determine the appropriate LDPC code as well as we can estimate the performance of the offloading method such as required signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and total FEC overhead without Monte Carlo simulation.
II. POLAR CODE FOR OFFLOADING METHOD Figure 1 shows schematic configuration of the offloading method using the polar coding to reduce complexity of the LDPC decoder. In a transmitter, a polar encoder induces the channel polarization where the less reliable and the more reliable bit-channels are polarized [8]. Only the less reliable bit-channel is encoded by an LDPC encoder, whereas the more reliable bit-channel is offloaded. In a receiver, powerful error correction is performed for the less reliable bit-channel using an LDPC decoder. The more reliable bit-channel is error-corrected by a successive cancellation (SC) decoder, in which the LDPC-decoded bit is used as a frozen bit, improving the error correction capability. Figure 2(a) illustrates the BERs without any decoder. The polar encoder degrades BER of the less reliable bit-channel, indicated as u1 in Fig. 1. On the other hand, the BER of the more reliable bit-channel (u2, u3, u4) is maintained. Figure 2(b) shows the BERs after the LDPC decoder and the SC decoder. By the powerful LDPC decoder, the worse BER of the less reliable bit-channel is drastically improved. Using the LDPCdecoded bit as a frozen bit in the SC decoder, the BER of the
Fig. 1 Configuration of offloading method using polar coding.
Fig. 2 BER characteristics (a) without and (b) with decoders.

XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:13:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

more reliable bit-channel is improved. Although the errors after the SC decoder remain, they are perfectly corrected by the outer HD-FEC decoder.
To maximize performance of the offloading method, it is required to design the polar code and LDPC code. The cross points between the output BER of the LDPC decoder and the pre-FEC BER threshold of HD-FEC is indicated by the blue circle in Fig. 2(b), and that of the output BER of the SC decoder is indicated by the red circle. The cross point of the SC decoder (the red circle) is required to be in the lower SNR region than that of the LDPC decoder (the blue circle). In addition, it is preferable that the blue circle is not too far from the red circle. To meet the requirements, we need to design an LDPC code appropriate for the used polar code.
We propose a procedure to design polar code and LDPC code for the offloading method. First, a polar encoder structure is defined. Second, we calculate the relationship between input and output BERs in the SC decoder. As the results, we obtain the input BER (BERreq) required to achieve the output BER lower than the BER threshold of HD-FEC. Third, the BER dependence on SNR without any decoder is calculated. The SNR (SNRreq) required to achieve BERreq of the SC decoder is found. Finally, we find an appropriate LDPC code to achieve the water-fall characteristics by approximately SNRreq. Therefore, we can estimate not only the required SNR but also the appropriate LDPC code for the specified polar encoder, determining the FEC overhead.
III. NUMERICAL DESIGN OF POLAR CODE AND LDPC CODE FOR OFFLOADING METHOD
The simulation model is shown in Fig. 3. It is assumed that the input bits are encoded by an outer HD-FEC whose overhead and threshold for the pre-FEC BER are 6.25% and 4.5 × 10-3, respectively [9]. They are divided into two streams. One is encoded by an encoder for DVB-S2 LDPC, while the other is offloaded. The offloaded bits and the LDPC-encoded bits are encoded by a polar encoder with the input bit size of five. The inset of Fig. 3 shows the structure of the polar encoder, which is constructed by nesting the typical polar encoders with input bit sizes of two and four [7]. The first and second bits are assigned to the LDPC-encoded bits, while the

third, fourth, and fifth bits are assigned to the offloaded bits. After the polar-encoded bits are mapped into Gray-coded 64QAM symbols, the 64QAM symbols are converted linearly into the optical domain.
After the optical 64QAM symbols suffer from complexvalue additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with a specified SNR, they are received based on optical coherent reception. The laser phase noise is neglected in the simulation. In the receiver, the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values of the received bits are calculated by SD QAM demapping. The LLRs of the LDPC-encoded bits are recovered by a SD operation to inverse the polar encoding, they are decoded by an LDPC decoder. Using the LDPC-decoded bits as the frozen bits, an SC decoder is performed for the offloaded bits. Finally, the BER is calculated by HD of all the decoded LLRs. Computational complexity is calculated based on the number of multiplexers used in all decoders [7].
First, we calculated the relationship between input and output BERs in the SC decoder when the BERs of the LDPCdecoded bits used as the frozen bits, BERfr, are 0, 1.1 × 10-3, and 4.5 × 10-3. The numerical results are plotted by the red circles in Fig. 4(a). The performance of the SC decoder is maintained as long as BERfr is less than 4.5 × 10-3. In the same figure, the pre-FEC BER threshold of HD-FEC is indicated by the dashed line. To achieve the output BER lower than the HD-FEC threshold, the input BER is required to be smaller than 3 × 10-2. Therefore, we obtained BERreq = 3 × 10-2.
Second, we calculated the BER without any decoder, as indicated in Fig.4(b). The red circles indicate the BER of the more reliable bit-channel, and the blue circles indicate that of the less reliable bit-channel. The SC decoder is performed for the more reliable bit-channel, and the SNR (SNRreq) of approximately 17 dB is required to achieve BERreq of 3 × 10-2 at the SC decoder input.
Finally, we optimize an LDPC code. Figure 4(c) shows the BER characteristics of the LDPC codes with different overhead (OH). It is found that the LDPC codes with overhead values of 50% and 67% are suitable to achieve the waterfall characteristics at approximately SNRreq of 17 dB.
In order to confirm validity of the proposed method, we calculated BER performance of the polar code and LDPC code using Monte Carlo simulation. Figure 5 shows the

Fig. 3 Simulation model for performance evaluation of the proposed method. Inset: structure of nested polar encoder.

Fig. 4 The relationship (a) between BERs before and after SC decoder, (b) between SNR and BER without any decoder, and (c) between BERs before and after LDPC decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:13:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 5 Calculated BERs after all decoders.
Fig. 6 Calculated BER performance with polar coding and conventional method using only LDPC codes.
calculated results using LDPC codes with overhead values of 25%, 33%, 50%, 67%, and 100%. Using the LDPC codes with 50% and 67% overhead values, the cross point between the waterfalling owing to the LDPC decoder and the error tailing due to the SC decoder becomes close to the pre-FEC BER threshold of HD-FEC, maximizing the performance. It is also observed that the required SNR values stay on approximately 17 dB. Using the designing method, the appropriate LDPC codes and the required SNR are possible to expect. The computational complexity of the LDPC decoder with 67% overhead and SC decoder is suppressed by less than half,

compared with the conventional method using only LDPC code.
Finally, we evaluated BER performance of polar encoders with input bit sizes of two, four, five and seven when the appropriate LDPC codes are used [7]. The numerical results are shown in Fig. 6. For comparison, the results of the conventional method using only LDPC codes are indicated by the open circles. The numbers in the figure indicate the total FEC overhead values. The fine tunability of total FEC overhead is achievable using different polar encoder with different sizes. For all cases, computational complexity is suppressed by less than half, compared with the conventional method using only LDPC code.
IV. SUMMARY
We proposed the method for designing polar code and LDPC code for the offloading method to reduce the decoder complexity. The proposed designing method enables both to decide the appropriate LDPC code for polar encoder and to estimate the required SNR values.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors express their gratitude to Professor K. Inoue of Osaka University and Dr. Y. Koganei of Fujitsu Ltd..
REFERENCES
[1] E. Yamazaki et al., Opt. Express, 19, 13179 (2011). [2] T. Kupfer et al., OFC2017, Th3G.2 (2017). [3] U. Wachsmann et al., IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 45, 1361 (1999). [4] A. Bisplinghoff et al., J. Lightw. Technol., 35, 1006 (2017). [5] Y. Koganei et al., J. Lightw. Technol., 37, 486 (2019). [6] T. Kakizaki et al., ECOC2021, Th1G.3 (2021). [7] Z. Song et al., Opt. Express, 32, 18139 (2024). [8] E. Arikan, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 55, 3051 (2009). [9] L. M. Zhang and F. R. Kschischang, J. Lightw. Technol., 32. 1999,
(2014).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:13:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

