2024 IEEE 3rd INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON PROBLEMS OF INFORMATICS, ELECTRONICS AND RADIO ENGINEERING (PIERE)
Application of LDPC Codes in Digital Communication Systems for Robotic Systems

2024 IEEE 3rd International Conference on Problems of Informatics, Electronics and Radio Engineering (PIERE) | 979-8-3315-1632-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/PIERE62470.2024.10804986

Karen Grigoryan Institute of Computer Technologies and
Information Security, Southern Federal University, Taganrog, Rostov oblast, Russian
Federation kgr@sfedu.ru

Elena S. Basan Institute of Computer Technologies and
Information Security, Southern Federal University, Taganrog, Rostov oblast, Russian
Federation ebasan@sfedu.ru

Ivan Polovko Institute of Computer Technologies and
Information Security, Southern Federal University, Taganrog, Rostov oblast, Russian
Federation iypolovko@sfedu.ru

Abstract— The purpose of this article is to analyze the possibility of using low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes to create an information exchange system for robotic systems. The article discusses using of the Richardson-Urbanke coding method with the basic matrix of the 802.11n standard. Also, methods for decoding LDPC codes are considered. The article discusses the MinSum method, as well as a method for improving decoding results called MinSum Normalized. Research was conducted using modeling in the Python programming language to estimate the bit error rate (BER) indicator with different normalization coefficients to obtain a coefficient at which the bit error rate ratio will be minimal. Also, comparisons of the complexity of the MinSum and MinSum Normalized algorithms were presented. Normalized algorithm in particular can significantly reduce the number of errors when transmitting data over a noisy communication channel. The results obtained will be used to develop an information exchange system for robotic systems. The obtained results are planned to be used in the design of a receiving and transmitting device for information exchange in robotic systems.
Keywords—interference-resistant coding, LDPC, wireless, telecommunication, robotic systems
I. INTRODUCTION
Robotic systems are increasingly integrated into various areas of human activity, demonstrating significant potential for automating tasks and optimizing production processes. Ensuring communication channel stability is a key problem that requires a solution to improve robotic systems reliability. For example: the paper [1] discusses the technical aspects of reliable communication organizing in radio access systems for marine robotic systems. The paper [2] considers methods for noise-resistant data transmission organizing in multiagent robotic systems using communication channel encryption. Authors in their paper [3] analyze the general principles of data exchange forming for managing a promising family of medical robotic systems. LDPC (lowdensity parity-check code) are increasingly used in many digital communication systems, such as 802.11n, LTE (longterm evolution) and other standards as error-checking codes (ECC) to detect and correct errors that occur during data transmission over a noisy channel. In addition to LDPC, there are other coding methods. Turbo codes are a serious competitor. Authors [4] conducted a study of LDPC, turbo

codes and Solomon-Reed codes. As a result, it was concluded that LDPC codes have significant advantages that can be used when constructing a communication system in robotic systems:
• Advantage in the encoding and decoding speed. These codes use sparse parity check matrices, which has a positive effect on the performance of the decoder. Another important fact is that the LDPC code designs are cyclic or quasi-cyclic.
• LDPC codes show better characteristics in communication channels with a relatively low SNR (signal-to-noise ratio). The use of iterative decoding methods for LDPC allows to get close to the throughput of a channel with additive white Gaussian noise.
It should be noted that LDPC codes allow to increase fault tolerance to ambient noise and possible negative factors that affect the channel. Thus, LDPC is a good tool for use in mobile networks and SDR systems, where the quality of communication may vary [5][6].
The tasks of data transmission in conditions when there are many nodes in the network are very relevant. Often, problems associated with poor quality of data transmission can arise and be related not only in the case of an attack or noise, but also when many neighboring devices are nearby and transmitting data. In this regard, when using large groups of mobile robots, in such applications as a factory or warehouse, the task of transmitting data reliably and noiseresistant is relevant. If we are talking about open space, then there may not be other networks there, but the open air space itself can reduce the quality of communication.
The flexibility of LDPC codes allows dynamic changes in coding parameters to support communication in different conditions, which is critical for mobile robot networks [7].
This paper discusses various methods of encoding and decoding information using LDPC codes. The obtained results are planned to be used in the design of a receiving and transmitting device for information exchange in robotic systems.

979-8-3315-1632-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

20

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2024 IEEE 3rd INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON PROBLEMS OF INFORMATICS, ELECTRONICS AND RADIO ENGINEERING (PIERE)

II. RECEIVER ARCHITECTURE
Figure 1 shows the structural setup diagram for data reception. In this diagram, the initial element is the SDR (software-defined radio) receiver. This element performs the functions of quantization and selection of the in-phase and quadrature components of the signal. The signal from the SDR receiver enters the LLR calculator, which returns soft modulation values with which the LDPC decoder can work. The decoder returns a set of decoded bits.

SDR receiver

IQ Detector

Quantizer

LLR Calculator

LDPC decoder

Fig. 1. Structural diagram of the receiver.
III. INFORMATION ENCODING
A. Encrypted message verification
The feature of LDPC codes is that the parity check matrix must be sparse, i.e. there must be significantly more zeros than ones in it [5]. To encode the information message, a matrix H is used, with dimensions m x n, where m is the size of the data being transmitted, and n is the length of the encoded message together with the check bits. Generating matrix G must be obtained from the matrix H. To do this, it is necessary to transform the matrix H into the form presented in formula 1:

Fig. 2. Base matrix from the 802.11n standard.
Obtaining the matrix H is reduced to a cyclic shift of the identity matrix by n elements to the right, where n is the value of the cell. Table 1 shows the matrix size for code 1/2 and H 324 by 648 is 27x27. The marked empty cells in the matrix from Figure 2 denote a change of the zero matrix within the same dimension. The dimension of the identity matrix should be 81x81 for the coding rate of 5/6 and H and a size of 1620 by 1944, and the last 4 rows of the base matrix are used to obtain the matrix H.
TABLE I. LDPC CODES CHARACTERISTICS OF THE 802.11N STANDARD

H = [P I ],

(1)

where I is the identity matrix and P is the parity part. The generating matrix G is calculated using formula 2:

G = [I PT ],

(2)

To encode a vector with information bits s, it is necessary to multiply this vector by the matrix G. To check the received message x for errors, it is necessary to multiply the vector of received bits x by the matrix H. If there are no errors, the result should be a zero vector (formula 3):

HxT = 0.

(3)

B. Richardson-Urbanke method
The above-described parity check method may be computationally complex for large matrices. The parity check matrix may lose sparsity property during the transformations. The Richardson-Urbanke method (hereinafter called as RU) is an efficient coding method. The LDPC encoder can be designed using a matrix that is close to the lower triangular matrix. Therefore, to obtain the matrix H, it is convenient to use the basic matrix from the 802.11n standard, which is shown in Fig. 2 [6]. In the future, it is proposed to use the 802.11n standard to perform coding using the RU method.

The preparatory stage of the RU method involves dividing the matrix into components A, B, T, C, D, E. T is a lower triangular matrix, which has dimensions (m-g) by (mg), where g is the height of the matrix E. The dimensions of the remaining submatrices are reflected in Fig. 3 [7].

Fig. 3. Representation of the matrix H.

The matrix H for the 324 by 648 code was obtained and is shown in Fig. 4. LDPC code is a code that includes linear blocks. This code is characterized by a sparse parity check

21
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2024 IEEE 3rd INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON PROBLEMS OF INFORMATICS, ELECTRONICS AND RADIO ENGINEERING (PIERE)

matrix ( × ), where is the number of rows needed for parity checking; is the length of the code itself, which is the number of columns in the matrix; is the length of the original data to be encoded. The code is called regular in the situation when the number of elements not equal to zero in
each row < , and at the same time c < the number of elements not equal to zero in each column, in another
situation the code is called irregular.

Initialize message from bit to check nodes
Get messages from check to bit nodes
Evaluate total LLR
Transform LLR to updated code

Yes Error check was successful

No

Fig. 4. Matrix H for code 1/2 324 x 648.

Allowed count of iteration was

Yes

exceeded?

It is further proposed to use Gaussian elimination to

optimize further calculations [8]. The result is presented in

formula 4:

No

 I 0 A B T   A

B

T

−ET −1 I  C D E  = −ET −1 A + C −ET −1B + D −ET −1T + E  .

(4)

Generate a new messages from bit to check nodes

End of algorhitm

IV. INFORMATION DECODING
A. Sum Product algorithm
A common method for LDPC decoding is Sum Product or SPA. First, in order to start the encoder, the so-called soft demodulation values are obtained, and it is also necessary to calculate the logarithmic likelihood ratio (LLR), which is determined by formula 5 [4]:

Fig. 5. Block diagram of the general iterative decoding algorithm.

The first step of the algorithm is the formation of messages from the bit to the check nodes (except for the first iteration, for which only the initialization of the matrix M is used):

 M j,i = L(vi )+, E . j '∈Mi, j '≠i j ',i

(7)

L(vi

)

=

log

  

Pr(vi Pr(vi

= =

0 1

| |

yi ) yi )

  

.

(5)

If we are talking about a channel with the property of antipodicity in which additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) is present., the LLR values can be calculated using the formula 6:

L(vi )

=

2 yi σ2

,

(6)

where M j,i is the packet that comes from the i -th bit element to the j ' -th element, which is considered the element to be tested; Ej',i. is the data that comes from the j ' -th test element to the -th bit element; i is the set of tests in which the i -th symbol participates; j ' is the set of symbols that participate in the j ' -th test.
The next step is to receive messages from the check to the bit nodes:

where: yi - received symbol, σ 2 - noise dispersion.
The common iterative decoding algorithm block diagram presented on Fig. 5. Solar Position Algorithm (SPA) algorithm Description throw formulas will be presented



∏  1 +



E j,i = log 


∏ 

1

−

i '∈M j ,i≠i i '∈M j,i≠i

 tanh 
 tanh 

M i '∈M j ,i≠i 2
M i '∈M j,i≠i 2

   

   .  

(8)

below.

where j is the number of a particular row,

i is the number of a particular column,

22
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2024 IEEE 3rd INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON PROBLEMS OF INFORMATICS, ELECTRONICS AND RADIO ENGINEERING (PIERE)

M_{j} is the set of non-zero values in the j-th row, and the expression i ≠ i means that we exclude the i-th variable node from consideration.
Next, the total cumulative LLR is calculated:

 L(Pi ) = L(vi ) + E . j∈Ai j,i

(9)

The final stage is obtaining new values of the code word from previously calculated L(Pi ) :

c j,i

=

1, 

L(

Pi

)

≤

0,

0, L(Pi ) > 0.

(10)

The decoding process is considered complete when the product of the calculated vector of encoded messages modulo 2 by the matrix H yields a zero vector or when the number of permissible iterations has been exhausted.
B. Minsum algorithm
By replacing the method of calculating messages that come from the check nodes with bit tosses according to expression (11), the following is achieved by replacing the SPA method with the Minsum algorithm:

Fig. 6. Dependence of the bit error rate (BER) on the normalization coefficient α at SNR = 1 dB.

∏ E j,i ≈ ( i'∈M j,i'≠i sign(M j,i' )) ⋅ mini'∈M j,i'≠i (| M j,i' |).

(11)

The Minsum algorithm is a simplified version of the SPA method, in which the step of calculating E j,i is approximated
to multiplying the elements and finding the minimum based on . M j,i

The Minsum algorithm loses to SPA in terms of energy gain of coding by 0.2 - 0.5 dB [10]. One of the ways to improve the BER indicator is the Minsum normalized algorithm. In this algorithm, the coefficient α is added. As a result, formula 12 was obtained:

∏ E j,i ≈ α ( i'∈M j,i'≠i sign(M j,i' )) ⋅ mini'∈M j,i'≠i (| M j,i' |).

(12)

where M j,i' minimum of number of elements, the value of " varies, as a rule, within the range (0, 1].

Fig. 7. Bit error rate (BER) for normalization factor =1 and "=0.9.
For Minsum Normalized, the minimum bit error probability is 0.019 with a normalization factor of 0.9.
Table 2 presents the calculations for calculating the number of operations for one iteration for Minsum and Minsum Normalized. For the matrix H (1620 x 1944) the weight of each column: dc =4, and the weight of each row: dr =8, the results are shown in Table 3.

V. RESULTS
Based on the block diagram in Figure 5 and formula 12, the minSum decoding algorithm with a normalization coefficient was implemented.
The simulation was performed in Python programming language using Numpy library in order to find normalization coefficient and apply it in the above-described improving BER indicators of Minsum algorithm method. The decoder simulation was performed together with simulation of encoder by RU method with code rate of 5/6 and H 1620x1944. Phase manipulation binary phase shift key (BPSK) was used as modulation. Additive white Gaussian noise was used as noise. The BER value was obtained at signal-to-noise ratio equal to 1 dB. The maximum number of iterations was taken equal to 5. The results are shown in Fig. 6. The values of Bit Error Probability at α =1 and α =0.9 were also obtained, which are shown in Fig. 7 as a graph.

TABLE II. NUMBER OF COMPUTATIONAL OPERATIONS FOR ONE ITERATION OF DECODING MINSUM AND MINSUM NORMALIZED

Operations

Additions

Multiplications

Comparisons

Taking

the

modulus

Modulo

2

additions

Operations count

Minsum

Minsum Normalized

Ndc2 Ndr (dr −1) Ndr (dr − 2) + N Ndr (dr −1)

Ndc2 Ndr (dr −1) + Mdr Ndr (dr − 2) + N
Ndr (dr −1)

Ndr

Ndr

TABLE III. CALCULATED NUMBER OF COMPUTATIONAL OPERATIONS TO PERFORM ONE ITERATION OF DECODING MINSUM AND MINSUM NORMALIZED

Operations

Operations count

Minsum

Minsum Normalized

23
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2024 IEEE 3rd INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON PROBLEMS OF INFORMATICS, ELECTRONICS AND RADIO ENGINEERING (PIERE)

Operations Additions

Multiplications

Comparisons

Taking the

modulus

Modulo

2

additions

Total count

Operations count

31104

31104

90720

103680

79704

79704

90720

90720

12960

12960

305208

318168

VI. CONCLUSION
The article considered the methods of encoding and decoding information based on LDPC codes. The encoding method based on the RU method using the H matrix generation algorithm based on the base matrix from the 802.11n standard was considered. The Minsum and Minsum normalized decoding algorithms were considered. As a result, the normalization value for improving BER was obtained at H 1620 x 1944. The complexity of the Minsum and Minsum Normalized algorithms was estimated. As a result of comparing the algorithms by the number of operations, it can be concluded that the Minsum Normalized decoding algorithm can improve the BER indicator with a relatively small increase in computational complexity. Based on the data obtained during the simulation, it was revealed that coding using LDPC, and in particular the use of the Minsum Normalized algorithm, allows for a significant reduction in the number of errors when transmitting data over a noisy communication channel.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The research was supported by the Grants Council of the President of the Russian Federation. Scholarship of the President of the Russian Federation for young academic and graduate students (Competition SP-2022) No. SP858.2022.5 for sections 1-3. The research was supported by the Scientific and Educational Center of the South of Russia, the topic of the project “UAS platform for a smart agro-

industrial complex (AIC) with a high degree of fault tolerance” for sections 4,5.
REFERENCES
[1] S. M. Sirazhdinov, "Organization of high-quality and secure data transmission in communication and radio access systems of marine robotic complexes," Voprosy Bezopasnosti, vol. 1, pp. 32-39, 2023.
[2] D. V. Samoylenko and O. A. Fin'ko, "Noise-resistant data transmission in radio channels of robotic complexes based on polynomial residue classes," Naukoyemkie Tekhnologii v Kosmicheskikh Issledovaniyakh Zemli, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 49-55, 2016.
[3] A. A. Zhigalov, A. Drogovoz, and V. V. Matveev, "Formation of communication and data transmission systems for controlling a promising family of military medical robotic complexes," Voennaya Mysl', vol. 3, pp. 33-43, 2019.
[4] N. V. Astakhov, A. V. Bashkirov, A. S. Kostyukov, M. V. Khoroshailova, and O. N. Chirkov, "Verification of LDPC codes," Vestnik Voronezhskogo Gosudarstvennogo Tekhnicheskogo Universiteta, pp. 73-77, 2017.
[5] R. G. Gallager, "Low density parity check codes," Sc.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA, USA, Sep. 1960.R. Nicole, “Title of paper with only first word capitalized,” J. Name Stand. Abbrev., in press.
[6] A.N. Krenke and V.G. Khodakov, “On the relationship between melt M. Mankar, G. M. Asutkar, and P. Dakhole, "Reduced complexity quasi-cyclic LDPC encoder for IEEE 802.11n," International Journal of VLSI Design and Communication Systems, vol. 7, no. 5/6, pp. 3347, Dec. 2016.
[7] A.N. Krenke and V.G. Khodakov, “On the relationship between melt M. Mankar, G. M. Asutkar, and P. Dakhole, "Reduced complexity quasi-cyclic LDPC encoder for IEEE 802.11n," International Journal of VLSI Design and Communication Systems, vol. 7, no. 5/6, pp. 3347, Dec. 2016.
[8] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, "Efficient encoding of lowdensity parity-check codes," IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638-656, Feb. 2001.
[9] A. V. Bashkirov, M. V. Khoroshailova, and V. I. Borisov, "Implementations of low-complexity LDPC decoders using the minsum algorithm," Vestnik Voronezhskogo Gosudarstvennogo Tekhnicheskogo Universiteta, pp. 82-86, 2016.
[10] V. Sh. Le, "Optimization of the min-sum decoding algorithm for lowdensity parity-check codes," Proceedings of MIPT, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 16-33, 2021.

24
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:09:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

