Enhancing Proximal Decoding for LDPC Codes
through Deep Unfolding
Asahi Ito
Nagoya Institute of Technology
a.ito.625@nitech.jp
Lantian Wei
Nagoya Institute of Technology
wei.lantian@nitech.ac.jp
Tadashi Wadayama
Nagoya Institute of Technology
wadayama@nitech.ac.jp
Abstract—This paper introduces a deep unfolding-assisted
proximal decoding for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.
Proximal decoding method is a decoding algorithm based on
the proximal gradient method. Our proposal, deep unfolding-
assisted proximal (DU-Proximal) decoding, is obtained by ap-
plying deep unfolding to the proximal decoding. We especially
focus on the decoding performance in multiple-input multiple-
output (MIMO) channels. In numerical experiments, we compare
the error correcting capability of the proposed algorithm with
the minimum mean squared error (MMSE) signal detection
method, the tanh signal detection method, and the MMSE jointly
with belief propagation (BP) algorithm for LDPC decoding. The
experimental results demonstrate that parameter optimization
via DU yields significant performance gains, especially at high
signal-to-noise ratio levels.
I. INTRODUCTION
The need for wireless communication continues to grow,
making it necessary to move towards the fifth-generation
(5G) mobile communication system. Concurrently, with the
escalating requirements for wireless communication, there
emerges an urgent need for formulating networks that surpass
the reliability and capacity of 5G infrastructures. In response
to these evolving needs, research and development initiatives
targeting the eventual realization of the sixth-generation (6G)
mobile communication system by approximately 2030 are
actively progressing [1].
To construct large-capacity networks, it is essential to utilize
communication transmission technologies that improve fre-
quency efficiency. An example of such technology is multiple-
input multiple-output (MIMO) transmission technology [2].
In MIMO transmission, there are multiple antennas on the
sender and receiver. Owing to the spatial multiplexing, MIMO
transmission has high spectrum efficiency and communication
capacity. Recently, research on massive MIMO channels has
been drawing strong attention [3].
To ensure high reliability in noisy environments, powerful
error-correcting codes capable of repairing corrupted signals
are essential. An example of such codes is low-density parity-
check (LDPC) codes [4]. LDPC codes have error-correcting
capabilities that approach the theoretical limit established by
Shannon. Currently, they are employed in various fields of
communication systems.
Among the decoding methods for LDPC codes, the belief
propagation (BP) algorithm and the bit-flipping decoding
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI Grant Number JP22H00514.
method are well-known [5]. The BP method is a decoding
approach based on probabilistic inference, which efficiently
calculates the marginal posterior probabilities of the trans-
mitted signals from received words by representing the com-
munication channel as a graph. Meanwhile, the bit-flipping
decoding method formulates the decoding problem as an opti-
mization problem and employs an iterative algorithm aimed at
minimizing a nonlinear objective function to perform the de-
coding. Recent researches on LDPC code decoding continues
to be conducted. Proximal decoding method was proposed for
detection and decoding in massive MIMO channels [5].
Proximal decoding is a decoding algorithm based on the
mathematical optimization technique known as the proximal
gradient method. It has been reported that the proximal decod-
ing method exhibits superior decoding performance in LDPC-
coded MIMO channels [5]. The proximal decoding method de-
codes LDPC codes by alternating between a gradient descent
step and a code-proximal step. Each kind of step has its own
adjustable step size. In study [5], the decoding performance
of the proximal decoding strongly depends on the step size
which needs to be adjusted manually.
Deep unfolding (DU) has recently attracted substantial
attention in many studies [6] [7]. DU is a deep learning-
based method that unfolds the steps of iterative algorithms
in the time direction. Then each iteration could be regarded as
a distinct layer of a neural network. This approach enables
the application of deep learning methods to optimize the
internal parameters of the algorithm, thereby enhancing its
performance. Specifically, it has been demonstrated that this
approach is highly effective when used together with iterative
mathematical optimization techniques. For example, there is
evidence that the convergence of the projected gradient descent
method can be significantly enhanced by treating the step
size as a trainable parameter [8]. This finding underscores the
practical value of deep learning in optimizing mathematical
processes. The exploration of DU in the context of proximal
decoding remains an unexplored area, despite the intuitive
appeal of using DU to refine and enhance the performance
of proximal decoding algorithms.
This paper assesses the application of DU to proximal
decoding. We first explain the existing proximal decoding, then
introduce the DU-Proximal decoding approach. Numerical
experiments evaluate the error correction and convergence per-
formance of the proposed method and confirm the performance
ISITA2024, Taipei, Taiwan, November 10-13, 2024
Copyright (C) 2024 by IEICE
227
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:11:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
N Transit 
antennas
M Received 
antennas
⋮
⋮
⋮
⋮
"𝑥!
"𝑥"
"𝑥#
"𝑎!!
"𝑎$!
"𝑎%#
"𝑎$#
%𝑤!
%𝑤%
%𝑤$
"𝑦!
"𝑦%
"𝑦$
⊕
⊕
⊕
Fig. 1: MIMO communication system model assumed in this
study
gain from DU.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. MIMO Communication Systems
Figure 1 shows the MIMO communication system assumed
in this paper. There are 𝑁and 𝑀antennas at a transmitter
and a receiver, respectively. The received signal vector ˜𝒚=
[ ˜𝑦1, ˜𝑦2, . . . , ˜𝑦𝑀]T ∈C𝑀×1 is expressed as
˜𝒚= ˜𝑨˜𝒙+ ˜𝒘,
(1)
where ˜𝒙= [ ˜𝑥1, ˜𝑥2, . . . , ˜𝑥𝑁]T ∈C𝑁×1 denotes the vector
consisting of transmitted symbols,
˜𝑨= { ˜𝑎𝑖, 𝑗} ∈C𝑀×𝑁
denotes the channel matrix, ˜𝒘∈C𝑁×1 denotes the noise vector
consisting of i.i.d. random variables following a complex
Gaussian distribution with zero mean and variance 𝜎2.
In this paper, a comparable real-valued channel model is
used, which is defined by
𝒚= 𝑨𝒙+ 𝒘,
(2)
where
𝒚=
Re( ˜𝒚)
Im( ˜𝒚)

∈R𝜇×1,
(3)
𝑨=
Re( ˜𝑨)
−Im( ˜𝑨)
Im( ˜𝑨)
Re( ˜𝑨)

∈R𝜇×𝑛,
(4)
𝒙=
Re( ˜𝒙)
Im( ˜𝒙)

∈R𝑛×1,
(5)
𝒘=
Re( ˜𝒘)
Im( ˜𝒘)

∈R𝜇×1,
(6)
and 𝜇= 2𝑀, 𝑛= 2𝑁. The noise 𝒘follows an i.i.d Gaussian
PDF with mean 0 and variance 𝜎2/2. In this model, the signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as
SNR = 10 log10
2𝑁
𝜎2 .
(7)
B. LDPC Codes
LDPC codes are linear binary error-correcting codes pro-
posed by Gallager in 1963 [4]. LDPC codes are capa-
ble of high-speed decoding due to the sparse properties of
their parity-check matrix, making them practical and widely
adopted in information and communication devices. Further-
more, when combined with the belief propagation algorithm,
LDPC codes are known for their high error-correcting capa-
bilities [9].
Given a sparse parity-check matrix 𝑯∈F𝑚×𝑛
2
. The LDPC
code 𝐶is defined by
𝐶= {𝒙∈F𝑛
2 |𝑯𝒙= 0}.
(8)
C. Proximal Decoding
The Proximal decoding is an algorithm based on the proxi-
mal gradient method, a mathematical optimization technique,
and employs the approximate maximum a posteriori (Approx-
imate MAP) decoding rule [5] for decoding. The objective
function is given by
𝑓(𝒙) = 𝐿(𝒙; 𝒚) + 𝛾ℎ(𝒙)
(9)
using the negative log-likelihood function 𝐿(𝒙; 𝒚) and a code
constraint polynomial ℎ(𝒙). The proximal decoding obtains
the estimated signal ˆ𝒙based on the gradient descent step and
the code-proximal step. The gradient descent step is defined
as
𝒓(𝑘+1) = 𝒔(𝑘) −𝜔∇𝐿(𝒔(𝑘); 𝒚),
(10)
and the code-proximal step is defined as
𝒔(𝑘+1) = 𝒓(𝑘+1) −𝛾∇ℎ(𝒓(𝑘+1)).
(11)
The decoding is performed by iteratively repeating the gradient
descent step and the code-proximal step from the initial
value 𝒔(0) = 0. Finally, the estimated signal is obtained by
ˆ𝒙= sign(𝒔(𝐾)), where 𝐾denotes the maximum number of
iterations.
D. Baseline schemes
Among the signal detection methods for MIMO systems,
the minimum mean squared error (MMSE) signal detection
method, and the tanh signal detection method are well-known.
We thus use them as baselines. Furthermore, the MMSE+BP
algorithm, which employs Belief Propagation (BP) for decod-
ing LDPC codes, is used as the baseline. The estimated signal
ˆ𝒙in the MMSE signal detection method is obtained as
ˆ𝒙= 𝑨𝑇(𝑨𝑨𝑇+ 𝜎2𝑰)−1𝒚.
(12)
The tanh signal detection method involves replacing the
code-proximal step of the Proximal decoding method with a
tanh function, given by
𝒓(𝑘+1) = 𝒔(𝑘) −𝜔𝑨𝑇(𝑨𝒙−𝒚)
(13)
𝒔(𝑘+1) = tanh (𝜖𝒓(𝑘+1)),
(14)
where 𝜖is a positive constant.
ISITA2024, Taipei, Taiwan, November 10-13, 2024
Copyright (C) 2024 by IEICE
228
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:11:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The MMSE+BP algorithm is a combination of the MMSE
signal detection method and the BP algorithm for LDPC
decoding, where the estimated signal obtained by the MMSE
signal detection method is input into the BP algorithm for
decoding. Here, the MMSE+BP algorithm is implemented by
applying a scaling parameter 𝜉to the output ˆ𝒙from the MMSE
signal detection method and using the input 𝜉ˆ𝒙for the BP
algorithm. It is known that setting the scaling parameter is
effective for achieving optimal performance.
E. Deep Unfolding
DU is a method that unfolds iterative algorithms in the time
direction, optimizing learnable parameters at each iteration
[6]. By optimizing these parameters, an improvement in the
performance of the iterative algorithm is anticipated.
1) Updating Learnable Parameters: Let 𝜽denote the set
of adjustable parameters possessed by the iterative algorithm.
The index of iterations within the algorithm is denoted as
𝑘= 1, 2, . . . , 𝐾, and the learnable parameters at the 𝑘th
iteration are denoted as 𝜽(𝑘). These parameters are optimized
using techniques from deep learning such as stochastic gra-
dient descent and backpropagation. During training, mini-
batches comprising pairs of input and output are prepared
as training data, and supervised learning is conducted. The
gradient ∇𝐿(𝜽) with respect to the loss function 𝐿(𝜽) is
calculated, and parameters 𝜽are updated to reduce the error
between the outputs of the model and the target data.
2) Incremental Learning: Within deep unfolding, the tech-
nique known as incremental learning is recognized for its
beneficial properties. Unlike the conventional approach in deep
learning where parameters across all layers are updated con-
currently, incremental learning adopts a sequential approach.
During the initial iteration, the learnable parameters 𝜽(1)
undergo optimization. Subsequently, in the second iteration,
both sets of learnable parameters 𝜽(1) and 𝜽(2) are subject
to optimization. Progressing in this method, the collection of
learnable parameters expands with the iteration count, result-
ing in the enhancement of optimization 𝜽(1), 𝜽(2), . . . , 𝜽(𝐾)
by the 𝐾th iteration. This approach enables a targeted opti-
mization of newly incorporated learnable parameters at each
iteration, and is known as an effective strategy for addressing
the challenge of the vanishing gradient problem.
III. PROPOSED METHOD
A. Weighted Proximal Decoding
In Section II-C, we introduced the proximal decoding
method, which is based on mathematical optimization tech-
niques. This method decodes by formulating the optimization
problem using the code constraint polynomials and aims to
minimize the non-linear objective function. However, it is
possible that the importance of the terms in the code constraint
polynomial changes with the SNR and the characteristics
of the channel. Thus, the importance of the code constraint
polynomials could be adjusted, by assigning weight parameters
to each term of the code constraint polynomials used in the
proximal decoding, hoping to improve the error correction
Algorithm 1 DU-Proximal Method
1: 𝒔(0) B 0
2: for 𝑘B 0 to 𝑲−1 do
3:
𝒓(𝑘+1) B 𝒔(𝑘) −𝜔(𝑘)∇𝐿(𝒔(𝑘); 𝒚)
4:
𝒔(𝑘+1) B 𝒓(𝑘+1) −𝛾(𝑘)∇ℎ(𝒓(𝑘+1); {𝛼, 𝛽})
5:
ˆ𝒙B sign(𝒔(𝑘+1))
6:
if ˆ𝒙∈𝐶(𝑯) then
7:
break
8:
end if
9: end for
10: Output ˆ𝒙
capability of the proximal decoding. The introduction of this
parameter has been proposed in the Gradient Flow (GF)
decoding [10] as a decoding algorithm that uses the code
constraint polynomial with weight parameters. The weighted
code constraint polynomial is defined as
ℎ(𝒙) ≡𝛼
𝑛
Õ
𝑗=1
(𝑥2
𝑗−1)2 + 𝛽
𝑚
Õ
𝑖=1
©­
«
©­
«
Ö
𝑗∈𝐴(𝑖)
𝑥𝑗ª®
¬
−1ª®
¬
2
,
(15)
where 𝛼is the weight parameter representing the importance
of the bipolar constraint, and 𝛽is the weight parameter repre-
senting the importance of the parity constraint. This enhanced
proximal decoding based on the weighted code constraint
polynomial (15) is called the weighted proximal decoding.
B. DU-Proximal Decoding
The proximal decoding contains two adjustable step sizes
𝜔, 𝛾, which are believed to significantly affect the error
correction capability and convergence properties, necessi-
tating proper adjustment. Therefore, we propose a method
to learn the step size parameters 𝜔, 𝛾through DU. We
treat the step size parameters 𝜔, 𝛾as learnable parameters
𝜔(𝑘), 𝛾(𝑘). Then, we learn the set of learnable parameters
{(𝜔(1), 𝛾(1)), (𝜔(2), 𝛾(2)), . . . , (𝜔(𝐾), 𝛾(𝐾))} where 𝐾denotes
the number of iterations of the algorithm. This proximal
decoding using the optimized parameters obtained through
deep unfolding is referred to as the DU-Proximal (Deep
Unfolding Proximal) decoding. This procedure is summarized
in Algorithm 1.
The learning procedure for the learnable parameters is
based on mini-batches. The mini-batch consists of a set of
randomly generated training data pairs of the transmit vector
and the receive vector {(𝒙1, 𝒚1), (𝒙2, 𝒚2), . . . , (𝒙𝑆, 𝒚𝑆)}, where
𝑆denotes the size of the mini-batch, 𝒙𝑖denotes the true
transmit signal, and 𝒚𝑖denotes the received signal obtained
by passing 𝒙𝑖through the MIMO channel. For the received
signals {𝒚1, 𝒚2, . . . , 𝒚𝑆}, the proximal decoding with deep
unfolding using the learnable parameters 𝜔(𝑘), 𝛾(𝑘) is exe-
cuted, and the estimated vectors { ˆ𝒙1, ˆ𝒙2, . . . , ˆ𝒙𝑆} are obtained.
The error between these estimated vectors and the transmit
ISITA2024, Taipei, Taiwan, November 10-13, 2024
Copyright (C) 2024 by IEICE
229
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:11:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE I: Experimental Conditions
Experiment No.
Number of Receive Antennas 𝑀
Number of Transmit Antennas 𝑁
Learning Rate for 𝜔(𝑘) , 𝛾(𝑘)
SNR during Learning
1
102
102
10−4
6dB
2
120
102
10−4
6dB
3
90
102
10−5
6dB
Fig. 2: BER v.s. SNR (Exp.1)
Fig. 3: BER v.s. SNR (Exp.2)
Fig. 4: BER v.s. SNR (Exp.3)
Fig. 5: BER v.s. Iteration (Exp.1)
Fig. 6: BER v.s. Iteration (Exp.2)
Fig. 7: BER v.s. Iteration (Exp.3)
vectors {𝒙1, 𝒙2, . . . , 𝒙𝑆} is calculated using a loss function.
The learnable parameters 𝜔(𝑘), 𝛾(𝑘) are optimized using the
incremental learning method. In this study, the mean squared
error (MSE)
𝐸= 1
𝑆
𝑆
Õ
𝑖=1
||𝒙𝑖−ˆ𝒙𝑖||2
𝑛
(16)
is used as the loss function.
IV. NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS
A. Experimental Setup
In our numerical experiments, a (3, 6)-regular LDPC with
𝑛= 204, 𝑚= 102 referenced from the RPTU database is used
[11]. The codeword is generated using the generator matrix
and a random 𝑚-length message vector. Furthermore, the code-
words undergo binary bipolar conversion in the transmission
channel, resulting in the transmission vector 𝒙∈{+1, −1}𝑛.
The complex channel matrix ˜𝑨∈C𝑀×𝑁is randomly gener-
ated from a complex Gaussian distribution with mean 0 and
variance 1. Then, the equivalent real-valued channel matrix
𝑨is obtained by (4). The Proximal decoding, tanh detection
method, the MMSE detection method, and the MMSE+BP
method, are used as baselines for comparison by calculating
the bit error rate (BER) through Monte Carlo simulations with
20, 000 trials.
In our proposed method, the initial values of the learnable
parameters are set as
𝜔(0) = 2.0/(𝜆min + 𝜆max),
(17)
where 𝛾(0) = 0.05, with weight parameters fixed at 𝛼=
0.7, 𝛽= 1. Here, 𝜆min, 𝜆max are the minimum and maximum
eigenvalues of the channel matrix 𝑨. These values provided
reasonable performance in preliminary experiments. Mini-
batch optimization was used for the optimization of learnable
parameters with a mini-batch size of 200 and the number of
training iterations set to 30. Adam method [12] was used in
the learning procedure. Moreover, the SNR was fixed at 6dB
for calculating learning and BER convergence characteristics.
The number of iterations 𝐾set to 50. In the tanh signal
detection method, the parameter 𝜖= 2, and for the MMSE+BP
algorithm, the scaling parameter 𝜉= 5, which was adjusted
heuristically. The number of iterations for the BP algorithm
was set to 20.
In this numerical experiment, three environments were pre-
pared. Experiment 1 considers the case where the number of
receive antennas equals the number of transmit antennas, with
𝑀= 𝑁= 102. Experiment 2 involved more receive antennas
ISITA2024, Taipei, Taiwan, November 10-13, 2024
Copyright (C) 2024 by IEICE
230
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:11:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
than transmit antennas, with 𝑀= 120, 𝑁= 102. Experiment
3 involved fewer receive antennas than transmit antennas, with
𝑀= 90, 𝑁= 102. By varying the number of receive antennas
relative to the number of transmit antennas, the characteristics
of the MIMO channel are altered, thus examining the impact
of applying deep unfolding on decoding performance. The
learning rates were adjusted for each experiment. Table I
shows the experimental conditions. These hyperparameters
were chosen based on values that demonstrated good BER
performance in preliminary experiments.
B. Experimental Results
In this section, we demonstrate the superior error correction
capability of DU-Proximal, especially in higher SNR regimes
facilitated by assigning weights to the code constraints.
Figure 2 shows the BER performance versus SNR for
Experiment 1 where 𝑀= 𝑁= 102. At a BER of 10−5, the
DU-Proximal achieves an SNR gain of around 2dB compared
to the proximal decoding. Moreover, the performance gap
expands as SNR increases. When SNR = 1dB , both methods
exhibit similar BERs around 10−1. However, at 8dB, while
the proximal decoding has a BER greater than 10−4, the
DU-Proximal achieves a BER below 10−5, over an order
of magnitude improvement. Fig. 5 presents the relationship
between BER and the number of algorithm iterations in
Experiment 1. Proximal decoding exhibits a decrease in BER
values as the number of iterations increases, but the decrease
becomes gradual, stabilizing around 10−2 once the number of
iterations exceeds 30. On the other hand, in the DU-Proximal,
there is a sharp increase in BER at the ninth iteration, but
from the tenth iteration onward, BER falls below those of the
existing method, continuing to decrease.
Figure 3 illustrates the relationship between SNR and BER
in Experiment 2. As conditions are more favorable in Experi-
ment 2 compared to Experiment 1, all methods achieve smaller
BER. The DU-Proximal achieves the smallest BER value.
Furthermore, with the DU-Proximal, a BER value of 10−5
is reached around an SNR of 7dB, whereas for the proximal
decoding, a BER value of 10−5 is achieved around an SNR
of 9.3dB. This indicates a significant improvement through
the application of deep unfolding compared to Experiment 1.
In the BER convergence characteristics shown in Fig. 6, the
DU-Proximal shows an increase in BER at the 9th and 14th
iterations, but after surpassing the 15th iteration, there is a
rapid decrease, falling below 10−3.
Figure 4 displays the relationship between SNR and BER
in Experiment 3. Due to less favorable conditions compared to
Experiment 1, all methods exhibit increased BER. Although
the performance of the DU-Proximal improves over the prox-
imal decoding, the difference between the DU-Proximal and
the proximal decoding is smaller in Experiments 1 and 2. The
BER convergence characteristics in Fig. 7 clearly show that
the DU-Proximal consistently achieves smaller BER compared
to the proximal decoding.
Figure 8 shows the values of the learnable parameters
𝛾(𝑘), 𝜔(𝑘) with respect to the number of iterations in Ex-
Fig. 8: The values of the learnable parameters 𝛾(𝑘), 𝜔(𝑘) at
iteration 𝑘
periment 1. The value of 𝛾(𝑘) increases until the 9th iteration
but decreases from the 10th iteration onwards. On the other
hand, the value of 𝜔(𝑘) fluctuates significantly before the
20th iteration and gradually decreases after surpassing 20
iterations. These changes suggest that the learnable parameters
are optimized with each iteration, which may lead to an
improvement in the BER convergence characteristics as shown
in Fig. 5. However, the details of this effect remain unclear.
From these results, it is evident that the DU-Proximal
optimizes the step size parameters according to the number
of iterations, resulting in a lower BER compared to the prox-
imal decoding, thereby confirming an enhancement in error
correction capability. Furthermore, the relationship between
BER and the number of iterations of the algorithm indicates a
significant improvement in the convergence characteristics of
the DU-Proximal through the application of deep unfolding.
V. CONCLUSION
In this study, we applied deep unfolding to the weighted
proximal decoding. In the weighted proximal decoding, we
introduced weight parameters 𝛼, 𝛽to the code constraint
polynomials. Furthermore, by applying deep unfolding to
make the step size parameters 𝜔(𝑘), 𝛾(𝑘) of the proximal
decoding learnable, we proposed the DU-Proximal decoding.
The results of the numerical experiments demonstrated that the
DU-Proximal achieved a lower BER than the original proxi-
mal decoding, confirming an improvement in error correction
capability due to the application of deep unfolding. Moreover,
an analysis of the relationship between BER and the number
of algorithm iterations confirmed that the DU-Proximal signif-
icantly improved convergence characteristics. This confirmed
the effectiveness of applying deep unfolding in enhancing the
performance of the existing proximal decoding. Additionally,
the error correction capability of the DU-Proximal was found
to improve more noticeably in regions of high SNR and also
enhanced when the number of receive antennas was large.
In the future, we are aiming to establish methods that avoid
getting trapped in local optima during the decoding process of
the proposed method.
ISITA2024, Taipei, Taiwan, November 10-13, 2024
Copyright (C) 2024 by IEICE
231
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:11:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Qadir, H. S. Munawar, N. Saeed, and K. Le, “Towards 6G internet
of things: Recent advances, use cases, and open challenges,” 2021.
[2] E. Telatar, “Capacity of multi-antenna gaussian channels,” European
transactions on telecommunications, vol. 10, no. 6, pp. 585–595, 1999.
[3] E. G. Larsson, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson, and T. L. Marzetta, “Massive
MIMO for next generation wireless systems,” IEEE Communications
Magazine, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 186–195, 2014.
[4] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on
Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[5] T. Wadayama and S. Takabe, “Proximal decoding for LDPC codes,”
IEICE Transactions on Fundamentals of Electronics, Communications
and Computer Sciences, vol. E106.A, no. 3, pp. 359–367, 2023.
[6] J. R. Hershey, J. L. Roux, and F. Weninger, “Deep unfolding: Model-
based inspiration of novel deep architectures,” 2014.
[7] K. Gregor and Y. LeCun, “Learning fast approximations of sparse
coding,” in Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning, ser. ICML’10.
Madison,
WI, USA: Omnipress, 2010, p. 399–406.
[8] N. Parikh and S. Boyd, “Proximal algorithms,” Foundations and
Trends® in Optimization, vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 127–239, 2014. [Online].
Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/2400000003
[9] S.-Y. Chung, G. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design
of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon
limit,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, 2001.
[10] T. Wadayama, K. Nakajima, and A. Nakai-Kasai, “Gradient flow de-
coding for LDPC codes,” in 2023 International Symposium on Topics
in Coding (ISTC), Brest, France, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[11] M. Helmling, S. Scholl, F. Gensheimer, T. Dietz, K. Kraft, S. Ruzika,
and N. Wehn, “Database of channel codes and ML simulation results,”
www.uni-kl.de/channel-codes, 2019.
[12] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2017.
ISITA2024, Taipei, Taiwan, November 10-13, 2024
Copyright (C) 2024 by IEICE
232
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:11:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
