7386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2011

Improved Linear Programming Decoding of LDPC Codes and Bounds on the Minimum
and Fractional Distance
David Burshtein, Senior Member, IEEE, and Idan Goldenberg, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—We examine LDPC codes decoded using linear programming (LP). Four contributions to the LP framework are presented. First, a new method of tightening the LP relaxation, and thus improving the LP decoder, is proposed. Second, we present an algorithm which calculates a lower bound on the minimum distance of a specific code. This algorithm exhibits complexity which scales quadratically with the block length. Third, we propose a method to obtain a tight lower bound on the fractional distance, also with quadratic complexity, and thus less than previously-existing methods. Finally, we show how the fundamental LP polytope for generalized LDPC codes and nonbinary LDPC codes can be obtained.
Index Terms—Fractional distance, linear programming decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, maximum likelihood (ML) decoding, minimum distance.
I. INTRODUCTION
W ITHIN the field of error-correcting codes, the method of linear programming (LP) decoding of linear codes has attracted considerable attention in recent years. One reason for this is that the LP decoder has the ML certificate property [1], i.e., that if the LP decoder succeeds in producing an integral vector as a solution, then it corresponds to the ML codeword. Another attractive property of the LP decoder is that one may improve the performance in various ways. These include using generic techniques to tighten the LP relaxations [1], using integer programming or mixed integer linear programming [1]–[3], adding constraints to the Tanner graph [4], [5], and guessing facets of the polytope [6].
However, LP decoding is disadvantaged as compared to iterative decoding algorithms such as belief propagation or min-sum decoding because the decoding complexity can be much larger. In general the LP decoder entails a polynomial, non-linear complexity. Several authors have proposed algorithms for low-complexity LP decoding, e.g., [7]–[9]. Vontobel and Koetter [7] have proposed an iterative, Gauss-Seidel-type algorithm for approximate LP decoding. In [10] the approach of [7] was studied
Manuscript received November 23, 2010; revised April 03, 2011; accepted July 07, 2011. Date of current version November 11, 2011. This work was supported by the Israel Science Foundation under Grant 772/09. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 2010 Information Theory Workshop, Dublin, Ireland, and at the 2011 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv 69978, Israel (e-mail: burstyn@eng.tau.ac.il; idang@eng.tau.ac. il).
Communicated by E. Arikan, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2162224

under a newly-proposed scheduling scheme. This study showed

that the performance of the LP decoder can be approached with

linear computational complexity. It was also shown that the iter-

ative LP decoder can correct a fixed fraction of errors with linear

computational complexity. In the same paper, these results were

also extended to generalized LDPC (GLDPC) codes.

In this paper, we present the following main results. First,

we show that merging check nodes in the graph can tighten

the relaxation and improve the performance of the LP decoder.

Second, we demonstrate how the linear-complexity LP decoder

from [10] can be used to obtain a lower bound on the min-

imum distance of a specific code, and an upper bound on the

fractional distance of the code, which is approximately equal to

it, with complexity

, where is the block length. In a

related recent result [11] an integer programming-based tech-

nique is used in a procedure which calculates the exact min-

imum distance; however, the convergence of the procedure to

a minimum-weight codeword is in general not guaranteed. Our

lower bound on the minimum distance can be improved by using

the check node merging technique. Third, we propose an algo-

rithm which calculates a tight lower bound on the fractional dis-

tance with complexity

. We note that Feldman et al. [1]

were the first to define the notion of fractional distance and pro-

pose an algorithm which calculates it exactly; their algorithm

entails a complexity which is polynomial but not quadratic in the

block length (since they use a general purpose LP solver). This

is also true for the fractional distance calculation in [9], even

though it has reduced complexity as compared to [1]. Our ap-

proach has lower complexity as compared to these techniques.

We note that in a related paper [12] a Monte Carlo approach

which produces pseudocodewords, and thus upper bounds on

the fractional distance, is proposed. Finally, we show how the

fundamental polytope of two important classes of codes, namely

GLDPC and nonbinary codes, can be obtained. This is accom-

plished by using the double description method [13], [14]. In

addition to these results, we show how the linear-complexity

LP decoder can be calculated efficiently for GLDPC codes.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the linear-

complexity LP decoder [10] is reviewed. Section III shows how

to perform some computations relating to the linear-complexity

LP decoder in an efficient manner. Section IV describes how

the LP relaxation can be tightened by merging check nodes.

In Section V, we propose an algorithm which yields a lower

bound on the minimum distance which is also an upper bound

on the fractional distance of specific LDPC codes. In Section VI,

an algorithm which produces a tight lower bound on the frac-

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND GOLDENBERG: IMPROVED LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND BOUNDS

7387

tional distance is presented. We show how to obtain the fundamental polytope of GLDPC and nonbinary codes in Section VII. Section VIII provides some numerical results, and the paper is concluded in Section IX.

where logarithms are to the base . We assume that there are no perfect measurements from the channel, i.e.,
(7)

II. APPROXIMATE ITERATIVE LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF GLDPC CODES

Consider a discrete binary-input memoryless channel (DMC)

described by the probability transition function

where

is the transmitted code-bit and is the channel output. Also

consider a GLDPC code represented by a Tanner graph

with variable nodes and linear constraint nodes, where

each constraint node represents a small local constituent code,

thus generalizing single parity checks (SPCs) in plain LDPC

codes. The code is used to transmit information over the given

DMC. Following the notation in [1], let and be the sets of

variable and constraint nodes, respectively, such that

and

. The variable node

is connected to the set

of constraint node neighbors. The constraint node

is

connected to the set of constraint node neighbors. Further

denote by the vector

Note that if we transmit over the binary erasure channel (BEC),

then this assumption does not hold. However, we can re-nor-

malize the ’s by replacing

with

and

with

. After this re-normalization the assumption (7)

holds, and we can then apply the decoding algorithm.

We term the minimization problem (2)–(6), Problem-P. We

also define

The polytope

is defined as follows [1]:

(sometimes we will use the notation

, the meaning

will be clear from the context) if and only if there exists a vector

such that (4)–(6) hold for this value of . For plain LDPC

codes it was shown that

if and only if

(1)

(8)

Given some

, denote by the constituent binary linear

code corresponding to the constraint node

(thus for plain

LDPC codes, is a simple parity-check code). Let denote

the all-zero local codeword on constraint node , and let de-

note the all-zero codeword in . A vector is a valid codeword

if and only if it satisfies

,

. In the following

will be used to denote a local codeword in .

We assume, without loss of generality, that there are no par-

allel edges in the Tanner graph, since otherwise we can modify

the structure of the code to satisfy this constraint.

The LP decoder is given by [1]

(2)

where the vector is defined by

and where (3)
subject to (4) (5)

We further denote by

the relaxed [1] or

fundamental polytope. Thus is feasible in (4)–(6) if and only

if

. Hence, (2) may be rewritten as

(9)

An important observation is that the LP decoder has the ML

certificate [1] in the sense that if the solution of Problem-P is

integer (in fact an integer implies that is also integer by (6))

then it is the ML codeword. Let

denote the set of ver-

tices of the polytope . If the LP decoder fails, it arrives

at a solution for which

, where

is a vertex different from the transmitted codeword vertex. The

weight of a vertex

is defined as its norm

. The fractional distance [1] is defined as the min-

imum weight over the set of nonzero vertices. Under this defi-

nition, it was shown [1] that the fractional distance plays an op-

erational role for the LP decoder which is similar to the role of

minimum distance for the ML decoder, i.e., the LP decoder can

successfully correct any set of up to

bits flipped

by the binary symmetric channel. This same conclusion extends

trivially to GLDPC codes.

Now consider the following problem, which we term

Problem-D. The variables in this problem are

for all

. In addition

(6) and the problem is defined by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(10)

7388
subject to

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2011
We will also define the quantities (11)

Lemma 1: Problem-P and Problem-D are Lagrange dual problems. The minimum of Problem-P is equal to the maximum of Problem-D.
The lemma is proven in [10]. Vontobel and Koetter [7] have proposed an algorithm which yields an approximated solution to Problem-D. They suggested to consider the following “soft” version of Problem-D, termed Problem-DS:
where
(12)

(15)

Let

be a constant such that

. The following itera-

tive algorithm was proposed in [10] to find an approximate so-

lution to Problem-P in linear time complexity. In the algorithm,

each edge in the graph connecting the variable node and the

constraint node is associated with the variables , and

(defined below). Each variable node

is associated

with the variables , , and .

Algorithm 1: Given a GLDPC code, channel observations

and some fixed parameters

and

do:

1) Initialization:

subject to (11). Note that the objective function in (12) is ob-

tained from (10) by approximating the

function using a

log-sum-exp function with a parameter

. This approxima-

tion can become arbitrarily accurate by increasing . Also note

that

is concave since the log-sum-exp function is convex.

In what follows, we give a brief overview of the linear-com-

plexity iterative LP decoder. The reader is referred to [10] for

additional details.

Consider a constraint node and its associated local code

which has codewords and block length . We construct a

matrix for this code by writing all the codewords

on the columns of that matrix, i.e.,

(13)

where define

are the local codewords. We also

2) Iteration: Pick an arbitrary element following updates:

(14)

where is a row vector of Note that the equation set

ones.

and make the

expresses the constraints (5)–(6). We define

3) Loop Control: If

then repeat step 2. Otherwise

proceed to step 4.

4) Produce the final solution and Exit:

: Compute

using

where is the transpose of matrix , and

where

and using

if

is the element of .

if

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND GOLDENBERG: IMPROVED LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND BOUNDS

7389

Output the primal vector

, the dual vector

and the bitwise-estimated integral vector

.

In [10], the following assumptions were made.

1)

(16)

with columns

, such that the vectors are

-dimensional binary vectors.

A. Efficient Computation of and
We need to compute and , by

, defined

for some positive constant . Note that practical chan-

nels with nonperfect measurements, that satisfy (7), also

satisfy (16), since their output is quantized to some finite

set.

2) We assume that

. where is the dual

distance of the constituent code corresponding to the con-

straint node . For plain LDPC codes this assumption de-

generates to

(this simpler version ap-

pears also in [7]).

3) We assume that all node degrees are bounded by some con-

stant (independent of ).

Under these assumptions it was shown in [10], for any fixed

and

, that Algorithm 1 exits after

it-

erations, and that the vector is feasible in Problem-P. Further-

more, by setting sufficiently large and sufficiently small,

we can make

, where is the minimum value

of Problem-P, arbitrarily small. More precisely:

[10, Theorem 1]: Consider Algorithm 1 under the assump-

tions above. For any given , after

iterations, each with a

constant number of operations, the algorithm yields a vector, ,

which is feasible in Problem-P and satisfies

where

Let , ,

, and

and

(20) be defined by
(21)

(22)

In these definitions is an dimensional binary vector,

,

, and is the bitwise exclusive or operator.

Similarly, we define

(17)

We also know from [10] that, by weak duality and by the primal

feasibility of ,

(23)

and that after the iterations have concluded Equations (18) and (19) will be used later.

(18)

and

can be computed recursively using the

forward recursion for

(19)

(24)

(for a given value of we use this recursion to compute for all possible states ) and the backward recursion for

III. EFFICIENT COMPUTATIONS RELATED TO THE ITERATIVE

APPROXIMATE LP DECODER

(25)

In this section, we demonstrate how the computation of with the initial conditions

and , defined in (15) can be efficiently implemented

for GLDPC codes. For LDPC codes an efficient computation scheme was presented in [10]. We also show how to efficiently

otherwise

(26)

implement the calculation of .

and

We follow the approach proposed in [15] that uses a trellis

representation of the code. To simplify the notation we assume

that

, and we fix and omit it from

otherwise

(27)

, , and . In addition we assume that the code is represented by the parity check matrix

Finally, and are computed using

(28)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7390

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2011

and (29)

for

.

In practice, in order to avoid numerical problems, the forward

recursion (24) and the backward recursion (25) are computed

using logarithmic computation.

Another possibility is to use the method proposed by Hart-

mann and Rudolph [16]. However, in this case one faces a nu-

merical problem since the method involves subtractions of num-

bers with large dynamic ranges, and not only summations; thus,

logarithmic arithmetics are problematic.

B. Efficient Calculation of

To calculate

for GLDPC codes, we use the same

methodology as in the calculation of and , and we use

the definitions of and in (21). The difference is that here

we only need a forward recursion for the calculation (i.e., this

is essentially a Viterbi algorithm).

By defining

Fig. 1. Starting from the graph G on the left part of the figure that represents the code C, we merge constraint nodes, thus creating a new representation of C with an underlying graph G shown on the right.

it is easily seen that our objective (the minimization in (10)) is equal to

Denote by the new set of constraint nodes corresponding to . Now, we can apply the LP relaxation to the new representation and calculate defined by

Now, as

can be calculated recursively for

(30) where

with the initial conditions

otherwise

(31)

IV. A NEW METHOD FOR TIGHTENING THE LP RELAXATION
Consider some GLDPC code represented by a Tanner graph . Let be the LP decoded word considered in Section II, i.e.,

Proposition 1: Suppose that the only difference between

and is that the constraint nodes

in are merged

to form the constraint node

in . Then

.

Proof: Suppose that

. We need to show that

. By definition, there exists

such

that (4), (5), and (6) (with

instead of ) hold

.

For

, define by

where

where is the subcodeword restricted to indices

.

For all other values of

, we define

where

is the constraint node in that corresponds to the

constraint node

in .

Note that

only if

(since any codeword

associated with the merged node is a codeword of for

). It follows that for

,

Now suppose that we merge some of the constraint nodes to-

gether to form analternative representation of the given code, with

underlying graph . This is illustrated in Fig. 1, where we merge

the constraint nodes and into (i.e., the constituent code as-

sociated with satisfies both the constraints implied by and

those implied by ), and the constraint nodes and into . In

this example the constraint node is left unchanged ( in ). Hence, we conclude that

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND GOLDENBERG: IMPROVED LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND BOUNDS

7391

Proposition 2: Suppose that is obtained from by a gen-

eral selection of sets of nodes, and merging the nodes within

each set to a new node. Then

.

Proof: First, one can easily observe that the conclusion of

Proposition 1 holds regardless of whether we keep the original

nodes

when going from to or not. With this obser-

vation in mind, the claim trivially holds as the merging of any

choice of sets of constraint nodes can be executed by a sequence

of mergings of two constraint nodes, and by repeated applica-

tion of Proposition 1.

Note that in the extreme case where we merge all the con-

straint nodes into one constraint node, the resulting polytope,

, is the convex combination of all possible codewords.

That is, the set of vertices of this polytope is the set of codewords

of , and the minimization of over

yields the

ML decoded codeword. Thus we have

. Note also that for any codeword we have

,

and

. That is,

is a finer relaxation

of

than .

Let the error probability

of the decoder that uses the

initial graph , given that the transmitted codeword is , be de-

fined by

Fig. 2. Merging two parity nodes, j and j , in the Tanner graph of the code
C. In this case there is no overlap between c and c .

Similarly, the error probability

of the decoder that uses

the graph , given that the transmitted codeword is , is defined

by

Fig. 3. Merging two parity nodes, j and j , in the Tanner graph of the code
C. In this case there is an overlap of one bit, c , between c and c .

Now consider the first case (Fig. 2). Suppose that

.

Then for

there exists a set of weights

for

By proposition 2, we immediately obtain the following.

such that

Proposition 3:

.

This proposition holds trivially due to the fact that the second

LP decoder uses a tighter relaxation of

.

and

Proposition 4: Suppose that the only difference between

and is that the constraint nodes

in are merged

to form the constraint node

in . Assume also that

the subgraph of induced by

and their direct neighbors

is cycle free. Then

and

.

Proof: We already know from Proposition 1 that

Define the set

for

respond to the subcodewords

by

, where and corand , respectively, in Fig. 2,

. Thus we only need to show that

. Consider

the pair of constraint nodes,

, selected for merging. It follows from this definition that

, and

In this case, by the assumption of the proposition, there are two

possibilities.

1) There is no overlap between the variable nodes that are

connected to and the variable nodes that are connected to Furthermore, for . Denote by and the subcodewords associated with

the variable nodes connected to and respectively. In

this case there is no overlap between and . This case

is illustrated in Fig. 2.

2) Exactly one variable node is connected to both and ,

that is there is an overlap of one bit, , between and

. This case is illustrated in Fig. 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7392

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2011

where ( , respectively) is the ’th component of Similarly, for

( ). This is shown by considering the following three possibilities

for :

,

and

. In the

first case,

, we have

. In this case

This shows that in the case considered

.

Next, consider the second case (Fig. 3). Suppose that

. Then for

there exists a set of weights

for

such that

(32) where the last equality follows from (34).

In the second case,

, we have

and (33)

Let denote the subcodeword excluding the common bit

. Similarly is the subcodeword excluding . Define

the set

for

, where , and

correspond to , and , respectively, by

if if

It follows from this definition that

, and

where the third equality is due to (34) and (35), and the fourth

equality is due to (33) (with

). The proof that (36) holds

in the third case,

, is identical. Thus in all three

cases considered (36) holds, and we conclude that

as claimed.

We proceed to generalize Proposition 4 to the case of a gen-

eral merging of nodes.

Proposition 5: Suppose that is obtained from by a gen-

eral selection of sets of nodes, and merging the nodes within

where the last equality follows from the following equalities, each set to a new node. Assume also that the subgraph of in-

which are implied by (32) and (33):

duced by each set of nodes to be merged (say

) and

their direct neighbors is cycle free (call this the tree assump-

tion). Then

and

.

Proof: First, we observe that the conclusion of Proposi-

tion 4 holds regardless of whether we keep the original nodes

(34)

when going from to or not. Now, it suffices to show

that upon merging a set of constraint nodes

,

for which the tree assumption holds, into one node , we have

(35)

(whether or not we choose to keep any of the

nodes from in ). This merging can be decomposed into a

It remains to show that

series of merging operations on two nodes which is split to two stages, as follows. In the first stage, we only merge nodes whose

sets of neighbors are not disjoint, until this is no longer possible.

(36) This ensures that after each merging operation the tree assump-

tion is satisfied (in fact the overlap between two merged nodes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND GOLDENBERG: IMPROVED LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND BOUNDS

7393

in this stage is exactly one). In the second stage we sequentially merge the remaining constraint nodes, noting that after each merging the tree assumption holds. For each merging operation, we apply Proposition 4, until all constraint nodes are merged into one node. This proves the claim.

Note that for simple LDPC codes, Propositions 4 and 5 were

already proved in [22]. Although the proof in [22] generalizes

to GLDPC codes, we have provided an alternative straightfor-

ward proof in the spirit of the proofs of Propositions 1 and 2

that avoids proving the relationships between the fundamental

polytope and graph-cover pseudocodewords.

Proposition 5 implies the following. Consider some graphical

representation of a code and suppose that we wish to obtain

a new graphical representation by merging constraint nodes

such that when using LP decoding, the error probability of

is smaller than the error probability of . Then, when consid-

ering candidate constraint nodes for merge up, it is sufficient to

consider only constraint nodes

such that the subgraph

of induced by

and their direct neighbors contains a

cycle.

V. BOUND ON THE MINIMUM AND FRACTIONAL DISTANCE OF SPECIFIC CODES

It was already shown in [1] that LP decoding can be used to

obtain the fractional distance, which is also a lower bound on

the minimum distance of specific linear codes, in polynomial

time complexity. In this section, we show how Algorithm 1 can

be used to obtain both a lower bound on the minimum distance

and an upper bound on the fractional distance of a given code.

These two quantities are equal up to the approximation error as-

sociated with Algorithm 1. Assuming the degree of the check

nodes is bounded by a constant independent of , this proce-

dure requires execution of Algorithm 1 a number of times pro-

portional to , and thus the total complexity is

.

Let

be a constraint node and let be some nonzero

local codeword of . The idea is to search for a minimum-weight

vector subject to the constraint that is the local codeword on

node (later we will show how such vectors allow to obtain a

lower bound on the minimum distance). This conforms to the set-

ting of Problem-P, if we set

for all . Denote

and

. We would like to obtain the solution by run-

ning Algorithm 1 on a modified version of the graph in which we

remove the node , all its neighbors and the edges connected

to these neighbors. However, in order to maintain a correct repre-

sentation of the code, we must account for the specific nonzero

local codeword . To do this, we look at all constraint nodes

where

. Let

be such a constraint

node described by a matrix with columns

; this situa-

tion is exemplified in Fig. 4(a). Since we will be forcing the vari-

ables in

to a value depending on , we have that the

local codeword vector

on node satisfies

= (0 1 1 0) Fig. 4. Coset codes formed when a codeword c

; ; ; is forced on

constraint node r which is removed. (a) The rightmost column of H corre-
N sponds to a removed variable node forced to a ’1’ value. (b) The new code C
is formed as r and are removed from the graph.

check node describes a coset code where a standard constraint

of the form

is replaced by the constraint

, where

and

. This is

exemplified in Fig. 4(b). Denote the set of local codewords of

this coset code by . Also denote

,

. Problem- is defined as follows:

(38)

subject to (39) (40)

(41)

Thus, by setting

, Problem- is easily

seen to be an instance of Problem-P, and thus its solution can be

approximated arbitrarily closely by Algorithm 1 in linear time.

The only modification we need to make is to account for the

coset codes

, and this can be accomplished by replacing

the definition of and in (15) by

(37)

We now remove parity check and all its neighbors from the

(42)

graph. Consequently, in the remaining graph we observe that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7394

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2011

These can be computed efficiently for any coset code using the method described in Section III-A. However, instead of (20) we now have (note that for simplicity we omit the dependence on )
(43)
It can be seen that the only alteration we need to make is to replace (28) and (29) by
(44)
and

— loop over

• loop over

and

• Compute

using (37).

• Define

.

• Compute all codewords of the local coset code

defined by

.

• Run Algorithm 1 to solve Problem- , defined by

(38)–(41). While running the algorithm, use the def-

initions of

and

in (42) instead of those

in (15).

• Set

and

where the vec-

tors and are output by Algorithm 1. Calculate

using (10) or by the more efficient method in

Section III-B, with (46) instead of (30).

— Calculate

and

.

• Output

and

.

(45)

for

. For the calculation of

of a coset

code, we can appropriately modify and use the efficient method

from Section III-B. The necessary modification for a coset code

characterized by a vector , is that we need to recursively

calculate

(46)

rather than

.

Solving Problem-

thus finds an approximate min-

imum-weight vector subject to enforcing a local codeword

on parity check . We repeatedly apply this method, solving

Problem- over all nonzero local codewords

,

and for each local codeword we record both a lower bound

and an upper bound

(see (18)) on

the optimal value. In this manner, we create two sets of values

and

. Next, we calculate the

minima

(47)

and (48)

Finally, the entire procedure is repeated for all calculate

and we (49)

We refer to this process as Algorithm 2, which is summarized in what follows.
Algorithm 2: Given a GLDPC code, do: • loop over

Proposition 6: , output by Algorithm 2, is a lower bound

on the minimum distance of the code.

Proof: Define

to be the set of codewords in

which have a nonzero local codeword on constraint node . First,

we claim that , defined in (47), is a lower bound on the

minimum Hamming weight of codewords in . This is due to

the fact that a minimum-weight codeword

must by

definition have some nonzero local codeword on check node

, and while running Algorithm 1 with the values of forced

on variable nodes , we optimize over a set containing .

Furthermore, due to weak duality (18), the result

is a

lower bound on the optimal value. Consequently, is a lower

bound on the minimum weight over the partial set of codewords

. Now, since

, then produced by

Algorithm 2 is a lower bound on the minimum distance of the

code.

Recall that we assume parity check degrees which do not de-

pend on . Consequently, for any check node , the bounds

and are obtained by running Algorithm 1 a constant

number of times. Repeating this process over all check nodes

thus entails a total complexity of

.

Next, we claim that is at least as large as the fractional

distance.

Proposition 7: The bound output by Algorithm 2 is an

upper bound on the fractional distance of the code.

Proof: Recall that was obtained by running Algo-

rithm 1 over some reduced version of the code, corresponding

to the selection of a nonzero local codeword on some

check node . That is, we find the minimum of

over the original LP polytope

while also imposing the

values of the local codeword. For

, let

be

the polytope

with the added restriction of the local code-

word . Now, the minimum of any LP is attained at a vertex.

Consequently, if we show that

, where

is the vertex set of the polytope , then the value of

output by Algorithm 2 is an upper bound on the -norm

of a nonzero pseudocodeword in , and is thus an upper

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND GOLDENBERG: IMPROVED LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND BOUNDS

7395

bound on the fractional distance. To this end, it will suffice

to show that imposing an integer value on a single coordinate

does not create new vertices. Without loss of generality, let

, and

. We now

show that

. In essence, an easy algebraic argu-

ment will be used. First, note that

can be represented as

a matrix inequality

(50)

where and are column vectors, is a matrix representing,

together with , the constraints (8)1 for all

, and is the

standard coordinate-wise inequality. The polytope

can

be similarly represented by

where

We make use of the property that a vertex is the intersection of

independent hyperplanes. Specifically, if

then

if and only if there exists a subset of rows

of , and a corresponding subvector of such that

and

(see, e.g., [17, p. 185]). Suppose

. If the matrix does not contain the

last row of , then it is also a submatrix of and we conclude

that

, as required. If contains the last row of

, then we replace this row in with

(51)

which appears in due to the constraint

[see (8)];

with this replacement the determinant is still nonzero and we

conclude that

is the intersection of independent

hyperplanes of , and thus

.

divide into pairs of constraint nodes, and for each pair ex-

amine all nonzero combinations of their local codewords. For

each such nonzero combination of pairs of codewords, it is pos-

sible to find a minimum-weight vector subject to forcing the

variable node neighbors to values corresponding to these code-

words, similar to what is done in Algorithm 2. As another pos-

sible variant to Algorithm 2, we propose the following greedy

procedure, which we term the bar method.

We set a target level or “bar”, denoted , for the lower

bound which the procedure attempts to exceed, as follows. We

loop over all check nodes, as in Algorithm 2. For each check

node

we evaluate , defined in (47). If

,

we proceed to the next check node. If

, say due to

a local codeword for which

, we refine the bound

as follows. First we pick a check node

for some

; thus is a check node at distance 2 from , with respect

to . Next we loop over the local codewords on node

which coincide with (i.e., which have the same values on the

variable nodes in

). For each such local codeword, we

run Algorithm 1, forcing local codewords on both check nodes

and . This forcing of local codewords jointly on a pair of check

nodes produces a lower bound

on the minimum distance

subject to forcing both check nodes to these local codewords.

Define

. If

, we conclude that the bar has been exceeded for

check node , and proceed to the next check node. Otherwise,

we pick another check node

for some

and repeat

the process until for some choice of node at distance 2 from

the bar is exceeded. If the bar is not exceeded for all nodes

at distance 2 from , the procedure is terminated with failure.

If, on the other hand, for all

we have

or

otherwise if for all

, we have

for some

node at distance 2 from , then we say that the level

is attainable. Due to the bound refining process, an attainable

bar level is guaranteed to be a lower bound on the minimum

distance. Using initial lower and upper values for the bar (which

can be determined ad-hoc), we can run the procedure, each time

using a different level for the bar, and use the bisection method

to find the highest attainable bar level.

Discussion: In this section, it was shown that and ,

output by Algorithm 2 and obtained with complexity

,

constitute a lower bound on the overall minimum distance and

an upper bound on the fractional distance, respectively. Due to

(19) it can be seen that

, where

can

be made as small as desired. Moreover, it is possible to improve

the lower bound on the minimum distance in the following two

ways. First, the node merging technique presented in Section IV

can be used to produce a tighter LP relaxation, and thus a better

lower bound on the minimum distance. This approach is exem-

plified in Section VIII. Second, instead of examining single con-

straint nodes on which a local codeword is forced, one could

1The constraints (8), which are valid for plain LDPC codes, are clearly expressible in matrix form. In Section VII we will see that for GLDPC codes, the fundamental polytope is also expressible in the form (50), and thus the conclusion of Proposition 7 holds also for GLDPC codes.

VI. A LOWER BOUND ON THE FRACTIONAL DISTANCE IN QUADRATIC COMPLEXITY

In [1], the following algorithm for calculating the fractional

distance was proposed. Consider the codeword polytope

and the all-zero vertex . It was shown in [1] that

the facets of this polytope (for plain LDPC codes) are given

by (8),

. Denote the set of facets of

which

do not contain by . For each facet

, run an LP

solver to find the minimum norm

over . The

smallest value (over all facets) obtained in this procedure is

the fractional distance [1]. The complexity of this calculation

is the same as the complexity of running an LP solver

times, and in our case we have

. By using the

iterative linear-complexity LP decoder, we will demonstrate

a procedure which produces a lower bound on the fractional

distance with complexity

. In terms of computational

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7396

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2011

complexity, this compares favorably with the aforementioned

procedure because an LP solver in general has complexity

worse than

. Furthermore, if a higher complexity is

allowed, this lower bound can be made arbitrarily close to the

true fractional distance. In this section we assume plain LDPC

codes. The results in the next section enable the generalization

of the algorithm to GLDPC codes.

Recall that

if and only if

and

, we have

node and let

be an odd-sized set,

hyperplane as follows:

. Define the

Our problem is to find the minimum fractional distance on

, denoted . Consider the following problem,

Problem-

:

(55)

Of these inequality constraints, the facets of contain are
and

which do not (52)

subject to (4)–(6), where

is some large constant. This def-

inition is motivated by the following observations. First, the fea-

sible region of Problem-

(in the variables) is by defini-

tion the polytope . Thus, every feasible point must satisfy

(56)

(53)

We follow the approach in [1], i.e., for each of the facets in

(52)–(53) we evaluate the minimum norm over the facet. We

show how each such evaluation can be performed in linear time

using Algorithm 1.

Let be some index and consider its corresponding facet

from (52). To find the minimum weight over this facet, we can

implement the method from Section V, as follows. The Tanner

graph is modified by removing variable node and all the edges

incident to it. Now, to keep the graph consistent with the orig-

inal code, each constraint node

(be it a standard parity

check or generalized node) is modified so that it represents a

local coset code

(where the subscript de-

notes that we remove the ’th column of and the ’th bit of

) for some column vector

rather than

.

The column is the column from the parity-check matrix rep-

resenting constraint node , which corresponds to the index of

variable node

(note that if is a standard parity check

then

has dimension 1). Algorithm 1 runs the same

on this modified graph, except that, similarly to Section V, we

need to replace the calculation of and in (28) and (29)

by (44) and (45), respectively. The vector replaces in

(44) and (45). If we take the value of the dual in the execution of

Algorithm 1 then due to (18) we get for each , a vector with

weight

which is a lower bound on the minimum weight

over the facet

. The minimum value

The second term in (55) is, by (56), a positive penalty term

on the event of sharp inequality in (56). Therefore, in the limit

where

, the exact value is produced as the solu-

tion to Problem-

. If the constant is finite, the weight

of the solution to Problem-

can be seen to be

a lower bound on

(since the vector which attains the

minimum fractional distance is feasible in Problem-

and yields the objective function value ). Second, the ob-

jective function of Problem-

is linear in its variables (it

also contains the additive constant

which is inde-

pendent of the variables and thus can be ignored). Consequently,

Problem-

can be reduced to an instance of Problem-P, by

setting

as

(57)

We conclude that the solution to Problem-

can be

approximated arbitrarily closely by Algorithm 1. Now, we

use Algorithm 1 to solve Problem-

. By taking the dual value output by

Algorithm 1, again by (18), we obtain a set of lower bounds

on the minimum fractional weight for each

of the facets (53) of

. A lower bound on the min-

imum fractional distance over the facets (53) is given by

Finally, we

combine this result with (54) and obtain the lower bound

(54) Assuming the node degrees in the Tanner graph are bounded

by a constant independent of , the overall number of calls to

is thus a lower bound on the minimum weight over all facets Algorithm 1 is

. Thus the computational complexity of

(52) of . This lower bound can be made as tight as desired evaluating a lower bound on the minimum fractional distance

if in Algorithm 1 we take large enough and small enough. using the procedure described above is

.

We now turn to the problem of calculating minimum frac- Naturally, the exact fractional distance can be approached by

tional distance on the facets (53). Let be some fixed constraint using very large values for the penalty constant . It should be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND GOLDENBERG: IMPROVED LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND BOUNDS

7397

noted that this could theoretically have an effect on the bound on

the convergence rate of Algorithm 1: In [10, Theorem 1] it was

shown that the bound on the convergence rate of Algorithm 1 is

related to , and from (57) it can be seen that this quantity

may be large as we increase . However a closer examination

of Algorithm 1 shows that if

, the asymptotic linear

complexity is unaffected. In Section VIII, we describe several

experiments conducted with

. Consistent with this

last observation, in these experiments, we have not seen a sig-

nificant increase in running time as compared with the minimum

distance bounds from Section V.

small. One possibility for doing this is by applying the double

description method [14], for which a publicly available software

implementation, cdd+ [20], exists (we note, however, that other

implementations are also available).

Using cdd+, we were able to obtain a representation of a bi-

nary constraint node representing the

Hamming code .

The matrix has 8 rows and 70 columns, and its transpose

is given in Fig. 5. For example, the first line of represents

the constraint

VII. FUNDAMENTAL POLYTOPES OF GLDPC AND NONBINARY CODES

For plain LDPC codes, the fundamental polytope is repre-

sented by (8). In this section, we propose a practical procedure

which obtains representations of the fundamental polytopes of

two important classes of codes: GLDPC and nonbinary codes.

We note that an interesting related effort for nonbinary (ternary)

codes has recently been made by Skachek [18]. We propose a

general practical technique which relies on the double descrip-

tion method [13], [14] to find, similar to (8), a description of

the fundamental polytope. For the case of nonbinary codes, as

in [18], we consider the LP formulation from [19] which ex-

presses a nonbinary decoding problem using a binary problem

of higher dimension. This description has an obvious applica-

tion, at least for binary GLDPC codes: The representation can

be used together with a procedure similar to the one presented

in Section VI to calculate a tight lower bound on the fractional

distance, which gives a lower bound on the error correction ca-

pability of the LP decoder on the BSC. For nonbinary codes,

however, it is not as obvious that a similar calculation has such

a practical application. We prove that the minimum weight of a

nonzero vertex of the polytope proposed in [19] for LP decoding

implies an error correction capability on the -ary symmetric

channel which is a natural extension of the corresponding result

[1] for binary codes.

Consider a constraint node . Suppose it represents some

general, not necessarily linear, local code with codewords

. The code polytope,

, is defined by

which is a facet of

. Note that the constraints

are also present in (e.g., the last row of

corresponds to

). Using this representation together

with the lower bound on the fractional distance in Section VI,

we found a randomly-generated GLDPC code with 70 variable

nodes and 20 constraint nodes, each representing a local

code, with fractional distance at least 11.2418. This code has

rate 1/7. The fractional distance result guarantees that this code

can correct 5 errors using the LP decoder.

A. Nonbinary Codes: The Fractional Distance and Its Significance

Flanagan et al. [19] gave an LP formulation suitable for non-

binary codes over rings. For a ring

of size

, let

be the ring

without the additive identity element. Every nonbinary

symbol is represented using a binary column vector

of size

. A vector of

nonbinary symbols is represented by a column vector

of dimension follows:

...

. The mapping

is defined as

(58)

where is defined in (14) and (13). Here the code is not

necessarily linear, so we use the notation

rather than

(59)

as in Sections II and IV. The polytope

can be In this manner, a nonbinary local codeword is mapped co-

equivalently represented as the convex hull of the codewords ordinatewise to a binary codeword. The convex hull of all the

. This follows immediately from the fact that resulting binary codewords corresponding to constraint node

the coefficients of any convex combination of the codewords yields the fundamental polytope

and the overall poly-

constitute a probability vector which satisfies the defini- tope is given by

, just as in the binary case.

tion (58).

The difference is that in the nonbinary case, the dimension of

Now, we can use any algorithm which converts the vertex rep- the polytope is higher, i.e.,

, and because

resentation of the polytope into a facet representation to express of the method of representation which uses the transformation

in terms of its facets. Unfortunately, the complexity of

, the resulting binary local codes are not necessarily linear.

such algorithms in general grows exponentially with the size of When

, this framework reduces to the standard binary

the problem, so it will only work reasonably if we keep the code case.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7398

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2011

Each nonbinary symbol is associated with a column vector

of channel log-likelihood ratios

, where

(recall that

is the channel transition probability). As an

example, consider the -ary symmetric channel with transition

probability . In this channel

and thus (60)
The nonbinary [19] LP decoder solves the problem

The fractional distance for a nonbinary code is defined as the minimum norm over all nonzero vertices of , i.e.,
(61)

The next proposition shows that plays a similar role for the nonbinary case as it does for the binary case.

Proposition 8: Consider a nonbinary code over a ring of

size . Suppose this code is transmitted over a -ary symmetric

channel with transition probability . Then the LP decoder can

correct any pattern of

symbol errors.

Proof: It was shown in [19] that the performance of the LP

decoder (61) is independent of the transmitted codeword. Thus

it can be assumed that the all-zero codeword was transmitted.

Consequently, the LP decoder will make an error if and only if

there is a nonzero vertex

,

,

with

(62)

We partition the set of indices into two subsets according to the channel outputs, as follows:

(63)

Fig. 5. Matrix of coefficients of the facet representation of the (7; 4) Hamming Since the all-zero codeword is assumed to be transmitted,

code polytope.

is the set of symbols uncorrupted by the channel and is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND GOLDENBERG: IMPROVED LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND BOUNDS

7399

Fig. 6. Matrix of coefficients of the facet representation of the SPC(4) code over GF(4) polytope.

its complement. Under the -ary symmetric channel, it is clear and (64), and the third inequality is due to the fact that is a

from (60) that we can normalize the variables so that their nonzero vertex and the definition (61). Setting

values are 0 or without affecting the output of the decoder. in (65) as in the assumption of the proposition, it is easily seen

Assuming this normalization, we have

that (62) does not hold, and thus the LP decoder succeeds. This

proves our claim.

(64) Proposition 8 shows that the fractional distance has opera-

tional significance for nonbinary codes which is very similar to

where the position of the in the case

depends on

the channel output. Now assume that the channel corrupts

symbols, i.e.,

, and let

,

. We

have

that of binary codes. The evaluation of tight lower bounds on in the nonbinary case is straightforward using the proce-
dure described above which utilizes the DD method. In this case, the matrix of codewords is constructed using the binary versions of the local codewords (which are obtained coordinate-

wise using (59)). Clearly, using the DD method, it is possible

to find experimentally the representation of any local code, pro-

vided it is not too large. As an example, using a binary vector

of length 12, we have found a representation of the fundamental

polytope of the nonbinary simple parity check code of length 4

over

. This polytope has 40 facets, given by the rows of

the matrix

, which is presented in Fig. 6. For any

particular LDPC code over

which uses

as

(65) the local code in its constraint nodes, we can use the method in Section VI to obtain tight lower bounds on the fractional dis-

where the first and second inequalities are due to the fact that tance. The same conclusion applies in general when, instead

of

we take any other code, provided that the DD

method outputs (in reasonable time complexity) a representa-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2011

Fig. 7. Simulation results for the BSC comparing the approximate LP decoder with and without merging of check nodes with belief propagation.

tion of its corresponding fundamental polytope. We expect that probability greater than 0.045, and better performance for

this will be the case for practical constituent codes.

lower values of crossover probability. Also, the improvement

gain by merging check nodes is clearly not substantial in this

VIII. NUMERICAL RESULTS

In the experiments outlined below, Algorithm 1 was operated

in the following mode, with respect to the values of the param-

eters and . Initialize with

and

. Iterate

until

. Then multiply by , divide by

and

iterate with the new constraints. The process of iterating and

multiplying and dividing by is repeated ten times, so that

at the end of the process

and

.

Fig. 7 shows simulation results comparing the approximate

iterative LP decoder with and without merging of check nodes,

as suggested in Section IV. It should be stressed that we rely

on the GLDPC framework for the results related to merged

check nodes. In the simulation we picked codes at random

from Gallager’s -regular ensemble of length

.

These codes were transmitted over a binary symmetric channel.

For the merging process, check nodes are picked as follows.

First, a list of short cycles (up to maximum length of 6) in the

graph is generated using the procedure proposed in [21]. Based

on this list, in each cycle we merge the check nodes into one

new check node. This approach is motivated by Proposition 5,

which guarantees an unchanged relaxation if the set of merged

constraint nodes is cycle-free. As a reference, we also plot

results for iterative belief propagation decoding. It is apparent

from the figure that despite the improvement due to check node

merging, the LP decoder exhibits worse performance than the

example. We do not know if this is an artifact of the short cycle

selection process or not, so perhaps results could be improved

by applying a different strategy for choosing check nodes to be

merged.

In Fig. 8, we plot our results from Sections V and VI. The

lower bound on the minimum distance derived in Section V is

shown in circles. This plot shows, for various block lengths, the

average value of (see (49)) over 10 randomly-generated

codes, taken from Gallager’s -regular ensemble. We also

include improved bounds obtained by merging check nodes.

Check nodes were chosen for merging as in Fig. 7, using all

cycles of length up to 6.

Fig. 8 also shows an improved lower bound on the minimum

distance using the bar method outlined at the end of Section V.

Clearly, in this case the lower bound is significantly improved by

allowing pairs of nodes to be examined. Next, we plot the lower

bound on the fractional distance from Section VI. The lower

bound on the fractional distance is calculated with the penalty

constant set to

. In this case we set in Algorithm 1

to an initial value of

, instead of 0.01 as previously stated;

this more stringent setting was used in order to increase the ac-

curacy of our result in light of the large value of 2. Finally,

exact fractional distance results, appearing in asterisks, are in-

cluded in Fig. 8. These results were taken from [1] and depict

exact fractional distance, averaged over a sample of 100 codes.

belief propagation decoder for values of the channel crossover 2See the discussion at the end of Section VI.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BURSHTEIN AND GOLDENBERG: IMPROVED LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING OF LDPC CODES AND BOUNDS

7401

Fig. 8. Lower bounds on the fractional distance and minimum distance.

With the exception of these exact results from [1], all results

REFERENCES

depict the average over the same 10 randomly-generated codes,

taken from Gallager’s -regular ensemble. Comparing the

exact results with our lower bound, we see that although the ran-

domly-selected codes are not the same, the statistical averages

indicate that the lower bound is close to the mark for

.

IX. CONCLUSION

In this paper we made the following contributions to the

framework of LP decoding. First, a method for tightening the

LP relaxation based on merging check nodes was proposed.

Second, an algorithm for determining a lower bound on the

minimum distance was presented. The performance of this

algorithm can be improved by the check node merging tech-

nique or by the greedy procedure introduced in Section V. This

algorithm has computation complexity

, where is

the block length. Third, an algorithm for determining a tight

lower bound on the minimum distance was presented. This

algorithm also has complexity

. Fourth, we showed how

the fundamental polytope can be obtained for GLDPC and

nonbinary codes.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the associate editor and the anonymous reviewers for their help and for their helpful suggestions.

[1] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, , Mar. 2005.
[2] S. C. Draper, J. S. Yedidia, and Y. Wang, “ML decoding via mixed-integer adaptive linear programming,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT 2007), Nice, France, Jun. 2007.
[3] S. Ruzika, A. Tanatmis, F. Kienle, H. W. Hamacher, N. Wehn, and M. Punekar, “Valid inequalities for binary linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Seoul, S. Korea, Aug. 2009, pp. 2216–2220.
[4] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec. 2008.
[5] M. Miwa, T. Wadayama, and I. Takumi, “A cutting-plane method based on redundant rows for improving fractional distance,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1603–1613, Aug. 2009.
[6] A. G. Dimakis, A. A. Gohari, and M. J. Wainwright, “Guessing facets: Polytope structure and improved LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 3479–3487, Aug. 2009.
[7] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Towards low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006, arxiv:cs/0602088v1.
[8] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On low-complexity linear-programming decoding of LDPC codes,” Eur. Trans. Telecomm., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 509–517, Aug. 2007.
[9] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “A new linear programming approach to decoding linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1061–1072, Mar. 2008.
[10] D. Burshtein, “Iterative approximate linear programming decoding of LDPC codes with linear complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 4835–4859, Nov. 2009.
[11] M. Punekar, F. Kienle, N. Wehn, A. Tanatmis, S. Ruzika, and H. W. Hamacher, “Calculating the minimum distance of linear block codes via Integer Programming,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 329–333.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

7402

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2011

[12] M. Chertkov and M. G. Stepanov, “An efficient pseudocodeword search algorithm for linear programming decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1514–1520, Apr. 2008.
[13] K. Fukuda and A. Prodon, “Double Description Method Revisited,” Report ETHZ Zürich, 1995 [Online]. Available: ftp://ftp.ifor.math. ethz.ch/pub/fukuda/paper/ddrev960315.ps.gz
[14] T. S. Motzkin, H. Raiffa, G. L. Thompson, and R. M. Thrall, “The double description method,” Contrib. to the Theory of Games, vol. 2, pp. 51–73, 1953.
[15] J. K. Wolf, “Efficient maximum likelihood decoding of linear block codes using a trellis,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-24, no. 1, pp. 76–80, Jan. 1978.
[16] C. Hartmann and L. Rudolph, “An optimum symbol-by-symbol decoding rule for linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 514–517, Sep. 1976.
[17] D. Bertsekas, Convex Analysis and Optimization. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 2003.
[18] V. Skachek, “Characterization of graph-cover pseudocodewords of
codes over F ,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW
2010), Dublin, Ireland, Sep. 2010. [19] M. F. Flanagan, V. Skachek, E. Byrne, and M. Greferath, “Linear-
programming decoding of nonbinary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4131–4154, Sep. 2009. [20] K. Fukuda, CDD and CDD+ Homepage 2008 [Online]. Available: http://www.ifor.math.ethz.ch/~fukuda/cdd_home/cdd.html [21] J. C. Tiernan, “An efficient search algorithm to find the elementary circuits of a graph,” Commun. ACM, vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 722–726, 1970.

[22] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes, Dec. 2005, arXiv:cs/0512078v1, submitted for publication.
David Burshtein (M’92–SM’99) received the B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering in 1982 and 1987, respectively, from Tel-Aviv University, TelAviv, Israel. During 1988–1989, he was a Research Staff Member in the Speech Recognition Group of IBM, T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY. In 1989, he joined the School of Electrical Engineering, Tel-Aviv University, where he is presently a Professor. His research interests include information theory, codes on graphs and iterative decoding algorithms. Dr. Burshtein serves as an Associate Editor for Coding Techniques for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY.
Idan Goldenberg (S’06) received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in Electrical Engineering in 2001 and 2007, respectively from the Israel Institute of Technology (Technion). During 2001–2007 he was with the Israel Defence forces, working as an engineer. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the department of Electrical Engineering-Systems at Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. His research interests include codes on graphs and iterative decoding algorithms, coding theory, and information theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:26:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

