Construction of QC-LDPC Codes Based On PSO Algorithm

Yang Yang, Yang Xiao
Institute of Information Science, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China Emails: 09120426@bjtu.edu.cn, yxiao@bjtu.edu.cn

Abstract—The well known Tanner codes are not encodable, in this paper, we derived an encodable QC LDPC codes and use PSO algorithm to determine the parameters of the parity check matrices of the QC LDPC codes. The proposed PSO code construction considers the girth 4 and BER performance to be the constrained conditions in the fitness function of PSO algorithm. Simulation results show that the QC codes constructed by the proposed method have better performance than that of random LDPC codes.
Keywords-QC-LDPC;Particle swarm optimization; circulant matrix
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes have been the subject of intense research lately because of their capacity-achieving performance and linear decoding complexity by using an iterative decoding algorithm, the so called belief propagation or sum-product algorithm [1-11]. Ever since their construction, decoding, efficient encoding and applications in digital communication have become focal points of research. Gallager considered only regular LDPC [2], i.e., codes that are represented by a sparse parity-check matrix with a constant number of ones (weight) in each column and in each row.
Methods for constructing LDPC codes can be classified into two categories: one is random or pseudorandom
constructions [11]; where the generator G or parity check matrix H of an LDPC has been generated randomly, which
requires large power and storage space because of its larger size. Long random LDPC codes in general perform closer to the Shannon limit than their equivalent algebraic constructed LDPC codes; however, they usually do not have sufficient structure to allow simple encoding. The encoding problem may be an obstacle for their commercial application. The other disadvantage is that the general LDPC codes need amount of memory to store the parity check matrix.
The other category is algebraic constructions [1-10]. QC-LDPC codes may be a good candidate for solving the memory and encoding problem of LDPC codes for their parity check matrix consists of circulant permutation matrix or zero matrix. Tanner code and array code are two reprehensive QC-LDPC codes [4]. The significant benefit of the QC-LDPC lies in the code construction where the rows of the generator matrix are just cyclic shifts of the first row. These structured QC-LDPC codes having a relatively simple algebraic
*This project is supported by Beijing Natural Science Foundation: (No.4102050).

construction that can be implemented with an inexpensive shift register generator which greatly simplifies the encoder desig n.
While the parity-check matrices of Tanner codes in [4] are singular, we can not get generator matrix with the same rank from them. The Tanner codes have the so-called encoding problem [6], it is impossible to derive their generator matrices from their parity-check matrix, since there are at least j-1 dependent rows in the parity-check matrix. To find these dependent rows of a parity-check matrix is a NP problem, because these dependent rows are the linear combinations of independent rows [6].
Particle Swarm Optimization (PSO) is an evolution method proposed by Kennedy and Eberhart [12-14]. We can obtain good performance in optimization of encodable QC LDPC codes. In this paper, we take PSO to optimize the construction of QC-LDPC codes, and solve encoding problem. This paper is organized as follows. In section II, QC-LDPC code is briefly reviewed. In Section III, introduced PSO algorithm and presented the proposed optimization scheme. Simulation result and performance analysis are given in Section IV. Section V is the conclusion of this paper.

II. QC-LDPC CODES
The parity check matrix of a code can be viewed as defining a bipartite graph with “variable” vertices corresponding to the columns and “check” vertices corresponding to the rows. Each non-zero entry in the matrix corresponds to an edge connecting a variable to a check. In Fig.1 an example of a parity check matrix and its equivalent bipartite graph are demonstrated.

⎡1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0⎤ ⎢⎢1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 0⎥⎥

H = ⎢0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0⎥

(1)

⎢⎢0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 0 1⎥⎥

⎣⎢0 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1⎥⎦

LDPC codes belong to the category of linear block codes

meaning that a codeword c of n bits is produced by the

original un-coded word u of k bits. Their parity check

matrix describes this class of codes, which is sparse and the
majority of its digits are zero. A codeword c is valid if the

subsequent parity check equation is true:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:25:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

H ∗cT = 0

(2)

The resultant code rate k n defines the size of the parity
check matrix, which is specified as (n − k ) ∗ n . Uniform
and the non-uniform row and column weights as regards to the parity check matrix, result in regular and irregular LDPC codes respectively.

C1

C2

C3

C4

C5

V1 V2 V3 V4 V5 V6 V7 V8 V9 V10

: variable node

: check node

Fig. 1 A parity-check matrix and the corresponding bipartite graph
LDPC codes are constructed by specifying a parity check
matrix H . The H matrix of QC-LDPC code is composed of
circulant permutation matrix or zero matrix. Due to the special structure of QC-LDPC codes, the cycle properties can be analyzed in a relatively easy way.
The BP decoding algorithm converges to the maximum a posteriori (MAP) solution for LDPC graphs to have no girths; for graphs with girths, there is no such optimality [4-11]. The girth of a graph is the length of the shortest cycle in the graph. To evaluate the proposed QC LDPC codes, we need to consider the girth problems. We have developed a theorem to test the girth 4 [11].
Definition 1: If there exist two columns or two rows of
parity check matrix H to have 1 at same position, which
forms a quadrangle, we call it 4-girth of the LDPC code.

Theorem 1 (test the 4-girths) [11]: The parity check matrix
H has no girth of 4, if and only if the entries of the test matrix O all are 1s or 0s except the diagonal line, where

O = HT H

(3)

The QC-LDPC codes consist of circulant sub-matrix. Each circulant sub-matrix is a square matrix for which every row is the cyclic shift of the last row, and the first row is obtained by the cyclic shift of the last row. In this way, every column of each circulant sub-matrix is automatically the cyclic shift of the previous column, and the first column is obtained by the cyclic shift of the last column. The cycle properties QC-LDPC codes are important to the performance of them. The minimum length of cycles in the Tanner graph of LDPC codes
is defined as girth [4, 6]. Girth distribution of H matrix has
an important effect on the decoding performance of LDPC codes.

The H matrix of dimension m × Lm for the
QC-LDPC can be written as

H = [ H1, H2, H3,....HL ]

(4)

where Hi is the i -th circulant sub-matrix of dimension m ×m , i = 1,2,...L . for the circulant matrices, the row
weight and column weight are the same and fixed. Once the
parity check matrix H is defined, the generator matrix is
obtained. The matrices are created such that they should
satisfy the constraint H ∗ cT = 0 . All the bits to be encoded
are run through the generator matrix, and therefore, all valid
code words obey the property H ∗ cT = 0 .

In this paper, we take Tanner-LDPC as an example to study the encodable irregular construction of QC-LDPC codes by PSO approach.

Ref. [4] used the structure of multiplicative groups in the
set of integers modulo m to “place” circulant matrices
within a parity- check matrix so as to form regular QC LDPC block codes with a variety of block lengths and rates. For
prime m , the integers {0,1,..., m −1} form a ?eld under
addition and multiplication modulo m —i.e., the Galois ?eld GF(m) . The nonzero elements of GF(m) form a cyclic
multiplicative group. Let a and b be two nonzero elements with multiplicative orders o(a) = k and o(b) = j , respectively. Then we form the j × k matrix P
of element form GF (m) that has as its (s, t) th element
ps,t = bs at as follows:

⎡1 a

a2 ... ak−1 ⎤

⎢

P

=

⎢ ⎢

b ...

ab ...

a2b ...

... ...

a k −1b

⎥ ⎥

... ⎥

(5)

⎢ ⎣

b

j

−1

ab j −1

a2b j−1

...

a

k

−1b

j

−1

⎥ ⎦

(here, 0 ≤ s ≤ j −1and 0 ≤ t ≤ k −1)

The LDPC code is constructed by specifying its
parity-check matrix H . Specifically, H is made up of a j × k array of circulant submatrices as shown in the
following:

⎡ I1

H

=

⎢ ⎢ ⎢

Ib ...

Ia Iab ...

Ia2 I a2b

... ...

I ⎤ ak−1 I ⎥⎥ ak−1b

... ... ... ⎥

(6)

⎢ ⎢⎣Ib j −1

Iab j−1

Ia2b j−1

⎥ ... I ⎥⎦ ak−1b j−1

where I x is an m ×m identity matrix with rows cyclically shifted to the left by x positions. The circulant submatrix in
position (s, t) within H is obtained by cyclically shifting

the rows of the identity matrix to the left by ps ,t places. The resulting binary parity-check matrix is of size jm × km ,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:25:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

which means the associated code has a rate R ≥ 1− ( j k) . By construction, every column of H contains j ones and every row contains k ones, and so H represents a ( j ,k )
regular LDPC code.

Tanner LDPC codes have a simple algebraic structure, for some cases, the short girths can be avoided [4-10]. However, Tanner LDPC codes have the so-called encoding problem: it is impossible to derive their generator matrices from their parity-check matrix, since there are at least -j1 dependent rows in the parity-check matrix. To find these dependent rows of a parity-check matrix is a NP problem, because these dependent rows are the linear combinations of independent rows [6]. The problem has been solved by [6], an encodable irregular construction of QC-LDPC codes can be derived from Tanner codes. This paper further extends the results of [6].

Not lose generality, considering (5, 10) QC codes from (6), and Ref [6], we can obtain an encodable irregular construction of QC-LDPC codes as follows,

H = [H1 H 2]

(7)

where

⎡ I0

⎢ ⎢

0

Ia I0

Ia2

Ia3

I I a2b

a3b

Ia4 Ia4b

⎤ ⎥ ⎥

H1 = ⎢⎢⎢IIbb23

0 Iab3

I0 0

I a3b2 I0

I a4b2

⎥ ⎥

I ⎥ a4b3

(8)

⎢ ⎣

Ib4

Iab4

I a2b4

0

I0

⎥ ⎦

⎡ ⎢ ⎢

Ia5 Ia5b

Ia6 I a6b

Ia7 I a7b

Ia8 Ia8b

Ia9 Ia9b

⎤ ⎥ ⎥

H2

=

⎢ ⎢ ⎢

I I

a5 a5

b2 b3

I a6b2 I a6b3

Ia7b2 Ia7b3

I a8b2 I a8b3

I a9b2 I a9b3

⎥ ⎥ ⎥

(9)

⎢ ⎣

I

a5

b4

I a6b4

Ia7b4

I a8b4

I a9b4

⎥ ⎦

where 0 is m ×m all zeros matrices. I0 is an m ×m
identity matrix.

It is easy to prove that the submatrix H1 is full rank of m ×m , then the proposed QC-LDPC codes are encodable.

“encodable” means that we can get generator matrix from
H,

where

G = ⎡⎣⎢H−1 1H2 I⎦⎤⎥

(10)

H1 and H 2 are given in (8) and (9), respectively.

Different from Tanner codes in (6), comparing (7) with (6), we know that there are some submatrices in (6) are replaced

by 0 matrices and I0 matrices. Thus, the results of [4] for
girth 4 are no longer valid. We nee apply Theorem 1 to test the proposed encodable QC-LDPC codes without girth 4.
From [6-8] we know that the different pair of (a,b)
makes different BER performance of LDPC codes. So the
proposed PSO should select a , b carefully. In this paper, our PSO algorithm selects (a,b) based on two conditions,
(1) the selected codes without girth 4; (2) the selected codes with better BER performance. The two conditions are considered in the fitness function of the proposed PSO algorithm.
The existing algorithm tries all the possible (a,b) to
select the best pair; apparently, it is very complex and takes much time. So we use particle swarm algorithm to find the
best pair (a,b) with best performance which is easy to
accomplish and make sure that there is no girth four.
III. PARTICLE AWARM OPTIMIZATION
A. Particle swarm optimization
Evolutionary computation techniques , motivated by the evolution of nature, have proven to be a useful method of optimization for difficult and discontinuous multidimensional engineering problems and have already been applied in many areas successfully. Particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithms [12-13] are entirely new kinds of social intelligence models to be recast as an optimization, learning, and problem solving method and they are able to accomplish the same goal as evolutionary computation in a new and faster way.
In this paper, we exploit the PSO algorithm in construction of QC-LDPC code. The PSO algorithm is inspired by social behavior of bird flocking or fish schooling. Suppose the following scenario: a group of birds are randomly searching for food in an area. There is only one piece of food in the area being searched. All the birds do not know where the food is. But, during each iteration, they learn via their inter communications, how far the food is [12-14]. So the best strategy to find the food is to follow the bird which is nearest to the food.
PSO learned from this bird-flocking scenario, and used it to solve the optimization problems. In PSO, each single solution is a "bird" in the search space. We call it "particle". All of particles have cost values which are evaluated by the cost function to be optimized, and have velocities which direct the flying of the particles. The particles fly through the problem space by following the current optimum particles.
PSO is initialized with a group of random particles (solutions) and then searches for optima by updating generations During iterations, each particle is updated by following two "best" values. The first one is the position vector of the best solution this particle has achieved so far. The cost value is also stored. This position is called pbest. Another "best" position that is tracked by the particle swarm optimizer is the best position, obtained so far, by any particle in the population. This best position is the current global best

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:25:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and is called gbest.

After finding the two best values, the particle updates its velocity and position according to the following equations

vi k +1

=

wvki

+

c1r1 ( pbesti

−

xik

) + c2r2 (gbestk

−

xik )

(11)

xi k +1

=

xki

+

vi k +1

(12)

where vki +1 is the velocity of particle number i at the (k + 1) th iteration, xki +1 is the current particle(solution or
position). The random number r1 and r2 can take values
between 0 and 1. The parameter c1 is the self confidence
factor, which c2 is the swarm confidence factor. Usually
c1 and c2 are in the range from 1.5 to 2.5. The parameter w is the inertia factor that takes values downward from 1 to
0 according to the iteration number and the maximum number of iterations as follows,

w = (max iter − iter)/max iter

(13)

B. The proposed scheme Based on the above analysis, we know that particle swarm
optimization can be used in the construction of LDPC codes.
We take the pair (a,b) as the particle, initialize it with a
random position value and velocity value, with the given position range and velocity scope it will find the best pair which can construct a QC-LDPC codes with the minimum BER. The proposed PSO code construction considers the girth 4 and BER performance to be the constrained conditions in the fitness function of PSO algorithm. The proposed scheme has the following steps:
Step 1: Initialize the particle (a,b) with a reasonable
position value and velocity value. Give a position range and velocity scope.
for i=1: the number of particle
for j=1:dimension of search space (here the dimension is 2)
ab(i,j)=fix(rand(1)* range-2)+2;
v(i,j)=randn;
end
end
Step 2: Let the fitness be the fitness function. Each particle has its own adaptability. And through the fitness we can get two values. pbest and gbest
for i=1:N
p(i)=fitness(ab(i,:));
pbest =ab(i,:);
end

gbest =ab(1,:);
ber_min=p(1);
for i=2:N
if p(i)<p(1)
ber_min=p(i);
gbest =ab(i,:);
end
end
Step 3: Each particle updates its position value and velocity value according to (11) and (12), Compare the current global optimization result p(i) and the optimization result gbest labeled; if p(i) <fitness( gbest), update gbest; else take gbest unchanged.
For t=1:the maximum number of iterations
For i=1: the number of particle
Update position value and velocity value according (11) and (12)
If current position value < fitness(pbest)
Update pbest
If current global value < fitness(gbest)
Update gbest
Step 4: Terminate if maximum number of iterations is found.
Remarks:
The fitness function in Step 2 is a LDPC simulation
program for given parity-check matrix H in (7) with the
pair (a, b). For every pair (a, b), the simulation program tests
whether H has girth 4 by applying Theorem 1, which ensure that the obtained H has no girth 4.
To save time, the proposed LDPC simulation progra m for fitness function only calculate the BER for one given SNR. The SNR point is selected at the varying range to obvious. If the LDPC codes are good, then the BER of them should lower than others.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS To analysis and compare the proposed construction of QC LDPC with the random LDPC codes. The parameters of QC LDPC are determined by the proposed PSO algorithm. The
code length is 1270, code rate is 1 / 2, column weight and row weight of H matrix is 5 and 10. In the fitness function of
PSO algorithm, we select SNR=2.5, and PSO algorithm found the parameters a=12 and b=16.
Applying Theorem 1, we can find the two codes to have
no 4-girth, the test matrix O is shown in Fig.2, and the O of
the random LDPC code is shown in Fig.3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:25:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2 The test matrix O of the proposed QC codes
Fig 3 The test matrix O of the random codes
Fig.4 The BER performance of the proposed QC codes and the random codes
In the system simulation, the bits’ stream is modulated by a binary phase-shift keying (BPSK), and through the AWGN channel. 500 data frames are transmitted at per SNR point. The iterative BP algorithm is used for decoding. The BP decoder is allowed a maximum of 100 decoding iterations, and it stops when either a valid codeword is found or the maximum number of decoding iterations is reached.

Generally, random LDPC codes are regarded as good codes, the new LDPC codes should have similar BER performance.
From Fig.4, we can know that the BER performance of the proposed QC LDPC codes is better than that of random codes, which verify that the proposed approach for encodable QC-LDPC codes is valid.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a new method of PSO construction of encodable QC-LDPC codes has been proposed which combines with particle swarm optimization. We using particle swarm optimization algorithm to find the best pair (a, b) which imply the performance of LDPC codes. From the simulation results we know that the codes constructed based on the proposed method have a good performance.
REFERENCE
[1] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey and H. A. Loeliger, Factor graphs and
sum-product algorithm, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp498-519, Feb. 2001.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1963.
[3] M. Fossorier, Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes From
Circulant Permutation Matrices, IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, 2004, 50(8): 1788-1793.
[4] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridhara. LDPC Block and Convolutional
codes Based on Circulant Matrices. IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, 2004, 50(12): 2966-2984.
[5] M. Fossorier, Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes From
Circulant Permutation Matrices. IEEE Trans. on Inform. Theory, 2004 50(8): 1788-1793.
[6] Y. Xiao and K. Kim, Good Encodable Irregular Quasi-Cyclic LDPC
codes, 11th IEEE Singapore International Conference on Communication Systems, (ICCS 2008), 2008,. pp.1291 – 1296.
[7] Y. Xiao and M. H. Lee, Construction of Good Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes,
Proceedings of IET International Conference on Wireless Mobile and Multimedia Networks, (ICWMMN 2006), p.172-175.
[8] Y. Xiao, M. H. Lee, Evaluations of Good LDPC Codes Based on
Generator Matrices, The 8th International Conference on Signal Processing, ICSP 2006, 2187-2190.
[9] Y. Xiao and K. Kim, Searching the minimum distances of LDPC codes,
Proceedings of IET International Conference on Wireless Mobile and Multimedia Networks(ICWMMN 2008), Oct. Beijing, 2008, pp.211-214.
[10] J. Fan, Y. Xiao, A method of counting the number of cycles in LDPC
codes, 8th International Conference on Signal Processing, ICSP 2006, Vol.3, pp. 2183-2186.
[11] Y. Xiao and M –H Lee, Low complexity MIMO-LDPC CDMA systems
over multipath channels, IEICE Trans. COMMUN., Vol. E89-B, No. 5, 2006, pp.1713-1717.
[12] J. Kennedy and R. C. Eberhart, Particle Swarm Optimization, Proc.
IEEE International Conf. on Neural Networks, 1995: pp1942-1948
[13] Z. Y. HE. Extracting Rules from Fuzzy Neural Network by Particle
Swarm Optimization, Proc. of the IEEE Conference on Evolutionary Computation, ICEC 1998. IEEE,Piscataway, NJ, USA, 98TH8360: pp74-77
[14] Z. –Q. Guo; Y. Xiao; M. H. Lee; Multiuser Detection Based on
Particle Swarm Optimation Algorithm, Proc. of IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems(ISCAS 2007), 2007, pp.2582- 2585

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:25:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

