IEEE Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference
November 14-16, 2011 / Jeju, Korea
A 1pJ/cycle Processing Engine in LDPC Application with Charge Recovery Logic 978-1-4577-1785-7/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE
Yimeng Zhang, Mengshu Huang, Nan Wang, Satoshi Goto and Tsutomu Yoshihara Graduate School of Information, Production and Systems, Waseda University, Fukuoka, Japan. 808-0135
Email: yimeng.zhang@fuji.waseda.jp

Abstract—This paper presents a Processing Engine (PE) which is used in Low Density Parity Codec (LDPC) application with a novel charge-recovery logic called pseudo-NMOS boost logic (pNBL), to achieve high-speed and low power dissipation. pNBL is a high-overdriven, low area consuming charge recovery logic, which belongs to boost logic family. Proposed Processing Engine is used in LDPC circuit to reduce power dissipation and increase the processing speed. To demonstrate the performance of proposed PE, a test chip is designed and fabricated with 0.18µm CMOS technology. Simulation results indicate that proposed PE with pNBL dissipates only 1pJ/cycle when working at the frequency of 403MHz, which is only 36% of PE with conventional static CMOS gates. The measurement results shows that the test chip can work as high as 609MHz with the energy dissipation of 2.1pJ/cycle.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the recent research, charge recovery logic is restudied due to its low power dissipation. In numerous presented literatures [1], [2], [3], charge recovery logics have demonstrated that their power dissipation performance has great potential. Charge recovery logic can achieve high power dissipation performance because circuit energies are conserved rather than dissipated as heat. A number of factors such as transition rate, threshold voltage can affect the energy efficiency of charge recovery logic, but charge recovery logic can work with energy dissipation below CV 2 which is the fundamental limit of static CMOS logic [4].
Low Density Parity Codec (LDPC) is a high code rate codec which is researched widely in recent years [5], and the LDPC chip is broadly used in many wireless communication field for error correction. In wireless communication application, power dissipation is becoming more and more important because it affects the battery life directly. Reducing power dissipation of LDPC chip is an important topic in recent research, and the main ideas of low power are focusing on architecture or algorithm [6]. Both methods requires improvement of complexity of circuits to realize the low power performance, and in some conditions, a trade-off between speed and power dissipation has been considered. Other method of lowering power dissipation of LDPC chip is considered is this paper: not focusing on architecture or algorithm, but using novel low power dissipation circuits techniques
In this paper, a novel charge recovery logic called pseudoNMOS boost logic (pNBL) is proposed. pNBL has the features
IEEE AosfiabnooSstolloidg-iSc:tathtee oCpierrcautiiotns cCaonnbfeerdeivnidceed into evaluation
stage aNnodvbeomobsterst1ag4e-1, 6an, d20th1e1o/pJeerajuti,oKnofrreeaquency can reach

as high as Giga-hertz. Moreover, the drive ability of pNBL is higher comparing with other boost logics. To verify the proposed pNBL is effective in reducing power dissipation of LDPC chip, a critical sequential circuit module called Processing Engine (PE) which occupies large portion of power dissipation is constructed. By demonstrating that the power dissipation of PE can be reduced by using pNBL, the total power of LDPC is also can be reduced as a result.
A test chip of PE module with pNBL is designed and fabricated in standard CMOS 0.18µm process technology, and the simulation results indicate that pNBL can work at operation frequency as high as 1.1GHz to achieve a better performance of energy dissipation than the conventional static CMOS. When the proposed PE is working at 1.1GHz, the energy dissipation is 3.5pJ/cycle, which reduces only 4% comparing with the conventional static CMOS; but when the circuit works at a lower operation frequency 403MHz, the energy dissipation is 1.0pJ/cycle which reduces 64% of static CMOS. In LDPC application, the operation frequency is around several hundred megahertz, in which range, proposed pNBL gate can achieve much better energy dissipation performance than static CMOS circuits. The measurement results of test chip show that the proposed PE can work as high frequency as 609MHZ with the energy dissipation of 2.1pJ/cycle.
II. PSEUDO-NMOS BOOST LOGIC
In this section, operation of pseudo-NMOS boost logic (pNBL) is first discussed, and then the power performance of pNBL is analyzed.
A. Operation of Pseudo-NMOS Boost Logic
Pseudo-NMOS boost logic (pNBL) illustrated in Figure 1 is an enhancement of PBL. In pNBL, PUNs in both rails are substituted with a single PMOS transistor, respectively, and gates of the PMOS transistors are connected with clk.
Operation of pNBL is also divided into evaluation stage and boost stage as other members in boost logic family.
In evaluation stage, clk is in low half cycle (0 to Vdd/2) while clk is in high half cycle (Vdd/2 to Vdd). When clk is low, PMOS M7 and M8 are always on and act as Pull-Up Network, and the complementary inputs make one PDN on and the other off. This operation procedure is the same with pseudo-NMOS circuits.
In boost stage, clk is in high half cycle while clk is in low half cycle. Since clk is low, pass gates M5 and M6 are both off,

978-1-4577-1785-7/11/$26.00 ©2011 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:30:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Logic clk
clk M7

Boost clk

M3

M4

Logic clk
M8 clk

in PDN

M5 out M1

M6 out M2

in PDN

clk

clk

clk

Fig. 1. Proposed Structure of pNBL

so voltage generated by the evaluation network cannot transfer to boost network. Voltage values generated in the evaluation stage are then boosted to amplitude value of clk voltage (Vdd for logic ‘1’ and 0 for logic‘0’).
Compare with PBL [3], pNBL improves as follows. First, the complex pull-up networks are eliminated and therefore complexity of circuits can be improved with the same number of transistors. Second, the crowbar current in the logic parts is reduced so that power dissipation of pNBL is smaller than PBL.

B. Energy dissipation

The power dissipation analysis method of pNBL is similar with that applied on PBL in Ref [3]. To apply this analysis, some assumptions as preconditions are required. For the AC power supply analysis, signals are simplified to sinusoidal format, and the transistors are all working in the linear region. Energy analysis is divided into two parts: energy dissipated in logic parts and boost parts.
In the logic parts of pNBL, signals have to be analyzed in logic ‘1’ and ‘0’ cases, respectively. In logic ‘1’ case, signal voltage swings between Vdd and Vdd − Vth at the operation frequency, and in logic ‘0’ case, voltage swings between 0 and Vth at the operation frequency. Load capacitance for the logic parts is parasitic capacitance Cpass of pass gate M5 and M6 ; thus, current amplitude for both logic ‘0’ and ‘1’ conditions is ωCpassVth. Due to the two rail structure of pNBL, possibilities of logic ‘0’ and ‘1’ are the same. Energy dissipation on logic parts in one cycle is expressed as:

Elogic

≈

2π2ReCpass T

Cpass

Vt2h

(1)

where Re is equivalent resistance of NMOS devices in evaluation network, and T is time of one cycle.
In the boost parts of pNBL, analysis is also divided into logic ‘0’ case and logic ‘1’ case. In logic ‘0’ case, because in the evaluation stage, output gets connected with clk which is in low half cycle, and in the boost stage, output gets connected with clk which is also in low half cycle, output value swings between 0 and Vth in each half cycle which causes that its frequency is twice of operation clock; while in logic ‘1’ case, output signal swings between Vdd and Vdd −Vth at the same frequency with operation clock. Assuming the

load capacitance of pNBL gate is CL, current amplitudes are 2ωCLVth and ωCLVth for logic ‘0’ and ‘1’ cases, respectively. According to the analysis above, energy dissipation of boost

parts is expressed as:

Eboost

≈

1 2

(

1 √
2

ωCLVth)2RbT

+

1 2

√ ( 2ωCL

Vth

)2

Rb

T

=

5π2

Rb T

CL

CLVt2h

(2)

where Rb is equivalent resistance of boost network. As a result, the energy dissipation of pNBL is

EpNBL = Elogic + Eboost

≈

2π2ReCpass T

CpassVt2h

+

5π2RbCL T

CLVt2h(3)

In pNBL structure, equivalent resistance Rb and Re are comparable; load capacitance CL is tens of femto farad at Gigahertz level operation frequency while capacitance of pass gate Cpass is only several femto farad. With these preconditions, first item in Equation 3 is much smaller than the second item, which makes Equation 3 be simplified to

EpN BL

≈

5π2RbCL T

CL

Vt2h

(4)

Equation 4 shows that the contribution of logic parts is small enough to be negligible, and main power dissipation is caused in the boost parts.
Comparing with energy dissipation of PBL in Equation 5, about 28% energy saves due to the structure improvement as analyzed in II-A.

EP BL

≈

7π2RbCL T

CL

Vt2h

(5)

III. DESIGN OF PROCESSING ENGINE

A. Introduction on PE

Processing Engine (PE) is a central processing unit of the architecture of LDPC decoding circuit. In LDPC decoder, a parity check matrix (PCM) is required, and decoding algorithm called message passing algorithm (MPA). In MPA, log likelihood ratio (LLR) is used to combine messages. PEs are used to perform calculation of LLR.
Figure 2 shows a simplified block diagram of PE. The target of PE is to find the minimum value of the input LLR information and subtract the offset factor, and use this

Rij
- L(qj)

index

min_index

ABS

COMP

Rij_new

min

offset

MUX

sign

Accumulator

FIFO

L(qj)_new
+

Fig. 2. Block diagram of Processing Engine

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:30:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

offset value to update the check message. Inputs of PE are two 5-bit signed number (1 sign bit and 4 bit number), and by performing the MPA algorithm, the outputs of PE are also two 5-bit signed number. In the PE module, circuits including adder, FIFO, multiplexer and comparator, which can be presentative for digital circuits.

Vcc

L
R clk

L
R clk

B. Design PE with pNBL
Interface circuits between conventional static CMOS and proposed pNBL are shown in Figure 3; with these interfaces, pNBL circuits can be compatible with the conventional static CMOS. Interface between static CMOS is a pNBL buffer, with which input DC signals can be transferred to AC signals and in the meanwhile setup time and hold time of generated signals can also satisfy the requirement of pNBL. Interface between pNBL and static CMOS is the same with that described in Ref [3], which can be recognized as A/D converter. This data A/D converter samples data when output is in the peak values, and therefore delay caused by it is small comparing with cycle time of power clock.
To generate the power clock, LC tank is used to recycle energy from circuits because inductor can store energy in format of magnet energy, and then energy is reused in the next cycle in the format of electrical power. Since 2-phase non-overlap power clock is necessary to drive pNBL, circuit called blip [7] shown in Figure 4 is designed. Power supply to the clock generator VCC is 0.8V DC. To verify that the proposed system can work at a high operation frequency with high energy efficiency, center-tapped on-chip inductor model is used in the simulation.
IV. TEST CHIP OF PROPOSED PE
A. Simulation Evaluation
To demonstrate the power dissipation performance improvement, a conventional static CMOS PE with the same architecture is designed using the same 0.18µm process technology which is used in the pNBL PE design.
Since the pNBL is compatible with static CMOS, the functional verification method is the same with that of conventional PE circuits: input the data pattern and verify the output data. The verification results show that the proposed pNBL PE is functional correct at the frequency 1.5GHz.

static CMOS

CMOS to
pNBL

PE (pNBL)

pNBL to
CMOS

static CMOS

Vdd clk
M3 M1 D
D1 M5

Q

M6 clk

clk clk
out in
clk

clk out
clk

clk clk
in clk

Q

C

C

Fig. 4. Blip power clock generator

In this simulation, on-chip inductor is used, and the achieved operation frequencies are in the range between 403MHz and 1.1GHz. The simulation result shows that the energy dissipation increases as the operation frequency increases which is indicated in Equation 4. A same architecture PE with conventional static CMOS is designed to make comparison of energy dissipation. In the static CMOS case, energy dissipation per cycle is expressed as

ECMOS = CLVD2D

(6)

where CL is the load capacitance and VDD is power supply. To achieve a better performance of energy dissipation, in low operation frequency range, a lower VDD is used, and in the high operation frequency range, a higher VDD is required to make sure the circuits works functional correctly. Figure 5 shows the comparison of energy dissipation between PE with static CMOS and PE with pNBL gates.
When operation frequency is higher than 1.1GHz, energy dissipation of static CMOS PE and pNBL gate PE is in the same level. But when operation frequency is in the low range (403MHz) which is operation frequency of LDPC chip, energy dissipation of pNBL gate PE is 36% comparing with static CMOS PE. Which means according Figure 5, LDPC chip with pNBL gate PE can achieve a much better energy dissipation performance comparing with static CMOS gate in this range.

Energy Dissipation (pJ/cycle)

4

Static CMOS

3. 5

pNBL

1.6V

3

1.5V

1.4V

1.7V

2. 5 14pF
2 20pF

1.8V 10pF

1. 5 35pF

1 40pF

0. 5

400

500

600

700

800

900

Operation Frequency (MHz)

1.8V 6pF
1000

Vdd clk
M0 M2 D
D1 M4

Fig. 3. Interface circuits between pNBL and static CMOS

Fig. 5. Energy dissipation comparison between static CMOS and pNBL

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:30:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PE Modules

NMOS Pair

Fig. 6. Microphotograph of test chip

TABLE I PERFORMANCE SUMMARY OF PNBL GATE PE

Items

Value

Operation frequency range Technology Total Transistors NO. (including static CMOS interface) Power supply for oscillator Power supply for data A/D converter Energy dissipation per cycle
Test chip area

404MHz to 609MHz 0.18µm CMOS technology NMOS:1083 PMOS:563 DC 0.8V DC 1.2V 1pJ@403MHz (Simulated) 1.1pJ@404MHz (Measured) 558µm × 240µm

B. Test Chip Measurement
The proposed PE module with pNBL is fabricated with 0.18µm CMOS process technology. Figure 6 shows the microphotograph of test chip including power clock generator and PE module. Area of Processing Engine is 230µm × 161µm, the whole system including power clock generator is 558µm × 240µm. The central-tapped on-chip inductor used in power clock generator is 3nH, and off-chip capacitors are used to adjust the resonance frequency of power clock generator: achieved operation frequencies are 404MHz, 420MHz, 440MHz, 476MHz, 507MHz, 549MHz and 609MHz.
First the function of processing engine is tested, the result shows that the test chip can work functional correctly in all achieved frequency. And then the energy dissipation is measured; in the measurement, the test chip dissipates 1pJ/cycle at low frequency 404MHz and 2.1pJ/cycle at high range frequency 609MHz; as operation frequency increases, the energy dissipation increases.
Figure 7 shows the measurement result comparing with simulation result with operation frequency varying. Trend of measured result is the same with simulation result, but measured energy dissipation is a little larger than simulated result. This is because in measurement elements such as wire resistance is not included in simulation. Table I summarizes performance of test chip.

Energy Dissipation (pJ/cycle)

2. 2 Measurement Result Simulation Result
1. 8

1. 4

1

0. 8

400

450

500

550

600

650

Operation Frequency (MHz)

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper a novel structure of charge recovery logic called pseudo-NMOS boost logic (pNBL) is proposed. Comparing with other charge recovery logic, the proposed pNBL has the advantage of high speed and low power dissipation with less transistors.
A Processing Engine which is used in LDPC decode system is designed with this charge recovery logic and implemented with standard 0.18µm CMOS process technology. The simulation results show that proposed PE dissipates 3.5pJ/cycle at 1.1GHz, and 1pJ at 403MHz in simulation. The latter one is only 36% of PE with static CMOS gates.
The test chip is fabricated an measured, the result shows that the test chip can work at frequency up to 609MHZ with the energy dissipation of 2.1pJ/cycle including PE module and blip power clock generator.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research was supported by Waseda University Global COE Program “International Research and Education Center for Ambient SoC” sponsored by Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Suvakovic and C. Salama, “Two phase non-overlapping clock adiabatic differential cascode voltage switch logic (adcvsl),” Solid-State Circuits Conference, 2000. Digest of Technical Papers. ISSCC. 2000 IEEE International, pp. 364 –365, 2000.
[2] W.-H. Ma, J. C. Kao, V. S. Sathe, and M. Papaefthymiou, “A 187mhz subthreshold-supply robust fir filter with charge-recovery logic,” VLSI Circuits, 2009 Symposium on, pp. 202 –203, June 2009.
[3] Y. Zhang, L. Okamura, and T. Yoshihara, “An energy efficiency 4bit multiplier with two-phase non-overlap clock driven charge recovery logic,” Electronics, IEICE Transactions on, vol. E94-C, no. 4, pp. 605– 612, April 2011.
[4] W. Athas, L. Svensson, J. Koller, N. Tzartzanis, and E. Ying-Chin Chou, “Low-power digital systems based on adiabatic-switching principles,” Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 398 –407, Dec. 1994.
[5] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-shannon-limit quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038 – 1042, july 2004.
[6] A. Darabiha, A. Chan Carusone, and F. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for ldpc decoders,” Solid-State Circuits, IEEE Journal of, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835 –1845, aug. 2008.
[7] W. Athas, L. Svensson, and N. Tzartzanis, “A resonant signal driver for two-phase, almost-non-overlapping clocks,” Circuits and Systems, 1996. ISCAS ’96., ’Connecting the World’., 1996 IEEE International Symposium on, vol. 4, pp. 129 –132, 12-15 May, 1996.

Fig. 7. Energy dissipation comparison between measurement and simulation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 08:30:54 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

