2023 IEEE 33rd International Workshop on Machine Learning for Signal Processing (MLSP) | 979-8-3503-2411-2/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/MLSP55844.2023.10285934

2023 IEEE INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON MACHINE LEARNING FOR SIGNAL PROCESSING, SEPT. 17–20, 2023, ROME, ITALY
RELIABLE BELIEF PROPAGATION: RECENT THEORETICAL AND PRACTICAL ADVANCES
Christian Knoll and Franz Pernkopf Signal Processing and Speech Communication Laboratory, Graz University of Technology, Austria

ABSTRACT
Belief propagation (BP) is an effective approximate inference method but lacks theoretical guarantees for loopy graphs. We discuss the optimization landscape and the message dynamics and how this helps to understand the behavior of message passing algorithms. These insights suggest several improvements. Specifically, we consider iterative initialization strategies, optimized message scheduling methods, and structural modifications, to improve the convergence behavior and accuracy while maintaining the model’s interpretability.
We then evaluate the different modifications on signal detection problems in MIMO systems, which is a particularly challenging application for message passing algorithms. Our experimental results show consistent improvements over standard BP with minimal increase in computational burden.
Index Terms— belief propagation, message passing, graphical models, signal detection, MIMO
1. INTRODUCTION
Belief propagation (BP) is a powerful technique for approximate inference in graphical models, including Bayesian networks and Markov random fields. It can be effective and accurate and is well-suited for distributed computations, making it exceptionally suitable for a variety of applications. However, BP’s applicability is hindered by the lack of theoretical guarantees for loopy graphs, which frequently appear in practical applications. To enhance BP’s performance and applicability, a thorough understanding of its behavior and the underlying optimization landscape is essential.
In this paper, we, therefore, aim to address these limitations, leading to algorithmic improvements. We discuss several enhancements, including various initialization strategies, optimized message scheduling methods, and a combination of marginal estimates over time. These improvements facilitate better convergence and reliable estimates.
A particularly challenging and thus revealing application of BP is the signal detection problem in multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) systems. MIMO systems serve as an exceptional test-bed as they highlight many of BP’s
We acknowledge support from the Wireless Lab, Huawei Tech. Sweden.

shortcomings while also having practical relevance. Previous attempts to apply standard BP methods have shown limited success, necessitating alternative approaches. We focus on BP on the one hand because of its high degree of parallelizabilty, and on the other hand because of our aim to reveal and address its limitations. Our experiments demonstrate that the proposed enhancements consistently outperform standard algorithms in terms of convergence and accuracy, with only a slight increase in computational demand.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides an overview of BP and the signal detection problem. Section 3 reviews important theoretical work and presents practical improvements for BP. Section 4 evaluates the capabilities of the discussed BP variants when applied to the signal detection problem. Finally, Section 5 concludes the paper.

2. BACKGROUND
In this section, we provide a brief background on probabilistic graphical models, the Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm, and the signal detection problem in MIMO systems.

2.1. Graphical Models
Consider an undirected graph G = (X, E), with nodes X = {X1, . . . , XN } and undirected edges E = {(ij) : i < j}. We further denote the set of neighbors of node i, i.e., the set of nodes that are joined to i by edges (ij), by N (i).
A probabilistic graphical model is defined as U = (G, Ψ), where Ψ = {Φ(x1), . . . , Φ(xK )} is the set of all K potentials, and X is the set of random variables. In this work, we focus on pairwise models, where all potentials consist of at most two variables. Let Z be the partition function, then the joint distribution PX(x) factorizes as follows:

1

N

PX(x) = Z

Φ(xi, xj) Φ(xi).

(1)

(ij)∈E

i=1

We focus on estimating the marginal distributions P (xi) for individual variables. In general, this problem is intractable as it requires summing over exponentially many terms. Hence one often approximates the marginals instead; the belief

979-8-3503-2411-2/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:46:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

propagation (BP) algorithm, also known as the sum-product algorithm is an iterative algorithm for this purpose; a good overview of the underlying principle can be found in [1, 2].

2.2. Belief Propagation (BP)

BP recursively exchanges messages between variables to ap-
proximate the marginals. This approach enables local compu-
tation at the variable level, which leads to efficient processing. More precisely, BP computes the messages µ(ijn+1) at iteration (n + 1) according to

µi(jn+1) ∝

Φ(xi, xj)Φ(xi)

µ(kni)(xi). (2)

xi ∈X

Xk∈N (i)\j

Let µ(n) = {µi(jn) : (ij)} ∈ E, xj ∈ X } be the set of all messages at iteration (n); then, BP has converged when all successive messages remain unchanged, i.e., if µ(n+1) = µ(n).
The marginals for every variable can be approximated by the
product of the incoming messages according to

Pˆ(xi) ∝ Φ(xi)

µki(xi).

(3)

Xk∈N (i)

BP was designed for tree-structured graphs, where it is guaranteed to converge and return the exact marginals [3]. For loopy graphs, however, BP might fail to converge, and even if it does, the resulting marginals are only approximations [4, 5]. Despite these issues, BP has been successfully applied in various applications with associated loopy graphs [6]. Much research focuses on understanding BP’s limitations and on designing versatile modifications that can cope well with loopy graphs. We will summarize these findings and discuss potentials for improvement in Section 3.

However, the ML method is computationally intractable for large-scale MIMO systems, as it requires an exhaustive search over all possible signals. Instead, one can approximate the prior distribution by a Gaussian, which leads to the popular minimum mean squared error (MMSE) estimator

xˆMMSE = (HT H + σ2I)−1HT .

(6)

While the MMSE decoder is more efficient, it still requires a costly matrix inversion. Alternatively, one can approximate the ML estimate by utilizing the representation of the likelihood in its factorized form with

Φ(xi)

=

exp(

yT hixi σ2

hiT hix2i 2σ2

),

(7)

Φ(xi,

xj

)

=

exp(−

1 σ2

hTi

hj

xixj

).

(8)

This representation does not simplify the problem in itself but it admits message passing methods that exploit the statistical dependencies and compute the marginals by recursive local computations. As such BP is a promising candidate for approximating the ML solution. As discussed, BP is neither guaranteed to converge nor to find the correct marginals for loopy graphs. The graphical model associated with the signal detection problem, however, is usually dense and contains many loops (as there is not much sparsity in the channel matrix), i.e., it is less suited for the application of BP than other applications e.g., in computer vision or LDPC codes. Indeed, BP is known to perform poorly for the signal detection problem, and it cannot be fixed by standard techniques or by introducing a certain amount of sparsity [7]. This makes the signal detection problem particularly interesting for assessing the capabilities of the discussed BP modifications.

2.3. Signal Detection in MIMO Systems

We consider a multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) sys-
tem with N users, each with one antenna, connected to a basestation equipped with M antennas (N ≤ M ). The channel gain between transmit antenna i and receive antenna j is given by hij. The transmitted signal, denoted by x = (x1, . . . , xN ), consists of independent symbols from the complex alphabet A, i.e., x ∈ AN . The receiver observes the signal impaired by additive complex white Gaussian noise with ni ∼ CN (0, σ2):

y = Hx + n.

(4)

Signal detection aims to infer the transmitted signal x given the channel matrix H and the received signal y. This complex-valued problem can be cast into an equivalent realvalued problem of twice the size (see [7]).
The maximum likelihood (ML) method is optimal for this task, as it finds the transmitted signals that maximize the likelihood of the observed data, i.e.,

xˆML = argmax P (y|H, x) = argmin ||Hx − y||2. (5)

x∈AN

x∈AN

3. IMPROVED BELIEF PROPAGATION
In this section, we summarize recent advances for BP. We will first start with a non-exhaustive overview of theoretical studies that helped to get a better understanding of the behavior of BP. Subsequently, we will discuss a number of practical implications that build upon those theoretical insights.
3.1. Theoretical Analysis
Extensive work has been devoted to understanding the behavior of BP. This has been particularly spurred by recognizing the inherent connection between the fixed points of BP and stationary points of the Bethe free energy [8]. For an exhaustive overview, we refer to resources such as [6, 2, 9, 1].
It is well-understood that BP converges to a stationary point of the Bethe free energy if it converges. Studying the optimization landscape by computing all Bethe states is only possible for restricted model classes though [10, 11, 12, 13]. Research on the dynamics of BP has focused on properties of its stationary points, examining local stability [14, 15] and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:46:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

regions of attraction [16]. However, their applicability is limited due to the required knowledge of the stationary points.
Given the complexity of properly understanding the optimization landscape, one can approximate the Bethe free energy instead, either by a convex function [17, 18] or by structural simplifications of the graph [19]. Although such approximations are more efficient, they often lack accuracy [20].
Most theoretical analyses offer valuable insights but rarely carry over to practical applications. They do, however, inspire modifications of BP. Recently, there has been a resurgence of interest in refining BP in two directions: first, by augmenting the update rule with neural networks; and second, by modifying specific aspects of the update rule to improve BP’s convergence behavior (including scheduling, initialization strategies, etc.).
3.2. Hybrid Models
While a comprehensive evaluation of hybrid models extends beyond the scope of this work, we briefly highlight recent advances. Hybrid models aim to reduce the need for fine-tuning the message passing algorithm by adapting it to the problem at hand. This adaptability can be attained through leveraging neural networks to either augment the messages [21, 22] or refine the graphical model [23]. Furthermore, a range of variational approximations can be unified to derive message passing algorithms, thereby optimizing the accuracyefficiency trade-off [24]. The use of reactive programming has also proven to be a valuable and flexible tool to enhance the efficiency of message passing [25].
In general, hybrid models have achieved significant success, often accelerating convergence and improving accuracy. The integration of neural networks usually yields data-efficient models that generalize well, primarily due to the stringent constraints of the underlying graphical model, which allows for the elegant incorporation of domain knowledge. In the context of the signal detection problem, augmenting the estimated symbols and variance of the orthogonal approximate message passing (OAMP) decoder by using a selfattention model has improved the performance consistently while maintaining excellent generalization capabilities [26].
3.3. Modifications of BP
Conventional BP is inherently related to the system, requires no training, and can be effectively parallelized for distributed settings. We will first review recently proposed algorithmic modifications for improving the performance of BP before analyzing them on the signal detection problems in Section 4.
The standard implementation of BP (see (2)) is one specific case in a broad class of message passing algorithms. Although similar in nature, different design choices in the subtleties of the update rule can lead to significantly different behavior. The key ingredients that specify the algorithmic behavior and can be tuned to enhance the performance are: first,

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1: Trajectories of BP initialized with (a) the wrong symbol, (b) the correct symbol, and (c) at random. The correct symbol lies in the lower right corner as illustrated by the likelihood landscape, i.e., at the blue background. The estimates are illustrated in green (MMSE), blue (ML), and black (BP).

the choice of the initialization, second, the update function (this includes damping and different rules for scheduling the messages), and third, the evaluation function that maps the messages to the values of interest (i.e., the marginals). We will now discuss different modifications of BP along those three aspects. Although this gives an elegant unifying view of the main aspects determining the behavior of BP, it is crucial to recognize the absence of a specific optimal choice. Understanding how these design choices affect BP’s behavior is essential for adapting it to specific applications.
3.4. Modified Initialization Strategies
As for any numerical method, the initial message values can have a large impact on the quality of the final estimate. Suitable initialization strategies can not only improve the convergence properties but also favor convergence towards accurate fixed points. Unfortunately, our knowledge about the optimization strategy is relatively limited so one often uses random or uniform message initialization. For so-called unidirectional models, initialization consistent with the local potentials guarantees convergence to the global optimum [27, 28].
3.5. Modified Update Rules
Damping messages is a standard approach to improve BP’s convergence behavior [29]. That is done by replacing the messages with a convex combination µ(n+1) = µ(n+1)(1 − ε) + µ(n) . This requires a well-chosen damping value ε, strong enough to achieve convergence and not too large to keep the number of iterations reasonable.
Alternatively, much potential lies in optimizing the update order of the messages. One widely adopted scheduling method to enhance the convergence and accuracy of Belief Propagation (BP) is residual belief propagation (RBP) [30]. RBP measures the residual, i.e., the change between two updates and prioritizes the message with the largest difference. This often helps to quickly reach a stable fixed point. Sometimes, however, RBP updates the same messages repeatedly, leading to oscillations; moreover, the quality of the estimate is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:46:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(a)

(b)

(c)

(d)

Fig. 2: Trajectories for different update rules: (a) parallel updates, (b) random updates, (c) RBP, and (d) WDBP. All variants use a damping value of ε = 0.4 and were initialized uniformly.

often not as good as expected. To address this issue, weightdecay belief propagation (WDBP) mitigates the oscillating behavior of RBP by dividing the residual of messages by the number of times a given edge has already been selected for update [31]. Such adaptive scheduling methods are termed informed scheduling.
3.6. Modified Evaluation Functions
The third kind of algorithmic modification is changing the evaluation function in (3). This is inspired by the fact that challenging models often require drastically large damping values for BP to converge, which significantly increases BP’s run-time. Averaging estimated symbols over a time frame can provide more representative estimates for non-convergent or slow-converging instances, potentially reducing the need for tuning the damping parameter and overall runtime.
This assumes that BP oscillates along a trajectory centered close to the correct estimate. Simply averaging the symbols, disregards all probabilistic information, however. By averaging the marginals, we achieve more robust estimates within fewer iterations. Easily integrated with any BP variant, this approach enhances performance and reliability in nonconvergent problems. Henceforth, these methods are referred to as BP with averaging and BP with marginal averaging
4. EXPERIMENTS
Assessing the practical impact of the proposed BP modifications, such as their application to signal detection in MIMO systems, is critical. This challenging task serves as an ideal testbed for comparing different BP variants. We will apply and compare the modified versions of BP with traditional BP and MMSE, yielding insights into their advantages, limitations, and potential research avenues.
4.1. Trajectory Analysis
While damping often helps to achieve convergence, BP rarely converges unless using extreme damping values of ε > 0.95. This, however, slows the convergence of BP drastically. Note that [32] reports an optimal damping value of ε = 0.4; given

the erratic behavior of BP, this number fluctuates significant depending on system specifications and the maximum number of iterations. Instead of blindly terminating BP and hoping for the best, we systematically study its behavior and suggest improvements based on empirical observations.
Figure 1 illustrates BP trajectories for a 4 × 8 MIMO system with 4-quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM). For visualization purposes, we project the trajectory onto a 2D space (representing one symbol). It also shows the MMSE (in green), the ML estimate (in blue), and the likelihood landscape. Optimal initialization (i.e., at the correct symbol) doesn’t ensure convergence to the most accurate fixed point; BP tends to follow a similar trajectory after a few iterations, irrespective of the initialization. Therefore, we need alternative ways to address convergence issues.
Figure 2 illustrates the trajectories for different message scheduling methods. While informed scheduling enhances the performance of BP, it can waste significant computational resources by updating only one message after computing all updates. This issue worsens with increasing system size and SNR, as the number of messages is larger and convergence is slower. A potential solution is updating a larger number of messages per iteration. Following [33], we update the top third of priority-sorted messages per iteration, thereby preserving informed scheduling’s robustness and performance, enhancing runtime, and achieving quicker convergence.
4.2. Averaging and Marginal Averaging
Figure 3 illustrates the effect of averaging and marginal averaging for different BP variants. For parallel and random updates, marginal averaging provides consistent improvement across all SNR values. Informed scheduling methods, such as RBP and WDBP, generally outperform standard BP, but the improvement varies depending on the SNR.
Interestingly, there is little difference between symbolwise and marginal averaging for RBP and WDBP, possibly due to their slower and more deliberate steps. Overall, the oscillating nature of BP is expected for the systems considered, and using an averaging scheme, ideally in the marginal domain, is highly recommended to reduce the oscillations’ impact. More elaborate scheduling methods can considerably

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:46:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3: SER over SNR (in dB) for a MIMO system of size 4 × 8 with 4-QAM modulation (5 · 104 transmissions) for: MMSE (brown), BP with parallel updates (black), with random updates (magenta), RBP (green) and WDBP (blue). Averaging is depicted by dots and marginal averaging by crosses.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4: (a) SER over SNR (in dB) for a MIMO system with 4-QAM modulation of size 8 × 16. We compare WDBP with averaging (orange), marginal averaging (blue), early stopping (red), and MMSE (brown). (b) the proportion of instances that converged within 100 iterations at most over SNR (in dB).

improve BP’s performance, but the extent of improvement depends on the specific configuration.
4.3. Early Stopping
Ideally, an objective quantity could predict BP’s performance for a given transmission. We hope to establish a connection between BP’s behavior and the problem’s hardness. Relying on WDBP with selecting the top-third of the priority-sorted messages, we found that a substantial proportion of instances either converge within relatively few iterations ns or fail to converge entirely. Empirically, we observed that – for the problems considered – setting a maximum of ns = 100 iterations is a good choice, as additional iterations would benefit only a small fraction of the models.
We will now quantify this more systematically. Therefore, we consider 100.000 random instances of a 8 × 16 system. Figure 4 compares the average SER of MMSE, WDBP, WDBP with marginal averaging, and WDBP stopped after ns = 100 iterations. We report the SER across all instances for the first three methods, whereas, for the last method, we discard instances that did not converge within ns iterations and average the SER over the remainder. The figure also shows the proportion of instances where WDBP converged within ns iterations. Early-stopping WDBP consistently outperforms standard WDBP and even surpasses MMSE in the low SNR region, with its relative improvement becoming more apparent as SNR increases.
4.4. Discussion
Two primary failure modes exist for BP: the existence of fixed points with suboptimal approximation quality, and a fragile optimization landscape exhibiting poor convergence behavior. Through our experiments, we found the latter to be the main challenge in the context of MIMO systems. This emphasizes the necessity to utilize some of the proposed modifications. While damping can help, its efficacy is undermined

by the need for careful, instance-specific fine-tuning; in contrast, informed scheduling (preferably WDBP with a priority queue) yields more consistent and robust improvements.
Furthermore, we observed a strong connection between the SNR and the behavior of BP, necessitating different strategies for different SNR regions. For low SNR, BP displays a tendency to oscillate, often demanding considerable effort to achieve convergence. That being said, the attained fixed point is typically accurate, making reliance on marginal averaging largely beneficial. For high SNR, BP tends to converge more frequently, but – if it does not – the failure is often catastrophic. Hence, we advise relying on early stopping for discerning and handling these problematic instances.
5. CONCLUSION
This paper examined the performance of Belief Propagation (BP) for signal detection in MIMO systems, revealing its convergence issues and suggesting potential enhancements. Our experiments showed that simple initialization strategies offer little improvement. Instead, we employed marginal averaging to address convergence issues, exploiting BP’s tendency to oscillate around correct symbols to enhance its performance.
We also explored informed scheduling methods, which consistently outperformed standard BP. Despite the task’s inherent challenges that render standard BP ineffective, minor modifications yielded substantial improvements, potentially making BP viable for previously unsuitable applications. We further conjecture that these enhancements, informed scheduling or marginal averaging, could also improve the overall performance of hybrid approaches.
6. REFERENCES
[1] FR Kschischang, BJ Frey, and HA Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf., vol. 47, 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:46:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[2] M Mezard and A Montanari, Information, Physics, and Computation, Oxford Univ. Press, 2009.
[3] J Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1988.
[4] JM Mooij and HJ Kappen, “Sufficient conditions for convergence of the sum–product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, 2007.
[5] Y Weiss, “Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models with loops,” Neural Comp., 2000.
[6] D Koller and N Friedman, Probabilistic Graphical Models: Principles and Techniques, MIT press, 2009.
[7] J Goldberger and A Leshem, “Mimo detection for highorder qam based on a gaussian tree approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 4973–4982, 2011.
[8] Jonathan S Yedidia, William T Freeman, Yair Weiss, et al., “Generalized belief propagation,” in NIPS, 2000.
[9] M Wainwright and M Jordan, “Graphical models, exponential families, and variational inference,” Foundations and Trends in Machine Learning, 2008.
[10] Adrian Weller and Tony Jebara, “Bethe bounds and approximating the global optimum,” in AISTATS, 2013.
[11] Christian Knoll and Franz Pernkopf, “Belief propagation: Accurate marginals or accurate partition function – where is the difference?,” in UAI, 2019.
[12] Gabriele Perugini and Federico Ricci-Tersenghi, “Improved belief propagation algorithm finds many Bethe states in the random-field Ising model on random graphs,” Physical Review E, vol. 97, no. 1, 2018.
[13] Amin Coja-Oghlan and Will Perkins, “Bethe states of random factor graphs,” Communications in Mathematical Physics, vol. 366, no. 1, pp. 173–201, 2019.
[14] JM Mooij and HJ Kappen, “On the properties of the Bethe approximation and loopy belief propagation on binary networks,” JSTAT, 2005.
[15] C Knoll and F Pernkopf, “On Loopy Belief Propagation–Local Stability Analysis for NonVanishing Fields,” in UAI, 2017.
[16] H Leisenberger, C Knoll, R Seeber, and F Pernkopf, “Convergence behavior of belief propagation: estimating regions of attraction via lyapunov functions,” in UAI, 2021.
[17] A Globerson and T Jaakkola, “Convergent propagation algorithms via oriented trees,” in UAI, 2007.

[18] J Jancsary and G Matz, “Convergent decomposition solvers for tree-reweighted free energies,” in AISTATS, 2011.
[19] H Leisenberger, F Pernkopf, and C Knoll, “Fixing the bethe approximation: How structural modifications in a graph improve belief propagation,” in UAI, 2022.
[20] O Meshi, A Jaimovich, A Globerson, and N Friedman, “Convexifying the Bethe free energy,” in UAI, 2009.
[21] E Nachmani, Y Be’ery, and D Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in Allerton Conference. IEEE, 2016.
[22] V G Satorras and M Welling, “Neural enhanced belief propagation on factor graphs,” in AISTATS, 2021.
[23] L Schmid and L Schmalen, “Low-complexity nearoptimum symbol detection based on neural enhancement of factor graphs,” IEEE Trans. Commun., 2022.
[24] ˙I S¸ eno¨z, T van de Laar, D Bagaev, and B de Vries, “Variational message passing and local constraint manipulation in factor graphs,” Entropy, 2021.
[25] D Bagaev, B de Vries, et al., “Reactive message passing for scalable bayesian inference,” Scientific Programming, vol. 2023, 2021.
[26] A Fuchs, C Knoll, N Mohadam, A Pak, J Huang, E Leitinger, and F Pernkopf, “Self-attention for enhanced OAMP detection in MIMO systems,” in ICASSP, 2023.
[27] C Knoll, A Weller, and F Pernkopf, “Self-Guided Belief Propagation – a Homotopy Continuation Method,” IEEE TPAMI, 2023.
[28] F Koehler, “Fast convergence of belief propagation to global optima: Beyond correlation decay,” in NIPS, 2019.
[29] KP Murphy, Y Weiss, and M Jordan, “Loopy belief propagation for approximate inference: an empirical study,” in UAI, 1999.
[30] G Elidan, I McGraw, and D Koller, “Residual belief propagation: Informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing,” in UAI, 2006.
[31] C Knoll, M Rath, S Tschiatschek, and F Pernkopf, “Message Scheduling Methods for Belief Propagation,” in ECML. 2015.
[32] P Som, T Datta, A Chockalingam, and BS Rajan, “Improved large-mimo detection based on damped belief propagation,” in ITW. IEEE, 2010.
[33] V Aksenov, D Alistarh, and J H Korhonen, “Scalable belief propagation via relaxed scheduling,” NIPS, 2020.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:46:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

