2023 IEEE 29th International Conference on Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications (RTCSA)

2023 IEEE 29th International Conference on Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications (RTCSA) | 979-8-3503-3786-0/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/RTCSA58653.2023.00018

Improving Read Performance for LDPC-Based SSDs with Adaptive Bit Labeling on Vth States

Jia-Xin Hou Department of Computer Science National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan noelhou7@gmail.com

Li-Pin Chang Department of Computer Science National Yang Ming Chiao Tung University
Hsinchu, Taiwan lpchang@cs.ncyu.edu.tw

Abstract—NAND-based Solid-State Disks (SSDs) have become the mainstream storage solution thanks to their high I/O performance and data persistency. Modern SSDs boost their storage capacity by increasing the flash cell-bit density, resulting in severe leakage-induced bit errors over time. Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) is a common error correcting code for flash memory, which features incremental decoding strength levels through adding extra voltage sensing levels. However, when bit error rate becomes high, LDPC decoding with strong correction will be very slow. In this study, we identify that the read latency is strongly correlated with the method of bit labeling on cell threshold-voltage states, and based on this finding we propose using adaptive bit labeling to optimize the SSD read latency. Specifically, our method employ 2-3-2 Gray Coding as the default mode, and frequently-read data will be switched to using the least-significant page and center-significant page with 1-2-4 Gray Coding for fast reading. Our experimental results show that our design greatly outperforms static bit labeling and a state-of-theart method.
Index Terms—Solid-state disks, flash memory, Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC), read performance, memory reliability
I. INTRODUCTION
Solid-State Disks (SSDs), in particular NAND-flash-based ones, have become the mainstream storage solution for mobile devices, personal computers, and enterprise servers. While providing excellent power conservation and vibration resistance, for a higher storage density per unit of cost, modern flash memory is thrusting toward a three-dimensional architecture with a high cell-bit density [10], [11]. Specifically, the Triple-Level Cell (TLC) design stores three logical bits per memory cell. However, modern flash designs suffer from various types of noises, among which retention error is the most significant one [3], [14], [19]. A flash memory cell represents logical bits using its threshold voltage level (Vth). However, due to charge leakage, over time this cell Vth level drops and eventually the bit information changes unexpectedly. This effect is in particular serious in modern flash memory, because when the cell-bit density is high, the error margin for voltage drifting becomes very narrow.
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) has been a standard error correcting method for modern SSDs [7], [16]. LDPC features dual-mode error correction: In the hard-decoding mode,
This work is in part supported by National Science and Technology Council, Taiwan, with a grant number MOST 110-2221-E-A49-029-MY3.

it accepts binary bit inputs, i.e., 0 and 1, for error correction. If hard decoding fails, LDPC proceeds to probability-based soft decoding. Soft decoding takes soft bit inputs, i.e., Log Likelihood Ratio (LLR) values, using extra voltage sensing levels. When soft decoding fails, it increases the current decoding strength by adding extra voltage sensing levels. However, voltage sensing with an extra level induces a read-equivalent latency, and therefore it is crucial to decode with as few sensing levels as possible for a high SSD read performance.
A TLC (cell) divides the full Vth extent into eight states and labels three logical bits, namely, LSB, CSB, and MSB, on the eight states. Commodity TLC flash employs Gray Coding for the bit labeling. For example, the lowest Vth state is labeled with 111 and the second lowest state is labeled with 011. The benefit of Gray Coding is that bit alternation is minimal between neighbor Vth states [13]. There are two possible bit labeling methods based on Gray Coding: 1-2-4 coding and 23-2 coding (see Section II-A for details). With 1-2-4 coding [8], the LSB alters only between the two center Vth states, while the MSB flips four times from the highest state to the lowest one. By contrast, 2-3-2 coding [18] balances the bit alternations among the three bits.
The choice of the bit labeling method affects the read latency in two ways: 1) the number of voltage sensing required and 2) the non-uniform degrees of charge leakage among Vth states. For the first factor, the more bit alternations of a logical bit has, the more voltage sensing is required on read. For example, four voltage sensing operations are required to determine the MSB value with 1-2-4 coding. For the second factor, the leakage-induced retention error is more serious on high Vth states. As the MSB with 1-2-4 coding alters between two highest Vth states (see P7 and P6 in Fig. 1a), it is more prone to retention error compared with the MSB with 2-3-2 coding and it may require stronger but slower LDPC decoding. These properties enable strategic mode selection for read-performance optimization: While 2-3-2 coding provides balanced, short read latencies among all bits in the short term, when the retention time is long, 1-2-4 coding offers very fast LSB and CSB but extremely slow MSB.
This study aims for improving the read performance of LDPC-based SSDs using adaptive bit labeling. Here, system software reads flash in terms of pages, each of which is formed

2325-1301/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE

77

DOI 10.1109/RTCSA58653.2023.00018

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

by all logical bits having the same bit significance from the cells of a word line. For example, the LSB page refers to a 16KB unit formed by all the LSBs of a string of flash cells. We observed that after a long duration of retention, reading LSB pages and reading CSB pages with 1-2-4 coding are still very fast because they require either hard decoding only or soft decoding with a low strength level. On the other hand, reading newly written data better uses 2-3-2 coding as the page read latencies are highly balanced. Based on these, our idea is simple: whenever a piece of existing data is identified frequently read, it will be migrated to an LSB page or a CSB page of a 1-2-4-coded block.
Our approach is performed by the Flash Translation Layer (FTL). It requires to monitor the read frequencies of page data and keeps track of the current coding method for flash blocks, each of which has 768 pages in typical TLC flash. We assume that the flash memory supports both 1-2-4 coding and 2-3-2 coding, but a flash block can only be configured to use one of the two upon erasure. On write, incoming data are always written to 2-3-2 coded blocks for balanced read latencies. On read, page data are read from a block using the current coding mode of the block. When a page is identified read frequently, it is kept in records for background migration. On page migration, a frequently-read page is copied to an LSB page or a CSB page of a block that uses 1-2-4 coding.
We conducted a series of experiments on the proposed method and compared it against two baseline approaches, 12-4 coding only and 2-3-2 coding only, and a prior method FastRead [5]. Results show that our design improved the read latency upon the three methods by 50%, 35%, and 23%, respectively. In summary, this study makes the following contributions:
1) Characterizing the page read latencies of different bit coding methods in consideration of retention time and LDPC decoding overhead.
2) Proposing an adaptive bit coding method for optimizing flash read performance.
3) Demonstrating the efficacy of the adaptive bit coding selection method under realistic workloads.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II presents the backgrounds of flash retention error and LDPC error correction, along with our motivating observation of this study. Section III elaborates the proposed approach for read performance improvement. Section IV reports our experimental results. Finally, Section V concludes this paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
A. NAND Flash and Bit Coding/Labeling
Cells are the basic unit for data storage in NAND flash. A cell is programmed (written) through electron charge injection. A cell represents bit value(s) with its threshold voltage Vth level, which is proportional to the amount of charge trapped in the cell. Reading data from a flash cell is based on voltage comparison of the current cell Vth against a pre-defined reference voltage level Vref . If the cell Vth is below the

(a) Bit labeling with 1-2-4 coding.
(b) Bit labeling with 2-3-2 coding.
Fig. 1: Two available bit labeling methods for TLC flash.
reference voltage, then the cell reads 1. Otherwise, the cell reads 0. Ths design, referred to as Single-Level Cell (SLC), stores 1 bit per cell. To boost the storage capacity per unit cost, modern flash designs store multiple bits in a cell. Fig. 1a shows that in TLC flash, the full extent of cell Vth is divided by seven reference voltages (Vref1 to Vref7) into eight Vth states (ER to P7), which suffice to represent three bits, namely, the Least Significant Bit (LSB), Center Significant Bit (CSB), and Most Significant Bit (MSB).
Flash cells are exposed to various types of noises, with retention error being the most significant one [14], [19]. Injected electron charge is trapped in flash cells, and thus flash memory offers non-volatility of data storage. However, as electron charge gradually escapes from cells, the threshold voltage level of a cell drops over time. The charge leakage eventually results in bit flips. For example, in Fig. 1a, if the cell Vth state is previously at P7 but now drops to P6, then an error emerges at the MSB (1 to 0).
The labeling of bits on Vth states is related to the management of bit errors and the overhead of bit reading. Specifically, bit labeling in commodity flash products employs Gray Coding, and there are two possible coding methods available. Fig. 1a depicts the original 1-2-4 coding. With it, LSB alters only between P3 and P4, and therefore one time of comparison between the cell Vth against Vref4 determines the LSB value, i.e., LSB is 1 if the comparison reports “less than”. However, four times of voltage comparison against Vref1, Vref3, Vref5, and Vref7 are required to determined the value of MSB. With Gray Coding, only one bit changes between neighbor Vth states, and therefore the leakage-induced bit errors can be reduced. Fig. 1b shows the balanced 2-3-2 coding. Differently, this method evenly distributes the required voltage comparison operations among reading LSB, CSB, and MSB.
B. Flash Error and LDPC Error Correction To model the distribution of the threshold voltage with
respect to a particular cell Vth state (e.g., P7 in Fig. 1), a common technique employs the Gaussian function N (μ,σ2) [17]. Over time, due to charge leakage, the distribution moves

78 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

leftward (toward low voltage) and becomes wider [10], [11].
The negative effects can be simulated by an decrease in the mean μ with an increase in the variance σ2, as follows [4]:

Δμ = K0K1(x − x0)ln(1 + t/t0)N 0.5 Δσ2 = K0K2(x − x0)ln(1 + t/t0)N 0.6

(1)

In these equations, K0, K1, and K2 are constant coefficients dependent on memory devices, x0 is the lowest possible Vth level, and t0 is the time unit length. In particular, t describes the retention time, and N refers to the P/E cycle count. The equations indicate that when the retention time t is large, the distortion of Vth distribution will be significant. With this, an overlap between neighbor Vth states emerges, as well as erroneous bits.
Modern SSDs employ LDPC to manage the bit errors in flash memory. With LDPC, a k-bit message is encoded into an n-bit codeword, i.e., the code rate is k/n (n > k). Like standard error-correction codes, LDPC can operate on binary input of bits. Fig. 2(a) shows that a hard bit is obtained by comparing the current cell Vth against a reference voltage. However, with a long period of retention time, the distribution of Vth states suffers from severe distortion and LDPC may fail to decode with hard bits. For stronger error correction, LDPC features soft decoding, which is based on the soft input on bits. Fig. 2(b) depicts that two extra voltage sensing levels are added surrounding the existing reference voltage level. Using soft sensing levels enables soft bit inputs that denote the confidence on the bit value. Soft inputs are often denoted using Log Likelihood Ratio (LLR) values. An LLR value is a signed real number, and the more the value deviates from zero, the more confident the soft input will be.
Notably, soft decoding with LDPC features incremental strength of error correction. For example, when soft decoding with two extra sensing levels fails, the SSD firmware may add more soft sensing levels to better distinguish between neighbor Vth states. Compared with Fig. 2(b), in Fig. 2(c) LDPC involves two extra pairs of soft sensing levels for stronger error correction. Although using many soft sensing levels helps improve the chance to decode the data, sensing with each extra voltage level introduces a read-equivalent latency on flash reading. Therefore, it is important to decode data using as few extra sensing levels as possible. In commodity SSDs, the firmware often adopts a table that records the block- or pagelevel history of the number of extra sensing levels used in the latest successful decoding attempt [9].

C. Motivational Observation
Read Latency. The latency of reading a page involves a few factors, including sensing the cell Vth, transferring hard/soft bit information to the LDPC decoder, and decoding the page data. In particular, the total number of voltage sensing includes not only the reference voltage levels for hard sensing but also the extra soft sensing levels surrounding each hard sensing level. For example, based on the 2-3-2 coding, soft decoding on the CSB page with two extra soft sensing levels requires

+DUGVHQVLQJOHYHO

6RIWVHQVLQJOHYHO

D

E

F

Fig. 2: LDPC decoding for flash: (a) Hard decoding. (b) Soft decoding with an extra pair of sensing levels and (c) soft decoding with two more pairs of sensing levels.

TABLE I: Average page read latency (see Equation 2) with 1-2-4 coding or 2-3-2 coding over retention times.

retention 1 day
1 month 3 months 6 months

1-2-4 Gray Coding LSB CSB MSB 66 104 180 229 305 1075 229 324 1652 229 356 1705

2-3-2 Gray Coding LSB CSB MSB 104 142 104 305 435 335 305 782 587 305 847 771
units: μs

3×(2+1)=9 voltage sensing operations. In other words, the page read latency can be formulated as follows:
read latency = (# of Vref levels × total sensing level)×
sensing latency + transf er time
+ LDP C decoding overhead (2)
The total number of voltage sensing operations dominates the page read latency. However, how many soft sensing levels are required by LDPC decoding is also dependent on the altitude of the reference voltage levels. For example, as shown in Fig. 1b, with 2-3-2 coding, reading LSB involves Vref5 and Vref1 while reading MSB involves Vref7 and Vref3. According to Equation 1, if the cell Vth is at a higher voltage level (i.e., x is large), the distortion of the Vth distribution will be more severe. Consequently, if reading a page involves one or more high-level reference voltages, LDPC may require more extra soft sensing levels for successful decoding.
Based on the flash reliability model in Equation 1 and the coefficients measured on a real 3D NAND flash product (see Section IV-A), we simulate the effect of retention error on flash cells and the total number of hard/soft sensing levels for successful page decoding. Table I shows the page read latencies with 1-2-4 coding and 2-3-2 coding over retention times. A key observation is that when the retention time is short, reading pages with 1-2-4 coding or 2-3-2 coding are both fast. However, when the retention time is long, reading a CSB page and reading an MSB page with 2-3-2 coding become slow, and reading an MSB page with 1-2-4 coding is even slower.
Analysis. By analyzing the breakdown of the page reading latency, we found that reading an MSB page with 1-2-4 coding requires 5.04 voltage sensing levels on average (including the hard sensing level) for LDPC decoding, and a total of 4×5.04

79 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

sensing operations are required to decode. Note that reading the MSB page involves Vref7, Vref5, Vref3, and Vref2, and the first two high levels are highly susceptible to charge leakage. On the other hand, reading an LSB page with 1-2-4 coding involves one moderate level of reference voltage Vref4, which is much less susceptible to charge leakage, and therefore a much small number of sensing levels are required for LDPC decoding.
Insights. Our basic idea is to switch between the two coding methods adaptively with a particular emphasis on a long retention time. Reading data with 2-3-2 coding enjoys a fast or moderate latency because the reference voltage levels are evenly distributed among different types of pages. However, when the retention time is long, reading a CSB page or an MSB page becomes slow due to a large number of reference voltages (e.g., three for the CSB page) or highaltitude, leakage-prone reference voltages (e.g., Vref7 for the MSB page). By contrast, with 1-2-4 coding, reading an LSB page or a CSB page is always very fast regardless of the retention time length, but after three months reading an MSB page becomes extremely slow. Therefore, while short-lived data can be written to pages with 2-3-2 coding, frequentlyread data with a long lifetime can be migrated to LSB pages and CSB pages for 1-2-4 coding.
D. Related Work
While the manufacturing cost of flash memory is constantly dropping, the research community is shifting their attention to flash reliability issues. In particular, NAND flash memory is subject to various types of noises, including read disturbance, write disturbance, and charge leakage (retention errors). Cai et al. [3] are among the pioneers who characterize the error patterns in MLC flash memory. In particular, high cell voltage states are reported vulnerable to retention errors. With the recent introduction of 3D flash architectures, Wu et al. [19] reported the error characteristics of 3D Charge-Trapping NAND flash. They addressed that 3D NAND is susceptible to fast de-trapping, i.e., significant charge leakage in early retention time, and this effect significantly amplifies the raw bit error rate in flash and increases the time overhead of error correction.
LDPC, one among the standard error correcting codes for flash memory, may incur a high latency through using many extra soft sensing levels. Li et al. [12] proposed asymmetric placement of sensing levels, which involves more sensing levels toward the direction of noise-induced shifting of the cell threshold voltage. Cui et al. [6] proposed optimizing the Log Likelihood Ratio (LLR), i.e., the soft bit input information, to better distinguish the original Vth state of a disturbed threshold voltage level. Zhang et al. [21] proposed using adaptive LDPC code rates for error correction. Hsu et al. [9] observed that if the hard sensing level is properly placed then the equilibrium between the bit counts of 1’s and 0’s should be achieved, and they proposed adjusting the hard sensing voltage leveling based on this property.

Fig. 3: System overview.
Gray coding [8], [18] is a standard method for bit labeling on Vth states for flash cells. With it, between two neighbor Vth states only one bit is flipped, and therefore the noiseinduced Vth level drifting will alter only one bit. Liu et al. [13] investigated different Gray Coding schemes for QLC flash. They reported that a coding scheme with an even distribution of reference voltage levels among page types is a better choice in terms of read latency and bit-error rate.
Reading different types of pages uses different numbers of voltage sensing operations. Based on 1-2-4 coding for TLC flash, Chang et al. [5] proposed migrating frequently-read data to LSB pages. Lv et al. [15] extended this concept to QLC flash. Although our work shares some similarity with these prior studies, they did not consider the time-variant performance trade-off between the two bit-labeling methods. Specifically, 2-3-2 coding is a good choice in the short term because the read latencies among page types are short and balanced, but for data requiring a long retention period, 1-2-4 coding offers asymmetric read performance among page types, i.e., LSB pages and CSB pages are still very fast but MSB pages are extremely slow. These considerations inspire us to develop a new method for read-performance optimization.
III. ADAPTIVE BIT LABELING FOR READ PERFORMANCE OPTIMIZATION
A. System Overview
This study aims at optimizing the read latency through adaptive bit labeling (or bit coding). Fig. 3 shows an overview of our design. The large component in the middle, the FlashTranslation Layer (FTL), implements block-device emulation on top of NAND flash memory. The FTL consists of existing components, namely, Garbage Collector for free-space reclaiming through block erasure, Wear Leveler for dispersal of program/erase cycles over flash blocks, Address Translation for logical-to-physical mapping, and the LDPC module. The highlighted components are new ones: Read-Hot Data Identifier is proposed to identify frequently-read (i.e., read-hot) data, Code Type Manager is introduced to keep track of the current bit labeling method of each individual block, i.e., 12-4 coding or 2-3-2 coding, and Page Migrator is presented to timely migrate read-hot data to fast pages, specifically, the LSB page and CSB page of a 1-2-4-coded block.

80 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

On host writing, the incoming data are always written to flash pages from a 2-3-2-coded block. On host reading, the requested data are retrieved from flash pages with the bit-labeling option reported by Code Type Manager. In the mean time, Read-Hot Data Identifier will increment the read frequency counter of the data, and if the counter exceeds an empirically defined threshold, the logical address of the data is temporarily recorded in a migration list. Interleaved with host requests, data of two read-hot pages are migrated to the LSB and CSB of a block using 1-2-4 coding.
In this study, we assume that a flash block can set its bitlabeling method upon erasure. In other word, a previously 23-2 coded block can use 1-2-4 coding after being erased, and vice versa. We believe that this assumption involves only the re-definition of the logical bit values on read and can easily be realized with the existing NAND flash technology.
B. Read-Hot Data Identification
In our approach, the identification of read-hot data is based on read frequencies. Let us first define logical pages to be the data units that the FTL exposes to the host system software. By contrast, physical pages are the smallest read-write units for flash operations. A logical page is as large as a physical page, and in this study, the page size is 16 KB.
To keep track of the read hotness of data, we propose maintaining read counters for logical pages in Read-Hot Data Identifier. Now, when a logical page is read by the host, the counter of the page is incremented by one. We introduce a threshold for classifying data as read-hot or not. On read, if the read counter of a logical page is greater than the threshold, the logical page is considered read-hot and will be migrated to a fast page later on. As different workloads also exhibit different read patterns, a fixed threshold may not apply to all workloads. We propose setting the threshold empirically to the average of non-zero read counters, i.e., if a logical page is read more frequently than the average then it is identified as read-hot. Notice that the counters will be periodically cleared and warmed up to adapt to read-pattern changes.
The principle of our approach is that whenever a logical page is identified read-hot, it will be migrated to a fast page. Now, let us define fast pages: For a block using 2-3-2 coding, the LSB pages of the block are fast pages; for a block using 1-2-4 coding, the LSB and CSB pages are fast pages. Other pages in blocks are referred to as slow pages. The definition directly follows the results in Table I, i.e., those page types remain using a small number of extra soft sensing level (and hence having a short read latency) after a long duration of retention time are considered as fast ones. When a logical page is identified read-hot, if the page is currently in a fast page then nothing will happen; if not, e.g., in a CSB page or an MSB page of a 2-3-2-coded block or in an MSB page of a 1-2-4-coded block, then the logical page should be migrated to a fast page. The identified read-hot pages are temporarily recorded in a migration list. The page migration process will be discussed in the next section.

0LJUDWLRQOLVW

5HDGKRW PLJUDWLRQ
5HDGFROG PLJUDWLRQ
)DVW3DJH
6ORZ3DJH

««

5HDG &RXQWHU


/6% &6% 06%
$SDJHVHWIURPD FRGHGEORFN

Fig. 4: Page Migrator moves two pages of read-hot data to the fast pages and a page of read-cold data to the slow page.

C. Read-Hot Data Migration
A block exclusively uses a bit labeling method on all its word lines (and therefore pages). Code Type Manager employs a bitmap to indicate the current bit labeling method on each block. On host reading, Code Type Manager first determines whether the target block uses 1-2-4 coding or 2-3-2 coding and then reads page data from the block with the correct bit labeling method. By default, the FTL writes incoming data to 2-3-2-coded blocks, because short-lived data are carried by the incoming write traffic and in the short term, pages with 23-2 coding show more balanced read latencies. When there is insufficient space for incoming data, garbage collection will be invoked to reclaim used pages occupied by invalid data. The selection of a victim block for garbage collection needs not distinguish blocks of different bit-labeling methods. In this study, we employ the greedy method, which picks up the block having the largest amount of invalid data, for erasure. In this case, after being erased, the victim block is marked using 23-2 coding to accommodate incoming data.
Our method employs a migration list to temporarily record the logical page numbers of read-hot data discovered so far. Read-hot data are currently in slow pages and their page read counter exceed the threshold. The list consists of pairs of read-hot page numbers, as our approach migrates two readhot pages at a time. The list length is currently set to 50 pairs. When the list is full or when the storage device enters an sufficiently long idle period, Page Migrator will be triggered.
Fig. 4 depicts how Page Migrator works. It always maintains an 1-2-4-coded block as the destination of read-hot data migration. On migration, Page Migrator first finds a set of free pages, consisting of an LSB page, a CSB page, and an MSB page, from the destination block. Next, Page Migrator pulls a pair of read-hot pages (their page numbers actually) from the migration list. Notice that in addition to two fast pages, i.e., the LSB page and the CSB page, in the page set there is a slow MSB page. To avoid wasting the storage space, as Fig. 4 shows, Page Migrator also locates a page of read-

81 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE II: NAND flash and FTL parameters.

Flash Setting Bits per cell Page Size Block Size Page Write Latency Block Erasure Latency

Value
3 16 KB 768 pages 700 μs 3500 μs

FTL Setting Overprovision Mapping units GC policy Volume size

Value 7% Page Greedy 512 GB

cold data to fill in the slow MSB page. Here, the source of read-cold data is the pages whose read counters are zero and are not in the LSB page of 1-2-4 coding. To find these zeroread pages, Page Migrator scans the page counters in the order of ascending logical page numbers. As sequential data often arrive at the storage in a burst, the scanning and migrating of read-cold data will create a large region of invalid data in their original block for the convenience of future garbage collection. Now, Page Migrator copies data of the two readhot pages to the fast pages (LSB and CSB) and the read-cold data to the slow page (MSB). Notice that Page Migrator will incrementally relax the threshold of cold data selection if no zero-read data can be found.
During data migration, if the destination 1-2-4-coded block runs out of space, garbage collection reclaims a free block and marks it a 1-2-4-coded one. By contrast, garbage collection for host writes produces 2-3-2-coded blocks.
A case might happen that a piece of previously-migrated read-hot data is no longer read by the host. However, since applying 1-2-4 coding to a block does not waste any storage space, there will be no problem to store the no-longer-read data in fast pages of a 1-2-4-coded block. In addition, with a read counter aging mechanism, the read count of such data will eventually becomes zero and will be used to fill the slow page of a 1-2-4-coded block in future data migration.
D. Implementation Overhead
Our proposed method creates a few essential data structures in the embedded RAM of an SSD for its operation. Code Type Manager uses one bit per block to indicate the bit-labeling method. Consider a piece of flash memory whose page size and block size are 16 KB and 768 pages, respectively. The code-type bits use 5.3 KB only for an 512GB SSD. Page Migrator uses a migration list, whose length is set to 50 pairs of logical page numbers. Read-Hot Data Identifier uses perpage read counters. In our current design, a counter uses 8 bits only, and all the counters require 32 MB of memory space. It is possible to reduce the space requirement of the counters using an LRU-based caching policy, as described in [15]. As the optimization is simple and orthogonal to our study, our experiments will be conducted without counter caching.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup and Performance Metrics
We conducted a series of experiments to evaluate our proposed approach. The experiments were conducted on an inhouse simulator based on the SSD extension of DiskSim. Table

TABLE III: Workload characteristics.

Workload
proj4 proj2 prn1 rsrch2 usr1 hm1 mds1 proj1 usr2 src22

Total Read 191.4 1,101.5 232.5
2.1 2,155.0
12.0 87.9 842.0 431.6 24.7 GB

Total Write
1.9 172.2 54.6
1.1 87.7 0.7 2.4 47.3 42.6 40.9 GB

Read Ratio 99.0% 86.5% 81.0% 65.7% 96.1% 94.5% 97.3% 94.7% 91.0% 37.7%

Read Hot 4.2% 35.5% 10.8% 36.8% 6.5% 6.6% 2.0% 3.8% 5.4% 13.0%

Read Warm 95.6% 64.5% 80.7% 54.7% 92.8% 69.4% 97.6% 96.2% 94.3% 87.0%

II shows our experimental parameters. We employed the flash reliability model previously shown in Equation 1 to model the cell Vth distribution with respect to different P/E cycle counts and retention time lengths. Based on real measurements from a piece of Toshiba BiCS 3D NAND flash [20], we calibrated the constant coefficients in Equation 1, as follows: K0 = 0.375, K1 = 3 × 10−4, and K2 = 6 × 10−6. The LDPC decoding process was based on pyldpc [1]. We set the LDPC code rate to 8/9 and the decoding iteration to 100. Extra sensing levels were added incrementally to determine the page read latency of different page types and different retention time lengths. Readers may refer to Table I for the results.
As shown in Table III, our experimental workloads were based on ten realistic I/O traces of MSR Cambridge servers from the SNIA IOTTA repository [2]. We mainly chose read-oriented workloads for our evaluation as the proposed approach aims at improving the read performance. Notice that the read-warm data in Table III denote the data that have been read but their read counters are below the migration threshold.
We employed the host read latency as the primary performance metric. This index directly reflected the time overhead to successfully read a page of data, including the those of voltage sensing operations, bit information transfer, and LDPC decoding operations. We also reported the page migration cost, which is the proportion of migration-related page writes among total page writes. We expected that our method achieved a low page read latency at a low migration cost.
Different methods were evaluated for performance comparison: Baseline 1-2-4 refers to the conventional data placement in flash pages with 1-2-4 coding only, and Baseline 2-32 is defined analogously. A state-of-the-art, FastRead, was evaluated for comparison. As described in [5], FastRead is based on 1-2-4 coding only, and it always migrates read-hot data to fast pages. By contrast, our method, referred to as Adaptive Bit Coding (ABC for short), employs 2-3-2 coding for incoming data and migrated read-hot data to fast pages of 1-2-4-coded blocks.
B. Read Performance
ABC vs. Baselines 1-2-4 and 2-3-2. Fig. 5 shows the host read latency, all normalized to Baseline 1-2-4. Under workloads prn1, rsrch2, usr1, and hm1, ABC achieved a significant improvement upon the two Baselines. Specifically,

82 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.



%DVHOLQH %DVHOLQH )DVW5HDG $%&



)DVW5HDG $%&













 SURM SURM SUQ UVUFK XVU KP PGV SURM XVU VUF
Fig. 5: Host read latency of different methods. All results are normalized to that of Baseline 1-2-4.

 SURM SURM SUQ UVUFK XVU KP PGV SURM XVU VUF
Fig. 6: Page migration cost (proportion of page writes spent on read-hot data migration).

ABC improved the read latency by 50% and 35% compared with Baseline 1-2-4 and that of Baseline 2-3-2, respectively. Analyzing these workloads, we found that host page reads mostly occurred on page data having a long retention time, i.e., the rarely-updated data, and they were migrated to fast pages (LSB and CSB) of 1-2-4-coded blocks for quick read responding. In addition, ABC kept incoming data and readwarm data in 2-3-2-coded blocks to avoid reading them with a long latency. Under proj2 and proj4, the advantage of ABC over the two Baselines was moderate. In particular, ABC improved upon Baseline 1-2-4 and Baseline 2-3-2 by 30% and 15%, respectively, under proj2. This is because the chance of reading data from a page of a long retention time was slightly lower. For mds1, proj1, and usr2, compared with Baseline 2-3-2 in particular, ABC delivered a slight performance gain, 7% on average. For these workloads, there was only a small amount of read-hot data so page migration was not frequently triggered. As a result, the performance of our ABC and Baseline 2-3-2 were similar. Lastly, our ABC barely outperformed the two Baselines under src22 because this workload was a write-heavy one. As the duration of data retention ends on update, under this write-heavy workload, reads on long-lived data were infrequent.
ABC vs. FastRead. Under workloads proj4, mds1, proj1, and usr2, our ABC outperformed FastRead (which involved 12-4 coding only) by 23%. This is because as shown in Table III, in many workloads, nearly 90% of all pages had been read once or more. In other words, the read coverage of these workloads was very large. FastRead used 1-2-4 coding only, meaning that one third of all pages were very slow (i.e., the MSB pages). With the large read coverage, it is inevitable that some read-warm data or read-hot data were retrieved from the very slow pages. Differently, ABC avoided reading from these very slow pages because it used 2-3-2 coding on readwarm data and short-lived data. For workloads mds1, proj1, and usr2, read requests were evenly dispersed on pages, and therefore many read-warm data were in the very slow pages of 1-2-4-coded blocks but not migrated. Interestingly, for this

reason, FastRead performed worse than Baseline 2-3-2. For workload hm1, both ABC and FastRead outperformed the two Baselines, but ABC had the smallest advantage upon FastRead (6% only). Under this workload, the read frequencies on data were bimodal. In other words, for both ABC and FastRead, many of the read requests occurred on read-hot data that had been migrated to fast pages of 1-2-4-coded blocks.
Summary. Baseline 1-2-4 is generally worse than Baseline 2-3-2. This is because if a read occurs on a very slow page from a 1-2-4-coded block with a long retention time, then the read latency will be negatively affected. Specifically, if the read coverage is higher than 66%, i.e., more than two thirds of the storage space is touched by host read requests, then it is inevitable to read data from a very slow page. By contrast, compared with Baseline 1-2-4, ABC employs 2-3-2 as the default coding method, and therefore reading a piece of warm data from a very slow page will not happen. In addition, compared with Baseline 2-3-2, ABC migrates readhot data to the fast pages of 1-2-4 coded blocks, improving the read latency. Lastly, compared with FastRead, our ABC avoids storing read-warm data in the very slow page of 12-4-coded blocks, because by default ABC writes incoming data to 2-3-2-coded blocks. Specifically, if the read coverage is higher than 66%, FastRead will have to read data from very slow pages.
C. Migration Overhead
Fig. 6 depicts the migration cost, which is reported in terms of the proportion of page writes due to read-hot data migration among all page writes. Overall, the migration cost was very low for both ABC and FastRead. The migration cost of our ABC was roughly twice as high as that of FastRead. This is because the chance that a piece of read-hot data appeared on a slow page is higher than that of FastRead due to the definition of slow page: ABC employed 2-3-2 coding as the default method, and data migration was triggered if a piece of readhot data appeared on a CSB page or on an MSB page. Recall that their read latencies were 847 μs and 771 μs, respectively,

83 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

after 6 months of retention. Differently. FastRead used 1-24 coding only, and only MSB pages (whose 6-month read latency is 1705 μs) was considered slow. Therefore, ABC was more active on data migration. Although it is possible to lower the migration threshold for FastRead to conduct more data migration, as reported in the prior section, FastRead already suffered from reading the very slow (MSB) pages of 1-2-4coded blocks. Involving more data migration for FastRead will only make this problem even worse.
V. CONCLUSION
Modern flash designs with a high cell-bit density are susceptible to leakage-induced bit errors as the margin between neighbor cell Vth states is narrow. LDPC offers incremental levels of error-correcting strength, and when charge leakage becomes severe after a long period of time, LDPC can still decode page data using extra sensing levels. In this study, we identified that the bit labeling method on cell Vth states profoundly affects the page read latency through 1) the number of reference voltages required to determine the bit value and 2) the altitude of reference voltage levels. We identified that after a long retention time, reading page data with many high reference voltage levels will be extremely slow as LDPC requires many extra soft sensing level to decode the data. A trade-off then emerges: Reading pages with 2-3-2 coding is fast, but after a long retention time, reading pages with 1-2-4 coding is still fast except the very slow MSB pages. Based on this, we propose timely migrating read-hot data to the fast pages of 1-2-4-coded blocks while keeping shortlived data in pages of 2-3-2-coded blocks. Experimental results demonstrated that our approach improved upon Baselines 12-4 and 2-3-2 and a prior method FastRead in terms of read latency by 50%, 35%, and 23%, respectively.
REFERENCES
[1] Pyldpc 0.7.9. https://pypi.org/project/pyldpc/, 2021. [2] Storage networking industry association. http://iotta.snia.org/, 2021. [3] Yu Cai, Erich F. Haratsch, Onur Mutlu, and Ken Mai. Error patterns in
mlc nand flash memory: Measurement, characterization, and analysis. In 2012 Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE), pages 521–526, 2012. [4] Yu Cai, Erich F. Haratsch, Onur Mutlu, and Ken Mai. Threshold voltage distribution in mlc nand flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling. In 2013 Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE), pages 1285–1290, 2013.

[5] Da-Wei Chang, Wei-Cheng Lin, and Hsin-Hung Chen. Fastread: Improving read performance for multilevel-cell flash memory. IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, 24(9):2998–3002, September 2016.
[6] Lanlan Cui, Fei Wu, Xiaojian Liu, Meng Zhang, and Changsheng Xie. Vallr: Threshold voltage distribution aware llr optimization to improve ldpc decoding performance for 3d tlc nand flash. In 2019 IEEE 37th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD), pages 668–671, 2019.
[7] R. Gallager. Low-density parity-check codes. IRE Transactions on Information Theory, 8(1):21–28, 1962.
[8] Frank Gray. Pulse code communication, March 1953. United States Patent 2,632,058.
[9] Hsiang-Sen Hsu and Li-Pin Chang. Exploiting binary equilibrium for efficient ldpc decoding in 3d nand flash. In 2022 IEEE 28th International Conference on Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications (RTCSA), pages 113–119. IEEE, 2022.
[10] C. Kim et al. A 512gb 3b/cell 64-stacked wl 3d v-nand flash memory. In 2017 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), pages 202–203, 2017.
[11] S. Lee et al. A 1tb 4b/cell 64-stacked-wl 3d nand flash memory with 12mb/s program throughput. In 2018 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), pages 340–342, 2018.
[12] Qiao Li, Liang Shi, Chun Jason Xue, Qingfeng Zhuge, and Edwin H.M. Sha. Improving ldpc performance via asymmetric sensing level placement on flash memory. In 2017 22nd Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference (ASP-DAC), pages 560–565, 2017.
[13] Shijun Liu and Xuecheng Zou. Qlc nand study and enhanced gray coding methods for sixteen-level-based program algorithms. Microelectron. J., 66(C):58–66, August 2017.
[14] Weihua Liu et al. Characterizing the reliability and threshold voltage shifting of 3d charge trap nand flash. In 2019 Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE), pages 312–315, 2019.
[15] Yina Lv, Liang Shi, Chun Joseph Xue, Qingfeng Zhuge, and Edwin H.M. Sha. Latency variation aware read performance optimization on 3d high density nand flash memory. In Proceedings of the 2020 on Great Lakes Symposium on VLSI, GLSVLSI ’20, page 411–414, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Computing Machinery.
[16] D.J.C. MacKay. Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 45(2):399–431, 1999.
[17] Yangyang Pan, Guiqiang Dong, Qi Wu, and Tong Zhang. Quasinonvolatile ssd: Trading flash memory nonvolatility to improve storage system performance for enterprise applications. In IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Comp Architecture, pages 1–10, 2012.
[18] John P. Robinson and Martin Cohn. Counting sequences. IEEE Transactions on Computers, C-30(1):17–23, 1981.
[19] Fei Wu et al. Characterizing 3d charge trap nand flash: Observations, analyses and applications. In 2018 IEEE 36th International Conference on Computer Design (ICCD), pages 381–388, 2018.
[20] Ryuji Yamashita et al. 11.1 a 512gb 3b/cell flash memory on 64word-line-layer bics technology. In 2017 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), pages 196–197, 2017.
[21] Meng Zhang et al. Beldpc: Bit errors aware adaptive rate ldpc codes for 3d tlc nand flash memory. In Proceedings of the 23rd Conference on Design, Automation and Test in Europe, DATE ’20, page 302–305, San Jose, CA, USA, 2020. EDA Consortium.

84 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

