IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 69, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

4869

Finite-Length Scaling of SC-LDPC Codes With a Limited Number of Decoding Iterations
Roman Sokolovskii , Alexandre Graell i Amat , Senior Member, IEEE, and Fredrik Brännström

Abstract— We propose four finite-length scaling laws to predict the frame error rate (FER) performance in the waterfall region of spatially-coupled low-density parity-check code ensembles under full belief propagation (BP) decoding with a limit on the number of decoding iterations and a scaling law for sliding window decoding, also with limited iterations. The laws for full BP decoding provide a choice between accuracy and computational complexity; a good balance between them is achieved by the law that models the number of decoded bits after a certain number of BP iterations by a time-integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. This framework is developed further to model sliding window decoding as a race between the integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process and an absorbing barrier that corresponds to the left boundary of the sliding window. The proposed scaling laws yield accurate FER predictions for the semi-structured code ensembles proposed by Olmos and Urbanke.
Index Terms— Codes-on-graphs, finite-length code performance, spatially-coupled LDPC codes, window decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
S PATIALLY-COUPLED low-density parity-check (SCLDPC) codes [1], [2] achieve capacity under suboptimal yet computationally feasible belief propagation (BP) decoding, which was first observed numerically [2], then proved for the binary erasure channel (BEC) [3] and later for the broad class of binary-input memoryless symmetric channels [4]. Moreover, it was shown that the minimum distance of regular SC-LDPC code ensembles grows linearly with the block length [5]. Spatial coupling is also a powerful technique more broadly; it has been applied to, e.g., turbo-like codes [6], product-like codes [7], lossy compression [8], and compressed sensing [9].
The Tanner graph of an SC-LDPC code is constructed by arranging the Tanner graphs of several uncoupled LDPC codes into a sequence and interconnecting them according to
Manuscript received 17 March 2022; revised 11 December 2022; accepted 27 February 2023. Date of publication 14 March 2023; date of current version 14 July 2023. This work was supported by the Swedish Research Council under Grant 2016-4026. (Corresponding author: Roman Sokolovskii.)
Roman Sokolovskii was with the Communication Systems Group, Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, 41296 Gothenburg, Sweden. He is now with the Department of Computing, Imperial College London, SW7 2AZ London, U.K. (e-mail: r.sokolovskii@imperial.ac.uk).
Alexandre Graell i Amat and Fredrik Brännström are with the Communication Systems Group, Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, 41296 Gothenburg, Sweden (e-mail: alexandre.graell@ chalmers.se; fredrik.brannstrom@chalmers.se).
Communicated by D. Mitchell, Associate Editor for Coding and Decoding. Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TIT.2023.3257235. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2023.3257235

a predefined pattern. The interconnecting is done in such a way so as to create structured irregularity at the boundaries of the resulting chain, such that the bits at the boundaries are better protected than those in the middle of the chain and are more likely to be decoded successfully; during BP decoding, information propagates from those boundaries inward in a wave-like fashion.
The structured irregularity at the boundaries entails a loss in code rate. The rate loss goes to zero as the chain length grows, but so does the probability that the decoding waves successfully propagate through the entire chain. A longer chain also implies higher latency if BP decoding is performed on the whole received sequence simultaneously, a scheme we refer to as full BP decoding. To limit decoding latency, so-called sliding window decoding, originally proposed in [10], is used in practice. Sliding window decoding limits BP decoding to a window of several spatial positions that slides through the chain from the left boundary rightward, making a decision on the bits that leave the window along the way and thus limiting decoding latency to the size of the window. Further, due to constraints on decoding latency and energy efficiency, both full BP and sliding window decoding must in practice be limited in terms of the maximum number of BP iterations.
To adopt an SC-LDPC code in a practical setting, the system designer would have to specify a range of parameters, including the underlying LDPC code ensemble, the interconnecting pattern, the length of the coupled chain, the size of the sliding window, and the limit on the number of decoding iterations. It is therefore important to understand the influence of these parameters on error-correcting performance, which is the subject of ongoing scientific inquiry.
The asymptotic performance of SC-LDPC codes (i.e., when the block length of the component LDPC codes grows large) is relatively well understood. Much less is known about their finite-length behavior. Olmos and Urbanke proposed a finite-length scaling law to predict the frame error rate (FER) of SC-LDPC code ensembles under full BP decoding with an unlimited number of iterations over the BEC [11]. The law in [11] follows the approach proposed earlier in [12] for uncoupled LDPC code ensembles and focuses on the number of degree-one check nodes (CNs) available for peeling decoding. Peeling decoding is equivalent in error-correcting performance to BP decoding with unlimited iterations but is more tractable analytically. A decoding failure corresponds to the peeling decoder running out of degree-one CNs before recovering the entire codeword. The authors estimate the probability of that event using an exponential approximation

0018-9448 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4870

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 69, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

Fig. 1. Tanner graph of the terminated (dv, dc, L, N ) SC-LDPC ensemble with dv = 3, dc = 6, L = 10, and N VNs per spatial position. The rectangular cuboids marked with π are permutation blocks. The sliding window of length W = 4 is shown as the red dashed frame. The decision on the VNs in the first
3 spatial positions (gray) has already been made; the associated values are fixed. The VNs in position WL(ℓ) = 3 (green) are next to be decided upon and fixed. The VNs in the next three positions (blue) participate in message passing, while those in positions WR(ℓ) = 7 and above (white) do not.

to the first-hit time distribution of an appropriately cho- probability of the wave being absorbed at the barrier (and

sen Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process [11]. This framework was thus overtaken by the sliding window) by numerically solving

later applied to protograph-based [13] and generalized [14] the initial value problem of the corresponding Fokker-Planck

SC-LDPC code ensembles.

equation with appropriately chosen boundary conditions. The

The prediction in [11] captures the slope of the FER proposed laws yield accurate predictions of the FER and

curve well. However, it exhibits a gap to the simulated FER allow us to quantify performance degradation associated with

performance. In [15], we closed this gap by proposing an the introduction of the limit on the number of decoding

alternative scaling law that models the number of degree-one iterations, making practical code parameter optimization using

CNs available for peeling decoding as a sum of two inde- finite-length scaling laws a step closer to reality.

pendent Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes that correspond to the decoding waves from the left and right boundary of the

II. PRELIMINARIES

chain. We provided laws to also predict the bit and block We consider the semi-structured (dv, dc, L, N ) SC-LDPC error rate performance. Importantly for practical applications, code ensemble introduced in [11]. Its Tanner graph is shown

we proposed scaling laws for the frame, bit, and block error in Fig. 1. To construct the Tanner graph of an element of the

rate under sliding window decoding, albeit still in the case of unlimited number of iterations.
The scaling law for the FER under full BP decoding from [15] was used in [16] to elucidate the non-trivial space

(dv, dc, L, N ) SC-LDPC code ensemble, one must first take L Tanner graphs of length-N (dv, dc)-regular LDPC codes of variable node (VN) degree dv and CN degree dc and arrange them into L spatial positions indexed by i ∈ L =

of trade-offs associated with the choice of code parameters {0, . . . , L − 1}. Each spatial position contains N VNs and

and extended in [17] to predict the error rate performance of

M

=

dv dc

N

CNs,

where

we

assume

M

is

an

integer.

We

refer

periodically-doped SC-LDPC code ensembles for streaming. to N as the component code length and to L as the chain

In [18], the authors optimize protograph-based SC-LDPC code length. The set of all LN VNs in the Tanner graph—and

constructions under sliding window decoding using a criterion thus of all LN code bits—is referred to as the frame. The L

derived from finite-length scaling models (the so-called win- Tanner graphs of the individual (uncoupled) LDPC codes are

dow mean parameter); they show that taking into account the then interconnected as follows: each VN at position i ∈ L is

finite-length scaling behavior of SC-LDPC code ensembles connected to dv CNs in positions [i, . . . , i+dv−1]. Specifically, during code optimization can yield codes that significantly one CN is chosen uniformly at random among M CNs at

outperform their counterparts designed using asymptotic BP position i, another one at position i + 1, and so on until

thresholds only.

position i + dv − 1. To connect the overhanging edges at the

Our ambition is to make finite-length scaling laws the tool of end of the chain, dv − 1 additional positions that contain CNs

choice in such code parameter optimization. To that end, this only are appended, resulting in a terminated ensemble. The

paper tackles the problem of predicting the FER of SC-LDPC generation of the elements from this ensemble is described in

code ensembles over the BEC under both full BP and sliding detail in [11] and can be expressed in terms of choosing the

window decoding for the practical case of a limited number L + dv − 1 permutation blocks in the Tanner graph in Fig. 1, of iterations. First, we consider full BP decoding and propose marked by π.

four scaling laws that vary in accuracy and computational The ensemble is structured from the VN perspective—it

complexity. One of these laws models the number of bits is certain that each VN is connected to CNs in dv different

recovered after a certain number of BP iterations by a time- spatial positions. The same cannot be said about the CNs.

integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. We then extend this framework and model sliding window decoding as a race between an absorbing barrier that corresponds to the left boundary of the window and an integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck

Indeed, a CN at position i ∈ {dv − 1, . . . , L − 1} can be connected to dc VNs from any non-empty subset of positions [i − dv + 1, . . . , i], depending on how the permutation block at position i reshuffles the edges connected to VNs at positions

process (with an additional diffusion term) that corresponds [i−dv +1, . . . , i] (see Fig. 1). This particular “semi-structured”

to the position of the left decoding wave. We estimate the ensemble is proposed in [11] to simplify the analysis. The
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOKOLOVSKII et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING OF SC-LDPC CODES WITH A LIMITED NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS

4871

same approach was later applied to protograph-based ensem- A. Density Evolution

bles [13]. In addition to the terminated ensemble, we also consider
the truncated and unterminated ensembles. In the truncated ensemble, the additional dv−1 positions with CNs only are not added at the end of the chain of length L, and the overhanging edges emanating from VNs at positions [L−dv +1, . . . , L−1] are simply deleted from the Tanner graph. The degree of VNs in these last dv − 1 positions is therefore reduced. In the unterminated ensemble, the chain is neither terminated nor truncated, resulting in a “semi-infinite” sequence of coupled codes. We introduce the unterminated ensemble for the analysis of sliding window decoding, and we evaluate the decoding error probability over the first L′ positions of this semi-infinite chain. Both the truncated and the unterminated ensemble have higher code rates than the terminated ensemble; however, they are not relevant as candidates for practical code constructions and are instead introduced here for analytical purposes.
Key to impressive error-correcting performance of SC-LDPC codes under BP decoding is the lower degree of CNs at the terminated boundaries of the chain, i.e., at the left boundary of the truncated and unterminated ensembles

Let qi(+ℓ)j,i denote the probability that a CN at position i + j sends an erasure message to a VN at position i at BP iteration ℓ. Likewise, let pi(ℓ) be the probability that a VN at position i is erased, and p(i,ℓi)+j the probability that a VN at position i sends an erasure message to a CN at position i + j at BP
iteration ℓ. The CN update for the semi-structured ensemble
averages the incoming error probabilities as

qi(+ℓ)j,i

=

1

−

 1

−

1 dv

dv −1

dc−1

pi(+ℓ−j−1)j′,i+j 

j ′ =0

.

(2)

To circumvent the problem of the reduced-degree CNs at the boundaries, the values of p(i+ℓ−j−1)j′,i+j that correspond to VN indices i+j −j′ outside the chain—i.e., when i+j −j′ ∈/ L—
are set to zero, implying that the VNs outside the chain are
not erased. Since a VN at position i ∈ L is connected to dv consecutive
positions {i, . . . , i + dv − 1}, as we discussed in the beginning of Section II, the VN update for the semi-structured ensemble
is

and at both left and right boundaries of the terminated ensemble. During BP decoding, information propagates from the terminated boundaries of the chain inward in a wave-like fashion. The finite-length scaling laws aim to estimate the probability that such “decoding waves” fail to

pi(,ℓi)+j = ϵ

qi(+ℓ)j′,i ,

(3)

j′≠ j

and the a posteriori probability that a VN at position i remains erased at iteration ℓ is

propagate through the entire chain, which results in decoding error.

dv −1

p(iℓ) = ϵ

qi(+ℓ)j,i .

(4)

Full BP decoding entails a decoding latency of LN bits,

j=0

which is impractical for long spatially-coupled chains. To limit decoding latency, sliding window decoding is used in practice, where decoding is limited to VNs in a window of W spatial positions (depicted as the red dashed rectangle in Fig. 1). After a certain number of BP iterations, the decoder decides on the values of the bits in the left-most spatial position within the window (colored green in Fig. 1) and the window slides by

To numerically estimate the BP decoding threshold ϵ∗ for
a given (dv, dc, L, N ) SC-LDPC code ensemble, we initialize p(i,0i)+j = 1 for all i ∈ L, j ∈ {0, . . . , dv − 1} and iterate equations (2)–(3) until the VN erasure probability (4) converges either to zero (for ϵ ≤ ϵ∗) or to another fixed point (for ϵ > ϵ∗) for all i.

one position to the right over the Tanner graph. We index BP B. Peeling Decoding

decoding iterations by ℓ and denote the leftmost position of the window by WL(ℓ). The first position just outside the window is denoted by WR(ℓ), as illustrated in Fig. 1. Sliding window decoding has a decoding latency of W N bits [10].
This paper investigates the influence of the limit on the number of BP iterations on the error-correcting performance. In the case of full BP decoding, we denote this limit by I and treat it is as a parameter of the decoder. In the case of sliding window decoding, the system designer should choose two parameters instead: First, the number of BP iterations after which the window slides for the first time, from position 0 to position 1, i.e., WL(ℓ) = 1, which we denote by Iin and whose impact will be clarified later. Second, for WL(ℓ) ≥ 1, the designer must specify the number of BP iterations before the window slides further, which we denote by Is. The total budget of BP iterations in the case of sliding window decoding can be obtained from Iin and Is for a chain of length L as

The finite-length analysis of BP decoding for the BEC becomes more tractable by considering peeling decoding [19], which is equivalent to BP decoding for an infinite number of iterations. The peeling decoder gets stuck in the same stopping sets and therefore yields the same performance as the BP decoder [19]. At the initial stage of peeling decoding, all VNs that correspond to non-erased bits are removed from the Tanner graph. At every subsequent iteration, the decoder selects one degree-one CN uniformly at random among all degree-one CNs in the graph. Since the value of the code bit associated with the VN connected to the chosen degree-one CN can be recovered, the decoder removes both the CN and VN from the Tanner graph along with dv adjacent edges and modifies the parity-check equations associated with the adjacent CNs according to the value of the recovered bit. This may in turn create new degree-one CNs to choose from (or remove some other degree-one CNs collaterally). Each

I = Iin + (L − 1)Is .

iteration of peeling decoding produces a new residual graph, (1) indexed by iteration number ℓPD. Decoding is successful if

eventually the decoder manages to peel off all VNs from

We consider transmission over the BEC with erasure the original Tanner graph, resulting in an empty graph. This

probability ϵ.

happens if at every iteration of peeling decoding there is at

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4872

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 69, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

Fig. 2. The evolution of E [r1(τPD)] during peeling decoding, normalized
by the distance to the BP threshold, for the (5, 10, L = 50) ensemble with ϵ∗ = 0.4994 at ϵ = 0.4875.

Fig. 3. The evolution of E [vBP(ℓ)] during BP decoding, normalized by
the distance to the BP threshold, for the (5, 10, L = 50) ensemble with ϵ∗ = 0.4994 at ϵ = 0.47.

least one degree-one CN to choose from. On the other hand, if the decoder runs out of degree-one CNs before recovering all VNs, decoding gets trapped in a stopping set and fails.
The goal of scaling laws for LDPC codes in [12] and for SC-LDPC codes in [11] and [15] is to estimate the error rate in the waterfall region, which is dominated by the stopping sets whose size grows linearly with the block length N [12]. A scaling law therefore aims to estimate the probability of the event that some VNs remain in the residual graph when decoding stops, focusing on “large” stopping sets whose size grows linearly with N .
We remark that the finite-length optimization of SC-LDPC code and decoder parameters must consider their effect on both the waterfall and the error-floor region. In the errorfloor region—in contrast to the waterfall region—the error probability is dominated by small harmful substructures in the Tanner graph known as stopping and trapping or absorbing sets. These structures have been investigated in the context of SC-LDPC codes in [20], [21], and [22] and used to estimate the error floor for SC-LDPC codes in [23]. Such errorfloor analysis complements the waterfall-oriented scaling-law approach developed in [11], [12], and [15], and in this paper.
C. The Scaling Laws for Unlimited Number of Iterations
The general approach to finite-length scaling of SC-LDPC code ensembles originally proposed in [11] for full BP decoding and improved and extended to sliding-window decoding in [15] is to focus on the stochastic process associated with the number of degree-one CNs in the residual graphs during peeling decoding normalized by N [24],

occurs if r1(τPD) hits zero before recovering all VNs that are erased by the channel. We refer to a realization of r1(τPD) as a decoding trajectory.
For a fixed τPD, the distribution of r1(τPD) converges to a Gaussian as N → ∞ and concentrates around its mean E [r1(τPD)] with expectation taken over the ensemble, channel, and peeling decoding realizations [11], [12]. The evolution of E [r1(τPD)] over τPD can be obtained by numerically solving a system of coupled differential equations called mean evolution. Mean evolution equations for the semi-structured (dv, dc, L, N ) SC-LDPC code ensemble are provided in [11]. For illustration, Fig. 2 shows the mean evolution curves E [r1(τPD)] normalized by ϵ∗ − ϵ for the terminated (blue curve) and truncated (red curve) (5, 10, L = 50, N ) SC-LDPC code ensemble at ϵ = 0.4875.
Notably, E [r1(τPD)] exhibits a steady-state phase where it remains essentially constant [11]. We denote the range of τPD corresponding to the steady state of the terminated ensemble as α˜, β˜ . Here and in the following, we denote the variables
associated with the terminated ensemble with a tilde, e.g., α˜, and those associated with the truncated ensemble with a breve, e.g., α˘—the two “extrema” in a tilde allude to the presence of two decoding waves in the terminated ensemble, and a single “extremum” in a breve to a single wave in the truncated ensemble.
During the steady state, the two waves propagating in the terminated chain are each equivalent to the single wave present in the truncated chain. In [15], we proposed to isolate a single wave by focusing on the truncated chain and modeling the first two moments of r1(τPD) in the same way as is done for the terminated chain in [11], namely

1

r1(τPD) = N

R1,u(τPD) ,

(5)

u

where τPD = ℓPD/N is the normalized time of peeling decoding, and R1,u(τPD) is the number of degree-one CNs at position u at iteration ℓPD. Since peeling decoding requires at least one degree-one CN at every iteration, a decoding error

E [r1(τPD)] ≈ γ˘ (ϵ∗ − ϵ) ,

ν˘ Var [r1(τPD)] ≈ N ,

Cov r1 τP(0D) , r1 τP(1D)

≈

ν˘ N

exp

−θ˘

τP(0D) −τP(1D)

for a triple of real positive numbers (γ˘, ν˘, θ˘).

(6) (7) , (8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOKOLOVSKII et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING OF SC-LDPC CODES WITH A LIMITED NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS

4873

Apart from the BP decoding threshold ϵ∗, the scaling law for unlimited number of BP iterations requires the five parameters (α˜, β˜, γ˘, ν˘, θ˘). The first three can be estimated by numerically solving mean evolution equations. We estimate them for several ϵ and linearly interpolate the values in between. The last two can be estimated by solving an augmented system of differential equations called covariance evolution [11]. Instead, we estimate (ν˘, θ˘) from a set of realizations of r1(τPD) for a fixed (ϵ, N ) and treat them as parameters that depend on (dv, dc) only. For our running example of the (5, 10, L, N ) SC-LDPC code ensemble, we use ν˘ = 0.424 and θ˘ = 1.64 as in [15]. The meaning of the scaling parameters for peeling decoding is illustrated in Fig. 2.
The key idea behind the scaling laws in [11] and [15] is to model r1(τPD) in the steady state by an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process, parametrized to match the first two moments of r1(τPD) (6)–(8). Olmos and Urbanke model the steady state of the terminated ensemble by a single Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process [11]; we proposed instead a refined model that relies on two independent Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes and yields more accurate predictions [15]. We summarize the model in [15] here and use it as the starting point for our analysis of decoding with a limited number of iterations.
To estimate the FER, we consider the normalized time of peeling decoding at which the number of degree-one CNs—and hence the value of r1(τPD)—drops to zero, referred to as the first-hit time τ0,

τ0 = min{τPD : r1(τPD) = 0} .

(9)

For the terminated ensemble, to exhaust all available degreeone CNs, the peeling decoder must run out of them in both the left and right decoding wave. Accordingly, we model τ0 as the sum of two independent variables A and B that correspond to the first-hit time of the left and right wave, respectively [15], as

τ0 = A + B .

(10)

The number of degree-one CNs available to each wave is modeled as an independent Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. It is known that the first-hit time distribution for an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process converges to an exponential distribution with mean µ˘0 as N → ∞ [11],

A, B ∼ Exp(µ˘0) ,

(11)

where µ˘0 = µ0(γ˘, ν˘, θ˘) and

√ 2π
µ0(γ, ν, θ) = θ

√

γ N/ν(ϵ∗−ϵ)

Φ(z)e

1 2

z2

dz

,

0

(12)

with Φ(z) denoting the CDF of the standard Gaussian distribution. The PDF of the number of degree-one CNs recovered by the left and right wave during the steady state is

fA(x) = fB(x) ≈ µ˘0−1 exp

x −
µ˘0

.

(13)

Let S denote successful decoding—specifically, the event that a codeword from a randomly sampled element from the code ensemble is fully recovered by the employed decoder after transmission over the BEC with erasure probability ϵ.

Since the total number of degree-one CNs that must be
recovered during the steady state of the terminated ensemble is β˜ − α˜, the probability of successful full BP decoding can
be expressed as

Pr {S} = Pr A + B > β˜ − α˜

(14)

∞x

=

fA(z) fB(x − z)dzdx .

β˜−α˜ 0

The approximation for the FER in [15] is obtained from (14) and (13) as

Pf(,Lt ) ≈ 1 −

β˜ − α˜ 1+
µ˘0

β˜ − α˜ exp −
µ˘0

.

(15)

In a similar manner, the FER of an unterminated SC-LDPC code ensemble evaluated over L′ spatial positions is approxi-
mated in [15] as

Pf(,Lu ′) ≈ 1 − exp

ϵL′ − α˘ −
µ˘0

,

(16)

which is the same approximation used by Olmos and Urbanke for the terminated ensemble, but with the scaling parameters estimated from the truncated ensemble instead of from the terminated ensemble. In other words, the law in (16) estimates the probability that the decoding wave from the left boundary of the unterminated chain successfully propagates through the first L′ positions.
The scaling law for the unterminated ensemble is used here and in [15] in the analysis of sliding window decoding, where the sliding window does not allow the right wave to propagate to the left by further than W positions, effectively limiting the first L − W positions to decoding by a single wave only. As we showed in [15], this results in a “two-phase” decoding, where the first phase comprises the first L − W positions and includes a single decoding wave from the left, and the second phase comprises the last W positions and may contain both the wave from the left and the wave from the right. The FER in the case of sliding window decoding with unlimited number of BP iterations can then be approximated as [15]

Pf(,Lt,,sWw ) = 1 − 1 − Pf(,Lu −W ) 1 − Pf(,Wt ) ,

(17)

where Pf(,·t) is given in (15), and Pf(,·u) is given in (16). Lastly, we will use the speed of a decoding wave in our
analysis. Specifically, we assume that a wave traverses VPD positions in N peeling decoding iterations. We estimate VPD from the average number of erased VNs in the middle of the
coupled chain during the steady state as

β˜ + α˜ −1

VPD ≈ N · E V⌊L/2⌋

2

,

(18)

where E [Vu(τPD)], the average number of erased VNs at position u at normalized iteration τPD, is produced alongside E [r1(τPD)] by numerically solving mean evolution [15].
For future reference, Table I provides the essential notation used throughout the paper. The table is split into three blocks. The first block covers the ensemble, channel, and decoder

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4874

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 69, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

TABLE I ESSENTIAL NOTATION

can be obtained from the decrease in the erasure probability across iterations of density evolution as

E [vBP,i(ℓ)] = pi(ℓ−1) − pi(ℓ)

(19)

with pi(ℓ) from (4). Define vBP(ℓ) ≜ i∈L vBP,i(ℓ). The number of code bits recovered in iteration ℓ is then N· vBP(ℓ),
with E [N · vBP(ℓ)] = N · E [vBP(ℓ)], where

parameters, and thus can be viewed as input to the scaling laws. The second and third blocks cover the notation used to describe the properties of the peeling and BP decoder, respectively.
We now proceed to develop the scaling laws for decoding with a limited number of iterations; first, for full BP decoding in Sections III–V, then for sliding window decoding in Section VI.
III. THE SPEED OF THE DECODING WAVES AND THE DURATION OF THE STEADY STATE
Besides providing BP thresholds for SC-LDPC code ensembles, density evolution, described in Section II-A, can be used to answer the following questions: How many BP iterations are needed before the steady state begins and the decoding waves establish? How fast do decoding waves propagate under BP decoding? How many iterations does it take for the decoding waves to collapse once they meet at the end of the steady state?
Let vBP,i(ℓ) be the fraction of code bits at position i recovered in BP iteration ℓ. The expected value of vBP,i(ℓ)

E [vBP(ℓ)] = E [vBP,i(ℓ)] .

(20)

i∈L

The evolution of E [vBP(ℓ)] / (ϵ∗ − ϵ) through BP iterations is shown in Fig. 3 for the terminated (blue curve) and truncated (red curve) (5, 10, L = 50, N ) SC-LDPC code ensemble at ϵ = 0.47. In contrast to the mean evolution curves (Fig. 2),
the onset of the steady state happens at the same time for
the truncated and terminated ensemble because BP decoding
resolves all code bits corresponding to VNs connected to degree-one CNs in parallel.1
Denote the number of BP iterations before the onset of the decoding waves by Istart and the number of BP iterations it takes for the waves to collapse once they meet by Iend. The parameters Istart and Iend are illustrated in Fig. 3. We estimate (Istart, Iend) by tracking the change in E [vBP(ℓ)] / (ϵ∗ − ϵ) across iterations and comparing it with a numerical threshold (the value of 10−2 is used; Istart corresponds to the first ℓ when the magnitude of the change becomes smaller than the threshold, and Iend corresponds to the number of iterations between the first ℓ when the change subsequently rises above the threshold and E [vBP(ℓ)] collapses to zero, see Fig. 3). Both Istart and Iend are estimated for several values of ϵ, and linear interpolation is used to estimate the intermediate values. A similar procedure was used in [15] to estimate (α˘, α˜, β˜) for
peeling decoding.
As introduced in Section II, we denote the limit on the total number of BP iterations by I. For decoding to be successful, the decoding waves must meet before the effective deadline of

Ieff = I − Istart − Iend

(21)

iterations of BP decoding after the beginning of the steady state phase.
Denote the speed of the decoding wave under BP decoding by VBP, measured in positions traveled by the wave per BP iteration. Fig. 4 shows VBP as a function of ϵ, VBP(ϵ). The black dots represent the values estimated directly from density evolution by tracking the mid-point of the wave fronts of pi(ℓ) over density evolution iterations. Their apparent noisiness stems from the discretization of the estimated positions of the wave fronts. The red solid curve is a quadratic fit to these data; we use VBP from the smoothed (red) curve in the numerical calculations.
There is an alternative way to estimate VBP(ϵ). Since a single iteration of BP decoding recovers all VNs connected to degree-one CNs, we assume that a single BP iteration during the steady state is equivalent to as many peeling decoding iterations as there are degree-one CNs available for each of

1This interpretation of BP decoding for the BEC is made rigorous in [25] with the concept of parallel peeling decoding, which the authors prove to be equivalent to BP decoding on a per-iteration basis.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOKOLOVSKII et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING OF SC-LDPC CODES WITH A LIMITED NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS

4875

Fig. 5. Schematic illustration of the model.

Fig. 4. The speed of the waves for the (5, 10, L) SC-LDPC code ensemble under BP decoding.

the waves. This assumption allows us to approximate VBP(ϵ) as

VBP(ϵ) ≈ VPD(ϵ) · γ˘(ϵ∗ − ϵ) ,

(22)

where VPD(ϵ) is the speed of the waves under peeling decoding, which can be calculated as shown in (18), and γ˘(ϵ∗ − ϵ) is the average number of degree-one CNs available to one decoding wave during the steady state of peeling decoding (see (6)).
The approximation (22) is also shown in Fig. 4 (blue dashed curve). The good match between the direct density evolution-based estimation of VBP(ϵ) (red) and the approximation in (22) (blue dashed) indicates that the number of degree-one CNs available to a decoding wave can be used as a crucial bridge between the steady-state behavior of peeling decoding and BP decoding. (This bridge between peeling and BP decoding was used by Olmos and Urbanke to estimate γ˜ from density evolution instead of from mean evolution [11, Sec. III.D]; we use it to characterize the effect of imposing a limit on the number of BP iterations.)

decoding would fail even though it could have been successful without a limit on I.
Our approach is to incorporate a limit on the number of BP iterations into the scaling laws for peeling decoding— analyzing BP decoding directly proves to be challenging. First, we need to account for the width of the decoding waves under peeling decoding. It takes β˜ − α˜ normalized peeling decoding iterations for the waves to propagate through the chain with a constant speed of VPD positions per normalized peeling decoding iteration (see Fig. 2). This means that the length (in positions) covered during the steady state is

Leff = (β˜ − α˜)VPD .

(24)

We schematically illustrate the meaning of Leff , which can be thought of as the effective length of the chain, in Fig. 5.
How much of that effective length should a wave cover under a limit on the number of BP iterations? Without loss of generality, take the left decoding wave, marked by 1 in Fig. 5. In Ieff BP iterations during the steady state, the wave can propagate by up to VBPIeff positions. This means that for successful decoding, wave 2 should propagate by at least

Dmin = max {0, Leff − VBPIeff }

≈ VPD · max 0, β˜ − α˜ − γ˘(ϵ∗ − ϵ)Ieff

(25)

IV. FINITE-LENGTH SCALING: CONSTANT PROPAGATION MODEL
For a limited number of BP iterations, the probability of successful decoding (14) should be rewritten as
Pr {S} = Pr A+B > β˜−α˜ enough iterations ; (23)
the decoding waves must jointly recover β˜ − α˜ degree-one CNs, and they must do so within the allotted budget of Ieff BP iterations. The first condition is the same as in the law for unlimited BP iterations in (14). The second condition is novel and is operationalized below.
Density evolution shows that the decoding waves propagate throughout the chain with a constant speed in the limit of N → ∞. A natural first step toward a finite-length scaling law would be to also assume a constant propagation speed in the context of a finite N —i.e., to assume that with every BP iteration each wave travels by exactly VBP positions.
To understand why a limit on the number of iterations affects the probability of successful decoding, consider the following scenario: imagine one of the waves fails immediately at the beginning of the chain; imagine further that VBP is too small for the other wave to propagate through the whole chain and meet the first wave within Ieff iterations. In that case

positions to meet wave 1 before the deadline, as illustrated in Fig. 5. We need to bear in mind that, mutatis mutandis, the same logic applies to both the first and second wave, hence both waves need to propagate by at least Dmin positions for decoding to be successful.
Fig. 6 shows an example of Dmin calculated using (25) for the terminated (5, 10, L = 50, N ) SC-LDPC code ensemble and I = {175, 250, 300} (solid curves). We observe that Dmin is zero up to a certain value of ϵ and then increases with increasing ϵ. Dmin = 0 means that a single decoding wave has enough time to propagate all the way along the chain (i.e., successful decoding is possible even if the other wave fails immediately after the onset of the steady state), so the limit on the number of iterations does not change the probability of decoding error compared to the case of unlimited number of iterations. For larger ϵ, Dmin may exceed Leff /2 (black dashed curve), which is when the waves do not get a chance to meet in time at all and decoding is bound to fail.
We can now use Dmin to translate the limitation on the number of BP iterations into the language of the first-hit times A and B. To require a wave to travel by at least Dmin positions is to ask it to survive for at least τmin = Dmin/VPD peeling decoding iterations. Bearing in mind that both waves need to survive that long to meet the deadline, we can rewrite the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4876

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 69, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

Fig. 6. The minimum propagation distance Dmin (25) for the (5, 10, L = 50) SC-LDPC code ensemble under BP decoding for I = {175, 250, 300}.

curves approach the FER curve for unlimited iterations (green dashed) calculated using (15). The scaling law (28) is a reasonably accurate approximation to the simulated FER, especially given that the only change to the scaling law for unlimited iterations (15) is the introduction of the additional term −2τmin in (28). However, juxtaposing Figs. 6 and 7 reveals that the analytical approximation does not capture the simulated FER behavior in the regions where Dmin is close either to zero (where the FER approximation curve joins the green dashed curve, as for I = 300 at around ϵ = 0.468) or to Leff /2 (where there may be a discontinuous jump to Pf = 1, as for I = 175 at around ϵ = 0.47).

Fig. 7. FER for the (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under BP decoding for different limits on the number of iterations I (solid curves) and its approximation using (28) (corresponding dash-dotted curves).

second condition in (23) as

enough iterations ⇐⇒ A, B > τmin .

(26)

Since the first-hit times A and B are exponentially distributed (11), the two conditions in (23) can be combined as

Pr {S} = Pr A + B > β˜ − α˜ A, B > τmin

∞ x−τmin

=

fA(z) fB(x − z)dzdx

β˜−α˜ τmin

=

1 + β˜ − α˜ − 2τmin

exp

β˜ − α˜ −

µ˘0

µ˘0

(27) ,

where we assumed Dmin < Leff /2; otherwise, Pr {S} = 0. The FER can therefore be estimated as

Pf ≈ 1 −

1 + β˜ − α˜ − 2τmin µ˘0

exp

β˜ − α˜ −
µ˘0

(28)

if Dmin < Leff /2 and 1 otherwise. Fig. 7 compares the simulated FERs (solid curves) for
the terminated (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble with the approximation (28) (dash-dotted curves) under different limits on the number of BP iterations I = {175, 250, 300}. Naturally, as the limit I increases, the solid

V. FINITE-LENGTH SCALING: RANDOMIZED PROPAGATION DISTANCE MODELS
In this section, we introduce three scaling laws that drop the assumption that a decoding wave propagates by the same distance in every BP iteration. Indeed, the partial mismatch of the scaling law (28) to the simulated FER curves in Fig. 7 suggests that the assumption of constant wave propagation does not hold in practice for a finite number of iterations— when VBP(ϵ) is sufficient for the limitation on the number of iterations not to matter for the scaling law (i.e., when predicted FER curves merge with that for full BP decoding), the waves may still fail to meet before the deadline. Likewise, when VBP(ϵ) becomes so low that the law predicts the FER to be equal to one, the waves may still succeed.
Let us denote by nPD(K) the number of normalized peeling decoding iterations (and hence the number of VNs recovered) that corresponds to K BP iterations for a decoding wave that has not run out of degree-one CNs. The scaling law in Section IV and the conversion between VPD and VBP in (22) effectively assume nPD(K) to be constant and equal to γ˘(ϵ∗ − ϵ)K. In this section, we treat nPD(K) as a random variable instead.
A decoding wave stops either because it runs out of degree-one CNs or because it reaches the limit on the number of BP iterations, whichever event happens first. Correspondingly, let X1 and X2 denote the number of VNs recovered by the first and second wave by that time,

X1 = min A, n(P1D)(Ieff ) , (29)
X2 = min B, n(P2D)(Ieff ) ,

where A and B are the first-hit times of the first and second wave, respectively, and the superscripts to nPD(Ieff ) emphasize that these are two independent random variables that correspond to the two decoding waves. (The two waves are numbered left to right as shown in Fig. 5.) The probability of a successful decoding can then be rewritten as

Pr {S} = Pr X1 + X2 > β˜ − α˜ .

(30)

Essentially, the model (30) incorporates the second requirement in (23)—that there should be enough BP iterations for the two waves to meet—into X1 and X2 via a random variable nPD(Ieff ), as opposed to incorporating it via a constant boundary τmin as in (27).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOKOLOVSKII et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING OF SC-LDPC CODES WITH A LIMITED NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS

4877

Fig. 8. The PDF of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck-simulated nPD(Ieff ) for the (5, 10, L, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under BP decoding for
I = 200 and ϵ = 0.47.

Assuming A and nPD(Ieff ) to be independent and A to be exponentially distributed (see (11)), we approximate the PDF of X1 as

fX (x) = fA(x) 1 − FnPD (x) + fnPD (x) 1 − FA(x)

1

x

≈ exp −

µ˘0

µ˘0

1−FnPD (x)

x

+ fnPD (x) exp

− µ˘0

,

(31)

where fnPD and FnPD denote the PDF and the CDF of nPD(Ieff ), respectively. The same logic applies to the second wave, so the PDF of X2 is also fX (x). We can now use (31) to estimate the FER similarly to (14) as

∞x

Pf = 1 − Pr {S} ≈ 1 −

fX (z)fX (x − z)dzdx . (32)

β˜−α˜ 0

In summary, we need to approximate the distribution of nPD(Ieff ) and use it in (31)–(32) to predict the FER. We provide three ways to model nPD(Ieff ) below. The third way results in a scaling law that offers the best trade-off between accuracy and computational complexity; however, it combines the features of the first two, and we present all three for clarity of exposition.

A. Simulating nPD(Ieff ) Using an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process
We can approximate the distribution of nPD(Ieff ) using the following heuristic: We keep the assumption that an iteration of BP corresponds to as many iterations of peeling decoding as there are degree-one CNs available to decode. However, we no longer assume the normalized number of available degree-one CNs across iterations during the steady state, r1(τPD), to be constant. Instead, we assume that each BP iteration is equivalent to advancing along a peeling decoding trajectory—i.e., a realization of r1(τPD)—by as much as there are degree-one CNs in the current position on the peeling decoding trajectory. This heuristic model allows us to directly simulate the PDF of nPD(Ieff ) from Monte-Carlo realizations of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process that correspond to realizations of the steady-state of r1(τPD). Indeed, from each Ornstein-Uhlenbeck realization of r1(τPD) we can generate a realization of nPD(K) as

nPD(K) = nPD(K − 1) + r1 (nPD(K − 1)) ,

(33)

Fig. 9. FER for the (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under BP decoding for different limits on the number of iterations I (solid curves) and its approximation using the PDF of nPD(Ieff ) from (33) based on the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (corresponding dash-dotted curves).
starting with nPD(1) = r1(0). We remark that when r1(τPD) is set to be constant and equal to E [r1(τPD)] from (6), nPD(K) boils back down to γ˘(ϵ∗ − ϵ)K.
Fig. 8 shows an example PDF of nPD(Ieff ) simulated via (33) from Monte-Carlo realizations of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process with parameters (γ˘, ν˘, θ˘) in (6)–(8) chosen to match the first two moments of r1(τPD) (blue histogram). We observe that the average value of nPD(Ieff ) (vertical black dashed line) is smaller than γ˘(ϵ∗ − ϵ)Ieff (vertical red solid line). Further, the left tail of the PDF is “heavier” than the right. This can be explained by the asymmetry in the way temporal correlation in r1(τPD) influences nPD(K) in (33): when r1 (nPD(K − 1)) is large, nPD(K) will end up far away from nPD(K − 1), so the next increment in nPD will be statistically close to a sample from an independent Gaussian random variable centered at γ˘(ϵ∗ −ϵ). When r1 (nPD(K − 1)) is small, on the other hand, the next increment in nPD will also likely be small.
The first scaling law we propose in this section uses the simulated distribution of nPD(Ieff ) based on the OrnsteinUhlenbeck model (33) in (31)–(32) to estimate the FER. The corresponding approximations are shown in Fig. 9 for the terminated (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble and I = {175, 250, 300} (dash-dotted curves). The match between the predicted and simulated (solid) FER curves is remarkable—evidently, the iterative model based on the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (33) is a good approximation of the behavior of BP decoding. The drawback of the model is that it requires Monte-Carlo approximation of the PDF of nPD(Ieff ) for every combination of (ϵ, N, I); however, simulating nPD(Ieff ) via (33) is still far less computationally complex than simulating BP decoding.
B. Gaussian Propagation Distance Model
In this section, we introduce a model that does not require Monte-Carlo simulation of the distribution of nPD(Ieff ) as in Section V-A. Instead, the model approximates nPD(Ieff ) by a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4878

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 69, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

Gaussian random variable. To that end, we will rely on the fact that a time integral of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process is normally distributed, as we describe below.
1) Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process. Necessary Background: A generic Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process Zt can be described using the following stochastic differential equation:

dZt = −b(xt − m)dt + σdBt ,

(34)

where Bt is the standard Wiener process, b and σ are real positive constants, and m is real. The first term on the right-hand side of (34) can be conceptualized as a mean-reverting factor and the second term as a random fluctuation. The constants b and σ determine their relative importance.
For a fixed sufficiently large t, the distribution of Zt is Gaussian. Specifically,

σ2

Zt ∼ N

m, 2b

.

(35)

Moreover, for sufficiently large t + s,

σ2

Cov [Zt, Zs] = 2b exp (−b |t−s|) .

(36)

Crucially, Ornstein and Uhlenbeck showed that a timeintegrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process is a Gaussian random variable [26]. For t → ∞,

t

σ2

Ztdt ∼ N mt, b2 t .

(37)

0

This result is the cornerstone of our approximation of nPD(Ieff ) as a Gaussian random variable.
2) Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process as a Model for BP Decoding: Let vBP(t) denote the number of new VNs (normalized by N ) resolved in BP iteration ℓ, where t is

t = ℓ · (ϵ∗ − ϵ) .

(38)

The quantity vBP(t) can be interpreted as the instantaneous decoding speed, measured in VNs (normalized by N ) per BP iteration. Here, the time variable t is normalized by the distance to the BP threshold (ϵ∗ − ϵ) instead of by N as is the case for τPD, discussed in Section II-C. Up to the normalization of time, vBP(t) is equivalent to vBP(ℓ) introduced in Section III. We use different time variables in these two cases to avoid confusion.
The process vBP(t) was introduced in [25] to provide an alternative finite-length scaling law for SC-LDPC code ensembles that yields less accurate predictions of the FER than the law in [15] (and even than the law in [11]) but does not rely on peeling decoding or mean evolution. Indeed, as opposed to E [r1(τPD)], E [vBP(t)] can be obtained directly from density evolution, as we discuss in Section III (see (20)). The authors show that vBP(t) exhibits a steady-state phase; they approximate the first two moments of this process during the steady-state phase as

E [vBP(t)] ≈ γ˘BP (ϵ∗ − ϵ) ,

(39)

Var [vBP(t)]

≈

ν˘BP N

,

(40)

Cov [vBP(t), vBP(s)]

≈

ν˘BP N

exp

−θ˘BP |t−s|

.

(41)

We apply the same refinement of the law as we did in [15]
and model the two-wave process for the terminated ensemble
as a combination of two independent Ornstein-Uhlenbeck processes. We therefore estimate the triple (γ˘BP, ν˘BP, θ˘BP) from the truncated ensemble, as we did in [15] for peeling decoding to estimate (γ˘, ν˘, θ˘). (We review the peeling decoding-based
laws in Section II-C.) The steady-state level constant γ˘BP is estimated along with Istart and Iend from density evolution: once Istart and Iend are estimated as described in Section III, we estimate γ˘BP from the average of E [vBP(ℓ)] for ℓ ∈ [Istart, Iend]. The covariance parameters ν˘BP and θ˘BP are estimated from Monte-Carlo simulations of BP decoding
for a single fixed (N, ϵ). For our running example of the (5, 10, N, L) SC-LDPC code ensemble, ν˘BP and θ˘BP are estimated for (N = 5000, ϵ = 0.465) to be ν˘BP ≈ 0.41, θ˘BP ≈ 2.74. The scaling parameters γ˘BP, ν˘BP, and θ˘BP are illustrated in Fig. 3 along with Istart and Iend.
We follow [25] and model vBP(t) in the steady state by an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. Equating the moments (39)–(41)
to those in (35)–(36) yields

m = γ˘BP (ϵ∗ − ϵ) ,

b = θ˘BP ,

σ2

=

2θ˘BP

·

ν˘BP N

.

(42)

3) Normal Approximation Based on a Time-Integrated
Ornstein-Uhlenbeck Process: The total number of VNs
decoded in Ieff iterations, nPD(Ieff ), can be expressed as a time integral of vBP(t), divided by (ϵ∗ − ϵ) to convert the units of speed to VNs per normalized iteration,

where

tstart +teff

1

nPD(Ieff ) ≈ ϵ∗ − ϵ

vBP(t)dt

tstart

teff
1 = ϵ∗ − ϵ vBP(t + tstart)dt ,

0

(43)

tstart = Istart (ϵ∗ − ϵ) , teff = Ieff (ϵ∗ − ϵ) . (44)

We can now use the expression for a time-integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (37) with appropriately chosen parameters (42) to approximate the distribution of nPD(Ieff ) from (43) as

(ϵ∗ −ϵ) nPD(Ieff ) ∼ N

σ2 mteff , b2 teff

=(a) N

γ˘BP

(ϵ∗ −ϵ)

teff ,

2ν˘BP N θ˘BP

teff

(45)

(=b) N

γ˘BP

(ϵ∗ −ϵ)2

Ieff ,

2ν˘BP N θ˘BP

(ϵ∗ −ϵ) Ieff

nPD(Ieff ) ∼ N

γ˘BP

(ϵ∗

−

ϵ)

Ieff

,

N

2ν˘BPIeff θ˘BP (ϵ∗ −

ϵ)

,

(46)

where in (a) we used (42) and in (b) we used (44). Notably, the approximation (46) reveals that both mean and variance of nPD(Ieff ) grow linearly with Ieff . We must also remark that the approximation (46) does not account for the possibility that the underlying Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process becomes negative.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOKOLOVSKII et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING OF SC-LDPC CODES WITH A LIMITED NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS

4879

Fig. 10. FER for the (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under BP decoding for different limits on the number of iterations I (solid curves) and its approximation using (31)–(32) with the distribution of nPD(Ieff ) from (46) (corresponding dash-dotted curves).

Fig. 11. The number of VNs decoded per BP iteration for the truncated (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble and ϵ = 0.47: the simulated average from 105 trajectories (blue solid curve) and the mean from
density evolution (red dashed curve). Several simulated trajectories are shown
as thin gray lines.

The second scaling law we propose in this section uses the normal approximation (46) to the distribution of nPD(Ieff ) in (31)–(32) to estimate the FER. The corresponding predictions are shown in Fig. 10 for our running example of the terminated (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble and I = {175, 250, 300} (dash-dotted curves). We observe that, while being a good approximation to the simulated FER, the predictions are more optimistic than the predictions based on the simulated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process from Section V-A (cf. Fig. 9).
4) Shifted Normal Approximation: Part of the reason behind the mismatch between the simulated and predicted FER in Fig. 10 is that (39) overestimates the average number of VNs decoded in a BP iteration for finite N , as shown in Fig. 11 for the truncated (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble and ϵ = 0.47. For the same ensemble and ϵ, Fig. 12 shows that the gap in the steady-state level translates into a shift in the location of the Gaussian approximation (46) to nPD(Ieff ) (green curve) relative to the simulated histogram (thin blue curve). Estimating the gap without resorting to Monte-Carlo simulations proves to be difficult; moreover, even if we adjust the location of the Gaussian by shifting its mean to account for the gap, the resulting distribution (red curve) lags behind the simulated histogram (thin blue curve). Overall, the simulated PDF based on the iterative Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model in Section V-A (purple curve) is the most accurate. On the other hand, the figure suggests that the two Gaussian models capture the variance of nPD(Ieff ) rather well.
With that in mind, we propose a hybrid model where the Gaussian approximation (46) is shifted to be located at the average of the iterative Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model (33). Specifically, let f (ϵ, N, Ieff ) denote that average. Unfortunately, obtaining f (ϵ, N, Ieff ) analytically is challenging; we resort to Monte-Carlo simulations of the iterative OrnsteinUhlenbeck model (33) to estimate it. These simulations indicate that f (ϵ, N, Ieff ) depends linearly on Ieff —we can thus estimate the slope of f (ϵ, N, Ieff ) as cf = f (ϵ, N, Ie′ff )/Ie′ff for

Fig. 12. The PDF of the total number of VNs decoded during the steady state for the truncated (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble, ϵ = 0.47 and I = 200: the simulated histogram (thin blue curve), the Gaussian approximation (46) with density evolution- (green curve) or BP simulation-based (red curve) mean, and the simulated PDF based on the iterative Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model from Section V-A (purple curve).

a specific Ie′ff and obtain the values of f (ϵ, N, Ieff ) for other Ieff by scaling that mother curve as cf Ieff , thereby avoiding the need to re-simulate f (ϵ, N, Ieff ) for every Ieff . This is
equivalent to using

m = cf

(47)

instead of m = γ˘BP (ϵ∗ − ϵ) in (42). Putting it all together, the third and last scaling law we pro-
pose in this section approximates the distribution of nPD(Ieff ) as

nPD(Ieff ) ∼ N

cf Ieff ,

2ν˘BPIeff N θ˘BP (ϵ∗ −

ϵ)

(48)

and uses it in (31)–(32) to estimate the FER.
The resulting FER predictions for the (5, 10, L = 50, N =
1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble are shown in Fig. 13 for I = {175, 250, 300} (dash-dotted curves). We chose Ie′ff = 350 − Istart − Iend, estimated cf = f (ϵ, N = 1000, Ie′ff )/Ie′ff for several ϵ, and linearly interpolated it to obtain the intermediate
values. (We remark that Istart and Iend depend on ϵ in their

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4880

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 69, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

Fig. 13. FER for the (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under BP decoding for different limits on the number of iterations I (solid curves) and its approximation using (31)–(32) with the distribution of nPD(Ieff ) from (48) (corresponding dash-dotted curves).

Fig. 14. Simulated FER for the (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under BP decoding for I = 175 (solid curve) and its approximations (dash-dotted curves).

turn; as we discuss in Section III, we also estimate them for several ϵ and use linear interpolation to obtain the intermediate values.) The resulting predictions are very close to those in Fig. 9 by the iterative Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model (i.e., by the first scaling law proposed in this section).
We conclude that the hybrid model provides the best trade-off between accuracy and analytical tractability. Importantly, unlike the first scaling law in this section, it does not require Monte-Carlo simulation for every combination of (ϵ, N, I)—estimating cf from a single value of the number of BP iterations allows us to obtain the whole family of FER curves for different limits on the number of BP iterations.
C. Discussion
Before we tackle the FER prediction for sliding window decoding with a limit on the number of iterations in Section VI, let us summarize the performance-complexity trade-offs associated with the four scaling laws we proposed for full BP decoding. To that end, Fig. 14 groups the simulated (black solid curve with pentagons) and predicted FER curves for the terminated (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under full BP decoding with I = 175 using the constant propagation model (28) (black dash-dotted curve) and the randomized propagation model (31)–(32) with the approximated distribution of nPD(Ieff ) based on the iterative Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model (33) (red dash-dotted curve with squares), on the normal distribution for the integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (46) (blue dash-dotted curve with circles), and on the shifted normal distribution (48) (purple dash-dotted curve with triangles). For reference, we have also included the simulated FER curve for unlimited number of iterations (green solid curve with diamonds) alongside our prediction from [15] (given in (15)) (green dashed curve).
Besides the scaling parameters also required for the scaling law with unlimited iterations (15), the black dash-dotted prediction curve obtained via the constant propagation model (28) requires calculating τmin, which is a function of quantities we

estimate from mean and density evolution, as we describe in Section IV. In that sense, the constant propagation model (28) is no more computationally challenging than the scaling law for unlimited iterations (15). On the other hand, the constant propagation model does not capture well the transition regions of the FER curve, as exemplified by the discontinuous jump of the black dash-dotted curve around ϵ = 0.47 and discussed in Section IV.
The iterative Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model (33) yields very accurate FER predictions (red dash-dotted curve with squares); however, it requires Monte-Carlo simulation of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process and numerical approximation of the PDF of nPD(Ieff ) from the simulated realizations for every (ϵ, N, I). The normal approximation based on the timeintegrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (46), shown in Fig. 14 as the blue dash-dotted curve with circles, is computationally less complex than the iterative Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model once the parameters (γ˘BP, ν˘BP, θ˘BP) are estimated, since it does not require estimating a probability distribution via Monte-Carlo simulation. However, it is also less accurate. The accuracy can be improved by shifting the Gaussian to be located at the mean of the iterative Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model, which we describe in Section V-B.4 to obtain the purple dash-dotted curve with triangles in Fig. 14 via (48). The shifted normal approximation is less computationally complex than the iterative Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model—not only does it rely on Gaussian distribution and thus simplify numerical integration in (32), but it also avoids simulating the iterative Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model (33) for every I—while achieving similar accuracy. It offers the best trade-off between complexity and accuracy, and we build upon the same shifted model in Section VI below to provide a scaling law for sliding window decoding with a limit on the number of iterations.
Let us review the steps required to apply the scaling law based on the shifted normal approximation. The user needs to implement density and mean evolution for the ensemble of interest, and the Monte-Carlo simulators of BP and peeling decoding and of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process. Density

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOKOLOVSKII et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING OF SC-LDPC CODES WITH A LIMITED NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS

4881

evolution is used to obtain the decoding threshold ϵ∗ and, for different ϵ, the values of Istart and Iend (the unshifted normal approximation requires γ˘BP estimated in the same way). Mean evolution is used to obtain the boundaries and the level of the peeling decoding steady state (α˜, β˜, γ˘) for several ϵ. For a single fixed (N, ϵ), Monte-Carlo simulation of
the peeling decoding is required to estimate the variance and covariance decay parameters of the steady state, (ν˘, θ˘); analo-
gously, Monte-Carlo simulation of BP decoding is required to estimate (ν˘BP, θ˘BP). Finally, Monte-Carlo simulations of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process for several (ϵ, N ) are needed to estimate cf . These parameters are fed to (48) and (31)–(32) to estimate the FER for different (ϵ, N, I).
It would greatly benefit the applicability of the finite-length scaling approach to be able to estimate (ν˘, θ˘) and (ν˘BP, θ˘BP) without resorting to Monte-Carlo simulation (and without
implementing covariance evolution [11]). Similarly, it would be interesting to find a way to estimate cf without simulating the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process for different (ϵ, N ). Providing
faster ways to estimate these values would facilitate further
adoption of finite-length scaling laws for code and decoder
parameter optimization and is an interesting direction of future
research. The values that are estimated from density and mean
evolution, on the other hand, are relatively easy to obtain.

VI. FINITE-LENGTH SCALING: SLIDING WINDOW DECODING WITH A LIMITED NUMBER OF ITERATIONS
The core idea behind the scaling laws in Section V is to model the number of bits recovered by a given number of BP iterations as a time integral of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process vBP(t). In this section, we further develop this approach and use it to estimate the FER under sliding window decoding. First, however, we need to consider the specific ways in which a limit on the number of iterations affects the probability of decoding error, which we discuss in the two following subsections.

A. Competition Between the Left Wave and the Sliding Window
In addition to the potential failure of the decoding waves that we analyzed in [15], a limit on the number of BP iterations in sliding window decoding introduces a kind of race between the left decoding wave and the sliding window. Let PL(ℓ) ∈ [0, L − 1] denote the position of the leftmost VN that remains unrecovered by iteration ℓ. We will refer to PL(ℓ) as the position of the left wave at iteration ℓ. Analogously, let WL(ℓ) denote the leftmost position within the sliding window, and WR(ℓ) = WL(ℓ) + W the next position just outside the right boundary of the sliding window. If, at any iteration ℓ, the left boundary of the window overtakes the wave, decoding fails, even though it could potentially have succeeded had the number of iterations not been limited. Let O denote this overtaking event,

O = PL(ℓ) < WL(ℓ) for some ℓ ∈ [1, I] .

(49)

A necessary condition for successful decoding is that O does not happen.

The setup we are considering can be illustrated by means of the following analogy. Suppose a user is watching a video via a streaming service. The video is being downloaded at a rate that fluctuates around a certain average. After an initial buffering period, the device starts playing the video. Then the event O in question is that the buffer is exhausted (and thus the video frozen) at least once during playback.

B. Reduced Maximum Propagation Distance for the Right Wave
Apart from the possibility of the window overtaking the left wave, the limit on the number of iterations also affects decoding by reducing the maximum distance that can be possibly traveled by the right wave (once the sliding window reaches the right boundary of the chain). When the number of decoding iterations is not limited, we assume that the right wave can travel by up to W positions, which is reflected in our scaling law for sliding window decoding (17) proposed in [15]. Here, we account for the presence of a limit on the number of iterations by estimating the maximum number of positions the right wave can travel to the left while the sliding window is moving to the right, which we denote by W ′ ≤ W .
We assume the following three-phase process: In the first phase, which begins when the sliding window starts to cover the last VN position (i.e., the right boundary of the window has reached the end of the coupled chain) and lasts Istart iterations, the right wave forms. Then, in the second phase, the right wave and the window move toward each other. Finally, in the third phase, which lasts Iend iterations, the two decoding waves meet and collapse. During the first and third phase the right wave does not travel, whereas the window moves to the right with speed VW = 1/Is. During the second phase, the right wave travels leftward with speed VBP, and the window moves rightward with speed VW. The maximum number of positions the right wave can travel, W ′, corresponds to the distance covered by the right wave in the second phase.
During the first and third phase, the window slides by

(Istart + Iend) VW

(50)

positions while the right wave does not move. The remaining

W − (Istart + Iend)VW

(51)

positions will be covered by the window and the wave jointly with speed VBP + VW, which will take

1

W − (Istart + Iend)VW

· VBP + VW

(52)

iterations. During that time, the right wave will have traveled by

W′ =

W − (Istart + Iend)VW

· VBP VBP + VW

(53)

positions, which is the adjusted size of the sliding window
we use in our model below. Naturally, as the limit on the
number of iterations is relaxed, VW → 0 in (53) and therefore W′ → W.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4882

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 69, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

C. General Form of the Scaling Law
We incorporate the limit on the number of iterations during sliding window decoding into our model via the two effects outlined above, namely, the possibility that the window overtakes the left wave (an event denoted by O) and the reduction of the maximum distance the right wave can travel. In essence, successful decoding requires that (i) the overtaking O does not happen; (ii) the left wave does not run out of VNs to decode while propagating through the first L − W ′ positions; and (iii) the left and right wave jointly cover the last W ′ positions. Conditions (ii) and (iii) are equivalent to the two-phase model we proposed in [15] to estimate the FER under unlimited iterations as in (17); the only adjustment is that the size of the second phase is reduced from W to W ′, defined in (53), to account for the reduction of the maximum reach of the right wave, as discussed in more detail in Section VI-B. Condition (i) is introduced in Section VI-A and is novel.
Modeling the three conditions as independent events, we approximate the FER under sliding window decoding with a limit on the number of BP iterations as

Pf = 1 − 1 − Pr {O}

· 1 − Pf(,Lu −W ′) 1 − Pf(,Wt ′) ,

(54)

where Pf(,Lu −W ′) and Pf(,Wt ′) are the estimated FERs for the unterminated and terminated SC-LDPC code ensembles of length L − W ′ and W ′, and are defined in (15) and (16),
respectively.
The rest of the section is devoted to the estimation of Pr {O}, the core of our finite-length scaling law for sliding
window decoding with a limited number of iterations.

D. Modeling the Race Between the Left Wave and the Window
The general idea behind our approach is to model the stochastic process associated with the position of the left wave, PL(ℓ), by a scaled time integral of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process that corresponds to vBP(ℓ), the normalized number of bits recovered in iteration ℓ defined in Section III, with an additional noise term. The wave cannot overtake the right boundary of the window, WR(ℓ), because no BP iterations are performed there. On the other hand, if the wave is itself overtaken by the left boundary, WL(ℓ), decoding is bound to fail. This motivates us to incorporate the boundaries of the window into our model as an absorbing barrier at WL(ℓ) and a reflecting barrier at WR(ℓ). When a stochastic process hits an absorbing barrier, it remains absorbed indefinitely. When a stochastic process hits a reflecting barrier, it is reflected back inside the domain [27]. The overtaking event O that we introduced in Section VI-A in (49) corresponds to PL(ℓ) having been absorbed by iteration I. The probability of this event can be estimated by tracking the evolution of the PDF of PL(ℓ) across iterations. That evolution can in turn be described by a partial differential equation called the Fokker-Planck equation [27]. We numerically solve the initial value problem for the Fokker-Planck equation for PL(ℓ) with the boundary conditions that correspond to an absorbing barrier at WL(ℓ)

and a reflecting barrier at WR(ℓ) and obtain the estimation of the probability of O.
1) Position of the Left Wave as an Integrated OrnsteinUhlenbeck Process: The scaling law for full BP decoding proposed in Section V uses a time integral of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process vBP(ℓ) as a model for the total number of VNs (normalized by N ) decoded in a given number of BP iterations. In the context of sliding window decoding, we are interested instead in the position of the wave after a number of iterations. The basic element of our model is the conversion of the normalized number of VNs decoded in BP iteration ℓ, vBP(ℓ), to the number of positions traveled by the wave in that iteration. We assume that N VNs decoded during the steady state of BP decoding advance the wave by VPD positions—i.e., by the same number of positions as for peeling decoding (18). The number of positions traveled in iteration ℓ is then

vBP(ℓ)VPD

(55)

and the total number of positions traveled in ℓ steady-state BP iterations is

PL(ℓ) = nPD(ℓ)VPD ,

(56)

where nPD(ℓ) is the number of VNs decoded in ℓ steady-state BP iterations that we introduced in Section V. We can use the model (43) of nPD(ℓ) in (56) to obtain

ℓ(ϵ∗ −ϵ)

PL(ℓ)

=

nPD(ℓ)VPD

=

VPD ϵ∗ − ϵ

vBP(t)dt . (57)

0

For convenience, we have assumed here that iteration ℓ = 0 corresponds to the beginning of the steady state when the position of the wave is zero.
To declutter notation, we do not use the time t normalized by the distance to the threshold (38) as we do in Section V and in (57). Instead, we use a continuous version of the variable ℓ with a unit of time also measured in BP iterations, denoted by τ . The model (57) can be rewritten in terms of τ as

ℓ

PL(ℓ) = vBP(τ )VPD dτ .

(58)

0

As we do for vBP(t) in Section V-B.2, we model vBP(τ ) by an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process of the form (34). The parameters b and σ need to be rescaled relative to those in (42), resulting in

m = cf , b = θ˘BP (ϵ∗ − ϵ) ,

σ2

=

2θ˘BP

(ϵ∗

−

ϵ)

ν˘BP N

;

(59)

the two models (i.e., the one with rescaled time t and the one with rescaled b and σ) are equivalent and yield identical predictions. We remark that in this section we use the same value for the average steady-state level m of vBP(τ ) as in the shifted normal approximation (47).
The scaling law for full BP decoding in Section V requires the probability distribution of the time integral of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process for a specific t, which is known

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOKOLOVSKII et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING OF SC-LDPC CODES WITH A LIMITED NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS

4883

Fig. 15. The histogram of the positions of the left wave PL(τ ) after τ = 412 BP iterations for the (5, 10, L, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble with ϵ = 0.455. Direct Monte-Carlo simulation of the decoding process (blue bars), numerical simulation of the integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (61)–(62): continuous (red dashed curve) and discretized (green solid curve) position. The difference in variance between the blue and green histograms is clear.

to be Gaussian (37). The analysis of sliding window decoding requires a more granular approach, since we need to track the evolution of PL(ℓ) over iterations. In other words, we need to treat PL(ℓ) as a stochastic process in its own right. This is complicated by the fact that an integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process of the form (37) or (58) is not Markov. However, the two-dimensional process



τ



η(τ ) = vBP(τ )VPD , PL(τ ) = η(s) ds

(60)

0

is Markov and can be analyzed using standard tools for diffusion processes [27]. (A diffusion process can informally be thought of as a continuous-time Markov processes with continuous sample paths [27].) The corresponding stochastic differential equation is [28, Eq. (35)]

dη(τ ) = −b(η(τ ) − m)dτ + σ1dBτ

(61)

dPL(τ ) = η(τ )dτ ,

where Bτ is the standard Wiener process. To account for the scaling of the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process vBP(τ ) (defined via (34) with parameters (59)) by VPD in (60), m and σ1 in (61) should be rescaled relative to those in (59), resulting
in

m = cf VPD , b = θ˘BP (ϵ∗ − ϵ) ,

σ12

=

2θ˘BP

(ϵ∗

−

ϵ)

VP2D

ν˘BP N

.

(62)

The need for a subscript in the diffusion coefficient σ1 will become apparent in the next subsection.
2) Additional Diffusion of the Left Wave’s Position: To answer whether the integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (61)–(62) is a good model for the propagation distance of the left wave, it can be tested against direct Monte-Carlo simulation of the decoding process. Fig. 15 compares the distribution of PL(ℓ) obtained via direct simulation (blue filled histogram) with the one estimated by simulating PL(τ ) (red dashed curve) and ⌊PL(τ )⌋ (green solid curve) using (61)–(62). The integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck model captures the average position of the wave relatively well (the means of the blue and green histogram are approximately 78 and 80 positions, respectively, after ℓ = 412 BP iterations) but

underestimates its variance. In other words, the uncertainty in the wave’s position does not come solely from the variation in the number of decoded VNs; there must be other factors at play.
We model this additional source of uncertainty via an additional diffusion term that affects PL(τ ) directly. Throughout iterations, even if the number of decoded VNs is known, the positions of these VNs is subject to random fluctuation. As Fig. 15 shows, by time τ that fluctuation accumulates into a difference in variance between simulated PL(ℓ) and ⌊PL(τ )⌋ from the model (61)–(62). We denote the variance of the simulated PL(ℓ) by σs2im(ℓ) and that of ⌊PL(τ )⌋ from (61)–(62) by σm2 odel(ℓ). We introduce a parameter σ22 that corresponds to additional per-iteration variance in position,

σ22

=

σs2im(ℓ) − σm2 odel(ℓ) ℓ

,

(63)

and incorporate that additional source of variance into our model by changing (61) to

dη(τ ) = −b(η(τ ) − m)dτ + σ1dBτ dPL(τ ) = η(τ )dτ + σ2dBτ′ ,

(64)

where Bτ′ is another standard Wiener process independent of Bτ . The rationale behind this model is that the variance of the standard Wiener process grows linearly with time [27]; adding the term σ2dBτ′ in (64) results in an additional variance of σ22ℓ in PL(ℓ) compared with the model in (61), thereby canceling the mismatch between the simulated and the modeled variance
in (63) but “spreading” this variance evenly across iterations.
We treat σ2 as a scaling parameter that depends on (dv, dc) only. We rely on a set of simulated realizations of the decoding process for a certain triple (ϵ, N, ℓ) to estimate σs2im. For our running example of the (5, 10, L, N ) SC-LDPC code
ensemble, we use (ϵ = 0.455, N = 1000, ℓ = 412) and obtain
σ2 ≈ 0.1179. As an aside, we remark that the video streaming analogy we

introduced in Section VI-A can be stretched further to include the additional uncertainty we are modeling here. Indeed,

the amount of downloaded data is not the only factor that determines how much time of playback is gained. This is also affected by, e.g., how much movement occurs in consecutive

frames of the video, assuming the video is compressed before transmission.
3) Modeling the Boundaries of the Sliding Window: We are

now ready to incorporate the sliding window into our model. In essence, we do so by limiting the process PL(ℓ) to the range from WL(ℓ) to WR(ℓ), i.e., to the range of positions covered by the sliding window at iteration ℓ. Indeed, PL(ℓ) cannot be larger than WR(ℓ) because sliding window decoding does not perform any BP iterations there. Similarly, if PL(ℓ) ever becomes smaller than WL(ℓ), the overtaking O happens and decoding fails. We account for these effects in our model by introducing an absorbing barrier at WL(ℓ) and a reflecting barrier at WR(ℓ).
During decoding, the sliding window moves in discrete

steps. It is convenient to smoothen this movement and assume it to be continuous and linear instead. We denote the continuously moving boundaries of the window by WL(τ ) and WR(τ ). The setup we use is illustrated in Fig. 16. The red dashed line

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4884

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 69, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

Fig. 16. Schematic illustration of the proposed model for the race between the left wave PL(τ ) and the left boundary of the window WL(τ ) from (66). The average position of the wave is shown as the blue solid line. The position
of the window is shown as the red dashed line. The gray curves represent the
minimum and maximum values observed for the position of the wave for a number of simulated realizations of PL(τ ). The range of values between them is shadowed. It is apparent that the spread of PL(τ ) grows with τ . Even though the wave (blue solid line) moves faster than the window (red dashed line) on average, some realizations of PL(τ ) do get overtaken by the window.

corresponds to WL(τ ), which will be included in the model as an absorbing barrier. Its slope is known and equal to VW. What remains to be specified is the iteration where WL(τ ) crosses 1, which we denote by ℓ∗ (see Fig. 16).
The value of ℓ∗ is what couples the model for PL(τ ) with WL(τ ). First, ℓ∗ depends not only on Iin but also on the time it takes for the wave to form, Istart. A natural choice for ℓ∗ in that regard would be Iin − Istart: it takes Istart iterations for the
steady state to establish, which eats away from the budget of
Iin initial iterations, and then the window slides to position 1. However, numerical simulations show that PL(Istart) is already
around one, not zero. In our model, we would like instead
to set the initial position of the wave to zero. We therefore subtract from Istart a term that corresponds to m−1 in (62),
which is the average time it takes for the wave to propagate
by one position, and set

ℓ∗ = Iin − Istart + cf−1VP−D1 .

(65)

Using our knowledge that WL(ℓ∗) = 1 and that the slope of WL(τ ) is VW, we obtain the continuous version of WL(ℓ) as

WL(τ ) = τ VW + 1 − ℓ∗VW .

(66)

For simplicity, we ignore the fact that WR(ℓ) remains flat for the first ℓ∗ iterations and let

WR(τ ) = WL(τ ) + W .

(67)

With (66)–(67) we have ensured that the boundaries of the window, WL(τ ) and WR(τ ), grow linearly with τ . They correspond to time-dependent absorbing and reflecting barriers and make the domain of PL(τ ) change over time. We remove that dependency by subtracting the time-dependent term τ VW

from PL(τ ). That corresponds to subtracting VW from η(τ ), which can in turn be expressed as a change in m.
Putting it all together, we use the model (64) with

m = cf VPD − VW , b = θ˘BP (ϵ∗ − ϵ) ,

σ12

=

2θ˘BP

(ϵ∗

−

ϵ)

VP2D

ν˘BP N

,

(68)

and the boundaries

WL = 1 − ℓ∗VW , WR = WL + W ,

absorbing , (69) reflecting , (70)

which no longer depend on τ . The initial conditions are η(0) ∼ N m, σ12/(2b) as in (35) and PL(0) = 0.
The probability of the overtaking event O corresponds to
the probability of PL(τ ) being absorbed at the barrier WL by the time ℓ∗ + (L − 1)Is. The latter probability can be obtained by solving the Fokker-Planck equation for (η(τ ), PL(τ )) with appropriately chosen initial and boundary conditions. The
following subsection provides a summary of the associated
results for general multidimensional diffusion processes.
4) Necessary Background on the Fokker-Planck Equation: Let Y τ be a time-homogeneous diffusion process on Rd defined as the solution to the Itô stochastic differential equa-
tion [27, Ch. 3]

dY (τ ) = b(Y (τ ))dτ + σ(Y (τ ))dBτ ,

(71)

where Bτ is the standard Wiener process on Rn, b(Y ) ∈ Rd is a drift vector, and σ(Y ) ∈ Rd×n. The matrix Σ(Y ) = σ(Y )σ(Y )T ∈ Rd×d is known as the diffusion matrix of Y (τ ). Let the initial condition Y (0) be a random vector
with probability density p0(Y ) independent of Bτ . Then the probability density p(Y , τ ) of Y (τ ) is the solution to the
initial value problem for the Fokker-Planck (also known as
forward Kolmogorov) equation

∂p

1

= ∇ · −b(Y )p + ∇ · (Σ(Y )p)

∂τ

2

d∂

1 d ∂2

= − i=1 ∂yi (bi(Y )p) + 2 i,j=1 ∂yi∂yj (Σij (Y )p) ,

p(Y , 0) = p0(Y ) ,

(72)

where y{i,j} , bi(Y ) , and Σij(Y ) denote the components of Y , b(Y ) , and Σ(Y ), respectively [27, Proposition 3.3 and Eq. (4.1)]. The Fokker-Planck equation describes the evolution of the probability density of Y (τ ) over time.
Absorbing or reflecting barriers affect p(Y , τ ) through additional boundary conditions for the Fokker-Planck equation (72). An absorbing barrier Ba imposes a Dirichlet boundary condition on (72), namely

p(Y , τ ) = 0 ∀Y ∈ Ba .

(73)

Likewise, a reflecting barrier Br translates into a Neumann boundary condition for (72). Specifically,

1

n·

b(Y )p − ∇ · (Σ(Y )p) 2

=0

∀Y ∈ Br ,

(74)

where n denotes a vector normal to Br. In other words, the probability density must vanish at the absorbing barrier Ba,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOKOLOVSKII et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING OF SC-LDPC CODES WITH A LIMITED NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS

4885

and there should be no probability flow at the reflecting barrier Br [27, pp. 90–91]. The probability mass lost by p(Y , τ ) is equal to the probability of Y (τ ) having been absorbed at Ba by the time τ ,

Pr {Y (τ ) absorbed at Ba} = 1 − p(Y , τ )dY , (75)
Ω
assuming Ba to be the only absorbing barrier present [27, p. 239]. The integration is performed over Ω that denotes the domain of Y (τ ).
5) The Fokker-Planck Equation for the Proposed Model: The model (64) is of the form (71) with

Y (τ ) = σ(Y ) =

η(τ ) PL(τ )
σ1 0 0 σ2

,

b(Y ) =

−b(η − m) η

,

and Bτ =

Bτ Bτ′

.

, (76)

We can therefore use (72)–(74) to derive the Fokker-Planck equation for the evolution of the PDF p(η, PL, τ ) of the process (64) as

∂p ∂τ

=

∂b (η − m) p ∂η

∂p −η
∂PL

+

σ12 2

∂2p ∂η2

+

σ22 2

∂2p ∂PL2

,

p(η, PL, 0) = p0(η, PL) ,

(77)

with boundary conditions

p (η, WL, τ ) = 0 ,

ηp

(η,

WR,

τ)

−

σ22 2

∂p (η, PL, τ ) ∂PL

= 0,
PL =WR

(78)

where WL and WR are defined in (69) and (70), respectively, and the parameters (m, b, σ1, σ2) are given in (68) and (63).
As we specify in Section VI-D.3, the initial distribution of η(τ ) and PL(τ ) should be η(0) ∼ N m, σs2t and PL(0) = 0, where σs2t = σ12/(2b). We should therefore set p0(η, PL) to a PDF whose marginal for η is the PDF of N m, σs2t and for PL the Dirac delta function. Handling such a distribution numerically is challenging; instead, we set p0(η, PL) to the
PDF of the correlated two-dimensional Gaussian distribution

N

m 0

,

σs2t ρδσst ρδσst δ2

,

(79)

where ρ → 1 and δ → 0. As δ → 0, the PDF of PL tends to the Dirac delta function as required; the correlation parameter ρ should tend to 1 because as τ → 0 , η(τ ) and its integral PL(τ ) become ever more dependent. The use of the PDF of (79) allows us to avoid the aforementioned numerical issues by backing ρ and δ off from their limits.
6) Numerical Solution to the Fokker-Planck Equation: To the best of our knowledge, the closed-form solution to the Fokker-Planck equation (77) in the presence of the boundary conditions (78) is not available. We therefore resort to solving (77)–(78) numerically using FiPy, a finite-volume solver of partial differential equations [29]. The range of η is limited to m ± 4σst to cover most of the probability mass without overstretching the domain, and that of PL to [WL, WR]. The resulting rectangular domain is discretized into a regular grid with η and PL split into 200 and 20W segments, respectively. We set ρ = 0.99 and δ = 0.1. The solver treats (77) as a

convection-diffusion equation; we use implicit convection and diffusion terms [29], which allows us to choose a large time step 1 without encountering numerical stability issues.
The numerical solution is propagated forward in time until the window is slid through the entire chain, i.e., until

τ ∗ = ℓ∗ + (L − 1)Is .

(80)

The PDF p(η, PL, τ ∗) is used to estimate the probability of the overtaking event O according to (75) as

WR m+4σst

Pr {O} = 1 −

p(η, PL, τ ∗) dη dPL .

WL m−4σst

(81)

The estimated Pr {O} is then used in (54) to estimate the FER.
In addition to the parameters required for the scaling law based on the shifted normal approximation, reviewed in Section V-C, the proposed scaling law for sliding window decoding with a limited number of iterations requires VPD, VBP, and σ2; VPD can be obtained from mean evolution for several ϵ as shown in (18), VBP can either be obtained directly from density evolution or from VPD using the approximation (22), and σ2 requires Monte-Carlo simulation of the BP decoder and of the integrated Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process (61)–(62) for a single fixed triple (ϵ, N, ℓ). It is thus relatively easy to obtain VPD and VBP; estimating σ2 more efficiently, on the other hand, is an open problem of practical interest.
We note that our implementation of the solver takes longer to estimate the FER than direct Euler-Maruyama simulation of 104 realizations of (64) to the same end. However, the computational complexity of the estimation based on the Fokker-Planck equation does not depend on the FER to attain a given accuracy, which is not the case for the simulation-based approach. Moreover, no attempt has been made to optimize either implementation.

E. Numerical Results
Fig. 17 compares the FER for the (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under sliding window decoding with W = 20 and Iin = 60 for Is = {6, 7, 10} (solid curves) with the corresponding approximation using (54), where the overtaking probability O is estimated using (81) (corresponding dash-dotted curves). We observe an impressive match between the simulated and predicted error rates. A similarly accurate prediction is obtained for N = 2000 in Fig. 18 and for other values of (dv, dc) with dv > 3.
Figs. 19 and 20 compare the simulated (solid curves) and predicted (corresponding dash-dotted curves) FER performance for the (4, 12, L = 50, N ) SC-LDPC code ensemble under sliding window decoding with W = 20, Iin = 60, and different values of Is for N = 996 and N = 1992, respectively. For this ensemble, the scaling parameters are estimated as ν˘ = 0.307, θ˘ = 2.172, ν˘BP = 0.285, θ˘BP = 2.921, and σ2 = 0.2056. As for the (5, 10, L, N ) SC-LDPC code ensemble, the predictions for the (4, 12, L, N ) SC-LDPC code ensemble are fairly accurate.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4886

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 69, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

Fig. 17. FER for the (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under sliding window decoding with W = 20 and Iin = 60 for different Is (solid curves) and its approximation (54) with Fokker-Planck-based estimation of the overtaking probability O (corresponding dash-dotted curves). The green dashed line corresponds to our approximation for the FER with unlimited number of iterations from [15].

Fig. 19. FER for the (4, 12, L = 50, N = 996) SC-LDPC code ensemble under sliding window decoding with W = 20 and Iin = 60 for different Is (solid curves) and its approximation (54) with Fokker-Planck-based estimation of the overtaking probability O (corresponding dash-dotted curves). The green dashed line corresponds to our approximation for the FER with unlimited number of iterations from [15].

Fig. 18. FER for the (5, 10, L = 50, N = 2000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under sliding window decoding with W = 20 and Iin = 60 for different Is (solid curves) and its approximation (54) with Fokker-Planck-based estimation of the overtaking probability O (corresponding dash-dotted curves). The green dashed line corresponds to our approximation for the FER with unlimited number of iterations from [15].

Fig. 20. FER for the (4, 12, L = 50, N = 1992) SC-LDPC code ensemble under sliding window decoding with W = 20 and Iin = 60 for different Is (solid curves) and its approximation (54) with Fokker-Planck-based estimation of the overtaking probability O (corresponding dash-dotted curves). The green dashed line corresponds to our approximation for the FER with unlimited number of iterations from [15].

The quality of the prediction deteriorates for smaller Iin, as exemplified in Fig. 21 for the (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under sliding window decoding with W = 20, Is = 9 and Iin = 25. We observe that degradation when Iin is such that the left wave is often overtaken at the very beginning of the chain. This setup, however, is of limited practical relevance—it is sensible for the system designer to ensure that the wave is firmly established by choosing Iin sufficiently large. This also lowers the probability that the wave is overtaken by the window early on during decoding if wave propagation happens to slow down for some time. We have included in Fig. 21 the simulated FER curve for unlimited number of iterations (green solid curve with circles)

alongside our prediction from [15] using (17) (green dashed
curve) for reference. We remark that we use θ˘BP ≈ 2.34 estimated at (ϵ =
0.455, N = 1000) to obtain the predictions in Figs. 17, 18, and 21. This is smaller than θ˘BP ≈ 2.74 used in Section V and estimated at (ϵ = 0.465, N = 5000). Choosing the latter value
makes the prediction curves slightly more optimistic. The covariance decay parameter θ˘BP seems to exhibit a stronger dependency on N than θ˘ in the case of peeling decoding;
we leave the investigation of this dependency as a subject
of future work. As a general rule of thumb, one should estimate θ˘BP for (ϵ, N ) that lie within the range one is
interested in.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SOKOLOVSKII et al.: FINITE-LENGTH SCALING OF SC-LDPC CODES WITH A LIMITED NUMBER OF DECODING ITERATIONS

4887

probability distributions of when decoding stops, which we did in [15] in the context of unlimited number of iterations.
Further, we do not foresee substantial difficulties in extending the scaling laws proposed here to protograph-based ensembles. What is required to do so is to modify density and mean evolution equations to account for the changed Tanner graph connectivity, as it is done in [13] for unlimited number of decoding iterations.

REFERENCES

Fig. 21. FER for the (5, 10, L = 50, N = 1000) SC-LDPC code ensemble under sliding window decoding with W = 20, Iin = 25, and Is = 9 (solid curve with squares) and its approximation (54) with Fokker-Planck-based estimation of the overtaking probability O (dash-dotted curve with squares). The green dashed line corresponds to our approximation for the FER with unlimited number of iterations from [15].
VII. CONCLUSION AND DISCUSSION
The proposed scaling laws for full BP decoding with a limited number of iterations and a scaling law for sliding window decoding with a limited number of iterations provide accurate predictions of the FER.2 Modeling the number of bits decoded in a given number of iterations by a time integral of an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process—the cornerstone of our scaling laws—proves to be a powerful tool in the analysis of decoding schemes with practically relevant constraints on the maximum number of iterations. More broadly, low-dimensional diffusion processes seem to be able to capture much of the behavior of iterative decoders relevant for error rate prediction in the waterfall region.
Another takeaway is that it is important for sliding window decoding to perform a sufficient number of iterations at the beginning of the chain. It is necessary not only because the decoder must ensure that the decoding wave is established, but also because allowing the decoding wave to propagate further inside the window builds up the decoder’s resilience to variation in the wave’s propagation speed.
We also remark that the scaling laws we propose in this paper can be extended to predict the bit and block error rate using the same techniques we employed in [15] to the same end. (Block error rate refers to the probability that a spatial position—a block—contains unrecovered bits after decoding.) Specifically, the models for both full BP decoding in Sections IV–V and for sliding window decoding in Section VI already keep track of the number of bits decoded across iterations implicitly; what is required to obtain a scaling law for bit and block error rate is to make use of this knowledge and average the bit and block error rate expressions over the
2An implementation of the proposed scaling laws along with density and mean evolution and the necessary Monte-Carlo simulators is available at https://github.com/rsokolovskii/fl_scaling_sc_ldpc

[1] A. J. Felström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep. 1999.
[2] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[3] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[4] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[5] A. Sridharan, D. Truhachev, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Distance bounds for an ensemble of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 12, pp. 4537–4555, Dec. 2007.
[6] S. Moloudi, M. Lentmaier, and A. Graell i Amat, “Spatially coupled turbo-like codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 63, no. 10, pp. 6199–6215, Oct. 2017.
[7] B. P. Smith, A. Farhood, A. Hunt, F. R. Kschischang, and J. Lodge, “Staircase codes: FEC for 100 Gb/s OTN,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 110–117, Jan. 2012.
[8] V. Aref, N. Macris, R. Urbanke, and M. Vuffray, “Lossy source coding via spatially coupled LDGM ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Cambridge, MA, USA, Jul. 2012, pp. 373–377.
[9] D. L. Donoho, A. Javanmard, and A. Montanari, “Informationtheoretically optimal compressed sensing via spatial coupling and approximate message passing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 7434–7464, Nov. 2013.
[10] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[11] P. M. Olmos and R. L. Urbanke, “A scaling law to predict the finitelength performance of spatially-coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 3164–3184, Jun. 2015.
[12] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength scaling for iteratively decoded LDPC ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 473–498, Feb. 2009.
[13] M. Stinner and P. M. Olmos, “On the waterfall performance of finitelength SC-LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 345–361, Feb. 2016.
[14] D. J. Costello, D. G. M. Mitchell, P. M. Olmos, and M. Lentmaier, “Spatially coupled generalized LDPC codes: Introduction and overview,” in Proc. 10th IEEE Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Hong Kong, Dec. 2018.
[15] R. Sokolovskii, A. Graell i Amat, and F. Brännström, “Finite-length scaling of spatially coupled LDPC codes under window decoding over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 10, pp. 5988–5998, Oct. 2020.
[16] H.-Y. Kwak, J.-W. Kim, and J.-S. No, “Optimizing code parameters of finite-length SC-LDPC codes using the scaling law,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 118640–118650, Aug. 2021.
[17] R. Sokolovskii, A. Graell i Amat, and F. Brännström, “On doped SCLDPC codes for streaming,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 2123–2127, Jul. 2021.
[18] H.-Y. Kwak, J.-W. Kim, H. Park, and J.-S. No, “Optimization of SCLDPC codes for window decoding with target window sizes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 2924–2938, May 2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4888

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 69, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

[19] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., El Paso, TX, USA, 1997, pp. 150–159.
[20] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello, “Minimum distance and trapping set analysis of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 254–281, Jan. 2013.
[21] H. Esfahanizadeh, A. Hareedy, and L. Dolecek, “Finite-length construction of high performance spatially-coupled codes via optimized partitioning and lifting,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 1, pp. 3–16, Jan. 2019.
[22] S. Naseri and A. H. Banihashemi, “Construction of time invariant spatially coupled LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 6, pp. 3485–3501, Jun. 2021.
[23] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello, and T. Fuja, “Performance bounds for quantized spatially coupled LDPC decoders based on absorbing sets,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Vail, CO, USA, Jun. 2018, pp. 826–830.
[24] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[25] M. Stinner, L. Barletta, and P. M. Olmos, “Finite-length scaling based on belief propagation for spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Barcelona, Spain, Jul. 2016, pp. 2109–2113.
[26] G. E. Uhlenbeck and L. S. Ornstein, “On the theory of the Brownian motion,” Phys. Rev., vol. 36, pp. 823–841, Sep. 1930.
[27] G. A. Pavliotis, Stochastic Processes and Applications. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2014.
[28] E. Benedetto, L. Sacerdote, and C. Zucca, “A first passage problem for a bivariate diffusion process: Numerical solution with an application to neuroscience when the process is Gauss–Markov,” J. Comput. Appl. Math., vol. 242, pp. 41–52, Apr. 2013.
[29] J. E. Guyer, D. Wheeler, and J. A. Warren, “FiPy: Partial differential equations with Python,” Comput. Sci. Eng., vol. 11, no. 3, pp. 6–15, May 2009. [Online]. Available: http://www.ctcms.nist.gov/fipy
Roman Sokolovskii received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees in telecommunication engineering from Saint Petersburg State University of Aerospace Instrumentation, Saint Petersburg, Russia, in 2014 and 2016, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, in 2022. He is currently a Post-Doctoral Research Associate with Imperial College London, London, U.K. His research focuses on applying modern coding-theoretic tools to digital communications and DNA data storage. He coauthored the paper that received the 2020 Best Student Conference Paper Award by the IEEE Sweden Joint VT-COM-IT Chapter.

Alexandre Graell i Amat (Senior Member, IEEE) received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy, in 2000, the M.Sc. degree in telecommunications engineering from the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, in 2001, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the Politecnico di Torino in 2004. From 2001 to 2002, he was a Visiting Scholar with the University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. From 2002 to 2003, he held a visiting appointment with Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, and the Telecommunications Technological Center of Catalonia. From 2001 to 2004, he held a part-time appointment with the STMicroelectronics Data Storage Division, Milan, Italy, as a Consultant on coding for magnetic recording channels. From 2004 to 2005, he was a Visiting Professor with Pompeu Fabra University. From 2006 to 2010, he was with the Department of Electronics, IMT Atlantique (formerly ENST Bretagne), Brest, France. Since 2019, he has been an Adjunct Research Scientist with Simula UiB, Bergen, Norway. He is currently a Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. His research interests are in the field of coding theory with application to distributed learning and computing, storage, privacy and security, and communications. He received the Marie Skłodowska-Curie Fellowship from the European Commission and the Juan de la Cierva Fellowship from the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science. He received the IEEE Communications Society 2010 Europe, Middle East, and Africa Region Outstanding Young Researcher Award. He was the General Co-Chair of the 7th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing, Sweden, in 2012, and the TPC Co-Chair of the 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding, Canada, in 2021. He was an Associate Editor of the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS from 2011 to 2013. He was an Associate Editor and the Editor-at-Large of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2011 to 2016 and from 2017 to 2020, respectively. He is currently an Area Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS.
Fredrik Brännström received the M.Sc. degree from Luleå University of Technology, Luleå, Sweden, in 1998, and the Ph.D. degree in communication theory from the Department of Computer Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, in 2004. From 2004 to 2006, he was a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of Technology. From 2006 to 2010, he was a Principal Design Engineer with Quantenna Communications Inc., Fremont, CA, USA. Since 2018, he is a Research Scientist (part time consulting) with Neural Propulsion Systems Inc., (nps.ai), Pleasanton, CA, USA, developing the next generation super-resolution radars. He is currently a Professor and the Head of the Communication Systems Group, Department of Electrical Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology. His research interests include algorithms, resource allocation, synchronization, antenna concepts, protocol design for vehicular communication systems, signal processing for radars, and different applications of coding. He was a recipient of the 2013 IEEE Communication Theory Workshop Best Poster Award. In 2014, he received the Department of Signals and Systems Best Teacher Award. He has coauthored the papers that received the 2016, 2017, and 2020 Best Student Conference Paper and the 2018 Best Student Journal Paper, all awarded by the IEEE Sweden Joint VT-COM-IT Chapter.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:39:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

