1934

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 27, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

A Task-Guided Normalized Min-Sum Decoding Network for LDPC Codes-Based DJSCC
Jianhong Yang, Shaohua Hong , Member, IEEE, and Lin Wang , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— Distributed joint source-channel coding (DJSCC) refers to the correlated sources which are encoded separately and reconstructed in the centre node by joint decoding. Therefore, the challenging problem involves designing a simple and efficient decoding algorithm to utilize the correlations among distributed sources. In this letter, a multi-task deep learning decoder is proposed for the low-density parity-check (LDPC) code-based DJSCC system to improve the performance. This proposal is based on the shared neural normalized min-sum (SNNMS) decoding network and the log likelihood ratio (LLR) shared unit is added to further exploit the source correlation. Moreover, an adaptive multi-loss function is proposed to prevent the network tilting the balance in favor of one certain task. Simulation results indicate that the proposed decoder can achieve a significant performance improvement with almost the same complexity compared with the separated SNNMS decoders.
Index Terms— Distributed joint source-channel coding, low-density parity-check, min-sum, neural network.
I. INTRODUCTION
WIRELESS sensor networks (WSNs) are composed of high-density distributed sensors to gather information. In the context of energy-limited and bandwidth-limited sensor transmission constraints, distributed source coding (DSC) is considered as an efficient coding technology for the WSNs [1], [2], where the joint decoder is utilized to exploit the correlation and computational complexity is shifted from encoder side to decoder side. Distributed joint source-channel coding (DJSCC) combines channel encoding and DSC so that the resilience against transmission channel errors is improved.
Due to the strong correction capability, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes are adopted into the DJSCC system to enhance the performance. There has been considerable interest in the LDPC codes-based DJSCC system and plenty of work has been proposed [3], [4], [5], [6], most of which focus on the code design or system design. Actually, the joint decoder that can best exploit the correlation between the distributed
Manuscript received 21 March 2023; revised 22 April 2023 and 21 May 2023; accepted 24 May 2023. Date of publication 31 May 2023; date of current version 12 August 2023. This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation of Fujian Province (No.2020J01003) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61671395). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was P. Giard. (Corresponding author: Shaohua Hong.)
Jianhong Yang and Lin Wang are with the Department of Informatics and Communication Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China (e-mail: 1334414868@qq.com; wanglin@xmu.edu.cn).
Shaohua Hong is with the Department of Informatics and Communication Engineering, Xiamen University, Xiamen 361005, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of Southeast Coast Marine Information Intelligent Perception and Application, Ministry of Natural Resources, Xiamen 361005, China (e-mail: hongsh@xmu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2023.3281576

sources is very important in practice. The use of two-stage iterative decoder technique is proposed, which consists of local iterations and global iterations [7]. The sum-product decoding algorithm is performed in local iterations while the updated estimates of the source correlation are achieved in global iterations and further passed on to the subsequent local iterations to obtain the additional coding gains. Based on this two-stage iterative decoder, reliability-oriented decoding strategy for LDPC codes-based DJSCC system is proposed to further improve the decoding performance [8].
The rapid development of deep learning has provided some new optimization concepts for the decoding algorithm of LDPC codes [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15]. The belief propagation (BP) and min-sum (MS) algorithms are two main LDPC decoding approaches. By unfolding the iterative decoding progress between the variable nodes (VNs) and checking nodes (CNs) into a feed-forward propagation network and assigning weights to the edges in the Tanner graph, the BP and MS algorithms can be improved by the deep learning methods. A neural normalized min-sum (NNMS) and the shared neural normalized min-sum (SNNMS) decoding network are proposed, which can reduce the number of iterations and improve bit error ratio (BER) performance simultaneously [13]. A high-performance neural min-sum method is proposed to make full use of the lifting structure of protograph LDPC (P-LDPC) codes [14]. A deep neural network is proposed to implement the layered mode decoding and additionally learn normalization and offset parameters to achieve better performance than MS decoders and approach the computationally expensive BP decoders [15].
Most of the neural decoding methods in the literature focus on the single source decoding. Inspired by multi-task learning [16], a multi-task normalized min-sum (MNMS) decoding network is proposed for the LDPC codes-based DJSCC system in this letter. In the proposed work, the log likelihood ratios (LLRs) shared unit is embedded to exploit the correlation to get additional performance gain. Moreover, an adaptive multi-loss function is proposed to improve the fitting capability of the network.
The remainder of this letter is organized as follows. Section II describes the system model. Section III describes the proposed MNMS decoder, and Section IV presents the simulation results. Finally, Section V concludes the letter.
II. THE SYSTEM MODEL
The LDPC codes-based DJSCC system model [3] is depicted in Fig. 1. The system is comprised of two correlated

1558-2558 © 2023 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:36:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: TASK-GUIDED NORMALIZED MIN-SUM DECODING NETWORK

1935

Fig. 1. The system model of LDPC code-based DJSCC.

The second difference is that the LLR shared unit is added to further exploit the source correlation. Let L(ui) denote the received channel LLR corresponding to bit i. L (qij) and L (rji) represent the VN to CN messages and CN to VN messages, respectively. The process of neural network decoding can be described as following.
Input layer: The LLR of the channel output L (ui,X ) and L (ui,Y ) are obtained by Eq. (1) and then splice them as a vector, given by

sources X and Y , where the correlation is modeled as a virtual binary-symmetric channel (BSC) with crossover probability P = ρ. Assuming that the information sequence length of distributed sources X and Y is k bits, LDPC encoder generates a codeword with length of n = k + m, where m is the length of parity bits. As shown in Fig. 1, the first ωk information bits of X, the remaining (1 − ω)k information bits of Y , and the m parity bits are sent to AWGN channel in the transmitter. Therefore, the compression rates of X and Y are Rx = (ωk + m) /k and Ry = ((1 − ω) k + m) /k, respectively.
At the receiver, the received information is rx and ry. Before LDPC decoding, a LLR union process is conducted, where the initial LLRs of the distributed sources are achieved. Taking the source X for example, the LLR is formulated as follows [6]:

 

2rxi /σ2,

i

∈

1, ωk

  

ρ + (1 − ρ) · e2ryi−ωk/σ2

L(ui,X ) =  log (1 − ρ) + ρ · e2ryi−ωk/σ2 ,



 

2rxi−k+ωk

/σ2

,

i ∈ ωk + 1, k
i ∈ k + 1, n (1)

where L(ui,X ) denotes the initial LLR information for the ith bit of the source X at the receiver side and σ2 is the variance
of the AWGN. Then the LDPC decoders output the estimated
information bits based on the BP or MS algorithm.

III. THE PROPOSED MNMS NEURAL DECODING NETWORK
Although the separated SNNMS and its improved version can be directly utilized for the decoder of LDPC codes-based DJSCC, the source correlation is only exploited in the input layer. In order to achieve additional coding gains, a MNMS neural decoding network is proposed to further exploit the source correlation in this section.
Fig. 2 depicts the proposed MNMS neural network architecture. The CNs and VNs in the iterative decoding algorithm is unfolded into a forward-propagation network. The edges of CN neural layer and VN neural layer are correspond to the edges between CNs and VNs from view of Tanner graph [11]. The first difference from the SNNMS is that the calculation process of the CN neuron layer and VN neuron layer of the two separated SNNMS networks is integrated into the same layer, where each layer edge connections correspond to the joint parity check matrix H consisting of the parity check matrices of the distributed sources X and Y . Obviously, the proposed network can be applied to the joint decoder of the distributed sources with different encoding schemes.

L0 (u·) = [L (ui,X ) , L (ui,Y )]T ,

(2)

where [·]T denotes the transposition of a vector or matrix. CN neuron layer:

L(l) (rji) =

sgn L(l−1) (qi′j )

i′ ∈Vj \i

· min
i′ ∈Vj \i

αi(′lj−1) × L(l−1) (qi′j )

,

(3)

where l is the number of iterations, Vj denotes the set of
column positions of ‘1’ in the jth row of the H matrix, Vj\i represents the Vj excluding the ith VN and αi(jl−1) is the correction factor of the edge connecting the CN nodes to the VN nodes. In other words, αi(jl−1) is the learnable weight parameter set of the edge.
Taking the complexity of the training process and the particularity of the distributed sources into account, the αi(jl−1) in the proposed network is simplified as

αi(jl−1) =

αX(l−1), when the edge belongs to X . αY(l−1), when the edge belongs to Y

(4)

That is to say, the CN neuron layer shares the same correction factors αX(l) and αY(l) for the distributed sources X and Y , respectively.
VN neuron layer:

L(l) (qij ) = Lκ (ui) +

βj(l′)i × L(l) (rj′i)

(5)

j ′ ∈Ci\j

where Ci denotes the set of row positions of ‘1’ in the ith column of the parity check matrix H, Ci\j represents the Ci excluding the jth CN, κ is the κth added shared unit layer, βj(li) is another learnable weight parameter of the edge, and Lκ (ui) denotes the output of the κth LLR shared unit, which is given in the subsequent presentation.
In order to reduce the size of the parameter set and the difficulty of the training process, all the parameters βj(li) are set as 1 in the proposed network.
LLR shared unit layer:
In context of multi-task learning [16], parameter sharing is
completed to leverage useful information contained in multiple
related tasks. However, the high computation arithmetic in
the shared procedure is unfriendly to practical application.
Inspired by mutli-task learning, the LLR shared unit is
proposed to further exploit the source correlation to improve
the decoding performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:36:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1936

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 27, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

Fig. 2. The MNMS neural network architecture for DJSCC.

Supposing that the shared unit is added after gth iteration, the LLR values of VNs can be achieved by

LLR(ui) = Lκ (ui) +

L(g) (rji) .

(6)

j∈Ci

Then the extrinsic information on the source bits can be estimated by

Lex(ui)≈ sign(Lρ) · sign(LLR(ui)) · min(|Lρ| , |LLR(ui)|), (7)

where Lρ = log((1 − ρ)/ρ). The detailed derivation process can be found in [6].
In order to further exploit the correlation between the distributed sources, the output of the shared unit is given by

Fig. 3. The proposed adaptive loss function.

Lκ(ui) =

L0(ui) + Lex(ui), Lex(ui),

transmitted source bits (8)
otherwise

The multiloss function [12] is given by

The output Lκ(ui) is sent to VN neuron layer to continue (g + 1)th iteration. Moreover, the output of the shared unit layer will participate in the calculation of the subsequent VN neuron layer as the Lκ(ui) until the next LLR shared unit layer.
Output layer:





oi = δ Lκ (ui) +

L(lm) (rji) ,

(9)

j∈Ci

where lm is the maximum number of iterations and δ(x) is the activation function for training stage. In the proposed network, the sigmoid function δ(x) = (1 + e−x)−1 is chosen as the activation function.
For the proposed decoding network, the decoding process of the distributed sources X and Y are integrated into a network for parallel decoding. There probably exists a gap in the decoding performance of the sources X and Y due to the different degree distributions of the LDPC codes. If the choice of loss function is not appropriate, the network will tilt toward a certain task, thereby widening the performance gap. To solve this problem, an adaptive multi-loss function that can learn the lower layers is proposed to avoid this issue. The proposed function can be calculated as follows:

1 lm n

L(v, o) = − n

vilog (oi) + (1 − vi) log (1 − oi) ,

l=1 i=1

(10)

where vi and oi are actual ith component of the source bits and the output at network output layer, respectively.
Then the proposed adaptive loss function is achieved by

Ltotal(v, o) = λLX (v, o) + (1 − λ) LY (v, o) , (11)

where LX (v, o) and LY (v, o) are the multiloss functions

of the distributed sources X and Y , respectively, and

λ

=

LX

LX (v,o) (v,o)+LY

(v,o)

.

Obviously,

λ

∈

[0, 1].

It

can

be

found

that if the network tilts toward a certain task, such as the

distributed source X, the multiloss function LX (v, o) will be minimized but the corresponding weight λ will also decrease

substantially due to the almost constant LY (v, o). Thus, the

total loss function of the network may not decrease. Fig. 3

depicts the proposed adaptive loss function vs. the multiloss

functions of the distributed sources X and Y . We observe

that the proposed adaptive loss function is minimized on

condition that both the distributed sources X and Y have the

minimum multiloss function. Therefore, the proposed adaptive

loss function can prevent the network tilting the balance in

favor of one certain task.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:36:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: TASK-GUIDED NORMALIZED MIN-SUM DECODING NETWORK

1937

Fig. 4. The performance results with different shared units layers.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we compare the proposed MNMS decoding network with the joint normalized MS (NMS) algorithm and the SNNMS decoding network. To evaluate the performance, the MNMS algorithm is also compared with the joint BP [6] and iterative joint BP (JBP) algorithms [7]. The MNMS and SNNMS decoding network are trained and tested by TensorFlow.
Due to the simple encoder structure and good performance, the P-LDPC is utilized in simulation. The chosen base matrix B [17] is given by

3 3 0 0 1 0 0 0

B

=

2 3

3 2

0 1

1 2

0 0

1 0

0 1

0 1

.

(12)

00202221

Then based on the progressive edge-growth (PEG) algorithm, the check matrix H with size n = 800 and m = 400 is obtained. In simulation, the symmetric compression with ω = 1/2 is selected in the DJSCC system. The training data is generated under multiple SNRs ranging from 1.25dB to 4dB with the step size of 0.25dB for the proposed MNMS and the separated SNNMS decoding networks. The training rate is set as 0.001. We set the batch size as 120 in this letter.
Fig. 4 depicts the performance results for different shared units layers with ρ = 0.01, where s0, s1, s2and s3 represent no shared unit layer (32 layers, i.e. 15 iterations), one added shared unit layer (63 layers, i.e. 30 iterations), two added shared unit layers (94 layers, i.e. 45 iterations) and three added shared unit layers (125 layers, i.e. 60 iterations), respectively. It can be seen that adding an appropriate number of shared unit layers can achieve better performance. However, the performance may not show the linear change with the number of shared unit layers increased. This result is consistent with the generality of the deep learning approach. With the increase of the number of layers, it may achieve over-fitting and poor performance in the test dataset. Moreover, the share unit layer may exacerbate this affect. Therefore, choosing an appropriate number of shared unit layers is critical.
Fig. 5 shows the performance comparison of different decoding algorithms with lm = 30. To achieve better performance of the separated SNNMS decoding network, the

Fig. 5. The BER performance comparison of different decoding algorithms.
multiloss function is separately utilized to train the model of X and Y . The iterative JBP algorithm consists of 15 local iterations and one global iteration (i.e., 30 total iterations). We choose g = 15 to insert the LLR share unit layer for the proposed MNMS decoding network. One observes that the proposed MNMS network has much better BER performance than the joint NMS, the joint BP, and the separated SNNMS network due to further exploiting the correlation between the distributed sources by the added share unit layer. Compared with the iterative JBP algorithm, the proposed network shows almost the same performance. However, as we know, the nonlinear operations (tanh(·)) are required in each iteration for the JBP algorithm and further the number of nonlinear operations in each iteration is linear with the number of edges in the Tanner graph. Thus, the iterative JBP algorithm requires plenty of nonlinear arithmetic operations, thereby having high computational complexity. That is to say, the proposed network shows almost the same performance as the iterative JBP algorithm with much lower computational complexity. Detail comparison shows that the performance of the distributed source Y is better than that of X for the proposed MNMS approach and the iterative JBP algorithm. The reason may be explained that the source correlation is further exploited according to the extrinsic information and the extrinsic information for Y is more accuracy. Moreover,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:36:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1938

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 27, NO. 8, AUGUST 2023

TABLE I COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT DECODING METHODS

the performance gain for ρ = 0.04 is larger than that for ρ = 0.02.
It can also be seen from Fig.5 that there exists a performance gap between the source X and the source Y for all the decoding algorithms due to the different degree distributions of the used P-LDPC code. Moreover, the proposed MNMS decoding network has smaller performance gap than the separated SNNMS decoding network. This fully demonstrates that the proposed adaptive multi-loss function can help the proposed MNMS network keep the balance for the multi-tasks case.
Suppose that the distributed sources X and Y have the same check matrix Hx = Hy with m rows and n columns. The number of ‘1’ in Hx or Hy is denoted as E (the number of edges in the Tanner graph). Given that the average row and column weights of the Hx and Hy are dc and dv, respectively, we can get

E = n × dv = m × dc.

(13)

Based on the process of neural network decoding, the complexity can be evaluated by the number of comparison (CMP), exclusive-OR (XOR), addition (ADD), and multiplication (MUL) operations. For CN neuron layer, the number of CMP operations is 2E(dc − 2), which is the same as the number of XOR operations required. Moreover, there requires 2E MUL operations due to the correction factor. For VN neuron layer, 2E(dv − 1) ADD operations are needed to update the messages. For LLR shared unit layer, there requires 2 × k CMP and 2 × 2k = 4k XOR operations to calculate the extrinsic information and k + 2m = n + m ADD operations to achieve the output of the shared unit. Table I lists the computational complexity with lm iterations and t added LLR shared unit layers. It can be found that the computational complexity of the proposed MNMS decoding network is almost the same as that of the separated SNNMS decoding network due to lm ≫ t.

V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, a MNMS decoding network is proposed for the LPDC-based DJSCC system. The proposed MNMS decoding

network embeds two decoding tasks into the same network and the LLR shared unit layer is added to implement interaction to further exploit the correlation between the distributed sources. Moreover, an adaptive multi-loss function is proposed for this architecture to train the network. Simulation results indicate that the proposed task-guided decoding network can achieve much better performance than the separated SNNMS decoding network without increasing the computational complexity. In future work, we need to explore the simplest and most optimal network architecture for more than two sources.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Slepian and J. Wolf, “Noiseless coding of correlated information sources,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-19, no. 4, pp. 471–480, Jul. 1973.
[2] X. Zhu, Y. Liu, and L. Zhang, “Distributed joint source-channel coding in wireless sensor networks,” Sensors, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 4901–4917, Jun. 2009.
[3] I. Shahid and P. Yahampath, “Distributed joint source-channel coding using unequal error protection LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 3472–3482, Aug. 2013.
[4] F. Cen, “Distributed joint source and channel coding with lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 2336–2339, Dec. 2013.
[5] M. Khas, H. Saeedi, and R. Asvadi, “Design and analysis of LDPC codes for joint source-channel decoding of two correlated sensors,” IET Commun., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 1003–1010, May 2018.
[6] S. Hong and L. Wang, “Protograph LDPC-based distributed joint sourcechannel coding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Syst. (ICCS), Dec. 2016, pp. 1–5.
[7] F. Daneshgaran, M. Laddomada, and M. Mondin, “LDPC-based channel coding of correlated sources with iterative joint decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 577–582, Apr. 2006.
[8] Y. Lyu, S. Hong, L. Wang, and Z. Xiong, “Reliability-oriented decoding strategy for LDPC codes-based D-JSCC system,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 11, pp. 2364–2367, Nov. 2017.
[9] S. Han, J. Oh, K. Oh, and J. Ha, “Deep-learning for breaking the trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 70, no. 5, pp. 2909–2923, May 2022.
[10] X. Guo, T. Chang, and Y. Wang, “Model-driven deep learning ADMM decoder for irregular binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 571–575, Feb. 2023.
[11] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in Proc. 54th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Sep. 2016, pp. 341–346.
[12] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Feb. 2018.
[13] Q. Wang, S. Wang, H. Fang, L. Chen, L. Chen, and Y. Guo, “A modeldriven deep learning method for normalized min-sum LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops (ICC Workshops), Jun. 2020, pp. 1–6.
[14] J. Dai et al., “Learning to decode protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1983–1999, Jul. 2021.
[15] N. Shah and Y. Vasavada, “Neural layered decoding of 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 3590–3593, Nov. 2021.
[16] S. Ruder, “An overview of multi-task learning in deep neural networks,” 2017, arXiv:1706.05098.
[17] H. Uchikawa, “Design of non-precoded protograph-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2014, pp. 2779–2783.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:36:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

