2023 VTS Asia Pacific Wireless Communications Symposium (APWCS) | 979-8-3503-1680-3/23/$31.00 ©2023 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/APWCS60142.2023.10234057

Performance of IR-HARQ-based RC-LDPC Code Extension in Optical Satellite Systems
Cuong T. Nguyen, Hoang D. Le, and Anh T. Pham Computer Communications Laboratory, The University of Aizu, Aizuwakamatsu 965-8580, Japan

Abstract—This paper studies the link-layer error-control solutions for low Earth orbit (LEO) satellite-based free-space optical (FSO) communications. Specifically, we address the design of lowdensity parity check (LDPC) codes for incremental redundancy (IR) hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) protocols. To facilitate the IR-HARQ operation, a rate-compatible (RC)-LDPC code family constructed by the code extension method is used. Performance metrics, including goodput and energy efficiency, are investigated. Simulation results confirm the effectiveness of our proposed design compared to existing solutions over the state-of-the-art. The results also support the proper selection of the LEO satellite’s transmitted powers based on the trade-off between goodput and energy efficiency.
Index Terms—Free-space optics (FSO), hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ), low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, low earth orbits (LEO) satellite

I. INTRODUCTION
In the vision of future sixth-generation (6G) wireless communications, the Internet of Things (IoT) is expected to enable a wide range of applications, such as the Internet of Vehicles (IoV), intelligent agriculture, and healthcare IoT [1]. The existing terrestrial infrastructure supporting IoT may not meet the stringent requirements for global coverage and high network capacity. Recent years have witnessed the rapid development of low-Earth orbit (LEO) satellites forming constellation networks to provide global Internet from space, e.g., in many projects of SpaceX’s Starlink, OneWeb, and Telesat [2]. LEO satellites offer low latency and less power consumption compared to other types of satellites [3]. In addition, free-space optical (FSO) technology has established its reputation for delivering extremely high-speed data services thanks to its broad license-free bandwidth [4]. Therefore, LEO satellite-based FSO communication is a potential candidate for many application services toward 6G networks, as shown in Fig. 1.
The uncertainty of atmospheric channels, especially the signal fading due to atmospheric turbulence, poses various issues in designing satellite-based FSO systems [5]. A feasible solution to tackle this issue is the use of hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ) protocols, which integrate automatic repeat requests (ARQ) and error correction codes (ECC) [6]. The design and performance evaluation of HARQ protocols have been recently investigated in LEO satellite-based FSO systems [2], [6]–[8]. Notably, the design of cooperative incremental redundancy (IR) HARQ, considering the sliding window ARQ and the punctured Reed-Solomon (RS) code, was introduced in [2], [7]. The performance of IR-HARQ

Fig. 1. An example of LEO satellite-based FSO systems supporting various applications.
based on the rate-compatible punctured convolutional (RCPC) code family with rate adaptation was analyzed in [6]. Most recently, the authors in [8] formulated the power optimization problem for LEO satellite-based FSO systems using different HARQ schemes. These studies confirmed the effectiveness of IR-HARQ over the time-varying FSO channels thanks to transmissions of incremental parity bits to correct erroneous frames.
The above-mentioned studies focused on punctured codes of either RS or convolutional codes for the IR-HARQ design. Nevertheless, the FSO channel coherence time is typically in the order of milliseconds, and long data frames are preferred for Gbps-rate transmissions [6]. Such long codewords result in exponentially increasing complexity in the Viterbi decoder of the convolutional codes [9]. Additionally, while long RS codes implemented on a large-size Galois field have been considered [10], it is still not feasible due to the high complexity. A viable solution is the employment of low-density parity check (LDPC) code for the HARQ design. The LDPC codes, which is a type of linear block code, have received tremendous attention thanks to low decoding complexity and close-to-capacity performance [11]. To facilitate the operation of IR-HARQ

979-8-3503-16A8u0t-h3o/2ri3z/e$d3l1ic.0e0ns©ed20u2s3e IliEmEitEed to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

protocols, the rate-compatible (RC)-LDPC code family, which is a set of nested LDPC code rates, is employed. To obtain such an RC-LDPC code family, there are two popular approaches, i.e., puncturing and code extension. The puncturing method, which achieves higher code rates by removing coded bits from a lower mother code rate, may suffer from painstaking optimization and performance degradation at higher code rates [11]. At the same time, the code extension method constructs the RC-LDPC code family by extending a parity check matrix of high-rate code to obtain the lower code rates, which can curtail the drawback of the puncturing method [11]. However, the design of the IR-HARQ-based RC-LDPC code extension has not been studied in the literature on LEO satellite-based FSO systems.
This paper, therefore, aims to address the design and performance evaluation of IR-HARQ-based RC-LDPC code extension in LEO satellite-based FSO systems. The sliding window mechanism is employed for IR-HARQ protocols. Additionally, the HARQ’s window size is designed by a burst size to effectively facilitate the operation of the IRHARQ protocol. Performance metrics, including goodput and energy efficiency, are investigated over turbulence-induced fading channels. Simulation results highlight the effectiveness of our proposed solution and discuss a proper selection of the system’s parameters.
II. SYSTEM AND CHANNEL MODELS
A. System Description
As illustrated in Fig. 1, we consider an FSO transmission from an LEO satellite to a ground station. The IR-HARQ protocol, which combines the sliding window ARQ and RCLDPC code, is employed at the link layer to guarantee the system’s reliability. The RC-LDPC-based code extension is used to correct the corrupted frames using the iterative belief propagation (BP) algorithm. In addition, the sliding window ARQ scheme is for the retransmission of additional redundancies for erroneous frames, which are uncorrected by the RC-LDPC code. For the sake of simplicity, feedback signals, i.e., ACK and NAK, are supposed to be error-free.
On the other hand, we consider a fixed-size time-slot structure for data transmission. Each time slot accommodates a burst transmission of multiple data/redundancy frames and its feedback signal. The burst duration is designed to be shorter than the FSO channel coherence time so that frames in a burst are assumed to experience the same channel condition. The time slot duration tslot can be written as tslot = ttrans + 2tprop, where tprop is the propagation delay, and ttrans = Nburst/Rb, where Nburst and Rb are the number of bits per burst and data bit rate, respectively. It is worth noting that different sizes of a given frame, which is for initial transmission and retransmissions, can be used. This results in size-varying burst transmissions. To keep the fixed-size bursts, the transmitter fills up the burst with new transmissions and zero paddings after sending all incremental retransmissions.

We consider the intensity modulation/direct detection (IM/DD) with on-off keying (OOK) modulation for the system. Thus, the received electrical signal is given as [12]

y = Rhx + n,

(1)

where R is the detector responsivity, h is the channel fading
coefficient considered to be constant over a burst transmission,
x ∈ {x0 = 0, x1 = 2Pt} is the transmitted intensity with average transmitted optical power Pt, and n denotes the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) with zero mean and variance σn2. The instantaneous electrical signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) at the receiver thus can be expressed as

γ

=

γ¯h2 E [h2]

=

2

(RPt σn2

h)2

,

(2)

where

γ¯

=

E 2(RPt )2
σn2

h2

is the average electrical SNR.

B. FSO Channel Model

The channel fading coefficient h consists of three factors, i.e. atmospheric attenuation hl, atmospheric turbulence ha, beam spreading loss hp and can be written as h = hlhahp. Details of these factors are as follows.
1) Atmospheric Attenuation: The atmospheric attenuation is deterministic, which is calculated by Beer Lambert’s law as

hl = exp (−σL) ,

(3)

where σ is the attenuation coefficient and can be expressed as

the function of the visibility V and the optical wavelength λ in

[4, (4)]; L is the communication distance and can be computed

as L = (Hs − Hr) sec (ξ) where Hs and Hr are respectively the altitude of the satellite and the ground station, ξ is the

zenith angle, sec (.) is the secant function.

2) Atmospheric Turbulence Fading: For the atmospheric

turbulence fading, we consider the Gamma-Gamma distributed

random variable to model a wide range of turbulence con-

ditions, from weak to strong [5]. Therefore, the probability

density function of the fading coefficient ha is given as

α+β

fha

(ha)

=

2 Γ

(αβ) (α) Γ

2
(β

)

α+β
ha 2

−1

Kα−β

2

αβha ,

(4)

where Γ (.) is the Gamma function, Kα−β (.) is the modified Bessel function of the second kind of order α − β. The
shaping parameters α and β are determined as functions of the Rytov variance σR2 [5]. Under the assumption of plane wave propagation, the Rytov variance is written as

Ha

σR2 = 2.25kw7/av6e sec11/6 (ξ)

Cn2 (h) (h − Hr)5/6 dh, (5)

Hr

where kwave = 2π/λ is the optical wave number, Ha is the atmospheric altitude. Moreover, Cn2 (h) is
the altitude-dependent refractive index structure coefficient

and can be modeled by the Hufnagel-Valley model as

Cn2 (h) = 0.00594

wwind 27

2

10−5h 10 exp

−

h 1000

+ 2.7 ×

10−16 exp

−

h 1500

+ Cn2 (0) exp

−

h 100

, where Cn2 (0) is the

ground-level turbulence , and wwind is root-mean-squared (rms)

wind speed [5].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

nIR × nBR sub-matrix corresponding to the extension part, I is an identity matrix, and 0 is a zero sub-matrix. Here, we consider the quasi-cyclic LDPC code, whose parity matrix is in the circulant form, i.e., Hd, Hp, and HIR, [14]. The encoder/decoder of such quasi-LDPC codes can be efficiently implemented on hardware.
The parity check matrix of the base rate is written as

Fig. 2. Structure diagram of an RC-LDPC code family’s parity check matrix derived by code extension.

HBR = Hd Hp ,

(7)

Here,

such

a

base

rate

has

the

code

rate

of

k nBR

.

The

lower-rate

parity check matrices are extended versions of the base parity

check matrix by the same number of rows and columns. Let denote H(i) as an extended version of the base parity check

matrix by i rows and columns (0 ≤ i ≤ nIR), which can be

expressed as

3) Beam-spreading Loss: We consider a Gaussian beam profile with the perfect tracking system [3]. As a result, the fraction of collected power at the receiver’s circular detector can be approximated as [12]

2ρ2

hp ≈ A0 exp − wL2 eq ,

(6)

where ρ is the radial displacement, A0 = [erf (v)]2 is

th√e fractio√n of the collected power at ρ = 0 with v = ( πra) / 2wL,eff , erf (.) is the error function, ra is the

receiver aperture radius, wLeq is the equ√ivalent beam width

and

can

be

expressed

aswL2 eq

=

wL2 ,eff

2v

πerf(v) exp(−v2

)

.

Moreover,

wL,eff is the effective beam width in the presence of optical

turbulence at the commu√nication distance L and can be calculated as wL,eff = wL 1 + Gd where Gd can be found

in [13, (16)]. wL is the diffractive beam radius at distance L

2

2

and is written as wL = w0

1

−

L F0

+ 2L
kwave w02

, where

w0

=

π λθ

and

F0

are,

respectively,

the

beam

radius

and

phase

font radius of curvature at the transmitter output aperture, θ is

the divergence half-angle.

III. IR-HARQ-BASED RC-LDPC CODE EXTENSION
This section focuses on the IR-HARQ-based RC-LDPC Code Extension. First, we introduce the RC-LDPC code extension. Then, the operation of IR-HARQ-based RC-LDPC Code Extension with FSO burst transmission is described.

A. Rate-compatible (RC) LDPC Code Extension
RC-LDPC codes are employed to correct erroneous frames using the LDPC encoder/decoder. They allow the encoder/decoder pair to adjust different code rates without changing their basic structure. All coded bits of low-rate RC-LDPC codes are extended from a high-rate code (a base rate) based on the extension of its parity check matrix. Fig. 2 illustrates the structure diagram of an RC-LDPC code family’s parity check matrix derived by code extension. The matrix includes five sub-matrices where Hd is a mBR ×k sub-matrix corresponding to data bits of the base rate, Hp is a mBR × mBR sub-matrix corresponding to the parity bits of the base rate, HIR is a

H(i) =

HBR HI(Ri)

0 ,
I

(8)

where HI(Ri) is the first i rows of HIR. The matrix H(i) has the

size

of

(mBR + i) × (nBR + i)

and

code

rate

of

k nBR +i

.

It

can

be seen that the extended matrix has a lower rate yet the same

information bits compared to the base parity check matrix. In

addition,

the

possible

code

rates

of

the

family

range

from

k nBR

to

. k
nBR +nIR

For systematic encoding, we denote the systematic generator

matrix for the base code rate as

GBR = I HdTH−p T .

(9)

In this case, we assume that Hp has full rank. Since Hp is

a square matrix, it is invertible, and there exists H−p T. The

decoding methods in case of rank deficient Hp can be found

on

[14].

For

the

code

rate

k nBR +i

with

the

parity

check

matrix

H(i), it can be considered as a concatenated code where the

outer code is the base code, and the inner code is a block code

whose generator matrix is

GI(Ri) = I

HI(Ri) T .

(10)

Thus, for a given k information bits denoted as vector m, the

LDPC-coded

frame

at

rate

k nBR +i

can

be

computed

as

c(i) = mGBRG(IRi) = c(0)G(IRi),

(11)

where c(0) = mGBR is the coded frame of the base rate. It can be seen that the frame of an arbitrary rate in the family is always systematic and nested in lower-rate frames. Therefore, we can construct low-rate frames by appending additional parity bits to a higher-rate one.

B. IR-HARQ-based LDPC with Burst Transmission
Let denote all the code rates of the RC-LDPC family as C1 > C2 > ... > CM , where M represents both the number of code rates and the maximum number of transmissions. If C1 = 1, the first transmission is an uncoded frame; otherwise, it is an LDPC-coded frame of rate C1. On the receiver side, we assume that the iterative BP algorithm is employed for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. An example of the IR-HARQ-based RC-LDPC code extension with burst transmission.

decoding received frames [15]. For OOK modulation, the loglikelihood ratio of j-th bit in codeword, cj, is computed as

LLR (cj)

=

log

Pr (yj|x1) Pr (yj|x0)

=

2Pt

h2 − hyj σn2

.

(12)

If the decoding attempt for a frame fails after a predefined number of iterations, the frame is considered to be erroneous. The transmitter then includes the incremental transmissions of these erroneous frames in the next burst. These incremental transmissions contain redundancy that can be appended to previously received frames and form a new lower-rate frame (C2, ..., CM ). The transmission procedure stops if a decoding attempt is successful, or the frame reaches the maximum number of transmissions. For the latter case, the system then discards the frame.
Fig. 3 describes an example of the LDPC-based IR-HARQ applied in the desired system. The RC-LDPC code rates are (1, 2/3, 1/2). It is observed that (1) the maximum number of transmissions is 3; (2) the second and third transmissions are redundancies whose length is half of the initial transmission; (3) the burst size allows for a maximum number of 100 new transmission frames. For the first burst, the initial transmission of the second frame denoted as F1(2) is corrupted, and a NAK(2) is sent back accordingly. The transmitter then sends the redundancy F2(2) in the second burst so it can combine with F1(2) to form a new frame of rate 2/3 at the receiver. After the third burst, frame 2 reaches the maximum number of transmissions and is still uncorrectable. Therefore, the system discards frame 2.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
This section presents and discusses the performance of IRHARQ-based LDPC code extension using Monte Carlo simulations. Performance metrics, including goodput and energy

TABLE I SYSTEM PARAMETERS

Name

Symbol

Value

LEO Satellite Parameters

LEO satellite altitude

Hs

600 km

Zenith angle

ξ

60o

Divergence half-angle

θ

10 µrad

Bit rate Number of bits per burst Optical wavelength

Rb Nburst
λ

1 Gbps 1.6 Mbits 1550 nm

Ground Station Parameters

Ground station altitude

Hr

Aperture radius

ra

Radial displacement

ρ

Noise standard deviation

σn

Detector responsivity

R

1.5 m 5 cm 0m 10−7 A/Hz 0.9

Other Parameters

Atmospheric altitude Rms wind speed
Ground turbulence level Visibility

Ha
wwind Cn2 (0)
V

20 km 21 m/s 10−14 m−2/3 20 km

efficiency, are considered. Here, the goodput is defined as the average number of successfully transmitted information bits per burst transmission. Additionally, the energy efficiency represents the successfully transmitted data bits per joule and can be calculated as the ratio between the goodput and the transmitted power.
For the simulations, we consider two sets of RC-LDPC code family, i.e. (1, 1/2, 1/3) and (1, 2/3, 1/2). The parity check matrix of these families is constructed by lifting a protograph two times, where the second lifting uses the circulant progressive edge growth algorithm [16]. The protograph is found

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 4. Goodput versus average received SNR for different retransmission- Fig. 5. Goodput versus radial displacements for different transmitted power

based schemes.

values.

in [11, (13, 14)]. The first and second lifting factors are 4 and 250, giving the information bits of 8000. The maximum number of iterations for the BP decoder is 20. We consider a collimated beam with F0 = ∞. The maximum number of transmissions M is 3. Other system parameters can be found in Table I unless otherwise stated.
Firstly, we investigate in Fig. 4 the goodput performance for different retransmission-based schemes, i.e., the IR-HARQbased LDPC code extension, type I (TI)-HARQ, and pure sliding window ARQ protocols. As seen, the IR-HARQ-based LDPC code extension outperforms the conventional solutions of TI-HARQ and pure ARQ thanks to the retransmission of only incremental redundancies for erroneous frames. For instance, to maintain the goodput of 0.8 Mbits/burst, our proposed solution can achieve 7 dB of SNR gain compared to the pure ARQ protocols. While TI-HARQ, which contains the same LDPC-coded frame for each transmission, performs better than the ARQ in the low SNR regime (0-10 dB), its maximum achievable goodput is bounded due to the fixed code rate. In addition, the goodput of the IR-HARQ with the RCLDPC family (1, 2/3, 1/2) shows a better performance than the one with the RC-LDPC family (1, 1/2, 1/3) in the SNR range of 10 to 20 dB. This is because the RC-LDPC code family (1, 2/3, 1/2) has less redundancies in the incremental transmissions, which contain more new frame transmissions in the same burst.
Next, Fig. 5 illustrates the advantages of the IR-HARQbased LDPC code extension over the conventional ARQ regarding radial displacement. Also, different transmitted power values, i.e., Pt = 14 dBm, 16 dBm, and 18 dBm, are taken into account. This is an especially essential performance metric to determine the operational coverage area of LEO satellitebased FSO systems. Using this figure, we can determine the operational area of the receiver to maintain a targeted goodput. For example, to maintain a targeted IR-HARQ’s goodput of 1 Mb/burst, the receiver should be placed at 4 m, 7 m, and 10

Fig. 6. Energy efficiency and goodput versus transmitted power for LDPCbased IR-HARQ and conventional ARQ.
m from the center of the beam footprint when Pt = 14 dBm, 16 dBm, and 18 dBm, respectively.
Finally, we explore the tradeoff between energy efficiency and the goodput over a range of transmitted powers in Fig. 6. Also, both IR-HARQ-based LDPC code extension and pure sliding window ARQ protocols are considered. As expected, our proposed solution outperforms the conventional ARQ in terms of energy efficiency. Using this figure, we can determine a proper transmitted power to maximize the system’s energy efficiency while maintaining a required level of goodput performance. For instance, to retain a required IR-HARQ’s goodput level of 0.8 Mb/burst while achieving the optimal value of energy efficiency, the transmitted power should be 10 dBm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have presented the design and performance evaluation of the IR-HARQ-based RC-LDPC code extension for LEO satellite-based FSO systems. To facilitate the operation of IR-HARQ, we used the RC-LDPC code family derived by code extension for incremental redundancy retransmission. Performance metrics, i.e., goodput and energy efficiency, were investigated. The simulation results highlighted the outperformance of IR-HARQ-based LDPC code extension compared to the conventional solutions, i.e., TI-HARQ and pure sliding window ARQ protocols. Furthermore, the results also explored the trade-off between goodput and energy efficiency, which supports the proper selection of transmitted powers.
REFERENCES
[1] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li, D. Niyato, O. Dobre, and H. V. Poor, “6g internet of things: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 359–383, 2021.
[2] H. D. Le, H. D. Nguyen, C. T. Nguyen, and A. T. Pham, “Fso-based space-air-ground integrated vehicular networks: Cooperative harq with rate adaptation,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., 2023.
[3] H. D. Le, P. V. Trinh, T. V. Pham, D. R. Kolev, A. Carrasco-Casado, T. Kubo-Oka, M. Toyoshima, and A. T. Pham, “Throughput analysis for tcp over the fso-based satellite-assisted internet of vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 71, no. 2, pp. 1875–1890, 2021.
[4] H. D. Le and A. T. Pham, “Level crossing rate and average fade duration of satellite-to-uav fso channels,” IEEE Photon. J., vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 1– 14, Feb. 2021.
[5] J. Ma, K. Li, L. Tan, S. Yu, and Y. Cao, “Performance analysis of satellite-to-ground downlink coherent optical communications with spatial diversity over gamma–gamma atmospheric turbulence,” Appl. Opt., vol. 54, no. 25, pp. 7575–7585, Aug. 2015.

[6] H. D. Le and A. T. Pham, “On the design of fso-based satellite systems using incremental redundancy hybrid arq protocols with rate adaptation,” IEEE Trans. Veh., vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 463–477, Nov. 2021.
[7] H. D. Nguyen, H. D. Le, C. T. Nguyen, and A. T. Pham, “Throughput and delay performance of cooperative harq in satellite-hap-vehicle fso systems,” in Proc. IEEE Veh. Technol. Conf, Norman, OK, USA, Sept. 2021, pp. 1–6.
[8] T. T. Kapsis and A. D. Panagopoulos, “Power allocation for reliable and energy-efficient optical leo-to-ground downlinks with hybrid arq schemes,” in MDPI Photonics, vol. 9, no. 2, Feb. 2022, p. 92.
[9] J. Luo, “On low-complexity maximum-likelihood decoding of convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf., vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5756–5760, 2008.
[10] T. Buerner, R. Dohmen, A. Zottmann, M. Saeger, and A. van Wijngaarden, “On a high-speed reed-solomon codec architecture for 43 gb/s optical transmission systems,” in Proc. 24th Int. Conf. Microelectron, vol. 2. IEEE, 2004, pp. 743–746.
[11] T.-Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protographbased raptor-like ldpc codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, Feb. 2015.
[12] A. A. Farid and S. Hranilovic, “Outage capacity optimization for free-space optical links with pointing errors,” IEEE/OSA J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 25, no. 7, pp. 1702–1710, July 2007.
[13] L. Andrews, R. Phillips, and P. Yu, “Optical scintillations and fade statistics for a satellite-communication system,” OSA Appl. Opt., vol. 34, no. 33, pp. 7742–7751, Nov. 1995.
[14] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[15] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[16] Z. Li and B. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Conf. Rec. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput, vol. 2, Pacific Grove, CA, USA, 2004, pp. 1990–1994.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:35:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

