Codes and Iterative Decoding on General Graphs
Niclas Wiberg, Hans-Andrea ioeliger. and Ralph Kotter ISY, LinkbDing Un:vemty, 5-58183 hnkoping, Sweden

Keywords: turbo (de-)coding, low-density paritycheck codes, Tanner graphs, M a r k o v random fields, “trellises” with a generalized “time” axis, generalized Viterbi and BCJR decoding.

Tanner graph, there is, in general, no unique minimal trellis. (The simplest example are tail-biting trellises.) Nevertheless, bounds on the “size” of t h e realization may be obtained from the (“abstract”) state spaces of the code.

I. INTRODUCTION
Until recently, most known decoding procedures for errorcorrecting codes were based either on algebraically calculating the error pattern or on some sort of tree or trellis search. With the advent of turbo coding [l],a third decoding principle has finally had its breakthrough: iterative decoding.
(Iterative decoding is not a new idea, though: most of the key ideas were already present in Gallager’s work on lowdensity parity-check codes [2].)
With respect t o Viterbi decoding, a code is most naturally described by means of a trellis diagram. T h e main thesis of the present paper is that, with respect t o iterative decoding, the natural way of describing a code is by means of a Tanner graph [ 3 ] ,which may be viewed as a generalized trellis, More precisely, it is t h e “time axis” of a trellis t h a t is generalized to a Tanner graph.
Trellises yield Tanner graphs of the type shown in Fig. 1; in particular, the graph has no cycles. T h e complexity reduction in turbo codes (and low-density parity-check codes: and many new codes to be discovered) comes from allowing Tanner graphs with cycles, cf. Fig. 2.
11. DECODING
Both Viterbi decoding and BCJR decoding i4] are easily generalized to arbitrary Tanner graphs without cycles, where these algorithms are still optimal (in the same sense as for trellises). T h e basic idea of iterative decoding is simpiy t o apply these algorithms even t o Tanner graphs with cycles, ignoring t h e fact t h a t the algorithms are no longer optimal. T h e empirical success of turbo coding (as well as our own experiments with other types of codes) confirm the validity of this approach.
Of course, analytical understanding of the decoder operation is also desirable. O u r main result here applies t o “cycle codes” ( a subclass of low-density parity-check codes): we give a complete algebraic characterization of all error patterns that are corrected by the generalized Viterbi algorithm after infinitely many iterations.

IV. A PRIORPIROBABILITIES
Our careful derivation of the two basic iterative decoding aigorithms clarifies, in particular, what a priori distributions are admissible and how they are properly dealt with. As it turns out, these distributions are closely related t o Markov Random fields.

REFERENCES

Il] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes (l),”
PTOCI.CC’93, Geneva, Switzerland, 1993, pp. 1064-1070.

[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. 7nform. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.

[3] R. M.Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.

[4] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal de-

k y i coding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE
Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 20, pp. 284-287, March 1974.

i

0

0

111

0

0

0

0

0

0

F i g u r e 1: A trellis ( t o p ) a n d its T a n n e r g r a p h ( b o t t o m ) .

...

..

111. REALIZATIOTNHEOROYN GENERAGL RAPHS
Much recent work was devoted to finding, and bounding the size of, the %mallest” trellis for a given code. This problem is significantly generalized by consideringgeneral Tanner graphs.
In the traditional setting, t h e only degree of freedom (for a given code) was t h e ordering of the “time axis”. For a given ordering, every linear code has a well-defined unique minimal trellis, and every other trellis for the same code may be collapsed t o t h e minimal trellis by state merging.
In our more general setting, the “time axis” need not be ordered, but may be an arbitrary Tanner graph. Even for a fixed

interleaver
,,
Figwe 2 : The T a n n e r graph of t u r b o coding [I].

468

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:42:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

