Information-Optimum Discrete Signal Processing for Detection and Decoding
(invited paper)

Gerhard Bauch, Jan Lewandowsky, Maximilian Stark, Peter Oppermann
Institute of Communications Hamburg University of Technology, Germany

Abstract—We present an information-theoretic approach to discrete signal processing called information-optimum signal processing for the example of a wireless receiver comprising LDPC decoding, channel estimation and detection. All operations are replaced by simple lookup tables and all messages which are exchanged between detection stages are unsigned integers. The lookup tables are designed offline using the information bottleneck concept of preserving relevant information. We show that the approach allows for simple signal processing with coarse quantization while achieving virtually the same performance as conventional signal processing approaches with high resolution, e.g. double precision. The contribution of the paper is a tutorial style explanation of the concept as well as an exemplary survey of applications and performance results which illustrate the potential of the concept.
I. INTRODUCTION
This paper discusses a new approach to discrete signal processing using the examples of LDPC decoding, detection and channel estimation in a wireless system. We call the approach information-optimum discrete signal processing. Given a coarse quantization with a limited number of bits per sample, the idea is to preserve in each detection step as much information on the variable of interest as possible in the sense of Shannon’s information theory. I.e., the maximum possible relevant mutual information shall be preserved in each detection step. However, we do not only care about the quantization problem of representing samples with a small number of bits. We also replace all operations by simple lookup tables such that the detector works with simple integer arithmetic only. The offline design of the lookup tables becomes the crucial task while the actual implementation of the detector is extremely simple. For the design of the lookup tables, we apply the information bottleneck method proposed by Tishby et. al. in [1]. The information bottleneck method has been widely applied in the field of machine learning, particularly in the context of text classification, but is hardly known in signal processing and communications. However, in the few works where it has been used for signal processing or communications problems it has proven to be extremely powerful (see e.g. [2]-[4]).
The approach is fundamentally different from conventional signal processing, even from existing approximations of signal processing steps by lookup tables. The fundamental difference is that we give up the conventional thinking in representation values in quantized signal processing. State-of-the-art discrete signal processing typically is based on an optimum or close-to-

optimum algorithm which is designed for real or complexvalued samples, at least for high resolution such as double precision. The optimum algorithm is then made implementable by approximations and reduced resolution, i.e. a coarser quantization with a limited number of bits per sample. The approximations are usually “local” approximations: In each stage of the signal processing chain, the current sample values and operations are approximated as good as possible according to a certain criterion such as mean squared error (MSE) given a quantized signal representation. In particular, the quantized samples indicate a representation value from the respective quantization interval. The quantized implementation of the signal processing algorithm then works based on those representation values. Optimality of an algorithm is usually lost in such a quantized implementation which often results in a significant performance degradation compared to a double precision implementation.
In contrast, the proposed information-optimum approach does not consider representation values at all. The relation of the discrete numbers to the variable of interest is via a joint probability distribution. This concept is in line with Shannon’s information theory where information is only defined by probabilities without taking the possible realizations of the involved random variables into account. Moreover, since we design each signal processing stage such that the maximum possible relevant information is preserved, performance very close to the optimum double precision implementation can be obtained with a small number of bits per sample and low computational complexity.
Signal processing methods which achieve close to optimum performance with coarse quantization and low computational complexity are of huge interest in real-time applications. This is particularly true in high throughput or low latency wireless communications as required e.g. in 5G systems, autonomous driving or industry 4.0 problems.
In this paper, we first focus on decoding of an LDPC code as a concise example which allows to explain the concept. This example is furthermore motivated by the fact that forward error control decoding is the by far computationally most expensive part of the baseband processing in a wireless communications system [5]. Hence, there is a need for more energy-efficient and computationally-efficient solutions. In fact, real-time decoding has been a major issue in the standardization of all 3GPP cellular communications generations. We then extend the concept to adjacent signal processing stages: to channel estimation and detection.

978-1-5386-6355-4/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

II. THE INFORMATION BOTTLENECK METHOD
A. Principle of the Information Bottleneck Method The information bottleneck method as introduced in [1] is
essentially a classification or clustering tool. The information bottleneck setup is schematically depicted in Fig. 1. It indicates the relation of the three involved random variables X, Y, T.

Fig. 1. Information bottleneck setup.

The random variable X with realizations xœࣲ is the random variable of interest. However, x is not directly observed. The observed random variable Y with realizations yœࣳ typically has significantly higher cardinality |ࣳ|>|ࣲ|. The essential assumption is that Y is informative about X, i.e. X and Y share mutual information I(X;Y) ≠ 0. The relation between X and Y is captured by the joint probabilities p(x,y).
The realizations y of the observed random variable Y shall be clustered to realizations tœ࣮ of the compressed random variable T with smaller cardinality |࣮| < |ࣳ|. The mapping y→t will be described by the conditional probabilities p(t|y). This includes the possibility of a soft mapping, where a realization y can be mapped to different clusters t with certain probabilities. In our context, only hard (deterministic) mappings are of interest, i.e. p(t|y) can only take the values 1 or 0. This implies that the clustering rule p(t|y) can be defined by a lookup table. The key of the information bottleneck method is the design criterion for the clustering rule p(t|y): The clustering is done such that the maximum possible mutual information I(X;T) on the relevant variable X is preserved. This so-called relevant information I(X;T) is limited by the number of different clusters, i.e. by the cardinality |࣮| of T. In case of no compression, i.e. |࣮|=|ࣳ|, the original mutual information I(X;Y) between the observed random variable Y and the relevant random variable X can always be preserved. In case of compression, i.e. |࣮|<|ࣳ|, some relevant information is in general lost, i.e. I(X;T) ≤ I(X;Y). However, this loss is minimized by design.
In a more general formulation the information bottleneck optimization problem is given by

min I (Y;T ) − β I ( X ;T ).

(1)

p(t y)

Minimization of the mutual information I(Y;T) implies maximal compression. The parameter β is a weighting factor between the conflicting targets compression and preservation

of relevant information. It can also be viewed as the Lagrangian multiplier in the optimization problem.
The information bottleneck principle can be applied to various problems from completely different fields. E.g. the observed variable Y could represent books which shall be clustered according to relevance with respect to certain topics or authors.
A communications example which is relevant in our context is included in Fig. 1: The relevant variable X represents the transmitted information bits. The observed variable Y indicates the noisy received samples or matched filter output. The received samples y shall be quantized with significantly less than log2|ࣳ| bits per sample for low complexity processing. Hence, Y is compressed to T. The essential difference to conventional quantization is that the clustering does not aim at approximating y as good as possible by a representation value e.g. in the sense of a mean squared error or a similar signal processing inspired criterion. Instead, the clustering is done such that the relevant information I(X;T) on X is preserved as good as possible. The relation between the compressed samples t and the relevant samples x is captured in the conditional probabilities p(x|t) rather than in a representation value. The information bottleneck approach in general leads to fundamentally different clustering rules p(t|y) than conventional “local” quantization approaches. An intuitive explanation may be that in contrast to conventional quantization approaches, noise which is contained in the observed samples y is not treated in the same way as useful signal components.
B. Information Bottleneck Algorithms Various algorithms have been proposed in the literature for
solving the information bottleneck optimization problem (1) and delivering the clustering mappings p(t|y). A good summary is provided in [6]. Unfortunately, the proposed algorithms do not guarantee to find a global optimum of (1). Fig. 2 summarizes the essential inputs and outputs of an information bottleneck algorithm.

Fig. 2. Information bottleneck algorithms.

An information bottleneck algorithm inevitably requires knowledge of the joint probability distribution p(x,y) of the relevant and the observed variable. It delivers the cluster mapping p(t|y) and as a side product the cluster probabilities p(t) as well as the conditional probabilities p(x|t). Hence, the joint probabilities

p(x,t) = p(x|t)p(t)

(2)

can be determined from the output of an information bottleneck algorithm. This is important in our signal processing problems: The compressed samples t of a signal processing stage m will become the observed samples of the successive signal processing stage n. Hence, pm(x,t) will become the input

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

pn(x,y) of the information bottleneck algorithm for the clustering design of the successive processing stage n. This is basically a density evolution procedure.
A good comparison of various information bottleneck algorithms is provided in [7]. In the next section, we will explain how the information bottleneck method can be applied for the design of LDPC decoders.
III. INFORMATION BOTTLENECK LDPC DECODER A. Conventional Message Passing Decoding of LDPC Codes
As a first example, we propose an LDPC decoder which is designed using the information bottleneck method. An LDPC code can be illustrated by a Tanner graph as depicted in Fig. 3.
Each variable node (circles) represents a code bit, each check node (rectangles) represents a parity check equation. The edges indicate which code bits participate in a parity check. I.e. the XOR sum over the code bits which are connected to the same check node is zero. The variable node degree and the check node degree are denoted by dv and dc, respectively.

Fig. 3. Tanner graph of an LDPC code.

LDPC codes are typically decoded by an iterative message passing algorithm where extrinsic information in the form of log-likelihood ratios is exchanged along the edges of the Tanner graph and updated by node operations. The desirable message passing algorithm is the sum-product algorithm. Here,
the updated extrinsic message ( ) L(ei→ j) xn to be passed from
node i to node j along edge n is obtained as a function of the incoming messages of a node from all other edges m≠n. In a variable node, the updating rule is a sum of the respective loglikelihood ratios. In the check nodes, it is a so-called boxplus sum which is the relatively complex operation

∏∏ L(ec→v)

(

xn

)

=

log

1 1

+ −

m≠n m≠n

tanh tanh

   

( L(ev→c)
2
( L(ev → c )
2

xm xm

) )

   

.

(7)

Quite a number of proposals have been made in the literature to simplify the boxplus operation (7). The most widely used are the min-sum approximation

∏ { } { } ( ) ( ) ( ) L(ec→v)

xn

≈

  m ≠ n

sign

L(ev→c)

xm

 

⋅

min
m≠n

L(ev→c)

xm

(8)

and modifications of (8) with multiplicative or additive correction terms. All those proposals have in common that they try to approximate the true log-likelihood ratio according to (7). Hence, they do “local” approximation in the conventional signal processing spirit and do not take into account the relevant information in the computation of the exchanged messages. In the next section, we propose to replace the

determination of the exchanged messages in all nodes by simple lookup tables which are offline designed using the information bottleneck method. The exchanged messages then preserve the maximum possible relevant information. Another important aspect is the bitwidth of the exchanged messages. Optimum performance of the sum-product algorithm - and also of its min-sum approximation – requires real valued messages, at least a high resolution with a large number of bits per message. However, a practical implementation will quantize the messages with a limited number of bits per message. Simply put, on a chip each bit in the quantized representation of a message requires a wired connection between the involved check node and variable node. It is, therefore, desirable to limit the number of bits per message in order to reduce the required chip area. On the other hand, the decoder performance will degrade if the resolution of the messages is reduced. Moreover, it is very difficult to analyze and quantify the effects of message quantization in conventional LDPC decoders. B. Principle of Information Bottleneck LDPC Decoders Before we give an explanation of an information bottleneck decoder, we summarize the two targets:
• Quantize the exchanged messages as much as possible with negligible loss in terms of relevant information.
• Perform the node operations on the quantized messages directly without recoding to suitable representation values.
The solution to both targets is a decoder implementation where the node operations degrade to simple lookup tables. The lookup tables are offline designed according to the criterion of preserved relevant information using an information bottleneck algorithm as described in Section II. The messages are then unsigned integer indices which represent table entries. The principle is indicated in Fig. 4 for the example of a check node.
Fig. 4. Implementation of the check node operation by look-up tables.
The message to be passed to variable node n is given by the sum of the other dc-1 incoming messages from the other edges m≠n as indicated in Fig. 3. Using our notation from Section II, from the viewpoint of a check node, the incoming messages are the observed variables ym, m≠n and the outgoing message is the compression variable t. The relevant variable x is the codebit bn associated with variable node n. In principle, a multidimensional lookup table (as depicted on the left hand side of Fig. 4) which maps the vector y =  y0 , y1,, ydc −2 T to an output integer t could be generated using the information bottleneck method. Here, we use a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

simplified notation where y captures all ym, m≠n. However, the size of this table would depend exponentially on the cardinality |ࣳ| of the symbol alphabet according to |ࣳ| dc −1 . This causes not only a relatively high memory demand to store the table but also a high computational effort for the information bottleneck algorithm which determines the mapping p(t|y).
Therefore, it was proposed in [8], [2] to apply the factor graph concept of node opening and to split the computation of the lookup table into the successive computation of twodimensional lookup tables as depicted in the middle of Fig. 4.
The involved variables in the determination of the intermediate tables have to be translated into the information bottleneck notation from Section II as follows:
Since each intermediate lookup table output tk represents a partial evaluation of the parity check sum, the relevant variable x for the k-th table, k = 0,, dc − 3 , is given by the XOR sum
k +1
 ⊕bm of the code bits bm associated with the incoming
m=0
messages y0,…yk+1. The observed vector y = [tk-1,yk+1]T for table k = 1,, dc − 3 , is given by the k+1-th incoming message, yk+1, and the output tk-1 of the previous table (see Fig. 4).
We have discussed in Section II, that an information bottleneck algorithm requires the joint probabilities p(x,y)=p(x,[tk-1,yk+1]T) as input. Hence, for determination of the two-dimensional lookup table mappings p(tk|y = [tk-1,yk+1]T), we need the joint probabilities p(x,tk-1). Fortunately, as pointed out in Section II.A, an information bottleneck algorithm delivers this joint probabilities as side product according to (2). Hence, the required joint probabilities for the determination of the twodimensional lookup tables in Fig. 4 can be obtained from a kind of density evolution principle. Since each of the twodimensional lookup tables in the middle of Fig. 4 is generated based on a different joint input distribution, the table mappings p(tk|y = [tk-1,yk+1]T) are different. For the same reason, the tables for different iterations are also distinct. However, the memory required to store all lookup tables is not critical as it is typically in the range of some tens of kbyte.
In order to reduce the processing delay during decoding, the successive processing of two-dimensional lookup tables can alternatively be implemented in a tree structure as depicted on the right hand side of Fig. 4. In this tree structure, all lookup tables in the same tree-depth are identical.
For the variable nodes, the two-dimensional lookup tables are generated in the same way. The only difference is that the relevant information x for a variable node is simply the code bit value b associated with the considered variable node, i.e. x=b for all two-dimensional subtables of a variable node. This is a consequence of the fact that a variable node does not represent a parity check equation but a code bit.
C. Information Bottleneck Decoder for Irregular LDPC Codes
The principle of information bottleneck LDPC decoders as described in the previous section works well for regular LDPC codes, where all variable nodes have the same degree dv and all check nodes have the same degree dc. Unfortunately, it breaks

down for the more widely used irregular LDPC codes, where variable nodes and/or check nodes have different degrees. This can be understood from the successive processing depicted in the middle of Fig. 4: In an information bottleneck decoder, the meaning of a message t on the relevant variable x is given via the joint probability p(x|t), not via a representation value as in classical signal processing. However, this joint probability depends on the number of successive two-dimensional tables which constitute a node operation. Hence, if the degrees of two check nodes or variable nodes, respectively, differ, the nodes determine the outgoing messages based on a different number of subtables. Hence, the meanings of messages coming from nodes of different degree are different. Consequently, they would have to be treated differently by a processing node.
Of course, the problem could be handled by a side information which provides the node degree along with a message t. However, this would counteract the idea of having only coarse integer messages. For a similar problem in the context of QAM demapping, we have, therefore, proposed in [9] a solution called message alignment. Message alignment can also be applied here: After processing the lookup tables as described in the previous section, each node applies an additional degreedependent lookup table with mapping rule p(t’|t). The task of this additional lookup table is to align the messages such that a certain message value t’ has approximately the same meaning p(x|t’) on the relevant variable no matter what the node degree is. Then, when processing incoming messages, a processing node does not need to care about the degree of the sending node but can apply the same procedure as described in the previous section for regular LDPC codes. Of course, for a more efficient implementation without additional processing delay, the alignment lookup table can be incorporated in the last lookup subtable for processing incoming messages.
It is not at all straightforward to decide how the alignment tables should be designed. The divergence between probability distributions can be quantified by the Kullback-Leibler divergence. Therefore, in [9] we have proposed an iterative algorithm which aligns the messages based on the KullbackLeibler divergence, i.e. according to

{ ( ) ( )} min
p(t′ t)

DKL

p x Td1 = t

p x Td0 = t′

.

(9)

Here, the messages t from a node with with degree d1 are aligned to messages t’ such that they have approximately the same meaning as messages generated from a node of degree d0. The approximation is done such that the Kullback-Leibler
( ) divergence between the “meanings” p x Td1 = t and
( ) p x Td0 = t′ is minimized.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF INFORMATION BOTTLENECK LDPC DECODERS
In order to obtain an idea of the performance potential of an information bottleneck decoder in comparison to state-of-theart implementations, we implemented various decoders for the (3,6) regular rate ½ LDPC code 8000.4000.3.483 from MacKay‘s database [10],[11].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BER performance results are depicted in Fig. 5. The iterative decoding has been stopped when all parity checks were satisfied or after a maximum of 50 iterations, respectively. All decoders considered in Fig. 5 receive quantized samples with 4 bit/sample from an AWGN channel. The channel quantizer was also designed using the information bottleneck method and is the same for all decoders.
Fig. 5. BER performance for decoder implementation of a (3,6) regular LDPC code on a digital signal processor (DSP).
Fig. 6. Throughput for decoder implementation of a (3,6) regular LDPC code on a digital signal processor (DSP).
As ultimate benchmark, the performance of a sum-product algorithm working with double precision messages is depicted. Another important benchmark is the state-of-the-art fixed point implementation of a min-sum decoder working with eight bit/message. Furthermore, we include a min-sum decoder with a Jacobian correction term and eight bit/message. Eight bit/sample have been chosen for the two variants of min-sum decoders as it turned out that a coarser quantization results in significant performance degradation. It is a remarkable observation that the information bottleneck decoder needs only four bit/message and performs surprisingly close to the ultimate benchmark sum-product decoder with double precision: The degradation is only about 0.1 dB. This is a typical value as we observed degradations of only about 0.1 to 0.2 dB in simulations for other codes including irregular codes with message alignment as well. Moreover, the information bottleneck decoder significantly outperforms the min-sum decoder by about 0.5 dB even though the information bottleneck decoder applies a coarser quantization (4 bit/message) than the min-sum decoder (8 bit/message). With a Jacobian correction term, the min-sum decoder performs slightly better than the information

bottleneck decoder. However, the Jacobian min-sum decoder also uses 8 bit/message and the correction causes additional computational complexity.
The complexity advantage of an information bottleneck decoder is further demonstrated in Fig. 6 via throughput measurements of the DSP implementations. It can be observed that the information bottleneck decoder achieves the highest throughput over the whole range of SNR. In the low SNR regime, the horizontal curves indicate that all decoders perform the maximum number of 50 iterations. The moderate performance advantage of the information bottleneck decoder is in this range due to the low node operation complexity as all all operations are implemented by lookup tables. In the medium SNR range, the performance advantage of the information bottleneck decoder can be explained by the lower number of iterations compared to the min-sum decoder which is required until a valid codeword is found. The Jacobian minsum decoder needs an even slightly smaller number of iterations than the information bottleneck decoder but this is on the expense of a higher computational complexity and, hence, lower decoder throughput.
V. CHANNEL ESTIMATION AND DETECTION In the previous sections, we have demonstrated that the information bottleneck method is a powerful tool for the design of close-to-optimum performing but coarsely quantized LDPC decoders. This motivates to apply the concept of informationoptimum discrete signal processing to other detection stages and eventually to design a complete receiver which works with coarsely quantized samples and lookup tables only. A first extension is the application of the information bottleneck method to channel estimation and detection.
Channel estimation is typically done based on known pilot symbols which are periodically transmitted. A channel estimator which operates based on a signal processing inspired criterion such as a minimum mean squared error (MMSE) criterion delivers an estimate hˆ on the channel coefficient h.
We wish to replace the conventional MMSE channel estimator by an information-optimum lookup table which accepts and delivers simply integer indices t. The lookup table is designed using the information bottleneck method such that the
( ) maximum possible relevant information I Hˆ ; H is
preserved, where the relevant information is now the true channel coefficient h. More precisely, it is the quantized channel coefficient, quantized according to the channel quantizer. The pilot samples z of a channel quantizer- which may be designed using the information bottleneck method- are the observed input to a channel estimation lookup table which
( ) delivers the mapping rule p hˆ z . Similarly as explained in
Fig. 4 for an information bottleneck LDPC decoder, the multidimensional lookup table can be split up into successive two-dimensional lookup tables using the factor graph concept of node opening.
The challenging part is to derive the joint probabilities p(h,z) between the observed and the relevant samples which are needed as input for the lookup table generating information

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

bottleneck algorithm. For Rayleigh fading, a solution based on stochastic numerical integration is provided in [12]. The integer outputs hˆ of the channel estimation table are then input to the channel quantizer of the data. The data channel quantizer is again a lookup table generated using the information bottleneck method which delivers the input integers for the LDPC decoder described in Section III. For a more detailed explanation we refer to [12].
VI. BER PERFORMANCE EVALUATION OF INFORMATION BOTTLENECK CHANNEL ESTIMATION, DETECTION AND LDPC
DECODING Simulation results for an information bottleneck receiver comprising channel estimation, channel quantization and LDPC decoding are depicted in Fig. 7. We consider a flat Rayleigh fading channel with normalized Doppler frequency TsfD,max = 0.003 and BPSK modulation. We used a frame structure with P=4 or P=6 successive pilot symbols separating blocks of M=30 or M=32 data symbols, respectively. For error control coding, we again used rate 1/2 (3,6) regular LDPC codes from [10] with two codeword lengths N: A short code with N=2640 and a long code with N=8000. The information bottleneck receiver used 5 bits per sample in all receiver stages. This was found to be the required resolution for best performance.
Fig. 7. BER performance of an information-optimum discrete receiver comprising channel estimation, detection and LDPC decoding.
For comparison, simulation results for a conventional receiver working with double precision in all stages are shown: The benchmark receiver applies MMSE channel estimation and sum-product LDPC decoding. The simulation results in Fig. 7 demonstrate that the concept of information-optimum discrete signal processing quantization provides virtually the same performance as conventional double precision signal processing. However, it allows for coarse quantization and very simple operations which are lookup tables only.

VII. CONCLUSIONS
We have described the concept of information-optimum discrete signal processing based on the information bottleneck method for the examples of LDPC decoding, channel estimation and detection. All operations are simple lookup tables which are designed offline using the concept of preservation of relevant information. Furthermore, only unsigned integers are exchanged between detection stages. Unlike in conventional signal processing, no representation values are considered. Instead, the connection to the variables of interest, i.e. the data, is made through conditional probabilities. This is inline with the spirit of information theory.
The encouraging result is that with coarse quantization, BER performance extremely close to the performance of double precision conventional signal processing can be obtained. In the discussed applications, the performance degradation is only about 0.1-0.2 dB at significantly lower implementation cost.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The information bottleneck method,” in Proceedings 37th Allerton Conference on Communication and Computation, 1999.
[2] J. Lewandowsky and G. Bauch, “Trellis based node operations for LDPC decoders from the Information Bottleneck Method,” in 9th International Conference on Signal Processing and Communication Systems, (ICSPCS). IEEE, 2015, pp. 1–10.
[3] G. Zeitler, R. Koetter, G. Bauch, and J. Widmer, “On quantizer design for soft values in the multiple-access relay channel,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Dresden, Germany, 2009, pp. 1–5.
[4] G. Zeitler, “Low-precision analog-to-digital conversion and mutual information in channels with memory,” in Proc. 48th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, USA, 2010, pp. 745–752.
[5] S. Bhaumik, S. P. Chandrabose, M. K. Jataprolu, G. Kumar, A. Muralidhar, P. Polakos, V. Srinivasan, and T. Woo, “CloudIQ: A Framework for Processing Base Stations in a Data Center,” in 18th Annual Inter. Conf. on Mobile Computing and Networking (MobiCom), Istanbul, Turkey, Aug. 2012.
[6] N. Slonim, “The information bottleneck: Theory and applications,” Ph.D. dissertation, Hebrew University of Jerusalem, 2002.
[7] D. Wuebben, “The information bottleneck: Fundamental idea and algorithmic implementations.” 10th Asia-Europe Workshop on Concepts in Information Theory (AEW), Boppard, Germany, June 2017.
[8] B. M. Kurkoski, K. Yamaguchi, and K. Kobayashi, “Noise thresholds for discrete LDPC decoding mappings.” IEEE GLOBECOM, New Orleans, USA, 2008.
[9] J. Lewandowsky, M. Stark, G. Bauch: Message alignment for discrete LDPC decoders with quadrature amplitude modulation. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), June 25-30, 2017, Aachen, Germany.
[10] D. J. C. MacKay, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes.” [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[11] J. Lewandowsky, P. Oppermann, G. Bauch, M. Adrat, M. Tschauner: An information bottleneck LDPC decoder on a DSP. 10th Asia-Europe Workshop on Concepts in Information Theory, June 21-23, 2017, Boppard, Germany.
[12] J. Lewandowsky, M. Stark, R. Mendrzik, G. Bauch: Discrete channel estimation by integer passing in information bottleneck graphs. International Conference on Systems, Communications and Coding (SCC), February 6-9, 2017, Hamburg, Germany.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

