2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

Performance Bounds for Quantized Spatially
Coupled LDPC Decoders Based on Absorbing Sets
Homayoon Hatami∗, David G. M. Mitchell†, Daniel J. Costello, Jr∗, and Thomas Fuja∗ ∗Dept. of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, Indiana, USA Email: {hhatami,dcostel1,tfuja}@nd.edu
†Klipsch School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, USA Email: dgmm@nmsu.edu

Abstract—Absorbing sets are known to be the primary fac- there is one type of absorbing set that dominates the error-

tor in the error-floor performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with message passing decoders over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. Besides showing excellent waterfall performance, spatially coupled LDPC (SC-LDPC) codes that are constructed by an edge spreading technique are known to

floor performance. If the code-independent bound is calculated for this absorbing set and multiplied by the absorbing set multiplicity in the code graph, a good estimate of the errorfloor performance is obtained.

have fewer cycles and absorbing sets than their block code counterparts, and therefore to exhibit better error-floor performance. Based on our previously obtained results for quantized LDPC block decoders, we derive lower bounds on the performance of quantized SC-LDPC decoders, including both a flooding schedule decoder and a sliding window decoder. Numerical simulation

Array based LDPC codes are a class of (γ, p)-regular quasicyclic LDPC-BCs defined by the parameter pair (γ, p), where p is a prime and p ≥ γ, with attractive implementation properties [9]. Also, thanks to the quasi-cyclic structure of these codes, it is possible to completely characterize their

results confirm the accuracy of the obtained bounds and show that, for quantized decoders, properly designed SC-LDPC codes have better error-floor performance than their underlying LDPC block codes.

absorbing sets [7], [10]. Several examples of designing arraybased SC-LDPCCs with the aim of decreasing the average number of absorbing sets per symbol are contained in [10]– [13]. Spatial coupling via edge spreading [14] is known to

I. INTRODUCTION

break cycles and absorbing sets in the code graph [10], [11].

Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are a power- Hence, the error-floor is expected to be better for SC-LDPCCs ful class of capacity approaching channel codes. One major than for their underlying LDPC-BCs.

benefit of these codes is that they can be decoded with an In this paper, we consider two different BP decoding iterative belief propagation (BP) message passing decoder schedules for SC-LDPCCs: the standard flooding schedule1

whose complexity grows linearly with block length, which is used for LDPC-BCs and a sliding window decoder used for

a significant advantage over maximum-likelihood decoders in low latency applications. We extend the code-independent

term of complexity. Spatial coupling (connecting) L copies bound of [8] to bound both the FER of the standard decoder

of an LDPC block code (LDPC-BC) Tanner graph creates and the block error rate (BLER) of the window decoder.

a coupled chain with a convolutional structure, called a We examine the proposed lower bounds for array-based SC-

spatially coupled LDPC code (SC-LDPCC), with improved LDPCCs with quantized sum-product algorithm (SPA) and performance [2]–[4]. Iterative BP decoding using the standard quantized min-sum algorithm (MSA) decoders.2 Finally, we

flooding schedule over the entire code graph can be used to compare the lower bounds of quantized SC-LDPCC decoders

achieve capacity approaching performance with SC-LDPCCs, with the lower bounds of their underlying quantized LDPC-BC

but the decoding latency and complexity is large. Therefore, decoders and provide simulation results to verify the accuracy

in [5], a sliding window decoder was proposed to allow low of the bounds.

latency operation with minimal loss in performance.

One important aspect of any decoder implementation is fi-

II. PRELIMINARIES

nite precision or quantization, which impacts both the waterfall and error-floor performance of message passing decoders. The main factor affecting the error-floor performance of message passing decoders for LDPC codes was identified as trapping sets in [6]. A special class of particularly harmful trapping sets are called absorbing sets, which are combinatorially-defined structures existing in the Tanner graph of an LDPC code [7]. In [8], we introduced a code-independent lower bound on the frame error rate (FER) of a quantized decoder for an LDPCBC based on absorbing sets, which can predict the effect

1) Absorbing sets: Let A denote a subset of cardinality a of all the variable nodes in a Tanner graph. Let E(A) and O(A) represent the subsets of check nodes connected to variable nodes in A with even and odd degrees, respectively, where |O(A)| = b. Here, A is called an (a, b) trapping set. Also, A is defined to be an (a, b) absorbing set if each variable node in A is connected to fewer check nodes in O(A) than E(A). As an illustration, Fig. 1(a) shows a (4, 2) absorbing set, with variable nodes and check nodes represented by

that each absorbing set has on code performance. Typically,

1Henceforth, we refer to this as the standard decoder.

This material is based upon work supported by the National Science

2The proposed method is not restricted to array-based SC-LDPCCs. These

Foundation under Grant No. CCSS-1710920.

codes are examined due to the known characteristics of their absorbing sets.

978-1-5386-4780-6/18/$31.00©2018 IEEE

826

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

L = 10

target symbols

H0

H1

W =6

H2

HSC =

W L+m

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: (a) (4, 2) absorbing set, and (b) (6, 0) absorbing set.

and , respectively. This structure appears often in (3, K)-

m=2

regular LDPC codes and is the dominant cause of errorfloors for quantized SPA decoders. Also, Fig. 1(b) shows Fig. 2: Window decoder for an SC-LDPCC operating on the a (6, 0) absorbing set, which was shown in [15] to be the parity-check matrix HSC.

dominant cause of error-floors in (3, K)-regular LDPC codes
for quantized MSA decoders. 2) Code-Independent Lower Bound: In [8], a lower bound
on the performance of a quantized LDPC-BC decoder was proposed based on a single dominant absorbing set A.3 The bound is denoted as λR (Eb/N0(dB)), where R is the rate of the code containing A. Henceforth we denote this bound simply as λ.4 A lower bound on the FER of any code containing N copies of A is then approximated by N λ.5 The bound was obtained by considering the absorbing set A with
an extra edge connected to each of its check nodes. These
single edges represent all edges connected to the check nodes from outside A. It was assumed that these edges carry the

coupled code with parity-check matrix HSC and syndrome

former memory m can be formed by partitioning HBC into

m component matrices Hi, i = 0, 1, . . . m, each of size µ × ν,

such that HBC =

m 0

Hi,

and

arranging

them

as

 H0



 H1 H0



  

...



H1 . . .

   

  HSC = Hm

...

...





H0

 

.

(1)

   

Hm

...





H1

 

  

...

...

  

Hm

largest possible quantizer outputs (maximum log-likelihood- In (1), each column including H0, H1, . . . , Hm is referred to ratios (LLRs)) from outside A at each decoding iteration. as a block, and L denotes the number of block columns in

Under this assumption, all possible combinations of quantized HSC. channel LLRs were input to the variable nodes of A, and 4) Window Decoding: A window decoder was introduced

each combination was decoded iteratively until all the variable in [5] to address the large latency and complexity requirements

nodes of A were decoded without error (success) or until a of decoding SC-LDPCCs with a standard decoder. Fig. 2,

maximum number of iterations Imax was reached (failure). adopted from [5], shows a window decoder with window size

The probability of those combinations of inputs that failed to W = 6 operating on the parity-check matrix HSC of an SCdecode correctly were then added to provide a lower bound λ LDPCC with m = 2 and L = 10. All the variable nodes

on the FER of any code containing A [8].

and check nodes included in the window (the blue area) are

In ongoing work, we further show that a better lower updated using a message passing algorithm that has access

bound on the error-floor performance can be obtained if the to previously decoded symbols (the red area). The goal is to

assumption regarding the LLRs of the extra edges connected decode the variable nodes in the first block of the window,

to the check nodes is modified. Specifically, if these edges called the target symbols. The message passing algorithm

have LLRs that monotonically increase with iteration number updates the nodes in the window for some maximum number

until they reach the maximum LLR level, new combinations of of iterations Imax, after which the first block of target symbols absorbing set LLRs beyond those that cannot be decoded under is decoded. Then the window slides one block (ν bits) to the

the previous assumption can sometimes be found. Computing right and one block down (µ bits) to decode the second block,

the probability of the intersection of the combinations of and the process continues until the last block is decoded.

absorbing set inputs that fail under both assumptions gives an improved estimate of the error-floor performance of a quantized decoder. A similar observation was made in [15] to obtain code-dependent lower bound. The code-independent bounds for MSA decoders presented in this paper are calculated based on this modified assumption.
3) Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes: Given an underlying LDPC-BC with a µ × ν parity-check matrix HBC, a spatially

5) Array-Based Spatially Coupled Codes: An array-based SC-LDPCC [10] is defined by the parameters γ, p, L, m and the partitioning used to form Hi, i = 0, 1, . . . , m, from the parity-check matrix HBC of an array-based LDPC-BC. In [10], an m = 1 partitioning is described by a cutting vector ξ, where ξ = [ξ0, ξ1, . . . , ξγ−1] is a vector of non-decreasing non-negative integers (0 ≤ ξ0 ≤ ξ1 ≤ . . . ≤ ξγ−1 ≤ p) that determines the partition of HBC of size γp × p into two

3If the decoding errors are mostly caused by different copies of A, we components H0 and H1 of the same size. Fig. 3 shows an

call A the dominant absorbing set.

example of an array-based parity-check matrix HBC being

4We simplify the notation by dropping the rate subscript for conve-
nience. The bound can be adjusted for rate using λR (Eb/N0(dB)) = λ1 (Eb/N0(dB) + 10 log(R)).
5The approximation of the lower bound is referred to as a bound for

partitioned into H0 and H1. In this case, H0 is obtained by taking H0 and setting the H1 area with all zeros. Similarly, H1 is obtained by taking H1 and setting the H0 area with all

convenience in this paper.

zeros. The resulting SC-LDPCC is denoted C(γ, p, L, ξ), and 827

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

B. Lower Bounds for Window Decoding of SC-LDPCCs

HBC =

H00

H01

Fig. 3: Array-based code with γ = 3 and p = 7, partitioned

by a cutting vector ξ = [2, 3, 5] to construct two component

matrices based on H0 and H1. (Each square represents a p×p circulant permutation matrix.)

the

code

rate

is

given

by

RSC

=

1

−

(L+1)γp−γ Lp2

+1

,

where

the

underlying

LDPC-BC

has

rate

RBC

=

1

−

γ

p−γ p2

+1

.

III. LOWER BOUNDS FOR SC-LDPCCS

The code-independent bound is based on the multiplicity of a given absorbing set. We categorize the absorbing sets in an SC-LDPCC by how many consecutive blocks are spanned by the variable nodes of the absorbing set. Depending on the memory size, the spatial coupling method, and the absorbing set structure, the number of blocks spanned may vary. For example, in the graph of the C(3, 61, L, [15, 30, 45]) SCLDPCC, the (4, 2) and (6, 0) absorbing sets of Fig. 1 are either contained completely in one block or span two blocks. We denote the multiplicity of absorbing set A that spans i blocks by Ni. It follows that the total number of absorbing sets A in a graph with L blocks is

L

N

Ni(L − i + 1).

(2)

i=1

Therefore, the average number of absorbing sets A per block

is

1L

N L

Ni(L − i + 1).

(3)

i=1

Example 1. Consider the C(3, 61, 100, [15, 30, 45]) SC-

LDPCC. Table I shows the resulting multiplicities for the (4, 2)

and (6, 0) absorbing sets, which are counted using the methods

described in [16].

(4, 2) (6, 0)

N1 37,088 48,129

N2 29,097 211,975

Ni, i ≥ 3 0 0

N
6,589,403 25,721,100

N
65,894.03 257,211

TABLE I: Multiplicities of absorbing sets in the C(3, 61, 100, [15, 30, 45]) SC-LDPCC.

For window decoding, we define the block error rate at window position j ∈ [L] {1, 2, . . . L} by BLER(j). By
taking the average over all the L window positions, the average
BLER can be written as

BLER

1

L
BLER(j).

(6)

L

j=1

Since BLER gives the average error rate for blocks of length ν with window decoding, it is appropriate to compare this to the FER of the underlying LDPC-BC or to FER for standard decoding of the SC-LDPCC.
To proceed, it is necessary to identify the absorbing sets that can cause decoding errors in one block of target symbols so that the code-independent bound can be applied to evaluate the lower bound on BLER for that block.

Definition 1. Absorbing set A is a window absorbing set if all the variable nodes and connected check nodes are in the window (the blue area in Fig. 2).

Consider the window decoder illustrated in Fig. 2. Assuming BP decoding is performed on all W blocks (the blue area), the code-independent bound can be applied to all the window absorbing sets to estimate the probability of error in the whole window.6 However, we are interested in the probability of error only in the target symbols. Hence, only window absorbing sets with variable nodes in the target symbols should be considered. To this end we propose the following definition.

Definition 2. Target symbol absorbing set A is a window absorbing set with at least one variable node in the set of target symbols.

For each window position j ∈ [L], we denote the multiplicity of target symbol absorbing sets by T (j). To evaluate the BLER of the jth block of target symbols, the code-independent bound with multiplicity T (j) can be applied. Defining Ti as the number of target symbol absorbing sets that span i ∈ [W ]
consecutive blocks, we can write

min(W,L−j+1)

T (j) =

Ti.

(7)

i=1

A. Lower Bound for Standard Decoding of SC-LDPCCs

Applying the code-independent bound, the probability that there is at least one error in the jth block of target symbols

Since the standard decoder operates on the entire graph, thus can now be (approximately) bounded below as

treating an SC-LDPCC as a large block code, our previously developed code-independent lower bound can be directly ap-

BLER(j) ≥ T (j)λ, j ∈ [L].

(8)

plied. To evaluate the approximate lower bound on FER for a Finally, using (7) and (8) in (6), we obtain

single dominant absorbing set A, the multiplicity N is used

to obtain

FER ≥ N λ,

(4)

λ L min(W,L−j+1)

BLER ≥ L

Ti.

(9)

j=1

i=1

where λ is the lower bound for A. To compare with the underlying LDPC-BC, which operates on a shorter graph. we normalize the FER by L, to obtain a normalized FER per

6In Fig. 2, the LLRs from previous window positions (the red area) are also used. However, we exclude any absorbing set with at least one node in the red area for two reasons. First, the LLRs in the red area are not being

block. denoted FER FER/L. Consequently, the normalized updated, so these absorbing sets do not satisfy the bound assumption that all

(approximated) lower bound is given by

variable node combinations are considered. Second, at high SNR, it is assumed that these LLRs have large values and therefore are less likely to cause an

Nλ

absorbing set to get trapped. Essentially, by excluding these absorbing sets,

FER ≥ = N λ. L

(5) we are obtaining a lower bound. 828

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

By examining Fig. 2, we can see that

100

L j=1

min(W,L−j+1) i=1

Ti

=

W i=1

Ti

(L

−

i

+

1),

and

therefore

10-2

λW

BLER ≥ L

Ti(L − i + 1).

i=1

(10)
10-4

Remark 1. Any absorbing set A of the SC-LDPCC with all

its variable nodes located within the first W − m blocks of

the window is a window absorbing set. Therefore, for the first

10-6

W − m blocks in the window, the absorbing set multiplicity

is counted in the same way as for the entire SC-LDPCCs, i.e.,

10-8

Ti = Ni for i ∈ [W − m].

(11)

Remark 2. Any absorbing set A of the SC-LDPCC that shares variable nodes with the last m blocks in the window is not necessarily a window absorbing set A since some check nodes of the SC-LDPCC code are not contained in the window for these blocks. Therefore, for the last m blocks, the multiplicity of absorbing sets must be counted separately.
Using (11) in (10) it follows that

4

5

6

7

8

9

Fig. 4: Proposed lower bound versus simulation results for standard decoding and window decoding of C(3, 61, 100, [15, 30, 45]), with both quantized MSA and quantized SPA.

λ W −m

BLER ≥ L

Ni(L − i + 1)

i=1
λW

(12)

+ L

Ti(L − i + 1).

i=W −m+1

If the target symbol absorbing sets are all confined to W − m positions, i.e. Ni = 0, i ≥ W − m + 1, it can be concluded that right hand side of (5) and (12) are the same, i.e., the FER of the standard decoder and the BLER of the window decoder have the same lower bound.

be found in [7], [17], N SC is given in Table I, and we find that α = 5.08 and 8.535, respectively. Regarding the rates, we make the assumption that the difference between the rate RBC of the block code and the rate RSC of the SC-LDPCC is negligible for large L.9 For code of Example 1, with L = 100, RSC = 0.9503 and RBC = 0.9514, so in this case we can ignore the rate difference. Therefore the SC-LDPCC standard decoder FER and window decoder BLER lower bounds are α times better than the underlying LDPC-BC FER lower bound.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

Example 2. For the code of Example 1, where m = 1 and Ni = 0, i ≥ 3, any window size W ≥ 3 gives the same lower bound for the FER of the standard decoder and the BLER of the window decoder. This result suggests that the choice of window size depends primarily on how it affects the performance in the waterfall, not in the error-floor.7

To verify the accuracy of the proposed lower bound, we simulated the C(3, 61, 100, [15, 30, 45]) code for various combinations of decoders/quantizers. The results are presented in Fig 4. When an SPA decoder with a 6-bit uniform quantizer (see [8] for parameters) is used, the (4, 2) absorbing sets are dominant, similar to the underlying block code. When an MSA decoder with a 5-bit quasi-uniform quantizer [18] (see [15] for

C. Lower Bound Comparison: Array-Based SC-LDPCCs vs. the Underlying LDPC-BCs
In this subsection, we compare the lower bounds on FER and BLER of array-based SC-LDPCCs to the lower bounds on FER of the underlying LDPC-BCs.8 In particular, we compare the (γ, p) array-based LDPC-BC with the corresponding arraybased SC-LDPCC with the same (γ, p). Two factors must be considered: first, the respective multiplicities NBC and N SC, and second, the respective rates of RBC and RSC of the LDPCBC and SC-LDPCC being compared. In [10], [12] it is shown that N SC for SC-LDPCCs is less than NBC for the underlying LDPC-BC, so we define α = NBC/N SC. For the code of Example 1, for the (4, 2) and (6, 0) absorbing sets, NBC can

parameters) is used, (6, 0) absorbing sets are dominant, which is also the case for the underlying LDPC-BC [15]. In [18], it was also shown that MSA with a quasi-uniform quantizer outperforms the conventional quantized SPA for LDPC-BCs. We recall from Sec. III-B that the bounds for FER of the standard decoder and BLER of the window decoder are the same for this SC-LDPCC. For standard decoding, applying the code-independent bound to these absorbing sets with the multiplicities from Table I, we see in Fig. 4 that the FER simulation result agrees with the bound. We also see that the BLER simulation result for window size W = 6 agrees closely with the bound. In summary, we note that (1) the lower bounds agree with the simulation results, and (2) the errorfloor performance is almost the same for standard decoding

7It is well known that small windows have poor waterfall performance, and window decoding.

and therefore choosing W < 3(m + 1) is not advisable.

8The proposed comparison provides a tool for error-floor comparisons of

9The rate RSC increases monotonically with L. As L → ∞, RSC →

SC-LDPCCs and LDPC-BCs. Waterfall comparisons are typically made via 1 − γ/p which is slightly less than RBC, and the rate loss vanishes as p

Monte-Carlo simulation.

increases [10].
829

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

100

10-2

10-2 10-4 10-6 10-8

10-4 10-6 10-8

10-10

4

5

6

7

8

9

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

7.5

8

Fig. 5: FER and FER comparison of the SC-LDPCC with stan- Fig. 6: BER simulation comparison of SC-LDPCCs with

dard decoding and the underlying LDPC-BC for the quantized standard decoding and window decoding and the underlying

SPA decoder.

LDPC-BC, quantized SPA vs. quantized MSA.

Fig. 5 shows the bound and simulation results for the FER [4] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. Costello, and K. Zigangirov, “Iterative

of the underlying LDPC-BC versus the bound and simulation

decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans.

results for the FER of the SC-LDPCC with SPA decoding and a uniform quantizer. It was noted earlier that α = 5.08 in

Inf. theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010. [5] A. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. Siegel, J. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and
G. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convo-

this case, which means that the bound for the LDPC-BC code

lutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58,

is 5.08 times higher than the bound for the SC-LDPCC, and we see that the simulation results agree with this prediction. In other words, the convolutional gain factor α = 5.08 of the

no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, April. 2012. [6] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2003 Allerton
Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Nov. 2003, pp. 1426– 1435.

proposed lower bounds tracks the convolutional gain exhibited by the simulation results.
In Fig. 6, another interesting comparison is made between

[7] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.

the simulated bit error rate (BER) performance of quantized [8] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello, and T. Fuja, “Performance

SPA and quantized MSA decoders, where we see that the trends observed in our analysis are also reflected in the BER

bounds for quantized LDPC decoders based on absorbing sets,” in 2016 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, July 2016, pp. 2539–2543. [9] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd

simulation results. In particular, for both standard and window

Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Sept. 2000, pp. 545–546.

decoding, the SC-LDPCC with the quantized MSA decoder outperforms the SC-LDPCC with the quantized SPA decoder as well as the underlying LDPC-BC decoded with either the

[10] D. G. M. Mitchell, L. Dolecek, and D. J. Costello, “Absorbing set characterization of array-based spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2014 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2014, pp. 886–890.
[11] D. G. M. Mitchell and E. Rosnes, “Edge spreading design of high rate

SPA or the MSA.

V. CONCLUSION

array-based SC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2017 IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2017, pp. 2940–2944. [12] H. Esfahanizadeh, A. Hareedy, and L. Dolecek, “Spatially coupled codes

In this paper, we derived lower bounds on the perfor-

optimized for magnetic recording applications,” IEEE Trans. Magnetics,

mance of quantized SC-LDPCC decoders, for both standard

vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 1–11, Feb. 2017. [13] A. Beemer and C. A. Kelley, “Avoiding trapping sets in SC-LDPC codes

flooding schedule decoders and sliding window decoders. We

under windowed decoding,” in Proc. 2016 Int. Symp. Inf. Theory and

showed that properly designed SC-LDPCCs have better lower bounds than their underlying LDPC-BC counterparts, and this advantage was confirmed via computer simulation. We also

Its Applications. (ISITA), Oct. 2016, pp. 206–210. [14] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “Spatially coupled
LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sept. 2015.

showed that MSA decoders with quasi-uniform quantization outperform SPA decoders with uniform quantization for SCLDPCCs, with either standard or window decoding.

[15] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello, and T. Fuja, “Lower bounds for quantized LDPC min-sum decoders based on absorbing sets,” in Proc. 2017 55th Annual Allerton Conf. Communi, Control, and Computing, Oct. 2017.

REFERENCES

[16] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, Jan. 1962.
[2] A. Jimenez Felstrom and K. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sept. 1999.
[3] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834,

variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713–6736, Dec 2016. [17] H. Liu, L. Ma, and J. Chen, “On the number of minimum stopping sets and minimum codewords of array LDPC codes,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 670–672, July. 2010. [18] X. Zhang and P. Siegel, “Quantized iterative message passing decoders with low error floor for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 1–14, Jan. 2014.

Feb. 2011.
830
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

