2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

Elimination of Cyclic Stopping Sets for Enhanced Decoding of LDPC Codes
Anxiao (Andrew) Jiang Computer Science and Engineering Department
Texas A&M University College Station, TX 77843-3112, USA
ajiang@cse.tamu.edu

Abstract—The Stopping-Set Elimination Problem is studied for LDPC codes: how to remove the fewest number of erasures from a stopping set such that the remaining erasures can be decoded by belief propagation in k iterations (including k = ∞). The problem is known to be NP-hard. Here efficient exact algorithms and approximation algorithms are presented for stopping sets whose induced graphs in Tanner graphs contain cycles.
I. INTRODUCTION
This work studies a basic theoretical problem for LDPC codes introduced in [3]: when the erasures in an LDPC codeword cannot be corrected by the decoder, how to remove the fewest number of erasures so that the remaining erasures become decodable? Here we consider the widely-used iterative belief-propagation (BP) decoder: in each iteration, it uses every parity-check equation involving exactly one erasure to correct that erasure; and it stops when every equation involves zero or at least two erasures. When decoding fails, the undecodable erasures we are left with are called a stopping set. A stopping set and its associated parity-check nodes in the Tanner graph can be represented by a bipartite graph G = (V ∪ C, E) as follows: V represents a set of variable nodes that are erasures, C represents a set of check nodes each of which is adjacent to at least two nodes in V in the Tanner graph, and E represents the set of edges between them in the Tanner graph. Here V is a Stopping Set and G is a Stopping Graph. (An example of a stopping graph is shown in Fig. 1.) Now let k be a positive integer. The problem we study, the Stopping-Set Elimination Problem called SSEk, is defined as follows [3], which differs from the many existing nice works on stopping sets [2], [4].
Definition 1. Given a Stopping Graph G = (V ∪ C, E), how to remove the minimum number of variable nodes from V such that the remaining variable nodes can be decoded by BP decoding within k iterations?
Here the parameter k controls the required time for decoding. If we consider only decodability but not decoding time, k can be seen as ∞ and we call the problem the SSE∞ Problem.
The Stopping Set Elimination Problem has a number of applications in data storage and communications. Consider n blocks of data B1, B2, · · · , Bn, where each block Bi = (bi,1, bi,2, · · · , bi,m) has m bits. Let them be m parallel LDPC

codewords: for 1 ≤ j ≤ m, the n bits (b1,j, b2,j, · · · , bn,j) form an LDPC codeword. (The mn bits can be seen as an n × m array, where each row is a block, and each column is an LDPC codeword.) When some blocks are lost (i.e., erased), they can be recovered by running the BP decoding algorithm identically on the m binary LDPC codewords in parallel. LDPC codes are an attractive option for erasure correction due to their high rates, simple XOR-based decoding and good locality (due to the low degrees of variable and check nodes).
If too many blocks are erased and BP decoding fails, extra measures can be used to retrieve some erased blocks from other sources so that the remaining erasures become decodable. Two such examples are shown in [3]. The first example is for distributed data storage, where the n blocks are distributively stored on n servers at a company’s data center. If too many blocks are lost, the company can retrieve some blocks from its backup system – which is often at a remote location – so that the remaining erased blocks can be decoded locally. (Most big IT companies have such backup systems.) The other example is for satellite-to-ground communication, where too many lost packets (i.e., erased blocks) to the user triggers the user’s request for the satellite to retransmit some of those lost packets. Since retrieving erased blocks from remote sites (e.g., remote backup system or satellite) is much more expensive than decoding data locally, it is desirable to minimize the number of retrieved blocks. This is the Stopping Set Elimination Problem.
When a set of variable nodes S ⊆ V is removed from the stopping graph G, if the remaining variable nodes become decodable (we shall also say “the remaining graph is decodable”), then we call S an Elimination Set. So the SSEk Problem seeks a minimum-sized (i.e., optimal) elimination set. In [3], the SSEk Problem is proved to be NP-hard, even when k is very large (k = ∞) or small (k = 1). When the degrees of the variable nodes and check nodes are upper bounded by dv and dc, respectively, an approximation algorithm of approximation ratio dv(dc−1) and time complexity O(dv2d2cV ) is presented for the SSE1 Problem. When the stopping graph is a tree (called a Stopping Tree), two efficient algorithms of time complexity O(V + C) are presented for the SSE∞ and SSEk Problems, respectively, which finds an optimal elimination set in the stopping tree.
The stopping graph can be trees when the number of

978-1-5386-4780-6/18/$31.00©2018 IEEE

821

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

erasures is not too many. However, a more general case is that the stopping graph can be cyclic but its number of cycles is bounded. That also matches the most useful cases in practice, where the number of erasures exceeds but is not far away from the LDPC code’s decoding threshold. So we focus on this more general case in this paper. Specifically, we focus on p-Cyclic Stopping Graphs defined as follows.

Definition 2. For a Stopping Graph G = (V ∪ C, E), if at most p variable nodes can be removed to make the remaining graph acyclic, then G is called a p-Cyclic Stopping Graph.

The main results of the paper are as follows. In Section

II, we analyze properties of the SSE∞ Problem and present a

scheme that finds optimal elimination sets for stopping graphs.

We present an efficient linear-complexity algorithm based on

the scheme for stopping graphs containing one cycle. We also

present an approximation algorithm for the SSE∞ Problem

for p-cyclic stopping graphs, which has approximation ratio

2p c+1

+1

and

polynomial

time

complexity,

where

c

≥

0

is

an integer parameter that can be selected freely. In Section

III, we present an extended polynomial-time approximation

algorithm with the same approximation ratio for the SSEk

Problem for p-cyclic stopping graphs. We further analyze the

SSEk Problem for dense stopping graphs, and show that for

high-rate LDPC codes with high erasure rates, all algorithms

can achieve good approximation ratios.

A. Properties of Stopping Graphs and SSE∞ Problem
Let us first define several concepts. We call a graph smooth if every node in it is of degree at least two. We call a node in a graph a smooth-node if it is either in a cycle, or on a simple path that connects two cycles in the graph. We call a node v in a graph G a tree-node if v has degree one, or if removing v from G will break G into two or more disjoint subgraphs and at least one of those subgraphs is a tree that has only one node adjacent to v in G. Given a stopping graph G = (V ∪ C, E), if a node v in it is both a smooth-node and a tree-node, then we call v a bridge-node; furthermore, if v ∈ V is a variable node (resp., if v ∈ C is a check node), then we call v a bridge-variable-node (resp., a bridge-check-node). We let Λ(G) denote the set of bridge-variable-nodes of G, and let Π(G) denote the set of bridge-check-nodes of G.
Given a stopping graph G = (V ∪ C, E), let SG denote the subgraph of G obtained by removing from G all the nodes that are tree-nodes but not bridge-nodes. We call SG the smoothcomponent of G. Furthermore, let CG denote the subgraph of SG obtained by removing from SG all the nodes in Π(G). We call CG the heart-component of G.
Lemma 3. For any stopping graph G = (V ∪ C, E), SG is a smooth graph. All the cycles in G are also in SG, and vice versa. The nodes in SG are exactly those smooth-nodes in G. Furthermore, both SG and CG are stopping graphs (i.e., every check node in them is of degree at least two).

Fig. 1. Example of a stopping graph G = (V ∪ C, E).
II. SSE∞ PROBLEM FOR 1-CYCLIC AND p-CYCLIC STOPPING GRAPHS
In this section, we study the SSE∞ Problem. We first analyze the properties of stopping graphs, and present an (not necessarily polynomial-time) algorithm that finds an optimal elimination set for any stopping graph. We then present two polynomial-time algorithms for stopping graphs with one cycle and for p-cyclic stopping graphs, respectively, which are variations of the first algorithm.

Proof: For succinctness, we focus on the last property. (The other properties are easy to see.) When nodes are removed from G to get SG or CG, for SG, every node has at least two neighbors since SG is smooth; for CG, every check node in it has the same set of neighbors as it does in G, so its degree remains unchanged and is at least two.
Consider a stopping graph G = (V ∪ C, E) and a bridgenode v in it. By definition, removing v from G will break G into multiple subgraphs, at least one of which is a tree with exactly one node (say node u) adjacent to v in G. We call such a tree a peripheral-tree Tpt,G(u) in G, and call u its root. Let AG(v) denote the set of roots of peripheral trees adjacent to v in G. Let Tbt,G(v) denote the subgraph of G containing these nodes: v, and all the nodes of those peripheral trees whose roots are in AG(v) (namely, are adjacent to v in G). It can be seen that Tbt,G(v) is a tree, which we call a bridge-tree, and call v its root. It is not hard to see that G contains a smooth-component and a set of disjoint bridge-trees, where each bridge-tree overlaps the smooth-component at its root (a bridge node). See Fig. 1 for an illustration.
We will use the two algorithms in [3] that find optimal elimination sets for stopping trees – one algorithm for the SSE∞ Problem and the other for the SSEk Problem – in the algorithms of this paper. Due to space limitation, we do not include their details, and use them only as modules. For convenience, let us call the two algorithms the T ree∞ Algorithm and T reek Algorithm, respectively. We note that the T ree∞ Algorithm has a property: it can choose any variable

822
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

node v in the stopping tree and ensure that the optimal elimination set it finds contains v. (v was seen as the tree’s root in [3].) That property will be used in our future analysis.
We now present a recursive algorithm (called OP T∞(G)) that finds an optimal elimination set for any stopping graph for the SSE∞ Problem. It takes a stopping graph G = (V ∪C, E) as input, and outputs an elimination set E ⊆ V for G.
Algorithm 4. OP T∞(G): 1) If G is smooth, find an optimal elimination set E ⊆ V for G, and return E.1 Otherwise, go to Step 2. 2) Eheart ← OP T∞(CG). (Namely, use the heartcomponent CG as input to this algorithm to obtain an elimination set Eheart for CG.) 3) For every bridge-node v ∈ Λ(G) ∪ Π(G), use the T ree∞ Algorithm to find an optimal elimination set F(v) for the bridge-tree Tbt,G(v). 4) Return Eheart ∪ ∪v∈Λ(G)F (v) − {v} ∪ ∪v∈Π(G)F (v) .
Example 5. Consider the stopping graph G = (V ∪ C, E) in Fig. 1. When we run Algorithm OP T∞(G), since G is not smooth, we need to find an optimal elimination set for its heart-component CG (the part shown in a dashed circle in the figure) using Step 2, which is found by making another call to the algorithm. (That recursive call will in turn find an optimal elimination set for the heart-component of CG, which consists of a path of three nodes and another isolated node.) The optimal elimination sets for bridge-trees are found using the T ree∞ Algorithm. 2
We now analyze the algorithm OP T∞(G), and prove that it returns an optimal elimination set for G = (V ∪ C, E).
First, let Gα = (Vα ∪ Cα, Eα) denote the subgraph of G obtained by removing all peripheral trees rooted at nodes in ∪v∈Λ(G)AG(v), namely, peripheral-trees adjacent to bridgevariable-nodes. (Here Vα ⊆ V and Cα ⊆ C.)
Lemma 6. Let G = (V ∪ C, E) be a stopping graph. For the SSE∞ Problem, there exists an optimal elimination set E∗ ⊆ V such that E∗ ∩ Vα is an elimination set for Gα.
Proof: Let Sˆ ⊆ V be an optimal elimination set for G. Consider a bridge-variable-node v ∈ Λ(G). Let Gγ(v) = (Vγ(v) ∪ Cγ(v), Eγ(v)) denote the subgraph of G obtained by removing the peripheral-trees adjacent to v. Consider the bridge-tree Tbt,G(v) = (Vbt,G(v) ∪ Cbt,G(v), Ebt,G(v)). There are two possible cases.
CASE 1: Sˆ ∩ Vbt,G(v) is an elimination set for Tbt,G(v). In this case, by the property of the T ree∞ Algorithm mentioned earlier, there exists an optimal elimination set P ⊆ Vbt,G(v) for Tbt,G(v) that contains the root v. So v ∈ P and |P | ≤ |Sˆ∩Vbt,G(v)|. Consider the set S∗ (Sˆ−Vbt,G(v))∪P. Clearly, |S∗| ≤ |Sˆ|. By removing the nodes in S∗ from G,
1It will be analyzed later how to obtain E here (or approximate it) based on properties of G to obtain a polynomial-time algorithm.

all the variable nodes in Tbt,G(v) become decodable (because P ⊆ S∗ is an elimination set for Tbt,G(v)), and all the variable nodes in G but not in Tbt,G(v) also become decodable (because the bridge-variable-node v is the only connection between Tbt,G(v) and the rest of G, so when v is removed, it only helps decode the variable nodes in V − Vbt,G(v)). So S∗ must be an optimal elimination set for G. Since v ∈ S∗, S∗ ∩ Vγ(v) must be an elimination set for Gγ(v) because once the bridgevariable-node v is removed, the decoding of nodes in Gγ(v) has got all the help it possibly could from the bridge-tree Tbt,G(v).
CASE 2: Sˆ ∩ Vbt,G(v) is not an elimination set for Tbt,G(v). In this case, since v is the only connection between Tbt,G(v) and Gγ(v), after nodes in Sˆ are removed from G, the BP decoding must recover the value of v by decoding nodes in Gγ(v) (not by decoding nodes in Tbt,G(v)). So Sˆ∩Vγ(v) must be an elimination set for Gγ(v). So in both cases, G has an optimal elimination set S ⊆ V (which is either S∗ or Sˆ in the above cases) such that S∩Vγ(v) is an elimination set for Gγ(v). The above analysis handles a single bridge-variable-node. It it not difficult to see that we can handle all the bridge-variable-nodes in the same way, and as a result, we get an optimal elimination set E ⊆ V such that E ∩ Vα is an elimination set for Gα. So the conclusion holds.
Lemma 7. Let G = (V ∪ C, E) be a stopping graph, and let CG = (Vheart ∪ Cheart, Eheart) be its heart-component, where Vheart ⊆ V and Cheart ⊆ C. Then for the SSE∞ Problem, there exists an optimal elimination set F ⊆ V such that F ∩ Vheart is an elimination set for CG.
Proof: By Lemma 6, there exists an optimal elimination set E∗ ⊆ V for G such that E∗ ∩ Vα is an elimination set for Gα. (Note that CG is a subgraph of Gα and can be obtained from Gα by removing all the trees in {Tbt,G(v) | v ∈ Π(G)}.)
∀ v ∈ Π(G), let BG(v) ⊆ AG(v) be the set of nodes with this property: for every node u ∈ BG(v), after nodes in E∗ are removed from G, if we run the BP decoding algorithm only on the tree Tpt,G(u), the variable nodes in Tpt,G(u) would not be fully decoded (which is equivalent to saying that the root u would not be decoded, because nodes outside the tree can help decode the tree only through u). Then, by the property of the T ree∞ Algorithm, we can require E∗ to have this property: ∀ u ∈ AG(v) − BG(v), we have u ∈ E∗.
We now transform E∗ to another optimal elimination set step by step as follows. In each step, consider a bridgecheck-node v ∈ Π(G) with |BG(v)| = 0, and let u be an adjacent variable node in ∈ AG(v). Note that when nodes in E∗ are removed from G and we run the BP decoding algorithm, the check node v must be used to decode one of its neighboring variable node w in the smooth-component SG, because otherwise we can exclude u from E∗ and use v to decode u instead, and get a smaller elimination set (which is a contradiction). Now to transform E∗, we replace u by w in E∗. After this transformation, the nodes outside Tpt,G(v) clearly

823
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

can still be decoded, and u will be decoded using v after v’s other neighboring variable nodes are all decoded. So the transformed E∗ is still an optimal elimination set; yet now we have |BG(v)| = 1. So after we repeat the above transformation step for every node v ∈ Π(G) with |BG(v)| = 0, we get an optimal elimination set E∗ with this property: ∀ v ∈ Π(G), we have |BG(v)| ≥ 1 (actually |BG(v)| = 1 because otherwise some peripheral-trees adjacent to v will not be decodable). It
means that in BP decoding, first all the nodes in the heartcomponent CG can be decoded; and then for every v ∈ Π(G), the unique variable node u ∈ BG(v) can be decoded using check node v; then all peripheral-trees can be decoded. So let F be the transformed E∗, and the conclusion holds.
For any stopping graph G , let χ(G ) denote the size of an optimal elimination set for G .

Theorem 8. Let G = (V ∪ C, E) be a stopping graph. Then

χ(G) = χ(CG) − |Λ(G)| +

χ(Tbt,G(v)).

v∈Λ(G)∪Π(G)

Proof: Let CG = (Vheart ∪ Cheart, Eheart) be the heartcomponent of G. By Lemma 7, there exists an optimal
elimination set F for G such that F ∩ Vheart is an elimination set for CG. So |F | = χ(G) and |F ∩ Vheart| ≥ χ(CG).
In any an elimination set for G, to decode any bridge-tree
Tbt,G(v) rooted at a bridge-variable-node v ∈ Λ(G), it is necessary to remove at least χ(Tbt,G(v)) − 1 non-root nodes (which, together with v, form an elimination set for Tbt,G(v)). To decode any bridge-tree Tbt,G(v) rooted at a bridge-checknode v ∈ Π(G), the nodes removed in Tbt,G(v) needs to be an elimination set for Tbt,G(v), because other nodes in G connected to Tbt,G(v) are all connected to the check node v, which makes it no easier to decode Tbt,G(v) than running BP decoding on Tbt,G(v) alone. So χ(G) = |F | ≥ |F ∩ Vheart|+ v∈Λ(G)(χ(Tbt,G(v))−1)+ v∈Π(G) χ(Tbt,G(v)) ≥ χ(CG) − |Λ(G)| + v∈Λ(G)∪Π(G) χ(Tbt,G(v)). It is not hard to see that an elimination set whose size matches the above
lower bound can be constructed. So the conclusion holds.

Theorem 9. The algorithm OP T∞(G) returns an optimal elimination set for G = (V ∪ C, E).
Proof: The proof is by induction. Note that OP T∞(G) is a recursive algorithm. As the base case, if G is smooth, which means the heart-component C(G) is the same as G (including the special case that C(G) is an empty graph), the algorithm will return an optimal elimination set in its Step 1. Now as the inductive step, assume G is not smooth. The algorithm (in its Step 2 through Step 4) constructs and returns an elimination set whose size matches the optimal size shown in Theorem 8, whose BP decoding process is as described in the end of the proof of Lemma 7 (for the transformed elimination set E∗). That completes the induction; so the conclusion holds.
B. Efficient Algorithm for Stopping Graph with One Cycle
The algorithm OP T∞(G) finds an optimal elimination set, but it may not be a polynomial-time algorithm, because it

is NP-hard to find an optimal elimination set for a smooth stopping graph (which can be derived from the NP-hardness of the SSE∞ Problem). In this subsection, we study the SSE∞ Problem for stopping graphs containing just one cycle, which is the basic case for cyclic stopping graphs, and show that an efficient algorithm exists.
For a stopping graph G = (V ∪ C, E) that contains one cycle, its heart-component CG is either a cycle (if |Π(G)| = 0) or |Π(G)| disjoint paths (if |Π(G)| > 0). If CG is a cycle, then its optimal elimination set contains a single variable node in the cycle. If CG consists of |Π(G)| disjoint paths, then its optimal elimination set contains |Π(G)| variable nodes (one for each path). So based on Theorem 8, we see that an optimal elimination set for G has size

χ(G) = max{|Π(G)|, 1}−|Λ(G)|+

χ(Tbt,G(v)).

v∈Λ(G)∪Π(G)

Based on the above analysis, the algorithm OP T∞(G) can be simplified accordingly. (We skip details of the algorithm due to space limit.) Note that the T ree∞ Algorithm has linear time complexity [3]. It is not hard to see that the algorithm here also has linear time complexity O(V + C + E).

C. Approximation Algorithm for p-Cyclic Stopping Graph
We now present an approximation algorithm for p-cyclic stopping graphs. It uses an approximation algorithm for the Minimum Feedback Vertex Set (MFVS) Problem as a tool. Given an undirected graph G = (V , E ), a feedback vertex set (FVS) is a set of vertices S ⊆ V such that every cycle in G contains at least one vertex of S (namely, removing S will turn G into an acyclic graph). The MFVS Problem is defined as follows: given an undirected graph G = (V , E ) where every vertex v ∈ V has a non-negative cost c(v), find an FVS in G whose cost is minimized. The MFVS Problem has a 2-approximation algorithm [1], which we shall call the MFVS Algorithm.
Our approximation algorithm for the SSE∞ Problem for a p-cyclic stopping graph G = (V ∪ C, E) is a modification of the Algorithm OP T∞(G). In Step 1 of OP T∞(G), instead of finding an optimal elimination set E ⊆ V for the smooth graph G, we find an approximate solution as follows:
• Step 1.1: Let c be a non-negative integer. Use exhaustive search to check if G has an elimination set of size at most c. If yes, return an optimal elimination set for G; otherwise, go to Step 1.2.
• Step 1.2: In G, let all variable nodes have cost 1, and let all check nodes have cost ∞. Run the MFVS Algorithm to find an FVS F ⊆ V for G. (The high cost for check nodes ensures that F contains only variable nodes.)
• Step 1.3: Remove the nodes in F from G, and use BP decoding to further remove those nodes that become decodable until we get a new stopping graph Gˆ = (Vˆ ∪ Cˆ, Eˆ). (Gˆ is acyclic because F is an FVS.) Then find an optimal elimination set S∗ ⊆ Vˆ for Gˆ using the T ree∞ Algorithm. Return F ∪ S∗ as the elimination set for G.

824
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

We let Step 2 through Step 4 of the algorithm OP T∞(G) remain the same. Let us call the new algorithm Approx∞(G). It has polynomial time complexity for constant parameter c because all its elements (the MFVS Algorithm, the T ree∞ Algorithm, the exhaustive search, the number of recursive calls) are of polynomial time. We now analyze its approximation ratio (define based on the size of the elimination set).

Theorem 10. Algorithm Approx∞(G) has approximation ratio 2p + 1.
c+1

Proof: It is sufficient to analyze the approximation ratio

for the elimination set found by Step 1.1 through Step 1.3 of

the algorithm, because the elimination sets found in the other

steps are optimal. If the smooth graph G has an elimination set

of size at most c, an optimal elimination set for G is returned.

Now consider the case that G has no elimination set of size

at most c, which means χ(G) ≥ c + 1. In Step 1.2, we have

|F | ≤ 2p (because the smooth graph G here is also p-cyclic,

and the MFVS Algorithm has approximation ratio 2). In Step 1.3, we have |S∗| = χ(Gˆ) ≤ χ(G) (because having some

variable nodes removed will only be helpful for decoding the

remaining

variable

nodes).

So

the

ratio

|F ∪S∗| χ(G)

=

|F |+|S∗| χ(G)

≤

2p+χ(G) χ(G)

=

2p χ(G)

+1

≤

2p c+1

+ 1.

So when p is small, the approximation ratio can be small.

III. SSEk PROBLEM FOR p-CYCLIC STOPPING GRAPHS AND DENSE STOPPING GRAPHS

A. Approximation Algorithm for p-Cyclic Stopping Graph

The SSEk Problem is a generalization of the SSE∞

Problem. We present an approximation algorithm for it for

a p-Cyclic Stopping Graph G = (V ∪ C, E). It is the same

as Step 1.1 through Step 1.3 of the Algorithm Approx∞(G), except that we use the T reek Algorithm to replace the T ree∞

Algorithm in Step 1.3; and we do not use the remaining

steps (namely Step 2 through Step 4 of OP T∞(G)). (That

is because here G is the original input to the algorithm, not

its smooth subgraph obtained during the recursion.) Let us call

the new algorithm Approxk(G).

Algorithm Approxk(G) also has an approximation ratio of

2p c+1

+

1

and

polynomial

time

complexity.

The

analysis

is

very

similar to Algorithm Approx∞(G), so we skip it details. Note

that although the two algorithms have the same approximation

ratio (which considers the worst case performance) and Algo-

rithm Approxk(G) appears simpler (i.e., with fewer steps),

Algorithm Approx∞(G) is better optimized for the SSE∞

Problem because its extra steps can further reduce the size of

the output elimination set.

B. Approximation Algorithm for Dense Stopping Graphs
In this subsection, we analyze how an important factor, RBER (raw bit-erasure rate), affects the performance of approximation algorithms. We show that for high-rate codes with high actual erasure rates (which leads to dense stopping graphs), all algorithms have good approximation ratios.

Consider an (N, K) LDPC code with N codeword bits and K information bits (where K < N ), whose code rate is R K/N . Let G = (V ∪ C, E) be its Stopping Graph, where V is the Stopping Set. It is simple to show that the higher RBER is, the greater |V | becomes on average. Let |V |/N be called the actual erasure rate relative to stopping set V .

Lemma 11. Let S ⊆ V be any solution (i.e., an Elimination Set) to the SSEk Problem. If |V | ≥ N − K, then
|S| ≥ |V | − N + K.
Proof: The proof is by contradiction. If |S| < |V | − N + K, then after the erased bits in the Elimination Set are removed, the total number of codeword bits with known values is (N − |V |) + |S| < (N − |V |) + (|V | − N + K) = K. Then the BP decoder will not be able to recover the K bits of information in the codeword.

Theorem 12. For the SSEk Problem, if > 1 − R, the approximation ratio of any algorithm is at most

. − (1 − R)

Proof: Let S∗ and S be an optimal solution and the

solution of an arbitrary algorithm, respectively, to the SSEk

Problem. If > 1 − R, then |V | = N > (1 − K/N )N =

N − K. By Lemma 11, |S∗| ≥ |V | − N + K. Since S ⊆ V ,

we

get

|S| |S ∗ |

≤

|V | |V |−N +K

=

−1+R .

So for high rate codes (where R approaches 1), if the RBER

is high (which approaches 1), then with high probability,

also approaches 1. In this case, −(1−R) approaches 1, so all algorithms have good approximation ratios.

IV. CONCLUSIONS
This paper studies the stopping set elimination problem for LDPC decoding, which has various applications to data storage and communication. It focuses on p-cyclic stopping graphs, and presents a number of algorithms. The work can be extended by studying more specific LDPC code constructions (e.g., spatially-coupled codes, etc.), and design corresponding SSEk algorithms.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT: This work was supported in part by NSF Grant CCF-1718886.

REFERENCES
[1] V. Bafna, P. Berman and T. Fujito, “A 2-approximation algorithm for the undirected feedback vertex set problem,” in SIAM J. Discret. Math., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 289-297, 1999.
[2] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” in IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570– 1579, 2002.
[3] A. Jiang, P. Upadhyaya, Y. Wang, K. R. Narayanan, H. Zhou, J. Sima and J. Bruck, “Stopping set elimination for LDPC codes,” in Proc. 55th Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, 2017. Available at http : //f aculty.cse.tamu.edu/ajiang/ P ublications/2017/StoppingSetElimination Allerton.pdf .
[4] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets,” in IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1640–1650, 2010.

825
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:55:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

