2376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 66, NO. 6, JUNE 2018

Joint Channel Estimation and LDPC Decoding Over Time-Varying Impulsive Noise Channels
Yi Hou, Rongke Liu, Member, IEEE, Bin Dai , and Ling Zhao

Abstract— This paper tackles the problem of channel estimation and decoding in environments that exhibit time-varying block-memoryless impulsive noise. In order to perform the estimation in continuous value space and the decoding in discrete value space jointly, a novel message passing framework is proposed that combines the sampling-importance resampling (SIR) estimator and the LDPC sum-product decoder in an iterative manner. The resampling process within the framework is further improved based on the asymptotic performance analysis for mismatched decoding. The simulation results prove the validity of the enhanced SIR estimator in the proposed method and demonstrate our method can achieve better performance than the LDPC decoder with quantile estimator.
Index Terms— Impulsive noise, message passing framework, low-density parity-check codes, sampling-importance resampling, random-walk metropolis algorithm.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE observation channel noise in many practical communication systems can be characterized as time-varying non-Gaussian and frequently as impulsive, for example, in wireless networks [1], [2], shallow water communications [3], powerline communication networks [4] and satellite communications [5]. Symmetric alpha-stable (SαS) distributions have been suggested for modeling impulsive noise under those above-mentioned circumstances, which includes Gaussian noise as a special case. Because most impulsive noise is from man-made or atmospheric sources, the state of the noise could change rapidly over long periods. In this paper, the time-varying impulsive noise channel is considered in a block-wise manner, where the channel varies randomly from one block to another over a codeword transmission and remains constant within each channel block. To counter the errors caused by the impulsive noise, LDPC codes, which are powerful channel codes, are a good candidate to be adopted in such systems. Due to the soft-input characteristic of the
Manuscript received September 11, 2017; revised January 8, 2018; accepted January 21, 2018. Date of publication February 1, 2018; date of current version June 14, 2018. This work was supported in part by the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University of China under Grant No. NCET-12-0030 and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 91438116 and No.61401010. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was E. Paolini. (Yi Hou and Bin Dai contributed equally to this work.) (Corresponding authors: Rongke Liu; Bin Dai.)
The authors are with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: mokyy@buaa.edu.cn; rongke_liu@buaa.edu.cn; daibinok@buaa.edu.cn; zhaoling@buaa.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2018.2800748

LDPC codes sum-product decoding algorithm, the accuracy of the channel noise estimation is crucial to obtaining better error-correcting performance. Meanwhile, the performance of the channel estimator could also benefit from the soft decoders corrected feedback. The interaction between the channel estimator and the decoder should be well considered.
In practical communication systems, the noise parameters are usually unknown and have to be estimated at receiver. Many efficient estimation schemes exist for providing channel parameters to the decoder under impulsive alpha-stable noise, such as the quantile based method [6], the fractional lower order moment based method [7] and the characteristic function based method [8]. However, they are mainly suitable for estimating constant noise parameters and perform worse in the presence of time-varying noise. Distinct from the above-mentioned non-Bayesian schemes, Kalman filtering and its extensions have been used to deal with channel with either constant or time-varying noise parameters [9]. The main drawback of such estimators is that they are not compatible with non-Gaussian processes. Another scheme under Bayesian frameworks, the particle filters based on random sampling, allow performing on-line estimation of time-varying evolving states under impulsive noise [10]. Unlike the particle filters which handle dynamic states, the Sampling-Importance Resampling (SIR) estimation method used in this paper deals with the noise parameters which stay static within each channel block. As we know, the sum-product iterative decoding algorithm for LDPC codes can be operated by message passing in a factor graph [11].
In this paper, we also use the factor graph to tackling the difficult task of joint channel estimation and LDPC decoding. The channel estimation method proposed in [12] rely on long training sequences to obtain accurate channel state information. In [13], a joint estimation and decoding is presented by using factor graph based OFDM receivers which contains the known symbols (pilot and null symbols) and the unknown data symbols. These kinds of data-aided methods have shown their efficiency but cannot be applied in every context, like cognitive radio applications. Furthermore, data-aided method would consume channel efficiency especially in single-carrier systems. As a result, we would focus on joint estimating and decoding in a non-data-aided manner.
The contribution of this paper can be summarized as Three aspects: First, the proposed scheme combines the SIR estimation algorithm with the LDPC sum-product decoding algorithm in a unified message passing framework over

0090-6778 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: JOINT CHANNEL ESTIMATION AND LDPC DECODING OVER TIME-VARYING IMPULSIVE NOISE CHANNELS

2377

time-varying block-memoryless impulsive channels without knowledge of the noise parameters. Secondly, according to asymptotic analysis under impulsive noise, we propose the Random-Walk Metropolis (RWM) algorithm to mitigate the sample degeneracy and impoverishment problems. Due to the enhanced resampling method, The intrinsic information mismatch of the LDPC decoding is effectively alleviated. Thirdly, a feedback strategy is proposed to further improve the decoding performance, in which the messages transferred between the decoder and estimator.
The organization of the paper is as follows: Section II provides the background knowledge; Section III presents the proposed joint estimation and decoding scheme; Section IV describes the SIR algorithm used for noise parameter estimation; Section V analyses the asymptotic decoding performance under estimation error and proposes an enhanced resampling method; Section VI illustrates the simulation performance and analysis; Section VII presents the conclusion.

II. BACKGROUND
A. Channel Model
The channel model considered in this paper is a timevarying block-memoryless impulsive noise channel, which is memoryless between the blocks of transmitted symbols and the state of noise remains static within a channel block. It is assumed that each channel block is h symbols long, and there are b blocks during each LDPC codeword transmission. The codeword length N = h × b. The received signal is given by

yi = xi + ni ,

(1)

where i = 1, 2, . . . , b, xi = [xi,1, xi,2, . . . , xi,h ] is the transmitted symbol vector in the i th block, xi, j ∈ {±1} denotes the j th transmitted LDPC-coded BPSK symbol for the i th block,
yi = [yi,1, yi,2, . . . , yi,h ] is the received signal vector from the i th block and yi, j denotes the corresponding received signal. The noise ni, j is a random variable following a symmetric alpha-stable distribution with αi as the characteristic exponent and γi as the scale parameter. The above two parameters of the channel noise remain fixed over a block and change
independently between successive blocks.

Since the PDF of SαS distribution is usually not acces-

sible in closed-form, it is only available through numerical

calculation [14]. To simplify the calculation, this paper uses

a fast algorithm proposed in [15] to obtain the PDF of SαS

distribution. In addition, the second order moment for SαS

distribution (α < 2) is infinite, the geometric signal-to-noise

ratio (GSNR) is given as [16]

⎛

⎞2

GSNR

=

1 2Cg

⎝A

1
Cgα

−1

γ

⎠

,

(4)

where A = 1 and Cg ≈ 1.78. The corresponding Eb/N0 is defined as

E b / N0

=

GSNR , 2R

(5)

where R is the code rate.

C. Sum-Product Iterative Decoding of LDPC Codes

In this section, the sum-product algorithm which will be

used in the proposed joint and decoding framework is briefly

introduced.

The Sum-Product decoding algorithm for LDPC codes is

described by the following five steps:

(1) Initialization:

For each check node c and variable node v for which

hc,v = 1, where hc,v is the c-th row and v-th column element

of the LDPC code parity-check matrix. Set Lv→c = Lv =

log

p(yv |x v =+1) p(yv |x v =−1)

= log

fα fα

(γ (γ

; ;

yv yv

−1) +1)

.

(2) Check nodes updating:

In each decoding iteration, the extrinsic message from

LDPC check nodes c to variable nodes v is calculated as

⎛

⎞

Lc→v = 2 tanh−1 ⎝

tanh (Lv →c/2)⎠. (6)

v ∈N(c)/{v}

(3) Variable nodes updating: The message from LDPC variable nodes to check nodes is calculated as

Lv→c = Lv +

Lc →v .

(7)

c ∈N(v)/{c}

B. Symmetric Alpha-Stable Distribution

The SαS distribution is a generalization of the Gaussian distribution that accommodates impulsive characteristics. There are no closed-form expressions for the pdf of SαS distributions except in special cases where α = 2 (Gaussian distribution) and α = 1 (Cauchy distribution). Instead, the distribution is defined by its characteristic function

φ(ω) = e−|γ ω|α .

(2)

The PDF of SαS distribution is defined via the inverse Fourier transform integral

fα(γ ; x )

=

1 2π

+∞
exp(−|γ ω|α)e−iωx dω.
−∞

(3)

(4) A posteriori log-likelihood ratio calculation: The decision information of each variable node is computed as

L

APP v

=

Lv

+

Lc →v .

(8)

c ∈N(v)

(5) Decision: For each decoded bit cv , make hard decision as follows

cˆv =

1,

if

L

APP v

<

0

0,

if

L

APP v

≥

0

(9)

Loop back to the check nodes updating step until the maximum decoding iteration count is reached or a codeword is found.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 66, NO. 6, JUNE 2018

Fig. 1. Factor graph representation for the proposed joint channel estimation and decoding system.

III. PROPOSED MESSAGE PASSING FRAMEWORK FOR JOINT CHANNEL ESTIMATION AND LDPC DECODING
The objective of this paper is to jointly perform estimation and decoding of the transmitted symbols without prior knowledge of the noise parameters. To make the decision, we follow the bit-wise maximum a posteriori rule which is given by [17]

xˆi, j

=

arg max
xi, j ∈{±1}

p

xi, j |y

= arg max

p (x|y)

xi, j ∈{±1} ∼xi, j

(10)

where x is the transmitted symbol vector [x1,1, x1,2, . . . , x1,h, x2,1, x2,2, . . . , xb,h], and y means the received signal vector [y1,1, y1,2, . . . , y1,h, y2,1, y2,2, . . . , yb,h]. The message passing algorithm [18] is a good tool for solving the above inference problem, and is always graphically represented using factor graphs. The factor graph for the proposed joint channel estimation and decoding problem is shown in Fig. 1. As it can be seen, there are four types of nodes in the graph, LDPC check nodes (square shape, representing the check equations in the LDPC codes), LDPC variable nodes (round shape, representing the code bits), channel function nodes (shaded square shape, representing the channel probability functions) and channel parameter nodes (shaded round shape, representing the estimation of channel parameters). The arrows illustrate the messages transferred between different nodes. The messages inside the decoding of LDPC code are not shown in this figure. The dashed boxes depict the channel blocks within which the noise parameters remain static (in Fig. 1 the channel block length h is assumed to be 2).

The probability function associated with the channel function node fci, j is given by

fci, j = p yi, j |xi, j , αi , γi ,

(11)

where i = 1, 2, . . . , b, j = 1, 2, . . . , h and p yi, j |xi, j , αi , γi = fαi (γi ; yi, j − xi, j ). The message transmitted from LDPC variable nodes to channel function nodes is denoted by po xi, j = p xi, j = s , s ∈ S, where S is the modulation constellation symbol set, in this paper S = {+1, −1}. The message po xi, j could be calculated from the total log-likelihood ratio generated by the
Sum-Product decoding procedure.
The expression of the messages from the channel function
nodes to the channel parameter nodes is

poi, j (αi , γi ) ∝ p yi, j |αi , γi
∝ p xi, j = s fci, j yi, j |xi, j = s, αi , γi ,
s∈S
(12)

where ∝ denotes equality up to a scale factor. pe αˆi , γˆi is the message sent from the channel parameter nodes to
the channel function nodes, which represents the estimated values αˆi and γˆi of the noise parameters. pe xi, j = p yi, j |xi, j , αi , γi is the message from channel function node fci, j to LDPC variable node xi, j .
It is generally known that message passing method on factor
graphs mainly focuses on systems of variables with small
value space [11]. However, the unknown noise parameters αi and γi are continuous variables, which are not solvable directly by traditional message passing. In order to generate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: JOINT CHANNEL ESTIMATION AND LDPC DECODING OVER TIME-VARYING IMPULSIVE NOISE CHANNELS

2379

messages pe (αi , γi ) at the channel parameter nodes using the incoming messages poi, j (αi , γi ), one effective way is to reduce the value space of the noise parameters by discarding low-probability values, or through random sampling. In this paper, the Sampling-Importance Resampling (SIR) algorithm is adopted in the channel parameter nodes to discretize the noise parameter space for performing joint estimation and decoding.

IV. SIR ALGORITHM FOR NOISE PARAMETER ESTIMATION

The SIR algorithm used in the proposed method for each

channel block is based on the idea of importance sampling

where the noise parameters distributions are approximated by

a set of samples weighted by the density of the target function.

Since the SIR algorithm does not rely on the Gaussian

assumption, it is particularly suitable for estimating parameters

in the impulsive noise environments. Explicitly, the algorithm

is described by the following steps:

(1) Sampling:

At the sampling step, samples γinγ are drawn

each of the Nα randomly from

samples αinα the uniform

and Nγ distribu-

tions U (1, 2) and U (0, 1) respectively in channel block i ,

where nα ∈ {1, 2, . . . , Nα}, nγ ∈ {1, 2, . . . , Nγ } and i ∈

{1, 2, . . . , b}. These samples are assigned to N = Nα Nγ pairs

{αin,α(0), γin,(γ0)}.

All

the

initial

weights

are

set

to

win,α(0,n) γ

=

1 .
N

(2) Importance weighting:

For the sample pair {αin,α( j), γin,(γj)}, using the message trans-

ferred from the j th channel function node ( j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , h})

in the i th channel block, the importance weight is calculated

as

win,α(

,nγ j)

=

win,α(

,nγ j −1)

p y j |αin,α( j ), γin,(γj ) p αin,α( j ), γin,(γj )|αin,α( j −1), γin,(γj −1)

×

.

π αin,α( j ), γin,(γj )|αin,α(1: j −1), γin,(γ1: j −1), y1: j

(13)

Since the channel is static within each block, so that we have αin,α( j ) = αin,α( j −1) = αinα and γin,(γj ) = γin,(γj −1) = γinγ . To simplify the computation of the importance weights, we use the transition prior probability distribution as the importance function,

π αin,α( j ), γin,(γj )|αin,α(1: j −1), γin,(γ1: j −1), y1: j = p αin,α( j ), γin,(γj )|αin,α( j −1), γin,(γj −1) = δ αin,α( j ) − αin,α( j −1), γin,(γj ) − γin,(γj −1) ,

(14)

where δ αin,α( j ) − αin,α( j −1), γin,(γj ) − γin,(γj −1) is the twodimensional Dirac delta function. Thus the importance weight
for sample pairs are recursively calculated as

win,α(

,nγ j)

∝

win,α(

,nγ j −1)

p

yi |αin,α( j ), γin,(γj )

∝

win,α(

,nγ j −1)

poi,

j

αinα , γinγ

.

(15)

The likelihood function poi, j (αi , γi ) is transferred from the

channel function nodes, which are obtained by using the a

posteriori probability function from the LDPC decoder. After

all the weights for sample pairs are computed completely, the normalized weights for individual samples αinα and γinγ

could be expressed as

⎛

⎞

Nγ

winα = ⎝

win,αh,nγ ⎠

⎛
Nα
⎝

⎞
Nγ
win,αh,nγ ⎠,

(16)

⎛nγ =1

⎞

Nα

winγ = ⎝

win,αh,nγ ⎠

⎛nα =1 nγ =1

⎞

Nα Nγ

⎝

win,αh,nγ ⎠.

(17)

nα =1

nα =1 nγ =1

(3) Resampling:

In order to mitigate the sample degeneracy and impover-

ishment problems, the proposed method applies the Random-

Walk Metropolis (RWM) algorithm [19] in the resam-

pling step. Firstly, randomly drawing the new samples αˆ inα and γˆinγ from the Gaussian proposal distributions N αinα , σα and N γinγ , σγ , respectively. Then, carrying
out the above importance weighting step using the new sample pairs to obtain the new weights wˆ inα and wˆ inγ . Draw value u from the uniform distribution U (0, 1]. The currentftooγ-rpm=retmvwiioonu{as1c,wcweˆepiintgγahntcwreainptγiro}osfbowaˆrbinsiαalimtiwepsinleαsαaon=fdtmhwˆeiinnnγ{o1i,wsewˆincγinhαaarrweacinutαes}eridastntiodc exponents and scale parameters respectively. If either of the

two acceptance probabilities is larger than u, accept the

corresponding new wˆ inα or γinγ = γˆinγ

,sawminγple=awnˆdinγw, eoitghhetr:wαisineα

= αˆ inα , winα = discard the new

sample and weight and still use the previous ones. In other

words, the RWM algorithm accepts all the new samples if

the corresponding weights become larger than the old ones,

and rejects the new samples with probability 1 − α or 1 − γ

which according to the type of the samples when their weights

are not more than the previous ones. Repeat the resampling

step until the maximum RWM iteration count is reached. The

RWM iteration procedure is also called the burn-in period,

which helps the SIR estimator converge to the desired results.

(4) Noise parameter calculation:

Nα

αˆi =

winα αinα ,

nα =1

Nγ

γˆi =

winγ γinγ .

nγ =1

(18) (19)

After the SIR estimation, the channel parameter nodes transmit the messages of the estimated values to the channel function nodes, so as to generate the updated intrinsic information for LDPC decoding.

V. MISMATCHED DECODING PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS AND ENHANCED RESAMPLING METHOD
In order to maintain acceptable complexity for the whole estimation and decoding procedure, the iteration number in the message passing framework should be relatively small,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 66, NO. 6, JUNE 2018

Fig. 2. Decoding thresholds for (3,6) regular LDPC code ensemble using different mismatched estimated parameter values and estimated results by SIR estimator at α = 1.5 and γ = 0.5.

Fig. 3. Decoding thresholds for (3,6) regular LDPC code ensemble using different mismatched estimated parameter values and estimated results by SIR estimator with E-RWM resampling algorithm at α = 1.5 and γ = 0.5.

which including the LDPC decoding iterations, the RWM iterations and the iterations between the SIR estimator and LDPC decoder. The limited iteration number causes inevitable estimation errors in the SIR algorithm and result in the degradation of LDPC decoding. In this paper, the asymptotic performance of such mismatched decoding performance over impulsive noise channel is analyzed by using the quantized density evolution (QDE) method.
An example for the decoding of the (3,6) regular LDPC code ensemble is illustrated in Fig. 2. The actual channel parameter pair are set to be α = 1.5 and γ = 0.5, shown as the cross mark in the center of the figure. The horizontal and vertical axes represent the offset values of the mismatched estimated parameters αˆ and γˆ respectively, both from −0.5 to +0.5. The decoding threshold of a special LDPC code over the AWSαSN channels is defined in [20]. It means that under the decoding threshold, the decision error can converge to zero, otherwise the decision error will be bounder away from zero. The decoding thresholds Eb/N0 in dB calculated by QDE are demonstrated as the contours in the figure. It means that inside a region delimited by a given contour, the decoding threshold corresponding to the mismatched channel parameter pairs is less than the dB value shown on the contour. The SIR algorithm (configured as 10 samples for each parameter and 10 RWM iterations) output estimated channel parameter pairs using the likelihood function generated by LDPC decoder with 4 iterations are depicted by the hollow round marks in the figure. As can be seen, the characteristic exponent results are overestimated and the scale results are underestimated to some extent.
In order to obtain better decoding performance, the estimated channel parameter pairs should be close to their actual value and located within the inner contours as much as possible. It could be advantageous to subtract or add an offset compensation value from each estimated result, however, the offset may vary significantly for different channel states so it may be hard to predetermine. For the proposed joint estimation and decoding framework, the RWM resampling

Algorithm 1 Enhanced Random-Walk Metropolis Resampling

1: for t = 1 : itrRWM do

2: u ∼ U (0, 1]

3: 4: 5: 6: 7: 8: 9: 10:

eeeiflllsssaaaaweeecccˆccccciniiieeefffeαppppwwwttttˆˆˆw{{{iiinnn{iαααnααααˆˆˆˆαiiinnninααααwww>,,,,iiinnnwwww1ˆˆˆˆαααiiinnnina=>=ααααn}}}}d1wwwαααaˆiiitt≤≤tinnhhhαd11pppαˆrrαraaooioninnnαbbbαddaaabb<bαααˆˆiiiinlliilnn1iiiαααtttyyyt≥hααpeα1αiinnαnαα·th<≥peαn11

then then

11: end if

12: 13: 14: 15: 16: 17: 18: 19:

eieeflllsssaaaaweeeccccˆcccciniiieeeefffγppppwwwttttˆˆˆw{{{{iiinnnγγγγinγγγˆˆˆˆγiiiinnnnγγγγwww>,,,,iiinnnwwww1ˆˆˆˆγγγ iiiinnnna==>γγγγn}}}}d1wwwγγγaˆiiiittt≤≤nnhhhγd11pppγˆrrrγiaaoooninnnγbbbγddaaabbb>γγγˆˆiiiiiilllnnniii1γtttγγyyyt≤hγγpγγeii1γnnnγγ·thp≤>γen11

then then

20: end if

21: end for

performance is improved by adding an extra adjustment for the candidate samples’ acceptance probability. During the burn-in period of the proposed enhanced RWM (E-RWM) resampling algorithm, different to the original RWM method mentioned in Section IV, the acceptance of the newly generated samples not only depends on their weights, but also on the sample values. Explicitly, the pseudocode of the E-RWM resampling algorithm running within each channel block is shown in Algorithm 1, where pα and pγ are the predetermined acceptance probabilities given based on the values of the samples. Fig. 3 depicts an example of estimated channel parameter pairs by using the E-RWM resampling algorithm in the SIR estimator. The condition of the impulsive noise channel and the configuration of the estimator and decoder are the same as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: JOINT CHANNEL ESTIMATION AND LDPC DECODING OVER TIME-VARYING IMPULSIVE NOISE CHANNELS

2381

the ones in Fig. 2, the acceptance probabilities pα and pγ are both set to 0.5 in the E-RWM algorithm. By comparing Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, the estimated channel parameter pairs are more likely to appear within the inner contours after adopting the proposed E-RWM algorithm, which reflects the improvement in decoding performance.

VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
In this section, the performance of the proposed joint estimation and LDPC decoding method is evaluated using Monte-Carlo simulations, comparing to both the method using the well-known quantile estimator [6] along with the decoder and the ideal decoder under perfect knowledge of the channel. The simulation at each SNR point is carried on until 50 frame errors occur.
The code selected for this simulation is MacKay’s rate 1/2, length 8000 regular (3, 6) LDPC code [21]. The noise used in the simulation is generated according to the timevarying block-memoryless alpha-stable impulsive noise model described in Section II, the number of channel blocks b is set to 200 and the length of each channel block h is set to 40. The channel noise parameters αi and γi within the i th block follow the normal distributions centered at the preset values α and γ respectively and their standard deviations are both set to 0.1.
In the proposed method, the SIR estimator uses 10 samples in both the sampling and resampling steps for parameter α and γ , and the RWM iteration is set to 10. Two iteration types are evaluated in the simulations, one is taking 2 iterations for the message transferred between the estimator and decoder (also called outer iterations) and the LDPC decoder iterates 10 times within each outer iteration, the other is using 5 outer iterations and within each one the LDPC decoder iterates 4 times. The total numbers of LDPC iterations in the above mentioned two types remain 20. For the enhanced resampling algorithm used in the estimator of the proposed method, the acceptance probabilities pα and pγ are both set to 0.5. In their non-iterative counterpart, the quantile estimator is carried out after the modulation removal by hard decision, and then the LDPC decoder is performed with 20 iterations.
Fig. 4, Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 demonstrate the bit error rate performance for the proposed method with different RWM iterations and numbers of samples under light, moderate and heavy impulsive noise environments. It can be observed that the BER performance is improved slightly when the number of RWM iteration exceeds 10. Furthermore, increasing the number of sample Nα and Nγ within the SIR sampling step could improve the BER performance of the proposed method, however, a substantial number of samples will lead to high operational complexity. Setting both Nα and Nγ to be 10 can achieve good BER performance with low complexity.
The Fig. 7, Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 show the bit error rate performance for the different methods under light, moderate and heavy impulsive noise environments (corresponding to average characteristic exponent α = 1.9, α = 1.5 and α = 1.1 respectively). From the simulation results, we can see the proposed method obtains better performance when the SIR estimator interacts with the LDPC decoder more often.

Fig. 4. BER performance comparison for (8000, 4000) LDPC code with different RWM iterations and samples at α = 1.9.
Fig. 5. BER performance comparison for (8000, 4000) LDPC code with different RWM iterations and samples at α = 1.5.
Fig. 6. BER performance comparison for (8000, 4000) LDPC code with different RWM iterations and samples at α = 1.1.
The enhanced resampling algorithm brings performance improvement over the resampling algorithm which only concentrates on the ratios between samples weights.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 66, NO. 6, JUNE 2018

Fig. 7. BER performance comparison for (8000, 4000) LDPC code at α = 1.9.

the decoder with quantile estimator at light and moderate impulsive situations, however, it gets worse when the impulsive degree is heavy. That is mainly because the intrinsic information which is input into the LDPC decoder becomes much more unreliable under heavy impulsive noise than the light and moderate cases. Since the performance of the SIR estimator in the message passing framework is greatly affected by the results of the decoder, the accuracy of the estimator without multiple interactions with the decoder is inevitably decreased at heavy impulsive situations. In contrast to the proposed joint iterative approach, the quantile estimator only uses the hard information to remove the modulations. Though using hard decisions is less informative than the soft decisions, the quantile estimator is not so sensitive to the impulsive degree. Consequently, the proposed method needs more outer iterations to perform well for heavy impulsive noise environment than the lighter impulsive cases.

Fig. 8. BER performance comparison for (8000, 4000) LDPC code at α = 1.5.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a novel non-data-aided joint estimation and LDPC decoding approach adopting message passing framework is developed for the time-varying block-memoryless impulsive noise channel. The Sampling-Importance Resampling method with Random-Walk Metropolis algorithm is proposed to discretize the noise parameter space for performing channel estimation. Furthermore, the resampling method in the estimator is enhanced based on mismatched asymptotic decoding performance analysis. The experimental results show that the proposed method outperforms the decoder using the well-known quantile estimator in all the simulation conditions except when the proposed method uses a very limited number of outer iterations in a heavy impulsive environment. The performance gap between the proposed method and the ideal decoder is only about 0.3 dB at high SNR regions. An important and challenging extension is to further improve the performance of this work in time varying impulsive noise channels with memory, modeled for example by finite-state Markov process or autoregressive process. In such cases, the channel variation states should be fully exploited in order to achieve the optimal estimation and decoding results. This is left for future work.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are very grateful to Editor and Reviewers for their comments and constructive suggestions, which help to enrich the content and improve the presentation of this paper.

Fig. 9. BER performance comparison for (8000, 4000) LDPC code at α = 1.1.
For the proposed method with 5 outer iterations, no matter if the enhanced SIR estimator is adopted or not, the bit-errorrate (BER) outperforms the method with quantile estimator in all the three simulation environments, and is only about 0.3 dB worse than the ideal decoder in the low BER region. The proposed method with 2 outer iterations is better than

REFERENCES
[1] K. Gulati, B. L. Evans, J. G. Andrews, and K. R. Tinsley, “Statistics of co-channel interference in a field of poisson and poisson-poisson clustered interferers,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 6207–6222, Dec. 2010.
[2] J. Ilow and D. Hatzinakos, “Analytic alpha-stable noise modeling in a poisson field of interferers or scatterers,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. SP-46, no. 6, pp. 1601–1611, Jun. 1988.
[3] M. Chitre, “A high-frequency warm shallow water acoustic communications channel model and measurements,” J. Acoust. Soc. Amer., vol. 122, no. 5, pp. 2580–2586, 2007.
[4] M. Nassar, K. Gulati, Y. Mortazavi, and B. L. Evans, “Statistical modeling of asynchronous impulsive noise in powerline communication networks,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOU et al.: JOINT CHANNEL ESTIMATION AND LDPC DECODING OVER TIME-VARYING IMPULSIVE NOISE CHANNELS

2383

[5] A. Weinberg, “The impact of pulsed RFI on the coded BER performance of the nonlinear satellite communication channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-29, no. 5, pp. 605–620, May 1981.
[6] J. H. McCulloch, “Simple consistent estimators of stable distribution parameters,” Commun. Statist. Simul., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1109–1136, 1986.
[7] X. Ma and C. L. Nikias, “Parameter estimation and blind channel identification in impulsive signal environments,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 43, no. 12, pp. 2884–2897, Dec. 1995.
[8] S. M. Koyon and D. B. Williams, “On the characterization of impulsive noise with α-stable distributions using Fourier techniques,” in Proc. 29th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Oct./Nov. 1995, pp. 787–791.
[9] M. Huang, X. Chen, L. Xiao, S. Zhou, and J. Wang, “Kalman-filterbased channel estimation for orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing systems in time-varying channels,” IET Commun., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 795–801, Aug. 2007.
[10] X. Zhong, A. B. Premkumar, and A. S. Madhukumar, “Particle filtering for acoustic source tracking in impulsive noise with alpha-stable process,” IEEE Sensors J., vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 589–600, Feb. 2013.
[11] H.-A. Loeliger, J. Dauwels, J. Hu, S. Korl, L. Ping, and F. R. Kschischang, “The factor graph approach to model-based signal processing,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 95, no. 6, pp. 1295–1322, Jun. 2007.
[12] F. Qu and L. Yang, “On the estimation of doubly-selective fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 1261–1265, Apr. 2010.
[13] M. Nassar, P. Schniter, and B. L. Evans, “A factor graph approach to joint OFDM channel estimation and decoding in impulsive noise environments,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 1576–1589, Mar. 2014.
[14] J. P. Nolan, “Numerical calculation of stable densities and distribution functions,” Commun. Statist. Stochastic Models., vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 759–774, 1997.
[15] F. Simmross-Wattenberg, M. Martín-Fernández, P. Casaseca-de-laHiguera, and C. Alberola-López, “Fast calculation of α-stable density functions based on off-line precomputations. Application to ML parameter estimation,” Digit. Signal Process., vol. 38, pp. 1–12, Mar. 2015.
[16] J. G. Gonzalez, J. L. Paredes, and G. R. Arce, “Zero-order statistics: A mathematical framework for the processing and characterization of very impulsive signals,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 3839–3851, Oct. 2006.
[17] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[18] J. Dauwels and H. A. Loeliger, “Phase estimation by message passing,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2004, pp. 523–527.
[19] M. S. Arulampalam, S. Maskell, N. Gordon, and T. Clapp, “A tutorial on particle filters for online nonlinear/non-Gaussian Bayesian tracking,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. 174–188, Feb. 2002.
[20] B. Dai, R. Liu, Y. Hou, L. Zhao, and Z. Mei, “EXIT chart aided LDPC code design for symmetric alpha-stable impulsive noise,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 464–467, Mar. 2017.
[21] D. J. C. Mackay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. Accessed: Dec. 20, 2017. [Online]. Available: http:// www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html

Yi Hou received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic and information engineering from Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2007 and 2016, respectively. His research interests include channel coding, signal detection and estimation, and digital receiver design and implementation for wireless communications and navigation.
Rongke Liu received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Beihang University in 1996 and 2002, respectively. He has been a Visiting Professor with the Florida Institution of Technology, USA, in 2005; The University of Tokyo, Japan, in 2015; and the University of Edinburgh, U.K., in 2018, respectively. He is currently a Full Professor with the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Beihang University. He received the support of New Century Excellent Talents Program from the Minister of Education, China. He has attended many special programs, such as China Terrestrial Digital Broadcast Standard. He has published over 100 papers in international conferences and journals. He has been granted 20 patents. His research interest covers wireless multimedia communication, compression coding, channel coding, and aerospace communication.
Bin Dai received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from the Nanjing Institute of Technology, China, and the M.S. degree in information and communication engineering from the Lanzhou University of Technology, china, in 2011 and 2014, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, China. His research interests include channel coding and their applications on communications.
Ling Zhao received the B.E. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Beihang University, Beijing, China, in 2003 and 2010, respectively. Since 2010, he has been with the School of Electric and Information Engineering, Beihang University. His research interests span the broad area of wireless communication, signal processing for communication, and architecture design for coding theory applications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:53:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

