 
 
 
 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                             
Abstract— WiMAX system performance can be significantly 
improved to achieve excellent error correction performance by 
utilizing powerful Forward Error Correction Codes. We present 
a class of parallel concatenated codes called Multiple Parallel 
Concatenated Gallager Codes (MPCGC) based on using (LDPC) 
component codes that is used in IEEE 802.16/WiMAX. Computer 
simulation results confirm that the proposed MPCGCs-WiMAX 
system shows better performance with an improvement by 0.3 dB 
gain when compared to a single long LDPC-WiMAX system. 
Moreover, by using the proposed coding scheme, lower 
computational complexity can be achieved than the long LDPC 
code due to multiple smaller lower codes. The advantages of the 
MPCGCs structure have the potential to be extended to other 
applications where reduced complexity and flexibility in forward 
error control coding are required. 
Keywords— LDPC, Parallel concatenation, WiMAX 802.16 
standard, physical layer) 
I. INTRODUCTION  
  Channel coding in digital wireless communication systems is 
becoming very important. Low density parity check (LDPC) 
codes have played an important role in error correction for 
achieving reliable data transmission in a communication 
systems over a noisy channel because of their performance 
that is very close to the Shannon limit. LDPCs are based on 
linear block codes and can be considered as a better error-
correcting scheme when compared with other codes. LDPC 
was first introduced by Gallager five decades ago and then 
remained largely forgotten for over 33 years [1]. 
  The only distinguished work was by Michael Tanner in 1981 
when he introduced diagrammatic representations of the codes 
subsequent called the Tanner graph [2]. Since the invention of 
Turbo codes in 1993 [3], researchers started to focus on 
finding low complexity codes that have a performance 
approaching the Shannon channel capacity. 
  Finally, LDPC was rediscovered again by Mackay and Nael 
in 1995 [4]-[5]. MPCGCs is a new class of parallel 
concatenated codes designed from parallel concatenation of 
LDPC codes. It is a concatenation of two or more LDPC codes 
built in parallel concatenation [6]. A benefit from applying 
concatenated small codes instead of a single long code is to 
achieve a low error rate with an overall encoding and 
decoding complexity that is lower than what is required for a 
single long LDPC code. The lower complexity can be 
achieved by encoding and decoding each component code 
separately. The reason for applying LDPC codes in the well-
known turbo code structure is to conquer the fairly complex 
encoding and decoding of a long code into steps, while 
maintaining the information flow between the component 
decoders and minimizing any information loss between the 
decoding steps [7]. 
  The puncturing of parity check bits is applied to forward 
error correction (FEC) codes in order to design the best rate 
compatible (RC) codes to obtain a higher code rate from a low 
rate mother code [8]. WiMAX (Worldwide Interoperability for 
Microwave Access) is a telecommunication technology that 
was first introduced in 2001 [9].  
 The IEEE 802.16 standard is a fixed broadband Wireless 
Access. This standard specifies the physical layer and the 
medium access control layer. Moreover it offers an alternative 
way to wired broadband standards such as DSL. There are 
different physical layer specifications due to different 
applications and frequency bands that are supported by the 
WiMAX standard [10].  
  In IEEE 802.16e, a modified iterative decoding method like 
belief propagation (BP) and Min-Sum Decoding Algorithm 
(MSA) by partitioning check nodes are applied. This method 
achieves good improvement in convergence speed while 
reducing the computational decoding complexity by half  [11]. 
An efficient encoder architecture was presented under the 
WiMAX standard in [12] suitable for both ½ rate and 2/3B 
rate where the idea of storing two lines of data in one ROM 
was applied to achieve the sharing of resources. 
 A proposed operation of WiMAX quasi cyclic LDPC (QC-
LDPC) decoding under high channel quality was proposed to 
reduce implementation complexity and power consumption.  
In [13], the reliability of the check nodes was tagged using a 
check node stopping (CNS) scheme by detecting the 
magnitudes of the check node belief messages with a 
threshold.    
  In this paper, we further explore MPCGCs by evaluating 
these codes for WiMAX over both AWGN and flat Rayleigh 
fading channels; we also investigate the puncturing of these 
codes and any performance improvements. 
  The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II we 
describe the MPCGC encoder. In section III and IV, we 
describe the MPCGC-WiMAX physical layer 
model. 
Computer simulations for several scenarios to demonstrate the 
system performance is presented in section V followed by a 
conclusion in section VI. 
Efficient coding Method of Multiple Parallel 
Concatenated Gallager Codes for WiMAX  
                 Ahmed Aftan                    
EEE Department, the University 
of Sheffield, UK. AL-Furat AL-
Awsat Technical University, Iraq 
e-mail: aoaftan1@sheffield.ac.uk 
 Mohammed Benaissa  
EEE Department, the University of 
Sheffield, 
UK 
e-mail: m.benaissa@sheffield.ac.uk 
               Hatim Behairy 
National Electronics Communication 
and Photonic Centre, King Abdulaziz 
City for Science and Technology, SA 
 e-mail: h.behairy@kacst.edu.sa 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
II. MPCGC PARALLEL ENCODER 
  MPCGCs are constructed to gather two or more relatively 
simple LDPC encoders’ component codes. This irregular 
LDPC combination highly improves the system performance 
when compared with single long LDPC code. If 𝑀 represents 
the number of (two or more) LDPC parallel encoders that are 
used to encode the information bits 𝐾 leading to generate a 
codeword. Each component code can be described by a (𝐾, 𝑃) 
generator matrix.  The parallel concatenation method is used to 
build an overall length 𝑁 and a codeword rate, 𝑅=1/(𝑀+ 1) 
code. LDPC codes can be defined in IEEE 802.16 standard that 
are based on number of essential LDPC codes. Each code of 
the collection of LDPC codes are systematic linear block code 
that can be defined by the parity check matrix 𝐻= [ℎ𝑖.𝑗]𝑇,𝑃 
where 𝑇 represents the number of parity check bits in the code 
and 𝑃 represents the number of bits in the code block.   
Furthermore, the number of information bits are 𝐾= 𝑃−𝑇. 
Moreover, when the entry ℎ𝑖,𝑗 of  𝐻 matrix is equal 1 a bit node 
is directly connected to a check node. The 𝐻 matrix is 
described by Tanner graph. An irregular LDPC parity check 
matrix of dimensions (𝑇, 𝑃) contains 𝑃 columns with Hamming 
weight 𝐶𝑛 where 1≤𝐶𝑛≤𝑇.  Let us consider the dimension of 
the parity check matrix of LDPC to be (𝑇, 𝑃). We have, 
                 𝜆(𝑥) = ∑
𝜆𝑖𝑥𝑖
𝑇
𝑖=1
,                                        (1)                                                               
  where 𝜆𝑖 represents the fraction of columns of weight  in the 
matrix. The average weight over all 𝑃 columns in the matrix 
can be defined as the Mean Column Weight (MCW) of the 
LDPC code for 𝐻 matrix.  
                          𝑀𝐶𝑊≅∑
𝑖 𝜆𝑖
𝑇
𝑖=1
.                                         (2) 
  The MCW is an easy and flexible measure to describe the 
structure of an MPCGC. The parity check matrices of the 
component LDPC codes are constructed based on selecting the 
appropriate value for the MCW [14].  After MPCGC encoder 
as shown in Fig. 1 the redundant bits will be cancelled or 
combined by a multiplexer. Thus, the final codeword of 
MPCGC is (𝑆, 𝑃1, 𝑃2, 𝑃3), where 𝑆 is the information bits, 
while 𝑃1, 𝑃2 and 𝑃3 are the parity bits generated by the first, 
second and third encoders respectively. The overall complexity 
of the encoder part can be reduced by breaking the encoding of 
a long code length into shorter (in this case 3) codes. For the 
channel, both AWGN and flat fading were considered.  The 
flat fading channel has complex impulse response ℎ(𝑡) and 
can be represented as: 
                           ℎ(𝑡) = ℎ1(𝑡) +  𝑗ℎ2(𝑡).                                 (3)                                                     
  Where, ℎ1(𝑡) and ℎ2(𝑡) represents the zero mean Gaussian 
distribution which have Rayleigh distributed as follows: 
 
                        |ℎ(𝑡)| = √|ℎ1(𝑡)|2 + |ℎ2(𝑡)|2.                     (4)                                    
  The probability density function (pdf) of Rayleigh 
distribution of equation (4) can be as follows [15]-[16]. 
 
                           𝑓(𝑦) =
2y
𝜎2 𝑒
−2𝑦
𝜎2 ,                                              (5)   
                                                                                    
where  𝜎2=E (|ℎ(𝑡)|2).     
 
Fig.1 Block diagram of MPCGC encoder. 
III.  WIMAX PHYSICAL LAYER MODEL 
  The WiMAX physical layer model, as shown in the block 
diagram in Fig. 2 is based on OFDM [9]. The system model 
combines MPCGCs with OFDM to implement and improve the 
WiMAX 802.16 standard. The baseband WiMAX system has 
four major parts: 
1. 
MPCGCs Encoder/ Decoder for the WiMAX 802.16  
standard 
2. 
Interleaving/ Deinterleaving 
3. 
Modulation/ Demodulation 
4. 
OFDM transmitter/Receiver 
  In this block diagram random data is generated. The proposed 
MPCGC encoder is designed to provide the advantage of 
breaking the equivalent long single LDPC code into multiple 
smaller codes with lower complexity and thus improve the 
overall system performance. The irregular LDPC codes provide 
lower encoding/decoding complexity with better performance. 
The entire parity check matrix is a set from a systematic linear 
block with different cyclic shifts, which allows reduction in 
complexity as well. Many improvements can be achieved by 
blocking short cycles in the parity check bits of H matrix, while 
optimizing the bipartite graph depending on better MCWs that 
are found in the structure phase [14].   
  The decoding process of MPCGCs follows the turbo decoding 
scenario except not using an interleaver among the component 
decoders. The process of exchanging information between the 
component decoders can be defined as super iteration, whereas 
a local iteration can be defined as a complete one cycle from 
sum product algorithm decoding. The MPCGC has the 
flexibility to stop both the local and super iterations at 
convergence. When the first super iteration is completed, each 
LDPC component decoder will get its own a priori information 
from the extrinsic information of all other (M-1) decoders. For 
all other subsequent super iterations the decoding process 
continues until all (M) component decoders converge to valid 
codeword, or reaching the maximum number 
i
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
 
Fig. 2 Block diagram of WiMAX-OFDM physical layer model. 
of super iterations. Finally, the output from the highest MCW 
value component decoder is stated as the best estimation of the 
transmitted sequence [6]. The process of reordering the data 
sequence in deterministic format is called interleaving. The 
interleaving is used by making permutation process to the 
encoded data. The inverse of interleaving is the deinterleaving 
at the receiver side, where the original data has been restored 
from the received sequence. There are four code rates 
supported in the WiMAX standard 1/2, 2/3, 3/4 and 5/6. Every 
base of the  𝐻 matrix has 24 columns. For every code rate, the 
base model parity check matrix is defined for the largest 
acceptable code length (N=2304). The expansion factor (z) 
varies from 24 to 96 with increments 4 and is equal to N/24 for 
code length N. For instance, the code length 768 has expansion 
factor z=32. Fig. 3 shows the structure of the parity check 
matrix H (384,768) of the standard for a single LDPC with 
code rate 1/2, z=32, N=768 [17]. 
 
Fig. 3 Structure of the parity check matrix of WiMAX IEEE 802.16 with ½ 
code rate and 768 code length. 
 
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
A. BER PERFORMANCE ANAYLYSIS 
  Firstly, the characteristics of MPCGCs parallel decoding are 
evaluated separately as shown in Fig. 4 using three LDPC 
component codes where each component is allowed a 
maximum of 38 local iterations whereas the overall MPCGCs 
have 30 super iterations. The BER performance of the 
MPCGCs is evaluated and is illustrated in Fig. 5. The 
parameters of the three parallel LDPC components of MPCGC 
have the same parity check dimensions, H (192,384) with 
different MCWs: code rate R=1/4, MCW1=1.94, MCW2=2.81, 
MCW3=1.81 and N=768. Again, the parameters of the 
equivalent single irregular LDPC code that is used for 
comparison are: R=1/4, MCW= 3.07, N=768, the MPCGC has 
a gain of 0.5 dB (at BER 2e-4) when compared to the 
equivalent single irregular LDPC with the same parameters. 
Furthermore, the MPCGCs performance outperforms by 1 dB 
the single short LDPC code with parameters: R=1/2, H 
(192,384), and MCW=2.8. The MPCGCs show 0.2 dB gain 
improvements when compared with the result of reported 
proposed method by Kim et. al using the same parameters [18].  
 
Fig. 4 MPCGCs decoding flow chart. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
  Secondly, the performance of a single LDPC-WiMAX 
baseband transceiver for IEEE 802.16 has been calculated 
according to the simulation parameters in table (1) with a 256 
size FFT [19]. The parameters of the LDPC code used for 
comparison are R=1/2, N=768 and the WiMAX parity check 
matrix standard H (384,768). The encoding process of single 
LDPC-WiMAX is calculated by constructing the generator 
matrix 𝐺, such that 𝐺.𝐻𝑇=0 where 𝐺 is obtained by inversion 
of the parity check matrix concatenated with the identity matrix 
of the same size. Then the codewords are calculated by 
multiplying the message frame with the generator matrix 𝐺.  
  The encoding process of MPCGCs-WiMAX is calculated by 
concatenated three small random LDPC codes into parallel 
concatenation with the same parity check matrix dimensions H 
(192,384) with different MCWs. The decoding process is 
calculated 
by 
parallel 
concatenation 
of 
three 
LDPC 
components by using the sum product algorithm. As shown in 
Fig. 6, the performance is enhanced and its provide 0.3 dB gain 
improvement at BER 2e-4 when compared with the same 
parameter of single LDPC-WiMAX according to the reported 
result by Teodor et. al [17]. Also shown in Fig. 6, that the 
MPCGCs-WiMAX outperforms single LDPC-OFDM by 0.8 
dB at the same parameters. We noticed also at moderate SNR 
region the packet error rate PER performance of the MPCGCs 
parallel decoding outperforms single irregular LDPC-OFDM 
component decoder at the same parameter by achieving  gain 
about 0.4 dB at BER=1e-3 as shown in Fig. 7. To enhance the 
BER 
performance 
of 
the 
standard 
MPCGC-WiMAX 
application and reduced the decoding complexity. The 
puncturing performance of the proposed designed MPCGCs 
were applied to upgrade the code rate to half [8]. The 
puncturing process is removing some bits from the codeword 
to change the code rate and reduced the decoding complexity. 
The decoder has known the location of the punctured bits and 
set the likelihood ratios (LLR’s) of punctured bits as 0.5 then 
proceeds with decoding operations of the other received bits. 
After encoding, the codeword N=768 is punctured by a 
puncturing fraction Ө=0.5 to be N=384 for enhancing the BER 
performance at only high Eb/No region as well as reduce the d- 
                         Table 1 WiMAX simulation Parameter. 
OFDM, FFT size 
256 
Number of data  
subcarriers  
192 
Code length 
768 
Modulation 
scheme 
BPSK [-1,+1] 
Channel model 
AWGN, Flat 
fading channel 
Cyclic prefix 
¼ 
Channel 
Bandwidth 
2.5 MHz 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 6 BER comparison of WiMAX physical layer model. 
 
Fig. 7 PER comparison for MPCGC-WiMAX system and single LDPC-
OFDM. 
 
Fig. 5 BER comparison for different LDPC coding model. 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
Fig. 8 BER comparison of WiMAX model over AWGN channel. 
 
Fig. 9 BER comparison of WiMAX model over flat fading channel. 
ecoding complexity and to increase the transmission code rate 
from ¼ to ½. In the punctured design, we will use the irregular 
puncturing to get the best performance for the WiMAX 
system. 
 The process of puncturing the codeword is done by removing 
fixed 128 bits from the different locations of the three parity 
check bits of the codeword. 
  Fig. 8 shows the different BER comparison of WiMAX 
application over AWGN channel, the punctured MPCGCs-
WiMAX outperforms both single LDPC-WiMAX and 
MPCGCs-WiMAX without puncturing at high Eb/No region 
only but provides worse BER at low and medium Eb/No 
region at the same parameters. Another BER comparison of  
 
 
WiMAX application over flat Rayleigh fading channel as 
shown in Fig. 9. 
B. MPCGC COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS 
  LDPC complexity for a particular code is proportional with 
the type of decoder and the density of the parity check matrix. 
The sum product algorithm has an important advantage that is 
it is less complex than other decoding algorithms used in turbo 
codes.  
  To estimate the complexity of MPCGC, we calculated the 
average number of local iterations per each LDPC code 
needed with different E𝑏/N0 values [20].  
  In our case, a MPCGC of three parallel component decoders 
executes a maximum of 30 super iterations; each component 
decoder in each super iteration performs a maximum of 38 
local iterations at the received data then passes the extrinsic 
information to the next decoder and so on. The MPCGC 
decoder generally for each super iteration performs a 
maximum of (3× 38) local iterations, which are done by 3 
LDPC decoders. For the sake of a fair comparison between 
MPCGC and single conventional LDPC codes, the decoding 
complexity per iteration can be estimated in terms of the 
maximum number of edges in the Tanner graph of the code 
which can be calculated as (NxMCW) for a single LDPC 
code. Therefore for a MPCGC in each super iteration, the 
maximum number of edges can be calculated according to,   
 Total edges= Number of Iterations ×∑
𝑁𝑖
𝑀
𝑖=1
𝑀𝐶𝑊.             (6) 
  On this basis, a preliminary complexity analysis and 
comparison have been carried out in terms of Eb/No and the 
results in terms of the maximum number of iterations and 
edges are illustrated in Fig. 10 and Fig. 11. The results show 
that the advantages of MPCGC can be exploited without 
significant additional complexity. 
 
Fig. 10 Complexity and performance comparison between LDPC and 
MPCGC. 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 11 Complexity and performance comparison between LDPC and 
MPCGC. 
 
V. CONCLUSION 
  This paper focused on investigating the deployment of 
MPCGCs in the IEEE 802.16 standard physical layer system 
based on the basic modulation scheme, over AWGN 
transmission and flat Rayleigh fading channel. For the same 
parameters, the proposed MPCGCs-WiMAX achieves better 
gain than single-long LDPC based WiMAX. In addition, the 
MPCGCs scheme shows further advantages when applying 
irregular puncturing for enhancing the code rate from ¼ to ½ to 
be compatible with non-puncturing standard WiMAX system. 
Furthermore, our MPCGCs scheme shows that can be 
exploited without significant additional decoding complexity 
than that of the conventional single LDPC. 
  The MPCGC scheme can be a potential scheme for the 
channel coding in the WiMAX communication system. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes, Research 
Monograph series.” MIT Press, Cambridge, 1963. 
[2] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity 
codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, 
1981. 
[3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near 
Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-
codes. 1,” in Communications, 1993. ICC ’93 Geneva. 
Technical Program, Conference Record, IEEE International 
Conference on, 1993, vol. 2, pp. 1064–1070 vol.2. 
[4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit 
performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. 
Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, p. 1645-, 1996. 
[5] D. J. C. Mackay, D. J. C. Mackay, R. M. Neal, and R. M. 
Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” Cryptogr. 
Coding, 5th IMA Conf. (Lecture Notes Comput. Sci. C. Boyd, 
Ed, vol. 111, no. 1025, p. 1025pp110-111, 1995. 
[6] H. M. Behairy and M. Benaissa, “Multiple Parallel 
Concatenated Gallager Codes (MPCGC): Code Design and 
Decoding Techniques,” 1995. 
[7] H. Behairy and S. C. Chang, “Parallel Concatenated 
Gallager Codes, In Proc. 5th CDMA Inter. Conf. (CIC2000), 
pp. 123-127, Seoul, R. O. Korea, Nov.2000. 
[8] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “Results on punctured low-
density parity-check codes and improved iterative decoding 
techniques,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 
53, pp. 599–614, Feb. 2007 
[9] M. Weiss "WiMAX general information about the standard 
802.16." Rohde & Schwartz Application Note, Munich, 
Germany (2006). 
[10] K. ElMahgoub and M. Nafie, “Symbol based log-map in 
concatenated LDPC-convolutional codes,” in Consumer 
Communications and Networking Conference (CCNC), 2010 
7th IEEE, 2010, pp. 1–4. 
[11] M.-H. Jang, B.-K. Shin, W.-M. Park, J.-S. No, and I.-S. 
Jeon, “Decoding method of LDPC codes in IEEE 802.16 e 
standards for improving the convergence speed,” J. Korean 
Inst. Commun. Inf. Sci., vol. 31, no. 12C, pp. 1143–1149, 2006. 
[12] X. Wang, F. Hong, T. Ge, Y. Wang, B. Xiao, and N. I. 
Sarkar, “The Design of LDPC Encoder Based on the WIMAX 
Standard,” Int. J. Futur. Gener. Commun. Netw., vol. 8, no. 4, 
pp. 25–32, 2015. 
[13] Lin, C.H., Huang, T.H., Lin, S.Y. and Lee, Y.H., 2017. 
Design and Implementation of Operation-Reduced LDPC 
Decoder Based on a Check Node Stopping Scheme. Journal of 
Circuits, Systems and Computers, 26.02 (2017), p.1750028. 
[14] H. Behairy and S. C. Chang, “On the Design, Simulation, 
and Analysis of Parallel Concatenated Gallager Codes, in Proc. 
2002 IEEE Int. Conf. Com-(ICC.02), New York, NY, pp. 
1850-1854, May 2002. 
[15] P. Matthias, “Mobile fading channels: modelling, analysis 
& simulation.” S. l.]= John Wiley, 2002. 
[16] M. K. Simon and M.-S. Alouini, Digital communication 
over fading channels, vol. 95. John Wiley & Sons, 2005. 
[17] T. B. Iliev, G. V Hristov, P. Z. Zahariev, and M. P. Iliev, 
“Application and evaluation of the LDPC codes for the next 
generation communication systems,” in Novel Algorithms and 
Techniques In Telecommunications, Automation and Industrial 
Electronics, Springer, 2008, pp. 532–536.  
[18] K. S. Kim, S. H. Lee, Y. H. Kim, and J. Y. Ahn, “Design 
of binary LDPC code using cyclic shift matrices,” Electron. 
Lett., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 325–326, 2004. 
[19] M. A. Kadhim and W. Ismail, “Implementation of 
WIMAX IEEE 802.16e Baseband Transceiver on Multi-Core 
Software Defined Radio Platform,” Int. J. Comput. Theory 
Eng., vol. 2, no. 5, p. 820, 2010. 
[20] H. M. Behairy, "Parallel concatenated gallager codes and 
their applications in CDMA wireless networks", Ph.D. 
dissertation, George Masson University, 2002. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
