SHORT LOW-ERROR-FLOOR TANNER CODES WITH HAMMING NODES

Gianluigi Liva Dipartimento di Elettronica, Informatica e Sistemistica
Universit'a di Bologna Email: gliva@deis.unibo.it

William E. Ryan Electrical and Computer Engineering Department
University of Arizona Email: ryan@ece.arizona.edu

ABSTRACT

codes as Tanner codes. We note that both BTC and LDPCC

are particular instances of Tanner codes.

While it is fairly easy to design good low-density parity- Other recent attempts in the research of good short codes check codes with medium or large block lengths, and with are also special cases of Tanner codes. In [8] and [9] a
code rates 1/2 or greater; much more effort is required for code structure is proposed, which is inspired by Gallager's
short lengths and low rates. We propose a code structure regular LDPC codes. For such generalized low density which incorporates Hamming codes into a code's graph, codes (GLDC), a regular bipartite graph is constructed as leading to a type of a Tanner code. The incorporation of follows. Each bit of the transmitted codeword is associated Hamming codes into the graph, which we call "Hamming with a variable node, while each constraint node constitutes code doping", tends to lead to larger minimum distances a constraint on the bits connected to it, in accordance with and hence low error-rate floors. We present an iterative the definition of a linear block code. Whereas for LDPCC, decoding algorithm tailored to graphs possessing "Ham- each check node corresponds to a single-parity check equaming nodes". Further; a density evolution analysis based tion, for GLDC the constraint nodes can be associated, on the Gaussian approximation is presented, which is a for instance, with Hamming codes. Hamming codes are useful tool for finding good codes. Finally, we present efficient short codes with minimum distance equal to 3, numerical results of some Hamming-doped Tanner codes thus the resulting codes are characterized by (relatively) simulated on the AWGN channel. The simulated codes large minimum distances. Numerical results presented in exhibit remarkably low error floors, while simultaneously [9] confirm this conjecture. displaying good decoding thresholds.
Our approach deals with a more general construction of

Tanner codes which might be called irregular GLDC.

INTRODUCTION

Specifically, we allow irregularities in the GLDC bipartite graph, permitting the use of different component codes and

As shown in [1] - [2], it is not difficult to design good low-density parity-check codes (LDPCC) or turbo codes when the block lengths are long. However, for short lengths, one typically sees a severe flooring effect in a given code's error rate curve. Possible approaches to the design of short iterative codes with low error floors are block turbo codes (BTC) [3] [4] or LDPC codes based on algebraic structures [5]. An alternative approach deals with girth conditioning techniques for random LDPCC graphs [6].

different node degrees. From another point of view, we can consider our design to be a "doping" of an LDPCC, based on the introduction of more powerful nodes in the bipartite graph. In such a doping technique, any linear block code can replace any node in the LDPC graph. In the following we will refer to codes constructed in this manner as doped LDPCC (D-LDPCC). When the code doping involves the use of Hamming component codes, we will refer to such codes as Hamming-doped LDPCC (HD-LDPCC).

A third, less explored way, is due to the work of Tanner [7] in which component codes more complex than singleparity check codes are employed in the code's graph. Such increased complexity in the constraint nodes of the bipartite graph can be exploited to obtain greater minimum distances, hence, lower floors. In the following, we will refer to such

The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we define the proposed code structure and we introduce basic notation. Section III deals with the description of the message-passing decoding algorithm. Section IV presents an analysis of iterative decoding convergence through density evolution techniques. In Section V, some numerical results for Hamming-doped LDPCC simulated over the

This work was funded in part by University of Bologna, Progetto Gaussian channel are provided, and Section VI presents

Pluriennale, and by NASA-JPL grant 1264726.

some concluding remarks.

1 of 6
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DOPED LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES
In figure 1 the graphical structure of a doped LDPCC is depicted. Constraint nodes are indicated as square nodes and are analogous to check nodes for LDPCC graphs. Variable nodes are represented by circles. The edge connection
details are included in the interleaver Hl. Square nodes marked by C1, C2, ..., CL are based on linear block codes C1, C2, ..., CL. In the following, such complex nodes
will be called doped nodes. An unmarked (blank) square node corresponds to a single parity-check (SPC) code and a circle corresponds to a code bit node. It must be noted that, while for an LDPCC code the bipartite graph gives a complete description of the code's structure, for D-LDPCC the specifications of the component linear block codes are also required.

C\ C/

1. ...

. . . 1,

i. .

by the necessity of achieving a reasonably low decoding complexity: the use of long component codes for doped nodes could result in an unacceptable increase in decoder complexity, as will be explained in the next section. In the context of very short doped LDPC codes, short Hamming codes represent an appealing choice for code doping.
MESSAGE-PASSING DECODER
The message-passing decoder for doped LDPCC is similar to that of an LDPC code: each node computes the softoutputs (extrinsic information) given the soft-inputs (a priori information) received from the edges connected to it. The extrinsic information propagates along the edges of a node, and constitutes the a priori information for its neighbors. We focus on the decoder for the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. At the first half-iteration, each variable node forwards the message received from the channel observation through the edges connected to it.

6....

6 .. q

Assuming a log-domain decoder, the channel observation for the j-th variable node is given by the log-likelihood ratio (LLR)

mh Pr(xj z +llzi)
J Pr(xj -l1lzj)

(1)

Channel side

Fig. 1. Graph representation for a doped LDPCC

Let us define m as the summation of all the redundancies
introduced by the m, constraint nodes, namely,
m,
m =E(n-ki),
i=l
where (ni, ki) represent the parameters of the component
code underlying the i-th constraint node and where n=
ki + 1 when the i-th node corresponds to an SPC code.
Thus, if n is the number of variable nodes in the bipartite graph representing the code, the number of information bits for the overall code is

k > n-m

with equality if all the check equations derived from con-

straint nodes definitions are linearly independent. The code

rate satisfies

Rc >R~1 -1m n

Our attention will be focused on LDPCC doped with (ex-

tended/shortened) Hamming codes. This choice is motivated

where xj is the j-th component of the transmitted vector x, and zj is the received soft-value, given by

zi = xj + nj.

(2)

The noise term nj is a zero mean Gaussian random variable with variance n. We assume antipodal signaling for xj:
if the corresponding bit of the codeword is cj = 0, then xj = +1; if cj = 1, then xj =-1. It is easily shown that

ch 22z'.

(3)

To complete the first iteration, constraint nodes compute the
extrinsic information given the soft-outputs received from variable nodes. For the i-th constraint node define m' i as
the message received on the l-th edge connected to it. If
the node has d' edge connections, then 1 < I < d'. The
i-th constraint node soft-output messages are denoted as
mSOut, with 1 < s < dtc. If the constraint is represented
by a conventional SPC-based node, the soft-output can be computed as

cdz

1d

/

flI MtS'Out =

a .0

(4)

1=1,1:As

1==I,I7As

2 of 6
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where ce, = sign(m",in), /3= m, and $(x) In ex 1)

The message exchange is iterated for a maximum number of iterations, Imax, and the final decision on the j-th symbol is taken according to

For constraint nodes based on more complex linear block codes, there are several possibilities for computing the softoutput. It can be obtained through the use of a local BCJR [10] decoder working on the trellis of the component code, or through other sub-optimum soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoders for the component code. An example of a SISO processor for a doped constraint node is depicted in figure 2. The soft-input must be subtracted from the soft-output of the BCJR decoder in order to provide the extrinsic information for the iterative decoding procedure.

Min

+

ot

BCJR

Fig. 2. Extrinsic information computation based on the BCJR algorithm, at a generic doped constraint node.

xi = +1 if Ziml'+nmI h> O
xi == -1 if z7=Km11in + mj. < 0.
However, the iterative procedure can be stopped before the maximum number of iterations is reached if the signs of the messages to the constraint nodes satisfy the parity-check equations underlying each node.
DENSITY EVOLUTION ANALYSIS
Density evolution analysis consists of the tracking of the probability density functions of messages exchanged along the edges of the biparite graph, in order to obtain useful information about decoding convergence properties of the message-passing algorithm over the graph. Such analysis is intractable for code graphs containing loops: loops introduce correlation among messages and modeling that correlation in a proper way is a formidable task. Thus, the graph is commonly assumed to be loop-free, or equivalently, the block length n -- oc. Under this assumption all exchanged messages can be considered to be independent.

The BCJR decoder gives an exact evaluation of soft-outputs,
but its complexity is related to the maximum number of states in the trellis of the component code. Since this
quantity is often equal to 2n'-k' (where n' and k' are the
parameters of the code C' underlying the node), the BCJR algorithm is computationally expensive when applied to long Hamming codes.

Possible sub-optimum local decoders could be based on the modified-Chase algorithm [4], or on the belief propagation applied to the (local) bipartite graph associated with the component code's parity-check matrix. The use of a belief propagation decoder for the component code gives the lowest complexity, but it could substantially degrade performance if the local bipartite graph contains too many length-4 cycles.

For variable nodes, the soft-output is computed as

di

ch(5) M38s,out = SE mlin ++ jX:

5

1 ,l#&S

namely, the soft-output for a variable node over the s-th edge is the sum of all of the other soft-inputs together with the channel log-likelihood ratio. Note that for j-th variable
node, the definitions of m80ut ml i and d13 are analogous
to those of the constraint nodes.

The loop-free (or infinite block length) assumption should in principle exclude the application of density evolution analysis from short-block length codes. However, density evolution will be used to understand which particular combinations of node types lead to good decoding convergence properties in the sense of the decoding threshold. The threshold is the lowest value of the signal-to-noise ratio Eb/No for which the message-passing decoding of an infinite block length code (with such node distributions) converges successfully to a probability of bit error Pb = 0 as the number of iterations goes to infinity. We indicate that value by (Eb/No)*. As pointed out in [11], density evolution permits one to compute the threshold for given node distributions.
D-LDPC codes deal with more complex nodes. The probability density function's transformation from the input to the output of a doped node is evaluated numerically, giving at the input of the doped node's SISO processor a set of samples distributed according to the input p.d.f. and collecting the output samples in a histogram. The problem of characterizing doped node behavior has an approximate solution if we base the density evolution analysis on the supposition that all messages exchanged along the edges can be modeled by Gaussian random variables. This approximation was exploited in [12], [13], [14] to perform simplified

3 of 6
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

density evolution analyses for different iterative coding schemes (including LDPCC), leading to likely threshold values. Where the actual density evolution was feasible, comparisons shown that such a Gaussian approximation is able to produce accurate estimates of thresholds, under some limitations on graph structures and working signalto-noise ratios.

and then substituting a fraction of the conventional check nodes with (8,4) extended Hamming code-based nodes. This pragmatic approach is based on the assumption that the use of Hamming nodes will increase the minimum distance of the code, thus lowering the error floor, without penalizing the performance in the waterfall region. The resulting code possesses a lower code rate: RC = 160/512 = 0.3125.

A preliminary step in the development of a density evolution analysis for doped LDPCC based on the Gaussian approximation requires the verification of the output p.d.f. for doped nodes, given a symmetric-Gaussian input [14], [12]. In figure 3 the p.d.f. estimates for the output of a constraint node based on a (16,11) extended Hamming code are depicted. The histograms were obtained using a BCJR decoder for the Hamming code, with an input vector of 16 independent values, all of them Gaussian with
mean min and variance Co2r = 2min, corresponding to input signal-to-noise ratio SNRin = min/2. Note that
the all-zero codeword was assumed. The procedure was repeated 100,000 times for each value of the input SNR. Observe in figure 3 that, at 3 dB, 6 dB and 10 dB, the output p.d.f. are nearly Gaussian; however, the symmetry condition is generally not satisfied. We remark also that at low SNR values the use of a Gaussian model for doped nodes output's distributions becomes less precise. For this reason the Gaussian approximation should be used carefully when analyzing codes based on such extended Hamming code, working at low SNR. This evaluation procedure must be applied to all component codes in order to verify the suitability of the Gaussian approximation.
Using as the tracked parameter the SNR of the distributions, or the mutual information [15] between the message and the associated codeword's symbol, we found more reasonable results than when we tracked the mean, which requires the symmetry condition. For codes described by graphs with different node types, we averaged all tracked parameters (related to the different messages distributions) over the fraction of edges connected to different node types, as suggested in [16].

The code whose graph we choose to code dope is an accumulate-repeat-accumulate (ARA) code with repetition rate equal to 3, presented in [17]. We substituted 32
conventional degree-5 check nodes with as many (8,4) extended Hamming nodes. For each of these doped nodes, the three excess edges connect the doped node to one degree-2 variable node and two degree-5 variable nodes. Accordingly, the degrees of these variable nodes increase to 3 and to 6.
The simulated performance has been compared to a Euclidean Geometry (EG) LDPCC with code parameters (511,139) presented in [5]. The EG LDPCC is characterized by a highly redundant parity-check matrix and a variable node degree equal to 72. In figure 4 the frame error rate (FER) for both codes is compared assuming a maximum of 50 iterations. The HD-LDPCC-I shows no
signs of floor down to FER- 3 x 10-7, and outperforms the EG LDPCC by about 0.1 dB at a FER= 10-5. Moreover,
the doped code possesses a lower decoding complexity with respect to the EG code since the number of constraint nodes working at each iteration is 364, while for the EG code 4599 check nodes are employed in the decoding procedure. This is due to the high redundancy of the paritycheck matrix of the EG LDPCC. However, the presence of

0.20 -
INPUTSNR 3dB 0.15-

INPUTSNR 6dB

0.10-
NUMERICAL RESULTS

INPUT SNR OdB

In this section we provide some numerical results obtained through Monte Carlo simulations for the binary-input AWGN channel. Our first design targets low error floor short codes with rate smaller than 0.5.
A first HD-LDPCC (HD-LDPCC-I) has been designed with n = 512 and k = 160. The approach followed in this case was based on the selection of a rate-0.5 LDPCC code characterized by good performance in the waterfall region,

0.05
0.00 -20-15 -10 -5 0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 message value
Fig. 3. Estimation of densities for the output of a node base on a (16,11) extended Hamming code, at different values of the input SNR.

4 of 6
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Hamming nodes among the 364 constraint nodes increases the decoding complexity of the HD-LDPCC-I relative to that of a standard LDPCC.
In figure 5, the performance of the HD-LDPCC-I is compared with a second Hamming-doped LDPCC (HDLDPCC-II). This code is a (512,140) HD-LDPCC (RC = 0.273) obtained using a similar design procedure. Here, the "code base" is an ARA code with repetition rate equal to 4. The doping consists of the substitution of 58 degree-6 check nodes with 58 (6,3) shortened Hamming code nodes. This second code has a performance loss of about 0.2 dB
at a FER=10-5 with respect to the HD-LDPCC-I, with 200
iterations. However, this second design permits low error rates (below FER=10-7) without error floors.
An interesting property of the HD-LDPCC-II is related to the characteristics of the (6,3) shortened Hamming code. Since the parity-check matrix of such code is cycle-4 free, local BP decoding for component codes is feasible, resulting in a negligible performance loss for the overall doped LDPCC. In figure 5 the gap between BCJR-based decoding and BP-based decoding is smaller than 0.1 dB.
The approach used in the design of a third code, a (2048,928) HD-LDPCC, was based on density evolution. Here, we fixed the maximum variable node degree to 4 and we chose as doping code a (16,11) extended Hamming code. An heuristic search for the remaining constraint nodes degrees and for node distributions has been performed, with the aim of lowering the decoding threshold. Following this method, we designed a code with (approximate) threshold at Eb/No = 0.68 dB. For such a code, the overall number of constraint nodes is 736: 96 are related to the (16,11) extended Hamming code, 640 are conventional degree-7 check nodes. On the variable node side, the number of degree-2 variable nodes is 1088; the remaining variable nodes are all of degree four. In figure 6, the EXIT chart [15] at the threshold for this nodes distribution is provided, as well as the decoding trajectory.
In the bipartite graph design, each variable node has one edge connected to a doped node. The resulting code possesses a good decoding threshold and a low error floor. In figure 7, the performance is compared with a (2048,1024) ARA code [17] (with repetition rate equal to 4). The threshold of the ARA code is at Eb/No = 0.56. For both codes, the maximum number of iterations was set to 50. The performance loss of the doped LDPCC code (with a BCJR decoder for doped nodes) in the waterfall region, is consistent with the DE analysis. However, the HD-LDPC
code does not show an error floor down to FER=5 x 10-7.
A simulation has been performed using a simpler Chase-

modified algorithm decoder for doped nodes. The doped nodes SISO processor used for the simulation is the one described in [4]. The number of test patterns was 16, while the value of the feedback coefficient was set to 0.5. The coefficient 3 is constant and equal to 1. For the meaning of such parameters, we refer to [4]. The use of such a simplified decoder for doped nodes results in a loss of 0.1 dB as shown in figure 7, although the loss will in general depend on the code.
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we provided a pragmatic design technique and a decoding algorithm for short Tanner codes. We presented a density evolution analysis based on the Gaussian approximation, showing how it can be exploited in the design of codes characterized by good performance in both error floor and waterfall regions. The pragmatic approach for the code design consists of the introduction (doping) of Hamming nodes in LDPCC with good thresholds.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to acknowledge Prof. Marco Chiani of the University of Bologna.

10-0

10,

T 1- ''

102

io3

--EG LDPCC, BP, Imax=50 --* HD-LDPCC-I, BCJR, hnax=50_
::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::: :::::::::::::::::::::::

i5

io07

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

Eb NO [dB]

Fig. 4. Frame Error Rate of the (512,160) HD-LDPCC-I compared to an Euclidean Geometry code.

REFERENCES
[1] D. J. C. MacKay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399-431, 1999.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, "Near shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes," in Proc. ICC'93, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993.

5 of 6
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10° -

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

4.0

Eb/NO [dB]

100

10°

ARA repeat-4 code BP max50
-o-HD-LDPCC - BCJR - Imax=50

HD-LDPCC - Chase mod. - Imax=50-

102

03
.A
10

IlUn-I 4

o-6i

10-7

0.(,0

0.5

1.0

1.5

2.0

2.5

3.0

3.5

Eb/NO [dB]

Fig. 5. Frame Error Rate comparison between the (512,160) HD- Fig. 7. Frame Error Rate of the (2048,928) HD-LDPCC compared to

LDPCC-I based on (8,4) extended Hamming codes compared and the a (2048,1024) Accumulate-Repeat-Accumulate code, with BCJR-based

(511,140) HD-LDPCC-II based on (6,3) shortened Hamming code.

and Chase-modified-based decoding for the component code.

Ia, Ie
Fig. 6. Mutual Information EXIT chart and decoding trajectory for the (2048,928) HD-LDPCC node's distributions, at the threshold.
[3] P. Elias, "Error-free coding," IRE Trans.Inform.Theory, vol. PGIT4, pp. 29-37, Sept. 1954.
[4] R. Pyndiah, "Near optimum decoding of product codes: Block turbo codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, pp. 1003-1010, Aug. 1998.
[5] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, "Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, Nov. 2001.

[6] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, "Progressive edgegrowth tanner graphs," in GLOBECOM, San Antonio, Texas, Nov. 2001, pp. 995-1001.
[7] R. Tanner, "A recursive approach to low complexity codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
[8] M. Lentmaier and K. S. Zigangirov, "Iterative decoding of generalized low-density parity-check codes," in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Boston, USA, Aug. 1998.
[9] J. Boutros, 0. Pothier, and G. Zemor, "Generalized low density (Tanner) codes," in Proc. ICC'93, Vancouver, Canada, June 1999.
[10] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F Jelinek, and J. Raviv, "Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 20, pp. 284-287, March 1974.
[11] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, "Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.
[12] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, "Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a gaussian approximation," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657-670, Feb. 2001.
[13] H. E. Gamal and A. R. Hammons, "Analyzing the turbo decoder using the gaussian approximation," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 671-686, Feb. 2001.
[14] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, "Iterative turbo decoder analysis based on density evolution," IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 19, pp. 891-907, May 2001.
[15] S. ten Brink, "Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 17271737, Oct. 2001.
[16] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, "Design of lowdensity parity-check codes for modulation and detection," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, pp. 670-678, Apr. 2004.
[17] A. Abbasfar, K. Yao, and D. Disvalar, "Accumulate repeat accumulate codes," in Proc. IEEE Globecomm, Dallas, Texas, Nov. 2004.

6 of 6
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:46:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

