IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

2977

Partition-and-Shift LDPC Codes
Jin Lu1, Member, IEEE,and José M. F. Moura2, Fellow, IEEE
Sun Microsystems, Lafayette, CO 80026 USA Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890 USA
This paper describes a new type of regular structured low-density parity-check (LDPC) code: the partition-and-shift LDPC (PS-LDPC) code. PS-LDPC codes can be easily designed to have large girth. The code construction is simple to explain: we divide the bit and check nodes in the Tanner graph into subsets and connect nodes in these subsets according to a set of parameters called shifts. We derive a general theorem on the shifts to prevent cycles that are harmful to LDPC decoding. This theorem provides a methodology to design PS-LDPC codes with arbitrary column weight and large girth . Simulation results over EPR4 channels demonstrate the good bit-error rate performance of PS-LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Error floor, girth, low-density parity-check (LDPC).

I. INTRODUCTION

H IGH-RATE low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are the focus of intense research in magnetic recording

because, when decoded by the iterative sum-product algorithm,

they show performance close to the Shannon Capacity [1].

LDPC codes can be described by a bipartite graph called a

Tanner graph [2]. The length of the shortest cycle in a Tanner

graph is referred to as its girth . Since large girth improves

the bit-error performance of the codes, leads to more efficient

decoding, and guarantees large minimum distance [2], LDPC

codes with large girth are particularly desired.

Structured LDPC codes reduce the encoder and decoder com-

plexities. We only discuss here a few typical techniques to de-

sign structured LDPC codes. Reference [3] designs LDPC codes

based on finite geometries. Codes constructed in this way have

girth 6. Another well-known method to construct structured reg-

ular LDPC codes is based on balanced incomplete block designs

(BIBD) [4], [5]. BIBD-based codes are well structured, free of

4-cycles, i.e., their girth is

, and achieve a very high code

rate. For a more expansive review of work on structured LDPC

codes, please refer to the overviews in [6] and [7].

In this paper, we describe a class of structured regular

LDPC codes with large girth and high code rates, called par-

tition-and-shift LDPC (PS-LDPC) codes, and explore their

error-correcting performance in magnetic recording channels.

II. CODE CONSTRUCTION

We briefly introduce PS-LDPC codes. For their detailed con-

struction please refer to [8] and [9]. Let be the set of all check

nodes and the set of all bit nodes in a Tanner graph. Divide

into disjoint subsets of equal size provided that the code

block length

, where is a natural number (not neces-

sarily a prime number). We index the check nodes in each subset

from 0 to . Similarly, partition into disjoint subsets

of equal size and index the bit nodes in each subset from 0 to

.

PS-LDPC codes, as defined in [8] and [9], are LDPC codes

that satisfy the following assumptions.

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2005.854446

Fig. 1. Tanner graph for PS-LDPC code.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. (a) Closed path in shift matrix S. (b) Six-cycle in Tanner graph with
six associated shifts S ; S ; S ; S ; S ; S .

1) Check nodes: Each check node is connected to bit nodes in different bit node subsets. The check nodes in the same check node subset are connected to distinct bit nodes in the same bit node subsets.
2) Bit nodes: Each bit node is connected to check nodes in different check node subsets. The bit nodes in the same
bit node subset are connected to distinct check nodes in the same check node subsets. 3) Shifts: Every check node, indexed by in the th check node subset, is connected to the bit node indexed by

in the th bit node subset, where

and

.

The operator in assumption 3) represents modulo- addition.

Similarly, we represent modulo- subtraction by . The param-

eters

in assumption 3) are

called shifts. We collect all the shifts in an

matrix

called the shift matrix

. For example, Fig. 2(a) shows

a shift matrix. Fig. 1 shows the Tanner graph for a PS-LDPC

code where all the check nodes are divided into three check node

subsets and all the bit nodes are partitioned into four-bit node

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:41:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

subsets. In each subset (check node subset or bit node subset),

there are three nodes.

Code Rate: We can design PS-LDPC codes with any desired

values for the column weight and the row weight . For a

regular code, ignoring the effect of a few linearly dependent

parity-check equations, the code rate is well approximated by

, which means that we can generate PS-LDPC

codes with any practical desired code rate by simply choosing

appropriate values for and . For example, if a

and column-weight-3 PS-LDPC code is desired, set

and

.

Fig. 3. Constructing S matrix: Step 1. Fig. 4. Constructing S matrix: Step 2.

III. CYCLES AND SHIFTS

By construction, PS-LDPC codes are characterized by shifts

. Since our goal is to elimi-

nate those short cycles in Tanner graphs, we first relate cycles

in Tanner graphs to shifts .

Before presenting this relationship, we first introduce nota-

tion. A closed path in is defined to be a sequence of connected

alternating vertical and horizontal lines such that the last line in

the sequence terminates at the beginning of the first line and ver-

tices of the closed path are entries of . The length of a closed

path is the number of lines it contains. As an illustration,

Fig. 2(a) depicts a closed path (solid line) in a shift matrix . Its

six vertices are

, and . Since this

closed path contains six lines, its length is six.

Next, we show the correspondence between cycles in Tanner

graphs and shifts in the following theorem.

Theorem 1 (2t-CYCLE): The Tanner graph for a PS-LDPC

code contains at least one cycle if and only if there exists

a closed path of length in the shift matrix such that

its vertices

satisfy the shift condition

Fig. 5. Constructing S matrix: Step 3.

H Fig. 6. for a (6075, 3, 27) PS-LDPC code with rate 8/9 and girth 8.

IV. DESIGN OF PS-LDPC CODES WITH LARGE GIRTH

We present next an example to illustrate how to find a shift

matrix

that avoids cycles of length up to .

We want to build a 3 6 shift matrix whose associate

PS-LDPC code (its Tanner graph) has girth 10. The size of

each node subset is set to be 150.

Initially, all the 18 shifts in the shift matrix are undeter-

mined, as shown in Fig. 3.

In the next step, we randomly choose values in between 0 and

149 for the entries in the first row and first column of . Next,

we determine the value of . Since forms a length-four

closed path (solid line in Fig. 4) with the already existing shifts

, and , we need to check whether the four shifts

, and violate the shift condition in Theorem

1. For instance, we choose

, then

. Hence, the shift

Proof: We omit the proof here. For details, please refer to condition is met. We have to choose another value of . Say

[8].

We illustrate Theorem 1 with an example. As shown in

Fig. 2(a), the six shifts

, and

are corners of a closed path of length six (solid line) in

. By Theorem 1, if the shift condition is violated, i.e.,

this time we choose

, then

. Hence, the shift

condition is violated. We fix the value of to be 85. This

process is shown in Fig. 4.

This process is repeated until we finally generate a shift ma-

, then trix that is free of cycles shorter than ten, as shown in Fig. 5.

the six-cycle shown in Fig. 2(b) does not exist in the Tanner After finding a shift matrix , we can construct a PS-LDPC

graph. Similarly, by choosing appropriate shifts

for code from the resulting matrix.

and

that violate the shift Similarly, Fig. 6 shows the 675 6075 parity-check matrix

condition in Theorem 1, we can eliminate cycles with length for a (6075, 3, 27) PS-LDPC code with rate

and girth

.

8. The matrix is developed from a 3 27 matrix generated

When

and

, where and are column and row by the method described above.

weights of the parity-check matrix, respectively, by choosing As stated before, PS-LDPC codes can be designed with large

appropriate shifts

we can design PS-LDPC codes with girth and any desired code rate. However, by forcing PS-LDPC

girth up to 12. For larger and , we can generate PS-LDPC codes to have large girth, we lose some flexibility in choosing

codes with higher girth [8].

the block size. A PS-LDPC code with column weight , row

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:41:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LU AND MOURA: PARTITION-AND-SHIFT LDPC CODES

2979

have a performance comparable to that of a random LDPC codes

free of four cycles.

We have studied in Fig. 7 PS-LDPC codes with column

weight

. Next, we study PS-LDPC codes with column

weight . The plot in Fig. 8 compares the BER performance

for a column weight

PS-LDPC code with girth 8 (solid

line) with a random LDPC code (no four cycles) with column

weight 4 (dashed line). Both codes have the same block length

32 760 and the same code rate 8/9. The slope of the BER curve

for the PS-LDPC code decreases faster with SNR than that of

random LDPC code. At low to moderate SNR, both codes have

similar BER performance.

Fig. 7. BER performance: PS-LDPC code, column weight 3, girth 8, and rate 8/9 versus same size random LDPC code free of four cycles.

VI. CONCLUSION
We present PS-LDPC codes in this paper. They are particularly suitable for future high-density data storage systems due to the following reasons demonstrated in the paper.
1) They can be systematically constructed with high code rates and large girth.
2) Their parity-check matrix is based on a much smaller matrix—the shift matrix , which reduces the memory requirements in hardware implementation.
3) Their BER performance outperforms random codes at high SNR. We observe that they can alleviate the error floor.

Fig. 8. BER performance: PS-LDPC code, column weight 4, girth 8, and rate 8/9 versus same size random LDPC code free of four cycles.

weight , girth , and block size should follow the bound

proposed in [10]:

. The exact

value of code block size can be found by computer search.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

We study by simulation the bit-error rate (BER) of large-girth

PS-LDPC codes in EPR4 channels. For the purpose of compar-

ison, we also show the BER of random LDPC codes free of

four cycles [1] that have the same size and same code rate as

the PS-LDPC codes we constructed. The signal-to-noise ratio

(SNR) definition we use is

, where

denotes the user bit energy and

is the two-sided power

spectral density.

Fig. 7 shows the BER of a PS-LDPC code with girth 8 and

the BER of a fiour-cycle free-random LDPC code in an EPR4

channel. Both codes have column weight

, block length

6075, and code rate 8/9. In the high SNR, the PS-LDPC code

outperforms the random LDPC code when BER is less than

10 . The plots show that in this region the performance of the

random code has shown the omen of an error floor, while the

PS-LDPC code has not yet reached the error floor at this BER.

We also notice that at low to moderate SNR, PS-LDPC codes

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Data Storage Systems Center (DSSC), Carnegie Mellon University.
REFERENCES
[1] D. J. C. Mackay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[3] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[4] B. Vasic, E. M. Kurtas, and A. V. Kuznetsov, “Kirkman systems and their application in perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1705–1710, Jul. 2002.
[5] B. Vasic, E. M. Kurtas, and A. V. Kuznetsov, “LDPC codes based on mutually orthogonal Latin rectangles and their application in perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2346–2348, Sept. 2002.
[6] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, Jun. 2004.
[7] J. M. F. Moura, J. Lu, and H. Zhang, “Structured LDPC codes with large girth,” IEEE Signal Processing Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, Jan. 2004.
[8] J. Lu, J. M. F. Moura, and U. Niesen, “PS-LDPC Codes: Regular structure and arbitrary girth,” submitted for publication.
[9] J. Lu, J. M. F. Moura, and U. Niesen, “Grouping-and-shifting designs for structured LDPC codes with large girth,” in Proc. ISIT 2004, Chicago, IL, Jun. 27–July 2 2004.
[10] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
Manuscript received February 8, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:41:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

