A Computationally Efficient Selective Node Updating Scheme for Decoding of LDPC Codes
Enver Cavus, Babak Daneshrad UCLA Electrical Engineering Department
{cavus, babakgee.ucla.edu}

Abstract
In this paper, we introduce a computationally efficient selective node update algorithm for the decoding of lowdensity parity check codes. Unlike the standard sumproduct algorithm, where all bit and check nodes are updated at each decoding iteration, the developed algorithm only updates unreliable check and bit nodes. A simple reliability criteria is developed to determine the active bit and check nodes per decoding iteration. Based on the developed technique, significant computation reductions are achieved with very little or no loss in the
BER performance of the LDPC codes. At a WER of 10-5,
91.8% and 72.7% check node and 80% and 41% bit node computation reductions are obtained for a (96, 48) and a (504, 252) LDPC code, respectively. The proposed method can be implemented with a slight modification to the standard sum-product decoding algorithm with negligible additional hardware complexity. From a hardware point of view, the proposed algorithm offers power reductions proportional to the computation savings and it leads to higher decoding speeds in serial implementations by decreasing the number of required memory accesses.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes [1][2] have attracted great attention due to their near Shannon Limit performance and highly parallelizable decoding architecture based on the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA). Although LDPC codes achieve excellent BER performance compared to non-iterative counterparts, this coding gain advantage comes at a price of excessive implementation complexity and increased power consumption. Higher hardware complexity and power dissipation in turn hampers the SNR improvement provided by LDPC codes and hinders the widespread deployment of LDPC codes in low complexity and low power constrained systems such as wireless applications. Therefore, it is essential to develop reduced complexity LDPC decoding schemes while preserving the BER performance advantage of LDPC codes.
In the last decade, various complexity reduction schemes for decoding of LDPC codes have been studied. One of the main factors that affects the complexity of LDPC decoding algorithms is the computation complexity of bit and check

node operations. In [5], two reduced complexity decoding of LDPC codes based on a-posteriori probability algorithm and belief propagation algorithm was proposed. Neither algorithm requires any channel information and involves only addition and compare operations. In [6]-[10], alternative evaluations of the check node operation were explored, and different offset factors were analyzed to reduce the performance loss resulted from simplified check node processing. Depending on the simplifications introduced at the check node, BER performance of the decoding algorithm was degraded anywhere from 0.1 dB to 1 dB.
Another promising and more advantageous technique for lowering the complexity of the sum-product algorithm is to reduce the number of processed bit and check nodes per decoding iteration. Recently, based on a threshold method two similar techniques have been proposed [3][4]. The proposed techniques exploit the notion that a large number of bit nodes converge to their respective states, being in a 1 or 0 state, very rapidly and their bit reliability values become fairly stable for the rest of the decoding process. Therefore, all of the bit nodes whose bit reliability values exceed a predefined threshold can be deactivated to obtain computation reductions. Using the proposed threshold methods in [3][4], 40% and 60% computations savings were reported with minimal to no performance losses.
In this paper, we introduce a simpler yet more effective technique to reduce the average number of active computation nodes for the sum-product decoding algorithm. Compared to the earlier proposed schemes of [3][4], the proposed technique offers computation savings for both bit and check nodes, and provides greater complexity reductions. Unlike the standard sum-product algorithm, where all bit and check nodes are updated at each decoding iteration, the developed algorithm only updates unreliable check and bit nodes, hence, called selective node update (SNU) algorithm. A simple reliability criteria is developed to determine the active bit and check nodes per decoding iteration. Based on the SNU algorithm, significant computation reductions are achieved with very little or no loss in the BER performance of the LDPC codes. The method incurs minimal additional computational or hardware complexity and can be

1
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:47:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

implemented with a slight modification to the standard sum-product decoding algorithm.
The remainder of paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews the standard sum-product decoding of LDPC codes. Section III introduces the proposed complexity reduction scheme. Then, simulation results and the computation savings of the proposed technique for two different LDPC codes are presented in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. STANDARD LDPC DECODING
Low density parity check codes are linear binary block codes with parity check matrices containing mostly zeros and only small number of ones. LDPC codes can be described either by an MxN parity check matrix, H, or via a graphical representation called bipartite graph. Mrows of parity check matrix specify each of the M constraints on codeword bits and N columns define the codeword length. Similarly, bipartite graph contains N bit nodes, one for each bit (column of H) and M check nodes, one for each of the parity checks (row of H). Figure 1 illustrates the parity check matrix, H, and corresponding bipartite graph for a simple (7, 3) code, where bit nodes depicted using circles and check nodes depicted using squares. The check nodes are connected to bit nodes they check or in other words
check nodej is connected to a bit node i whenever element
hji in H is a 1.

vO vl v2 v3 v4 v5 v6
11 1 1 0 0 0 cO
H= 1 0 0 0 1 1 0 cl 1I1 0 1 0 0 0 c2
0 0 0 0 1 11 c3

77%

NV

tN
j

A.

Before describing the algorithm, the notation used in the
remainder of the paper is introduced. The set V(j)=(i:
Hj,i=1) defines the bit nodes that are connected to checkj
and the set of check nodes that are connected to bit i is
denoted as ,u(i) =(j: Hj i=l). A set V(j) with bit i excluded is referred by V(j) \ i and a set ,u(i) with check j excluded is denoted by ,u(i) \ j. Qij defines a message
sent from bit node i to check node j and Rjj refer to the
message that is passed from check nodej to bit node i. The
standard sum-product algorithm starts with an initialization step and then iterations continue by exchanging messages between bit and check nodes. Decoding is stopped when all the parities are satisfied or a maximum number of iterations is reached. The main steps of the decoder are summarized as follows.
1st Step: Initialization: Each bit node is assigned a
posteriori log-likelihood ratio, Li = InL ) I= yi
where pi (1) and pi (0) represents probability of being 1 and 0 for bit i, respectively. For an AWGN channel this
expression can be estimated by Li = 'y, where yi is the
2 72 received soft bit values and o2 is the variance of the channel.
2nd Step: Check Node Operation: The expression for
check node to bit node messages, Rji, is calculated
according to (1)

Rj,= ai,j 0 - 0 18

(1)

i E Vj\i

icEVj\i

where

Figure 1. Bipartite graph of a (7, 3) code.
The bipartite graph provides a visual representation of the parity check matrix H and assists in the understanding of the iterative soft decoding algorithm. The sum-product decoding algorithm works iteratively by passing messages on the edges of the associated bipartite graph. The messages are the Log-Likelihood Ratios (LLRs), where the sign of the message represent the binary digit and the magnitude denotes the reliability of the message.

a, = sign(Qij)

8, = Qij

qO(X

eX +I = log
x-

3rd Step: Bit Node Operation : The messages from the
check nodes arrive at the bit node and the outgoing messages are estimated based on (2).

QU

=

in

,

Pi P,

(1)
(0),

+

(2)

2
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:47:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In this step, the soft decision values, Q,, for each bit are
also estimated from (3), which are then used in the next
step for the estimation of hard decision values, ci .

I Q2 = in Pi (1) + ERjil jHZi

(3)

4th Step: Syndrome Check: The parity check operations,
cHT , is performed based on the hard decision variables, ci, from equation (4).

The initialization step of the proposed decoding method is the same as the standard sum-product algorithm. The remaining 3 steps of the proposed SNU method is summarized by the following pseudo code. In the pseudo code, MAX ITER is the preset maximum number of decoding iterations and NOT DONE condition is true as long as there are unsatisfied checks in the decoder.
While(iteration < MAX_ITER or NOT-DONE)
{
Do Syndrome-check;
For G fromO to M -1)

if Qri<s
i l otherwise

(4)

If cHT = 0 or the number of iterations equals the
maximum limit then the decoder is stopped else the decoder goes back to 2nd step and continues iterating.
III. SELECTIVE NODE UPDATE (SNU) ALGORITHM
In this section, we describe the proposed reduced
complexity selective node update algorithm for the sumproduct decoding of the LDPC codes. As described in Section II, the standard sum-product algorithm updates all the check and bit nodes. In the proposed scheme, we differentiate all the check and bit nodes as reliable and unreliable nodes and perform the check and bit node update operations only for the unreliable nodes.
The reliability and unreliability criteria are defined as follows. We denote a check node as an unreliable node simply if a check node is unsatisfied during the syndrome check step of a decoding iteration. Likewise, unreliable bit nodes are defined as the participant or neighboring bit nodes of one or more unreliable check nodes. The rest of the bit and check nodes are considered as reliable nodes and put in a passive mode during the iterative decoding process. In addition, if a previously unsatisfied check node becomes satisfied at a subsequent iteration, the decoder still considers that particular check node and its neighboring bit nodes to be unreliable. In other words, once a check or bit node is tagged as unreliable during a decoding iteration, they still get updated until the end of decoding. This is a particularly necessary precaution in the proposed technique. Updating the newly satisfied check node and its neighboring bit nodes in the subsequent iterations prevents the recently corrected error bits to go back to the error state.

if(unreliable _ checks[j] == True) then
Do check node_operations[j];
end if; }end for;
For (i from Oto N -1)
if(unreliable _ bits[i] == True) then
Do bit_node_operations[i];
end if; }end for;
}end while loop;
The proposed scheme requires only minimal additional complexity and can be implemented with a very slight modification to the standard sum-product decoding algorithm. For an LDPC code with an MxN parity check matrix, we use a length M and length N boolean vectors,
referred as unreliable checks[M] and unreliable_bits[N],
to keep track of the unreliable check and bit nodes, respectively. Whenever a check is unsatisfied in the syndrome check step of the decoding process, we set the corresponding check node entry to be TRUE in the unreliable check vector and all the neighboring bit nodes in the unreliable bits vector. A TRUE entry in the unreliable vectors cannot be overwritten as FALSE until a new decoding starts. This ensures to update the unreliable checks even though they might be satisfied in the subsequent iterations.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In the following, BER comparison of the proposed SNU algorithm with the standard SPA is provided for a (96, 48) and a (504, 252) LDPC code both taken from [11]. In the simulations, AWGN channel with zero mean and variance

3
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:47:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

No/ is assumed and BPSK modulation is employed. The 2
maximum decoding iteration limit is set to 50 and simulations are carried out until 100 word errors are collected for each SNR point.
In Figure 2 and Figure 3, BER and WER performance comparisons of the proposed selective node update decoder and standard sum-product algorithm are illustrated. As observed, the proposed algorithm very closely matches the performance of the standard SPA at all SNR points, and at most 0.1 dB performance degradation is introduced for both simulated codes.
(

achieved computation savings for bit nodes (BN) and check nodes (CN). The bit or check node computation complexity factor E) for each SNR point is defined as:

)N ) IAVE TAVE

(5)

where IAVE is the average number of decoding iterations
and TAVE is the average number of processed computation
(bit or check) nodes per decoding iteration. For the
standard SPA, TAVE equals to M or N depending on the
complexity calculation is done for check nodes or bit
nodes, respectively.
Table I. Comparison of average number of decoding iterations and computation savings of SNU decoding scheme and SPA algorithm

Figure 2. BER and WER performance comparison of the proposed algorithm with standard SPA for (96, 48) code.

0 45.95 42.9 34.3

91.6

33.2

10.9

1 32.68 33.7

33

90.1

29.1

3.22

2 16.0 17.7 27.4

83.1

36.8

4.24

3 6.27 7.22 20.6

72.9

50.5

12.6

4 3.28 3.22 14.5

59.2

70.3

39.5

5 2.38 1.86 9.82

44.3

84.0

63.9

6 1.90 1.21

6.17

29.8

91.8

80.2

Table II. Comparison of average number of decoding iterations and computation savings of SNU decoding scheme and SPA algorithm

0 50 49.75 187.8 489.4

25.8

3.38

1 39.9 43.2 183.7

484.8

21.0

-4.14

2 13 17.74 152.7

454.9

17.3

-23.1

3 5.7 7.28 110.6

393.5

43.9

0.28

4 3.96 4.56 78.1

317.6

64.3

27.4

4.5 3.47 3.7

64.5

277

72.7

41.3

Figure 3. BER and WER performance comparison of the proposed algorithm with standard SPA for (504, 252) code.
In Table I and Table II, the two algorithms are compared in terms of the average number of decoder iterations and

As it is observed from Table I and Table II, the number of average iterations for SNU is increased in most cases. SPA is expected to converge faster as the bit node reliabilities are improved more rapidly by processing all nodes, whereas the SNU algorithm does not improve LLR values
of reliable bit nodes further. The reduced IAVE values of

4
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:47:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the SNU algorithm in Table I at low BERs are likely due to poor error-correction capability of the (96, 48) code. For longer LDPC codes, SNU always converges slower compared to SPA due to processing fewer bit and check nodes.
Table I and Table II also presents the percentage of achieved computation savings for the SNU algorithm. The achievable computational savings are proportional to the SNR region of operation and remarkable savings are
possible for low WERs. At a WER of 10-5, for a (96,48)
code the SNU provided 91.8% reduction in the bit node computation and 80% reduction in the check node computation. The savings for a (504, 252) code were72.7 and 41%, respectively. As seen, the proposed scheme provides greater savings for check node computations. Due to computational complexity of check node operations, complexity reductions applied to check nodes are more valuable.

Personal Multimedia Communications (WPMC04), Abano Terme, Italy, September 2004. [5] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic and H. Imai, "Reduced Complexity Iterative Decoding of Low-Density Parity Check Codes Based on Belief Propagation", IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, pp. 673680, May 1999. [6] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, "Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes," IEEE Commun. Letters, vol. 6, pp. 208-210, May 2002. [7] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, A. H. Banihashemi, "On Implementation of MinSum Algorithm and Its Modifications for Decoding Low-Density ParityCheck (LDPC) Codes," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549-554, April 2005. [8] T. Theocharides, G. Link, F. Swankoski, N. Vijaykrishnan, M. J. Irwin, H. Schmit, "Evaluating alternative implementations for LDPC decoder check node function," Proceedings ofIEEE Computer society Annual Symposium on VLSI, pp. 77-82, Feb. 2004. [9] E. Eleftheriou, T. Mittelholzer, A. Dholakia, "Reduced-complexity decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes," IEE Electronics Letters, vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 102-104, Jan 2001. [10] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, and J.-L. Danger, "Lambda-Min Decoding Algorithm of Regular and Irregular LDPC Code," 3rd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, September 2003 [11] D. MacKay, "Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes," available at http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html

One limitation of the SNU algorithm is the relatively higher number of average iterations introduced at higher error rates, which can result in an increase in the computation complexity. As observed in Table II, at
WERs above 10-2, SNU decoding algorithm results in a
23% increase in the bit node computations as a result of higher number of average iterations. However, this is only
observed for bit node operations and it is above the region of operation for most applications.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, a very simple reduced complexity decoding technique is introduced for LDPC codes without degrading BER performance of the decoder. The proposed method can be implemented with a slight modification to the standard sum-product decoding algorithm with negligible additional hardware complexity. From a hardware point of view, the proposed algorithm offers power reductions proportional to the computation savings and it leads to higher decoding speeds in serial implementations by decreasing the number of required memory accesses. In addition, the proposed technique is easily combined with previous approaches of [3][4] to achieve even greater savings.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-density parity-check codes," Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, "Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse
matrices," IEEE Trans. Inf Theory, vol.45, no.2, pp.399-43 1, Mar. 1999.
[3] R. Bresnan, W. Marnane, and M. Sala, "Efficient low-density parity-check decoding," Proc. ofIrish Signals and Systems Conference, 2004, Belfast
[4] E. Zimmermann, G. Fettweis, P. Pattisapu, and P. K. Bora, "Reduced Complexity LDPC Decoding," 7th International Symposium on Wireless

5
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:47:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

