2980

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

An Improved Bit-Flipping Scheme to Achieve Run Length Control in Coded Systems
Zongwang Li, Member, IEEE, Jin Xie, and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, Senior Member, IEEE
Data Storage Systems Center, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

We propose an improved bit-flipping scheme that combines error-correcting codes such as low-density parity check codes with run length limit (RLL) constraints. In addition to its compatibility with soft decision decoding, the proposed scheme has the advantages of no error propagation and fixed block length. Testing with simulated data and real data show good performance. The loss in performance due to the introduction of RLL constraint is less than 0.1 dB at bit-error rate 10 6 and block-error rate 10 4.
Index Terms—Iterative detection, low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, run length limit.

I. INTRODUCTION

A VARIABLE rate with randomized

method is one

of the ways to achieve run length limit (RLL) constraint in

magnetic tape recording systems [1]. The encoding algo-

rithm monitors the incoming data stream for requirements such

as RLL constraints. If one of the requirements is violated, a bit

is inserted into the data stream. This process of inserting the

bits (where needed) makes it a variable rate scheme. During the

decoding stage, the decoded bits up to the current time instant

are inspected to determine if the current bit is an inserted bit

or not; if it is an inserted bit, it is skipped. Clearly, if the ear-

lier bit decisions are erroneous, it can result in error propaga-

tion. The main purpose of the RLL scheme is to ensure

that the encoded data contains adequate tracking and amplitude

information for reliable data detection and to prevent the pre-

amble pattern (used for timing recovery) from occurring during

the data field. Although the approach to RLL constraint is

effective, it has the disadvantages of variable rate and error prop-

agation. Furthermore, standard

decoding is not compat-

ible with the soft decoding needed by low-density parity check

(LDPC) codes being investigated for high-density data storage

systems because of their excellent error correction performance,

low complexity, and inherent parallel decoding architecture. Be-

cause of its outstanding error correction performance, an LDPC

decoder may be able to recover the codeword even if we delib-

erately flip bits in the coded sequence in order to satisfy RLL

constraints [2]. In addition to allowing soft decision decoding,

the bit-flipping scheme has the advantages of no error propaga-

tion and fixed block length. However, if the number of flipped

bits becomes too large, the LDPC decoder may not be able to

overcome these deliberate errors. In this paper, we improve the

performance of the bit-flipping scheme [2] by combining the bit

flipping with a randomizer.

In Section II, the improved LDPC coded system with

RLL constraint is discussed. Although we use LDPC codes for

error handling, any powerful error correction strategy can be

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2005.854457

Fig. 1. VR RLL encoding flowchart [1].

employed in conjunction with the bit-flipping scheme. We provide the simulation and real data test results in Section III. We conclude in Section IV.

II. LDPC CODED SYSTEM WITH BIT FLIPPING

A.

RLL Constraints

In the RLL scheme shown in Fig. 1, additional bits are inserted to the user bits to satisfy the RLL constraints. The encoding algorithm [1] monitors the incoming data stream for four different conditions: phase, null, amplitude, and preamble. The phase constraint ensures adequate transitions in the encoded data. The null constraint limits the number of consecutive zeros to only eight. The amplitude constraint ensures adequate amplitude content for automatic gain loop and the preamble constraint inhibits the preamble pattern from occurring in the data field. The encoder inserts one bit into the data stream when a constraint is violated. Two example insertion patterns are shown in

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:44:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: IMPROVED BIT-FLIPPING SCHEME TO ACHIEVE RUN LENGTH CONTROL

2981

Fig. 1. If the preamble constraint is violated at time with input

data , an extra bit with the same value of is inserted at time

between bit

and . If other constraints are vi-

olated at time with input data , an extra bit with the value

of twos complement of is inserted at time

between bit

and . In order to control the number of inserted bits,

a linear feedback shift register (LFSR), also called randomizer

[1], is used. The LFSR is initialized with a random 24-bit seed

value, which is recorded in the header field, enabling the de-

coder to unrandomize the data field.

B. LDPC Encoding With RLL Type Constraints

Although the

RLL approach is effective at satisfying

constraints with small overhead, it has the disadvantages of

variable block length and error propagation. Furthermore,

RLL constrained data is not compatible with the soft informa-

tion needed by LDPC decoders. To solve these problems, we

propose a new LDPC coded scheme that incorporates

RLL constraints.

The improvement we propose to the bit-flipping scheme [2]

is shown in Fig. 2. First, a user bit block is encoded (using

LDPC or other ECC schemes). Then, the codeword is XORed

(i.e., added modulo-2) with a pseudorandom binary sequence

generated by a LFSR with a certain initial value seed. The feed-

back connections of the LFSR (shown at the bottom of Fig. 2)

are governed by a generator polynomial [1]. Then, the RLL

type constraints are met by deliberately flipping bits (different

from the traditional approach of inserting bits) wherever

the constraints are violated. If the number of flipped bits exceeds

a predefined threshold, then a different LFSR sequence (gener-

ated by a different seed) is tried. Otherwise, the XORed sequence

as well as the seed of the LFSR sequence used are recorded. If

the number of XOR attempts exceeds a prechosen threshold, the

XORed sequence with the smallest number of flipped bits, along

with the corresponding seed value, is recorded. The seed can

also be protected by a short block error correcting code.

C. Iterative Detection and Decoding Scheme
To recover the data encoded by the system in Fig. 2, the iterative detection and decoding scheme shown in Fig. 3 is used. The channel detector is a symbol by symbol a posteriori probability (APP) detector (using either the Bahl–Cocke–Jelimek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm or the soft-output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) algorithm). The APP ratio in logarithm domain, also called logarithm likelihood ratio (LLR), is defined as

VR Fig. 2. LDPC encoder with RLL constraint.

VR Fig. 3. Iterative detection and decoding scheme for LDPC coding with
RLL type constraint.

where the second term is the a priori information of . The a priori term is zero if the binary inputs are equally probable. However, in iterative detection it represents the extrinsic information from the LDPC decoder. By using the BCJR [3] or SOVA algorithm [4], [5], the computation of (2) can be separated into a forward and backward calculation. Vector is the sequence of LDPC codeword XORed with a pseudorandom sequence and it has deliberately introduced errors (i.e., bit flips) to satisfy constraints. During the iterative detection and decoding, the LFSR seed value extracted from the header field is fed to the LFSR. Then, the LFSR reproduces the pseudorandom sequence
. , the LLR of , is separated into two vectors: the hard decision bit part

if if

(3)

and the reliability value

(4)

(1)
where is the received vector from the partial response (PR) readback channel with white Gaussian noise, and is the th element of the input channel bit vector . By using Bayes’s rule, (1) is further expressed as

The vector is then XORed with the pseudorandom sequence . The result is
(5)
Based on and , iterative LDPC decoding is performed using the sum product algorithm (SPA) [6]. If all checksums are zeros or if the maximum number of decoding iterations is reached, the LLR of codeword bit is calculated as [6]

(2)

(6)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:44:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

TABLE I

VR PERFORMANCE OF LDPC CODE WITH

RLL TYPE CONSTRAINT WITH

REAL DATA

VR Fig. 4. BER/BLER Performance of LDPC code with

RLL type

constraint for simulated data.

where

is the check node set connected to variable node ,

and

is the incoming LLR from check node

to

variable node . The corresponding decoded bit is

if if

(7)

The extrinsic information of variable node is

(8)

It also needs to be separated into the hard decision bit

if if

(9)

and the reliability value

a BLER of 10 . The loss is less than 0.1 dB at BER 10 and BLER 10 , when using the proposed scheme with 8 XOR attempts. Table I shows the results from real data acquired on a magnetic recording tape testbed at Carnegie Mellon University (configuration of the testbed shown in Table I). The RLL constrained system without LDPC code exhibits high BLER. The proposed scheme has no error for recording densities from 220 to 250 kb/i for several thousands of test blocks.

IV. CONCLUSION

We proposed an improved bit-flipping scheme of LDPC

coded system to achieve

RLL type constraints. In addi-

tion, we proposed an iterative detection and decoding scheme

for this scheme. The proposed scheme has good performance.

Furthermore, it has the advantages of no error propagation and

constant block length compared with the original

RLL

approach.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported in part by grants from the Information Storage Industry Consortium (INSIC) EHDR program and the Tape program.

(10)
To perform iterative detection, is XORed with the LFSR output sequence and then fed to the channel detector along with
as the extrinsic information of channel detector. The LDPC decoder outputs the decoded bits if all checksums are zeros or if both the maximum number of detection and decoding iterations are achieved.

III. SIMULATED AND REAL DATA RESULTS

Fig. 4 shows results using simulated data. A quasi-cyclic

LDPC code with code length 4608 and rate 8/9 [7] is used.

Fig. 4 shows the bit-error rate (BER) and block-error rate

(BLER) performance of the proposed scheme over an ideal

EPR4 channel corrupted by additive white Gaussian noise

(AWGN). The LDPC coded system with RLL type con-

straints and one XOR attempt exhibits 0.6 dB signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR) loss (compared with the case of no

RLL

type constraints) at a BER of 10 and 0.8 dB SNR loss at

REFERENCES
[1] M. D. Gray, “Variable rate bit inserter for digital data storage,” U.S. Patent 5 815 514, Sep. 1998.
[2] B. Vasic and K. Pedagani, “Run-length-limited low-density Parity check codes based on deliberate error insertion,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1738–1743, May 2004.
[3] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. IT–20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[4] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[5] A. Ghrayeb and W. E. Ryan, “Concatenated coding and iterative SOVA decoding with PR4 signaling,” Proc. IEEE ICC2000, vol. 2, pp. 597–601, Jun. 2000.
[6] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM’01, vol. 2, pp. 1036–1036, Nov. 2001.
[7] Z. Li and B. V. K. Vikayakumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic lowdensity parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., vol. 2, Nov. 2004, pp. 1990–1994.
Manuscript received February 6, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:44:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

