IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

3847

A Generalized LDPC Decoder for Blind Turbo Equalization
Jacob H. Gunther, Madan Ankapura, and Todd K. Moon, Senior Member IEEE

Abstract—The equations for iteratively decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are generalized to compute joint probabilities of arbitrary sets of codeword bits and parity checks. The standard iterative LDPC decoder, which computes single variable probabilities, is realized as a special case. Another specialization allows pairwise joint posterior probabilities of pairs of codeword bits to be computed. These pairwise joint probabilities are used in an expectation–maximization (EM) based blind channel estimator that is ignorant of the code constraints. Channel estimates are input to a turbo equalizer that exploits the structure of the LDPC code. Feeding pairwise posterior probabilities back to the channel estimator eliminates the need to average across time for channel estimation. Therefore, this scheme can be used to equalize very long codewords, even when the channel is time varying. This blind turbo equalizer is evaluated through computer simulations and found to perform as well as a channel-informed turbo equalizer but with approximately twice the number of turbo iterations.
Index Terms—Blind equalization, equalization, intersymbol interference, iterative methods, LDPC codes, turbo equalization.

I. INTRODUCTION

B LIND identification and equalization of intersymbol interference (ISI) channels have received considerable atten-

tion over the last three decades and are now mature subjects. For

reference, we cite only the books [1], [2] and survey articles [3],

[4]. A narrow segment of the prior work in this area, and one not

emphasized in the literature cited above, is a scheme that iterates

between symbol and channel estimation [5]–[8]. First, an initial

channel estimate is used to compute tentative symbol decisions

or soft information. For example, channel estimates can be used

to compute a posteriori symbol probabilities given observations

,

, via the Bahl, Cocke, Jelinek, and Raviv (BCJR)

algorithm [9], where is the symbol transmitted at time ,

, and is the symbol alphabet. Alternatively, maximum

likelihood symbol information can be computed via the Viterbi

algorithm (VA) (hard-output [10] or soft-output [11] VA). The

availability of channel estimates also allows reduced complexity

suboptimal filter-based equalization using nonlinear structures

such as decision-feedback equalizers. All of these techniques

Manuscript received August 16, 2004; revised December 9, 2004. Part of this work was presented at the IEEE DSP Workshop, Taos, NM, August 2004. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Dr. Markus Rupp.
J. H. Gunther and T. K. Moon are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322-4120 USA (e-mail: jake@ece.usu.edu; todd.moon@ece.usu.edu).
M. Ankapura was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322-4120 USA. He is now with Visionaire Technology Corporation, Fremont, CA 94538 USA (e-mail: madana@visionaire-tech.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2005.855396

offer superior performance compared with linear filter equalizers on channels having spectral nulls [12].
The second step in iterative blind equalization uses symbol information provided by the equalizer to compute a refined estimate of the channel. The next iteration starts by feeding the new channel estimate back to the equalizer. The whole process is repeated iterating between channel estimation and equalization until some stopping criterion is satisfied. Most prior work in iterative blind equalization derives from expectation–maximization (EM) estimation of the channel. The EM iterations are guaranteed to converge to a local maximum of the joint likelihood function [13]. With good initial conditions or prior information, convergence to the true channel and symbols is possible. Iterative blind equalization does not exploit the structure of error correcting codes. Fortunately, prior information is easily incorporated into iterative schemes, and therefore, iterative blind channel identification is well suited for a combination with turbo equalization.
Turbo equalization [14], [15] is an iterative process that combats ISI of transmitted data that is protected by forward error correction (FEC) coding. Soft information about symbols, or equivalently codeword bits, is exchanged between an equalizer and a probabilistic FEC decoder. Using knowledge of the channel, the equalizer collects together information about a codeword bit from local parts of the received signal and feeds this information to the decoder. Exploiting the code structure, the decoder combines information about a transmitted symbol from distant parts of the received signal and sends this information to the equalizer. During this exchange of information, care must be taken to feed back only extrinsic information [16], [17].
A restrictive assumption made in most work to date on turbo equalization is that the coefficients of the ISI channel are known. Indeed, evaluating the likelihood of measurements given transmitted symbols (needed for both BCJR and VA equalizers) requires knowledge of the channel coefficients. This paper investigates a scheme in which EM-based iterative blind channel identification and turbo equalization are combined. The EM-based channel estimator is incorporated into the turbo equalizer loop. Computing the optimum channel coefficients reduces to solving a linear system of “normal” equations where the coefficient matrix is a function of the second-order statistics of the transmitted symbol sequence. Exact evaluation of second-order statistics requires knowledge of pairwise joint probabilities of the transmitted symbols, but existing probabilistic decoders compute only single variable marginal probabilities.

1053-587X/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:42:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

An important contribution of this paper is the derivation hidden Markov model for the noisy channel output. Efficient on-

of a generalized LDPC decoder that computes joint posterior line filtering and smoothing algorithms were developed. White

probabilities of arbitrary sets of codeword bits. The standard et al. [24] used approximations to reduce the complexity of the

low-density parity-check (LDPC) decoder, which computes sequential EM to be comparable to recursive least-squares fil-

posterior probabilities of single codeword bits (originally tering. Neither of these two methods assume or exploit code

derived by Gallager [18]) may be realized as a special case. structure. While a full-complexity BCJR equalizer is used in

Another specialization allows pairwise joint probabilities to be this paper, a reduced-complexity turbo equalizer could be de-

computed. With joint probabilities in hand, the second-order veloped by replacing BCJR processing with a lower complexity

statistics (cross-correlations) may be computed and used in algorithm, such as that in [23] and [24].

EM-based blind channel estimation.

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II

An advantage of using joint probabilities to evaluate second- shows how the LDPC decoder can be modified to output pair-

order statistics rather than estimating them using sample av- wise joint posterior probabilities. Section III briefly reviews

erages is the opportunity for estimating and turbo equalizing EM-based channel estimation that forms the basis of several

time-varying channels. Fundamentally, turbo equalization is a approaches to iterative blind channel identification and equal-

block processing technique in which the block length is equal ization. A structure for blind turbo equalization is proposed in

to the length of the codewords. The symbol sequences for turbo Section IV. Simulation results comparing the proposed scheme

and LDPC codes may be as long as to symbols. Over and a channel informed turbo equalizer are the subject of

this many symbol periods, channel variation may occur. The Section V.

availability of pairwise joint probabilities makes it possible to

compute a separate channel estimate for every symbol period.

II. MODIFIED LDPC DECODER

This could also be done using short-term sample averages, but averaging does not account for the structure of the LDPC code. On the other hand, the pairwise joint probabilities use the knowledge of the code and should produce more reliable second-order statistics.
Combined blind channel identification and turbo equalization has been investigated previously. Ha and Honary [19] build

This section develops iterative equations that are a generalization of the standard LDPC iterative decoder. Iterative equations for computing general high-order joint posterior probabilities are derived. Pairwise joint posterior probabilities as well as the standard marginal posterior probabilities will be obtained as special cases.

on [5] by incorporating the structure of turbo codes into the EM estimation equations. The covariance matrix is computed as a sample average in which the likelihood of the observations weights the data. In this paper, pairwise joint probabilities are used to evaluate expectations instead of using weighted averages.
Garcia-Frias and Villasenor [20] investigate turbo equalization of unknown ISI channels using a trellis to represent the channel. This leads to a hidden Markov model (HMM) for the noisy channel output, and the Baum–Welch algorithm [21] provides estimates of the HMM parameters that include the ISI-corrupted received signal prior to adding noise, as discussed in [6]. Therefore, an explicit channel estimate is not needed but may be computed using the estimates of the channel output. In addition, symbol estimation is a side process carried out after the Baum–Welch iterations have reached a fixed point. In the present paper, the soft-output BCJR equalizer relies on a channel estimate that is obtained using EM and LDPC joint probabilities.
Lopes and Barry [22] use the blind iterative channel estimator in [8] that is based on EM. A decision feedback equalizer is designed using the channel estimate, and using a Gaussian model of the equalized output, a low-complexity soft-output equalizer is obtained and used in a turbo equalizer loop. In the development of the channel estimator in [8], a sample average was used to replace a certain ensemble average. In the present work, single-variable marginal and pairwise joint probabilities are used to evaluate all ensemble averages.

A. Generalized LDPC Decoder

We begin with the following definitions. A binary LDPC code

may be defined by check equations involving codeword

bits. The “low-density” designation of LDPC codes stems from

the fact that while is typically very large

, only

a few bits (four to six) are involved in each check equation.

For each

, let be the set of indexes of

code bits that participate in the th check equation. Denoting

the parity checks by , we have

(mod

2 sum). The set of LDPC codewords is defined to be all se-

quences of bits that satisfy the parity check equations, i.e.,

. For

each

, let

be the set of

indexes of parity checks in which the th bit participates. The

set contains the indexes of all the 1s on the th row of the

parity check matrix , whereas gives the indexes of all the

1s in the th column. Another notational device used further

ahead in the decoder derivation is the set

, which is the set

without the index . There is one set

corresponding

to each nonzero element of . For example,

corresponds

to the nonzero element in the th row and th column of .

The subscript will only be used to refer to a check , and

will only be used to refer to a bit in the codeword.

The following shorthand is used to refer to sets of checks

and bits:

and

. In

addition, the notation

refers

to a specific pattern of zeros and ones. In the following, the

probability of events such as

(all checks with

Krishnamurthy and Moore [23] proposed blind channel iden-

are satisfied) and

(the bits in are equal to the

tification and input estimation based on sequential EM and a pattern of zeros and ones in ) will be considered.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:42:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUNTHER et al.: GENERALIZED LDPC DECODER FOR BLIND TURBO EQUALIZATION

3849

To clarify the notation introduced above, the following example considers a small LDPC code.
Example 1: Let

be a binary parity check matrix for a

,

LDPC

code. The and sets are given below along with the

parity check equations

which is the joint probability that an arbitrary set of codeword

bits is equal to the specific zero-one pattern , given that

the checks are all satisfied and given the data . This extends

(3) to a joint probability. The choice of the sets and is

free. To examine the joint probability of the event

, it

would seem natural to condition on all checks of all the bits in

, leading to

. Example 2 illustrates this idea

for a small LDPC code.

Example 2: For the LDPC code in Example 1, to compute

the pseudo-posterior

, set

, and let

.

In order to compute the joint pseudo-posteriors in (4), gener-

alized iterative LDPC decoding alternates between the compu-

tation of the two probabilities defined by

(5)

(6)

where

(7)

Corresponding to each nonzero element in , there is a set

, which is the set without the index . For example,

. The sets

will be used further ahead

in the decoder derivation.

To compute the pairwise joint posterior probability

, set

. Then,

may

be rewritten using the definitions above as

,

where

, and

.

The standard LDPC decoder [18] alternates between the com-

putation of two sets of probabilities. The first

Observe that

and

in (5) and (6) are

extensions to joint probabilities of the corresponding single

variable probabilities used in standard LDPC decoding in (1)

and (2).

Code bits that do not participate in the same parity check

equation may be approximated as being independent. Therefore,

the joint probability of an arbitrary set of bits may be factored

into the product of lower order joint probabilities of sets of in-

dependent bits. For this reason, the following development may

be restricted to the case where

in (5).

Note that the argument of is the parity

of and not the particular pattern of zeros and ones in . To

see why, split the calculation of the th check into the two terms

(1)

. Therefore, the probability that

, given the bits

is the probability that bit

, given that all the parity checks

associated with the th bit, except for , are satisfied and given

the observations

. The second probability

(2)

, depends on the sums and

but not on the specific

zero-one pattern in .

Example 3: This example continues Examples 1 and 2. Let

and

. Then,

,

and

. The probability

that

is the probability that the th parity check is satisfied, given that the th bit is equal to . Using these probabilities, the so-called pseudo-posterior probabilities

(3)

may be calculated [25]. By conditioning on the event that

all the parity checks associated with bit are satisfied, the

pseudo-posterior

summarizes all the information about

given

,

is the probability that

, which

depends only on the sum

.

The connection between

and

is fairly

easy to derive once certain independence assumptions are

employed. Application of Bayes rule allows

to be

written as

bit available by knowing the code. Hard decisions based on the pseudo-posteriors may be used to determine whether all the parity checks are satisfied. If so, a valid codeword has been found, and decoding iterations stop. Note that the standard LDPC decoder produces only single-variable marginal posterior probabilities on the codeword bits .
We propose to generalize the standard LDPC decoder to compute joint pseudo-posterior probabilities such as

(8)

where

is a normalization constant

chosen to make

sum to one. Throughout the de-

coder development, will be used to denote a normalization

constant wherever it appears. The value of may be inferred

from context.

The central issue is how to simplify the probabilities in (8).

Two assumptions that produce the greatest mathematical sim-

(4) plification are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:42:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3850

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

A1) All the checks in are independent given the bits . A2) The bits are independent, given . These assumptions are made partly for mathematical expediency, and the success of LDPC decoding is a testament to their effectiveness. However, they are not without some intuitive justification. For instance, the checks in are sums of code bits. Conditioning on the code bits in common among the checks ,
makes the checks functions of disjoint sets of other code bits, leading to independence of the checks. As discussed at length in [25], assumptions A1) and A2) are not actually true due to the presence of loops in the Tanner graph associated with the LDPC code. However, the assumptions provide the mechanism for making progress on the otherwise difficult problem of factoring joint probability distributions in a way that leads to a low-complexity iterative decoding algorithm. See [25] for further details on these assumptions. Other assumptions could be made and would lead to different decoder algorithms.
Assumptions A1) and A2) allow the joint probabilities in (8) to be factored as

(9) (10)

where the definition of

in (6) was used to simplify

(9)–(10). If the checks in all depend on different sets of

bits (i.e., the sets ,

are disjoint), then A1) and

A2) are reasonable assumptions. Otherwise, checks are func-

tions of the common bits, and the assumptions lead to inaccu-

rate approximations.

Other equally valid lines of reasoning could be followed to

break the joint probability

into prod-

ucts of lower order joint probabilities. Knowledge of the sets

and could be used to guide the process. To be certain, the

way that

is factored at this point will

determine the probabilities that must be propagated during iter-

ative decoding and will thus influence the computational com-

plexity of the final algorithm. In the following development, the

results of assumptions A1) and A2) will be pursued. This dis-

cussion is meant to point out that alternative possibilities exist

and will be investigated in future research.

Equation (10) shows how to compute

, given

. To complement (10), we need to show how to

compute

, given the

. This may be done

by introducing some extra variables and marginalizing them

out as follows:

The sum in (11) is over all

possible sequences of zeros

and ones. Note that

is equal to one if

and is zero oth-

erwise. The codeword bits in the set

are assumed to be

independent and independent of the bits in . Therefore, (11)

simplifies to

(12)

Equation (10) computes

from

. To

complete the iterative decoder, we must find a computational

path starting with

and leading back to

that incorporates information about the code structure (parity

checks) along the way. Equation (12) does not quite fill

this requirement, but it could with the right approximation.

To this end, consider replacing

in (12) by

. Observe that the only

difference between these two probabilities is that

is conditioned on the event that certain checks are satisfied:

for

. Thus, the proposed substitution pro-

vides a computational path from

to

and

incorporates information about the code structure through

conditioning. Note that when substituting

into (12)

in place of

, we are free to condition on any set

of checks . The choice of will affect aspects of the final

decoding algorithm including what probabilities are computed,

the computational complexity of a single iteration, the con-

vergence rate, and possibly also the error performance of the

decoder. Further ahead, the value of corresponding to the

standard and the new modified LDPC decoder will be given.

The generalized decoder iterates alternately between

the calculation of (10) and (12). On the first iteration,

is set equal to the product of channel poste-

riors

, which is an approximation to (10)

in which

. In this paper, the communication

channel introduces ISI so that a soft output equalizer is placed

between the channel and the LDPC decoder, as shown in Fig. 1.

Therefore, the channel posterior probabilities

are replaced by the equalizer output extrinsic posterior probabil-

ities

. After accounting for the bit-to-symbol

mapping, these become probabilities on bits

,

. For multilevel and multiphase modulation schemes,

the conversion from symbol to bit posterior probabilities is

nontrivial and was considered in [26]. In the binary case con-

sidered here, we use

and

.

The calculation of

in (12) accumulates probability

(omitting the contribution from bits ) of all codewords for

which the bits

sum to

. The sum-product

nature of the calculation in (12) suggests that it may be evalu-

ated recursively in

multiply-accumulate steps. This

recursion is fully developed in the Appendix. The three steps

are as follows. First, compute

(11)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:42:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(13)

GUNTHER et al.: GENERALIZED LDPC DECODER FOR BLIND TURBO EQUALIZATION

3851

Fig. 1. Transmitter consisting of a LDPC encoder, bit flipper and symbol mapper, ISI channel, and additive white Gaussian noise. The blind turbo equalizer is also shown. The block labeled “EIC” is an extrinsic information computer.

TABLE I SUBSTITUTIONS TO RECOVER THE STANDARD LDPC DECODER
FROM THE GENERALIZED LDPC DECODER

TABLE II SUBSTITUTIONS TO COMPUTE PAIRWISE JOINT PROBABILITIES
FROM THE GENERALIZED LDPC DECODER

Second, form the product

(17)

(14) (18)

Third, compute

(15)
These probabilities in (15) are used in (10) to compute on the next iteration. A full iteration for computing
joint probabilities amounts to evaluating (13)–(15) and (10) in order.

B. Standard and Modified LDPC Decoders

The standard LDPC iterative decoder can be obtained as

a simplification of the above iteration. First, recall that the

goal of decoding is to compute the so-called pseudo-posteriors

. These probabilities may be obtained

from

using the replacements identified in Table I.

With these substitutions, (10) simplifies to

(19) (20)

Pairwise joint posterior probabilities will be required in

Section III for blind channel estimation. A reasonable prob-

ability to use is

,

which is the probability of two codeword bits given the data

and the condition that all the checks associated with both

bits are satisfied. This joint posterior probability is equal to

when

and

. Making

these substitutions in (10) gives the equation for calculating the

joint posteriors

The same substitutions give for the other equations in the iteration
(16)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:42:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005
TABLE III MODIFIED LDPC CODE ITERATIVE DECODING ALGORITHM

The

needed in the above calculation can be computed ities. Note that only the standard LDPC decoder steps are it-

using the following formulas that are obtained from those de- erated. After the final iteration, the joint probability steps are

rived previously with the substitutions

and computed. Therefore, calculation of pairwise joint probabilities

:

by the modified decoder is only slightly more complicated than

running the standard LDPC decoder. The iterations are stopped

(21) after a decoding success or because a preset maximum number of iterations has been reached.

(22) It should be clear that the choice for is arbitrary. The choice made above for the modified decoder was done for com-

(23) putational expediency. Another choice that leads to simple re-

sults is

. Then,

in the modified

(24) decoder can be computed as the product of terms

(25) and

that are computed by the standard decoder.

The purpose of this discussion is to stress the fact that there are

other choices for , and the choice made will affect the ad-

The final problem is choosing the set . Comparing the

equations for and in the standard decoder (19) and (20)

with the corresponding equations in the modified decoder (24)

and (25) suggests setting

. With this choice,

the computations involved in the standard decoder are reused

ditional complexity of generalized decoders beyond that of the standard decoder. The choice of may also impact the number of iterations required for convergence and could potentially introduce a bias into the probability calculations. These issues are the subject of ongoing investigations.

to compute quantities in the modified decoder. Additionally, the

only difference between of the two decoders is a single term in the product [compare (18) with (23)]. Therefore, the mod-

III. EM FOR BLIND CHANNEL IDENTIFICATION

ified decoder that calculates the pairwise joint posterior prob- This section briefly reviews the EM development. A data

abilities reuses much of the work done in the standard LDPC model for the equalization problem is established first. The

decoder iterations. The only additional work is the calculation transmitted symbols are obtained by mapping bits

of

in (23) and

,

in (21) and from the codeword to points in the symbol constellation .

(22). The choice of the sets , , and for the modified de- However, the presence of LDPC coding is ignored in the EM

coder are summarized in Table II.

development.

Table III lists the steps in the standard LDPC decoder plus the Let ,

be a sequence of independent and

steps required to compute the pairwise joint probabilities needed identically distributed (i.i.d.) symbols drawn from a constel-

for channel estimation. Steps marked by solid dots form the lation of points (complex numbers) and transmitted over a

standard LDPC decoder iterations. Steps marked by open cir- channel with finite impulse response ,

that

cles are used in the computation of pairwise joint probabil- may vary with time . The impulse response for

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:42:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUNTHER et al.: GENERALIZED LDPC DECODER FOR BLIND TURBO EQUALIZATION

3853

is assumed to be zero for all . The received signal , may be modeled as

(26)

where ,

is an i.i.d. sequence of Gaussian

random variables with zero-mean, variance and independent

from . The values

and

needed to compute

and

are as-

sumed to be zero. This requires the use of a zero prefix to be

inserted between LDPC codewords transmitted sequentially.

The vectors

and

in

(26) are defined for convenience. Note that is the conjugate

transpose of , whereas is the transpose of .

A maximum likelihood estimate of the channel response

at time based on local data

could be obtained by minimizing

. Unfortu-

nately,

is unknown. However, the likelihood function

is known, where

.

When applied to the problem of channel estimation, the EM

principle begins with an initial estimate and iteratively

minimizes

Note that (29) depends on second-order statistics of the symbols,

whereas (30) depends on the conditional mean (a first-order

statistic). If the true channel is time invariant, then letting

and

gives a single channel estimate that could

be used over the entire block of observations.

Probabilistic FEC decoders usually produce single variable

posterior probabilities of code bits such as

, where

. From these probabilities, using the bit-to-symbol

mapping, it is possible to obtain symbol probabilities such as

. Clearly, these types of probabilities may be used to

evaluate the expectations in (30)

However, evaluating the correlations in (29) requires pairwise

joint symbol probabilities such as

. For example

(31)

The joint symbol probabilities needed in (31) may be obtained

from the pairwise joint bit probabilities

. Besides the

generalized LDPC decoder developed in Section II, no previ-

ously described decoders output such joint probabilities.

IV. BLIND TURBO EQUALIZATION

(27) This section assembles the constituent parts of the blind turbo equalizer for LDPC protected data transmitted over

where is an estimate of obtained at iteration . For

time-varying channels, this optimization must be carried out

for each

. The iteration in (27) is guaran-

teed to converge to a local maximum of

[13]. Due

to the Gaussian assumption on the noise, the minimization

in (27) admits a closed-form solution as follows. (See also

[27].) The log-likelihood has the form

, where

, and

do not depend on . Neglecting the multiplicative and additive constants leads to the following objective:

time-varying ISI channels. The complete system is depicted in

Fig. 1. The equations for the BCJR algorithm are well known

[9]. The BCJR algorithm may be viewed as a process for con-

verting the likelihoods

for

into

the posteriors

for

and

all

. An initial estimate of the channel and the standard

deviation of the noise must be made available to BCJR. In this

paper, the noise standard deviation is assumed known; how-

ever, it may be estimated using EM, as in [27]. The transition

probabilities used in the BCJR algorithm may be viewed as

prior information about the channel input symbols for each

. On the first pass through the BCJR algorithm,

these probabilities are uniformly distributed for each .

Using the symbol-to-bit mapping, extrinsic probabilities

are computed from the BCJR output prob-

abilities by computing the logarithm of probability ratios,

in which minimization leads in turn to the following system of subtracting off the prior information, and then converting the

normal equations for the optimum

:

result back into a probability. In Fig. 1, this extrinsic informa-

tion calculation is performed in the blocks labeled “EIC.” The (28) extrinsic probabilities are delivered to the LDPC decoder, where

where

they are used as prior probabilities on the codeword bits. Using knowledge of the code, the LDPC decoder collects information

about the bit at time from distant parts of the received data

(29) block. It declares its belief about in the single variable output

probabilities

. Using the bit-to-symbol

map, extrinsic symbol probabilities

are com-

(30) puted and fed back to be used as prior probabilities (transition probabilities) in the BCJR algorithm. Besides computing single

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:42:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3854

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

variable posterior probabilities, the modified LDPC decoder

also computes the pairwise joint bit probabilities following

the steps shown in Table III. It should be noted that several

basic LDPC iterations are performed before computing the

joint probabilities, which are computed only after the final

LDPC iteration. These are converted to pairwise joint symbol

probabilities

. Both the

single symbol and pairwise joint symbol probabilities are used

in channel estimation, as outlined in (28)–(30).

A few comments regarding the computational complexity of

the overall process are in order. Assuming a binary constella-

tion, the complexity of the BCJR algorithm is on the order of

, which grows exponentially fast with the length of the

channel. The complexity of a single pass through the standard

LDPC decoder computes single variable posterior probabili-

ties. Therefore, the computational complexity is roughly on the

order of . However, the modified LDPC decoder has the addi-

tional burden of computing all pairwise joint probabilities.

For long LDPC codes, is in the range of to , which

makes computation and storage of joint probabilities very

difficult. Fortunately, since only local correlations are needed to

evaluate the covariance matrix in (29), only about of the

joint probabilities ever need to be calculated, and is typically

small.

Fig. 2. Probability of error versus SNR for the blind turbo receiver (dashed lines) versus a channel informed turbo equalizer (solid lines). Each curve is tagged to show the number of turbo iterations.

V. SIMULATIONS

The blind turbo equalizer that uses the modified LDPC

decoder was evaluated by computer simulation. A

length, rate

LDPC code was used. The codewords

were transmitted via binary phase shift keying (BPSK)

over a three-tap channel with impulse

response

. This is channel B

in [12] and possesses a spectral null near normalized frequency

. Additive white Gaussian noise was added to the channel

output to produce the desired signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in the

observation sequence . The length of the channel model used

for blind turbo equalization was set to

.

To avoid simulating the LDPC encoder, the all-zero message was used. This resulted in an all-zero codeword and a sequence of symbols for transmission over the channel. The all sequence biases the results, however, since the signal energy out

Fig. 3. Channel coefficient estimates (solid lines) versus turbo iteration averaged over 500 trials. The dashed lines are the true channel coefficients. The shaded regions show one standard deviation of the coefficient estimates around the mean.

of the channel with the all input sequence is, in this case,

4.26 dB greater than the signal energy out of the channel with

a random sequence (

dB Fig. 1, the flipping operation and the bit-to-symbol map are

versus

dB). To combined into a single block labeled “Flip/Map.” The block la-

avoid this bias, the codeword bits were flipped randomly be- beled “Flip Map ” performs the reverse operation.

fore mapping to BPSK symbols so that, from the standpoint of For each transmitted data block (codeword), the prior prob-

the channel, a different random codeword was transmitted in abilities used by BCJR were initialized to 0.5. Five hundred

each block. The bit flipping pattern was used at the receiver to blocks were transmitted (7.5 million bits). Because the channel

“flip” the extrinsic probabilities exchanged between the BCJR impulse response is unknown, the likelihoods needed by BCJR

equalizer and the LDPC decoder. If codeword bit was flipped were calculated using the impulse response

on the ini-

at the transmitter, then the corresponding receiver probabilities tial pass for each transmitted data block.

and

(extrinsic and regular prob- The maximum number of iterations for the LDPC decoder

abilities) were swapped. This flipping operation was performed was set to 50. The turbo iterations stop when the LDPC decoder

at the LDPC input and output so that the BCJR algorithm and declares a decoding success or when the norm of the change

the EM channel estimator always operate on flipped probabili- between BCJR priors and posteriors is less than a threshold.

ties while the LDPC decoder uses unflipped probabilities. In Fig. 2 compares the performance of blind turbo equalization to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:42:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GUNTHER et al.: GENERALIZED LDPC DECODER FOR BLIND TURBO EQUALIZATION

3855

(32) (33) (34) (35)

the performance of turbo equalization in which the true channel impulse response is given to the BCJR algorithm. Roughly speaking, the price paid for blind equalization is computational; the blind turbo equalizer achieves roughly the same level of performance as the informed turbo equalizer with twice as many iterations.
To examine how accurately the blind turbo equalizer is able to estimate the unknown channel response, the blind turbo equalizer was forced to complete 30 turbo iterations. Five hundred trials were performed. The mean channel coefficient estimates (solid line) are plotted versus turbo iteration in Fig. 3. The shaded regions show one standard deviation of the estimates around the mean. The dashed lines are the true channel coefficients. Clearly, the blind turbo equalizer provides very good channel estimates. It is also interesting to note that the LDPC decoder succeeded in decoding within the first six turbo iterations for 99% of the 500 trials. Fig. 3 shows that the channel estimate is highly accurate on average only after the tenth turbo iteration. Therefore, the blind turbo equalizer successfully decodes with a very rough estimate of the channel.

APPENDIX

Fix the order of the elements in the set

, and let

be the th element. Let be the number of elements in the

set

. Then, define

, and rewrite

(12) as (32)–(35), shown at the top of the page. Replacing by

in (35) and substituting in

for

leads to a recursion for calculating

and

(36)

(37)

The recursion is initialized when

with

and is repeated for

.

This recursion collapses to a product using the following trick.

Subtracting (37) from (36) leads to

(38)

VI. CONCLUSIONS

With the definitions

This paper derived a generalized LDPC decoder in which

(39)

joint posterior probabilities of arbitrary sets of codeword bits

(40)

may be computed. Two special cases of the generalized decoder are the standard LDPC decoder and a new modified LDPC de- Equation (38) reduces to the simple form

coder that computes pairwise joint probabilities of code bits. As

an application, the modified decoder was used in a scheme for blind turbo equalization. In this case, the receiver consisted of Recursing times yields

three blocks: a BCJR equalizer, the modified LDPC decoder,

and an EM-based blind channel estimator. Single variable and

pairwise joint probabilities from the modified LDPC decoder

provide the EM channel estimator with the probabilities needed

(41)

to evaluate ensemble averages. The blind channel estimate is where used in the BCJR equalizer, which exchanges single variable marginal probabilities with the LDPC decoder. This scheme was fact that

. The probabilities can be recovered using (39) and the

shown to perform nearly as well as a channel-informed turbo

equalizer, but with extra turbo iterations, and produced accurate

channel estimates.

(42)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:42:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3856

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 53, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

REFERENCES
[1] Z. Ding and Y. G. Li, Blind Equalization and Identification. New York: Marcel Dekker, 2001.
[2] G. B. Giannakis, Y. Hua, P. Stoica, and L. Tong, Signal Processing Advances in Wireless & Moblie Communications: Trends in Channel Estimation and Equalization. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2001, vol. 1.
[3] K. Abed-Meraim, W.-Z. Qiu, and Y. Hua, “Blind system identification,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 85, no. 8, pp. 1310–1322, Aug. 1997.
[4] L. Tong and S. Perreau, “Multichannel blind identification: From subspace to maximum likelihood methods,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 86, no. 10, pp. 1951–1968, Oct. 1998.
[5] G. K. Kaleh and R. Vallet, “Joint parameter estimation and symbol detection for linear or nonlinear unknown channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 42, no. 7, pp. 2406–2403, Jul. 1994.
[6] C. Anton-Haro, J. A. F. Fonollosa, and J. R. Fonollosa, “Blind channel estimation and data detection using hidden Markov models,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 241–247, Jan. 1997.
[7] H. A. Cirpan and M. K. Tsatsanis, “Stochastic maximum likelihood methods for semi-blind channel estimation,” IEEE Signal Process. Lett., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 21–24, Jan. 1998.
[8] R. R. Lopes and J. R. Barry, “Blind iterative channel identification and equalization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Helsinki, Finland, Jun. 2001.
[9] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[10] J. G. D. Forney, “Maximum-likelihood sequence estimation of digital sequences in the presenece of ISI,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-18, no. 3, pp. 363–378, May 1972.
[11] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecomm. Conf., 1989, pp. 1680–1686.
[12] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, Fourth ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
[13] T. K. Moon, “The expectation-maximization algorithm,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 13, no. 11, pp. 47–60, Nov. 1996.
[14] C. Douillard, M. Jezequel, C. Berrou, A. Picart, P. Didier, and A. Glavieux, “Iterative correction of intersymbol interference: Turbo equalization,” Eur. Trans. Telecomm., vol. 6, pp. 507–511, Sep.–Oct. 1995.
[15] R. Koetter, A. C. Singer, and M. Tüchler, “Turbo equalization,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 27, Jan. 2004.
[16] G. Colavolpe, G. Ferrari, and R. Raheli, “Extrinsic information in iterative decoding: A unified view,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 2088–2094, Dec. 2001.
[17] T. K. Moon, Error Correcting Coding: Mathematical Methods and Algorithms. New York: Wiley, 2005.
[18] R. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mass. Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[19] P. Ha and B. Honary, “Improved blind turbo detector,” in Proc. IEEE Vehicular Tech. Conf, Tokyo, Japan, 2000.
[20] J. Garcia-Frias and J. D. Villasenor, “Combined turbo detection and decoding for unknown ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 79–85, Jan. 2003.
[21] L. R. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden Markov models and selected applications in speech recognition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 77, no. 1, pp. 257–285, Jan. 1989.
[22] R. R. Lopes and J. R. Barry, “Exploiting error-control coding in blind channel estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., vol. 2, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1317–1321.
[23] V. Krishnamurthy and J. B. Moore, “On-line estimation of hidden Markov model parameters based on the Kullback-Leibler information measure,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 2557–2573, Aug. 1993.

[24] L. B. White, S. Perreau, and P. Duhamel, “Reduced computation blind equalization for FIR channel input Markov models,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 2, 1995, pp. 993–997.
[25] T. K. Moon and J. H. Gunther, “An introduction to low-density paritycheck codes,” in Proc. Int. Telemetering Conf., 2003.
[26] S. ten Brink, J. Speidel, and R.-H. Yan, “Iterative demapping and decoding for multilevel modulation,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., vol. 1, Nov. 1998, pp. 579–584.
[27] M. Shao and C. L. Nikias, “An ML/MMSE estimation approach to blind equalization,” in Proc. ICASSP, vol. 4, 1994, pp. 569–72.
Jacob H. Gunther received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Brigham Young University (BYU), Provo, UT, in 1994, 1994, and 1998, respectively.
From 1992 to 1994, he was a Research Assistant with the Microwave Earth Remote Sensing Laboratory, BYU. From 1994 to 1995, he was with Lockheed-Martin, Manassas, VA, where he worked on target detection algorithms, sonar systems, and satellite digital communication systems. From 1998 to 2000, he worked at Merasoft, Inc., Provo, where he worked on speech recognition, speaker identification, acoustic echo, and noise cancellation using microphone arrays. He joined the faculty of the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Utah State University, Logan, in 2000. His research interests include array signal processing for wireless communications, blind deconvolution and source separation, and system identification.
Madan Ankapura received the B.E. degree in electronics and communication from the University of Mysore, Mysore, India, in 2001 and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Utah State University, Logan, in 2004.
Since 2004, he has worked for Visionaire-Tech, Fremont, CA, as Firmware Engineer. His current research interests include signal processing for digital communication.
Todd K. Moon (SM’02) received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering and mathematics summa cum laude and the M.S. degree in electrical engineering in 1988 from Brigham Young University, Provo, UT, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Utah, Salt Lake City, in 1991.
He is the author of Mathematical Methods and Algorithms for Signal Processing (Englewood Cliffs, NJ Prentice-Hall, 2000) and Error Correction Coding: Mathematical Methods and Algorithms (New York: Wiley, 2005). His research interests include iterative decoding and estimation theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:42:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

