646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 52, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

Soft-Bit Decoding of Regular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Sheryl L. Howard, Student Member, IEEE, Vincent C. Gaudet, Member, IEEE, and Christian Schlegel, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A novel representation, using soft-bit messages, of the belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes is derived as an alternative to the log-likelihood-ratio (LLR)-based BP and min-sum decoding algorithms. A simple approximation is also presented. Simulation results demonstrate the functionality of the soft-bit decoding algorithm. Floating-point soft-bit and LLR BP decoding show equivalent performance; the approximation incurs 0.5-dB loss, comparable to min-sum performance loss over BP. Fixed-point results show similar performance to LLR BP decoding; the approximation converges to floating-point results with one less bit of precision.
Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), iterative decoding algorithms, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, soft output decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
T URBO codes [1] and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2], both iteratively decoded near-capacity-performing classes of error-correcting codes, are used in a number of recent digital communications standards, including W-CDMA, CDMA2000, IEEE 802.16, 802.20, DVB-RCT and DVB S-2. Turbo codes are iteratively decoded using maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding [3], while LDPC codes are typically iteratively decoded using belief propagation (BP) [4] or suboptimal min-sum [5] algorithms.
MAP and BP decoding algorithms are soft-decision algorithms which operate in either the probability or log-likelihood-ratio (LLR) domains. Min-sum algorithms also operate in the LLR domain. MAP, BP, and min-sum algorithms have all been implemented in recent state-of-the-art soft-decision analog [6]–[8], ASIC and field-programmable gate array (FPGA) digital [9]–[11] technologies.
An alternate form of the BP decoding algorithm is derived in this paper, which represents decoding messages in the hyperbolic tangent domain, rather than the LLR domain. The hyperbolic tangent domain is sometimes called the soft-bit domain, as messages have a fixed range ( 1, 1). The soft-bit domain, when linearly quantized, is equivalent to finer quantization of small-valued LLR messages and coarser quantization of larger-valued LLR messages.
Manuscript received August 25, 2004; revised December 27, 2004. This work was supported by the Alberta Informatics Circle of Research Excellence (iCORE). This paper was recommended by Associate Editor C. M. Lau.
The authors are with the High Capacity Digital Communications (HCDC) Laboratory, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4 (sheryl@ece.ualberta.ca; vgaudet@ece.ualberta.ca; schlegel@ece.ualberta.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2005.850742

This alternate message format provides LDPC decoder designers with another degree of freedom in implementation. For analog designers, soft-bit decoding offers alternative computational kernels which are well-suited to analog implementation. For digital designers, soft-bit decoding provides a quantization range compatible with the iteratively improving probability messages associated with iterative decoding algorithms. Soft-bit decoders can easily be interfaced with iterative cancellation receivers, where soft-bit estimates are required for iterative signal cancellation.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II derives the soft-bit-domain BP algorithm. Section III discusses an approximation to the algorithm of Section II. Section IV presents simulation results, including both floating-point and fixed-point representations. Finally, Section V concludes this paper.

II. SOFT-BIT DECODING ALGORITHM

LDPC decoding is viewed graphically via a bipartite graph

or factor graph [12]. The factor graph has both variable nodes,

representing the codeword bits, and parity check nodes, repre-

senting the parity check equations of the code’s parity check ma-

trix . Edges connect variable nodes to check nodes according

to the check equations. Each edge connecting a variable node

to a parity check node denotes

, and variable is a

component of the parity check equation of row . Each of the

parity check equations, when multiplied by a codeword must

sum to zero, that is,

.

The factor graph is thus a visual representation of . Fig. 1

shows a factor graph for a

LDPC of constant variable

node degree

and check node degree

, termed

a regular [3,6] LDPC. Node degree indicates how many edges

connect to a node, and the term regular denotes constant, rather

than varying, node degree. is the number of variable nodes,

and the code length.

Decoding consists of sending messages along the connecting

edges, from variable nodes, initialized with received channel

messages, to parity-check nodes and back. Each node type per-

forms different computations, utilizing the extrinsic principle,

i.e., an outgoing message on an edge excludes information re-

ceived along the same edge.

In the LLR-domain version of BP, each check node per-

forms the following computation for its outgoing LLR message

1057-7130/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:43:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOWARD et al.: SOFT-BIT DECODING OF REGULAR LDPC CODES

647

d Fig. 2. Degree = 3-variable node and associated check messages.

H N Fig. 1. Factor graph and parity check matrix of regular [3,6] = 16
LDPC.
to variable node , assuming check node degree (number of edge connections) :

Implementing the product of these quantized soft-bit messages digitally can be done with a simple shift and add circuit.
In the LLR-domain version of BP, each variable node performs the following computation for its outgoing LLR message to parity check node , assuming node degree
(4)

(1)
The min-sum approximation to LLR BP decoding chooses the minimum incoming LLR magnitude as the outgoing LLR magnitude, with sign as the product of the message signs.
Equation (1) can be rewritten as

where

is the channel LLR available for bit .

A degree

-variable node is shown in Fig. 2, with its

associated check node and channel LLR messages.

Moving into the soft-bit domain, (4) becomes

(5)

where Introducing the soft-bit notation rewritten as

(2) Using comes
. , (2) may be
(3)

, a degree 2–variable node message be(6)

This soft-bit message has a fixed range ( 1, 1). Linear

quantization of the

message corresponds to nonlinear

Similarly, for a degree 3-variable node, using , we obtain

LLR quantization at larger values. A nonlinear LLR quantiza-

tion scheme allows for representation of larger LLR magnitudes

with fewer bits of precision. The LLR messages improve with

increasing decoding iterations as they become more reliable,

increasing in magnitude. A quantization scheme allowing

representation of these larger LLR magnitudes, while also

offering finer quantization of small LLR magnitudes for the

(7)

initial decoding iterations, might provide better accuracy for

less bit precision than a linear quantization scheme. The soft-bit

message domain provides this with linear quantization which corresponds to a nonlinear LLR quantization.
The check-node computation for soft-bit decoding is the product of the incoming soft-bit messages. Products are easily

We observe that, denoting the degree 2-variable node compu-

tation of (6) as

and the degree 3-variable node compu-

tation of (7) as

implemented as Gilbert multipliers [13] in analog decoding

(8)

circuits [14]. Because the soft-bit message range is fixed to

( 1,1), in digital circuits the quantized messages will be Thus, (7) may be implemented as two degree 2-variable node

fractions of powers of two, as shown in Fig. 3 in Section IV. kernels, with the first taking as inputs and , and the second

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:43:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 52, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

taking the resulting output and input to produce (7). Higher degree representations of (5) can be found; the general variable equation consists of a top term of the sum of incoming messages plus cross-product terms with odd factors, i.e.,
, and a bottom term of 1 plus even-factored cross-products, as

TABLE I NODE EQUATIONS FOR SOFT-BIT DECODING

(9)

This form is quite complex and difficult to implement due to

the many crossproducts. More simply, higher degree nodes

can be represented as a function of degree 2-variable node

kernels [15], just as for the degree 3 node. For example, a

degree 7-variable node is computed as

, using six de-

gree 2-variable node kernels. A degree -variable node

requires

degree 2-variable node kernels to exactly

implement (9).

In summary, a soft-bit-domain BP algorithm is implemented

by performing products at check nodes and (5) at variable nodes.

Higher degree variable nodes are subdivided into

com-

putational kernels which implement (9). The complexity shifts

from the check nodes for LLR-domain BP decoding to the vari-

able nodes in soft-bit decoding. A simplification of the variable

node equation (9), suitable for VLSI implementation, is pre-

sented in the next Section.

III. SIMPLIFICATION OF VARIABLE NODE EQUATION

A general approximation for both variable node equations (6)

and (9) can be written by noting that when incoming soft-bit

messages have magnitude near 1, the variable node equation ap-

proaches magnitude 1. For small-valued soft-bit messages, the

cross-terms will be much smaller than the sum of the individual messages, and the variable node equation reduces to approximately the sum of the incoming messages. An approximation

mFig. 3. Bit precision and soft-bit and corresponding LLR quantization for an = 4-bit sign-magnitude message.

for any degree variable node is given by

variance

. The all-zeros codeword is sent, using binary

phase shift key (BPSK) modulation. Plots show frame error rate

if

(FER) versus signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) in decibels. The SNR

is

, where is the energy per bit.

(10) Each FER value is calculated from 50+ frame errors, with 64

decoding iterations per frame.

if

.

Both floating-point and fixed-point precision were exam-

ined. The bit precision includes a sign bit. Quantization to

However, this approximation becomes less accurate for higherdegree variable nodes, as the sum quickly goes to 1. This approximation should not be applied as a series of degree 2 computational kernels, or degradation of the approximation occurs.
Table I summarizes the equations to be implemented at each node for each iteration of soft-bit BP decoding.

bits results in bins. Bin edges are placed at

,

, with the quantized bin value set

to the center value of the bin, located at

,

. Fig. 3 displays fixed-point sign-mag-

nitude precision and soft-bit quantization, along with the

corresponding nonlinear LLR quantization, for an

-bit

message.

IV. RESULTS

Fig. 4 displays results for both floating and fixed-point precision, using at the variable nodes. Convergence to floating-point

Simulation results are presented for soft-bit decoding com- results requires 7 bits of precision; approximately 0.1 dB loss

paring (7) and approximation (10). Simulations used a rate 1/2 is incurred using 6 bits of precision. Floating-point FER results

[3,6] LDPC code of codeword length

[16], over are consistent with BP decoding of the same code with LLR-do-

an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with noise main messages.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:43:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HOWARD et al.: SOFT-BIT DECODING OF REGULAR LDPC CODES

649

N N Fig. 4. SNR versus FER for soft-bit message decoding of = 1008 [3,6] Fig. 6. SNR versus FER for soft-bit message decoding of = 1008 [3,6]

LDPC code, with (7) at variable nodes.

LDPC code, with sum approximation (10) at variable nodes.

TABLE II QUANTIZATION RESULTS FOR SOFT-BIT AND LLR DECODING

N Fig. 5. SNR versus FER for quantized LLR message decoding of = 1008
[3,6] LDPC code.

Table II summarizes our results for floating-point and finite

In comparison, simulations using quantized LLR BP de- precision simulations of soft-bit and LLR BP decoding for the

coding with (1) and (4) for the same code were also performed. regular (3,6)

LDPC.

The last LLR bin edge and quantized value correspond to Soft-bit decoding of a regular rate 0.667 (3,9)

and

the associated last

soft-bit quantized value. Linear rate 0.333 (4,6)

LDPC was also examined, com-

quantization determines the remaining bins.

paring the exact soft-bit (9) and approximation (10) at the vari-

Results are shown in Fig. 5. LLR BP decoding requires 7 bits able nodes, for both floating and fixed-point simulations. Re-

of precision to achieve floating-point results, the same as for sults were similar to that of the regular (3,6) LDPC, with 0.5 dB

soft-bit decoding using (7) at the variable nodes. Compared to loss due to the sum approximation. However, the lower rate (4,6)

floating point, 6 bits of precision costs 0.15 dB. Floating-point LDPC achieved floating-point results with 1 less bit of preci-

results are the same for both LLR BP and soft-bit BP decoding, sion, while the higher rate (3,9) LDPC required 1 additional bit

as expected since the two algorithms are equivalent.

of precision to achieve floating-point results. LLR BP decoding

Fig. 6 shows results using approximation (10) at the variable was also examined, with the same results as exact soft-bit de-

nodes, for both floating- and fixed-point precision. Floating- coding in both floating and fixed point.

point FER results for the approximation show a 0.5 dB loss com- Irregular LDPCs have varying, not constant, node degrees and

pared to the exact soft-bit (7). The approximation requires 6 bits are described by degree distributions and . The variable node

of precision to converge to floating-point results; 5 bits of pre- degree distribution is

, and is the fraction

cision results in 0.1 dB loss.

of edges connecting to variable nodes of degree . Likewise, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:43:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

650

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 52, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

check node degree distribution is

, and is

the fraction of edges to check nodes of degree .

An irregular rate 0.5 LDPC with degree distribution

(11) (12)

was also simulated. This degree distribution has a threshold SNR of 0.65 dB. Both the exact soft-bit (9), as implemented with degree 2 computational stages, and approximation (10) at the variable nodes were compared for floating point. While (9) provided equivalent results to LLR BP decoding, the sum approximation (10) did not, and in fact performed very poorly, with 1 dB and greater FER loss compared to the exact equation.
The sum approximation typically overestimates (9). However, messages of mixed signs, where the sum is near zero, can also cause the wrong sign for the approximation. Degree 2 nodes do not suffer from this; however, as the variable degree increases, this problem increases. Subtracting off a small amount or scaling the messages to compensate for the overestimation in the manner of [17] to improve min-sum decoding did not improve soft-bit performance, as most of the approximation loss is not due to overestimated messages but to the incorrect output message sign. Additionally, quantization of (9) required 11 bits of precision to achieve floating-point results, significantly more than for the regular LDPCs.
The soft-bit algorithm is best suited for regular LDPCs and, due to the poor performance of the sum approximation and high bit precision required for good results with quantization of (9), is not recommended for irregular LDPCs. Very high variable degree regular LDPCs would most likely also suffer from poor sum approximation performance; however, the regular (4,6) LDPC examined gave good results.

V. CONCLUSION
A novel representation of the BP decoding algorithm for LDPC codes which operates in the soft-bit domain rather than the LLR domain was derived and simulated. Use of soft-bit messages, which have a fixed range from ( 1,1) instead of the infinite range of LLRs, allows for linear quantization of a nonlinear parameter, the (LLR) messages. This is equivalent to a nonlinear quantization of the LLR messages, with fine quantization of small-valued LLRs and coarse quantization of larger LLRs.
Higher degree variable nodes can be subdivided into degree 2 computational kernels, greatly simplifying their implementation. This subdivision is equivalent to the direct computation of (9). Additionally, a simple approximation to the more complex variable node processing in the soft-bit domain was presented. Simulation results for the sum approximation showed a 0.5 dB

loss over exact soft-bit variable node decoding, but achieved
floating-point results with one less bit precision than the exact
soft-bit variable node (9).
The soft-bit decoding algorithm is well-suited to regular
LDPCs. Due to poor performance of the sum approximation
and high precision required for quantized exact soft-bit de-
coding, the soft-bit algorithm is not practical for irregular
LDPCs.
Soft-bit decoding offers another design option for both dig-
ital and analog decoder implementations. It provides alternate
computational kernels easily implemented in analog devices,
and quantization well matched to the iteratively improving mes-
sages in LDPC BP decoding.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC’93), May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[3] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 3, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[4] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[5] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-42, no. 3, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[6] M. Moerz, T. Gabara, R. Yan, and J. Hagenauer, “An analog 0.25 m
BiCMOS tailbiting MAP decoder,” in Proc. Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. (ISSCC’00), Feb. 2000, pp. 356–357.
[7] V. Gaudet and G. Gulak, “A 13.3-Mb/s 0.35 m CMOS analog turbo
decoder IC with a configurable interleaver,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 2010–2015, Nov. 2003. [8] C. Winstead, J. Dai, S. Yu, C. Myers, R. Harrison, and C. Schlegel, “CMOS analog MAP decoder for (8,4) Hamming code,” IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 122–131, Jan. 2004. [9] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002. [10] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 1.6 Gbit/s 2048-bit programmable and code-rate tunable LDPC decoder chip,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 137–140. [11] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “A 56 Mb/s (3,6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE SIPS’02, San Diego, CA, Oct. 2002, pp. 127–132. [12] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Eur. Trans. Telecomm., pp. 513–525, Sep./Oct. 1995. [13] B. Gilbert, “A precise four-quadrant multiplier with subnanosecond response,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. SC-3, no. 3, pp. 365–373, Jun. 1968. [14] H.-A. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, and F. Tarköy, “Probability propagation and decoding in analog VLSI,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 837–843, Feb. 2001. [15] F. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001. [16] D. J. C. MacKay. Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html [17] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density Evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:43:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

