IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

2983

Field-Programmable Gate-Array-Based Investigation of the Error Floor of Low-Density Parity Check Codes for Magnetic Recording Channels
Lingyan Sun1, Hongwei Song2, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar1, and Zak Keirn2
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA Read Channel Group, Agere Systems, Longmont, CO 80503 USA

Good performance of iterative detection and decoding using low-density parity check (LDPC) codes has stimulated great interest in the data storage industry. One major concern in using LDPC codes in the read channel is their error floor, which is still an open question. To investigate the performance of LDPC codes in low bit-error rates (BER 10 10), we developed a high-throughput fully reconfigurable simulator using a field programmable gate array. Using this simulator, we are able to observe the performance of LDPC codes at low BER within a reasonably short time (10 10 within 1.5 h). We show the evaluation results for two types of LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Field-programmable gate array (FPGA), iterative decoding, low-density parity check (LDPC) code, SOVA.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity check (LDPC) codes [1] have shown a 3–5-dB coding gain at bit-error rates (BERs) around 10 , over the uncoded partial response maximum-likelihood (PRML) channels [2]. However, the error floor of LDPC codes is still an open question and is one of the major concerns in applying LDPC codes in high-density recoding channels. Due to the suboptimal nature of decoding schemes and the difficulties in code spectrum analysis, the analytical evaluation of LDPC codes in a very low BER region is very difficult, if not impossible. Therefore, the performance of LDPC codes is usually evaluated through Monte Carlo simulations. However, the sequential nature of the conventional C simulations limits their capability for BER investigation. For 10 bits simulated, it usually takes months to finish the simulation with optimized C code and a 2-GHz computer. A simple calculation can justify this observation. To finish the calculation for one bit, the main operations are in the soft channel detector and LDPC encoding and decoding. The operation needs for a channel detector are proportional to the states and depth. We assume the soft channel detector has 16 states with trace back depth of 25 and two channel iterations are applied. We also assume three operations per state at each trace back step and three clock cycles for each operation (considering the memory read/write). The
clock cycles are needed for one bit calculation. Even with full bandwidth of 2 GHz, we need more than one month to finish the calculation for 10 bits without considering other operations in LDPC encoding and decoding.
To investigate the code performance at a very low BER, a high-throughput platform is required. Compared to other platforms, such as general purpose microprocessors, digital signal processors or application specific integrated circuits (ASIC), field-programmable gate array (FPGA) with its high speed and
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2005.854455

Fig. 1. FPGA simulator architecture.
reconfigurability is a better choice. We have developed a highthroughput fully reconfigurable FPGA platform for the evaluation of LDPC codes in a PR channel. The main challenge for developing the simulator on FPGA is in making the design fully parameterized for different PR targets, LDPC codes, noise variances, bit widths, etc., while pushing the throughput as high as possible and size as small as possible to fit in one chip. In this paper, we describe the architecture and main features of the channel simulator on a FPGA. The evaluation results for some LDPC codes using the simulator are shown as examples.
We describe the FPGA simulator architecture and submodules in Section II. In Section III, we show the code performance evaluation results using the FPGA simulator. We conclude the paper in Section IV.
II. FPGA SIMULATOR
A. FPGA Simulator Architecture
Fig. 1 shows the architecture as well as human interface environment of our simulator. For the human interface, a computer equipped with MATLAB and C is used. The FPGA board is connected with the PC through the PCI interface.

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:43:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

The handshaking between the PC and the FPGA board is through PCI interface logic. The PCI control logic and the whole

TABLE I LOGIC CONSUMPTION ON XILINX VERTEX II XCV6000

simulator are realized in the FPGA chip.

The simulator consists of a write processor and a read pro-

cessor, a random number generator (RNG), an LDPC encoder

(ENC), a data buffer, a random interleaver, an ideal PR channel

(PR), and an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) noise gen-

erator. The read processor consists of a soft channel detector

(DET), a deinterleaver, an LDPC decoder, a random interleaver, and an error counter. Each module in the simulator is standalone for future upgrading such as including a jitter noise module and the modifying channel detector to include noise-predictive maximum likelihood (NMPL) detection.
When the simulation starts, the computer (using C and MATLAB programs) initiates a start command and sends parameters including the signal to noise ratio (SNR) level and minimum number of bit errors or block errors for the simulation to stop. The simulator stops when the PC initiates the stop command or the minimum number of errors is reached and sends back the total number of error bits, error blocks, and simulated blocks through the PCI port to PC.

blocks can be eliminated if the interleaver pattern can be calculated according to a certain function or it follows a certain pattern. The same interleaver and corresponding deinterleaver are used in the read processor.
The PR module implements the ideal partial response channel, which is basically a feedforward shift register. The PR channel target length and coefficients can be changed easily. The AWGN generator adds white Gaussian noise. The method used is the Box–Muller transform. The functions in the transform are approximated using a lookup table combined with polynomial and nonlinear piecewise segmentation.
On the read processor side, a soft-output channel detector is used to calculate the initial soft information. The performance of

B. Simulator Modules
The first module in the simulator is the RNG, which generates a random sequence that never repeats during the simulation period. A linear feedback shift register (LFSR) that generates
sequences is used. As an -bit register produces an sequence with period of 2 -1, choosing to be 64 makes the period longer than 10 , more than what we need to reach BERs of 10 . In the error counter, the same -sequence generator is implemented. The generated sequence is compared with the each iteration output from an LDPC decoder for the final BER and block error rate (BLER) calculation.
The LDPC encoder maps the random data sequence into LDPC codewords. Different LDPC codes need different encoders. A general encoder can be implemented following the method proposed in [3]. However, as rows and columns in the parity check matrix are permuted for simple encoding, building one general LDPC decoder becomes difficult. As the encoder complexity is usually much lower than the decoder complexity, we build one LDPC decoder for a broad class of LDPC codes and build encoders for different types of LDPC codes. For practical application, only structured LDPC codes which can be easily encoded are of interest. We implemented encoders for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes which we simulated. Simple shift

different soft channel detectors including MAP, Max-Log-Map, Log-Map, Bi-directional SOVA, and two-step SOVA were compared. Soft decisions from different soft detectors differ, influencing the results after the LDPC decoder. Our simulation result shows that the MAP and Log-Map are identical and so are the Max-Log-Map and Bidirectional SOVA. Two-step SOVA exhibits performance degradation of about 0.2 dB at a BER around 10 . From an implementation point of view, the twostep SOVA has the lowest complexity, followed by the Bidirectional SOVA and the Max-Log-Map. MAP has the highest complexity. We implemented the Bidirectional SOVA [4] as well as the two-step SOVA on the FPGA.
The most challenging part is the LDPC decoder. To evaluate different LDPC codes, we implement a generalized LDPC decoder on FPGA. We call it generalized as the decoder can work for a broad class of LDPC codes. All the LDPC codes whose H matrix consists of small regular submatrices can fit in the decoder architecture (most of the structured LDPC of interest satisfy this constraint). As the decoder is fully parameterized, the implementation is automatically changed according to the decoder configuration file setting. Different LDPC codes can therefore be evaluated without any change in the decoder. More information about the decoder can be found in [5].

registers are used. Following the encoder, a buffer is used to save the encoded

C. Implementation and Testing

data sequence. The buffer length is two times that of codeword The FPGA channel simulator is written in VHDL and im-

length so that no time is wasted between block switching. For an plemented on a Xilinx Vertex II XCV6000. All the parameters

LDPC code of size 4608, we need 9216 bits. One block memory including PR target, SNR level, SOVA bit width, SOVA window

(18 Kb) in Xilinx Vertex II FPGA is enough.

length, LDPC decoder bit width, channel iteration number,

The data in the buffer are read in the sequence defined in LDPC iteration number, LDPC code block length, code rate,

the random interleaver. For flexibility, the interleaver pattern is and code structure can be configured in one file. Each module in

saved in the block memory of FPGA. Assuming an LDPC block the design is tested separately. The whole system is simulated

length of 4608, we need 13 4608 bits for storage (since each of using ModelSim SE6.0 and synthesized using Xilinx ISE 6.1.

the 4608-bit positions can be represented by 13 bits), which re- The result from FPGA is compared with C simulation results

quires four 18-Kb block memories. All possible interleavers can to verify the performance. Table I shows the logic consumption

be investigated by updating the memory contents. The memory for the main components in the simulator as well as the whole

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:43:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SUN et al.: FIELD-PROGRAMMABLE GATE-ARRAY-BASED INVESTIGATION OF ERROR FLOOR

2985

Fig. 2. DDS j = 3 code performance.

Fig. 4. Array code j = 3 code performance.

each LDPC iteration in each channel iteration are shown. There

is about a 2-dB loss in the PR channel compared to the AWGN

channel with error floor at BER 10 . The result from C simu-

lation is also plotted. The implementation loss is about 0.2 dB.

Fig. 3 shows the performance of the DDS code with

and

. We see the error floor of the code at about

10 within 1.5 h with 10 bits simulated. The throughput is

about 185 Mb/s. Fig. 4 shows the array code performance with

. The error floor is at 10 . All the

simulations use 7-bit SOVA and 6-bit LDPC decoding.

Fig. 3. DDS j = 5 code performance.

simulator. Here, we use an EPR4 channel and disjoint differ-

ence set-based LDPC code (DDS-LDPC) with block length

, column weight

, and rate 8/9. The synthesis

clock frequency is 110 MHz.

III. CODE EVALUATION

Using the FPGA simulator, we tested two types of structured

LDPC codes in an EPR4 channel: DDS-LDPC and array-based

LDPC code (array-LDPC). In Fig. 2, we show the results for

the DDS code with

and number of parity

checks

(i.e., rate 8/9). The code performances in the

AWGN channel and PR channel (all from FPGA simulation) are

shown for comparison. In the AWGN channel, a maximum of

50 LDPC iterations are performed and the last iteration result

is plotted. In the PR channel, a maximum two-channel iteration

and 25 LDPC iterations are used and the BER and BLER for

IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented an FPGA-based simulator to investigate the performance of the LDPC code in a PR channel. The simulator architecture, submodules, and performance are described. We also show the error floors of two types of LDPC codes using the simulator. In the future, we will use the simulator to investigate the performance of different types of LDPC codes and search for codes that have low error floor.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] H. Song, “Iterative soft detection and decoding for data storage channels,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. ECE, Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, PA, Dec. 2002.
[3] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, no. 6, pp. 638–656, Jun. 2001.
[4] L. Sun, T. Horigome, and V. Kumar, “A high-throughput, field programmable gate array implementation of soft output Viterbi algorithm for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 3081–3083, Jul. 2004.
[5] L. Sun and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Field programmable gate array implementation of a generalized decoder for structured low-density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Field Programmable Technology, Australia, 2004, pp. 17–24.
Manuscript received February 9, 2005; revised March 27, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:43:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

