IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

2953

LDPC Codes Satisfying the (0; k) Constraint
Sharareh Babvey1, Member, IEEE, and Steven W. McLaughlin2, Senior Member, IEEE

Department of Computer Science, Georgia State University, Atlanta, GA 30302-3994 USA School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332 USA
In this paper, we use a stochastic expectation-maximization method to illustrate how to come close to achieving the capacity of the noisy (0 ) constrained additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. We use the bit-flipping-based constrained coding system proposed by Vasic and Pedagani, to transmit (0 ) constrained low-density parity check (LDPC) codewords over an AWGN channel. In the original approach of Vasic and Pedagani, if the number of flipped bits is large, the message-passing decoder of the LDPC codes fails to correct all the errors, and the system is prone to an error floor. We propose a flip decoder that exploits the information from the message-passing decoder to correct the flipped bits. We illustrate that the message-passing decoder and the flip decoder together correct both the channel and flip errors and achieve rates close to the noisy (0 ) channel capacity.
Index Terms—Error correction coding, iterative decoding, magnetic recording, modulation coding.

I. INTRODUCTION

A COMMON constraint in virtually every magnetic or optical recording system is the run-length-limited constraint,

where runs of “0”s and “1”s are constrained for the purpose of

controlling intersymbol interference and aiding timing recovery.

A typical run-length constraint is the binary

constraint

with at least and at most zeroes between any two consecu-

tive ones. For example, in high-density longitudinal recording,

a long run of zeros can cause timing recovery problems, and

the

constraint is used. In optical recording, the (2, 10)

constraint is used in CDs and DVDs. In magnetic recording,

the

constraint is used in today’s longitudinal recording

systems. Designing low-complexity encoders and decoders for

constrained channels with rates close to the Shannon’s channel

capacity continues to be a challenge, particularly in the con-

text of combining advanced error control codes like low-density

parity check (LDPC) codes [3].

A straightforward approach for combining LDPC codes with

the

constraint uses bit flipping to satisfy the constraint [1],

as shown in Fig. 1. The constraint is enforced by taking the mes-

sage blocks of unconstrained bits and flipping (XOR with one)

some bits of each codeword such that the constraint is satisfied.

The proposed decoder in [1] is the usual message-passing de-

coder for LDPC codes, and the general idea is to use the capa-

bility of this decoder to correct the flipped bits. In this paper,

we consider the encoding of [1] and show how to modify the

decoder to obtain codes that perform close to the noisy

capacity. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In

Section II, we summarize the encoder. In the following sections,

we illustrate how

constraints affect the achieved capaci-

ties over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. We

also design a new decoder for the joint LDPC and

con-

strained system. Using the proposed decoder, we demonstrate

that the error floor of the constrained system is limited by the

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2005.855329

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the system.

error floor of the unconstrained LDPC code, not by the bit flipping as in [1]. Section III presents the simulation results, and Section IV concludes the paper.

II. THE ENCODER

For a

constraint, bit-flipping-based encoding proceeds

in two steps: 1) encoding a message using an error control code

to produce a codeword and 2) flipping the ( )th zero on

any run of

consecutive zeros in . For example, code-

word

does not satisfy the (0, 3) constraint.

However, if we flip the sixth bit, the resulting codeword satisfies

the constraint. We are interested in the use of good error-cor-

rection codes (ECCs) and in this paper concentrate on LDPC

codes [3] over the

constrained AWGN channel. Although

this encoder is very simple, from the perspective of a standard

message-passing decoder, the encoding creates errors. If the

number of flipped bits is small, then the message-passing de-

coder is powerful enough to correct them with no loss in perfor-

mance. If the number of flipped bits is large, however, the mes-

sage-passing decoder fails to correct some of the flipped bits,

and the performance degrades, particularly for small .

III. THE PROPOSED DECODING SCHEME
The idea is to design a flip decoder that corrects the deliberately flipped bits, using the constraint and the information obtained from the message-passing decoder of LDPC codes. An iteration of the decoder includes three steps.
1) Run an iteration of the message-passing algorithm. 2) Employ “unflip” to correct the deliberately flipped bits. 3) Employ “reflip” to correct those bits that are incor-
rectly changed by unflip.

0018-9464/$20.00 © 2005 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:43:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2954

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 41, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2005

For each bit of a given codeword

, we

define random variables

and

for

, as

follows. is the sum of all normalized messages from bit

to , the set of all the parity checks that involve bit .

is the sum of all normalized messages from (the set of all

the parity checks for bit ) to bit . These random variables are

helpful in determining the flipped bits.

For a

constraint, unflip selects bit and sets the corre-

sponding channel output to the constant number 1 (bit is

unflipped), if the following conditions hold.

1) Bit follows a run of consecutive zeros. Thus,

for

.

2) Bit realizes itself to be one with higher probability

than zero, or

.

3) Bit is at least bits away from the previously un-

flipped bits.

4) The majority of the parity checks that include bit

are satisfied with higher probability if is zero rather

than one. Thus, is a negative number with a large

absolute value.

Moreover, we mark those bit nodes for which the majority of

the incoming messages are negative and satisfy conditions 1–3.

These marked bits are used to update a list of unflip candidates.

In each iteration, we find the number of bits for which

and differ in sign. After a number of iterations , if this

number is larger than a given threshold and no bits are se-

lected to be unflipped, then we unflip the unflip candidates. In

our simulations, is

rounded to the nearest integer.

Alternatively, assume that bit got unflipped during an ear-

lier iteration. Reflip flips again (sets to the constant number

) if at least one of the following conditions holds.

1) After a number of iterations increases for bit and gets larger than a given positive threshold . In

our simulations,

.

2) The majority of received massages from the parity

checks are positive for bit .

Fig. 2 shows an iteration of the proposed decoder. In this

figure, represents the message from bit to the th parity,

and is the message from the th parity to bit . and

represent the number of parities and bits, respectively. is the

set of all the bits involved in the th parity, and is the set of

all the parities for bit .

Fig. 2. Decoding steps at iteration L.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

Fig. 3 shows how

constraints affect the achievable ca-

pacities over an AWGN channel. We use the stochastic expecta-

tion-maximization method [4] to compute the lower bounds on

the channel capacity. The channel input is a Markov process of

length

with states for a

constrained system.

The achieved capacity bounds are maximum in the ideal case

(unconstrained AWGN), when the channel imposes no restric-

tions on the transmitted codewords. The capacity bounds for

constrained channels lay below the ideal (unconstrained) case.

For weak constraints

, the gap between the capacity

bounds of the constrained and unconstrained AWGN is fairly

small. This gap increases for stronger constraints with smaller

values of .

Fig. 3. Achieved capacities in bits per second (b/s).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:43:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

BABVEY AND MCLAUGHLIN: LDPC CODES SATISFYING THE

CONSTRAINT

2955

Fig. 4. BER versus SNR for a (0, 9) constrained LDPC code, comparing the Fig. 5. BER versus SNR for a (0, 7) constrained LDPC code, comparing the

proposed decoder and the message-passing decoder.

proposed decoder and the message-passing decoder.

We apply the bit-flipping-based constrained coding method to

transmit

constrained regular LDPC codes over an AWGN

channel. We use regular LDPC codes with parity-check matrices

of column weight three; no effort is made to optimize the LDPC

code for use with the

constraint. The codewords are 4000

b long, and the code rate is 0.8 b per symbol for both codes.

Then, we apply the proposed decoder to the constrained reg-

ular LDPC code and the message-passing decoder to the uncon-

strained code and compute the achievable rates. Fig. 3 compares

the achievable rates for a (0, 7) constrained LDPC code (plotted

with diamonds) and an unconstrained LDPC code (plotted with

circles) for error rates of 1e-5 b/s. As the figure shows, both

codes achieve comparable rates. Performance of the constrained

LDPC codes is close to the unconstrained case, and both are

about the same distance from their respective capacities.

We also compared the performance of the proposed decoder

and the original message-passing decoder when applied to

constrained systems with different values of and computed the

resulting bit-error rates (BERs) at different signal-to-noise ratio

(SNR) values. We employ heuristically designed LDPC codes

with bit rate 0.95 b/s. The column weight of the parity-check

matrix that defines each LDPC code is equal to three, and the

codewords are 4000 b long. Figs. 4 and 5 show the simulation

results for

and

, respectively. As the figures show,

constrained systems result in considerable error floors

when decoded by the message-passing decoder. The worst case

situations are for low values of and high values of rate, and

one can see its effect in the high error floors. Thus, we consider

rate 0.95.

However, using the proposed flip decoder, the BER de-

creases rapidly with the SNR. The (0, 9) constrained LDPC

code achieves BERs smaller than 1e-5 at SNR 8.3 dB, whereas

the message-passing decoder has a BER greater than 1e-3, at

this SNR. Similarly, the (0, 7) constrained LDPC code achieves

negligible error rates at SNR 8.9 dB. Using the message-passing

decoder, the error rate is quite considerable at this SNR (order

1e-2).

According to the figures, using the proposed decoder, the error floor of a constrained LDPC code is limited by the error floor of the unconstrained code, not by the bit-flipping system.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we used the stochastic expectation-maximiza-

tion method to illustrate that the

constrained additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels with

achieve

capacities close to the unconstrained AWGN. We also used the

bit-flipping-based constrained coding system (due to its low

complexity) to transmit low-density parity check (LDPC) code-

words over

constrained AWGN channels. However, this

system is prone to an error floor even at high signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR) values if the number of flipped bits is large.

Therefore, we designed an efficient flip decoder to correct the

deliberately flipped bits and designed a new decoder achieving

rates fairly close to the noisy

constrained channel.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
S. Babvey would like to thank Dr. A. Adibi for his generosity in providing the access to high-performance computation facilities.

REFERENCES
[1] B. Vasic and K. Pedagani, “A runlength limited low-density parity-check coding scheme,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, vol. 5, 2003, pp. 3115–3119.
[2] S. Datta and S. W. McLaughlin, “An enumerative method for run-lengthlimited codes: Permutation codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2199–2204, Sep. 1999.
[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[4] A. Kavcic, “On the capacity of Markov sources over noisy channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conf., Nov. 2001, pp. 2997–3001.

Manuscript received January 18, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 12:43:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

