2012 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings

Trapping Set Structure of Finite Geometry LDPC Codes
Qiuju Diao1, Ying Yu Tai2, Shu Lin1, and Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar1 1 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of California, Davis, CA 95616, USA
2 SanDisk Corporation, Milpitas, CA 95035, USA Email: {judiao, yytai, shulin, kaghaffar}@ucdavis.edu

Abstract—The trapping set structure of LDPC codes constructed using finite geometries is analyzed. A trapping set is modeled as a sub-geometry of the geometry used to construct an LDPC code. The variable nodes of a trapping set are viewed as points of the geometry and the check nodes adjacent to the variable nodes are viewed as the lines passing through any of these points. Based on this geometrical representation of a trapping set, its configuration can be determined.
I. INTRODUCTION
With iterative decoding, most LDPC codes have a common severe weakness, known as the error-floor. The error-floor of an LDPC code is characterized by the phenomenon that as the SNR continues to increase, the error probability suddenly drops at a rate much slower than that in the region of low to moderate SNR. The error-floor may preclude LDPC codes from applications where very low error rates are required.
Ever since the phenomenon of the error-floors of LDPC codes with iterative decoding became known [1], a great deal of research effort has been expended in finding its causes and methods to resolve or mitigate the error-floor problem. For the AWGN channel, the error-floor of an LDPC code is mostly caused by an undesirable structure, known as a trapping set [2], in the Tanner graph on which the decoding is carried out.
This paper is concerned with the analysis of the trapping set structure of LDPC codes constructed using finite geometries, called finite geometry (FG)-LDPC codes. In this analysis, a trapping set is modeled as a sub-geometry of the geometry used to construct an FG-LDPC code. The variable nodes (VNs) of a trapping set are viewed as points of the geometry and the check nodes (CNs) adjacent to the variable nodes are viewed as the lines containing any of these points. Based on this geometrical representation of a trapping set, we are able to determine the configuration of the trapping set.
In this paper, we focus on the trapping set structure of LDPC codes constructed from the two-dimensional Euclidean geometry (EG) over finite fields. The concepts and the geometrical model developed for this subclass of geometries can be applied in a straightforward manner to Euclidean geometries of higher dimensions and to projective geometries. It should be stated that the geometrical approach has been already used to characterize trapping sets of projective geometry codes of dimensions 2 and 3 in [3] and the related stopping sets in [4]. Our approach is simpler and more elementary than that

in [3] which resorts to some results in projective geometries to derive the results.
This paper is organized as follows. Relevant definitions are given in Section II. Two-dimensional Euclidean geometries and codes are reviewed in Sections III and IV, respectively. The main contributions are presented in Section V in which the analysis of trapping sets of codes is given. The paper is concluded in Section VI.
II. DEFINITIONS AND BASIC CONCEPTS
Definition 1. Let G be the Tanner graph of a binary LDPC code C of length n given by the null space of an m × n matrix H over GF(2). For 1 ≤ κ ≤ n and 0 ≤ τ ≤ m, we have the following definitions [5]:
1) A (κ, τ ) trapping set is a set of κ VNs in G which induces a sub-graph of G with exactly τ odd-degree CNs and an arbitrary number of even-degree CNs.
2) An elementary (κ, τ ) trapping set is a trapping set for which all CNs in the induced sub-graph of the Tanner graph have degree one or degree two, and there are exactly τ degree-one CNs.
3) A sm√all (κ, τ ) trapping set is a trapping set for which κ ≤ n and τ /κ ≤ 4.
Suppose, in transmission of a codeword in C, an error pattern e with κ errors at the locations of the κ VNs of a (κ, τ ) trapping set, T, occurs. This error pattern will cause τ parity-check failures. In this case, for iterative decoding, another decoding iteration must be carried out to correct the failed check-sums. Iterative decoding, such as the SumProduct Algorithm (SPA) and the Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA), is very susceptible to trapping sets of a code because it works locally in a distributed-processing manner. Each CN has a local processing unit to process the messages received from the VNs connected to it and each VN has a local processing unit to process the messages received from the CNs connected to it. Hopefully, these local processing units through iterations and message exchanges collect enough information to make a global optimum decision of the transmitted code bits.
In each decoding iteration, we call a CN a satisfied CN if it satisfies its corresponding check-sum constraint, otherwise, we call it an unsatisfied CN. During the decoding process, the decoder undergoes state transitions from one state to another until all the CNs satisfy their corresponding check-sum

978-1-4673-2579-0/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

3088

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:04:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

constraints or a predetermined maximum number of iterations is reached. In the process of a decoding iteration, the messages from the satisfied CNs try to reinforce the current decoder state, while the messages from the unsatisfied CNs try to change some of the bit decisions to satisfy their check-sum constraints. If errors affect the κ code bits (or the κ VNs) of a (κ, τ ) trapping set T, the τ odd-degree CNs, each connected to an odd number of VNs in T, will not be satisfied while all other CNs will be satisfied. The decoder will succeed in correcting the errors in T if the messages coming from the unsatisfied CNs connected to the VNs in T are strong enough to overcome the messages coming from the satisfied CNs. However, this may not be the case if τ is small. As a result, the decoder may not converge to a valid codeword even if more decoding iterations are performed and this non-convergence of decoding results in an error-floor.
For the binary-input AWGN channel, error patterns with a small number of errors are more probable to occur than error patterns with a larger number of errors. Consequently, in message-passing decoding algorithms, the most harmful (κ, τ ) trapping sets are usually those with small values of κ and τ , especially when the value of τ is very small compared to that of κ. From extensive computer simulations reported in the literature, it has been observed that most trapping sets that exert a strong influence on the error-floor are elementary trapping sets and small trapping sets, see Definition 1 parts 2) and 3), respectively.
Furthermore, undetected errors caused by minimum-weight codewords also contribute to the error-floor of the code. These minimum-weight codewords correspond to (dmin, 0) trapping sets where dmin is the minimum distance of the code. If there are no harmful trapping sets of size smaller than dmin, then the error-floor of the code decoded with iterative decoding is dominated by the minimum distance of the code.
A regular binary LDPC code is given by the null space of a sparse parity-check matrix H over GF(2) that has constant column weight γ and constant row weight ρ. Such an LDPC code is said to be (γ, ρ)-regular. In almost all of the proposed constructions of LDPC codes, the following constraint on the rows and columns of the parity-check matrix H is imposed: no two rows (or two columns) can have more than one place where they both have non-zero components. This constraint on the rows and columns of H is referred to as the rowcolumn (RC)-constraint. The RC-constraint ensures that the Tanner graph of the LDPC code given by the null space of H has a girth of at least 6 and that the minimum distance of the code is at least γ + 1 [6], [7]. A parity-check matrix H that satisfies the RC-constraint is called an RC-constrained paritycheck matrix and the code given by its null space is called an RC-constrained LDPC code. The code is cyclic if the cyclic shift of every codeword in the code is also a codeword. If H is a column of circulants, then its null space is a cyclic code.
In a very recent paper [8], we investigated the trapping set structure of RC-constrained regular LDPC codes and showed that, for an RC-constrained (γ, ρ)-regular LDPC code, its Tanner graph contains no trapping set of size κ ≤ γ with

the number τ of odd-degree CNs smaller than γ. For several classes of algebraic LDPC codes, their Tanner graphs contain
no harmful trapping sets of sizes smaller than their minimum
distances, which are relatively large. Hence, the error-floors of
these codes are expected to be very low.
III. TWO-DIMENSIONAL EUCLIDEAN
GEOMETRIES
In this section, we give a brief review of two-dimensional
Euclidean geometries and develop some of their structural
properties which are pertinent for analyzing the trapping set
structure of EG-LDPC codes. Consider the two-dimensional Euclidean geometry EG(2, q)
over the field GF(q), where q is a power of a prime. This geometry consists of q2 points and q(q + 1) lines. A point in EG(2, q) is a two-tuple a = (a0, a1) over GF(q) and the zero two-tuple (0, 0) is called the origin. A line in EG(2, q) is a one-dimensional subspace or its coset of the vector space of all the q2 two-tuples over GF(q). A line contains q points. If a point a is on a line, we say that the line passes through the point a. Any two points in EG(2, q) are connected by one and only one line.
The field GF(q2), as an extension field of the field GF(q), is a realization of EG(2, q) [7]. Let α be a primitive element of GF(q2). Then, the powers of α, α−∞ 0, α0 = 1, α, α2,. . . , αq2−2, give all the q2 elements of GF(q2) and they represent the q2 points of EG(2, q). The 0-element represents the origin of EG(2, q).
For every point a in EG(2, q), there are q + 1 lines that intersect at (or pass through) the point a. These lines are said to form a bundle of lines intersecting at the point a, called an intersecting bundle at a and denoted by Δ(a). Any point in EG(2, q) other than a lies on one and only one line in Δ(a) while the point a lies on every line in Δ(a). Let Δ(b) be the bundle of lines intersecting at the point b = a. Then Δ(a) and Δ(b) have a unique line in common, namely, the line connecting points a and b.
Two lines in EG(2, q) are called parallel if they do not have points in common. The q(q + 1) lines in EG(2, q) can be partitioned into q + 1 sets, each set consists of q parallel lines and is called a parallel bundle. Each point in EG(2, q) lies on one and only one line in each parallel bundle.
Let α be a primitive element of GF(q2). Then the order of αq+1 is q − 1. The set L−∞ = {α−∞ = 0, α0 = 1, α(q+1), . . . , α(q−2)(q+1)} of q points in EG(2, q) form a line passing through the origin. For 0 ≤ j ≤ q, the set αj L−∞ = {0, αj , α(q+1)+j , . . . , α(q−2)(q+1)+j } of q points also forms a line passing through the origin of EG(2, q) [7]. Hence, L−∞, αL−∞, . . . , αqL−∞ give the q + 1 lines intersecting at the origin.
Let L = {αj1 , αj2 , . . . , αjq } be a line in EG(2, q) not passing through the origin with αj1 , αj2 , . . . , αjq as its q points where 0 ≤ j1, j2, . . . , jq < q2 − 1. For 0 ≤ i < q2 − 1, let αiL = {αj1+i, αj2+i, . . . , αjq+i}. Then, the set αiL of q points also forms a line in EG(2, q) not passing through the

3089
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:04:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

origin and α0L, αL, . . . , αq2−2L give all the q2 − 1 lines in EG(2, q) not passing through the origin.

IV. EG-LDPC CODES

In this section, we define parity-check matrices
for Euclidean geometry codes. For a line, L, in EG(2, q), we define the q2-tuple over GF(2):
vL = (v−∞, v0, v1, . . . , vq2−2), whose components correspond to the q2 points α−∞, α0, α, α2, . . . , αq2−2 of EG(2, q), where vj = 1 if and only if αj is a point on L and vj = 0 otherwise. The weight of vL is q. This q2-tuple vL is called the incidence vector of the line L.
Form a q(q + 1) × q2 matrix HEG over GF(2) with the incidence vectors of the q(q + 1) lines of EG(2, q) as rows.
This matrix is constructed as follows. Let L−∞ and L be a line passing through the origin of EG(2, q) and a line not passing
through the origin, respectively. We arrange the rows of HEG in such a way that the incidence vectors of the lines L−∞, αL−∞, . . ., αqL−∞ are the first q + 1 rows of HEG and the incidence vectors of the lines αj L with 0 ≤ j < q2 − 1 are the next q2 − 1 rows of HEG. We label the rows of HEG from 0 to q(q + 1) − 1 and the columns of HEG from −∞, 0 to q2 −2. The column labeled with −∞ corresponds to the origin of the geometry. For 0 ≤ j < q2 − 1, the column labeled j corresponds to the point αj. Let HEG,T and HEG,B be the sub-matrices of HEG that consist of the top q + 1 and the bottom q2 − 1 rows of HEG, respectively. Then,

HEG =

HEG,T HEG,B

.

(1)

The top sub-matrix HEG,T of HEG is a (q + 1) × q2 matrix over GF(2) which has the following structures: 1) the −∞th column consists of q + 1 1-entries; and 2) the 0-th to the (q2 − 2)-th columns form a row of (q − 1) identity matrices of size (q + 1) × (q + 1). The bottom sub-matrix HEG,B of HEG has the following structures: 1) the −∞-th column consists of q2 − 1 0-entries; and 2) the other q2 − 1 columns form a (q2 −1)×(q2 −1) circulant with both column and row weights equal to q. The column and row weights of HEG are q + 1 and q, respectively. For j = −∞ or 0 ≤ j < q2 − 2, there are q + 1 rows in HEG that have 1-components at the j-th position. These rows are the incidence vectors of the q + 1 lines that intersect at the point αj of EG(2, q). The rows of the top sub-matrix HEG,T of HEG correspond to the q + 1 lines of EG(2, q) that intersect at the origin and the rows of the sub-matrix HEG,B of HEG correspond to the q2 − 1 lines
that do not pass through the origin.
Since two lines in EG(2, q) are either parallel or they
intersect at one and only one point, their corresponding
incidence vectors have at most one place where they both
have 1-components. This implies that HEG satisfies the RC-constraint. Its null space gives a binary RC-constrained
(q + 1, q)-regular EG-LDPC code CEG. The RC-constraint on HEG ensures that the minimum distance of this code is at least q + 2 and its Tanner graph has a girth of at least 6.

If we remove the first column from the parity-check matrix HEG, the top sub-matrix becomes a (q+1)×(q2−1) circulant H∗EG,T and the bottom sub-matrix becomes a (q2−1)×(q2−1) square circulant HE∗ G,B. The resultant matrix becomes

HE∗ G =

H∗EG,T HE∗ G,B

.

(2)

The null space of H∗EG gives a cyclic EG-LDPC code since both HE∗ G,T and H∗EG,B are circulants. This code, which we denote by CE(0G) ,cyc, has length q2 − 1 and minimum distance at least q + 2. If we use the bottom circulant H∗EG,B in (2) as the parity-check matrix, then the null space of HE∗ G,B gives a cyclic-EG-LDPC code CE(1G) ,cyc of length q2 −1 with minimum distance at least q + 1. The cyclic-LDPC codes, CE(0G) ,cyc and CE(1G) ,cyc are called type-0 and type-1 cyclic-EG-LDPC codes, respectively. The type-1 cyclic-EG-LDPC codes were first

introduced in [6]. Huang et. al. [8] have recently proved that

their Tanner graphs do not contain harmful trapping sets of

sizes smaller than their minimum distances.

The type-1 cyclic EG-LDPC codes, which were introduced

in [6], are dual codes of a special subclass of polynomial codes

discovered in the late 1960’s and early 1970’s [9],[10]. For q = 2s, it was proved that the rank of HE∗ G,B is 3s − 1 and the type-1 cyclic EG-LDPC code CE(1G) ,cyc given by the null space of HE∗ G,B has minimum distance exactly 2s + 1. The type-0 cyclic EG-LDPC code CE(0G) ,cyc is a sub-code of the type-1 cyclic EG-LDPC code CE(1G) ,cyc. It can be readily proved that the rank of H∗EG is 3s and the minimum distance of CE(0G) ,cyc is exactly 2s + 2. The EG-LDPC code CEG given by the parity-check matrix HEG in (1) is an extended code of CE(0G) ,cyc and the rank of HEG is also 3s. The minimum distance of CEG is exactly 2s + 2.

V. TRAPPING SETS OF EG-LDPC CODES
In this section, we analyze the structure of trapping sets of the EG-LDPC code, CEG, whose parity-check matrix, HEG, is the q(q + 1) × q2 matrix given by (1).

A. Geometrical Interpretation of a Trapping Set
The rows of HEG correspond to the q(q + 1) lines of EG(2, q) and the columns correspond to the q2 points of EG(2, q). For the purpose of our analysis, we label the rows
with L0, L1, . . . , Lq(q+1)−1, the lines of EG(2, q), and label the columns with α−∞ = 0, α0 = 1, α, α2, . . . , αq2−2, the points of EG(2, q), where α is a primitive element of GF(q2).
The Tanner graph GEG associated with the parity-check matrix HEG consists of q2 VNs and q(q + 1) CNs. Since the VNs correspond to the columns of HEG and the CNs correspond to the rows of HEG, we label the VNs and the CNs of GEG as we labeled the columns and the rows of HEG, respectively. A VN αj is connected to a CN Li if and only if αj is a point on the line Li in EG(2, q), i.e., if and only if the line Li passes through the point αj. Since each point in EG(2, q) is intersected by q +1 lines and each line in EG(2, q)

3090
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:04:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

consists of q points, we readily see that the degree of each VN in the Tanner graph GEG associated with the parity-check matrix HEG is q + 1 and the degree of each CN in GEG is q. The Tanner graph GEG is actually a graphical representation of the geometry EG(2, q).
Let Λ be a set of κ points and Φ(Λ) be the set of lines, each passing through at least one point in Λ. Then, Λ induces a (κ, τ ) trapping set where τ is the number of lines in Φ(Λ), each passing through an odd number of points in Λ. Hence, if ni is the number of lines in Φ(Λ), each passing through exactly i points in Λ, then

τ = n1 + n3 + n5 + · · · .

(3)

Notice that ni = 0 for i = 0 or i > κ. Based on this geometrical point of view, a trapping set of an EG-LDPC code simply corresponds to a sub-geometry of EG(2, q).

B. General Bounds on Trapping Sets

We derive here a lower bound on the number, n1, of lines passing through exactly one point in Λ. This bound will certainly give a lower bound on τ in (3).
First, we count, in two different ways, the number of pairs where each pair consists of a point in Λ and a line in Φ(Λ) passing through this point. Since each of the κ points in Λ is on q + 1 lines, the total number of such pairs is (q + 1)κ. Alternatively, since a line passing through i points in Λ contributes i such pairs, the total number of pairs is n1 + 2n2 + · · · + κnκ. Hence,

n1 + 2n2 + · · · + κnκ = (q + 1)κ.

(4)

Next, we count, also in two different ways, the number of pairs

of points in Λ. (Throughout this paper, by a pair of points we

mean an unordered pair of distinct points.) Since Λ consists of

κ points, there are

κ 2

such pairs. Alternatively, since every

pair of points in Λ is on a unique line in Φ(Λ) and a line

passing through i points in Λ connects total number of pairs of points in Λ is

i 2

pairs
κi i=1 2

of points, the ni. Hence,

2 2

n2 +

3 2

n3 + · · · +

κ 2

nκ =

κ 2

.

(5)

As

i 2

= i(i − 1)/2 ≥ i/2 for i ≥ 2, it follows from (5) that

2n2 + 3n3 + · · · + κnκ ≤ 2

κ 2

= κ(κ − 1).

(6)

From (4) and (6), we obtain

n1 ≥ (q + 1)κ − κ(κ − 1) = (q + 2 − κ)κ.

(7)

If 1 ≤ κ ≤ q + 1, then (q + 2 − κ)κ ≥ q + 1. This follows from the fact that (q + 2 − κ)κ is a concave function in κ which equals q + 1 for κ = 1 and q + 1. From (3) and (7),
we conclude that the number of CNs of odd degree in any trapping set of size at most q + 1 is at least q + 1. Since the
ratio of the number of CNs of odd degree to the number of VNs is at least q + 2 − κ, it follows, from Definition 1 part 3), that the Tanner graph GEG associated with the parity-check

matrix HEG contains no small trapping set of size κ ≤ q − 3
as τ /κ ≥ q + 2 − κ > 4 in this case. On the other hand, from the same definition, since the code length n = q2, it follows

that GEG co√ntains no small trapping since κ ≥ n + 1 in this case. For

set of size κ ≥ q + 1 q = 2s, the minimum

distance of CEG is 2s + 2. The above result basically says that
the Tanner graph GEG of CEG contains no trapping set of size smaller than the minimum distance 2s + 2 of the code with

the number of CNs of odd degrees smaller than 2s + 1 (the

column weight of the parity-check matrix HEG).

Equality holds in (7) if and only if

i 2

ni

=

ini/2

for

2

≤

i ≤ κ, which is the case if and only if n3 = n4 = · · · =

nκ = 0, i.e., each line in Φ(Λ) passes through at most two

points in Λ. This is the same as saying that no three points

in Λ are collinear. In this case, we say that the points in Λ

have a uniform pair-wise distribution. If this condition holds,

then Λ forms a (κ, (q + 2 − κ)κ) elementary trapping set. Any

other distribution of points will result in a trapping set with a

larger number CNs with odd degrees.

As another special case, we consider the extreme opposite

case in which all the points in Λ are collinear. Then, n2 = · · · = nκ−1 = 0 and nκ = 1. Substituting in (4), it follows that n1 = qκ, i.e., the trapping set has qκ CNs of degree 1 in addition to a CN of degree κ. Hence, Λ forms a (κ, qκ)

trapping set if κ is even and a (κ, qκ + 1) trapping set if κ

is odd. Typically, such trapping sets will not trap the iterative

decoder since they have large numbers of CNs of odd degree.

C. Detailed Structure of Trapping Sets
In the previous subsection, we developed a bound on the number of odd-degree CNs in the Tanner graph GEG associated with the parity-check matrix HEG of the EG-LDPC code CEG. In the following, we improve upon this bound by considering the detailed configuration of lines passing through
the points corresponding to the trapping set.
Based on the geometrical interpretation presented in this
paper, to characterize the subgraph induced by a trapping set of κ VNs, labelled αj1 , αj2 , . . . , αjκ , in the Tanner graph of an EG-LDPC code, we consider the set Λ = {αj1 , αj2 , . . . , αjκ } in EG(2, q) and the set of lines, Φ(Λ), that contain points in Λ. Notice that the set of lines passing through αjl , for 1 ≤ l ≤ κ, is the intersecting bundle Δ(αjl ). Hence, Φ(Λ) = Δ(αj1 ) ∪ Δ(αj2 ) ∪ · · · ∪ Δ(αjκ ). A CN of degree
1 corresponds to a line passing through one and only one point in Λ, i.e., the line belongs to one and only one of the intersecting bundles Δ(αj1 ), Δ(αj2 ), . . . , Δ(αjκ ). In the
following, we lower bound the number of such lines.
Recall that each parallel bundle, of q lines, contains all the points in EG(2, q) and, in particular, all the points in Λ = {αj1 , αj2 , . . . , αjκ }. Let P be a parallel bundle of lines and Li1 , Li2 , . . . , Lib be the lines in P , each passing through at least one point in Λ. For 1 ≤ l ≤ b, let Λl be the set of points in Λ that lie on line Lil and let κl be the number of such points. Since the lines Li1 , Li2 , . . . , Lib are parallel, each point in Λ lies on one and only one of these lines. Hence, Λ1, Λ2, . . . , Λb are disjoint sets whose union is Λ and κ1 + κ2 + · · · + κb = κ.

3091
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:04:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Let Ωl be the set consisting of the κl intersecting bundles whose intersecting points are those points in Λ lying on Lil . We call Ωl the congregation with the line Lil as its center. Thus, in total we have b center lines and all other lines in
Φ(Λ) are non-center lines. We denote by n1 the number of center lines Lil , 1 ≤ l ≤ b, for which κl = 1, i.e., n1 = |{l : 1 ≤ l ≤ b, κl = 1}|. For 1 ≤ i ≤ κ, let ni denote the number of non-center lines, each passing through i points in
Λ. Since any two points in Λl are connected by a center line,
they cannot lie on the same non-center line. Hence, the points
on any non-center line belong to different sets Λ1, Λ2, . . . , Λb. This implies that ni = 0 for i > b. We are interested in lower bounding n1 = n1 + n1 , the total number of lines in Φ(Λ) that pass through exactly one point in Λ.
Since each of the κ points in Λ is on q + 1 lines, including
the center line, each point is on exactly q non-center lines.
Hence, the number of pairs each consisting of a point in Λ
and a non-center line passing through the point is

n1 + 2n2 + · · · + bnb = qκ.

(8)

For 1 ≤ r < t ≤ b, there are κrκt pairs of points, one belonging to Λr and the other to Λt. Hence, the number of pairs of points in Λ that do not belong to the same set Λl for 1 ≤ l ≤ b, is given by

(

ρ=

κrκl =

1≤r<t≤b

b l=1

κl)2

−

2

b l=1

κl2

=

κ2

−

2

b l=1

κl2

.

(9)

Since the two points in every such pair are connected by a

non-center line, and a non-center line passing through i points

in Λ connects

i 2

such pairs, we have

2 2

n2 +

3 2

n3 + · · · +

b 2

nb = ρ.

(10)

From (8) and (10) and following the same argument leading to (7), we obtain

b

n1 ≥ qκ − 2ρ = qκ − κ2 + κ2l .

(11)

l=1

Hence, the number of lines in Φ(Λ) passing through a single point in Λ, which is n1 = n1 + n1 , is bounded by

b
n1 ≥ qκ − κ2 + κ2l + |{l : 1 ≤ l ≤ b, κl = 1}|. (12)
l=1

This gives a lower bound on the number of CNs of degree one in a trapping set of size κ. We notice that this lower bound agrees with the lower bound in (7) whenever κl ≤ 2 for all 1 ≤ l ≤ b and improves upon it in all other cases.
Inequality (12) can be applied easily once the points in the
geometry corresponding to the VNs of the trapping set are given. The inequality depends on the numbers κ1, κ2, . . . , κb, which in turn depend on the set of points Λ as well as on the choice of the parallel bundle P . For example, if each point is represented by a two-tuple (a0, a1) over GF(q), then {(a0, a1) : a0 ∈ GF(q)} for some a1 ∈ GF(q) is a line

associated with this value of a1. The q lines associated with the q values of a1 ∈ GF(q) form a parallel bundle. (This parallel bundle can be viewed as the set of the q horizontal lines in a two-dimensional plane where each point in the Euclidean geometry is represented by its cartesian coordinates.) The number of points in Λ on the line associated with a1 is the number of points (a0, a1) ∈ Λ. From this, it is easy to compute κ1, κ2, . . . , κb which can be used in (12) to obtain a lower bound on the number of CNs of degree one in the trapping set.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a geometrical model to analyze the trapping set structure of the Tanner graph of the EGLDPC code with parity-check matrix HEG as given in (1). The parity-check matrix HE∗ G in (2) of the cyclic EG-LDPC code CE(0G) ,cyc is obtained by removing the origin from the Euclidean geometry EG(2, q) and, therefore, (6) also holds for its associated trapping sets. By also removing all the lines passing through the origin, we obtain the parity-check matrix HE∗ G,B of the cyclic-EG-LDPC code CE(1G) ,cyc. In this case, each point is on q lines rather than on q + 1 lines as in the case of HEG. Hence, (6) also holds for CE(1G) ,cyc after replacing q + 1 by q. Our approach can also be applied to analyze the trapping set structure of projective geometries and Euclidean geometries with dimensions greater than two [11].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation (NSF) under the grant CCF1015548.
REFERENCES
[1] D. J. C. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[2] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annual Allerton Conf. Commun., Control and Comp., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[3] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “The trapping redundancy of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 53–63, Jan. 2009.
[4] N. Kashyap and A. Vardy, “Stopping sets in codes from designs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 122.
[5] S. La¨ndner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Networks, Communications and Mobile Computing, Maui, HI, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635.
[6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[7] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd edition. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2004.
[8] Q. Huang, Q. Diao, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Cyclic and quasicyclic LDPC codes on constrained parity-check matrices and their trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 2648– 2671, May 2012.
[9] T. Kasami, S. Lin, and W. W. Peterson, “Polynomial codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 807–814, Nov. 1968.
[10] S. Lin, “On the number of information symbols in the polynomial codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 18, no. 6, pp. 785–794, Nov. 1972.
[11] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. A. S. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 572–596, Feb. 2005.

3092
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:04:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

