An FPGA-based Prototyping Method for Verification, Characterization and Optimization of
LDPC Error Correction Systems

P. Sakellariou, I. Tsatsaragkos, N. Kanistras, A. Mahdi and V. Paliouras Electrical and Computer Engineering Department University of Patras 26500 Patras, Greece

Abstract—This paper introduces a methodology for forward error correction (FEC) architectures prototyping, oriented to system verification and characterization. A complete design flow is described, which satisfies the requirement for error-free hardware design and acceleration of FEC simulations. FPGA devices give the designer the ability to observe rare events, due to tremendous speed-up of FEC operations. A Matlab-based system assists the investigation of the impact of very rare decoding failure events on the FEC system performance and the finding of solutions which aim to parameters optimization and BER performance improvement of LDPC codes in the error floor region. Furthermore, the development of an embedded system, which offers remote access to the system under test and verification process automation, is explored. The presented here prototyping approach exploits the high-processing speed of FPGA-based emulators and the observability and usability of software-based models.
Index Terms—LDPC, FPGA emulation, embedded systems, verification, code characterization, error correcting performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
During the last decade FPGA devices have progressed both in terms of resources and performance. The adoption of ultra-thin chip geometries (down to 28nm) and higher levels of integration, as well as the use of faster communication links and specialized cores, derive FPGAs that are easily customizable for DSP, data processing and system connectivity applications [1]. The two main competitors of FPGAs are ASICs and Microprocessors. Advantages of FPGA-based prototyping compared to ASIC prototyping include the ability to re-program (even partial device reconfiguration supported) to fix bugs, early time-to-market, lower engineering costs and easy transition to structured ASICs. A middle design choice is to develop the hardware on FPGAs and implement the final version in ASIC. The overall performance growth of traditional microprocessors in recent years is unable to follow the stunning growth in the performance of FPGAs. FPGAs can provide performance per watt of power consumed increased by more than two orders of magnitude, compared to a microprocessor. FPGAs dominate when dealing with problems that can efficiently divided into many parallel, recurrent computational tasks and offer more flexibility in terms of I/O interface (I/O pins, SerDes links, attached
The research activities that led to these results, were co-financed by Hellenic Funds and by the European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) under the Hellenic National Strategic Reference Framework (NSRF) 2007-2013, according to Contract no.MICRO2-SE-B/E-II of the Project “Next Generation Millimeter Wave Backhaul Radio” within the Programme “Hellenic Technology Clusters in Microelectronics - Phase-2 Aid Measure”.

SRAM/SDRAM memories). On the other hand, generally FPGAs are not particularly well suited to floating-point calculations. In this case, a increased amount of logic cells is required [2]. Someone should also take into consideration that FPGA development often takes much longer than an equivalent development task for a microprocessor using a high-level programming language, due to the long synthesis and implementation time, as well as the greater demands of HDL code development. Worth noting that in the last few years CUDA-based graphics processing units (GPUs) have become a strong candidate for applications where processing of large blocks of data is done in parallel, offering highly parallel computation, very high memory bandwidth, and a flexible programmable environment.
Recent architectural approaches combine the logic blocks and interconnects of traditional FPGAs with embedded microprocessors and related peripherals to form a complete “system on a programmable chip.” An embedded system is an applied computer system dedicated to handle a particular task [3], as distinguished from other types of computer systems such as personal general-purpose computers (PCs) or supercomputers. Embedded systems are designed for specific control functions within a larger system, often with real-time computing constraints. Since such a system is dedicated to specific tasks, design engineers can optimize it to reduce the size and cost of the product and increase the reliability and performance. Prototyping of embedded hardware/software systems is important because it shortens the path from specification to final product. Prototyping is part of product planning, requirements engineering, and product development. The trends that dominate hardware/software embedded system prototyping are the advent of very large reprogrammable devices with other processing elements on a single chip, or system on a chip, the expansion of embedded systems into virtually all electronic application fields, and the reuse of pre-existing components together with new hardware and software. These trends will influence the need for rapid system prototyping, and make it a permanent part of the embedded system design process. FPGA-based evaluation boards are invaluable tools in the initial stages of product development. Ideas can be quickly tried out before committing to a PCB layout. Software simulation can assist in the design process, but if the design involves other ICs that are connected the FPGA the task becomes more complicated. There is a need to observe and control what is happening inside an FPGA. For functional verification, an emulator environment based on an FPGA prototyping board has been designed by Oh et. al. in [4]. Fan presents an FPGA-based data acquisition system where analogue signals are converted to digital via a signal processing module and sequentially, data

978-1-467A3u-t2ho2r9iz7ed-3li/c1en2s/e$d3u1s.e0l0im©ite2d0to1:2YoInEsEeiEUniv. Downloaded on J2u8n6e 24,2026 at 09:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FEC Parameters
Embedded System with High-Performance HW FEC Accelerator
rare events Matlab

LDPC
RNG
Encoder

AWGN Channel

LDPC Decoder

Output

Errors

NbE

RNG Counter

Fig. 2. Block Diagram of the LDPC-Codec and AWGN Channel system.

Fig. 1. Data capturing flow.
is collected using FPGA data acquisition module and stored on personal computer via USB connection [5]. However, a flexible human-FPGA interface is required to capture/insert data from/into the RTL design. For this purpose, Legat has developed in [6] an embedded system web server, based on Microblaze soft-core processor on a Virtex-4 FPGA, to provide a network interface for custom FPGA-based embedded designs. A Xilinx Embedded Development Kit (EDK) was used to select and construct the required hardware using an external dynamic RAM of 64 MB as main memory. Manivannan and Kumaresan in [7] have proposed a design of on-line interactive data acquisition and control system based on an embedded ARM platform. Their system is capable of meeting to the strict requirements of the data acquisition and control system such as the function, reliability, cost, size, power consumption. An embedded web server mode is also used to share the acquired data. Exploiting the ability of FPGA devices to offer massively parallel processing, Gomez et. al. present a circuit which accelerates the design of good error correcting codes [8]. Authors implement in hardware functions which use the information about the minimum distance and the Hamming distance between the codewords that comprise a code, in order to perform fitness evaluation for code optimization.
In this paper, an FPGA-based prototyping and verification methodology is proposed, particularly suited for characterization of an LDPC error correction system and readily applicable to different target implementations. The characteristics of the FEC system prototyping and optimization that require particular solutions are:
• need to observe very rare events, occurring at a rate of 1 per 1012 repetitions,
• requirement for acceleration of the simulation of FEC operation, allowing the exploration of the LDPC codes BER performance in the error floor region, and
• error-free hardware design.
An interesting feature of the presented approach is that the same parametric HDL model used to implement the hardware core of the accelerator system is used to generate decoders capable of delivering throughput rates required by applications but not supported by development boards. This is achieved by supporting a parametric degree of parallelism.
A complete design flow is described which includes software/hardware co-verification and simulation, FPGA-based prototyping and emulation. A case of study is to simulate the behavior of a system under test (SUT) using a software model on a simulation program such as Matlab. Another approach performs hardware simulations exploiting the high processing speed of FPGA emulators. This paper describes a hybrid approach. LDPC parity check matrices are generated using models on Matlab. The BER performance of these codes is evaluated on high-speed FPGAs. The

generated data, by the SUT (LDPC codec), are collected via a proposed here embedded system. This system offers access for monitoring, observation and controlling of the SUT. This data can be further analyzed and processed off-line on Matlab, in order to optimize the error correction capability of the LDPC system.
In Fig. 1 the flow of data acquisition by the proposed embedded system is depicted. FEC parameters are set as inputs to the HW FEC accelerator system, which is monitored by the embedded system. When worth to study events occur – what rarely happens in case of very low BER – the embedded system captures the required data, which are in this manner available for further process by Matlab.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section II describes the LDPC error correction system, the error floor effect and certain phenomena related to decoding failures. Section III presents the proposed design flow and section IV describes the proposed here embedded system for prototyping and verification. The design space exploration and system characterization procedure follows in section V. A challenging design story where the proposed development process has been successfully applied is reported in section VI, while conclusions are discussed in section VII.
II. APPLICATION: LDPC ERROR CORRECTION
This paper presents a complete methodology which yields to optimized error correction architectures. The specific target application is a forward error correction (FEC) system which consists of an LDPC-codec, an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) Channel and additional circuitry for the evaluation of the error correction performance [9]. More specifically, its basic blocks are the LDPC Encoder, an AWGN Channel, the LDPC Decoder, the Errors Counter module and two LFSRs (Fig. 2). The LDPC Decoder implements variations of the min-sum layered decoding algorithm [10]. BPSK modulated symbols are transmitted over an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel [11]. A Random Number Generator (RNG) feeds the input of the system, while a second identical RNG module is synchronized with the Decoder’s output and generates the corresponding frame, which originally entered the Encoder, as soon as the Decoder’s output is active. In this manner, Encoder’s inputs and Decoder’s outputs are compared without the use of extra memory for the storage of input bit-streams (frames). The RNG modules are implemented as Linear Feedback Shift Registers (LFSRs). The Errors Counter module calculates the number of the bit errors (NbE), by comparing the hard-decision bits of the Decoder’s output with the corresponding bits in the Encoder’s input. We have constructed irregular LDPC codes of several rates R and sizes N , using degree distribution polynomials of WiMAX LDPC codes [12]. The system has been designed in VHDL and mapped into several FPGA platforms, such as Xilinx ML507.
The error correcting capability of LDPC based systems at low noise levels is often dominated by the error floor. Is so called a region where the slope of the BER vs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u8n7e 24,2026 at 09:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10−1 10−2

c52

2.13268.5312

v1646 (0−1)

11.311035

10−3 10−4 10−5 10−6

c113

−4.8984 −2.8438
5.2−71314.0234
v1317 (1−0) −11.408691

−7.4−040.90078

c380

6.1328 5.1782 −5.5−550.73438
c136

v1975 (1−0) −14.130981

BER

10−7

10−8

10−9

10−10

Error Floor

10−11

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

Eb/No (dB)

Fig. 3. The error floor region in LDPC codes.

noise (SNR) plot deteriorates (Fig. 3) . BER reduction slows down as the noise level decreases [13]. Iterative decoding algorithms on graphs with cycles usually become trapped to local minimum solutions failing to result in a valid codeword. The decoder enters a non-codeword steady state from which it cannot escape (trapping set). Trapping of the decoder depends among others on the properties of the specific LDPC code, numerical issues in the decoder implementation and the decoding algorithm, degrading the error correction capability of the particular LDPC system. The error floor is usually observed at low noise levels, corresponding to BER values below 10−9. Software simulations in these regions are extremely time consuming, thus sometimes the error floor is out of reach of the simulations performed. Our will to explore the BER performance of an LDPC code in the error floor region and develop codes which perform well at low-SNR operating points made apparent the need of a high speed encoding/decoding hardware architecture implemented on a FPGA platform. Such a hardware implementation is necessary in order to take reliable BER measurements in the error floor region, allowing the study to extend to BER values below 10−9, where flattening effects appear.
A. Trapping Sets
A binary block code is totally defined and described by its binary parity check matrix H. Each row of H corresponds to a parity check equation, while columns correspond to the codeword bits. Another way to represent a parity check matrix, is its bipartite Tanner graph [14], that consists of check and variable nodes. Check nodes correspond to parity rows of H, variable nodes correspond to H columns, while an ace in the i-th row and j-th column of H indicate a connection between the corresponding nodes. All of the parity check equations have to be satisfied by a codeword of the code. This property, is exploited by the LDPC decoding algorithms. However, a parity check equation is capable of detecting only odd number of errors among the participated to it variable nodes. Consequently, there may be one or more combinations of appropriately positioned errors into the word, that satisfy the majority of parity check equations. The existence of certain inherent structures in an LDPC code increases the occurrence probability of such error combinations.
Such a phenomenon leads the majority of decoding algorithms to get stuck during decoding and finally to fail.

−3.875 −5.7759

4.5996 6.9043

v1698 (0−1) 12.050781

c178

2.9062 9.6094
7.3146.74344

c185

4.731414.0352

v235 (0−1) 19.006104

13.4255.58803

7.3438 2.0918

v70

c65

(0−1)

2.7859.15078

9.773438

2.9688 4.8164

6.4219 2.2266

c104

13.6406 −3.8672

−8.5507 −5.5803
c461

c289

Fig. 4. Trapping set: a snapshot of the decoding process at the end of the 15-th decoding iteration. Rectangles denote check nodes, ellipses denote variable nodes.

An example is depicted in Fig. 4, where a part of an instance of the decoding process is represented. Particularly, a part of the decoder is displayed, consisting of
- the bits, for which the decoder takes wrong decision at the end of the second decoding iteration, and
- the check nodes of the parity check equations, where wrong variable nodes participate into.
Rectangular nodes correspond to check nodes, while circular nodes represent variable nodes. Green and yellow check nodes indicate satisfaction and non-satisfaction of parity check equation respectively, while red variable nodes stand for erroneous bits. Exchanged messages between connected nodes are also displayed. Pairs of erroneous bits are connected to satisfied check nodes, which are therefore unable to detect the existence of errors.
Fig. 4 has been produced by a developed tool that graphically represents the Tanner graph of the code. The tool is based on bioinformatics Matlab toolbox and displays information about a selected decoding iteration. The displayed information concerns snapshots of the decoding process and especially
- check nodes satisfaction, - correctness of decoding algorithm decisions about
variable bits1, as well as - exchanged information among connected node of the
code graph.
Decoding of the particular frame converges at the end of the 15-th iteration, implementing the Normalized Min-Sum
1Value of decision messages, real bit value and decoder failed decision are displayed also.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u8n8e 24,2026 at 09:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

algorithm [15], with normalization factor a = 0.75. The implemented decoder uses a total of 504 check and 2016 variable nodes.
This information may be used for FPGA-based system verification also, assuming that decoding has been executed by a Matlab bit-true model of the SUT.

B. Distance problem
As distance problem, we refer to the case of decoding convergence to a codeword different than the transmitted one. Assuming
- ct, the transmitted codeword, - wr, the word that derives from the hard decision of the
received noised symbols sequence according to

wri

=

1

−

sign(si 2

)

,

i = 1, 2, . . . , N

where si stands for the i-th received symbol2, and - cd, the decision of the decoder,
we check the Hamming distances, d(ct, wr) and d(cd, wr), between ct − wr and cd − wr respectively. An alternative approach is to consider the corresponding Euclidian distance. In this case wr stands for the received symbols sequence, instead of its hard decision derivative.
There are two possible scenarios,
◦ 1st scenario: d(ct, wr) > d(cd, wr), and ◦ 2nd scenario: d(ct, wr) < d(cd, wr).
In case that the first one holds, the noise added to the transmitted symbols results to a hard decision bit sequence that is closer to another codeword, namely the decoder output. Since the decoding procedure is desired to converge to the closest to the received one codeword, it is anticipated to converge to a codeword different from the transmitted, in the case that this scenario holds. A better code, with larger minimum distance is required in such a case. On the contrary, in case of the second scenario, decoding failure is considered, since decoder converges to a codeword that is not closer to the received one, comparing to the transmitted codeword.

C. Codeword oscillations
The developed Matlab-based emulator, is flexible enough to emulate captured frames decoding, using a variety of double-precision or bit-true decoding algorithms. Moreover, inner decoder accuracy (in case of bit-true decoding), as well as the number of executed decoding iterations, are quite easily altered at will.
This flexibility is quite helpful to study decoding phenomena, like oscillations on decoding process. Authors studied such kind of oscillations [9], by exploiting the flexibility that a combination of FPGA-based and Matlab-based systems provides. In order to efficiently capture adequate number of frames, where decoding fails, an extra system was developed, that provides a high-level monitoring of the executed on FPGA-based system simulations.

III. DESIGN FLOW
Fig. 5 depicts the FPGA prototyping and verification design flow. The design process begins with the development of a Matlab model of the error correction system. An easy-to-use parameterized software model allows the performance investigation for BER values up to 10−7. Basic simulation

2This relationship holds in case of BPSK modulation. The most common bit-to-transmitted symbol mapping is 0 → 1 and 1 → −1. This mapping is assumed here also.

System Specifications

Hardware Architecture
(VHDL)
Synthesis & Implementation
(ISE)

Behavioral Simulation

Matlab Simulation

Verification

Post-Route Simulation

Bit-True Simulation

Software Model (Matlab)
Bit-True Model (Matlab)

FPGA

On-board Simulation

On-board Verification

Fig. 5. Complete design flow diagram for the LDPC error correction system.

parameters are the parity check matrix H, the decoding algorithm performed and the number of decoding iterations. The next task is to build a HDL description of the LDPC codec hardware architecture. We use parameterized Matlab scripts to automate the HDL code generation procedure. In addition, we developed a bit-true Matlab model which precisely describes the implemented hardware architecture. Bit-true simulations are much more time consuming than Matlab software model simulations, but extremely useful during the debugging process. Design verification has taken place at all levels of design abstraction, focusing on checking the functional effective equivalence of models between various levels:
• Double precision Matlab vs. bit-true Matlab. BER performance as evaluated by the bit-true Matlab is slightly worse because of the finite precision representation.
• Bit-true Matlab vs. HDL simulations. HDL simulations can be behavioral simulations of the HDL code or post-route simulations performed after synthesis and implementation of the design. We use a hardware simulation and debug environment such us Modelsim. The results obtained by bit-true Matlab are compared with the corresponding data of the hardware architecture.
• Bit-true Matlab vs. data obtained from a hardware prototype of the LDPC codec. This is the last step of design verification, performed after the HDL is compiled into a binary configuration file and loaded into the FPGA. It is important to mention that a successfully verified hardware design, behaviorally tested in Modelsim, does not guarantee the functional correctness of the equivalent FPGA design.
To ensure the system reliability, Matlab-based system emulates accurately the bit-true behavior of the FPGA-implemented codec. Matlab bit-true model takes into account, both the finite precision representation and computations of the decoder, as well as the finite accuracy of the decoder input from channel. Operational consistence of two systems, namely the FPGA-implemented LDPC codec and the Matlab bit-true LDPC codec, has been verified through testing of sufficient large number of transmitted words (a few hundreds of frames). Exchanged decoding information, as well as decoder decisions, have been thoroughly checked.
In order to conduct on-board verification of the implemented architecture and export experimental results, we use a series of tools:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u8n9e 24,2026 at 09:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

• Logic Analyzer. • ChipScope Pro tool, which inserts an on-chip embedded
logic analyzer into the design. • A proposed here embedded system for prototyping and
verification on FPGAs.
The particular tests are of significant importance during both design verification and error correcting performance characterization.
IV. EMBEDDED SYSTEM FOR VERIFICATION
Verification is probably the most important procedure of system development. For FPGA-based systems, verification is straightforwardly related to operational monitoring of the developed system. In case of a FEC system, such as the one considered as SUT in this work, monitoring may concern the encoding-decoding procedure. Moreover, at a most abstract level, the correction performance of the system may be monitored. At any case, the SUT operational monitoring, concerns practically the capturing of data, that are produced during SUT operation. Using Logic Analyzer and Chipscope are the contemporary offered solutions. The main drawback of both of them, is the limited storing capabilities and the lack of capturing flexibility. Consequently, the support of flexibility in the verification process required for the FEC characterization and optimization process is rather limited. Motivated by the limited control options and storage space offered by contemporary solutions, we developed an embedded system for verification and prototyping on FPGAs. We call the embedded system presented here ESPVF (Embedded System for Prototyping and Verification on FPGAs). It is reasonable to compare ESPVF with the current version of Xilinx Chipscope [16]. Currently Chipscope offers control options through the VIO (Virtual I/O) and the observability is limited by the size of core inserted to the SUT. Moreover, the only option provided by Chipscope to automate the process of data retrieval is to set trigger signals to initiate the process of capturing data frames.
On the other hand, ESPVF takes advantage of off-chip components, such as DDR2 SDRAM for storage and Ethernet controller, in order to provide interaction between the SUT and the user. There are no requirements, by ESPVF, for a host computer system and it can be actually accessed by any device with a network access and an internet browser. This study implements an interface based on plain html pages. Alternatively, interface could be developed in JavaScript or even a high-level computer based program interface without imposing any overhead to the transported data or to the serve time since it would only affect the upper OSI layers. The automation of the process is another spot worth mentioning. Since the development of the core embedded-system software is in C, any operation scenario of data retrieval and control of SUT can be programmed modifying a few lines of code or even allowing to choose the operation scenario over the internet. Also, exploiting the virtual file system, large amounts of test vectors and parameters can be preloaded in DDR2 file system, without any overhead to hardware space and SUT performance, along with the remote access to these data. This section presents the process of developing EPSVF.
A. Hardware Platform - Modelling
During the development of ESPVF, implementation dilemmas were addressed. ESPVF adopts a computer based single processor design architecture. The central component is the processor, either MicroBlaze [17] or PowerPC [18], connected with two buses. The first bus is dedicated to processor memory access, either LMB (Local

memory bus) [19] or PPC440MC (Power PC 440 Memory controller) [20] respectively, used for data and introduction code. The second bus is the PLB (Processor Local Bus) [21], serving an optional number of peripherals such as IP Cores, Ethernet Controller, memory units, UART etc. To assure portability and compatibility on different device families, the flow of CIP (Create and Import Peripheral wizard) on Xilinx XPS is distinguished among the available choices in order to create a dedicated Peripheral connected with the PLB. Other methods to connect the processor with the SUT are the use of DMA (Direct Memory Access), FSL (Fast Simplex Link) and GPIO (General Purpose I/O). The SUT is encapsulated along with a small size local BRAM (Block RAM implemented using SliceM) and an FSM (Finite State machine) to produce a Custom IP core. This method also offers independence of architecture and hardware design. The FSM is responsible to handle the incompatibility between fast hardware speed and slow software run time.
During the development phase, a model of the SUT was introduced and used for debugging and development of the ESPVF to facilitate simultaneously development of ESPVF and the SUT. This model provides identical Inputs/Outputs and similar timing behavior to the SUT. The core of the developed model is composed of a 32-bit LFSR (linear feedback shift register) as a random data generation mechanism, a local BRAM and an FSM (finite state machine) emulating the behaviour of the SUT. The FSM also handles the speed incompatibility of Custom IP process time and software runtime. Using the developed model it was possible to verify the functionality, the reliability and the performance in every step of the developing process even before the development of the SUT. Moreover, using an LFSR, it is a straightforward process to verify the generated data off-line or on-line. Also taking advantage of implementing LFSR using software, it was possible to develop a special set-up to verify the reliability of the process of data retrieval and data storage. The proposed ESPVF is implemented using Xilinx ML507 development board [22]. During the development process, several boards were used to verify functionality and compatibility such as Xilinx ML402 and Xilinx Spartan 3E Starter Kit.
B. ESPVF Design Space Exploration
Embedded systems employ a variety of memories and ways to communicate with the outside world. The process of data storage and user interaction with the hardware can be categorized in three approaches. In the first approach retrieved data can be saved to a remote host computer system using a link such as a UART (serial communication). The same link can be used as a two-way connection to provide access to the SUT. In the second approach, a removable non-volatile device such as CompactFlash, attached to the board, can be used to save retrieved data locally. This method does not support observability and can only use the ability of control by pre-loading parameters to the non-volatile device. In the third approach, the retrieved data can be saved locally to a volatile memory such as DDR2, which is the main memory, and subsequently be recovered over an Ethernet link. These approaches can be easily distinguished by the scalable complexity. In order to select the most suitable among the various approaches, they have been developed and tested.
The first approach employees a UART to implement a link between the embedded system and a remote host computer. There cannot be a direct connection between the SUT and the UART in the current architecture of PLB. As a result, data have to be transferred from SUT to the local memory of the CPU and temporarily be stored there. These data can be transferred sequentially through the UART. This method

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u9n0e 24,2026 at 09:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Different Time line

PPC440

PPC440MC

DDR2

PLBv46

PHY Ethernet Conroller

Timer

Custom IP Core

TABLE I CPU CYCLES OF PROPOSED IMPLEMENTATIONS

Proposed implementation Serial Communication
CompactFlash as storage device DDR2 as storage device

CPU cycles 7854000 3372400 843056

DDR2

Register FSM

Interrupts FSM

Top Level FSM

PLBv46

Ethernet - Internet
Fig. 6. Architecture of DDR2 as main storage device.

PPC440
Interrupt Controller

Error Correction subsystem

Local RAM
Multiplex structure

suffers from large serve time due to the low UART speed. Furthermore, the only mechanism assuring the correctness of the broadcasting data is a parity check on byte level. This poses reliability issues because the data are transmitted and afterwards stored to a remote host computer.
In the second approach, the use of a removable memory to store exported data and as a mean to import parameters to the Custom IP core has been considered. Using a CompactFlash as storage device has better performance than using serial communication for data storage. This method does not allow direct access of Custom IP Core to the CompactFlash. The observability of the experiment during verification procedure is also limited. Thus LEDs and switches should be added in order to increase interaction. The reliability of this system is higher than the first approach due to the fact that the data are stored locally and not transmitted. Adopting this approach, additional mechanisms for safely removing the non-volatile memory need to be taken into account.
In the third approach, the use of the main memory as the storage device has been considered. So, it becomes possible to break the bottleneck of transferring data to the processor local memory and then to another IP Core that handles data retrieval. Accordingly, there is a direct transfer and storage of the data from the SUT to the main memory taking advantage of the high speed DDR2 memory. This approach arises though another issue, which is the reliable retrieval of the stored data. For this matter, an Ethernet connection can be used benefited from the reliability of OSI (Open System Interconnection) layers checksums. In this approach, the retrieval/storage of the data from the SUT and the remote data recovery are two separate procedures.The architecture of this approach is presented in Fig. 6.
Serve time is one of the most vital criteria for the SUT to define the optimal system organization. Table I shows the CPU cycles needed to retrieve and store or transmit a data frame of 4000 32-bit words. Finally, the approach adopted is the third one, which is the use of DDR2 as a storage device, along with

Fig. 7. Middle layer hardware design.
an Ethernet Controller as a means to communicate with the outside world.
C. Hardware Design
An approach of hardware-software co-design is followed to ensure that the implemented design would take advantage of hardware high processing power and at the same time has the flexibility and the scalability offered by software.
During the development stage of the Custom IP, middle-layer hardware has been designed to guarantee compatibility between different interfaces of SUT and PLB and different run-times of software and hardware. In Fig.7 the middle-layer hardware is depicted, consisting of three sub-layers. The external sub-layer is the PLB interface. In the second sub-layer the address and the data are organized into registers directly controlled by software. The third sub-layer is composed of an FSM, a local RAM and multiplexers. This FSM controls the SUT, addresses the local memory to store and export data and handles interfacing issues. The local RAM stores data in every clock cycle as long as the date frame does not exceed the size of the RAM defined at the implementation stage.
The components of the developed systems are presented in Figs. 6 and 7. Apart from the Custom IP core, implementing an LDPC-based FEC system, there is a PHY Ethernet controller, a timer and an interrupt controller. The timer is required in order to provide time information to the TCP protocol through the interrupt controller. The interrupt controller is connected with all IP cores providing different configurable priorities giving the highest to the Custom IP core. The overhead of the developed system is considered to be acceptable since it occupies 3761 (8%) SliceM and 3479 (7%) SliceL on Xilinx ML507 leaving remainder of the device to the SUT.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u9n1e 24,2026 at 09:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

D. Software Design
The software has been entirely developed in C according to [23]. A custom minimal OS (operating system) has been developed for the needs of ESPVF, using standard and additional libraries provided by Xilinx SDK (Software Development Kit). The operating system developed is an interrupt-based custom operating system [24], [25]. After the initialization of interrupt controller, Ethernet controller and stack protocols, the main process waits for interrupts. Software functionality can be distinguished into two tasks. The first task is data retrieval and storage to the main memory and the second task provides access to the stored data and offer observability to the SUT. This task can be modified to meet the need of the SUT for data retrieval and operation scenarios. Xilinx MFS (Memory File System) has been employed to provide a virtual file system in the main memory, enabling the storage of retrieved data in a specific form of files. Also, MFS offers the ability of data preload, composed of either files required from the operation system or data used as test vectors for the SUT. Apart from 2 MB required for the OS functionality, the remainder of the memory is available to the MFS.
The second task is dedicated to offer access to the stored data and to the SUT through the first task. Controllability can be achieved though Ethernet controller with the use of lwIP (v1.30)(Lightweight IP)[26]. The lwIP provides the backbone of the Internet access to the system which is a protocol stack. TCP protocol is considered to be most reliable choice used through the RAW API. Over the TCP protocol and according to [27] a minimal Web server was developed which is a particular light version of common embedded web servers. Through the web server, a user can have access to the SUT and to the stored data remotely over the Internet. The choice of HTTP over TCP/IP over MAC Ethernet assures the correctness of the transmitting data though multiple checks. There is a check on MAC level, on TCP level with the ability to detect and correct data and a final check on the HTTP level.
Data retrieval over the Ethernet is safe enough given the checks performed by different OSI layers. The procedure of safe data storage is the most crucial process since there is no way of otherwise verifying data generated by the SUT. In order to verify the reliability of the software and the hardware-software cooperation, an experimental set-up is suggested [28], [29]. The results generated by the hardware, using the model, can be stored in files and then be verified using the software implementation of the LFSR. The proposed set-up verified 32754 files containing 4000 32-bit values in about 44 hours of run-time achieving a 100% of safe data storage. After that period the experiment was terminated.
V. DESIGN SPACE EXPLORATION - CHARACTERIZATION
OF ERROR CORRECTING PERFORMANCE
Verification and characterization methodology of the FEC system is based on the use of parameterized HDL models synthesized and mapped onto FPGA-based accelerators for performance evaluation at low BER points. During the design space exploration several alternatives are investigated to identify the optimal parameters in terms of BER performance, area, speed and power dissipation. Crucial parameters to be optimally defined are the structure of the LDPC code, the iterative decoding algorithm to be used and the internal data representation.
After the procedure of determining design specifications, the choice of particular LDPC codes for implementation follows. The design decision to use LDPC codes, mainly to benefit from the extraordinary correction capabilities of

this scheme, has an impact on the complexity of the design and the verification. The latter is due to the unavailability of theoretical models that predict accurately the behavior at low BER, where error floor occurs. Basic differentiating features of LDPC codes are the codeword length, code rate, density, girth and minimum distance. Since FPGA-based development is more time-consuming than software-based development, we perform some test simulations first in the Matlab double-precision model in order to find codes which exhibit good error correction performance for BERs up to 10−7. These codes are strong candidates for hardware implementation and FPGA emulation. Our measurements show that FPGA simulations are more than four orders of magnitude faster than corresponding double precision Matlab simulations, allowing the performance investigation to extend to BER values up to 10−12.
An iterative parity check matrix construction method [10] is exploited to simplify hardware complexity both in the LDPC encoder and decoder. These LDPC codes support hardware architectures of various degrees of parallelism. The designer has the choice to built first a hardware architecture with small degree of parallelism in order to verify the correct operation of the system. This approach reduces the synthesis and implementation time during the development process. It allows us to develop a less area demanding system on small, cheap FPGA platforms and implement the final high-throughput architecture on a larger FPGA device or in ASIC. By developing parametric HDL models, the extension to higher degrees of parallelism is automated, thus minimizing the probability of design errors.
Furthermore, several optimization techniques [9][30] have been developed that fine tune the FEC decoder hardware implementation to support high-throughput rates at low hardware complexity, while operating at low BER.
Although the FPGA-based system significantly accelerates the simulation process, the detailed monitoring of the decoding procedure becomes impractical. On the other hand, the study of certain phenomena related to decoding failures, that rarely occur, but are of great interest, requires the detailed monitoring of decoding procedure for particular blocks of received bits. Such phenomena are trapping [13], absorbing [31] or stopping [32] sets, near codewords [33] and pseudo codewords [34] and are mainly responsible for the error floor effect, that degrades the decoding performance of LDPC codes at low BER. In our case, this detailed analysis of decoding procedure is performed using a developed Matlab-based system, that emulates the FPGA-based one. The Matlab-based emulator, captures the whole information that is produced, exchanged and processed during decoding. Thereafter it provides the appropriate data to study in depth the mechanism that evoke the above mentioned phenomena.
Due to its severe speed limitations, such a model is practical for the study of a few transmitted frames only. However several billions of frames need to be transmitted at low noise before such frames of interest are observed. Therefore, we here use hardware acceleration to identify a few frames of interest, which are collected from the hardware system for further off-line processing in Matlab.
VI. THE FEC SYSTEM AS PART OF A DIGITAL BASEBAND
FOR A 60GHZ GIGABIT LINK
The presented design, verification and optimization methodology has been successfully applied to the development of a digital baseband processor of a 60GHz point-to-point link, under Nexgen Miliwave research project [35]. There was a need of techniques capable of compensating impairments due

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u9n2e 24,2026 at 09:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

to millimeter-wave front-end and yet support a throughput rate of more than one gigabit, with modest hardware cost. This baseband processor provides all basic functionality required from a digital transmitter and receiver, including filtering, synchronization, equalization, and error correction. Specifically, our research group was responsible for the development of the error correction subsystem. Targeting backhauling applications, a particularly low bit error rate specification of 10−12 has been adopted. Meeting the particular specification, as well as speed and complexity constraints, required the adoption of sophisticated FEC techniques to provide coding gain, which significantly improved the overall link power budget. Furthermore, extensive verification tasks needed to be adopted which included hardware prototyping, as well as effective IP management among involved parties.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
The contribution of this paper is the following. The proposed software/hardware co-verification process, performed at all levels of hardware design abstraction, succeeds to derive fully tested FEC architectures. Parametric hardware designs which support multiple degrees of parallelism, assisted by software-based double precision and bit-true Matlab models, reduce the development time and engineering costs. The proposed design flow extends the investigation of the FEC system error correcting capability to the error floor region, for BER values up to 10−12. A proposed here embedded system (ESPVF) captures data in a reliable and flexible way, overcoming the inherent weaknesses of FPGA-based systems monitoring, with a low overhead to the overall system area requirements. A developed here Matlab-based bit-true system undertake an exhaustive analysis of decoding procedure in an efficient way. This complete flow can speed-up the process of prototyping and increase the performance of the FEC system. The ESPVF system, combined with a high-speed, highly scalable error correction architecture and a proposed here prototyping methodology, constitutes a powerful tool for the error correction capability optimization of a FEC system.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Chandrashekar. (2004, Jul.) Advantages of FPGA design methodologies. [Online]. Available: http://www.design-reuse.com/ articles/8404/advantages-of-fpga-design-methodologies.html
[2] S. Edwards. (2011, Feb.) Microprocessors or FPGAs?: Making the right choice. [Online]. Available: http://rtcmagazine.com/articles/view/102015
[3] T. Noergaard, Embedded Systems Architecture: A Comprehensive Guide for Engineers and Programmers (Embedded Technology). Newnes, 2005.
[4] K.-S. Oh, S.-Y. Yoon, and S.-I. Chae, “Emulator environment based on an FPGA prototyping board,” in 11th International Workshop on Rapid System Prototyping, RSP, 2000, pp. 72–77.
[5] Y. Fan, “FPGA-based data acquisition system,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Signal Processing, Communications and Computing (ICSPCC), Sep. 2011, pp. 1–3.
[6] U. Legat, “Embedded System Web Server,” 9th International PhD Workshop on Systems and Control: Young Generation Viewpoint, no. October, 2008.
[7] M. Manivannan and N. Kumaresan, “Design of on-line interactive data acquisition and control system for embedded real time applications,” in 2011 International Conference on Emerging Trends in Electrical and Computer Technology (ICETECT), Mar. 2011, pp. 551–556.
[8] J. Gomez-Pulido, M. Vega-Rodrguez, and J. Sanchez-Perez, “High-speed reconfigurable parallel system to design good error correcting codes in communications,” Journal of Signal Processing Systems, vol. 66, pp. 147–152, 2012.

[9] I. Tsatsaragkos, N. Kanistras, and V. Paliouras, “A syndrome-based LDPC decoder with very low error floor,” in 2011 17th International Conference on Digital Signal Processing (DSP), Jul. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[10] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “A flexible layered LDPC decoder,” in 2011 8th International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), Nov. 2011, pp. 36–40.
[11] I. Paraskevakos and V. Paliouras, “A flexible high-throughput hardware architecture for a gaussian noise generator,” in 2011 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), May 2011, pp. 1673–1676.
[12] IEEE Std 802.16e-2005 and IEEE Std 802.16-2004/Cor 1-2005 (Amendment and Corrigendum to IEEE Std 802.16-2004, May 2006.
[13] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in 41st Annual Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003.
[14] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[15] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[16] Xilinx, “ChipScope Pro 12.1 Software and Cores,” Xilinx, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[17] ——, “MicroBlaze Processor Reference Guide,” Xilinx, Tech. Rep., 2010.
[18] ——, “PowerPC Processor, Reference Guide,” Xilinx, Tech. Rep., 2010. [19] ——, “( LMB ) V10 ( v1 . 00a ) LMB V10 Module I / O Signals,”
Xilinx, Tech. Rep., 2009. [20] ——, “LogiCORE IP DDR2 Memory Controller for PowerPC 440
Processors ( v3 . 00b ) I / O Signals,” Xilinx, Tech. Rep., 2010. [21] ——, “Processor local bus (plb) v4.6 (v1.04a),” Xilinx, Tech. Rep.,
2009. [22] ——, “Virtex-5 FPGA User Guide,” Xilinx, Tech. Rep., 2010. [23] ——, “OS and Libraries Document Collection,” Xilinx, Tech. Rep. 12.2,
2010. [24] P. Glover, “Using and Creating Interrupt-Based,” pp. 1–37, 2005. [25] Xilinx, “LogiCORE IP XPS Interrupt Controller (v2.01a), Data Sheet.”
Xilinx, Tech. Rep., 2010. [26] S. Velusamy, “LightWeight IP ( lwIP ) Application Examples,” Xilinx,
Tech. Rep., 2009. [27] R. Fielding, J. Gettys, J. Mogul, H. Frystyk, L. Masinter, P. Leach, and
T. Berners-Lee, “RFC 2616: Hypertext Transfer Protocol – HTTP/1.1,” 1999. [Online]. Available: http://www.apps.ietf.org/rfc/rfc2616.html [28] H. Pham, System Software Reliability (Springer Series in Reliability Engineering). Springer, 2006. [29] “Goddard Space Flight Center. Overview of Software Reliability.” [Online]. Available: http://sw-assurance.gsfc.nasa.gov/ disciplines/reliability/index.php [30] I. Tsatsaragkos, N. Kanistras, and V. Paliouras, “Multiple LDPC decoder of very low bit-error rate,” in 2011 17th International Conference on Digital Signal Processing (DSP), Jul. 2011, pp. 1–6. [31] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, M. Wainwright, V. Anantharam, and B. Nikolic, “Evaluation of the low frame error rate performance of ldpc codes using importance sampling,” in IEEE Information Theory Workshop, 2007, ITW ’07, Sep. 2007, pp. 202–207. [32] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002. [33] D. J. C. MacKay and M. J. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan–Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” in Proceedings of MFCSIT2002, Galway, ser. Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 74. Elsevier, 2003. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/abstracts/margulis.html [34] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of ldpc codes,” CoRR, vol. abs/cs/0512078, 2005. [35] N. Kanistras, I. Tsatsaragkos, A. Mahdi, K. Karagianni, V. Paliouras, F. Gioulekas, E. Lalos, K. Adaos, M. Birbas, P. Karaivazoglou, M. Koziotis, and M. Perakis, “Digital baseband challenges for a 60GHz gigabit link,” in 2011 18th IEEE International Conference on Electronics, Circuits and Systems (ICECS), Dec. 2011, pp. 346–349.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J2u9n3e 24,2026 at 09:06:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

