4848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

On the Pseudocodeword Redundancy of Binary Linear Codes
Jens Zumbrägel, Member, IEEE, Vitaly Skachek, and Mark F. Flanagan, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—For a binary linear code, the pseudocodeword redundancy with respect to the additive white Gaussian noise channel, the binary symmetric channel, or the max-fractional weight is defined to be the smallest number of rows in a parity-check matrix such that the corresponding minimum pseudoweight is equal to the minimum Hamming distance of the code. It is shown that most codes do not have a finite pseudocodeword redundancy. Also, upper bounds on the pseudocodeword redundancy for some families of codes, including codes based on designs, are provided. The pseudocodeword redundancies for all codes of small length (at most 9) are computed. Furthermore, comprehensive results are provided on the cases of cyclic codes of length at most 250 for which the eigenvalue bound of Vontobel and Koetter is sharp.
Index Terms—Fundamental cone, low-density parity-check codes, pseudocodeword redundancy, pseudocodewords, pseudoweight.

I. INTRODUCTION

P SEUDOCODEWORDS represent the intrinsic mechanism of failure of binary linear codes under linear

programming (LP) or message-passing iterative (MPI) de-

coding (see, e.g., [1] and [2]). The concept of pseudoweight

of a pseudocodeword was introduced in [3] and [4] (see also

[2]) as an analog to the pertinent parameter in the maximum

likelihood (ML) decoding scenario, i.e., the signal Euclidean

distance in the case of the additive white Gaussian noise channel

(AWGNC), or the Hamming distance in the case of the binary

symmetric channel (BSC). Accordingly, for a binary linear

code and a parity-check matrix of , the (AWGNC or

BSC) minimum pseudoweight

may be considered as

a first-order measure of decoder error-correcting performance

Manuscript received March 18, 2011; revised March 06, 2012; accepted March 20, 2012. Date of publication April 05, 2012; date of current version June 12, 2012. This work was supported in part by the Science Foundation Ireland under Grants 06/MI/006, 08/IN.1/I1950, and 07/SK/I1252a. The work of V. Skachek was also supported in part by the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Singapore under Research Grant NRF-CRP2-2007-03. The work of V. Skachek was done in part while he was with the Claude Shannon Institute and the School of Mathematical Sciences, University College Dublin, Belfield, Dublin, Ireland, and with the Division of Mathematical Sciences, School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, and at the 19th International Symposium on Mathematical Theory of Networks and Systems, Budapest, Hungary, July 2010.
J. Zumbrägel and M. F. Flanagan are with the Claude Shannon Institute, University College Dublin, Dublin 4, Ireland (e-mail: jens.zumbragel@ucd.ie; mark.flanagan@ieee.org).
V. Skachek is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC H3A 2A7, Canada (e-mail: vitaly.skachek@gmail.com).
Communicated by P. O. Vontobel, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2193661

for LP or MPI decoding. Another closely related measure is

the max-fractional weight, which we sometimes also call a

pseudoweight in order to simplify statements; it serves as a

lower bound on both AWGNC and BSC pseudoweights.

In order to minimize the decoding error probability under

LP (or MPI) decoding, one might want to select a matrix

which maximizes the minimum pseudoweight of the code for

the given channel. Adding redundant rows to the parity-check

matrix introduces additional constraints on the so-called fun-

damental cone, and thus may improve the performance of LP

decoding and increase the minimum pseudoweight.1 However,

such additions increase the decoding complexity under MPI

decoding, especially since linear combinations of low-density

rows may not yield a low-density result. On the other hand, there

exist classes of codes for which sparse parity-check matrices

exist with many redundant rows, e.g., [5].

For the AWGNC, binary erasure channel (BEC), BSC, and

max-fractional pseudoweights, define

,

,

, and

, respectively, to be the minimum

number of rows in any parity-check matrix such that the

minimum pseudoweight of with respect to this matrix is equal

to the code’s minimum Hamming distance . For the sake of

simplicity, we sometimes use the notation

when the type

of channel is clear from the context. The value

is called

the (AWGNC, BEC, BSC, or max-fractional) pseudocodeword

redundancy (or pseudoredundancy) of . If for the code there

exists no such matrix , we say that the pseudoredundancy is

infinite.

The BEC pseudocodeword redundancy, which is equivalent

to the stopping redundancy, is studied in [6], where it is shown

that for any linear code the BEC pseudoredundancy is finite; the

paper also contains bounds on

for general binary linear

codes and for some specific families of codes. These bounds

were subsequently improved, for instance in [7]. The study of

BSC pseudoredundancy was initiated in [8], where the authors

presented bounds on

for various families of codes.

In this paper, we further investigate the pseudoredundancy

for the AWGNC, BSC, and max-fractional pseudoweight. We

show that, for most codes, there exists no such that the min-

imum pseudoweight (with respect to ) is equal to , and there-

fore, the AWGNC, BSC, and max-fractional pseudocodeword

redundancy (as defined above) is infinite for most codes. For

some code families for which the pseudoredundancy is finite,

we provide upper bounds on its value. We consider in particular

constructions of new codes from old codes, as well as construc-

tions of codes based on designs. Furthermore, we compute the

pseudocodeword redundancies for all codes of small length (at

1We note that for MPI decoding, apart from the case of decoding over the BEC, there is no general statement that additional parity checks are beneficial.

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZUMBRÄGEL et al.: ON THE PSEUDOCODEWORD REDUNDANCY OF BINARY LINEAR CODES

4849

most 9), and we investigate cyclic codes for which the eigenvalue bound of Vontobel and Koetter [9] is sharp.
The outline of this paper is as follows. In Section II, we provide detailed definitions and some background information on LP decoding, pseudocodewords, the minimum pseudoweight, and the pseudocodeword redundancy; we also discuss related notions appearing in the literature. Subsequently, we show in Section III that the pseudocodeword redundancy for random codes is infinite with high probability. The next four sections are concerned with upper bounds on the pseudoredundancy for some particular classes of codes; we investigate punctured codes and codes of dimension 2 in Section IV, constructions of codes from other codes in Section V, parity-check matrices of row-weight 2 in Section VI, and codes based on designs in Section VII. The final two sections are devoted to experimental results; Section VIII examines the pseudocodeword redundancy for all codes of small length, and Section IX deals with cyclic codes that meet the eigenvalue bound on the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight by Vontobel and Koetter.

II. GENERAL SETTINGS

Let be the binary field and let be the field of real num-

bers. Addition and multiplication (including matrix–vector and

matrix–matrix multiplication) are carried out in when the

operands are defined over , and in when the operands are

defined over the reals. Occasionally, we will explicitly con-

vert elements in into real numbers; in this case, we identify

with

and

with

.

Let be a code of length

over the binary field ,

defined by

the code canonically as a subset of

, one can

then express ML decoding as the minimization problem

This is essentially equivalent to the linear programming problem2

where

denotes the convex hull of in . However,

since the number of defining hyperplanes of

usually

grows exponentially with the block length, this minimization

problem becomes impractical.

Instead, one might consider a relaxation of the aforemen-

tioned minimization problem (see [2], [10], and [11]), where the

convex hull

is replaced by the so-called fundamental

polytope

to be defined next. For

, let denote

the th row of the parity-check matrix , and consider the local

code

consisting of all binary vectors satisfying the th parity-check,

so that

. Then, the fundamental polytope

is defined as

where again is viewed as a subset of . Now LP decoding of a binary linear code with parity-check matrix can be expressed as the minimization problem

where is an

parity-check matrix over of the code .

Obviously, the code may admit more than one parity-check

matrix, and all the codewords form a linear vector space of di-

mension

. We say that is the dimension of the

code . We denote by (or just ) the minimum Hamming

distance (also called the minimum distance) of . The code

may then be referred to as an

linear code over .

Denote the set of column indices and the set of row indices

of the parity-check matrix by

and

, respectively. For any row index

, we let

denote the set of the column indices where the parity-check matrix is nonzero; similarly, for

any column index

, we let

denote the corresponding set of row indices.

The matrix is said to be

-regular if

for

all

and

for all

;a

-regular matrix

is also called simply -regular.

(1)

where

denotes the fundamental polytope.

We note that

, where the inclusion is usually

proper. However, the number of defining hyperplanes of is

typically much smaller than for

, in particular for LDPC

codes, so that the corresponding linear programming problem

becomes tractable.

If is strictly larger than

, then it may happen that

the decoding rule (1) outputs a vertex3 of that is not a vertex of

, i.e., not a codeword. Such vertices, called pseudocode-

words, are the reason for the suboptimality of LP decoding with

respect to ML decoding.

Note that the fundamental polytope

is dependent on

the parity-check matrix rather than the code itself, but we

always have

(cf. [10], [11]).

B. Fundamental Cone and Pseudoweights

A. LP Decoding
We give a brief review of LP decoding. Consider data transmission over a memoryless binary-input output-sym-

When analyzing LP decoding, we may assume without loss of generality that the zero codeword has been sent; then, given this assumption, the probability of correct LP decoding depends

metric channel with channel law the received vector log-likelihood-ratio vector

. Based on , we can define the
by

for

. Viewing

2These two optimization problems are not exactly equivalent since, if a set consisting of more than one codeword is returned by the first optimization, the convex hull of this set will be returned by the second optimization.
3The set of optimal solutions contains a vertex, and one may assume that the output is a vertex.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4850

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

only on the conic hull of the fundamental polytope rather than

on the fundamental polytope itself (see [10], [11], and [2]). The

conic hull of the fundamental cone

is called the funda-

mental cone

. More concretely,

is given as the set

of vectors

that satisfy

(2)

(3)

The vectors

are called pseudocodewords4 of

with respect to the parity-check matrix . Note again that the

fundamental cone

depends on the parity-check matrix

rather than on the code itself. At the same time, the funda-

mental cone is independent of the underlying communication

channel.

Example 2.1: Let be the parity-check matrix

Hamming code with

Note that for binary vectors

, we have

where

denotes the Hamming weight of .

Example 2.2: Let and

The vector

word in

with weights

and

Furthermore,

, where

nally,

be as in Example 2.1. is a pseudocode-
.
, and fi.

We define the BEC minimum pseudoweight of the code with respect to the parity-check matrix as

Then, the fundamental cone inequalities read

The quantities

,

, and

are de-

fined similarly. We note that the considered pseudoweights are

invariant under scaling by a positive scalar, and that a minimum

is indeed attained on

(see [2, Sec. 6]). When the type

of pseudoweight is clear from the context, we sometimes use the

notation

. Note that all four minimum pseudoweights

are upper bounded by , the code’s minimum distance.

The influence of a nonzero pseudocodeword on the decoding

performance will be measured by its pseudoweight, which de-

pends on the channel at hand. The BEC, AWGNC, BSC pseu-

doweights, and max-fractional weight of a nonzero pseudocode-

word

were defined in [4] and [2] as follows:

C. Pseudocodeword Redundancy

Given a code , we will define the pseudocodeword redun-

dancy as the minimum number of rows in a parity-check matrix

for such that the corresponding minimum pseudoweight

equals the minimum distance.

So for a binary linear

code , we define the BEC

pseudocodeword redundancy of the code as

Let be a vector in with the same components as

nonincreasing order. For

, where

. Define

and

but in , let

where

, and similarly we define the pseudocode-

word redundancies

,

, and

for the

AWGNC and BSC pseudoweights, and the max-fractional

weight. When the type of pseudocodeword redundancy is clear

from the context, we sometimes use the notation . We remark that all pseudocodeword redundancies satisfy

.

Example 2.3: Let be the

Hamming code. Then

Finally, the max-fractional weight of is defined as

Additionally, the pseudoweight of the all-zero vector is

usually defined to be zero, i.e.,

, for all four

pseudoweights , but this is inessential for this paper.

The following matrices , , and are examples for

parity-check matrices with a minimum number of rows such

that

,

, and

holds:

4Some authors consider only the vertices of the fundamental polytope

as pseudocodewords, but we will use this more general definition which includes

all vectors of the fundamental cone

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZUMBRÄGEL et al.: ON THE PSEUDOCODEWORD REDUNDANCY OF BINARY LINEAR CODES

4851

These matrices were found by computer search, see

Section VIII.

We describe the behavior of the pseudocodeword redun-

dancy and the minimum pseudoweight for a given binary linear

code by introducing four classes of codes:

(class 0): is infinite, i.e., there is no parity-check ma-

trix with

.

(class 1): is finite, but

.

(class 2):

, but is not in class 3.

(class 3):

for every parity-check matrix

of .

Note that if a code has infinite pseudocodeword redundancy,

then LP decoding for this code can never achieve the ML de-

coding performance; on the other hand, if a code’s pseudocode-

word redundancy is finite, its value gives a (very approximate)

indication of the LP decoding complexity required to achieve

this bound. Note that this is a fundamental complexity asso-

ciated with the code, and not tied to a particular parity-check

matrix. We leave it as a direction for further research to pro-

vide more general definitions which capture the average com-

plexity-performance tradeoff of LP decoding as more redundant

rows are added to the parity-check matrix.

D. Basic Connections
The different minimum pseudoweights are related as follows. This result is taken from [2].
Lemma 2.4: Let be a binary linear code with the paritycheck matrix . Then

As a straightforward corollary, we obtain the following theorem, which relates the different pseudoredundancies.
Theorem 2.5: Let be a binary linear code. Then

the stopping distance equals the minimum BEC pseudoweight,

and thus, the stopping redundancy is equivalent to the BEC

pseudocodeword redundancy.

Besides pseudocodewords, the notion of trapping set [12] is

another concept for analyzing the performance of binary linear

codes under MPI decoding. In [13], the trapping redundancy

for binary linear codes is introduced as a generalization of the

stopping redundancy, and several upper bounds are presented.

In [14], a binary linear code is called geometrically perfect

if it admits a parity-check matrix such that the fundamental

polytope equals the convex hull of the code, i.e.,

. In this case, ML decoding can be exactly described as

an instance of LP decoding. Kashyap [14, Th. VI.2] gave a char-

acterization of all geometrically perfect codes: a binary linear

code is geometrically perfect if and only if does not contain

as a minor5 any code equivalent to certain codes , , with

parameters

,

, and

, respectively.

It is easy to see that for geometrically perfect codes, all four

pseudocodeword redundancies are finite.

Smarandache and Vontobel [15] define the pseudoweight

spectrum gap for a binary linear code given by a parity-check

matrix as follows. The set

of all minimal pseu-

docodewords is defined as the set of all vectors

that lie

on an edge of the fundamental cone

. Now, let

denote the set of all minimal pseudocodewords that are not

scalar multiples of codewords

, and let be any of the

BEC, AWGNC, BSC, or max-fractional pseudoweight. Then,

the pseudoweight spectrum gap is the quantity

It is apparent that

, and we have

if and only if

.

If the pseudoweight spectrum gap

is strictly positive,

then the LP decoding performance approaches the ML de-

coding performance as the signal-to-noise ratio goes to infinity.

To date, only few examples of interesting codes with positive

pseudoweight spectrum gap are known; these include the codes

based on the Euclidean plane or the projective plane [15, Th. 8].

III. PSEUDOREDUNDANCY OF RANDOM CODES
In this section, we show that for most binary linear codes, the AWGNC and BSC pseudoredundancies are infinite. We begin with the following lemma.
Lemma 3.1: For a binary linear code of length , let be the minimum distance of the dual code. Then, the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight of (with respect to any parity-check matrix ) satisfies

(4)

Proof: Consider the pseudocodeword

E. Related Notions

. Since

is the

As mentioned in Section I, Schwartz and Vardy consider in minimum distance of the dual code, every row in has weight [6] the so-called stopping distance of a binary linear code given at least . Therefore, all inequalities (2) and (3) are satisfied

by a parity-check matrix, and the stopping redundancy of a bi- 5A minor of a code is any code obtained from by a (possibly empty) nary linear code. With [2, Proposition 51], it is easy to see that sequence of shortening and puncturing operations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

for this , and so it is indeed a legal pseudocodeword. Finally, observe that the AWGNC pseudoweight of is given by the right-hand side of (4).

In the sequel, we use the term random code for a binary linear

code whose generator matrix contains independently and

uniformly distributed random entries from . The following

result is known as the Gilbert–Varshamov bound. If we pick a

code by selecting the generator matrix entries at random, the

resulting code has, with probability approaching 1 as

,

rate

and relative minimum distance , such that

for any fixed small

, where

is the inverse of the bi-

nary entropy function

for

. A similar result also holds when the code

is defined by selecting the parity-check matrix entries (indepen-

dently and uniformly) at random.

Let

be fixed. Then, if we select at random a

matrix over , which corresponds to the generator matrix of a

code , the relative minimum distance of is at least

(with probability approaching 1 as

) and the

relative minimum distance of the dual code of is at least

(again, with probability approaching 1 as

).

By taking the intersection of these two events, both the code

and the dual code have relative minimum distances which are

-close to the Gilbert–Varshamov bound with probability ap-

proaching 1 as

. (The reader can refer to [16, Th. 4.4,

4.5, and 4.10], and to [17, Th. 8 and Exercise 3].)

We apply the preceding results as follows. Consider a random

binary linear code of arbitrary length (for

) with

. The dual code of , with probability close to one, has

rate

and relative minimum distance

that attains the Gilbert–Varshamov bound

Note that (4) may be written in terms of the relative minimum distance of the dual code as follows:

(5)

Hence, for large , the minimum pseudoweight of the code is

bounded from above by

for some small

, and this bound does not depend on . On

the other hand, is a random code and so its minimum distance

satisfies the Gilbert–Varshamov bound, namely

Remark 3.3: The result of Theorem 3.2 is different from, but related to, the results in [2, Proposition 49 and Corollary 50], where it was shown that the minimum AWGN pseudoweight of ensembles of regular LDPC codes grows sublinearly in the code length. Indeed, there are three fundamental differences between our results and [2]: 1) We do not assume regularity of the matrix ; indeed, our ensemble is not a low-density ensemble. We also use the fact that the dual code of the random code is asymptotically good; for a regular LDPC code, this is not true. 2) We consider the fundamental cone, which is formed by all possible linear combinations of the rows of ; by contrast, the authors in [2] consider only the case when the column weight of is smaller than its row weight. 3) We show that the minimum pseudoweight of the considered ensemble is bounded from above by a constant, while in [2] this quantity is shown to be bounded by a sublinear function.
It is also instructive to consider the result of Theorem 3.2 in light of previous results bounding the LP decoding threshold of an ensemble; the interested reader is referred to [18, Examples 9-12].
The following lemma is a counterpart of Lemma 3.1 for the BSC.
Lemma 3.4: Let be a binary linear code of length , and let be the minimum distance of the dual code. Then, the minimum BSC pseudoweight of (with respect to any paritycheck matrix ) satisfies

Proof: Consider the pseudocodeword

for some positive integer . This vector is then a legal pseu-

docodeword; since is the minimum distance of the dual code,

every row in has a weight of at least , and so, all inequal-

ities (2) and (3) are satisfied by this .

If

, then by the definition of the BSC

pseudoweight

. This condition is equivalent

to

. Therefore, we set

. For the cor-

responding vector , the pseudoweight is less or equal to

.

Similarly to the AWGNC case, let be a random binary linear

code of length with

. The parameters and of

its dual code attain with high probability the Gilbert–Var-

shamov bound

.

From Lemma 3.4, for all , the pseudoweight of the code

is bounded from above by

which increases linearly with for a fixed . This immediately

establishes the following theorem.

Theorem 3.2: Let

be fixed. For a random binary

linear code of length and rate , there is, with probability

approaching 1 as tends to infinity, a gap between the minimum

AWGNC pseudoweight (with respect to any parity-check ma-

which is a constant. On the other hand, is a random code and its minimum distance also satisfies the Gilbert–Varshamov bound, so it increases linearly with . This proves the following theorem.

trix) and the minimum distance. Therefore, the AWGNC pseu- Theorem 3.5: Let

be fixed. For a random bi-

doredundancy is infinite for most codes.

nary linear code of length and rate , there is, with prob-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZUMBRÄGEL et al.: ON THE PSEUDOCODEWORD REDUNDANCY OF BINARY LINEAR CODES

4853

ability approaching 1 as tends to infinity, a gap between the minimum BSC pseudoweight (with respect to any parity-check matrix) and the minimum distance. Therefore, the BSC pseudoredundancy is infinite for most codes.

The last theorem disproves the conjecture in [8] that the BSC pseudoredundancy is finite for all binary linear codes.6

Example 3.6: Consider the

Golay code having min-

imum distance

. The minimum distance of its dual code

is

. We can take a pseudocodeword as in the proof of

Lemma 3.4 with

. We have

,

thus obtaining that the minimum distance is not equal to the min-

imum pseudoweight for any parity-check matrix of this code.

Similarly, for the

extended Golay code, we have

, and by taking

we obtain

.

Note, however, that the presented techniques do not answer

the question of whether these Golay codes have finite AWGNC

pseudoredundancy.

In the context of the extended Golay code, we mention that there are other interesting graphical representations of codes than by Tanner graphs; in particular, a minimal tail-biting trellis has been constructed for the extended Golay code in [19]. The pseudoweights of its pseudocodewords are investigated in [4], where it is shown that there are pseudocodewords with a BSC pseudoweight of 6; on the other hand, as far as we know, it is still unknown whether there are nonzero pseudocodewords of the tail-biting trellis with an AWGNC pseudoweight of less than 8.
We have seen in this section that the AWGNC pseudoredundancy and the BSC pseudoredundancy of a random binary linear code are infinite. From Theorem 2.5, it follows that this holds also for the pseudoredundancy with respect to the max-fractional weight.

IV. BASIC UPPER BOUNDS

Whereas a random code has infinite pseudoredundancy for the AWGNC and the BSC, there are several families of codes for which the pseudoredundancy is finite. Sections IV—VII deal with upper bounds on the pseudoredundancy for some particular classes of codes.
We start with this section considering two basic situations, namely the puncturing of zero coordinates and codes of minimum distance 2. The following results hold with respect to the BEC, AWGNC, and BSC pseudoweights, and the max-fractional weight.

Lemma 4.1: Let be an nates, and let be the at these coordinates. Then

code having zero coordicode obtained by puncturing

Let

be the set of nonzero coordinates of the code . To

prove the first inequality, let be a

parity-check matrix

for . Consider its

submatrix consisting of the

columns corresponding to . Then, is a parity-check matrix

for , and

Therefore,

, and this proves

.

For the second inequality, let be a

parity-check

matrix for . Now, we consider a

matrix with the

following properties: The upper

submatrix of consists

of the columns of at positions and of zero columns at

positions

, and the lower

submatrix consists of rows

of weight 1 that have 1s at the positions . Then,

and

Consequently, .

, and this proves

Lemma 4.2: Let be a code of minimum distance

.

Then,

for any parity-check matrix of ,

i.e., is in class 3 (for BEC, AWGNC, BSC, and max-fractional

pseudoweight).

Proof: By Lemma 2.4, it suffices to prove this lemma

for the max-fractional weight

. Since

holds for all nonzero pseudocodewords, we always have

, which proves the result in the case

.

Let

and be a parity-check matrix for . Let

and let be the largest coordinate. Since

,

there is no zero column in and thus there exists a row with

. Then,

, hence

, and

thus

. It follows

and the lemma is

proved.

V. CONSTRUCTIONS OF CODES FROM OTHER CODES

The following results consider the pseudoredundancy of codes obtained from other codes by the direct sum or the construction. They are analogs of [6, Th. 7 and 8], and [8, Th. 4.1 and 4.2], for the case of the max-fractional weight and the AWGNC pseudoweight. Our proofs in each case follow the exposition of these earlier proofs.

Theorem 5.1: Let and be

and

binary linear codes, respectively. Then, the direct sum

is an

code with

Proof: For notational purposes, we identify with ,

and for

and some subset

, we let

be

the projection of onto the coordinates in .

6We note that a slightly different definition of BSC pseudoweight was given in [8], but the statement of Lemma 3.4 and thus Theorem 3.5 hold with the same proof also with respect to this definition.

Proof: Without loss of generality, we may assume that both

and

are finite, for otherwise the statement to be

proved is trivial. For

, let be a parity-check matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4854

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

for having

rows and such that

. Then

for all

is a parity-check matrix for with

rows. Let

, where the vectors and in the

concatenation have lengths and respectively. Then, we

may assume

and

, and

therefore

and

. (Note that in the case

where either or is equal to , the theorem is trivially true

since for any

,

for both the max-fractional

weight and the AWGNC pseudoweight.)

We consider the two cases of max-fractional weight and

AWGNC pseudoweight separately.

Max-fractional weight: Assume without loss of generality

that

. Then

is a parity-check matrix for with

rows (here, de-

notes the

identity matrix). Let

,

where the vectors

and in the concatenation both

have length . Then, for

, from the fundamental

cone inequalities for row , we get

, so we have

. Now, since

, we have

.

Since

for both the max-fractional weight

and the AWGNC pseudoweight, we have

, and the

result follows.

Remark 5.3: In [6, Th. 9] and [8, Th. 4.3], it was stated that if

is an

binary linear code, then the extended

code satisfies

, for the BEC pseudoweight

and the BSC pseudoweight, respectively. Regarding the corre-

sponding results for the case of the max-fractional weight and

the AWGNC pseudoweight, we mention here only that the anal-

ogous result in fact does not hold for the case of the max-frac-

tional weight. As a counterexample, consider the

Ham-

ming code which satisfies

(cf. Propo-

sition 7.7). On the other hand, the

extended Hamming

code satisfies

(cf. Section VIII-B).

which proves the result.

AWGNC pseudoweight: Assume without loss of generality

that

; this condition may be written as

(6)

To establish the result, we need only to prove that . Now, since the entries of and are nonnegative,
we have
(7)

Adding

to both sides of (7) and adding

the resulting inequality to inequality (6) yields

which may be rearranged as

, as

desired.

VI. PARITY-CHECK MATRICES WITH ROWS OF WEIGHT 2

In this section, we consider the pseudoredundancy of codes with a parity-check matrix consisting of rows of weight 2 and at most one additional row. The results are then applied to upper bound the pseudoredundancy for codes of dimension 2. The basic case is dealt with in the following lemma.

Lemma 6.1: Let be a parity-check matrix of such that

every row in has weight 2. Then, we have the following.

a) There is an equivalence relation on the set of column

indices of such that for a vector

with nonneg-

ative coordinates, we have

if and only if has

equal coordinates within each equivalence class.

b) The minimum distance of is equal to its minimum BEC,

AWGNC, BSC, and max-fractional pseudoweights with

respect to , i.e.,

.

Proof: For a), define the required relation as follows. For

, let

if and only if

or there exists an

integer

, column indices

,

and row indices

such that

Theorem 5.2: Let be an is a

binary linear code. Then, This is an equivalence relation, and it defines equivalence

code with

classes over . It is easy to check that inequalities (2) imply

that

if and only if

for any

.

In order to prove b), we note that the minimum (BEC,

AWGNC, BSC, or max-fractional) pseudoweight is always

bounded above by the minimum distance of , so we only have

to show that the minimum pseudoweight is bounded below by

Proof: As earlier, without loss of generality, we may as-

sume that

is finite. Let be a parity-check matrix for

with

rows and such that

for all

. Then

the minimum distance.

Let

be the set of equivalence classes of

, and let

for

. It is easy to see that the minimum

distance of is

(since the minimum-weight

nonzero codeword of has nonzeros in the coordinates corre-

sponding to a set

of minimal size and zeros everywhere

else).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZUMBRÄGEL et al.: ON THE PSEUDOCODEWORD REDUNDANCY OF BINARY LINEAR CODES

Now, let

. Since the coordinates , , depend

only on the equivalence classes, we may use the notation ,

. Let ,

, be the largest coordinate. Then

With

4855
, it follows that

Therefore, ,

, and by using Lemma 2.4, we get

, and

.

The following proposition is a stronger version of Lemma 6.1.

Proposition 6.2: Let be an

parity-check matrix

of , and assume that the

first rows in have weight 2.

Denote by the

matrix consisting of these rows,

consider the equivalence relation of Lemma 6.1 a) with respect

to , and assume that intersects each equivalence class in

at most one element. Then, the minimum distance of is equal

to its minimum BEC, AWGNC, BSC, and max-fractional pseu-

doweights with respect to , i.e.,

.

Proof: Let be the set of classes of the aforementioned

equivalence relation on , and let

for

. Let

Consequently

and thus

. We conclude that the

minimum max-fractional weight is given by

But this is easily seen to be equal to the minimum distance

of the code.

Finally, by using Lemma 2.4, we obtain that

,

, and

.

Remark 6.3: The requirement that all

belong to dif-

ferent equivalence classes of in Proposition 6.2 is necessary.

Indeed, consider the matrix

Also, let

, so that

for all

.

Let

. As earlier, since the coordinates ,

, depend only on the equivalence classes, we may use the

notation ,

. The fundamental cone constraints (2) and

(3) may then be written as

for all

and

(8)

respectively, and the max-fractional weight of is given by

(9)

Suppose

has minimal max-fractional

weight. Let be its largest coordinate. First note that if there

exists

with

, setting to zero results

in a new pseudocodeword with lower max-fractional weight,

which contradicts the assumption that achieves the minimum.

Therefore,

for all

. We next consider

two cases.

Case 1:

. If there exists

with

,

setting all such to zero results in a new pseudocodeword

with lower max-fractional weight, which contradicts the

minimality of the max-fractional weight of . Therefore,

is the only positive coordinate of , and by (9) the

max-fractional weight of is .

Case 2:

. In this case,

for all

. From

inequality (8) for

, we obtain

One can see that there are two equivalence classes for :

,

. The minimum distance of the

corresponding code is 4 [since

is the only nonzero

codeword]. However,

is a pseu-

docodeword of max-fractional weight 2.

Corollary 6.4: Let be a code of length and dimension 2.

Then,

, i.e., is of class at least 2 (for BEC,

AWGNC, BSC, and max-fractional pseudoweight).

Proof: We consider two cases. Case 1: has no zero coordinates. Let and be two linearly independent codewords of . Define the following subsets of :

The sets , , and are pairwise disjoint. Since has

no zero coordinates,

. The ordering of the

elements in implies an ordering on the elements in each

of , , and . Assume that

and

. If

, let

be the

minimal element in , and define an

matrix

as follows:

if

otherwise.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4856

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

Similarly, define

and

matrices

and , with respect to and . (Some of the

might be equal to , in which case the corresponding

is not defined.) Let and be minimal elements of

and , respectively (if

and

).

Subcase 1-a: One of , , and is empty. Without

loss of generality, we may assume that

, i.e.,

that and have disjoint support; indeed, if for ex-

ample

, then

and we

can replace by

. Define an

ma-

trix by

. It is easy to see that all

rows of are linearly independent, and so its rank is

. It is also straightforward that for all

, we

have

. Therefore, is a parity-check ma-

trix of . The matrix has a form as in Lemma 6.1,

and thus,

.

Subcase 1-b: Neither of , , and is empty. Define

a

matrix

, where

if

otherwise.

Additionally, define an

matrix by

. Similarly to the

previous case, all rows of are linearly independent;

its rank is

. For all

, we have

.

Therefore, is a parity-check matrix of .

The matrix has a form as in Proposition 6.2 (where

, , and are corresponding equivalence classes

over ), and therefore,

.

points, and that satisfies

if block contains point ,

and

otherwise.

If each block contains the same number of points and

every two-element subset of is contained in exactly blocks,

the design is said to be an

BIBD, or 2-design.

In the following, we avoid the trivial cases

and

.

For a BIBD, we have

, and also

(see, e.g., [20, p. 60]), so eters and by

determines the other param-

(10)

Note that [21] and [22] consider parity-check matrices based on

BIBDs; these matrices are the transpose of the incidence ma-

trices defined here.

We have the following general result for codes based on par-

tial

designs.

Theorem 7.2: Let be a code with parity-check matrix ,

such that a subset of the rows of forms the incidence matrix

for a partial

design. Then, the minimum max-fractional

weight of with respect to is lower bounded by

(11)

For the case of an also be written as

BIBD, the lower bound in (11) may

Case 2: has

zero coordinates.

Consider a code of length obtained by puncturing

in these zero coordinates. From Case 1 (with respect to

),

. By applying the rightmost inequality

in Lemma 4.1, we have

. Since

, we

conclude that

.

VII. CODES BASED ON DESIGNS

The alternative form follows directly from (10).

Proof: Consider the subset of the rows of which forms

the incidence matrix for a partial

design. Let be a

nonzero pseudocodeword and let be a maximal coordinate

of ( ). For all

, sum the inequalities (2). We have

Among the codes with finite pseudoredundancy, an inter-

esting class of codes is based on designs. In this section, we consider partial designs, which include the common balanced and thus

incomplete block designs (BIBDs) (also called 2-designs). We

present a principal lower bound on the minimum pseudoweight

for codes, when the parity-check matrix is the block-point

incidence matrix of a partial design. We apply this bound to the Hamming codes and the simplex codes and deduce that their

The result now easily follows from the definition of

.

pseudoredundancy is finite.

Theorem 7.3: Let be a code with parity-check matrix ,

Definition 7.1: A partial consisting of an -element set

design is a block design (whose elements are called

such that a subset of the rows of forms the incidence matrix

for a partial

design. Then

points) and a collection of subsets of (called blocks) such

that every point is contained in exactly blocks and every

two-element subset of is contained in at most blocks. The

incidence matrix of a design is an

matrix whose rows

correspond to the blocks and whose columns correspond to the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZUMBRÄGEL et al.: ON THE PSEUDOCODEWORD REDUNDANCY OF BINARY LINEAR CODES

4857

Proof: Apply Lemma 2.4 and Theorem 7.2. Results similar to Theorem 7.2 and Theorem 7.3 were also presented and proven by Xia and Fu [23] in the AWGNC case.

Remark 7.4: Under the conditions of Theorem 7.3,

if

is a nonzero pseudocodeword such that

holds, then it follows that

is a scalar multiple of a binary vector. This can be

easily seen by considering the proof of the inequality

(see [2, Lemma 44]) and exam-

ining when equality

holds.

Furthermore, it can be shown that in this case, is actually a

scalar multiple of a codeword (see [23, Th. 3]). It follows that the

AWGNC pseudocodeword spectrum gap is positive, provided

that

holds.

Another tool for proving lower bounds on the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight is provided by the following eigenvalue-based lower bound by Vontobel and Koetter [9].

Proposition 7.5 (cf. [9]): The minimum AWGNC pseu-

doweight for a

-regular parity-check matrix whose

corresponding Tanner graph is connected is bounded below by

(12)

where and denote the largest and second largest eigen-

value (respectively) of the matrix

; here, and the

matrix multiplication are to be considered over the reals.

In the case where is equal to the incidence matrix for an BIBD, the bound of Proposition 7.5 becomes

matrices form the incidence matrix for a partial design with pa-

rameters

and

, respec-

tively7; in particular, these codes have finite pseudoredundancy.

We next apply the bounds of Theorems 7.2 and 7.3 to some other examples of codes derived from designs.

Proposition 7.7: For

, the

Hamming code has BEC, AWGNC, BSC, and max-fractional

pseudocodeword redundancies

Proof: For

, consider the binary parity-check

matrix whose rows are exactly the nonzero codewords of

the dual code , in this case the

simplex

code. This is the incidence matrix for a BIBD with param-

eters

. Theorem 7.2 gives

, leading to

.

The result for BEC, AWGNC, and BSC follows by applying

Theorem 2.5.

In the next example, we consider simplex codes. Straightforward application of the previous reasoning does not lead to the desired result. However, more careful selection of the matrix
, as described in the following, leads to a new bound on the pseudoredundancy.

Proposition 7.8: For

, the

simplex

code has BEC, AWGNC, BSC, and max-fractional pseudocode-

word redundancies

(13)

Proof: For

, consider the binary parity-check ma-

trix whose rows are exactly the codewords of the dual code

so that, in this case, the bound of Proposition 7.5 coincides with

that of Theorem 7.3 (for the case of the AWGNC only).

To see why (12) becomes (13), denote the column

of

by and denote the matrix

. From

the properties of a BIBD, we get

(in this case the

Hamming code)

with Hamming weight equal to 3. This is the incidence ma-

trix for a BIBD with parameters

.

Theorem 7.2 gives

.

Note that the number of codewords of weight 3 in

the

Hamming code equals

. One can show this, e.g., by consid-

if if

Now, has largest eigenvalue

and only one other

eigenvalue

, whose multiplicity is

, since

one can write

, where and denote the

all-ones and the identity matrices, respectively. Now, we have

and

, so

that

.

ering the full sphere packing of the perfect Hamming code and

observing that each codeword of weight 3 covers exactly three

vectors of weight 2, of which there are

in total.

Next, we justify the claim that is a parity-check matrix

of . A theorem of Simonis [24] states that if there exists a

linear

code, then there also exists a linear

code whose codewords are spanned by the codewords of

weight . Since the Hamming code is unique for the parameters

Remark 7.6: Prominent examples for codes based on

designs are codes based on Euclidean or projective ge-

ometries, in particular the

code

based on the Euclidean plane

as well as the

code based on the pro-

, this implies that the Hamming code itself is spanned by the codewords of weight 3, so the rowspace of equals .
The result for BEC, AWGNC, and BSC follows again by applying Theorem 2.5.

jective plane

(see [5] and [15]). Theorem 7.3 and

Remark 7.4 apply to these codes, as their standard parity-check

7In the latter case, the partial design is even a BIBD with parameters .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4858

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

We remark that the bounds of Propositions 7.7 and 7.8 are

sharp at least for the case

and the max-fractional weight,

see Section VIII-B.

The following proposition proves that the AWGNC, BSC,

and max-fractional pseudocodeword redundancies are finite for

all codes with minimum distance at most 3.

TABLE I

NUMBER OF BINARY

CODES WITH

WITHOUT ZERO COORDINATES

AND

Proposition 7.9: Let be a

code with

. Then,

is finite. Moreover, we have

in

the case

.

AWGNC, BSC, and max-fractional pseudoweights. The enu-

Proof: By using Lemma 4.2, we may assume

. De- meration of codes and parity-check matrices can be described

note by the parity-check matrix whose rows consist of all by the following algorithm.

codewords of the dual code of . Note that for a code of minimum distance , a parity-check matrix consisting of all Algorithm 8.1:

rows of the dual code is an orthogonal array of strength

. In the present case

, and this implies that in any

pair of columns of , all length-2 binary vectors occur with

equal multiplicities (cf. [20, p. 139]). Thus, the matrix is

an incidence matrix for a partial block design with parameters

, where

. Therefore, for this

matrix , the code has minimum (AWGNC, BSC, or max-frac-

tional) pseudoweight at least

, and it follows

that the pseudocodeword redundancy is finite for any code with

.

Input: Parameters (code length), (code dimension),

(number of rows of the output parity-check matrices), where

.

Output: For all codes of length , dimension , minimum

distance

, and without zero coordinates, up to code equiva-

lence: a list of all parity-check matrices, up to parity-check matrix equivalence.

1) Collect the set of all

matrices such that

a) they have different nonzero columns, ordered lexico-

graphically;

We remark that Proposition 7.9 implies the results for the

b) there is no nonempty -sum of rows which has

Hamming codes (Proposition 7.7). However, we present the two

proofs, since they use different methods.

We have considered in this section several families of codes

based on designs, which have finite pseudocodeword redun-

dancy. As noted in Section II-E, finiteness of pseudoredundancy

would also follow if one can show that the codes are geomet-

rically perfect. However, this is not the case for the examined

codes in general. For example, the

Hamming code is not geometrically perfect for

; this

follows from the characterization of geometrically perfect

codes, as the

simplex code can be obtained from the

Hamming code by repeated shortening, when

.

weight 0 or 1 (this way, the matrices are of full rank

and the minimum distance of the row space is at

least 2). 2) Determine the orbits in under the action of the group

of invertible

matrices over (this enumer-

ates all codes with the required properties, up to equiva-

lence; the codes are represented by parity-check matrices).

3) For each orbit , representing a code :

a) Determine the suborbits in under the action of the

symmetric group (this enumerates all parity-check

matrices without redundant rows up to equivalence).

b) For each representative of the suborbits, collect all

matrices enlarged by adding different redundant

VIII. PSEUDOCODEWORD REDUNDANCY FOR CODES OF SMALL LENGTH
In this section, we compute the AWGNC, BSC, and max-fractional pseudocodeword redundancies for all codes of small length. By Lemma 4.2, it is sufficient to examine only codes with minimum distance at least 3. Furthermore, in light of Lemma 4.1, we will consider only codes without zero coordinates, i.e., codes that have a dual minimum distance of at least 2. Finally, we point out that because Corollary 6.4

rows that are -sums of at least two rows of . Let

be the union of all such

matrices.

c) Determine the orbits in

under the action of the

symmetric group , and output a representative for

each orbit.

This algorithm was implemented in the C programming

language. The minimum pseudoweights for the various

parity-check matrices were computed by using Maple 12 and

the Convex package [25].

holds for codes of dimension 2, we may focus on codes with B. Results dimension at least 3.
We considered all binary linear codes up to length with

A. Algorithm
To compute the pseudocodeword redundancy of a code , we have to examine all possible parity-check matrices for the

minimum distance

and without zero coordinates, up to

code equivalence. The number of those codes for given length

and dimension is shown in Table I.

code , up to equivalence. Here, we say that two parity-check AWGNC Pseudoweight: The following results were found to

matrices and for the code are equivalent if can be hold for all codes of length

.

transformed into by a sequence of row and column permu- 1) There are only two codes with

, i.e., in

tations. In this case,

holds for the BEC,

class 0 or 1 for the AWGNC.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZUMBRÄGEL et al.: ON THE PSEUDOCODEWORD REDUNDANCY OF BINARY LINEAR CODES

4859

— The

extended Hamming code is the shortest

code in class 1. We have

and

out of 12 possible parity-check matrices (up to equiva-

lence) with one redundant row there is exactly one ma-

trix with

, namely

There is exactly one matrix with

, and for the remaining matrices , we have

.

For this code, also

, and it is the only

code of length

with

.

— Out of the four

codes, there is one code in

class 1. We have

and out of

2526 possible parity-check matrices (up to equivalence)

with one redundant row there are 13 matrices with

.

2) For all codes of minimum distance

and for all

parity-check matrices of , we have

;

in particular, if

, then is in class 3 for the AWGNC.

3) For the

simplex code, there is (up to equivalence)

only one parity-check matrix without redundant rows

such that

, namely

3) For the

extended Hamming code , we have

, and thus, the code is in class 0 for the

max-fractional weight. It is the shortest code with infinite

max-fractional pseudoredundancy.

(It can be checked that

is a pseu-

docodeword in

, where the rows of consist of all

dual codewords; since

, we have

.)

4) There are two other codes of length 8 with

,

namely two of the three

codes, having pseudocode-

word redundancies 6 and 8, respectively.

Comparison: Comparing the results for the AWGNC and

BSC pseudoweights, and the max-fractional weight, we can

summarize the results as follows.

1) For the

Hamming code , we have

,

, and

.

2) For the

simplex code , we have

,

, and

.

3) For the

extended Hamming code , we have

,

, and

. This

code is the shortest one such that

, and

also the shortest one such that

.

4) If

, then for every parity-check matrix , we have

. This is not true for the BSC and the

max-fractional weight.

These observations show that there is some significant

difference between the various types of pseudocodeword

redundancies.

It is also interesting to note that the

Hamming code

is geometrically perfect, while the

code and the

code are not (cf. Section II-E).

It is the only parity-check matrix with constant row weight 3.

IX. CYCLIC CODES MEETING THE EIGENVALUE BOUND

BSC Pseudoweight: We computed the pseudocodeword re-

dundancy for the BSC for all codes of length

.

1) The shortest codes with

, i.e., in class 0 or 1 for

the BSC, are the

Hamming code and its dual code

, the

simplex code. We have

and

.

2) There are two codes of length 8 with

.

These are the

extended Hamming code, for which

holds, and one of the three

codes,

which satisfies

.

Max-Fractional Weight: We computed the pseudocodeword

redundancy with respect to the max-fractional weight for all

codes of length

.

1) The shortest code with

is the unique

code . We have

.

2) There are two codes of length 7 with

. These

are the

Hamming code and the

simplex

code, which both have pseudocodeword redundancy 7. In

both cases, there is, up to equivalence, a unique parity-

check matrix with seven rows that satisfies

.

In this last section, we apply the eigenvalue-based lower

bound on the minimum AWGNC pseudoweight by Vontobel

and Koetter [9], see Proposition 7.5. We investigate for which

cyclic codes of short length this bound is sharp with respect

to the minimum distance; in this case, the codes have finite

AWGNC pseudoredundancy.

We consider binary cyclic codes with full circulant parity-

check matrices, defined as follows. Let be a binary cyclic code

of length with check polynomial

(cf. [20,

p. 194]). Then, the full circulant parity-check matrix for is the

matrix

with entries

. Here,

all the indices are modulo , so that

.

Since such a matrix is -regular, where

, we

may use the eigenvalue-based lower bound of Proposition 7.5

to examine the AWGNC pseudocodeword redundancy: If the

right-hand side equals the minimum distance of the code ,

then

.

Note that the largest eigenvalue of the matrix

is

, since every row weight of equals

. Consequently, the eigenvalue bound is

This demonstrates that Propositions 7.7 and 7.8 are sharp

for the max-fractional weight, and that the parity-check

matrices constructed in the proofs are unique in this case.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4860

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

where is the second largest eigenvalue of . We remark fur-

ther that

is a symmetric circulant matrix, with

and

. The eigenvalues of are

thus given by

TABLE II BINARY CYCLIC CODES UP TO LENGTH 250 WITH
MEETING THE EIGENVALUE BOUND

for

, where

is the th primitive root of

unity and

(see, e.g., [26, Th. 3.2.2]).

We also consider quasi-cyclic codes of the form given in the

following remark. This code construction is only introduced for

completeness toward classifying the results; the resulting codes

are not interesting for applications, as the minimum Hamming

distance is at most 2 for

.

Remark 9.1: Denote by the

matrix with all entries

equal to 1. If is a -regular circulant

matrix, then the

Kronecker product

will be a -regular circulant

-matrix and defines a quasi-cyclic code. We have

TABLE III BINARY CYCLIC CODES UP TO LENGTH 250 WITH
MEETING THE EIGENVALUE BOUND

and the eigenvalues of

are and 0. Thus, the largest

eigenvalues of are

and

,

and the eigenvalue bound of Proposition 7.5 becomes

We carried out an exhaustive search on all cyclic codes up

to length

and computed the eigenvalue bound in all

cases where the Tanner graph of the full circulant parity-check

matrix is connected, by using the following algorithm.

in these cases and thus we have for the pseudocodeword redun-

dancy

. All examples of minimum distance 2 are

actually quasi-cyclic codes as in Remark 9.1 with parity-check

matrix

. We list here the constituent code given

by the parity-check matrix .

We conclude this section by proving a result which was ob-

served by the experiments.

Proposition 9.3: Let

and let be the even weight

subcode of the Hamming code of length

, which is a

cyclic

code. Consider its full circulant parity-

check matrix . Then

Algorithm 9.2:

Input: Parameter (code length).

Output: For all divisors of

, corresponding to cyclic

In particular, if result implies

then is the and

code and the .

codes with full circulant parity-check matrix, such that the

Proof: Let be the -regular full circulant parity-check

Tanner graph is connected: the value of the eigenvalue bound. matrix for . We claim that

. Indeed, equals

1) Factor

over into irreducibles, using Cantor and the weight of a nonzero codeword of the dual code . As the

Zassenhaus’ algorithm (cf. [27, Sec. 14.3]).

code is the intersection of the Hamming code and the simple

2) For each divisor

of

consider the following. parity-check code, its dual code consists of the codewords

a) Let

and

.

of the simplex code and their complements. Consequently,

b) Check that the corresponding Tanner graph is con- equals

,

, or

. But cannot be even,

nected (i.e., that the greatest common divisor of the for otherwise all codewords of would be of even weight.

indices with

together with is 1).

As

is clearly not possible either, it must hold

c) Compute the eigenvalues of

: Let

.

and for

compute Next, we show that the second largest eigenvalue of

.

equals

. Indeed, let and

d) Determine the second largest eigenvalue and be different rows of , representing codewords of . As their

output

.

weight is equal, their Hamming distance is even, and thus, it

This algorithm was implemented in the C programming lan- must be

. Hence, the size of the intersection of the supports

guage. Tables II and III give a complete list of all cases in which of and is

. This implies that

and

the eigenvalue bound equals the minimum Hamming distance ,

, for . Consequently, has an eigenvalue

for the cases

and

, respectively. In particular, the of multiplicity

, namely

, and

AWGNC pseudoweight equals the minimum Hamming distance thus, must be

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZUMBRÄGEL et al.: ON THE PSEUDOCODEWORD REDUNDANCY OF BINARY LINEAR CODES

4861

Finally, we apply Proposition 7.5 to get
which proves the result.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors are indebted to the anonymous reviewers for their worthwhile suggestions and recommendations, which significantly improved the exposition of the work, and also to Pascal Vontobel for careful handling of the manuscript. In addition, they would like to thank Nigel Boston, Christine Kelley, and Olgica Milenkovic for helpful discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Koetter, W.-C. W. Li, P. O. Vontobel, and J. L. Walker, “Characterizations of pseudo-codewords of (low-density) parity-check codes,” Adv. Math., vol. 213, pp. 205–229, Aug. 2007.
[2] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes, CoRR Dec. 2005 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0512078
[3] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[4] G. D. Forney, Jr, R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Proc. Codes, Syst., Graph. Models IMA Workshop, New York, Aug. 1999, pp. 101–112.
[5] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[6] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and the stopping redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 922–932, Mar. 2006.
[7] J. Han and P. H. Siegel, “Improved upper bounds on stopping redundancy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 90–104, Jan. 2007.
[8] C. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “On the pseudocodeword weight and paritycheck matrix redundancy of linear codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, NV, Sep. 2007, pp. 1–6.
[9] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Lower bounds on the minimum pseudo-weight of linear codes,” presented at the the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004.
[10] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, 2003.
[11] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[12] T. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[13] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “The trapping redundancy of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 53–63, Jan. 2009.
[14] N. Kashyap, “A decomposition theory for binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 3035–3058, Jul. 2008.
[15] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Pseudo-codeword analysis of Tanner graphs from projective and Euclidean planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2376–2393, Jul. 2007.
[16] R. M. Roth, Introduction to Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2006.

[17] V. Guruswami, Introduction to coding theory course notes, notes 2 [Online]. Available: http://www.cs.cmu.edu/venkatg/teaching/codingtheory/notes/notes2.pdf
[18] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Bounds on the threshold of linear programming decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Punta del Este, Uruguay, Mar. 2006, pp. 175–179.
[19] A. R. Calderbank, G. D. Forney, Jr, and A. Vardy, “Minimal tail-biting trellises: The Golay code and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1435–1455, Jul. 1999.
[20] F. J. MacWilliams and N. J. A. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1978.
[21] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1176, Jun. 2004.
[22] N. Kashyap and A. Vardy, “Stopping sets in codes from designs,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003.
[23] S.-T. Xia and F.-W. Fu, “Minimum pseudo-codewords of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Chengdu, China, Oct. 2006, pp. 109–113.
[24] J. Simonis, “On generator matrices of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 38, no. 2, p. 516, Mar. 1992.
[25] M. Franz, Convex—A Maple package for convex geometry 2009 [Online]. Available: http://www-fourier.ujf-grenoble.fr/~franz/convex
[26] P. J. Davis, Circulant Matrices. New York: Wiley, 1979. [27] J. von zur Gathen and J. Gerhard, Modern Computer Algebra, 2nd
ed. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
Jens Zumbrägel (S’08–M’11) received the M.Sc. (2003) degree from the University of Cambridge, the Diploma (2004) degree from the University of Oldenburg, and the Ph.D. (2008) degree from the University of Zurich, all in mathematics. Since 2009 he holds a postdoctoral research position at the Claude Shannon Institute for Discrete Mathematics, Coding and Cryptography at University College Dublin. His research interests include ring theory, coding theory, and public-key cryptography.
Dr. Zumbrägel qualified for the World Finals of the International Collegiate Programming Contest (ICPC) of the ACM in 2002.
Vitaly Skachek received the B.A. (Cum Laude), M.Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in computer science from the Technion—Israel Institute of Technology, in 1994, 1998, and 2007, respectively.
In the summer of 2004, he visited the Mathematics of Communications Department at Bell Laboratories. During 2007–2012, he held visiting positions with the Claude Shannon Institute and the School of Mathematical Sciences, University College Dublin, with the School of Physical and Mathematical Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, and with the Coordinated Science Laboratory, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana. He is now with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada.
Dr. Skachek is a recipient of the Permanent Excellent Faculty Instructor award, given by Technion.
Mark F. Flanagan (M’03–SM’10) received the B.E. (1998) and Ph.D. (2005) degrees in electronic engineering from University College Dublin, Ireland.
He worked as a project engineer with Parthus Technologies Ltd. in the period 1998–1999. He served as Principal Investigator on the project “COding for BRoadband wireless Applications” (COBRA) with the Digital Signal Processing research group at University College Dublin in the period 2005–2006. Between 2006 and 2008 he held postdoctoral research fellowships at the University of Zürich, the University of Bologna, and the University of Edinburgh. In 2008 he was appointed as SFI Stokes Lecturer in Electronic Engineering at University College Dublin. He is an academic member of the Claude Shannon Institute for Discrete Mathematics, Coding and Cryptography, Dublin. He is a reviewer for many leading international journals, and he has served on the Technical Program Committee of several international conferences. His research interests are in the fields of information theory, wireless communications, and signal processing.
Dr. Flanagan is currently serving as an Editor for IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS. He was a recipient of the ESRF Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Institute of Advanced Studies, University of Bologna, Italy, in 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

