IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012
4753
Mathematical Programming Decoding of Binary
Linear Codes: Theory and Algorithms
Michael Helmling, Stefan Ruzika, and Akın Tanatmis
Abstract—Mathematical programming is a branch of applied
mathematics and has recently been used to derive new decoding
approaches, challenging established but often heuristic algorithms
based on iterative message passing. Concepts from mathematical
programming used in the context of decoding include linear,
integer, and nonlinear programming, network flows, notions of
duality as well as matroid and polyhedral theory. This paper
reviews and categorizes decoding methods based on mathe-
matical programming approaches for binary linear codes over
binary-input memoryless symmetric channels.
Index Terms—Integer programming (IP), linear programming
(LP) decoding, mathematical programming, maximum likelihood
(ML) decoding, polyhedral theory.
I. INTRODUCTION
B
ASED on an integer programming (IP)1 formulation of
the maximum likelihood decoding (MLD) problem for
binary linear codes, linear programming decoding (LPD) was
introduced by Feldman et al. [1], [2]. Since then, LPD has been
intensively studied in a variety of articles especially dealing
with low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. LDPC codes
are generally decoded by heuristic approaches called iterative
message passing decoding (IMPD) subsuming sum-product
algorithm decoding (SPAD) [3], [4] and min-sum algorithm
decoding (MSAD) [5]. In these algorithms, probabilistic
information is iteratively exchanged and updated between com-
ponent decoders. Initial messages are derived from the channel
output. IMPD exploits the sparse structure of parity-check
matrices of LDPC and turbo codes very well and achieves good
performance. However, IMPD approaches are neither guaran-
teed to converge nor do they have the maximum likelihood
(ML) certificate property, i.e., if the output is a codeword, it is
not necessarily the ML codeword. Furthermore, performance
of IMPD is poor for arbitrary linear block codes with a dense
parity-check matrix. In contrast, LPD offers some advantages
and thus has become an important alternative decoding tech-
nique. First, this approach is derived from the discipline of
mathematical programming which provides analytical state-
Manuscript received April 27, 2010; revised February 12, 2012; accepted
February 14, 2012. Date of publication April 19, 2012; date of current version
June 12, 2012. This work was supported in part by the Center of Mathemat-
ical and Computational Modeling, University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserslautern,
Germany.
The authors are with the Department of Mathematics, University of Kaiser-
slautern, 67663 Kaiserslautern, Germany (e-mail: helmling@mathematik.
uni-kl.de; ruzika@mathematik.uni-kl.de; akin.tanatmis@kpec-gmbh.de).
Communicated by N. Kashyap, Associate Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2191697
1See the Table I for a list of the acronyms used.
ments on convergence, complexity, and correctness of decoding
algorithms. Second, LPD is not limited to sparse matrices.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, notation is
fixed and well known but relevant results from coding theory
and polyhedral theory are recalled. Complexity and polyhedral
properties of MLD are discussed in Section III. In Section IV,
a general description of LPD is given. Several linear program-
ming (LP) formulations dedicated to codes with LDPC matrices,
codes with high-density parity-check matrices, and turbo-like
codes are categorized, and their commonalities and differences
are emphasized in Section V. Based on these LP formulations,
different streams of research on LPD have evolved. Methods
focusing on efficient realization of LPD are summarized in Sec-
tion VI, while approaches improving the error-correcting per-
formance of LPD at the cost of increased complexity are re-
viewed in Section VII. Some concluding comments are made in
Section VIII.
II. BASICS AND NOTATION
This section briefly introduces a number of definitions and
results from linear coding theory and polyhedral theory which
are most fundamental for the subsequent text.
A binary linear block code
with cardinality
and block
length
is a -dimensional subspace of the vector space
defined over the binary field
.
is given by
basis vectors of length
which are arranged in a
matrix
, called the generator matrix of the code
.2
The orthogonal subspace
of
is defined as
and has dimension
. It can also be interpreted as a binary
linear code of dimension
which is referred to as the dual
code of
. A matrix
whose
rows
form a spanning set of
is called a parity-check matrix of
. It follows from this definition that
is the null space of
, and thus, a vector
is contained in
if and
only if
. Normally,
and the
rows of
constitute a basis of
. It should
be pointed out, however, that most LPD approaches (see Sec-
tion VII) benefit from parity-check matrices being extended by
redundant rows. Moreover, additional rows of
never degrade
the error-correcting performance of LPD. This is a major differ-
ence to IMPD which is generally weakened by redundant parity
checks (RPCs), since they introduce cycles to the Tanner graph.
2Note that single vectors in this paper are generally column vectors; however,
in coding theory, they are often used as rows of matrices. The transposition of
column vector a makes it a row vector, denoted by a .
0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4754
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012
Fig. 1. Parity-check matrix and Tanner graph of an (8; 4) code.
Let
,
. The Hamming distance between
and
is the number of entries (bits) with different
values, i.e.,
. The min-
imum (Hamming) distance of a code,
, is given by
. The Hamming
weight of a codeword
is defined as
, i.e.,
the number of ones in
. The minimum Hamming weight of
is
. For binary linear codes
it holds that
. The error-correcting performance
of a code is, at least at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), closely
related to its minimum distance.
Let
denote an
matrix and
,
be the row and column index sets of
, respec-
tively. The entry in row
and column
of
is given
by
. The
row and
column of
are denoted by
and
, respectively. A vector
is called the
unit
column vector if
,
, and
for all
.
A parity-check matrix
can be represented by a bipartite
graph
, called its Tanner graph (Fig. 1). The vertex
set
of
consists of the two disjoint node sets
and
. The
nodes in
are referred to as check nodes and correspond to the
rows of
, whereas the nodes in
are referred to as variable
nodes and correspond to columns of
. An edge
connects node
and
if and only if
. Let
denote the index set of variables incident to check
node , and analogously
for
.
The degree of a check node
is the number of edges incident to
node
in the Tanner graph or, equivalently,
. The
maximum check node degree
is the degree of the check
node
with the largest number of incident edges. The degree
of a variable node
,
, and the maximum variable node
degree
are defined analogously.
Tanner graphs are an example of factor graphs, a general con-
cept of graphical models which is prevalently used to describe
probabilistic systems and related algorithms. The term stems
from viewing the graph as the representation of some global
functions in several variables that factor into a product of sub-
functions, each depending only on a subset of the variables. In
case of Tanner graphs, the global function is the indicator func-
tion of the code, and the subfunctions are the parity-checks ac-
cording to single rows of
. A different type of factor graphs
will appear later in order to describe turbo codes. Far beyond
these purely descriptive purpose, factor graphs have proven suc-
cessful in modern coding theory primarily in the context of de-
scribing and analyzing IMPD algorithms. See [6] for a more
elaborate introduction.
Let
be a binary linear code with parity-check matrix
and
. The index set
is called the support of the codeword . A codeword
is called a minimal codeword if there is no codeword
such that
. Finally,
is called a minor code
of
if
can be obtained from
by a series of shortening and
puncturing operations.
The relationship between binary linear codes and polyhedral
theory follows from the observation that a binary linear code can
be considered a set of points in
, i.e.,
. In
the following, some relevant results from polyhedral theory are
recalled. For a comprehensive review on polyhedral theory, the
reader is referred to [7].
Definition II.1: A subset
such that
where
and
is called a
polyhedron.
In this article, polyhedra are assumed to be rational, i.e., the
entries of
and
are taken from
. The
row vector of
and
the
entry of
together define a closed halfspace
. In other words, a polyhedron is the intersection of
a finite set of closed halfspaces. A bounded polyhedron is called
a polytope. It is known from polyhedral theory that a polytope
can equivalently be defined as the convex hull of a finite set of
points. In this study, the convex hull of a binary linear code
is
denoted by
and referred to as the codeword polytope.
Some characteristics of a polyhedron are its dimension, faces,
and facets. To define them, the notion of a valid inequality is
needed.
Definition II.2: An inequality
, where
and
, is valid for a set
if
.
The following definition of an active inequality is used in sev-
eral LPD algorithms.
Definition II.3: An inequality
, where ,
and
, is active at
if
.
Valid inequalities which contain points of
are of spe-
cial interest.
Definition II.4: Let
be a polyhedron,
let
be a valid inequality for
and define
. Then,
is called a face of
.
is a proper face if
and
.
The dimension
of
is given by
the maximum number of affinely independent points in
minus one. Recall that a set of vectors
is affinely
independent if the system
has no solution other than
for
. If
, then the polyhedron is full-dimensional. It
is a well-known result that if
is not full-dimensional,
then there exists at least one inequality
such that
holds for all
(see, e.g., [7]). Also,
we have
for any proper face of
. A face
of
is called a facet of
if
.
In the set of inequalities defined by
, some inequalities
may be redundant, i.e., dropping these inequalities
does not change the solution set defined by
. A standard
result states that the facet-defining inequalities give a complete
nonredundant description of a polyhedron
[7].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HELMLING et al.: MATHEMATICAL PROGRAMMING DECODING OF BINARY LINEAR CODES: THEORY AND ALGORITHMS
4755
Fig. 2. Codewords of the single parity-check code C = fx 2
: x + x + x
 0
(mod 2)g and the polytope conv(C) in
.
A point
is called a vertex of
if there exist
no two other points
such that
with
,
, and
. Alterna-
tively, vertices are zero-dimensional faces of
. In an LP
problem, a linear cost function is minimized on a polyhedron,
i.e.,
,
. Unless the LP is in-
feasible or unbounded, the minimum is attained on one of the
vertices.
The number of constraints of an LP problem may be very
large, e.g., Section V contains LPD formulations whose descrip-
tion complexity grows exponentially with the block length for
general codes. In such a case, it would be desirable to only in-
clude the constraints which are necessary to determine the op-
timal solution of the LP with respect to a given objective func-
tion. This can be accomplished by iteratively solving the asso-
ciated separation problem, defined as follows.
Definition II.5: Let
be a rational polyhedron
and
a rational vector. The separation problem is to
either conclude that
or, if not, find a rational
vector
such that
for all
and
. In the latter case,
is called a valid cut.
We will see applications of this approach in Sections VI and
VII.
There is a famous result about the equivalence of optimization
and separation by Grötschel et al. [8].
Theorem II.6: Let
be a proper class of polyhedra (see, e.g.,
[7] for a definition). The optimization problem for
is polyno-
mial time solvable if and only if the separation problem is poly-
nomial time solvable.
III. COMPLEXITY AND POLYHEDRAL PROPERTIES
In this section, after referencing important NP-hardness re-
sults for the decoding problem, we state useful properties of the
codeword polytope, exploiting a close relation between coding
and matroid theory.
IP provides powerful means for modeling several real-world
problems. MLD for binary linear codes is modeled as an IP
problem in [2] and [9]. Let
be the channel output.
In MLD, the probability (or, in case of a continuous-output
channel, the probability density)
is maximized over all
codewords
. Let
denote the ML codeword. It is shown
in [1] that for a symmetric memoryless channel the calculation
of
amounts to the minimization of a linear cost function,
namely
(1)
where the values
are the so-called log-like-
lihood ratios (LLR). Consequently the IP formulation of MLD
is implicitly given as
(2)
Berlekamp et al. have shown that MLD is NP-hard in [10] by a
polynomial-time reduction of the 3-D matching problem to the
decision version of MLD. An alternative proof is via matroid
theory: as shall be exposed shortly, there is a one-to-one cor-
respondence between binary matroids and binary linear codes.
In virtue of this analogy, MLD is equivalent to the minimum-
weight cycle problem on binary matroids. Since the latter con-
tains the max-cut problem, which is known to be NP-hard [11],
as a special case, the NP-hardness of MLD follows.
Another problem of interest in the framework of coding
theory is the computation of the minimum distance of a given
code. Berlekamp et al. [10] conjectured that computing the
distance of a binary linear code is NP-hard as well, which was
proved by Vardy [12] about two decades later. The minimum
distance problem can again be reformulated in a matroid theo-
retic setting. In 1969, Welsh [13] formulated it as the problem
of finding a minimum cardinality circuit in linear matroids.
In the following, we assume
to be canoni-
cally embedded in
when referring to
(see Fig. 2
for an example). Replacing
by
in (2) leads to an
LP problem over a polytope with integer vertices. In general,
computing an explicit representation of
is intractable.
Nevertheless, some properties of
are known from ma-
troid theory due to the equivalence of binary linear codes and
binary matroids. In the following, some definitions and results
from matroid theory are presented. An extensive investigation
of matroids can be found in [14] or [15]. The definition of a ma-
troid in general is rather technical.
Definition III.1: A matroid
is an ordered pair
where
is a finite ground set and
is a collection of subsets of
, called the independent sets, such that (a)–(c) hold.
a)
.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4756
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012
b) If
and
, then
.
c) If
and
, then there exists
such that
.
In this paper, the class of
-representable (i.e., binary)
matroids is of interest. A binary
matrix
defines an
-representable matroid
as follows. The ground set
is defined to be the index set of the columns of
. A subset
is independent if and only if the column
vectors
,
are linearly independent in the vector
space defined over the field
. A minimal dependent set, i.e.,
a set
such that all proper subsets of
are in
, is
called a circuit of
. If a subset of
is a disjoint union of
circuits then it is called a cycle.
The incidence vector
corresponding to a cycle
is defined by
if
if
.
The cycle polytope is the convex hull of the incidence vectors
corresponding to all cycles of a binary matroid.
Some more relationships between coding theory and matroid
theory (see also [16]) can be listed: a binary linear code corre-
sponds to a binary matroid, the support of a codeword corre-
sponds to a cycle (therefore, each codeword corresponds to the
incidence vector of a cycle), the support of a minimal codeword
corresponds to a circuit, and the codeword polytope
corresponds to the cycle polytope. Let
be a binary matrix,
be the binary matroid defined by
(
is a representa-
tion matrix of
), and
be the binary linear code defined
by
(
is a parity-check matrix of
). It can easily be shown
that the dual
of
is the same object as the dual of the binary
matroid
. We denote the dual matroid by
, where
is the generator matrix of
. Usually, the matroid related terms
are dualized by the prefix “co.” For example, the circuits and
cycles of a dual matroid are called cocircuits and cocycles, re-
spectively. The supports of minimal codewords and the supports
of codewords in
are associated with cocircuits and cocycles
of
, respectively.
A minor of a parent matroid
is the submatroid
obtained from
after any combination of contraction and re-
striction operations (see, e.g., [14]). In the context of coding
theory, contraction corresponds to puncturing, i.e., the deletion
of one or more columns from the generator matrix of a parent
code, and restriction corresponds to shortening, i.e., the deletion
of one or more columns from the parity-check matrix of a parent
code.
Next, some results from [17] which are related to the structure
of the cycle polytope are rewritten in terms of coding theory.
Kashyap provides a similar transfer in [18]. Several results are
collected in the following theorem.
Theorem III.2: Let
be a binary linear code.
a) If
then the codeword polytope is full-dimen-
sional.
b) The box inequalities
(3)
and the cocircuit inequalities
(4)
where
is the support of a dual minimal codeword
, are valid for the codeword polytope.
c) The box inequalities
,
define facets of
the codeword polytope if
and
is not
contained in the support of a codeword in
with weight
three.
d) If
and
does not contain
(
sim-
plex code) as a minor, and if there exists a dual minimal
codeword
of weight 3, then the cocircuit inequalities de-
rived from
are facets of
.
Part (b) of Theorem III.2 implies that the set of cocircuit inequal-
ities derived from the supports of all dual minimal codewords
provide a relaxation of the codeword polytope. In the polyhe-
dral analysis of the codeword polytope, the symmetry property
stated below plays an important role.
Theorem III.3[17]: If
defines a face of
of
dimension , and
is a codeword, then the inequality
also defines a face of
of dimension , where
if
if
and
.
Using this theorem, a complete description of
can
be derived from all facets containing a single codeword [17].
Let
be a dual minimal codeword. To identify if the cocircuit
inequalities derived from
are facet-defining, it should
be checked if
has a chord. For the formal definition of
chord, the symmetric difference
which operates on two finite
sets is used, defined by
. Note that
if
,
and
, then
.
Definition III.4: Let
be dual minimal code-
words. If
and
, then
is called a chord of
.
Theorem III.5[17]: Let
be a binary linear code without the
simplex code as a minor and let
be the support
of a dual minimal codeword with Hamming weight at least 3
and without chord. Then, for all
with
odd, the
inequality
defines a facet of
.
Optimizing a linear cost function over the cycle polytope,
known as the cycle problem in terms of matroid theory, is inves-
tigated by Grötschel and Truemper [19]. The work of Feldman
et al. [2] enables us to use the matroid theoretic results in the
coding theory context. As shown previously, solving the MLD
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HELMLING et al.: MATHEMATICAL PROGRAMMING DECODING OF BINARY LINEAR CODES: THEORY AND ALGORITHMS
4757
problem for a binary linear code is equivalent to solving the
cycle problem on a binary matroid. In [19], binary matroids for
which the cycle problem can be solved in polynomial time are
classified, based on Seymour’s matroid decomposition theory
[20]. Kashyap [16] shows that results from [19] are directly ap-
plicable to binary linear codes. The MLD problem as well as the
minimum distance problem can be solved in polynomial time
for the code families for which the cycle problem on the associ-
ated binary matroid can be solved in polynomial time. This code
family is called polynomially almost-graphic codes [16].
An interesting subclass of polynomially almost-graphic
codes are geometrically perfect codes. Kashyap translates
the sum of circuits property (see [19]) to the realm of binary
linear codes. If the binary matroid associated with code
has
the sum of circuits property then
can be described
completely and nonredundantly by the box inequalities (3)
and the cocircuit inequalities (4). These codes are referred to
as geometrically perfect codes in [16]. The associated binary
matroids of geometrically perfect codes can be decomposed in
polynomial time into its minors which are either graphic (see
[14]) or contained in a finite list of matroids.
From a coding theoretic point of view, a family of error-cor-
recting codes is asymptotically bad if either dimension or min-
imum distance grows only sublinearly with the code length.
Kashyap proves that the family of geometrically perfect codes
unfortunately fulfills this property. We refer to [16] for the gen-
eralizations of this result.
IV. BASICS OF LPD
LPD was first introduced in [2]. This decoding method is, in
principle, applicable to any binary linear code over any binary
input memoryless channel.3 In this section, we review the basics
of the LPD approach based on [1].
Although several structural properties of
are known,
it is in general infeasible to compute a concise description of
by means of linear inequalities. In LPD, the linear cost
function of the IP formulation is minimized on a relaxed poly-
tope
where
. Such a relaxed polytope
should have the following desirable properties:
1)
should be easy to describe, and
2) integral vertices of
should correspond to codewords.
Together with the linear representation (1) of the likelihood
function, this leads to one of the major benefits of LPD, the
so-called ML certificate property: If the LP decoder outputs an
integral optimal solution, it is guaranteed to be the ML code-
word. This is a remarkable difference to IMPD: If no general
optimality condition applies (see e.g., [23, Sec. 10.3]), there
is no method to provably decide the optimality of a solution
obtained by IMPD.
Each row (check node)
of a parity-check matrix
defines the local code
3In fact, Flanagan et al. [21] have recently generalized a substantial portion of
the LPD theory to the nonbinary case. Similarly, work has been done to include
channels with memory (see e.g., [22]).
that consists of the bit sequences which satisfy the
parity-
check constraint; these are called local codewords. A particu-
larly interesting relaxation of
is
known as the fundamental polytope [24]. The vertices of the
fundamental polytope, the so-called pseudocodewords, are a su-
perset of
, where the difference consists only of nonintegral
vertices. Consequently, optimizing over
implies the ML cer-
tificate property. These observations are formally stated in the
following result (note that
).
Lemma IV.1: [24] Let
. If
then
and
.
The description complexity of the convex hull of any local
code
and thus
is usually much smaller than the
description complexity of the codeword polytope
.
LPD can be written as optimizing the linear objective function
on the fundamental polytope
, i.e.,
(5)
Based on (5), the LPD algorithm which we refer to as bare
linear programming decoding (BLPD) is derived.
Bare LP decoding (BLPD)
Input:
,
.
Output: ML codeword or ERROR.
1: solve the LP given in (5)
2: if LP solution
is integral then
3: output
4: else
5: output ERROR
6: end if
Because of the ML certificate property, if BLPD outputs a
codeword, then it is the ML codeword. BLPD succeeds if the
transmitted codeword is the unique optimum of the LP given in
(5). BLPD fails if the optimal solution is nonintegral or the ML
codeword is not the same as the transmitted codeword. Note that
the difference between the performance of BLPD and MLD is
caused by the decoding failures for which BLPD finds a nonin-
tegral optimal solution. It should be emphasized that in case of
multiple optima it is assumed that BLPD fails.
In some special cases, the fundamental polytope
is equiva-
lent to
, e.g., if the underlying Tanner graph is a tree or
forest [24]. In these cases, MLD can be achieved by BLPD. Note
that in those cases also MSAD achieves MLD performance [5].
Observe that the minimum distance of a code can be under-
stood as the minimum
distance between any two different
codewords of
. Likewise the fractional distance of the funda-
mental polytope
can be defined as follows.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4758
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012
Definition IV.2 [2]: Let
be the set of vertices (pseu-
docodewords) of
. The fractional distance
is the min-
imum
distance between a codeword and any other vertex of
, i.e.,
It follows that the fractional distance is a lower bound for the
minimum distance of a code:
. Moreover, both
definitions are related as follows. Recall that on the binary sym-
metric channel (BSC), MLD corrects at least
bit
flips. As shown in [1], LPD succeeds if at most
errors occur on the BSC.
Analogous to the minimum distance, the fractional distance
is equivalent to the minimum
weight of a nonzero vertex of
. This property is used by the fractional distance algorithm
(FDA) to compute the fractional distance of a binary linear code
[1]. If
is the set of inequalities describing
, let
be the
subset of those inequalities which are not active at the all-zero
codeword. Note that these are exactly the inequalities with a
nonzero right hand side. In FDA, the weight function
is subsequently minimized on
for all
in order to
find the minimum-weight nonzero vertex of
.
Fractional distance algorithm (FDA)
Input:
.
Output: Minimum-weight non-zero vertex of
.
1: for all
do
2: Set
.
3: Solve
.
4: end for
5: Choose the minimum value obtained over all
.
A more siginficant distance measure than
is the so-called
pseudodistance which quantifies the probability that the optimal
solution under LPD changes from one vertex of
to another
[24], [25]. Likewise, the minimum pseudo-weight is defined as
the minimum pseudodistance from 0 to any other vertex of
and, therefore, identifies the vertex (pseudocodeword) which is
most likely to cause a decoding failure. Note that the pseudodis-
tance takes the channel’s probability measure into account and
thus depends on the chosen channel model.
Albeit no efficient algorithms are known to compute the exact
minimum pseudoweight of the fundamental polytope of a code,
promising heuristics as well as analytical bounds have been pro-
posed [24]–[26].
V. LPD FORMULATIONS FOR VARIOUS CODE CLASSES
This section reviews various formulations of the polytope
from (5), leading to optimized versions of the general BLPD
algorithm for different classes of codes.
In Step 1 of BLPD, the LP problem is solved by a general
purpose LP solver. These solvers usually employ the simplex
method since it performs well in practice. The simplex method
iteratively examines vertices of the underlying polytope until the
vertex corresponding to the optimal solution is reached. If there
exists a neighboring vertex for which the objective function can
be improved in the current step, the simplex method moves to
this vertex. Otherwise it stops. The procedure of moving from
one vertex to an other is called a simplex iteration. Details on
the simplex algorithm can be found in classical books about LP
(see, e.g., [27]).
The efficiency of the simplex method depends on the com-
plexity of the constraint set describing the underlying polytope.
Several such explicit descriptions of the fundamental polytope
have been proposed in the LPD literature. Some can be used
for any binary linear code whereas others are specialized for a
specific code class. Using alternative descriptions of
, alterna-
tive LP decoders are obtained. In the following, we are going to
present different LP formulations.
A. LP Formulations for LDPC Codes
The solution algorithm referred to as BLPD in Section IV
was introduced by Feldman et al. [2]. In order to describe
ex-
plicitly, three alternative constraint sets are suggested by the au-
thors by the formulations BLPD1, BLPD2, and BLPD3. In the
following, some abbreviations are used to denote both the for-
mulation and the associated solution (decoding) algorithm, e.g.,
solving an LP, subgradient optimization, neighborhood search.
The meaning will be clear from the context.
The first LP formulation, BLPD1, of [2] is applicable to
LDPC codes.
(6)
(7)
Here,
is the set of valid bit con-
figurations within
. The auxiliary variables
used in this
formulation indicate which bit configuration
is taken at
parity check . In case of an integral solution, (6) ensures that
exactly one such configuration is attained at every checknode,
while (7) connects the actual code bits, modeled by the vari-
ables
, to the auxiliary variables:
if and only if the
set
contains
for every check node . Note that here we
consider the LP relaxation, so it is not guaranteed that a solution
of the aforementioned program is indeed integral.
A second LP formulation for LDPC codes, BLPD2, is ob-
tained by employing the so-called forbidden set (FS) inequali-
ties [28]. The FS inequalities are motivated by the observation
that one can explicitly forbid those value assignments to vari-
ables where
is odd. For all local codewords in
, it holds
that
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HELMLING et al.: MATHEMATICAL PROGRAMMING DECODING OF BINARY LINEAR CODES: THEORY AND ALGORITHMS
4759
where
. Feldman et al. [2] show that
for each single parity-check code
, the FS inequalities to-
gether with the box inequalities
,
completely
and nonredundantly describe
(the case
as
depicted in Fig. 2 is the only exception where the box inequali-
ties are not needed). In a more general setting, Grötschel proved
this result for the cardinality homogeneous set systems [29].
If the rows of
are considered as dual codewords, the set
of FS inequalities is a reinvention of cocircuit inequalities ex-
plained in Section III. BLPD2 is given as follows:
Feldman et al. [2] apply BLPD using formulations BLPD1
or BLPD2 to LDPC codes. Under the BSC, the error-correcting
performance of BLPD is compared with the MSAD on an
random rate-
LDPC code with
,
,
;
with the MSAD, SPAD on the random rate-
LDPC code with
,
,
; with the MSAD, SPAD, MLD on
the random rate-
LDPC code with
,
,
.
On these codes, BLPD performs better than MSAD but worse
than SPAD. Using BLPD2, the FDA is applied to random
rate-
LDPC codes with
,
and
from an ensemble of Gallager [30]. For
Reed–Muller codes [31] with
they compare the
classical distance with the fractional distance. The numerical
results suggest that the gap between both distances grows with
increasing block length.
Another formulation for LDPC codes is given in Section VI-B
in the context of efficient implementations.
In a remarkable work, Feldman and Stein [32] have shown
that the Shannon capacity of a channel can be achieved with
LP decoding, which implies a polynomial-time decoder and the
availability of an ML certificate. To this end, they use a slightly
modified version of BLPD1 restricted to expander codes, which
are a subclass of LDPC codes. See [32] for a formal definition
of expander codes as well as the details of the corresponding
decoder.
B. LP Formulations for Codes With High-Density Parity-Check
Matrices
The number of variables and constraints in BLPD1 as well as
the number of constraints in BLPD2 increase exponentially in
the check node degree. Thus, for codes with high-density parity-
check matrices, BLPD1 and BLPD2 are computationally ineffi-
cient. A polynomial-sized formulation, BLPD3, is based on the
parity polytope of Yannakakis [33]. There are two types of auxil-
iary variables in BLPD3. The variable
is set to one if
vari-
able nodes are set to one in the neighborhood of parity-check ,
for
in the index set
. Furthermore,
the variable
is set to one if variable node
is one of the
variable nodes set to one in the neighborhood of check node :
Fig. 3. Check node decomposition.
Feldman et al. [2] show that BLPD1, BLPD2, and BLPD3
are equivalent in the sense that the
-variables of the optimal
solutions in all three formulations take the same values.
The number of variables and constraints in BLPD3 increases
as
. By applying a decomposition approach, Yang et al.
[34] show that an alternative LP formulation which has size
linear in the length and check node degrees can be obtained (it
should be noted that independently from [34], a similar decom-
position approach was also proposed in [35]). In the LP formu-
lation of [34], a high degree check node is decomposed into sev-
eral low degree check nodes. Thus, the resulting Tanner graph
contains auxiliary check and variable nodes. Fig. 3 illustrates
this decomposition technique: a check node with degree 4 is de-
composed into 2 parity checks each with degree at most 3. The
parity-check nodes are illustrated by squares. In the example,
original variables are denoted by
, while the auxiliary
variable node is named
. In general, this decomposition tech-
nique is iteratively applied until every check node has degree
less than 4. The authors show that the total number of variables
in the formulation is less than doubled by the decomposition.
For the details of the decomposition, [34] is referred.
For the ease of notation, suppose
is the set of parity-check
nodes after decomposition. If
,
, then the
parity-check constraint
is of the form
. Note that with our notation, some of these variables
might represent the same variable node
, e.g.,
from Fig. 3
would appear in two constraints of the above form, as
and
,
respectively. Yang et al. show that the parity-check constraint
can be replaced by the linear
constraints
,
,
,
(for a single check node of
degree 3 the box inequalities are not needed). If
then
along with the box constraints models the parity-check.
The constraint set of the resulting LP formulation, which we call
cascaded linear programming decoding (CLPD), is the union of
all constraints modeling the
parity checks:
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4760
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012
Fig. 4. Excerpt from a trellis graph with four states and initial state 0. The style
of an edge indicates the according information bit, while the labels refer to the
single parity bit.
In the objective function only the
variables corresponding to
the original
variables have nonzero coefficients. Thus, the ob-
jective function of CLPD is the same as of BLPD1. The con-
straints in CLPD are the FS inequalities used in BLPD2 with
the property that the degree of the check node is less than 4.
Yang et al. prove that the formulations introduced in [2] and
CLPD are equivalent. Again, equivalence is used in the sense
that in an optimal solution, the
-variables of BLPD1, BLPD2,
BLPD3, and the variables of the CLPD formulation which cor-
respond to original
-variables take the same values. Moreover,
it is shown that CLPD can be used in FDA. As a result, the com-
putation of the fractional distance for codes with high-density
parity-check matrices is also facilitated. Note that using BLPD2,
the FDA algorithm has polynomial running time only for LDPC
codes. If
is described by the constraint set of CLPD, then in
the first step of the FDA, it is sufficient to choose the set
from
the facets formed by cutting planes of type
where
,
, and
are variables of the CLPD formulation.
Additionally, an adaptive branch and bound method is suggested
in [36] to find better bounds for the minimum distance of a code.
On a random rate-
LDPC code with
,
, and
, it is demonstrated that this yields a better lower bound
than the fractional distance does.
C. LP Formulations for Turbo-Like Codes
The various LP formulations outlined so far have in common
that they are derived from a parity-check matrix which defines
a specific code. A different approach is to describe the encoder
by means of a finite state machine, which is the usual way to
define so-called convolutional codes. The bits of the informa-
tion word are subsequently fed into the machine, each causing a
state change that emits a fixed number of output bits depending
on both the current state and the input. In a systematic code,
the output always contains the input bit. The codeword, con-
sisting of the concatenation of all outputs, can thus be parti-
tioned into the systematic part which is a copy of the input and
the remaining bits, being referred to as the parity output.
A convolutional code is naturally represented by a trellis
graph (see Fig. 4), which is obtained by unfolding the state
diagram in the time domain. Each vertex of the trellis represents
the state at a specific point in time, while edges correspond to
valid transitions between two subsequent states and are labeled
by the according input and output bits. Each path from the
starting node to the end node corresponds to a codeword.4 The
cost of a codeword is derived from the received LLR values and
4We intentionally do not discuss trellis termination here and assume that the
encoder always ends in a fixed terminal state; cf., [23] for details.
Fig. 5. Factor graph of a turbo code. The interleaver links the systematic bits
x of both encoders C
(upper part) and C (lower part).
the edge labels on the path associated with this codeword. See
[23] for an in-depth survey of these concepts.
Convolutional codes are the building blocks of turbo codes,
which revolutionized coding theory because of their near
Shannon limit error-correcting performance [37]. An
turbo code consists of two convolutional codes
and
,
each of input length
, which are linked by a so-called inter-
leaver that requires the information bits of
to match those
of
after being scrambled by some permutation
which is fixed for a given code.5 It is this coupling of rather
weak individual codes and the increase of complexity arising
therefrom that entails the vast performance gain of turbo codes.
A typical turbo code (and only this case is covered here; it is
straightforward to generalize) consists of two identical system-
atic encoders of rate
each. Only one of the encoders
and
, however, contributes its systematic part to the resulting
codeword, yielding an overall rate of
, i.e.,
(since their
systematic parts differ only by a permutation, including both
would imply an embedded repetition code). We thus partition a
codeword
into the systematic part
and the parity outputs
and
of
and
, respectively.
A turbo code can be compactly represented by a so-called
Forney-style factor graph (FFG) as shown in Fig. 5. As op-
posed to Tanner graphs, in an FFG, all nodes are functional
nodes, whereas the (half-)edges correspond to variables. In our
case, there are variables of two types, namely state variables
(
), reflecting the state of
at time step , and a vari-
able for each bit of the codeword
. Each node
represents
the indicator function for a valid state transition in
at time
and is thus incident to one systematic and one parity variable as
well as the “before” and “after” state
and
, respectively.
Note that such a node
corresponds to a vertical “slice” (often
called a segment) of the trellis graph of
, and each valid con-
figuration of
is represented by exactly one edge in the re-
spective segment.
Turbo codes are typically decoded by IMPD techniques
operating on the factor graph. Feldman [1] in contrast in-
troduced an LP formulation, turbo code linear programming
decoding (TCLPD), for this purpose. This serves as an example
5Using exactly two constituent convolutional encoders eases notation and is
the most common case, albeit not being essential for the concept—in fact, recent
development suggest that the error-correcting performance benefits from adding
a third encoder [38].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HELMLING et al.: MATHEMATICAL PROGRAMMING DECODING OF BINARY LINEAR CODES: THEORY AND ALGORITHMS
4761
that mathematical programming is a promising approach in
decoding even beyond formulations based on parity-check
matrices.
In TCLPD, the trellis graph of each constituent encoder
is modeled by flow conservation and capacity constraints [39],
along with side constraints appropriately connecting the flow
variables
to auxiliary variables
and
, respectively,
which embody the codeword bits.
For
, let
be the trellis according
to
, where
is the index set of nodes (states) and
is the
set of edges (state transitions)
in
. Let
and
denote the unique start and end node, respectively, of
. We
can now define a feasible flow
in the trellis
by the system
(8)
(9)
(10)
Let
and
denote the set of edges in
whose corre-
sponding input and output bit, respectively, is a 1 (both being
subsets of the th segment of
), the following constraints re-
late the codeword bits to the flow variables:
(11)
(12)
(13)
We can now state TCLPD as
where
is split in the same way as
.
The formulation straightforwardly generalizes to all sorts of
“turbo-like” codes, i.e., codes built by convolutional codes plus
interleaver conditions. In particular, Feldman and Karger have
applied TCLPD to repeat-accumulate (RA( )) codes [40]. The
encoder of an RA( ) repeats the information bits
times, and
then sends them to an interleaver followed by an accumulator,
which is a two-state convolutional encoder. The authors derive
bounds on the error rate of TCLPD for RA codes which were
later improved and extended by Halabi and Even [41] as well as
by Goldenberg and Burshtein [42].
Note that all
variables in TCLPD are auxiliary: we could
replace each occurrence by the sum of flow variables defining
it. In doing so, (12) and (13) break down to the condition
(14)
Because the rest of the constraints defines a standard network
flow, TCLPD models a minimum cost flow problem plus the
additional side constraints (14). Using a general purpose LP
solver does not exploit this combinatorial substructure. As was
suggested already in [1], in [43], Lagrangian relaxation is ap-
plied to (14) in order to recover the underlying shortest path
problem. Additionally, the authors of [43] use a heuristic based
on computing the
shortest paths in a trellis to improve the de-
coding performance. Via the parameter
the tradeoff between
algorithmic complexity and error-correcting performance can
be controlled.
VI. EFFICIENT LP SOLVERS FOR BLPD
A successful realization of BLPD requires an efficient LP
solver. To this end, several ideas have been suggested in the lit-
erature. CLPD (cf., Section V) can be considered an efficient
LPD approach since the number of variables and constraints are
significantly reduced. We review several others in this section.
A. Solving the Separation Problem
The approach of Taghavi and Siegel [44] tackles the large
number of constraints in BLPD2. In their separation approach
called adaptive linear programming decoding (ALPD), not all
FS inequalities are included in the LP formulation as in BLPD2.
Instead, they are iteratively added when needed. As in Defini-
tion II.5, the general idea is to start with a crude LP formulation
and then improve it. Note that this idea can also be used to im-
prove the error-correcting performance (see Section VII). In the
initialization step, the trivial LP
is
solved. Let
be the optimal solution in iteration . Taghavi
and Siegel show that it can be checked in
time if
violates any FS inequality derived from
for all
(recall that
is the dimension of
and
is the maximum check-node degree). This check can
be considered as a special case of the greedy separation algo-
rithm introduced in [29]. If some of the FS inequalities are vio-
lated then these inequalities are added to the formulation and the
modified LP is solved again with the new inequalities. ALPD
stops if the current optimal solution
satisfies all FS in-
equalities. If
is integral then it is the ML codeword, oth-
erwise an error is output. ALPD does not yield an improvement
in terms of frame error rate since the same solutions are found as
in the formulations in the previous section. However, the com-
putational complexity is reduced.
An important algorithmic result of [44] is that ALPD con-
verges to the same optimal solution as BLPD2 with significantly
fewer constraints. It is shown empirically that in the last itera-
tion of ALPD, less constraints than in the formulations BLPD2,
BLPD3, and CLPD are used. Taghavi and Siegel [44] prove that
their algorithm converges to the optimal solution on the funda-
mental polytope after at most
iterations with at most
constraints.
Under the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise
channel (BIAWGNC), Taghavi and Siegel [44] use various
random
-regular codes to test the effect of changing
the check node degree, the block length, and the code rate on
the number of FS inequalities generated and the convergence
of their algorithm. Setting
and rate
, the
authors vary the check node degree in the range of 4 to 40
in their computational testing. It is observed that the average
and the maximum number of FS inequalities remain below
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4762
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012
Fig. 6. FFG for PLPD.
270. The effect of changing block length
between 30 and
1920 under
is demonstrated on a
-regular LDPC
code. For these codes, it is demonstrated that the number of FS
inequalities used in the final iteration is generally between
and
. Moreover, it is reported that the number of iterations
remains below 16. The authors also investigate the effect of
the rate on the number of FS inequalities created. Simulations
are performed on codes with
and
where the
number of parity checks
vary between 15 and 90. For most
values of
it is observed that the average number of FS in-
equalities ranges between
and
. For ALPD, BLPD2,
and SPAD (50 iterations), the average decoding time is tested
for
-regular and
-regular LDPC codes with various
block lengths. It is shown that ALPD outperforms BLPD with
respect to computation time, while still being slower than
SPAD. Furthermore, increasing the check node degree does
not increase the computation time of ALPD as much as the
computation time of BLPD. The behavior of ALPD, in terms
of the number of iterations and the FS inequalities used, under
increasing SNR is tested on a
-regular LDPC code with
. It is concluded that ALPD performs more iterations
and uses more FS inequalities for the instances it fails. Thus,
decoding time decreases with increasing SNR.
In [45], ALPD is improved further in terms of complexity.
The authors use some structural properties of the fundamental
polytope. Let
be an optimal solution in iteration . In [44],
it is shown that, if
does not satisfy an FS inequality de-
rived from check node , then
satisfies all other FS in-
equalities derived from with strict inequality. Based on this re-
sult, Taghavi et al. [45] modify ALPD and propose the decoding
approach we refer to as modified adaptive linear programming
decoding (MALPD). In the
iteration of MALPD, it is
checked in
time if
violates any FS inequality
derived from
for some
. This check
is performed only for those parity checks
which do not
induce any active FS inequality at
. Moreover, it is proved
that inactive FS inequalities at iteration
can be dropped. In any
iteration of MALPD, there are at most
FS inequalities. How-
ever, the dropped inequalities might be inserted again in a later
iteration; therefore, the number of iterations for MALPD can be
higher than for ALPD.
B. Message Passing-Like Algorithms
An approach toward low complexity LPD of LDPC codes
was proposed by Vontobel and Kötter [46]. Based on an FFG
representation of an LDPC code, they derive an LP, called
primal linear programming decoding (PLPD), which is based
on BLPD1. The FFG, shown in Fig. 6, and the Tanner graph
are related as follows.
For each parity check, the FFG exhibits a node
which is
incident to a variable-edge
for each
and demands
those adjacent variables to form a configuration that is valid
for the local code
, i.e., their sum must be even. This cor-
responds to a check node in the Tanner graph and thus to (6)
and (7) except that now there are, for the moment, independent
local variables
for each
. Additionally, the FFG general-
izes the concept of row-wise local codes
to the columns of
, in such a way that the
column is considered a local repe-
tition code
that requires the auxiliary variables
for each
to be either all 1 or all 0. By this, the variable nodes
of the Tanner graph are replaced by check nodes
—recall that
in an FFG all nodes have to be check nodes. There is a third type
of factor nodes, labeled by “ ”, which simply require all inci-
dent variables to take on the same value. These are used to es-
tablish consistency between the row-wise variables
and the
column-wise variables
as well as connecting the codeword
variables
to the configurations of the
.
From this discussion it is easily seen that the FFG indeed
ensures that any configuration of the
is a valid codeword.
The outcome of writing down the constraints for each node and
relaxing integrality conditions on all variables is the LP
where the sets
are defined as in (BLPD1).
While bloating BLPD1 in this manner seems inefficient at
first glance, the reason behind is that the LP dual of PLPD
leads to an FFG which is topologically equivalent to the one
of the primal LP, which allows us to use the graphical structure
for solving the dual. After manipulating constraints of the dual
problem to obtain a closely related “softened” dual linear pro-
gramming decoding (SDLPD) formulation, the authors propose
a coordinate-ascent-type algorithm resembling the min-sum al-
gorithm and show convergence under certain assumptions. In
this algorithm, all the edges of FFG are updated according to
some schedule. It is shown that the update calculations required
during each iteration can be efficiently performed by the SPAD.
The coordinate-ascent-type algorithm for SDLPD is guaranteed
to converge if all the edges of the FFG are updated cyclically.
Under the BIAWGNC, the authors compare the error-cor-
recting performance of the coordinate-ascent-type algorithm
(max iterations: 64, 256) against the performance of the MSAD
(max iterations: 64, 256) on the
-regular LDPC code with
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HELMLING et al.: MATHEMATICAL PROGRAMMING DECODING OF BINARY LINEAR CODES: THEORY AND ALGORITHMS
4763
and rate
. MSAD performs slightly better
than the coordinate-ascent-type algorithm. In summary, [46]
shows that it is possible to develop LP-based algorithms with
complexities similar to IMPD.
The convergence and the complexity of the coordinate-as-
cent-type algorithm proposed in [46] are studied further by Bur-
shtein [47]. His algorithm has a new scheduling scheme and its
convergence rate and computational complexity are analyzed
under this scheduling. With this new scheduling scheme, the
decoding algorithm from [46] yields an iterative approximate
LPD algorithm for LDPC codes with complexity in
. The
main difference between the two algorithms is the selection and
update of edges of the FFG. In [46], all edges are updated cycli-
cally during one iteration, whereas in [47], only few selected
edges are updated during one particular iteration. The edges are
chosen according to the variable values obtained during pre-
vious iterations.
C. Nonlinear Programming Approach
As an approximation of BLPD for LDPC codes, Yang et al.
[36] introduce the box constraint quadratic programming de-
coding (BCQPD) whose time complexity is linear in the code
length. BCQPD is a nonlinear programming approach derived
from the Lagrangian relaxation (see [7] for an introduction to
Lagrangian relaxation) of BLPD1. To achieve BCQPD, a subset
of the set of the constraints are incorporated into the objective
function. To simplify notation, Yang et al. rewrite the constraint
blocks (6) and (7) in the general form
by defining a
single variable vector
(so
is the total
number of variables in BLPD1) and choosing
and
appropri-
ately. Likewise, the objective function coefficients are rewritten
in a vector , which equals
followed by the appropriate number
of zeros. The resulting formulation is
. Using a multiplier
, the Lagrangian of this
problem is
If
is violated then a positive value is added to the orig-
inal objective function
, i.e., the solution
is penalized. Set-
ting
and
the BCQPD problem
is obtained. Since
is a positive semidefinite matrix, i.e., the
objective function is convex, and since the set of constraints
constitutes a box, each
can be minimized separately. This
leads to efficient serial and parallel decoding algorithms. Two
methods are proposed in [36] to solve the BCQPD problem,
the projected successive overrelaxation method (PSORM) and
the parallel gradient projection method (PGPM). These methods
are generalizations of Gauss–Seidel and Jacobi methods [48]
with the benefit of faster convergence if proper weight factors
are chosen. PSORM and PGPM benefit from the low-density
structure of the underlying parity-check matrix.
One of the disadvantages of IMPD is the difficulty of an-
alyzing the convergence behavior of such algorithms. Yang
et al. showed both theoretically and empirically that BCQPD
converges under some assumptions if PSORM or PGPM is used
to solve the quadratic programming problem. Moreover, the
complexity of BCQPD is smaller than the complexity of SPAD.
For numerical tests, the authors use a product code with block
length
and rate
. The BIAWGNC is
used. It is observed that the PSORM method converges faster
than PGPM. The error-correcting performance of SPAD is
poor for product codes due to their regular structure. For the
chosen product code, Yang et al. demonstrate that PSORM
outperforms SPAD in computational complexity as well as in
error-correcting performance.
D. Efficient LPD of SPC Product Codes
The class of single parity-check (SPC) product codes is of
special interest in [34]. The authors prove that for SPC product
codes the fractional distance is equal to the minimum Hamming
distance. Due to this observation, the minimum distance of SPC
product codes can be computed in polynomial time using FDA.
Furthermore, they propose a low complexity algorithm which
approximately computes the CLPD optimum for SPC product
codes. This approach is based on the observation that the parity-
check matrix of an SPC product code can be decomposed into
component SPC codes. A Lagrangian relaxation of CLPD is ob-
tained by keeping the constraints from only one component code
in the formulation and moving all other constraints to the ob-
jective function with a penalty vector. The resulting Lagrangian
dual problem is solved by subgradient algorithms (see [7]). Two
alternatives, subgradient decoding (SD) and joint subgradient
decoding (JSD) are proposed. It can be proved that subgradient
decoders converge under certain assumptions.
The number of iterations performed against the convergence
behavior of SD is tested on the
SPC product code, which
has length
, rate
and is defined
as the product of four SPC codes of length 4 each. All vari-
ants tested (obtained by keeping the constraints from component
code
in the formulation) converge in less than 20
iterations. For demonstrating the error-correcting performance
of SD if the number of iterations are set to 5, 10, 20, 100, the
SPC product code (
, rate
)
is used. The error-correcting performance is improved by in-
creasing the number of iterations. Under the BIAWGNC, this
code and the
SPC product code are used to compare the
error-correcting performance of SD and JSD with the perfor-
mance of BLPD and MLD. It should be noted that for increasing
SNR values, the error-correcting performance of BLPD con-
verges to that of MLD for SPC codes. JSD and SD approach
the BLPD curve for the code with
. For the SPC product
code with
the subgradient algorithms perform worse
than BLPD. For both codes, the error-correcting performance
of JSD is superior to SD. Finally, the
SPC product code
with
and rate
is used to compare
the error-correcting performance of SD and JSD with the SPAD.
Again the BIAWGNC is used. It is observed that SD performs
slightly better than the SPAD with a similar computational com-
plexity. JSD improves the error-correcting performance of the
SD at the cost of increased complexity.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4764
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012
E. Interior Point Algorithms
Efficient LPD approaches based on interior point algorithms
are studied by Taghavi et al. [45], Vontobel [49], and Wadayama
[50]. The use of interior point algorithms to solve LP problems
as an alternative to the simplex method was initiated by Kar-
markar [51]. In these algorithms, a starting point in the interior
of the feasible set is chosen. This starting point is iteratively
improved by moving through the interior of the polyhedron in
some descent direction until the optimal solution or an approxi-
mation is found. There are various interior point algorithms and
for some, polynomial time convergence can be proved. This is
an advantage over the simplex method which has exponential
worst case complexity.
The proposed interior point algorithms aim at using the spe-
cial structure of the LP problem. The resulting running time is a
low-degree polynomial function on the block length. Thus, fast
decoding algorithms based on interior point algorithms may be
developed for codes with large block lengths. In particular affine
scaling algorithms [49], primal-dual interior point algorithms
[45], [49], and primal path following interior point algorithm
[50] are considered. The bottleneck operation in interior point
methods is to solve a system of linear equations depending on
the current iteration of the algorithm. Efficient approaches to
solve this system of equations are proposed in [45] and [49], the
latter containing an extensive study, including investigation of
appropriate preconditioners for the often ill-conditioned equa-
tion system. The speed of convergence to the optimal vertex of
the algorithms in [45] and [50] under the BIAWGNC are demon-
strated on a nearly
-regular LDPC code with
,
and a randomly-generated
-regular LDPC code
with
, respectively.
VII. IMPROVING THE ERROR-CORRECTING
PERFORMANCE OF BLPD
The error-correcting performance of BLPD can be improved
by techniques from IP. Most of the improvement techniques can
be grouped into cutting plane or branch & bound approaches. In
this section, we review the improved LPD approaches mainly
with respect to this categorization.
A. Cutting Plane Approaches
The fundamental polytope
can be tightened by cutting
plane approaches. In the following, we refer to valid inequali-
ties as inequalities satisfied by all points in
. Valid cuts
are valid inequalities which are violated by some nonintegral
vertex of the LP relaxation. Feldman et al. [2] already address
this concept; besides applying the “Lift and project” technique
which is a generic tightening method for integer programs [52],
they also strengthen the relaxation by introducing redundant
rows into the parity-check matrix (or, equivalently, RPCs into
the Tanner graph) of the given code (cf., Section II). When using
the BLPD2 formulation, we derive additional FS inequalities
from the RPCs without increasing the number of variables. We
refer to such inequalities as RPC inequalities. RPC inequalities
may include valid cuts which increase the possibility that LPD
outputs a codeword. An interesting question relates to the types
of inequalities required to describe the codeword polytope
exactly. It turns out that
cannot be described
completely by using only FS and box inequalities; the
simplex code (dual of the
Hamming code) is given as
a counter-example in [2]. More generally, it can be concluded
from [53] that these types of inequalities do not suffice to
describe all facets of a simplex code.
RPCs can also be interpreted as dual codewords. As such, for
interesting codes there are exponentially many RPC inequali-
ties. The RPC inequalities cutting off the nonintegral optimal
solutions are called RPC cuts [44]. An analytical study under
which circumstances RPCs can induce cuts is carried out in
[24]. Most notably, it is shown that RPCs obtained by adding
no more than
dual codewords, where
is the length of
a shortest cycle in the Tanner graph, never change the funda-
mental polytope.
There are several heuristic approaches in the LPD literature to
find cut inducing RPCs [2], [44], [54], [55]. In [2], RPCs that re-
sult from adding any two rows of
are appended to the original
parity-check matrix. The authors of [44] find RPCs by randomly
choosing cycles in the fractional subgraph of the Tanner graph,
which is obtained by choosing only the fractional variable nodes
and the check nodes directly connected to them. They give a
theorem which states that every possible RPC cut must be gen-
erated by such a cycle. Their approach is a heuristic one since
the converse of that theorem does not hold. In [54], the column
index set corresponding to an optimal LP solution is sorted. By
rearranging
and bringing it to row echelon form, RPC cuts are
searched. In [55], the parity-check matrix is reformulated such
that unit vectors are obtained in the columns of the parity-check
matrix which correspond to fractional valued bits in the optimal
solution of the current LP. RPC cuts are derived from the rows
of the modified parity-check matrix.
The approaches in [28], [44], and [55] rely on a noteworthy
structural property of the fundamental ploytope. Namely, it can
be shown that no check node of the associated Tanner graph
(regardless of the existence of RPCs) can be adjacent to only
one nonintegral valued variable node.
Feldman et al. [2] test the lift and project technique on a
random rate-
LDPC code with
,
and
under the BIAWGNC. Moreover, a random rate-
LDPC code
with
,
, and
is used to demonstrate
the error-correcting performance of BLPD when the original
parity-check matrix is extended by all those RPCs obtained by
adding any two rows of the original matrix. Both tightening
techniques improve the error-correcting performance of BLPD,
though the benefit of the latter is rather poor, due to the afore-
mentioned condition on cycle lengths.
The idea of tightening the fundamental polytope is usually
implemented as a cutting plane algorithm, i.e., the separation
problem is solved (see Definition II.5 and Section VI-A). In
cutting plane algorithms, an LP is solved which contains only
a subset of the constraints of the corresponding optimization
problem. If the optimal LP solution is a codeword then the cut-
ting plane algorithm terminates and outputs the ML codeword.
Otherwise, valid cuts from a predetermined family of valid in-
equalities are searched. If some valid cuts are found, they are
added to the LP formulation and the LP is resolved. In [44],
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HELMLING et al.: MATHEMATICAL PROGRAMMING DECODING OF BINARY LINEAR CODES: THEORY AND ALGORITHMS
4765
[54], and [55], the family of valid cuts is FS inequalities derived
from RPCs.
In [54], the main motivation for the greedy cutting plane al-
gorithm is to improve the fractional distance. This is demon-
strated for the
Hamming code, the
Golay
code, and a
LDPC code. As a byproduct under the
BSC, it is shown on the
Golay code and a
LDPC code that the RPC based approach of [54] improves the
error-correcting performance of BLPD.
In the improved LPD approach of [44], first ALPD (see Sec-
tion VI) is applied. If the solution is nonintegral, an RPC cut
search algorithm is employed. This algorithm can be briefly out-
lined as follows.
1) Given a nonintegral optimal LP solution
, remove all
variable nodes
for which
is integral from the Tanner
graph.
2) Find a cycle by randomly walking through the pruned
Tanner graph.
3) Sum up (in
) the rows
which correspond to the check
nodes in the cycle.
4) Check if the resulting RPC introduces a cut.
The improved decoder of [44] performs noticeably better than
BLPD and SPAD. This is shown under the BIAWGNC on
-regular LDPC codes with
.
The cutting plane approach of [55] is based on an IP for-
mulation of MLD, which is referred to as IPD. (Note that this
formulation was already mentioned in [9].) Auxiliary variables
model the binary constraints
over
in the
real number field
:
In [55], the LP relaxation of IPD is the initial LP problem which
is solved by a cutting plane algorithm. Note that the LP relax-
ation of IPD is not equivalent to the LP relaxations given in Sec-
tion V. In almost all improved (in the error-correcting perfor-
mance sense) LPD approaches reviewed in this paper, first the
BLPD is run. If BLPD fails, some technique to improve BLPD
is used with the goal of finding the ML codeword at the cost
of increased complexity. In contrast, the approach by Tanatmis
et al. [55] does not elaborate on the solution of BLPD, but im-
mediately searches for cuts which can be derived from arbitrary
dual codewords. To this end, the parity-check matrix is modi-
fied and the conditions under which certain RPCs define cuts
are checked. The average number of iterations performed and
the average number of cuts generated in the separation algorithm
decoding (SAD) of [55] are presented for the
random reg-
ular codes with
and for the
,
,
,
BCH codes. Both performance
measures seem to be directly proportional to the block length.
The error-correcting performance of SAD is measured on the
random regular
LDPC codes with block length 100 and
200, and Tanner’s
group structured LDPC code [56].
It is demonstrated that the improved LPD approach of [55] per-
forms better than BLPD applied in the adaptive setting [44]
and better than SPAD. One significant numerical result is that
SAD proposed in [55] performs much better than BLPD for
the
and
BCH codes, which have high-den-
sity parity check matrices. In all numerical simulations the BI-
AWGNC is used.
Yufit et al. [57] improve SAD [55] and ALPD [44] by em-
ploying several techniques. The authors propose to improve
the error-correcting performance of these decoding methods by
using RPC cuts derived from alternative parity-check matrices
selected from the automorphism group of
,
. In the
alternative parity-check matrices, the columns of the original
parity-check matrix are permuted according to some scheme.
At the first stage of [57, Algorithm 1], SAD is used to solve the
MLD problem. If the ML codeword is found then Algorithm 1
terminates, otherwise an alternative parity-check matrix from
is randomly chosen and the SAD is applied again. In
the worst case this procedure is repeated
times where
denotes a predetermined constant. A similar approach is also
used to improve ALPD in [57, Algorithm 2]. Yufit et al. enhance
Algorithm 1 with two techniques to improve the error-cor-
recting performance and complexity. The first technique, called
parity-checkmatrixadaptation,istoaltertheparity-checkmatrix
prior to decoding such that at the columns of the parity-check
matrix which correspond to least reliable bits, i.e., bits with the
smallest absolute LLR values, unit vectors are obtained. The
second technique, which is motivated by MALPD of [45], is
to drop the inactive inequalities at each iteration of SAD, in
order to avoid that the problem size increases from iteration
to iteration. Under the BIAWGNC, it is demonstrated on the
BCH code and the
BCH code that SAD
can be improved both in terms of error-correcting performance
and computational complexity.
B. Facet Guessing Approaches
Based on BLPD2, Dimakis et al. [28] improve the error-
correcting performance of BLPD with an approach similar to
FDA (see Section IV). They introduce facet guessing algorithms
which iteratively solve a sequence of related LP problems. Let
be a nonintegral optimal solution of BLPD,
be the ML
codeword, and
be a set of faces of
which do not contain
. This set
is given by the set of inequalities which are not
active at
.
The set of active inequalities of a pseudocodeword
is de-
noted by
. In facet guessing algorithms, the objective func-
tion
is minimized over
for all
, where
is an arbitrary subset of
. The optimal solutions are stored in a
list. In random facet guessing decoding (RFGD),
of the faces
are chosen randomly. If
, then exhaustive facet
guessing decoding (EFGD) is obtained. From the list of optimal
solutions, the facet guessing algorithms output the integer so-
lution with minimum objective function value. It is shown that
EFGD fails if there exists a pseudocodeword
such that
for all
. For suitable expander
codes, this result is combined with the following structural prop-
erty of expander-based codes also proven by the authors. The
number of active inequalities at some codeword is much higher
than at a nonintegral pseudocodeword. Consequently, theoret-
ical bounds on the decoding success conditions of the polyno-
mial time algorithms EFGD and RFGD for expander codes are
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4766
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012
derived. The numerical experiments are performed under the BI-
AWGNC, on Tanner’s
group-structured LDPC code
and on a random LDPC code with
,
,
.
For these codes, the RFG algorithm performs better than the
SPAD.
C. Branch and Bound Approaches
LP-based branch and bound is an implicit enumeration tech-
nique in which a difficult optimization problem is divided into
multiple, but easier subproblems by fixing the values of cer-
tain discrete variables. We refer to [7] for a detailed description.
Several authors improved LPD using the branch and bound ap-
proach.
Breitbach et al. [9] solved IPD by a branch and bound ap-
proach. Depth-first and breadth-first search techniques are sug-
gested for exploring the search tree. The authors point out the
necessity of finding good bounds in the branch and bound algo-
rithm and suggest a neighborhood search heuristic as a means of
computing upper bounds. In the heuristic, a formulation is used
which is slightly different to IPD. We refer to this formulation
as alternative integer programming decoding (AIPD). AIPD can
be obtained by using error vectors. Let
be
the hard decision for the LLR vector
obtained from the BI-
AWGNC. Comparing
with a codeword
re-
sults in an error vector
, i.e.,
.
Let
, and define
by
. IPD can be reformu-
lated as
In the neighborhood search heuristic of [9], first a feasible
starting solution
is calculated by setting the coordinates of
corresponding to the
most reliable bits (i.e., those
such that
are largest) to 0. These are the nonbasic
variables, while the
basic variables are found from the vector
. Starting from this solution, a neighborhood search
is performed by exchanging basic and nonbasic variables. The
tuple of variables yielding a locally best improvement in the
objective function is selected for iterating to the next feasible
solution.
In [9], numerical experiments are performed under the
BIAWGNC, on the
BCH code, the
Reed–Muller code, the
BCH code, and the
BCH code. The neighborhood search with
single position exchanges performs very similar to MLD for
the
BCH code. As the block length increases, the
error-correcting performance of the neighborhood search with
single position exchanges gets worse. An extension of this
heuristic allowing two position exchanges is applied to the
Reed–Muller code, the
BCH code,
and the
BCH code. The extended neighborhood
search heuristic improves the error-correcting performance at
the cost of increased complexity. A branch and bound algorithm
is simulated on the
BCH code and different search
tree exploration schemes are investigated. The authors suggest
a combination of depth-first and breadth-first search.
In [58], Draper et al. improve the ALPD approach of [44]
with a branch and bound technique. Branching is done on the
least certain variable, i.e.,
such that
is smallest for
. Under the BSC, it is observed on Tanner’s
code that the ML codeword is found after few iterations in many
cases.
In [36], two branch and bound approaches for LDPC codes
are introduced. In ordered constant depth decoding (OCDD)
and ordered variable depth decoding (OVDD), first BLPD1 is
solved. If the optimal solution
is nonintegral, a subset
of the set of all nonintegral bits
is chosen. Let
. The
subset
is constituted from the least certain bits. The term “or-
dered” in OCDD and OVDD is motivated by this construction.
It is experimentally shown in [36] that choosing the least certain
bits is advantageous in comparison to a random choice of bits.
OVDD is a breadth first branch and bound algorithm where the
depth of the search tree is restricted to . Since this approach is
common in IP, we do not give the details of OVDD and refer to
[7] instead. For OVDD, the number of LPs solved in the worst
case is
.
In OCDD,
-element subsets
of
, i.e.,
and
, are chosen. Let
. For any
,
LPs are solved, each time adding a constraint block
to BLPD1, thus fixing
bits. Let
be the solution with the
minimum objective function value among the
LPs solved. If
is integral, OCDD outputs
; otherwise, another subset
is chosen. Since OCDD exhausts all
-element subsets of
,
in the worst case,
LPs are solved.
The branch-and-bound-based improved LPD of Yang et al.
[36] can be applied to LDPC codes with short block length. For
the following numerical tests, the BIAWGNC is used. Under
various settings of
and , it is shown on a random LDPC code
with
,
, and
that OCDD has a
better error-correcting performance than BLPD and SPAD. Sev-
eral simulations are done to analyze the tradeoff between com-
plexity and error-correcting performance of OCDD and OVDD.
For the test instances and parameter settings6 used in [36], it has
been observed on the aforementioned code that OVDD outper-
forms OCDD. This behavior is explained by the observation that
OVDD applies the branch and bound approach on the most un-
reliable bits. On a longer random LDPC code with
,
, and
, it is demonstrated that the OVDD
performs better than BLPD and SPAD.
Another improved LPD technique that can be interpreted
as a branch and bound approach is randomized bit guessing
decoding (RBGD) of Dimakis et al. [28]. RBGD is inspired
from the special case that all facets chosen by RFGD (see
Section VII-B) correspond to constraints of type
or
. In RBGD,
variables, where
is a
constant, are chosen randomly. Because there are
different
possible configurations of these
variables, BLPD2 is run
times with associated constraints for each assignment. The
best integer valued solution in terms of the objective function
6The parameters m and g are chosen such that OVDD and OCDD have sim-
ilar worst case complexity.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HELMLING et al.: MATHEMATICAL PROGRAMMING DECODING OF BINARY LINEAR CODES: THEORY AND ALGORITHMS
4767
is the output of RBGD. Note that by setting
to
,
a polynomial complexity in
is ensured. Under the assump-
tion that there exists a unique ML codeword, exactly one of
the
bit settings matches the bit configuration in the ML
codeword. Thus, RBGD fails if a nonintegral pseudocodeword
with a better objective function value coincides with the ML
codeword in all
components. For some expander codes, the
probability that the RBGD finds the ML codeword is given in
[28]. To find this probability expression, the authors first prove
that, for some expander-based codes, the number of nonintegral
components in any pseudocodeword scales linearly in block
length.
Chertkov and Chernyak [59] apply the loop calculus approach
[60], [61] to improve BLPD. Loop calculus is an approach from
statistical physics and related to cycles in the Tanner graph rep-
resentation of a code. In the context of improved LPD, it is used
to either modify objective function coefficients [59] or to find
branching rules for branch and bound [62]. Given a parity-check
matrix and a channel output, linear programming erasure de-
coding (LPED) [59] first solves BLPD. If a codeword is found,
then the algorithm terminates. If a nonintegral pseudocodeword
is found, then a so-called critical loop is searched by employing
loop calculus. The indices of the variable nodes along the crit-
ical loop form an index set
. LPED lowers the objective
function coefficients
of the variables
,
, by multi-
plying
with , where
. After updating the objec-
tive function coefficients, BLPD is solved again. If BLPD does
not find a codeword, then the selection criterion for the critical
loop is improved. LPED is tested on the list of pseudocodewords
found in [35] for Tanner’s
code. It is demonstrated
that LPED corrects the decoding errors of BLPD for this code.
In [62], Chertkov combines the loop calculus approach used
in LPED [59] with RFGD [28]. We refer to the combined algo-
rithm as loop guided guessing decoding (LGGD). LGGD differs
from RFGD in the sense that the constraints chosen are of type
or
, where
is in the index set
, the index
set of the variable nodes in the critical loop. LGGD starts with
solving BLPD. If the optimal solution is nonintegral, then the
critical loop is found with the loop calculus approach. Next, a
variable
,
, is selected randomly and two partial LPD
problems are deduced. These differ from the original problem
by only one equality constraint
or
. LGGD
chooses the minimum of the objective values of the two sub-
problems. If the corresponding pseudocodeword is integral, then
the algorithm terminates. Otherwise, the equality constraints are
dropped, a new
along the critical loop is chosen, and two
new subproblems are constructed. If the set
is exhausted,
the selection criterion of the critical loop is improved. LGGD
is very similar to OCDD of [36] for the case that
and
. In LGGD, branching is done on the bits in the critical
loop, whereas in OCDD, branching is done on the least reliable
bits. As in [59], LGGD is tested on the list of pseudocodewords
generated in [35] for Tanner’s
code. It is shown
that LGGD improves BLPD under the BIAWGNC.
SAD of [55] is improved in terms of error-correcting per-
formance by a branch and bound approach in [57]. In [57, Al-
gorithm 3], first SAD is employed. If the solution is noninte-
gral, then a depth-first branch and bound is applied. The non-
TABLE I
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
integral valued variable with smallest LLR value is chosen as
the branching variable. Algorithm 3 terminates as soon as the
search tree reaches the maximally allowed depth
. Under the
BIAWGNC, on the
BCH code and the
BCH code, Yufit et al. [57] demonstrate that the decoding per-
formance of Algorithm 3 (enhanced with parity-check matrix
adaptation) approaches MLD.
VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have shown how the decoding of binary
linear block codes benefits from a wide range of concepts
which originate from mathematical optimization—mostly LP,
but also quadratic (nonlinear) and IP, duality theory, branch
and bound methods, Lagrangian relaxation, network flows,
and matroid theory. Bringing together both fields of research
does lead to promising new algorithmic decoding approaches
as well as deeper structural understanding of linear block
codes in general and special classes of codes—like LDPC and
turbo-like codes—in particular. The most important reason for
the success of this connection is the formulation of MLD as the
minimization of a linear function over the codeword polytope
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
4768
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012
. We have reviewed a variety of techniques of how to
approximate this polytope, whose description complexity in
general is too large to be computed efficiently.
For further research on LPD of binary linear codes, two
general directions can be distinguished. One is to decrease
the algorithmic complexity of LPD toward reducing the gap
between LPD and IMPD, the latter of which still outper-
forms LPD in practice. The other direction aims at increasing
error-correcting performance, tightening up to MLD perfor-
mance. This includes a continued study of RPCs as well as the
characterization of other, non-RPC facet-defining inequalities
of the codeword polytope.
There are other lines of research related to LPD and IMPD
which are not covered in this article. Flanagan et al. [21] have
generalized LP decoding, along with several related concepts,
to nonbinary linear codes. Another possible generalization is to
extend to different channel models [22]. Connecting two seem-
ingly different decoding approaches, structural relationship be-
tween LPD and IMPD has been discussed in [63]. Moreover, the
discovery that both decoding methods are closely related to the
Bethe free energy approximation, a tool from statistical physics,
has initiated vital research [64]. Also, of course, research on
IMPD itself, independent of LPD, is still ongoing with high ac-
tivity. A promising direction of research is certainly the appli-
cation of message passing techniques to mathematical program-
ming problems beyond LPD [65].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We would like to thank Pascal O. Vontobel and Frank Kienle
for their comments and suggestions. We also thank the anony-
mous referees for the helpful reviews.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,”
Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, 2003.
[2] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear pro-
gramming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.
51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[3] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and
the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2,
pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[4] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.
[5] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. disserta-
tion, Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[6] H.-A. Loeliger, “An introduction to factor graphs,” IEEE Signal
Process. Magn., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28–41, Jan. 2004.
[7] G. L. Nemhauser and L. A. Wolsey, Integer and Combinatorial Op-
timization, ser. Wiley-Interscience series in discrete mathematics and
optimization.
New York: Wiley, 1988.
[8] M. Grötschel, L. Lovász, and A. Schrijver, Geometric Algorithms and
Combinatorial Optimization.
Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag,
1988.
[9] M. Breitbach, M. Bossert, R. Lucas, and C. Kempter, “Soft-decision
decoding of linear block codes as optimization problem,” Eur. Trans.
Telecommun., vol. 9, pp. 289–293, 1998.
[10] E. Berlekamp, R. McEliece, and H. van Tilborg, “On the inherent in-
tractability of certain coding problems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.
IT-24, no. 3, pp. 384–386, May 1978.
[11] R. M. Karp, “Reducibility among combinatorial problems,” in Com-
plexity of Computer Computations, R. E. Miller and J. W. Thatcher,
Eds.
New York: Plenum, 1972, pp. 85–103.
[12] A. Vardy, “The intractability of computing the minimum distance of a
code,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1757–1766, Nov.
1997.
[13] D. J. A. Welsh, “Combinatorial problems in matroid theory,” in Com-
binatorial Mathematics and its Applications, D. J. A. Welsh, Ed.
London, U.K.: Academic, 1971, pp. 291–307.
[14] J. G. Oxley, Matroid Theory.
Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press,
1992.
[15] D. J. A. Welsh, Matroid Theory.
New York: Academic, 1976, L. M.
S. Monographs.
[16] N. Kashyap, “A decomposition theory for binary linear codes,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 3035–3058, Jul. 2008.
[17] F. Barahona and M. Grötschel, “On the cycle polytope of a binary ma-
troid,” J. Comb. Theory Ser. B, vol. 40, pp. 40–62, 1986.
[18] N. Kashyap, “On the convex geometry of binary linear codes,” pre-
sented at the presented at the Inaugural UC San Diego Workshop Inf.
Theory Appl., La Jolla, CA, Feb. 2006.
[19] M. Grötschel and K. Truemper, “Decomposition and optimization
over cycles in binary matroids,” J. Comb. Theory Ser. B, vol. 46, pp.
306–337, 1989.
[20] P. D. Seymour, “Decomposition of regular matroids,” J. Comb. Theory
Ser. B, vol. 28, pp. 305–359, 1980.
[21] M. Flanagan, V. Skachek, E. Byrne, and M. Greferath, “Linear-pro-
gramming decoding of nonbinary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4134–4154, Sep. 2009.
[22] A. Cohen, F. Alajaji, N. Kashyap, and G. Takahara, “LP decoding for
joint source-channel codes and for the non-ergodic Polya channel,”
IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 678–680, Sep. 2008.
[23] S. Lin and D. Costello Jr., Error Control Coding, 2nd ed.
Upper
Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[24] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, Graph-cover decoding and finite-length
analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes 2005
[Online]. Available: arXiv:cs/0512078v1 [cs.IT]
[25] G. D. Forney Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the
effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with
cycles,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, ser. ser. IMA Vol.
Math. Appl., B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds.
New York: Springer-
Verlag, 2001, vol. 123, pp. 101–112.
[26] M. Chertkov and M. Stepanov, “Polytope of correct (linear program-
ming) decoding and low-weight pseudo-codewords,” in Proc. IEEE
Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, St. Petersburg, Russia, Jul./Aug. 2011, pp.
1648–1652.
[27] A. Schrijver, Theory of Linear and Integer Programming.
New York:
Wiley, 1986.
[28] A. G. Dimakis, A. A. Gohari, and M. J. Wainwright, “Guessing facets:
Polytope structure and improved LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 55, no. 8, pp. 4134–4154, Aug. 2009.
[29] M. Grötschel, “Cardinality homogeneous set systems, cycles in ma-
troids, and associated polytopes,” in Sharpest Cut: Impact Manfred
Padberg His Work.
Philadelphia, PA: SIAM, 2004, pp. 99–120.
[30] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[31] G. D. Forney Jr., “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans.
Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 529–548, Feb. 2001.
[32] J. Feldman and C. Stein, “LP decoding achieves capacity,” in Proc.
16th Annu. ACM-SIAM Symp. Discrete Algorithms, Philadelphia, PA,
Jan. 2005, pp. 460–469.
[33] M. Yannakakis, “Expressing combinatorial optimization problems by
linear programs,” J. Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 43, pp. 441–466, 1991.
[34] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “A new linear programming ap-
proach to decoding linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.
54, no. 3, pp. 1061–1072, Mar. 2008.
[35] M. Chertkov and M. Stepanov, “Pseudo-codeword landscape,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1546–1550.
[36] K. Yang, J. Feldman, and X. Wang, “Nonlinear programming ap-
proaches to decoding low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1603–1613, Aug. 2006.
[37] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding
and decoding: turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10,
pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[38] C. Berrou, A. Graell i Amat, Y. Ould-Cheikh-Mouhamedou, and Y.
Saouter, “Improving the distance properties of turbo codes using a third
component code: 3D turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no.
9, pp. 2505–2509, Sep. 2009.
[39] R. K. Ahuja, T. L. Magnanti, and J. B. Orlin, Network Flows.
Engle-
wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1993.
[40] J. Feldman and D. R. Karger, “Decoding turbo-like codes via linear
programming,” J. Comput. Syst. Sci., vol. 68, pp. 733–752, Jun. 2004.
[41] N. Halabi and G. Even, “Improved bounds on the word error proba-
bility of RA(2) codes with linear-programming-based decoding,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 265–280, Jan. 2005.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
HELMLING et al.: MATHEMATICAL PROGRAMMING DECODING OF BINARY LINEAR CODES: THEORY AND ALGORITHMS
4769
[42] I. Goldenberg and D. Burshtein, “Error bounds for repeat-accumulate
codes decoded via linear programming,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo
Codes, Iterative Inf. Proc., Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 487–491.
[43] A. Tanatmis, S. Ruzika, and F. Kienle, “A Lagrangian relaxation based
decoding algorithm for LTE turbo codes,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo
Codes, Iterative Inf., Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 369–373.
[44] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear pro-
gramming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp.
5396–5410, Dec. 2008.
[45] M. H. Taghavi, A. Shokrollahi, and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient implemen-
tation of linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol.
57, no. 9, pp. 5960–5982, Sep. 2011.
[46] P. O. Vontobel and R. Kötter, “On low-complexity linear-program-
ming decoding of LDPC codes,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 18, pp.
509–517, 2007.
[47] D. Burshtein, “Iterative approximate linear programming decoding of
LDPC codes with linear complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55,
no. 11, pp. 4835–4859, Nov. 2009.
[48] D. Bertsimas and D. J. Tsitsiklis, Parallel and Distributed Com-
putation: Numerical Methods.
Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific,
1997.
[49] P. O. Vontobel, “Interior-point algorithms for linear-programming de-
coding,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, La Jolla, CA, Jan. 2008,
pp. 433–437.
[50] T. Wadayama, “An LP decoding algorithm based on primal path-fol-
lowing interior point method,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory,
Seoul, Korea, Jun./Jul. 2009, pp. 389–393.
[51] N. Karmarkar, “A new polynomial-time algorithm for linear program-
ming,” Combinatorica, vol. 4, pp. 373–395, 1984.
[52] L. Lovasz and A. Schrijver, “Cones of matrices and set-functions and
0–1 optimization,” SIAM J. Optim., vol. 1, pp. 166–190, 1991.
[53] M. Grötschel and K. Truemper, “Master polytopes for cycles in binary
matroids,” Linear Algebra Appl., vol. 114/115, pp. 523–540, 1989.
[54] M. Miwa, T. Wadayama, and I. Takumi, “A cutting-plane method based
on redundant rows for improving fractional distance,” IEEE J. Sel.
Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 1005–1012, Aug. 2009.
[55] A. Tanatmis, S. Ruzika, H. W. Hamacher, M. Punekar, F. Kienle, and
N. Wehn, “A separation algorithm for improved LP-decoding of linear
block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3277–3289,
Jul. 2010.
[56] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. Costello
Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant ma-
trices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984,
Dec. 2004.
[57] A. Yufit, A. Lifshitz, and Y. Be’ery, “Efficient linear programming de-
coding of HDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 3, pp.
758–766, Mar. 2011.
[58] S. C. Draper, J. S. Yedidia, and Y. Wang, “ML decoding via mixed-
integer adaptive linear programming,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf.
Theory, Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 1656–1660.
[59] M. Chertkov and V. Y. Chernyak, “Loop calculus helps to improve
belief propagation and linear programming decodings of low-density-
parity-check codes,” presented at the presented at the 44th Allerton
Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, Sep. 2006.
[60] M. Chertkov and V. Y. Chernyak, “Loop calculus in statistical physics
and information science,” Phys. Rev. E, vol. 73, no. 6, p. 065102, Jun.
2006 [Online]. Available: arXiv.org:cond-mat/0601487
[61] M. Chertkov and V. Y. Chernyak, “Loop series for discrete statistical
models on graphs,” J. Statist. Mech. Theory Exp., vol. 2006, p. P06009,
2006 [Online]. Available: arXiv.org:cond-mat/0603189
[62] M. Chertkov, “Reducing the error floor,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory
Workshop, Sep. 2007, pp. 230–235.
[63] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On the relationship between linear pro-
gramming decoding and min-sum algorithm decoding,” in Proc. Int.
Symp. Inf. Theory, Parma, Italy, Oct. 2004, pp. 991–996.
[64] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free-energy
approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282–2312, Jul. 2005.
[65] M. Bayati, D. Shah, and M. Sharma, “Max-product for maximum
weight matching: Convergence, correctness, and LP duality,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 1241–1251, Mar. 2008.
Michael Helmling received the Diploma in Mathematics from the University
of Kaiserslautern, Germany, in 2011.
Since 2011, he has been a Ph.D. student with the Optimization Research
Group, Department of Mathematics, University of Kaiserslautern.
Stefan Ruzika received a M.S. degree in mathematics from Clemson Univer-
sity, SC, in 2002 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in mathematics from the Uni-
versity of Kaiserslautern in 2003 and 2007, respectively.
Since 2008 he is assistant professor at the University of Kaiserslautern. His
research interests include coding theory, combinatorial optimization and mul-
tiple objective programming.
Akın Tanatmis received the B.Sc. degree in Industrial Engineering from
Bilkent University, Turkey, in 2002 and the Diploma in Mathematics and Ph.D.
degrees from the University of Kaiserslautern in 2006 and 2011, respectively.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:07:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
