2012 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory Proceedings

A Two Stage Selective Averaging LDPC Decoding
Dinesh Kumar. A and Ambedkar Dukkipati Department of Computer Science and Automation
Indian Institute of Science, India Email: {dinesh.a, ambedkar}@csa.iisc.ernet.in

Abstract— Low density parity-check (LDPC) codes are a class of linear block codes that are decoded by running belief propagation (BP) algorithm or log-likelihood ratio belief propagation (LLR-BP) over the factor graph of the code. One of the disadvantages of LDPC codes is the onset of an error floor at high values of signal to noise ratio caused by trapping sets. In this paper, we propose a two stage decoder to deal with different types of trapping sets. Oscillating trapping sets are taken care by the first stage of the decoder and the elementary trapping sets are handled by the second stage of the decoder. Simulation results on the regular PEG (504,252,3,6) code and the irregular PEG (1024,518,15,8) code shows that the proposed two stage decoder performs significantly better than the standard decoder.
I. INTRODUCTION
A Low Density Parity-Check (LDPC) code can be described by a parity-check matrix H that is represented using a special type of graph called factor graph. A factor graph is a bipartite graph composed of N variable nodes vj, for j ∈ {1, . . . , N } that represent the message bits in the codeword and M check nodes ci, for i ∈ {1, . . . , M } that represent the parity-check equations. We use the notation PEG (N, M, x, y) where N is the number of variable nodes, M is the number of check nodes, x and y represent the maximum degree of the variable nodes and maximum degree of the check nodes respectively. The channel considered here is an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. We use the log likelihood ratio belief propagation (LLR-BP) algorithm for decoding. Let m(vli)cj be the message passed from variable node vi to check node cj at iteration l of the algorithm. Similarly, one can define mc(lj)vi . The initial values of the message m(v0i)cj is equal to the channel information log likelihood ratio (LLR) Cvi of the variable node vi and it is independent of cj.
The main problem with LDPC codes is the high error floor in high signal to noise ratio (SNR) which is caused by existence of trapping sets [1]. In this paper, we propose a two stage decoder that in the first stage averages the messages from the selected variable nodes over two iterations. The nodes are selected if the belief in the node is decreasing below a certain threshold or if the belief is increasing rapidly. The decoded string is checked if it has converged to a valid code word in each iteration. If the decoded string has not converged to a valid code word even after maximum number of iterations and the number of check nodes that are not satisfied is below a certain threshold, we proceed to the second stage of the decoder where we flip certain bits connected to the unsatisfied check nodes. Then the first stage of the decoding process is repeated for the processed string.

The paper is organized as follows. § II provides the necessary background for understanding the error floor in LDPC codes and the recent literature on tackling this problem. § III proposes our two stage decoder and analyses how they improve the performance from the trapping set point of view. § IV gives the simulation results to prove that the proposed algorithm does better than averaging decoder and standard decoder. We provide the concluding remarks in § V.
II. BACKGROUND A. Trapping sets
Error floor was analyzed in the context of trapping sets by Mackay [2]. Later, Richardson [1] showed that trapping sets exhibit a strong influence on the slope of the error-floor of LDPC codes.
Trapping set is defined as follows. A Trapping set (x, y) is an induced subgraph of x variable nodes with y ≥ 0 odd degree check nodes [3].
Fig. 1. (6,2) Trapping set
An example of a trapping set is illustrated in Figure 1. In the above figure we can see six variable nodes and two unsatisfied check nodes.
There are three types of error events in the error floor region [3]. They are (i) unstable error events - dynamic errors which changes with iterations and have large x and y, (ii) stable or elementary trapping sets - main cause of error floor in high SNR values. It has small x and y values, and (iii) oscillating trapping sets - the number of trapping set error oscillate with iteration, some times subsets of stable trapping sets.
The error-floor can be explained due to the following phenomena [4], In the initial stages of the decoder, due to certain noise samples, variables nodes that belong to one particular trapping set (initial trapping set) increase their belief on wrong bit value rapidly. This affects the other variable nodes in the induced subgraph of the trapping set that already have a low belief value. As the decoder iterates, the variables

978-1-4673-2579-0/12/$31.00 ©2012 IEEE

2866

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

outside of the trapping set starts to correct the affected variable nodes. But this is not enough as these nodes are significantly biased towards the wrong bit values. Since the number of check nodes that can detect the trapping set error are small (small y value in elementary trapping set), the trapping set error persists till the end of decoding process.
The trapping sets are union of several cycles. One of the most prevalent types of error in the waterfall region are oscillating trapping sets that cause the LLR values of some nodes to oscillate. This could be due to two or more cycles passing through the same node. When the messages iterating in different cycles supporting different bit values arrive at the same variable node at distinct times, the LLR values seems to oscillate.

B. Related Work
A lot of research has gone into designing decoders to mitigate the errors caused by the trapping sets. The decoders are designed in such a way that the computational complexity of the modified decoder is not high compared to the standard decoder.
In [4], the problems caused by trapping sets and why the decoder fails in overcoming these problems are studied. Landner et al. [4], [5] propose an averaging decoder that averages the probability of a node over several iterations (averaging of LLR discussed in [5]).
Averaging prevents the erroneous information from being trapped in the code graph by slowing down the convergence speed of the nodes. This modified decoder is tested on [2640,1320] Margulis code at 2.4 dB SNR. It is reported in previous studies [2], [1] that this SNR is the onset of the error floor for the Margulis code. This method though computationally less complex, it slows down the convergence of the reliable nodes. This affects the performance of the decoder in the waterfall region as oscillating trapping sets are prevalent in this region than the elementary trapping sets.
In [6], the BP algorithm is well studied in the point of view of the Bethe energy and how it fails in the presence of cycles. They propose a BP algorithm with a tunable parameter Δ and a modification to the outgoing message from the variable node.

mv(ilc)j

=

mv(li)cj

+

(K − 1) Δ

m(vli−1) − m(vli)

,

where K = |N (vi)|, is the degree of the node vi. On adjusting the parameter Δ at different SNR points, they are able to achieve performance better than the standard BP decoder. This modification also follows the same principle as the averaging decoder by slowing down the information flow to prevent the trapping of the erroneous information.
The work put forward in [7] concentrates on short and middle length LDPC codes as they are largely affected by cycles in the graph. These cycles result in oscillation of the LLR values in the nodes. They propose to modify the outgoing messages from the variable nodes vi

mv(ilc)j =

mv(li)cj + mv(ilc−j1), mv(li)cj ,

if sgn(mv(li)cj ) = sgn(mv(ilc−j1)) otherwise.

This modification helps in damping the oscillation, but their method does not handle the errors caused by elementary trapping sets.
A two stage decoder was proposed in [8] [9], in which the conventional decoding process is performed as the first stage. If the decoder fails after the maximum number of iterations, then it is concluded that the result of the failure is due to a trapping set. If the number of unsatisfied check nodes is below a certain threshold, then the decoder enters the second stage. In the second stage, using the fact that an unsatisfied check node will have odd number of variable nodes connected to it in the trapping set (one bit in most notorious case), a set of matching sets Ψ of variable nodes is constructed. All the variable nodes that belong to a matching set ψ ∈ Ψ are assigned inital log likelihood ratios (LLR’s) to the maximum possible value with opposite signs, and the first stage is repeated again. This process is repeated for all the members of the set Ψ or till the trapping set error is corrected. Since the trapping set is considered as an unstable equilibrium, flipping one or two bits is enough for breaking the trapping set. But this decoder is a very complex decoder and in the worst case it may have to be repeated for all the member of the set Ψ. On setting the variable nodes initial LLR’s to a maximum value we introduce external noise into the system which is not recommended. As this decoder only deals with trapping sets with very few unsatisfied check nodes, they do not solve the errors due to oscillating trapping sets.
There are also some modification proposed to the schedule of the BP algorithm [10] [11]. In [10], they propose a sequential schedule based on a measure called as residual which is the difference between the message in the current and previous iteration. This acts as an indicator of the level of convergence in that part of the graph. They order the variable node messages in such a way that the the least converged part of the graph receives the new information first. The check node messages are not altered.

III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM
The proposed decoding algorithm consists of two stages. In the first stage of the decoder we handle the oscillating trapping sets using a selective decoding algorithm. If the decoder does not converge after a fixed number of iterations and the number of unsatisfied check nodes is below a certain threshold, we assume that it is due to elementary trapping sets and identify the variable nodes that are connected to the unsatisfied check nodes and multiply the channel information LLR Cvi with a constant and repeat the first stage of the decoder.
Our aim in the first stage is to prevent the error due to oscillating trapping sets and initial trapping set. The algorithm must be designed such that it does not affect the convergence of reliable nodes. Faster convergence of the reliable nodes helps the convergence of the oscillating nodes as the messages

2867
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

from the converged reliable nodes are very strong compared to set of matching sets of vertices that might belong to a trapping

the belief in the oscillating nodes. As explained in § II-A, the set. The initial LLR value of the variable nodes that belong to

nodes affected by the initial trapping set have a rapid increase one of the members of the set of matching set are flipped and

in reliability value on the wrong bit and the errors caused by the decoding process is repeated. If the trapping set error is not

this can be prevented by slowing down the wrong information solved, then the decoder backtracks and repeats the process for

from flowing out of these nodes.

the next member of the set of matching set. The second stage

The selective averaging algorithm modifies the outgoing

messages mv(li)cj from the variable nodes as follows:

⎧

⎨ , (l) m = ⎩m , vicj

m(vli)cj +mv(li−cj1) 2
(l) vi cj

if Ω(vi) > 0, if Ω(vi) = 0,

of our decoder also follows a similar approach but we avoid backtracking as it increases the complexity of the decoder.
Algorithm 2 Second Stage of the decoder 1: First stage decoder unsuccessful. 2: Find the set C of unsatisfied check nodes.

where Ω(vi) = 0 corresponds to the node vi not being selected. 3: if |C| < CNthreshold then

The messages from the check nodes mc(lj)vi are not modified.

4: Vo∗ld ←output of first stage of the decoder. 5: Find the set of variable nodes Vun where Vun =

Algorithm 1 Node Selection

N (cj)
cj ∈C

for i ∈ 1, 2, . . . , N do

(N (cj) is the set of all variable nodes that are connected

B((vl)i) ← |L((vl)i)| B((vl−i)1) ← |L((lv−i)1)| if Ω(vi)! = 2 then
Ω(vi) ← 0 end if if B((vl)i) < B((vl−i)1) && (B((vl−i)1) − B((vl)i)) > β then
Ω(vi) ← 1 else if B((vl)i) > B((vl−i)1) then
if (B((vl)i) − B((vl−i)1)) > ν then Ω(vi) ← 1

to the check node cj). 6: Remove all the variable nodes in Vun that have common

check nodes other than the unsatisfied check nodes. This

set is Vnc

7: for vk ∈ Vnc do

8:

C(vk) = −C(vk) ∗ η

C(vk) is the channel information LLR of the variable

vk

9:

Ω(vk) ← 2

10: end for

11: end if

end if

12: re-decode with the the new channel information LLR

end if end for

C(vk ) . 13: if re-decode is successful then

14: stop and exit

In this algorithm, L((lv)i) represents the LLR of the node vi at iteration l and L((vl−i)1) represents the LLR of the node vi at iteration l − 1. We assign |L((vl)i)| to B((vl)i) and |L((lv−i)1)| to B((vl−i)1). We then check if the belief in the node B(vi) is decreasing or increasing in each iteration. If the belief is decreasing below a constant β, we assume this as an oscillating node and it is selected. If the belief is increasing rapidly at a rate above the constant ν, we consider this behavior as an

15: else

16: Vn∗ew ←output of re-decode. 17: Find the set C of unsatisfied check nodes.

18: if |C| < |C | then

19:

output Vo∗ld.

20: else

21:

output Vn∗ew.

22: end if

23: end if

initial trapping set [5] and the node is selected for averaging

of the messages in the next iteration. This condition also helps The second stage of the proposed decoder is listed in

prevent the oscillating nodes. All the nodes are unselected at algorithm 2. If the first stage of the decoder has not converged

the beginning of the node selection procedure at each iteration even after the maximum number of iterations and the number

except the nodes that are modified in the second stage of the of unsatisfied check nodes is below CNthreshold, we conclude algorithm. Message from these nodes are always averaged. that the error occurred due to an elementary trapping set. As

A more detailed explanation for this special treatment of the the trapping set is an unstable equilibrium condition, if we flip

modified nodes will follow when we explain the second stage even one or two variable nodes that belong to the check nodes,

of the algorithm.

it is enough to break the trapping set. But we do not know

The first stage of the decoder is not designed for dealing the variables nodes that belong to the trapping sets. The only

with the elementary trapping sets that are the most prevalent information available to us is that the unsatisfied check nodes

type of trapping sets in the error floor region. We will use a are connected to odd number of variable nodes (one node in

similar algorithm to the one proposed in [8]. The algorithm the worst case) in the trapping set as shown in Figure 1. We

proposed in [8], [9], uses a backtracking approach and forms a find the set of variables nodes Vun that is a union of all variable

2868
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

nodes connected to the unsatisfied check nodes. Remove all the variable nodes in Vun that have common check nodes other than the unsatisfied check nodes. This set is Vnc We will multiply the initial LLR value Cvk with -η for all the variable nodes vk that belong to the set Vnc. This flips the bit value of the node and the decoding process is repeated. But some of the correctly decoded nodes that do not belong to the trapping set might also be flipped. Since the variable nodes do not have any common check nodes, the wrongly flipped nodes are easily corrected by other reliable nodes in the decoding process. If the re-decoding is not successful, then we report the string with the least number of unsatisfied check nodes. To be cautious we assign Ω(vk) = 2 so that they remain always selected and the messages from these nodes are always averaged. This helps in preventing the wrong information from spreading initially before the reliable nodes converge. The nodes that we have flipped in this stage that belong to trapping set will help in breaking the trapping set.
Note that the computational cost of the proposed decoder not significantly greater than the standard decoder. The selected averaging decoder runs at most twice (if second stage is triggered) and the cost of node selection algorithm is negligible compared to the overall cost of the algorithm.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
We ran simulations of the proposed decoder for (1024,518,15,8) irregular PEG code and (504,252,3,6) regular PEG code. We compare the results of the proposed decoder with the averaging decoder [4] and the standard decoder. Without loss of generality, the codewords were all-zero.
For selecting the parameters β and ν we plotted iteration vs LLR value for each node. We observed the rate of fall of LLR in oscillating nodes and found a range of values for the parameter β. We ran the selective averaging algorithm for the values in the range and found the optimal value. The same procedure was repeated for the parameter ν, but here the rate of rise of LLR value in the nodes was observed instead of the rate of fall. We used the following value for our experiments. β = 3.2 and ν = 1. We observed in our experiments that β, ν values need not be adjusted for each SNR point. This is because the parameters act on the difference of LLR values in consecutive iterations. CNthreshold decides if it is useful to execute the second stage of the algorithm. The second stage of the algorithm is used to handle the elementary trapping sets. Since elementary trapping sets are low weight errors [9], we assign a low value for CNthreshold. The rule of thumb, we used, is to take a value roughly one percent of the total number of variable nodes N . We used CNthreshold = 10 is our experiment. To reduce the initial belief of the flipped bits we multiply the C(vk) with a number slightly less than 1. We used η = 0.8 in our experiments(η > 1 is not advisable as it induces external noise in the system).
In Figure 2, 3, 4, 5 and Table I we can see that the proposed two stage decoder performs better than the other two decoders in both bit error rate (BER) and (BLER) for regular

TABLE I PERFORMANCE COMPARISON FOR IRREGULAR PEG CODES
(1024, 518, 15, 8) AT SNR 3.5 dB

Algorithm Two stage selective averaging Averaging [4] Standard

BLER 2.133 e-08 6.333 e-08 1.8 e-07

BER 1.645 e-09 3.378 e-09 1.365 e-08

Fig. 2. Comparison of BLER (504,252,3,6) regular PEG code
Fig. 3. Comparison of BER (504,252,3,6) regular PEG code
(504,252,3,6) PEG code and Irregular (1024, 518, 15, 8) PEG codes. This performance is expected because the proposed two stage decoder solves the trapping sets better than the averaging decoder [4] and the standard decoder.
We observed that the proposed decoder solved 1 out of every 4 solvable elementary trapping set errors (number of unsatisfied check nodes is less that CNthreshold) for regular PEG code and 5 out of 8 solvable elementary trapping set errors in irregular PEG code.
In Figure 6 we can see the number of bit errors in the redecoding after processing in the second stage of the decoder and the number of bit errors in the averaging decoder [4]. It shows how the averaging decoder fails to solve certain elementary trapping sets but the proposed two stage decoder solves the error in about 60 iterations in the re-decoding after

2869
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

code especially in the error floor region. In the first stage we handle the oscillating trapping sets by selecting the nodes based on rate of increase or decrease of the belief. The messages from the selected nodes are averaged with message from the previous iteration to slow down the flow of erroneous information in the system. The reliable nodes are allowed to converge faster and they help in solving the oscillating trapping sets. The first stage decoder does not solve the errors due to elementary trapping set. To address this we proposed a second stage and our simulation results show that this helps in breaking the trapping sets.

Fig. 4. Comparison of BLER Irregular PEG codes (1024, 518, 15, 8)

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We gratefully acknowledge that without late Prof. Priti Shankar’s participation, this work would not have been possible.

Fig. 5. Comparison of BER Irregular PEG codes (1024, 518, 15, 8)
Fig. 6. Comparison of the error performance of two stage decoder and averaging decoder [4].

REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proceedings of the 41st Annual Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Sept 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[2] D.J.C. MacKay and M.J. Postol, “Weaknesses of margulis and ramanujan-margulis low-density parity-check codes,” in Proceedings of MFCSIT2002, Galway. 2003, vol. 74 of Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, Elsevier.
[3] Y. Han and W. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 57, pp. 1663–1673, June 2009.
[4] S. Landner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proceedings of International Conference on Wireless Networks, Communications and Mobile Computing, June 2005, vol. 1, pp. 630–635.
[5] Stefan Landner, Thorsten Hehn, Olgica Milenkovic, and Johannes B Huber, “Two methods for reducing the error-floor of LDPC codes,” Tech. Rep. arXiv:cs/0701006, Jul 2007.
[6] M. G. Stepanov and M. Chertkov, “Improving convergence of belief propagation decoding,” in Proceedings of 44th Allerton Conference, Sep 2006.
[7] S. Gounai, T. Ohtsuki, and T. Kaneko, “Modified belief propagation decoding algorithm for low-density parity check code based on oscillation,” in Proceedings of IEEE 63rd Vehicular Technology Conference VTC 2006-Spring, May 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1467–1471.
[8] Jingyu Kang, Li Zhang, Zhi Ding, and Shu Lin, “A two-stage iterative decoding of LDPC codes for lowering error floors,” in Proceedings of IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, Dec 2008, pp. 1–4.
[9] Jingyu Kang, Qin Huang, Shu Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error-floors of LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64– 73, january 2011.
[10] A.I. Vila Casado, M. Griot, and R.D. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Communications, June 2007, pp. 932–937.
[11] P. Radosavljevic, A. de Baynast, and J.R. Cavallaro, “Optimized message passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” in Proceedings of Thirty-Ninth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers,, Nov 2005, pp. 591–595.

the second stage. The second stage of the proposed decoder solves the elementary trapping sets by flipping certain bits. This behaviour is observed only for some instances of the simulations.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a two stage decoding algorithm for LDPC codes that reduces the error performance of the

2870
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:02:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

