4770

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

Analytical Solution of Covariance Evolution for Irregular LDPC Codes
Takayuki Nozaki, Student Member, IEEE, Kenta Kasai, Member, IEEE, and Kohichi Sakaniwa, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The scaling law developed by Amraoui et al. is a powerful technique to estimate the block erasure probabilities of finitelength low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Solving a system of differential equations called covariance evolution, one can obtain the scaling parameter. However, the covariance evolution has not been analytically solved. In this paper, we present the analytical solution of the covariance evolution for irregular LDPC code ensembles.
Index Terms—Binary erasure channel (BEC), covariance evolution, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, peeling algorithm (PA), scaling law.
I. INTRODUCTION
G ALLAGER invented low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1]. The LDPC codes are linear codes defined by sparse bipartite graphs, called Tanner graphs. The peeling algorithm (PA) [2], [3] introduced by Luby et al. is a sequential iterative decoding algorithm for the binary erasure channel (BEC). As the PA proceeds, edges and nodes are progressively removed from the original Tanner graph and the so-called residual graph is left at each iteration. The residual graph at each iteration consists of the variable nodes that are still unknown and the check nodes and the edges connecting to those variable nodes. The decoding process successfully stops if and only if the residual graph vanishes. It is known that the PA and the belief propagation (BP) decoder have the same decoding result.
The scaling law developed by Amraoui et al. [4] is a powerful technique to estimate the block and bit erasure probabilities for finite-length LDPC codes. Let and be random variables representing the number of edges connecting to the check nodes of degree and to the variable nodes of degree , respectively, in the residual graph. Then, the scaling parameter is obtained from the mean and the variance of . The means of and are determined from a system of differential equations which was derived and analytically solved by Luby et al. [2]. The covariances of and also satisfy a system of differential equations called covariance evolution which was derived by Amraoui et al. [4]. However, the analytical solution of the covariance evolution has
Manuscript received January 20, 2010; revised November 15, 2011; accepted February 14, 2012. Date of publication March 21, 2012; date of current version June 12, 2012. This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for JSPS Fellows from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science. This paper was presented in part at the 2009 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
The authors are with the Department of Communications and Integrated Systems, Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo 152-8550, Japan (e-mail: nozaki@comm.ss.titech.ac.jp; kenta@comm.ss.titech.ac.jp; sakaniwa@comm.ss.titech.ac.jp).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2012.2191668

not been known. Therefore, one had to resort to numerical com-

putation to solve the covariance evolution.

In [5], Amraoui et al. proposed an alternative way to deter-

mine the variance of , though only at the decoding threshold.

Thereby, they have given the analytic expression for the scaling

parameters without using covariance evolution. They used BP

decoding instead of the PA. This method was applied to irreg-

ular repeat-accumulate codes [6] and to turbo-like codes [7] and

was extended to the binary memoryless symmetric channels [8],

[9].

Denote by the total number of edges in the Tanner graph.

For

, let be the random variable which is 1 if

the edge conveys an erasure message from a variable node to a

check node, and 0 otherwise, in BP decoding. The method in [5]

analyzed the random variable

in decoding and

derived the analytical expression for the variance of . Finally,

they made an unproved assumption that the random variable

in the PA is proportional to the random variable

in BP decoding and under this assumption they have given

the analytical solution for the variance of .

However, no such assumption is needed if the covariance

evolution is solved analytically. Moreover, we obtain the vari-

ance of at any channel erasure probability. In this paper, we

present the analytical solution of the covariance evolution for

irregular LDPC code ensembles.

II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we recall some basic facts on the finite-length analysis of LDPC codes under iterative decoding. We also introduce some notations used throughout this paper.

A. Ensemble and Channel Model

In this paper, we consider irregular LDPC code ensembles

[10]. An irregular LDPC code ensemble is defined by the set

of bipartite graphs with variable nodes and check nodes. Let

and be the fractions of the edges connected to variable

nodes and check nodes of degree , respectively. Let and

be the sets of degrees of variable nodes and check nodes,

i.e.,

and

, respec-

tively. Irregular LDPC code ensembles are characterized with

the block length and two polynomials,

and

. The derivatives of and are

and

,

respectively. Denote the total number of edges in the Tanner

graph by , i.e.,

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:01:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOZAKI et al.: ANALYTICAL SOLUTION OF COVARIANCE EVOLUTION FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

4771

We assume the transmission over the BEC with channel era- where

is the expectation of the random variable . Let

sure probability .

be the expectation of the fraction of the edges in the residual

graph, i.e.,

. We define

B. Peeling Algorithm

(1)

The PA [2] is a sequential iterative decoding algorithm for the LDPC codes over the BEC. It is known that the PA and the BP decoder have the same decoding result. A residual graph at each iteration consists of the variable nodes that are still unknown and the check nodes and the edges connecting to those variable nodes. The decoder proceeds as follows.
1) Initialization: Variable nodes receive the channel outputs. The variable nodes receiving the known values send their values to the check nodes connected to them. Then, the variable nodes sending their values and edges connecting to those variable nodes are removed from the graph.
2) Iteration: The decoder uniformly chooses a check node of degree one in the residual graph. The chosen check node sends the value computed from the received values to the adjacent variable node. The variable node propagates this value to all adjacent check nodes. The variable node is removed together with its edges.
3) Decision: If the decoder does not find any check nodes of degree one in the residual graph, then the decoding process stops. If the residual graph is empty, then the decoding process succeeds; otherwise, it fails.
C. Analysis of Residual Graph

Define a parameter such that

at

and

Hence, we see that the iteration round is parameterized by .

Let be the indicator function which is 1 if the condi-

tion inside the braces is fulfilled and 0 otherwise. Define

. For

and

in the limit of large

block length, Luby et al. [2] showed that

satisfies the fol-

lowing system of differential equations:

We define the binomial coefficient [12] for nonnegative integer as

Recall that the channel erasure probability is . By using the

parameter , for

and

, this system of

differential equation are solved as

Denote the iteration round of the PA by . Let and

denote random variables representing the number of edges con-

necting to the variable nodes of degree and to the check nodes

of degree , respectively, in the residual graph at the iteration

round . Let be the maximum degree of check nodes. We de-

fine

. We also define a set of random

variables

where

and

. Define

. From

this result, we see that

and

.

For

, we define the normalized covariance of

and by

Since the total number of edges connecting to variable nodes is equal to the total number of edges connecting to check nodes in each residual graph, we have

where

is the covariance of and . Unless other-

wise specified, we drop to simplify the notation. In [4] and

[11], Amraoui et al. showed that

satisfies the following

system of differential equations for irregular LDPC code ensem-

bles in the limit of large block length:

This equation asserts

. Hence,

we see that the random variable

depends on the random

variables in . Hence, we drop as in [11]. To simplify the

notation, we drop the subscript .

For

, we define the normalized expectation of

as

(2)

and this system of differential equation is referred to as covari-

ance evolution. Define

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:01:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4772
TABLE I SUMMARY OF INTERMEDIATE VARIABLES DEFINED IN SECTION II-C

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012
TABLE II SUMMARY OF NOTATIONS IN SECTION II-C

The terms in the covariance evolution are given by the following

for

,

and

D. Scaling Law

Let

be the block erasure probability under BP de-

coding for channel erasure probability and block length . The

BP threshold is defined by

and characterized via density evolution as follows:

and for

and

Initial conditions of the covariance evolution are also given

by Amraoui et al. [4], [11]. For

and

, the initial

conditions of the covariance evolution are derived as follows:

The block erasure probability is represented by the sum of

two contributions, the decoding erasure of large weight and the

decoding erasure of small weight. The curve of the block erasure

probability for finite-length LDPC codes is divided into two re-

gions which are called waterfall region and error floor region.

In the waterfall region, the block erasure probability drops off

steeply as the function of channel erasure probability. The wa-

terfall region is mainly caused by the decoding erasures of large

weights (of order ). In the error floor region, the block era-

sure probability has a gentle slope. The error floor region is

mainly caused by the decoding erasures of small weights (of

order ).

The scaling law is a technique which allows us to estimate the

decoding erasure probability caused by the decoding erasures of

large weight. In other words, the scaling law is a technique to

estimate the waterfall region. The scaling law is based on the

analysis of the residual graphs.

In [4], the block erasure probability

is given by

where

and

where is slope scaling parameter depending on the ensemble and the -function is defined as

In [5], the slope scaling parameter is derived as

The summary of intermediate variables and notations are in

(3)

Tables I and II, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:01:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOZAKI et al.: ANALYTICAL SOLUTION OF COVARIANCE EVOLUTION FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

4773

where is the nonzero solution of

at the threshold,

Proof: Since

and

i.e., define such that

. Note that

represents the average degree of the variable nodes.

and equations, we have from (6)

, we see that . Combining those

III. MAIN RESULTS

We show, in the following theorem, the analytical solution of the covariance evolution, for the irregular LDPC code ensembles. The proof shall be given in Section IV.

Theorem 1: Consider transmission over the BEC with

channel erasure probability . Let be the normalized iteration

round of the PA as defined in (1). A parameter is defined by

and

at

. The intermediate

variables are defined in Tables I and II. For the irregular LDPC

code ensemble,

and

, in the limit of the block

length, we obtain the following:

Recall that

. We see that

From (3), we obtain (9).
The result of Corollary 1 coincides with the result in [5] for irregular LDPC code ensembles.

(4) IV. LEMMAS AND PROOFS

In this section, we prove Theorem 1. To prove Theorem 1, we

(5) state three lemmas. We use Lemmas 1, 2, and 3 to prove (4), (5) and (6), respectively.

From the covariance evolution (2), we have the following

equations for

and

:

(10) (6) where
(11) (7)
(8)

Using Theorem 1, we obtain the following corollary.

Corollary 1: Let be the threshold of the ensemble under

(12)

BP decoding, be the block length, and be the total number

of edges in the original graph. Denote the nonzero solution of

at the threshold by . Define

and

. For irregular LDPC code ensembles, the slope

scaling parameter is given by

To simplify the notation, we drop some subscripts in this para-

graph. From those equations, we see the following.

1) The differential equations

only involve .

2) The differential equations

involve and .

3) The differential equations

involve and .

Since the differential equation

only involves , first,

we solve

in Section IV-A. If

is a known function,

we are able to solve the differential equation

. Hence,

(9) second, we solve

in Section IV-B. Similarly, if

is a

known function, we are able to solve the differential equation

. Thus, finally, we give

in Section IV-C.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:01:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4774
TABLE III DEFINITIONS OF INTERMEDIATE VARIABLES USED IN SECTION IV-A

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

For

, (17) gives the following equation:

A. Lemma and Proof of (4)

In this section, we give a lemma to prove (4). Table III gives the definitions of intermediate variables which are used in this section.
1) Lemma to Prove (4):

Lemma 1: We define

as in Table III. The intermediate

variables are defined in Table I. For

, we have the

following equations:

The solution of this differential equation is
where is a constant determined from the initial conditions. The initial conditions gives

(13) Thus, we have for

Proof: Define

(14) Hence, we obtain (14). 3) Proof of (15): Equation (14) is rewritten for all
(15)

as in Table III. From (10), we get

The sum of this equation over all

is written as follows:

(16)
1) Proof of (13): From (16), we have the following equation:
Combining (17) with this equation, we have

From the initial conditions, we obtain

This leads to (13).

2) Proof of (14): Obviously, the left-hand side of (14) is

equal to 0 for

. Hence, we get (14) for

. Next, we

consider the case for

. From (16), we have

where

From this equation and the definition of have

in Table III, we

(17)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:01:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(18)

NOZAKI et al.: ANALYTICAL SOLUTION OF COVARIANCE EVOLUTION FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

4775

Note that

TABLE IV DEFINITIONS OF INTERMEDIATE VARIABLES USED IN SECTION IV-B

Since (18) is a first-order differential equation, it is solved as follows:

with a constant which is determined from the initial conditions. The integration of the part of this equation is

Hence, we get From the initial conditions, we have

The sum of this equation over all

is written as follows:

(20)

Combining (20) with (13), we have

(21)

Next, we consider the second term of (19). From (15), we have

Hence, the constant is derived as (22)

Therefore, we have

Combining (19) with (21) and (22), we obtain

(23)

Thus, (15) holds.

2) Proof of (4): Here, by using Lemma 1, we prove (4). First,

we consider

. By transforming

, we have

Second, we consider that for

for

. From (14), we see

Combining this equation with (23), we obtain (4) for

.

The sum of this equation over all

is written as follows:

(19)

Now, we consider the first term of (19). By transforming (14), we see that for all

B. Lemma and Proof of (5)
In this section, we introduce a lemma to prove (5). The definitions of intermediate variables used in this section are summarized in Table IV.
1) Lemma to Prove (5):

Lemma 2: We define

,

,

,

,

and as in Table IV. The intermediate variables are defined

in Table I. For

and

, we have the following

equations:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:01:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(24)

4776

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

Define

,

, and

(31), we have

(25)

as in Table IV. From

(26)

(27)

We use (24) and (26) to prove the basis of the mathematical

induction in the proof of (25) and (27), respectively.

Proof: We will derive differential equations. First, we

consider

for

. We define

,

, and

as in Table IV. From (11), we have for

and

where a known function

(28)

is defined as for

and

(32)

for

, and

. From this equation, we see that we ob-

tain

if the function

is known. Moreover,

we see that we obtain

if the function

is

known.

Finally, we consider

. From the sum of (32) over all

, we obtain

(33)

Since this equation is a first order of differential equation, we

are able to solve this equation. We will derive

in

Section IV-B1c.

1) Proof of (24): Since (30) is a first-order differential

equation, it is solved as follows:1

From (28), we have for

with a constant which is derived from the initial conditions. (29) From the initial conditions, we see that

From this equation, we see that

is solved if

is

a known function. Moreover, we see that

is solved

if

is a known function.

Second, we consider

. The sum of (29) over all

gives

as follows:

From this equation, we determine

. Thus, we find

(30)

Since this equation is a first-order differential equation and the

first and second terms of this equation are known function, we

are able to solve this equation. The derivation of

is

written in Section IV-B1a.

Next, we derive the differential equation of

for

and

. By using (28), we get

Hence, we have (24). 2) Proof of (25): Since (29) is a first-order differential
equation, the solution of (29) is

(34)

where

is a constant derived from the initial conditions.

We solve (34) by mathematical induction for

.

First, we derive

. Using (4), (24), and the definition

of

and

, we have

(31)

1In a way similar to the derivation of

, we perform this calculation

in Section IV-B1b. More precisely, we use integration by parts to integrate (30).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:01:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOZAKI et al.: ANALYTICAL SOLUTION OF COVARIANCE EVOLUTION FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

4777

Since

for

, the

second term of left-hand side of (38) are transformed as follows:

(35)

Note that for

The combination of (34), (35), and (36) gives

The first and second terms of this equation coincide with the first (36) and third term of (37), respectively. In other words, the sum of
the first three terms of (37) is equal to the right-hand side of (38). The fourth term of (37) is transformed as follows:
(39)
Thus, we obtain

The initial conditions give

Hence, we get

Thus, we show that

fulfills (25). Now, we consider the induction step. In other

words, we show that if

fulfills (25), then

also fulfills (25). Using the induction hypothesis, the first term

of (34) is written as follows:

(37)
Using integration by parts, the second term of (37) is written as follows:

Hence, we have

Here, the last step is derived from a similar way to

.

Hence, we get

From the initial conditions, we have (38)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:01:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4778
TABLE V DEFINITIONS OF INTERMEDIATE VARIABLES USED INSECTION IV-C

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

The initial covariance leads

and

.

Hence (26) holds.

4) Proof of (27): In a way similar to Section IV-B1b, i.e.,

by mathematical induction for

and

, we obtain (27).

2) Proof of (5): From definitions of we see that

and

,

Hence, we have

Thus, we find

Thus, we obtain (5).

This leads to (25) for Next, we consider , we have

. . Since

Hence, we obtain (25). 3) Proof of (26): Since (33) is a first-order differential
equation, it is solved as follows:

C. Lemma and Proof of (6)

In this section, we introduce a lemma to prove (6). Table V gives the definitions of intermediate variables which are used in this section.
1) Lemma to Prove (6):

Lemma 3: Define

and

as in Table V. The

intermediate variables are defined in Table I. Define and

as in (7) and (8). For

, the following equations hold:

(40) Note that

where By using integration by parts, we have

(41)
We use (40) to prove the basis of the mathematical induction in the proof of (41). Similarly, we use (41) to prove the basis of the mathematical induction in the proof of (6).
Proof: First, we derive differential equations. We define as in Table V. From (12), we get

Thus, we have

(42)

where

is defined in Table V. From this equation, we

have

if

and

are known functions.

Moreover, to solve

, we need to obtain

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:01:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NOZAKI et al.: ANALYTICAL SOLUTION OF COVARIANCE EVOLUTION FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

4779

. From the sum of this equation over all

, the Combining with this equation, the definition of

and

differential equation for

is written as follows:

(41), we have

Similarly, we see that to solve

, we need to obtain

. Moreover, if we obtain

, we are able to solve

. The sum of this equation over all

is written

as follows:

for

. Hence, in the case for

transformed to

(43) 1) Proof of (40): The solution of (43) is given by

, (44) is

(45)

where

is a constant determined from the initial condi-

tions. The initial conditions give

The initial condition gives

. Thus, we see that

fulfills (6). We show that if all the elements in

fulfill (6), then all

the elements in

fulfill (6).

Using the induction hypothesis, we solve (44) as follows:

and

. Thus, we obtain

This leads to (40). 2) Proof of (41): In a way similar to Section IV-B1b, we
find (41).
2) Proof of (6): Equation (42) is solved as follows:

The constant given by

is derived from the initial condition and

Thus, we have (6) for Since fulfills (6) for

. , we show that
. Hence, we obtain (6).

(44)

This equation is solved by mathematical induction for

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

. First, we consider

for

. From (5), In this paper, we have analytically solved the covariance evo-

is given by

lution for irregular LDPC code ensembles. We have also ob-

tained the slope scaling parameter without assumptions.

Recently, Hinton et al. have derived the covariance evolution

for multi-edge type LDPC code ensembles [13]. As a future

work, we will solve the covariance evolution for multi-edge type

LDPC code ensembles.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:01:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4780

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 58, NO. 7, JULY 2012

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are so grateful to anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.

[12] R. Graham, D. Knuth, and O. Patashnik, Concrete Mathematics: A Foundation for Computer Science. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1994, A foundation for computer science.
[13] R. Hinton, S. Wilson, and R. Urbanke, Finite-length scaling for multiedge type LDPC ensembles, to be published.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963, Research Monograph series.
[2] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, D. A. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 1997, pp. 150–159.
[3] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, Mar. 2008.
[4] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength scaling for iteratively decoded LDPC ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 473–498, Feb. 2009.
[5] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “How to find good finitelength codes: From art towards science,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 491–508, 2007.
[6] I. Andriyanova, “Finite-length scaling of repeat-accumulate codes on the BEC,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Zurich Semin. Commun., Mar. 2008, pp. 64–67.
[7] I. Andriyanova, “Finite-length scaling of turbo-like code ensembles on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 918–927, Aug. 2009.
[8] J. Ezri, A. Montanari, S. Oh, and R. Urbanke, “The slope scaling parameter for general channels, decoders, and ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2008, pp. 1443–1447.
[9] J. Ezri, “Finite-length scaling laws for iterative coding systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, 2011.
[10] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[11] A. Amraoui, R. Urbanke, and A. Montanari, “Finite-length scaling of irregular LDPC code ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Sep. 2005, pp. 1–5.

Takayuki Nozaki (S’09) received B.E. and M.E. degrees from Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo, Japan, in 2008 and 2010, respectively. He is currently pursuing the D.E. degree in Department of Communications and Integrated Systems in Tokyo Institute of Technology. His research interests are codes on graphs and iterative decoding algorithms. He is a student member of IEEE and IEICE Japan.
Kenta Kasai (M’07) received B.E., M.E., and Ph.D. degrees from Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo Japan, in 2001, 2003, and 2006, respectively. Since 2006, he has been an assistant professor in Department of Communications and Integrated Systems, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Tokyo Institute of Technology. From 2008 to 2009, he was a visiting researcher at ETIS laboratory, Ecole Nationale Supérieure de l’Electronique et de ses Applications, Cergy-Pontoise, France. His current interests include coding theory.
Kohichi Sakaniwa (SM’88) received B.E., M.E., and Ph.D. degrees all in electronic engineering from Tokyo Institute of Technology, Tokyo Japan, in 1972, 1974, and 1977, respectively. He joined Tokyo Institute of Technology in 1977 as a research associate and served as an associate professor from 1983 to 1991. Since 1991 he has been a professor in the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, and since 2000 in Department of Communications and Integrated Systems, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, both in the Tokyo Inst. of Tech. From November 1987 to July 1988, he stayed at the University of Southwestern Louisiana as a Visiting Professor. He received the Excellent Paper Award from the IEICE of Japan in 1982, 1990, 1992 and 1994. His research area includes Communication Theory, Error Correcting Coding, (Adaptive) Digital Signal Processing and so on. Dr. Sakaniwa is a member of IEEE, IEICE Japan, Information Processing Society of Japan, and Institute of Image Information and Television Engineers of Japan.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 09:01:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

