Th3I.2.pdf

CLEO Pacific Rim 2018 © OSA 2018

Enhanced LDPC based differential iteration decoding Scheme for PDM 16-QAM Coherent Optical Communication Systems
Wenxiang Cao, Jing He, Zhihua Zhou
College of Computer Science and Electronic Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan, China Correspondence and requests for materials should be addressed to Jing He (Tel: 0731-88822417 and E-mail:hnu_jhe@hotmail.com, jhe@hnu.edu.cn)
Abstract: An enhanced LDPC based differential iteration decoding scheme is applied in 400-Gb/s PDM 16-QAM coherent optical communication systems. The simulation results show that, the system performance can be greatly improved by using the proposed method.
OCIS codes: (060.0060) Fiber optics and optical communications; (060.2330) Fiber optics communications
1. Introduction Recently, quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) has been widely used in high-speed and long-reach coherent optical transmission system. However, as a higher order modulation format than quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK), the 16QAM has a more serious phase ambiguity in the estimation of the carrier phase at the receiver due to the 4-fold rotation symmetry of its constellation [1]. Usually, we use the differential encoding before 16-QAM mapping to solve the phase ambiguity problem. However, this method leads to error spread in decoding procedure [1,2]. In this paper, an enhanced Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) based differential iteration decoding scheme is applied in 400-Gb/s polarization division multiplexing (PDM) 16-QAM coherent optical communication systems to overcome the performance loss caused by the phase ambiguity. It can be seen from the simulation results that, by using the proposed scheme, the BER performance is greatly improved.
2. LDPC and Differential Encoded 16-QAM Iterative Scheme
The block diagram of the DSP transceiver is illustrated in Fig.1(a). At the transmitter, the data stream is encoded by a LDPC encoder, and then sent to an interleaver. After interleavering, the data is encoded by the differential encoder. At the receiver, after synchronization, equalization, and carrier recovery, the symbol information is obtained. Then the bit information are obtained by the demapping models.
(a)

(b)

Fig.1. (a) The DSP block diagram of the transceiver (b)Description of the joint LDPC and 16-QAM differential decoding technology

Fig.1(b) shows the calculation process of the LDPC based differential iteration decoding scheme. LeDxt (xk ) is the

extrinsic information of the differential decoder. After de-interleaving, it is fed into the LDPC decoder. Similarly, as the

extrinsic information of the LDPC decoder, LeLxt (xk ) is input into the interleaver, and then as the priori information of

the differential encoder. The extrinsic information is given by

Lext (xk )  Lpos (xk )  Lpri (xk )

(1)

where Lpos (xk ) is the posteriori information and Lpri (xk ) is the priori information. The differential decoder uses MAX-

Log-MAP algorithm to obtain soft information of all the four bits [3]. The corresponding iterative formula can be

expressed as follows

L pos D

( xk ,i )



 max * (
s ' , s ,d k ,i 1

k 1 ( s ' )





k

(s', s)



k

( s ))



 max * (
s ' , s ,d k ,i  0

k 1 ( s ' )





k

(s', s)



k

( s ))

(2)

where  k (s) is the forward metric,  k (s) is the backward metric,  k (s' , s) is the branch metric. And the max*-

operator in the formula above is defined by max*(x, y)  log(ex  e y ) . In this way, the performance of decoder can be

CLEO Pacific Rim 2018 © OSA 2018 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:43:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Th3I.2.pdf

CLEO Pacific Rim 2018 © OSA 2018

improved effectively by exchanging soft information between differential decoder and LDPC decoder through iterative process.
3. Simulation Setup and Results
The simulation setup of the PDM 16-QAM coherent optical communication system is demonstrated in Fig.2. The symbol rate is 50-Gbaud, so the rough net rate is 400-Gb/s. After the DSP operation at transmitter, the generated signal is divided into two different signals, and then injected into IQ modulator, respectively. The X-polarization and Ypolarization signals are combined together by the polarization beam combiner (PBC). The PDM signal is sent to the optical attenuator(ATT), then transmitted over a long-distance SSMF. An erbium-doped fiber amplifier (EDFA) is employed to compensate the fiber power loss. At the receiver, coherent detection is used to convert the optical signal to electrical signal, it is followed by the DSP modules at receiver to further process.

Fig.2. Simulation setup for 400-Gb/s PDM 16QAM Coherent Optical Transmission System
Fig.3 shows the constellation diagram of the two polarization direction before and after carrier phase recovery. It can be seen that the phase rotation can be overcome after the carrier phase recovery. However, as we can see from Fig.4 that, the BER of the schemes without using LDPC is quite larger than the schemes using LDPC. It means that the phase ambiguity leads to a lot of errors in decision. We can also see from the Fig.4 that, when the coding rate of LDPC is 8/9, over 100-km and 200-km standard single mode fiber (SSMF) transmission, the proposed scheme can get about 1 dB and 1.6 dB OSNR gain, respectively, at the BER of 110-3 .

Fig.3. constellations of the two polarization directions (a) Pol.x before carrier phase recovery (b) Pol.x after

Fig.4. BER performance of different distances

carrier phase recovery (c) Pol.y before carrier phase

recovery (d) Pol.y after carrier phase recovery

4. Conclusions

In this paper, the LDPC based differential iteration decoding scheme is proposed to improve the performance of the

coherent optical communication systems. It is emulational demonstrated in a 400-Gb/s PDM 16-QAM coherent optical

communication system. The proposed scheme can overcome the decision errors caused by serious phase ambiguity.

5. Acknowledgment

This work was supported in part by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61775054, 61377079, 61307087), by the Scientific Research Foundation for the Returned Overseas Chinese Scholars, State Education Ministry of China; and in part by Science and Technology Project of Hunan Province (2016GK2011).

6. References

[1] M.Secondini, E.Forestieri and F. Cavaliere, “Novel optical modulation scheme for 16-QAM format with quadrant differential encoding” in International Conference on Photonics in Switching of Proceeding, (IEEE, Pisa, 2009), pp.15-19.

[2] WEI R, "Differential encoding for quadrature-amplitude modulation," in IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference of Proceeding, (IEEE, China Taipei, 2010), pp. 16-19.
[3] Z Wu, L Yu., “Network coding method based on differential modulation in multiple-access relay channel”. Systems Engineering and Electronics, 37(3): 646-651(2015).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:43:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

