1520

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 8, AUGUST 2018

Classification-Based Algorithm for Bit-Flipping Decoding of GLDPC Codes Over AWGN Channels
Sherif Elsanadily , Ashraf Mahran, and Osama Elghandour

Abstract— In this letter, an improved bit-flipping (BF) decoder for generalized LDPC over AWGN channels is proposed. It takes the advantage of the fast BF decoding with only initial help from the channel soft information by introducing a classification step at first. Second, it adds an auxiliary bit in messages between the bipartite graph nodes as a tool for increasing the decision reliability and improving the performance. The reliability is presented as a tool for diminishing the effect of the generated trapping sets. The proposed classification threshold is mathematically derived, and the algorithm is revealed to surpass the various BF algorithms concerning the bit error rate performance.
Index Terms— GLDPC codes, bit-flipping, iterative decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L DPC CODE is proved to surpass Turbo code at rates near to Shannon limit. The bipartite graph, containing the variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes (CNs), represents the parity matrix H of the code which is supposed to be very sparse [1]. The decoding is performed by either a Soft-Decision Decoding (SDD) iterative algorithm such as the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) [2] or a Hard-Decision Decoding (HDD) iterative algorithm such as Bit-Flipping (BF) algorithm [1]. Although the SDD of LDPC provides a wonderful performance, the number of real calculations can produce inconvenient implementation complexity especially in the ultra-high speed applications. In contrast, the HDD has a low complexity but poor performance.
Generalized LDPC (GLDPC) codes were presented by Tanner [3] by replacing the simple CNs with generalized block codes (subcodes). Generalized LDPC codes were proved to emulate various near-capacity codes. G-LDPC codes, using Hamming constituent codes, have a great performance and high Hamming distance [4]. Flexibility of GLDPC parameters, by selecting the length and rate of its subcodes, makes it easy to be applied in TV broadcasting and high speed space communications, etc.
The BF algorithm for LDPC codes was first presented then modified varieties, utilizing the soft input information from the AWGN channel, were proposed showing more implementation complexity [5], [6]. The other main disadvantage of these algorithms is the slow convergence (only a single flip occurs at each iteration). The PWBF [7] was introduced where several
Manuscript received April 17, 2018; accepted May 14, 2018. Date of publication May 24, 2018; date of current version August 10, 2018. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was C. Feng. (Corresponding author: Sherif Elsanadily.)
S. Elsanadily and O. Elghandour are with the Department of Communications Engineering, Helwan University, Cairo 11795, Egypt (e-mail: sherif_elsanadily@yahoo.com).
A. Mahran is with the Avionics Department, Military Technical College, Cairo 11331, Egypt (e-mail: a.mahran@ieee.org).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2018.2840146

bits are flipped in parallel at one iteration. A different kind of BF algorithms, by adding an auxiliary bit in the decoding messages, is presented in [8] which shows an improved performance of LDPC codes. In [9], an algorithm, using a multi-threshold HDD technique classifying the received bits according to their qualities, is presented to obtain further improvement in the performance.
While the concept of adding extra information in the BF algorithm is widespread in LDPC decoding; it is rarely exploited in GLDPC HD decoding algorithms in the literature. The Weighted Bit-Flipping Voting algorithm (WBFV) is one of these few researches. It searches for the highest vote and makes a single bit flip among the received symbols at each iteration [10]. In spite of the simplicity of the operated Hamming subcodes in this algorithm, finding the maximum vote in a long received codeword yields noticeable latency with large number of iterations. In [11]; a simple algorithm, with BCH subcodes, is proposed as it allows multiple-bit flipping in the same iteration. It converges with less iterations; however, it adds more decoding complexity. Elsanadily et al. [12] propose a different bit-flipping algorithm, called TSSA-BF, which increases the decision reliability by exploiting the various states of the Hamming sub-decoders.
In this article, a new developed BF algorithm is proposed to outperform all HD decoding algorithms of GLDPC codes in the literature. The algorithm is founded on two issues; First, it has the advantage of the fast BF decoding as HDD, but with the aid of the AWGN channel soft information which is only utilized at the beginning of the decoding process for just classification purposes. Second, it further improves its performance by inserting an auxiliary bit in incoming messages at VNs from CNs as a tool for increasing decision reliability at both. The basic purpose of the added bit is to benefit from the subcode decoding states, which are discussed in detail later, as in [12] but with a different manner. This approach allows for substantial improvement in error performance at a slight increase in the resources at only the side of VNs. The SDD algorithms are quite complex and need a huge number of real calculations, based on the channel received soft information, all during the whole decoding process. However, our algorithm which is considered as HDD needs them only initially as a classification tool and then all processed data during all iterations of the decoding are hard values. By this tool, we could therefore reduce much of the computational complexity, which was existed in [12].
II. WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING
Let us define (N, J, n) G-LDPC code originated from M by N sparse matrix with the row weight n and the column weight J. Considering GLDPC in [10] with 1B-construction

1558-2558 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:45:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELSANADILY et al.: CLASSIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHM FOR BF DECODING OF GLDPC CODES

1521

Fig. 1. Example of generated votes in the WBFV decoding algorithm

and employing the extended Hamming code (as a subcode)

(n,k,4), the bi-partite graph of GLDPC contains N symbol

nodes (VNs) and M Generalized Check Nodes (GCNs). The

number of GCNs (1 − rc) where

is R

calculated by is the code

M

=

N ·J n

and

R

rate and rc =

≥
k n

1−J is the

subcode rate. The column weight J is chosen to be 2 to obtain

the largest overall code rate. After receiving the transmitted

codeword, the decoders of the constituent codes at the GCNs

generate votes as illustrated in Fig. 1. The decoder at GCN-1

with zero-syndrome generates votes of value V to all n

connected VNs. The decoder at GCN-2 detects and corrects

a single error; therefore, it generates vote of value E to the

supposed VN to have the error and vote of value e to the rest

of (n-1) connected VNs. The output weights, when using the

rule B, are: V=0, e=1 and E=2. Therefore the VN, in this

example, accumulates a weight of 1. The VN which has the

highest weight is inverted before the subsequent iteration. The

decoding process stops if it satisfies the overall syndrome-

check or reaches a preset number of iterations.

III. THE CLASSIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHM
The trapping sets, which are generated to cause uncorrected errors, are an important reason of the degradation in the error performance of the bipartite graph-based codes. Our target in this proposed algorithm is to reduce the destructive effect of the maximum possible number of those sets even by adding a few additional resources which are explained below in this section.
Our algorithm uses the soft information (for further performance improvement) but only at the start of the decoding to make the appropriate classification for the received symbols (VNs) by using a predefined threshold. The value of this threshold is derived as will be explained in the VN processing in this section. Due to its fast decoding and simple structure, the extended Hamming codes are considered as subcodes for the GLDPC code. Other than the ordinary code, the extended Hamming code (single-error correcting and double-error detecting code) with increased dmin(dmin = 4) is slightly more powerful and convenient for constructing standard-relevant GLDPC codes and this is the reason we use it in our algorithm. The local ext-Hamming decoders may generate errors in both cases (success or failure) of the decoding process. If the decoder at GCN fails, it cannot identify the positions of errors and the errors remain. When the decoding succeeds, the errors of the decoder may emerge from two cases; the first case is the undetected errors as the received word decoded to non-transmitted valid one (e ≥ 4) where e is the number of errors at the input of the

Fig. 2. Mutual messages between GCNs and VNs.
local decoder. The second case is the wrong or false correction (e > 2).
An auxiliary bit is added next to the single bit in the message from the GCN to a connected VN. It represents the GCN decision strength by raising its reliability from two grades (error bit or correct bit) to four grades. The decoder at GCN decodes the received subcode word, sends two bits (the normal bit and the auxiliary one) to every connected VN. If the ordinary bit is seen as a decision (flip (1) or keep (0)), the auxiliary one is seen as the strength of this decision (strong (1) or weak (0)). Therefore the four reliability grades in descending order are: 0+(01), 0−(00), 1−(10) and 1+(11) corresponding to strong keep, weak keep, weak flip and strong flip respectively. The proposed GLDPC decoding contains two processes; the GCN processing and the VN processing as will be explained below.
A. GCN Processing
The three possible states, that the ext-Hamming sub-decoder at a given GCN can be one of them, are defined as follows:
1) State “0”: when the syndrome gives zero and the received binary subcode word remains without any correction (i.e. the received sequence is a valid codeword).
2) State “1”: is the case of single-error correction when the syndrome vector is nonzero and it is also found as one of the columns of the parity check matrix of the subcode (i.e. an error is detected and can be corrected). Therefore, it decodes to the right transmitted codeword or decodes to another valid codeword).
3) State “2”: at the decoder failure (errors detected and cannot be corrected).
As illustrated in Fig. 2, for any GCN, a=1,2,..,M, let da(t) be the decoder state of the a-th GCN at the t-th iteration. The actions of the sub-decoder in the GCN process of the proposed algorithm are explained as follows:
• If d(at) = 0, it forwards 0+ to all elements of the set of connected VNs, B(a) = {b1, b2, .., bi,.., bn}. The message (0+) is the highest reliability grade.
• If d(at) = 1, it forwards 1+ (grade 1) on the position b (an assumed-error bit) and 0− (grade 3) to the rest of set elements B (a). Elements of B (a) are given 0− (not 0+) assuming some errors may be involved (with e > 2) causing the decoder to perform a wrong correction (an assumed-correct bit is flipped).
• If d(at) = 2, it forwards 1− (grade 2) to all of B(a) elements as they contain a set of errors (with e > 1) leading to a decoder failure (errors detected with no correction capability).
Let Ua(t,b)i = [Ua(t,b)i (1) Ua(t,b)i (2)] be the two bits which represent the outgoing decision message and its strength

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:45:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1522

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 8, AUGUST 2018

Fig. 3. The proposed threshold ηc over AWGN channel

around zero point. To get ηm, the equation δ (r)|r=ηm = 0 should be solved as follows:

δ = √ 1 [e−(r−1)2/2σ2 − e−(r+1)2/2σ2 ] (3) 2πσ2

δ (r)|r=ηm

=

√1 2πσ2

[

1

− σ2

r

e−(r−1)2

/2σ2

−

·

·

·

−(1 + σ2

r)

e−(r+1)2/2σ2

]

=

0

(4)

Therefore,

(1

−

ηm)e

ηm σ2

=

−(1

+

ηm

)e

−ηm σ2

(5)

respectively from GCN a to VN bi. Let Va(,tb)i be the incoming binary bit value of the constituent codeword at GCN a from

VN bi. The overall set of N hard demodulated sequence bits is

Y

=

{yb,

b

=

1,2,

…,N,

yb

∈

{0, 1}}

as

yb

=

1 2

(sgn(rb

)

+

1)

and rb is the soft value of the b-th bit in the received sequence

from AWGN channel. For any VN b, the initial values Va(j0b) =

yb for j = 1, 2. Therefore at any GCN a, the initial values

Va(,0b)i = ybi for i=1,…,n.

B. VN Processing

For any VN, it is represented by two bits. The normal bit is the symbol binary value which is sent alone to its connected GCNs. The auxiliary bit represents the initial reliability of the symbol value, (1) if a suspect bit or (0) if an assumedcorrect bit, and the VN will use this extra information locally as will be discussed later. The codeword symbols which are represented by VNs are classified into two categories; Most-Reliable bits (MR) or Least-Reliable bits (LR). The classification is only initiated according to the soft information received through the channel based on a predefined threshold.
For any transmitted codeword of length N, The b-th code bit vb ∈ {0, 1} are mapped to xb ∈ {−1, 1} respectively and transmitted over AWGN channel which is characterized by the probability density function (pdf) p(r/x) given by

p(rb/xb)

=

√1 2πσ2

exp[−(rb

−

xb)2/2σ2]

(1)

where σ2 is the variance of the zero-mean Gaussian noise
nb that the channel adds to the transmitted value xb (so that rb = xb + nb). As illustrated in Fig. 3, let ηo be the standard threshold on which the hard demodulator decision is based. For BPSK over AWGN channel, ηo = 0 and at this value, p(r/x = 1) = p(r/x = −1). Let δ(r) be the absolute
difference between the two probabilities as

δ(r) = |p(r/x = 1) − p(r/x = −1)|

(2)

The received symbol is supposed to be considered as LR bit if its value rb approaches the zero point or ηo (δ = 0). On the other hand the value of r with maximum difference
δmax can be taken as a second point ηm which the received symbol is considered as MR bit if its value rb approaches it. The absolute value of the second point |ηm| is the same for both ±rb values as the two density functions are symmetric

This equation can be solved numerically by Newton Raphson method and for various values of σ2 (0.1-0.9),ηm ≈ 1.04.

The classification threshold ηc for the proposed algorithm is

set to be in the middle between the two points. Therefore ηc =

ηo +ηm 2

=

0+1.04 2

=

0.52.

Denote

the

initial

reliability

of

the

b-th received bit as λb. According to the proposed algorithm,

this bit is classified as MR (λb = 0) if |rb| ≥ ηc. Otherwise,

it is classified as LR (λb = 1).

Using column weight of two and four grades of reliability,

there are 10 probable combinations of these incoming mes-

sages to VN b, b=1,2,..,N. These combinations are divided

into 3 subsets {si,i=1,2,3}. For any VN b, its reliability state gb(t) is determined according to the incoming messages (belong to which subset). Inspired by the TSSA-BF algorithm in [12]

but with adding the new parameter λb, we have;

s1 = {(1+, 1+), (1+, 1−), (1+, 0−)},

s2 = {(1−, 1−), (1−, 0−), (0+, 1+)},

s3

=

{(0−, 0−), (0+, 1−), (0+, 0−), (0+, 0+)}

⎧ ⎪⎨

0

if

{Ua(lj)b, j

=

1,

2}

∈

s1

gb(t)

=

⎩⎪

1 2

if if

{Ua(lj)b, j {Ua(lj)b, j

= =

1, 2} 1, 2}

∈ ∈

s2 s3

The VN b with least reliability, gb(t) = 0, needs flipping immediately. For gb(t) = 1, VN state-counter is employed to compare the VN present reliability state gb(t) with the one of the previous iteration gb(t−1). let γb(t) be number of previous successive repetitions of this state gb(t). If gb(t) = 1 with γb(t) = 2 and, in the same time, λb = 1 (i.e.it is considered as LR bit), the VN will be flipped. Otherwise, the VN is assumed a correct bit and kept without flipping. The messages are updated according to the previously mentioned rules and the algorithm continues until a satisfied over-all syndrome check occurs or it reaches the preset maximum number of iterations.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The GLDPC codes, used in the simulation, have block lengths of 2048 and 4096 (as illustrated in Fig. 4 and Fig. 5). Fig. 4 presents the GLDPC BER performance using the (32,26,4) extended Hamming subcode by the proposed decoding with respect to the Bit-Flipping algorithms in [10]–[12]. It is noticed that this proposed algorithm highly surpasses the other ones at the cost of a slight increase in computational complexity resulting from the comparison

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:45:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELSANADILY et al.: CLASSIFICATION-BASED ALGORITHM FOR BF DECODING OF GLDPC CODES

1523

Fig. 4. Simulated BER curves of (N,2,32) GLDPC codes.

Fig. 6. The average number of additional operations executed all during the decoder iterations (for (2048,2,16) GLDPC code with Imax = 20).

arithmetic or Boolean operations, performed equally by both algorithms, are not considered in the table and only the additional and dissimilar operations are inserted.

Fig. 5. Simulated BER curves of (N,2,16) GLDPC codes.

V. CONCLUSION
Unlike the conventional Bit-Flipping decoding of GLDPC codes, we propose to use the soft information, contained in the received sequence over AWGN channel, to classify the received bits (VNs) into two categories. The contribution of our letter is not in the classification itself, but in the way that these classified nodes are processed. Our proposed algorithm achieves a better performance and can handle more generalized and robust subcodes with the capability to correct more errors.

operations made at the initial classification step. It is also noticed as N increases, a slow improvement in the performance is achieved. We set Imax, maximum number of iterations, as 20 iterations as in [12]. This predefined number is found to be very sufficient for good performance as the additional iterations beyond this limit has no considerable difference in the performance. In [10], the used Imax starts from nearly 10 for short lengths to output reasonable performance. This number may increase in their algorithm with larger block length N or lower SNR value (due to the increased number of bits in error contained in the received word) as their algorithm makes only a single bit flip among the received symbols at each iteration. We also concern about latency in the decoding process. Thus, all simulations performed here are set to this limit for fast decoding purposes. Fig. 5 shows a high gain obtained by the proposed algorithm over the remaining algorithms by using (16,11,4) extended Hamming subcode. It is noticed that the performance has much improved, but at cost of losses in the overall code rate.
As illustrated in Fig. 6, the computational complexity is provided in terms of the average number of executed operations for the proposed algorithm against the rather comparable TSSA-BF algorithm. It is noticed that the complexity of the proposed decoder is reduced by more than 60%. we concern with the difference in computational complexity between the two algorithms, therefore all the main common

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. TIT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[4] M. Lentmaier and K. S. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density paritycheck codes based on Hamming component codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 248–250, Aug. 1999.
[5] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[6] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[7] X. Wu, C. Zhao, and X. You, “Parallel weighted bit-flipping decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 671–673, Aug. 2007.
[8] D. V. Nguyen and B. Vasic, “Two-bit bit flipping algorithms for LDPC codes and collective error correction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1153–1163, Apr. 2014.
[9] Y. H. Liu, X. L. Niu, and M. L. Zhang, “Multi-threshold bit flipping algorithm for decoding structured LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 127–130, Feb. 2015.
[10] S. Hirst and B. Honary, “Decoding of generalised low-density paritycheck codes using weighted bit-flip voting,” IEEE Proc.-Commun., vol. 149, no. 1, pp. 1–5, Feb. 2002.
[11] N. Miladinovic and M. Fossorier, “Generalized LDPC codes with Reed–Solomon and BCH codes as component codes for binary channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., St. Louis, MO, USA, Nov./Dec. 2005, pp. 1239–1244.
[12] S. Elsanadily, A. Mahran, and O. Elghandour,“Two-side state-aided bitflipping decoding of generalized low density parity check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 2122–2125, Oct. 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:45:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

