1536

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 8, AUGUST 2018

Belief Propagation List Decoding of Polar Codes
Ahmed Elkelesh , Moustafa Ebada , Sebastian Cammerer , and Stephan ten Brink

Abstract— We propose a belief propagation list (BPL) decoder with comparable performance to the successive cancellation list (SCL) decoder of polar codes, which already achieves the maximum likelihood (ML) bound of polar codes for sufficiently large list size L. The proposed decoder is composed of multiple parallel independent belief propagation (BP) decoders based on differently permuted polar code factor graphs. A list of possible transmitted codewords is generated and the one closest to the received vector, in terms of Euclidean distance, is picked. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed BPL decoder provides the best performance of plain polar codes under iterative decoding known so far. The proposed algorithm does not require any changes in the polar code structure itself, rendering the BPL into an alternative to the SCL decoder, equipped with a soft output capability enabling, e.g., iterative detection and decoding to further improve performance. Further benefits are the lower decoding latency than the SCL decoder and the possibility of high throughput implementations. Additionally, we show that a different selection strategy of frozen bit positions can further enhance the error-rate performance of the proposed decoder.

Index Terms— Polar codes, permuted factor graphs, belief propagation decoding, list decoding, successive cancellation list decoding, RM-Polar codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
P OLAR codes [1] were adopted by the 3GPP group as the channel codes for the upcoming 5th generation mobile communication standard (5G) uplink/downlink control channel [2]. Therefore, decoding of polar codes has been grasping more and more attention as a practical implementation challenge.
As successive cancellation (SC) decoding, originally proposed in [1], is sub-optimal for finite length polar codes, SCL decoding [3] was later introduced achieving the ML bound for a sufficiently large list size L, at the cost of increased complexity due to the list decoding nature. Further enhancement of the code was conducted via concatenating a high rate outer code such as Cyclic Redundancy Check (CRC) and parity-check (PC) codes. Under SCL decoding, these CRC-aided polar codes [3] and parity-check concatenated polar codes [4] were shown to outperform the state-of-the-art low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Later, an extension of polar codes, namely Polar Subcodes, were proposed in [5], outperforming the above-mentioned code constructions. However, the SCL decoder is characterized by a high complexity
Manuscript received January 16, 2018; revised May 8, 2018; accepted June 15, 2018. Date of publication June 26, 2018; date of current version August 10, 2018. This work has been supported by DFG, Germany, under grant BR 3205/5-1. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was C. JEGO. (Corresponding author: Ahmed Elkelesh.)
The authors are with the Institute of Telecommunications, Pfaffenwaldring 47, University of Stuttgart, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany (e-mail: elkelesh@inue.uni-stuttgart.de; ebada@inue.uni-stuttgart.de; cammerer@ inue.uni-stuttgart.de; tenbrink@inue.uni-stuttgart.de).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2018.2850772

Fig. 1. BER and BLER comparison between BP, SCL (L = 32), SCL + CRC-16 (L = 32) and BPL for a P(2048, 1024)-code. All iterative decoders use the G-matrix-based stopping condition.
and an inherently serial decoding nature, which in turn reduces the decoding throughput and causes high decoding latency (see [6] and references therein). In addition, SCL decoding is not a good match to iterative detection and decoding due to its hard-decision output nature (i.e., not a soft-in/soft-out decoder).
In this work, the major focus is on the achievable performance of iterative decoding of polar codes based on message passing over the encoding graph [7]. The BP algorithm enjoys some fundamental advantages over SC-based decoding, as it can be easily parallelized, thus high throughput/low latency implementations are possible, and it inherently enables soft-in/ soft-out decoding, facilitating joint iterative detection and decoding. Thus, BP decoding is a promising candidate for high data rate and low latency demanding applications.
Although much effort has been spent on enhancing its performance, e.g., significant improvements through postprocessing were reported in [8], the BP decoding algorithm is still outperformed by the SCL decoding algorithm. In [9], it was shown that BP decoding of polar codes can be enhanced by appending a short-length LDPC code to the semi-polarized bit channels of the polar code. In [10], the selection of information and frozen bit channels was altered based on log-likelihood ratio (LLR)-evolution leading to a considerable performance gain. Though these approaches push the performance of BP-based decoding of polar codes a bit forward, the gap between their performance compared to that of SCL decoding is, however, still quite large. Besides, all these

1558-2558 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:43:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELKELESH et al.: BPL DECODING OF POLAR CODES

1537

methods, making them incompatible to the standardized polar codes (i.e., CRC/PC-aided polar codes).
Based on the observation that the stages of the encoding graph of a polar code of length N can be permuted leading to (log2 N )! different graphs with the same encoding behavior, the idea of decoding on parallel BP decoders, each based on a different stage-permuted factor graph realization, was introduced in [11], but has not yet been investigated further. This new decoding scheme was then implemented in a sequential manner and used in [12] to overcome the effects of insufficient LLR-clipping. It was further studied in [13] where the performance of polar codes under iterative BP decoding with the help of a high rate CRC code was shown to be comparable to SCL (i.e., SCL without the CRC aid). This decoding scheme offers a trade-off between good error-rate performance and large decoding delay (also complexity) due to its sequential decoding fashion. In addition, the decoder approaches the performance of SCL only when the code is concatenated with a high rate CRC code, which is used as a stopping flag in the decoder. Similar permutation decoding techniques were reported in [14] for Reed–Muller (RM) codes.
Unlike [13], where the code itself was changed via concatenating the polar code with a high rate CRC code, the proposed algorithm in this letter proposes a new decoder based on a list of L parallel independent BP decoders without altering the code itself (i.e., no code concatenation is involved), hence it is referred to as “BPL decoder”. Compared to the decoder proposed in [13], BPL allows the parallel execution of all graphs and, thus, possibly both higher throughput and lower latency can be achieved. It is worth mentioning that this decoder resembles the one proposed in [15] where Bose-ChaudhuriHocquenghem (BCH) and Golay codes are decoded based on multiple BP decoders over different graph realizations. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed BPL decoder provides the best, so far, known performance of plain polar codes under iterative decoding. The decoder is introduced in its basic high complexity (but conceptually simple) form. Further complexity reduction approaches are reserved to future investigation.

II. POLAR CODES AND ITERATIVE DECODING

As introduced in [1], polar codes are based on the concept

of channel polarization, where N = 2n identical channels are

combined such that a channel polarization effect occurs. The

recursive channel combination leads to the generator matrix G,

given by G = F⊗n, where F =

10 11

and F⊗n denotes the

n-th Kronecker power of F.

The codewords x can be obtained by x = u · G, where

u contains k information bits and N − k frozen bits. The k

information bits are assigned to the k most reliable positions denoted as information set A (and A¯ denotes the frozen

positions), which have to be found during the code con-

struction phase. If not explicitly mentioned, we use Arıkan’s

Bhattacharyya-based design; however, any other polar code

construction (i.e., different A) could be used. Let P (N, k)

denote a polar code with codeword length N and k information

bits, i.e., the information set has the cardinality k = |A|.

An iterative decoding algorithm was introduced in [7]

based on Gallager’s BP decoding of LDPC codes. The main

Fig. 2. Factor graphs of P(8, k)-code (loop structure changes).

difference is that the iterative message passing is applied over

the encoding factor graph (Fig. 2) instead of the parity-check

matrix. This factor graph consists of n + 1 stages containing

N nodes per stage. Due to the limited space, only a short

overview on the BP decoding algorithm is provided. We refer

the interested reader to [7], [12], and [16]. Two types of

messages are involved, left-to-right messages (R-messages)

and right-to-left messages (L-messages). The R-messages at

stage 1 represent the a priori information available to the

decoder and thus, are either 0 or ∞ for non-frozen (i ∈ A) and frozen (i ∈ A¯ ) bits, respectively. The L-messages at the

last stage (n + 1) are initialized with the channel output LLRs

Lch,i

=

log

P P

(xi (xi

=0|yi =1|yi

) )

,

i.e.,

Li,n+1

=

Lch,i.

During each iteration, L- and R-messages are itera-

tively propagated from stage to stage through the factor

graph [7]. As shown in Fig. 2, the polar factor graph con-

sists

of

log2(N )

·

N 2

processing elements (PE)s (or check

nodes, CNs) [12].

The BP decoder can stop after a pre-defined maximum

number of iterations Nit,max, or if an early stopping condition is fulfilled [16]. Finally, either the LLRs of the estimated

information word uˆ and the estimated codeword xˆ is for-

warded as the decoder output, or a hard decision is applied to

recover the information bits. Two stopping conditions, based

on intermediate hard-decisions on uˆ and xˆ, are practically

relevant:

1) G-matrix-based [16]: stop when xˆ = uˆ · G is fulfilled.

2) CRC-based: stop when the CRC on uˆ is fulfilled.

However, this would require an outer CRC code

(i.e., a change in the code structure).

III. BELIEF PROPAGATION LIST DECODER
As outlined in [11], there exist n! different permutations of the polar code factor graph which fulfil the condition x = u · G. Any permutation of the factor graph based on Arıkan’s kernel can be characterized by a vector Π with entries πj from 1 to n permuted in any random order, written as: (Π)1×n = randperm (n) (i.e., random permutations of the vector [1, 2, 3, . . . , n]). The jth stage in the factor graph is characterized by sj defining the separation between the two bit channels to be connected together via a check node. The vector s with entries sj for the n stages is calculated as: sj = 2πj−1, where 1 ≤ j ≤ n. Fig. 2a and 2b show a pair of permutations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:43:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1538

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 8, AUGUST 2018

Fig. 3. An abstract view of BPL decoding (L parallel independent BP decoders).
for P(8, k)-code (i.e., n = 3). The factor graph in Fig. 2a is defined by the vector Π = [3, 2, 1] and thus the separation s = [4, 2, 1]. While the factor graph in Fig. 2b is defined by the vector Π = [2, 1, 3] and thus the separation s = [2, 1, 4].1
BP decoding can be performed over any one of such permuted factor graphs. Different permutations contain different loops as depicted in Fig. 2. Thus, one factor graph permutation may be better than another permutation for a specific set of inputs (i.e., transmitted codeword plus noise realization).
A. Algorithm
As there exist no clear evidence on which graph permutation performs best for a given input, the BPL decoder of polar codes consists of L parallel independent BP decoders2 each based on a different permuted factor graph. Some cyclic shifts of the original factor graph (i.e., the vectors Πk are cyclic shifts of [1, 2, 3, . . . , n], where 1 ≤ k ≤ L) were observed to be better than randomly permuted factor graphs. Thus, and for reproducibility, the n − 1 cyclic shifts were always selected among the L different factor graph permutations. The full decoding procedure is depicted in Fig. 3. BP iterations are conducted on each single decoder until the G-matrixbased stopping condition is satisfied, or a maximum number of iterations per decoder Nit,max is performed. Therefore, after Nit,max iterations, a list of L codewords (i.e., candidates) is available. Only those codewords satisfying the G-matrixbased stopping condition are declared as the set of valid polar codewords. Finally, that valid codeword from the L parallel BP decoders which is closest, in terms of Euclidean distance, to the channel output y is picked to be the BPL decoder output
xˆBP L = arg min y − xˆi .
xˆi,i∈{1,...,L}
Fig. 1 shows that the error-rate performance of the BPL decoder converges to that of the SCL decoder for the same information set A. One can also infer from Fig. 1 that increasing L and Nit,max enhances the BPL error-rate performance.
1Remark: the decoder can be sufficiently described by s, however, from an implementation perspective we believe that a permutation Π of the natural numbers from 1 to n is more convincing.
2The major difference between SCL and BPL decoders in building the list is that the SCL is based on the branching-while-decoding strategy; thus, the list size is doubled after a bit decision until reaching L branches, while the BPL decoder starts with L branches (i.e., L parallel independent BP decoders).

B. Potential Benefits

The BPL is a soft-output decoding algorithm and, thus, can

be used in joint detection and decoding which is not possible

with hard-output decoders (e.g., SCL).

As shown in [6], iterative decoding of polar codes has

a higher potential of high throughput implementations when

compared to SC-based decoding. Thus, BPL enjoys a higher

potential of parallel hardware implementations leading to high

throughput and low latency. The latency of BPL scales with
O (Nit,max · log N ) as each stage can be fully parallelized, i.e., it scales with log2 N for a constant number of iterations. Furthermore, stage-combining is possible without any perfor-

mance loss, reducing the decoding latency and the memory

complexity. In contrast, due to the sequential decoding nature

of SCL, low latency implementations are hard to realize (cf. [6]), i.e., the latency of SCL scales with O (N ) without further pruning techniques such as partitioning.

A major advantage of our proposed decoder, namely BPL,

is the reduced sorting complexity when compared to the SCL

decoder. In SCL decoding, for large values of L, the metric

sorter is time consuming and expensive in terms of complexity,

while in BPL decoding no intermediate sorting steps are

needed; only one sorting operation is done at the very end to pick the closest codeword to y.

The price, however, to pay is having L parallel BP decoders with an overall complexity of O (L · N · log N ) assuming a

constant number of iterations. It is worth mentioning that

the complexity of BPL increases linearly with the number

of performed BP iterations. Thus, in terms of the num-

ber of performed operations, a naive implementation of

BPL is more computationally complex than SCL. A basic

SCL (L = 32) implementation for a P (2048, 1024)-code

requires 0.7209 × 106 unit calculation updates [17]. BPL

(L = 32, Nit,max = 200) requires 25 × 106 PE updates at

Eb N0

=

2 dB and 14 × 106

respectively. However, in the

PE updates high SNR

at

Eb N0

region

= 3.2 dB,

(e.g.,

Eb N0

=

3.2 dB), BPL only requires a list size L = 5 to achieve the SCL

(L = 32) error-rate performance and, thus, requires 1.01×106

PE updates. PE and unit calculation updates have similar

complexity. Thus, in the high SNR region and without further

complexity reductions, the BPL has a feasible complexity

when compared to plain SCL.

IV. RM-POLAR CODES UNDER BPL DECODING
We observed that the BPL decoder benefits only slightly from an outer CRC/PC code. However, we show in this section that a more proper polar code design can further reduce the gap to the CRC-aided SCL performance by simply selecting the frozen/information bit positions according to [18].
On the one hand, RM and polar codes are based on the same polarization matrix F⊗n. On the other hand, they differ in the selection of bit channels used for conveying the information bits. In polar codes, the information bits are those k bits with the k smallest Bhattacharyya parameters; while in RM codes, the information bits are the k bits corresponding to the highest row weights (i.e., Hamming weights) in the generator matrix G. The goal of the polar code construction is to minimize the error probability under SC decoding, which is not necessarily optimum under iterative decoding (i.e., “flooding”

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:43:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ELKELESH et al.: BPL DECODING OF POLAR CODES

1539

Fig. 4.

BLER comparison between BP, SCL (L = 32) and

BPL (L = 32, Nit,max = 200) for both P(2048, 1024)-code and

PRM (2048, 1024, 16)-code. All iterative decoders use the G-matrix-based

stopping condition.

BP decoding). However, the goal of the RM construction is to design a code with the largest minimum Hamming distance. For finite length codes, the distance properties are of more significant impact than the polarization effect [19].
In [18], a new type of codes is constructed according to both the RM and polar code construction rules together, yielding a code with a higher minimum Hamming distance than polar codes, and thus, better error-rate performance in the finite length regime. First, the bits corresponding to a row in the G-matrix which has a weight less than or equal to a certain threshold d are set to be frozen, regardless of the Bhattacharyya parameter values of these bit channels. Afterwards, the k information bits are the ones with the smallest Bhattacharyya parameters from the remaining set (i.e., the most reliable k bit channels under SC decoding). Finally, the remaining set of bits are set to be frozen. An RM-polar code of length N with k information bits and the Hamming weight threshold d is denoted by PRM (N, k, d).
This hybrid RM-polar code construction method yields codes that have significantly better error-rate performance than the codes constructed by the Bhattacharyya parameter under BPL and SCL decoding, Fig. 4. Note that an SCL decoder of a PRM (2048, 1024, 16)-code requires a pretty large list size L (L > 512) to closely approach the ML bound of the hybrid RM-polar code [18]. For the case of the P(2048, 1024)-code under SCL decoding, it was shown in [3] that a list size of 32 is sufficient to closely approach the ML bound of the polar code in the high SNR region (Eb/N0 > 1.5 dB).
In Fig. 4 it can also be seen that the hybrid RM-polar code construction method yields codes that have better error-rate performance than the codes constructed by the Bhattacharyya parameter under BPL decoding. This gain comes at no extra complexity cost, where the only difference between the codes is the frozen/information bits selection. It should be emphasized that no additional CRC was used for the results in Fig. 4.
V. CONCLUSION
We propose a multiple permuted factor graph-based iterative decoding algorithm of polar codes which reaches the

same error-rate performance as SCL decoding. To the best of our knowledge, this BPL decoder is the best iterative decoder for plain polar codes known thus far. The proposed algorithm does not require any changes or additions in the polar code structure, i.e., the gains are solely based on the improved decoding algorithm itself. Additionally, a hybrid RM-polar code design can further significantly enhance the performance as it improves the distance spectrum of the polar code. We show results for carefully constructed polar codes under iterative (i.e., BPL) decoding, surprisingly only less than 0.5 dB away from the CRC-aided polar codes under SCL decoding. The advantages of the proposed decoder are soft-in/soft-out decoding and the possibility of low latency implementations. The drawbacks, high decoding complexity and the missing CRC/PC compatibility, are left open for future research.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Arıkan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacityachieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, Jul. 2009.
[2] “Evaluation of TBCC and polar codes for small block lengths,” Huawei, Shenzhen, China, Tech. Rep. 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 N.85, May 2016.
[3] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213–2226, May 2015.
[4] T. Wang, D. Qu, and T. Jiang, “Parity-check-concatenated polar codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2342–2345, Dec. 2016.
[5] P. Trifonov and V. Miloslavskaya, “Polar subcodes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 254–266, Feb. 2016.
[6] P. Giard et al., “Hardware decoders for polar codes: An overview,” in Proc. IEEE Inter. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2016, pp. 149–152.
[7] E. Arıkan, “Polar codes: A pipelined implementation,” in Proc. 4th ISBC, 2010, pp. 11–14.
[8] S. Sun, S.-G. Cho, and Z. Zhang, “Post-processing methods for improving coding gain in belief propagation decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[9] J. Guo, M. Qin, A. G. i Fábregas, and P. H. Siegel, “Enhanced belief propagation decoding of polar codes through concatenation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2014, pp. 2987–2991.
[10] M. Qin, J. Guo, A. Bhatia, A. G. i Fábregas, and P. H. Siegel, “Polar code constructions based on LLR evolution,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 1221–1224, Jun. 2017.
[11] N. Hussami, S. B. Korada, and R. Urbanke, “Performance of polar codes for channel and source coding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2009, pp. 1488–1492.
[12] A. Elkelesh, S. Cammerer, M. Ebada, and S. ten Brink, “Mitigating clipping effects on error floors under belief propagation decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst., Aug. 2017, pp. 384–389.
[13] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Belief propagation decoding of polar codes on permuted factor graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Apr. 2018, pp. 1–6.
[14] I. Dumer and K. Shabunov, “Soft-decision decoding of Reed–Muller codes: Recursive lists,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 1260–1266, Mar. 2006.
[15] T. Hehn, J. B. Huber, S. Laendner, and O. Milenkovic, “Multiple-bases belief-propagation for decoding of short block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2007, pp. 311–315.
[16] B. Yuan and K. K. Parhi, “Early stopping criteria for energy-efficient low-latency belief-propagation polar code decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 24, pp. 6496–6506, Dec. 2014.
[17] K. Chen, K. Niu, and J. Lin, “A reduced-complexity successive cancellation list decoding of polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE 77th Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC Spring), Jun. 2013, pp. 1–5.
[18] B. Li, H. Shen, and D. Tse. (Jul. 2014). “A RM-polar codes.” [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1407.5483
[19] V. Bioglio, F. Gabry, I. Land, and J.-C. Belfiore, “Minimum-distance based construction of multi-kernel polar codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2017, pp. 1–6.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:43:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

