Dynamics of ML Approaching Randomized Decoders on Graphs with Cycles
Saied Hemati, Senior Member, IEEE Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering University of Idaho, Moscow, Idaho, USA 83844-1023 Email: shemati@uidaho.edu, Telephone: (208) 885-6504, Fax: (208) 885-7579

Abstract—Randomized channel decoders are promising candidates for approaching maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding using low-complexity decoders when decoding latency is not a concern. This paper is focused on the dynamics of randomized decoders and divides these decoders into statically and dynamically randomized decoders. It is shown that some statically randomized decoders are ML achieving. For dynamically randomized channel decoders that are defined on graphs with cycles, it is shown that randomness can alleviate the impact of cycles.
Index Terms—Channel decoder, dithered decoder, randomized decoder, noisy decoder, stochastic Chase decoder.
I. INTRODUCTION
Achieving maximum likelihood (ML) decoding is the grand challenge in coding theory [1]. The search space for an ML codeword is so large for non-trivial codes that an NP hard problem must be solved. For codes that are defined on graphs, the ML decoding is possible if the graph is cycle-free. However, useful codes are not cycle-free and messages will thus become dependent, which ultimately leads to sub-optimal decoding performance [2].
Randomized decoding algorithms are able to randomize the decoding trajectory and constitute a low-complexity approach for incorporating simulated annealing in the sub-optimal decoding algorithms in the search for the globally optimum solution [3], [4], [5]. Unlike common deterministic decoders, the decoding performance of the randomized decoders asymptotically approaches ML decoding just by increasing the decoding time even for low-complexity decoders.
It is commonly hypothesized that randomized decoding algorithms only blindly bring the decoding trajectory inside the region-of-convergence (ROC) of the ML codeword.
This paper is focused on the dynamics of ML approaching randomized decoders on graphs with cycles and investigates if randomness can be utilized to gradually make messages independent in a graph with cycles to possibly eliminate the sub-optimality gap.
In the following sections, randomness in channel decoders will be reviewed and we divide randomized channel decoders into statically and dynamically randomized decoders. We show some statically randomized channel decoders are ML approaching. In this regard, we will propose an ML approaching stochastic decoder based on a hard-decision Gallager-A decoding algorithm.
For the dynamically randomized decoders, while the decoding trajectory is randomized, it is not clear if the decoders will

ultimately achieve the ML decoding performance. However, dynamically randomized channel decoders that are defined on graphs with cycles can make messages independent. Therefore, the degrading impact of cycles can be alleviated. Unfortunately, this positive effect has an adverse impact on information propagation throughout the graph during the decoding process and some vital information will be lost.
II. RANDOMNESS IN CHANNEL DECODING
While F. Lustenberger and H.-A. Loeliger were studying the impact of transistor mismatch on the performance of analog decoders, they included a random noise in the ideal decoder and they observed some coding gain in their simulation results [7]. They argued that belief propagation is suboptimal on graphs with cycles and therefore the observed coding gain was justifiable. However, they did not try to further explore the observed coding gain.
Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi also reported a randomized message-passing schedule for the decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes that took into account the structure of the Tanner graph of the code. Simulation results showed some coding gain when the deterministic flooding scheduling in iterative decoding was substituted with a randomized message-passing schedule [8].
Invention of stochastic decoders by V. C. Gaudet and A. C. Rapley was a turning point in adding randomness to channel decoders as the decoding trajectory was completely randomized [9]. Re-decoding concept, which means repeating the decoding, was first developed for stochastic decoders [10]. Unlike deterministic decoders that follow a unique trajectory and lead to a unique output, the randomized trajectory in stochastic decoders leads to different outcomes and can increase the chance of convergence to the most likely transmitted codeword.
While stochastic decoders were created when authors attempted to implement belief propagation decoding algorithm using stochastic computation, there is an alternative approach for explaining stochastic decoding. In fact, the first stochastic decoder resembles a hard-decision Gallager-A decoder with randomized inputs and a memory [11].
This randomizing concept concept was exploited in developing dithered belief propagation [3], which is belief propagation with randomized inputs and also in creating stochastic Chase decoding [4] that is a soft decoding of algebraic codes such as

978-1-5386-7392-8/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

725

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:44:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Reed-Solomon and BCH codes using randomized inputs (see Figure 1).
Dithered decoding is also related to modeling ideal analog min-sum decoding where the decoder was described by a set of differential equations. It was observed that on graphs with cycles, the characteristic matrix could become singular and no unique output could be generated. It was shown that those deficiencies that led to trapping sets and caused error floor in LDPC decoding, also caused singularity in the ideal analog min-sum decoder. The author proposed dithering by adding random noise to the decoder to eliminate cycles-generated singularities [6].
Noisy decoders due to hardware imperfections have been studied by a few researchers [12], [13], [14], however, the authors were mainly exploiting fault tolerant features of channel decoders. For example, in [14], timing violations were permitted in an LDPC decoder, without any hardware compensation mechanism. Several quasi-synchronous LDPC decoder circuits provided 23% to 40% reduction in energy consumption or energy-delay product, while decoders achieved the same performance and occupying the same area as conventional circuits.

Soft Channel Outputs
Channel outputs to discrete or continuous Random Variables
A Hard or Soft Decision Decoder
No Have a codeword? Yes
Best found No codeword?
Yes

III. STATICALLY AND DYNAMICALLY RANDOMIZED CHANNEL DECODERS
Randomized decoding algorithms can be divided into two categories based on using static or dynamic randomness.

A candidate for the ML codeword

A. Statically Randomized Decoders
In statically randomized channel decoders, the added randomness remains unchanged during one complete decoding cycle, i.e., the decoder processes the inputs and the decoder finishes its job and outputs are generated, without changing the randomized parameters. The decoding process can be repeated with a new set of random variables in the following decoding cycles. For example, mismatch analysis in [7], dithered decoding with randomized input in [3], and stochastic Chase in [4] are examples of statically randomized channel decoding.
Stochastic decoders are mainly described as an alternative implementation of belief propagation algorithm using stochastic computations, where simple AND gates can perform floating point multiplication when inputs are Bernoulli sequences [9]. Therefore, the complex check node operation in belief propagation decoding algorithm can be implemented using simple XOR gates. However, these decoders can also be modeled as statically randomized decoders. In other words, stochastic decoders perform soft-decision decoding based on simple hard-decision decoders.
Let’s define an ideal stochastic decoder as a decoder similar to the stochastic decoder in [9] but with minor modifications in the variable nodes. Each variable node in the ideal stochastic decoder broadcasts a single random bit to the neighboring check nodes. The random bit, similar to the decoder in [9] is associated with a Bernoulli sequence corresponding to the channel output. The check nodes are also similar to stochastic decoder in [9]. However, each variable node generates an

Fig. 1. A flow graph of a statically randomized decoder. Channel outputs are used as the mean (µ) of discrete or continuous random variables. Discrete (continuous) random variables are used for creating randomized inputs for hard-decision (soft-decision) decoders, which is called stochastic Chase decoding (Dithered decoding). Euclidean distance between any decoded codeword and channel output is used to find an ML candidate codeword. The ML candidate codeword will approach the ML codeword as the process repeated.
output only when all incoming bits from the neighboring check nodes and the generated random bit associated with the channel output agree. In a successful iteration, all variable nodes generate output bits and these bits are used to track statistics of the decoder output word. In other words, in a successful iteration all parity-check equations are satisfied and a codeword has been found. In unsuccessful iterations, any generated bit is discarded.
While the ideal stochastic decoder is not practical as the likelihood of performing a successful iteration is equal to finding a valid codeword, it is an interesting decoder from a theoretical perspective. The ideal stochastic decoder provably implements ML decoding in stochastic domain when iteration number tends to infinite. The decoder in [9] is sub-optimal since when incoming bits are disagreeing, variable nodes do output the last valid output, which is no longer a valid output. Furthermore, the decoder tracks the statistics of each variable node’s output bit instead of the decoder’s output frame. As an example, let’s assume C1, C2 and C3 are the most

726

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:44:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

probable transmitted codewords and C1 is the ML codeword. Statistically, C1 will appear more than C2 and C3 in the ideal stochastic decoder, however, bitwise, there is no guarantee that bits of C1 will be observed more often. So, tracking statistics of the variable nodes’ output bits is suboptimal.
The ML approaching ideal stochastic decoder resembles a single iteration in a hard-decision Gallager-A algorithm [11] with randomized inputs as shown in Figure 1. It is worth noting that unlike the ideal stochastic decoder, in GallagerA algorithm the output of a variable node is equal to variable node’s incoming bits if they are all the same or the channel output.
Other hard-decision decoders such as Reed-Solomon (RS) and BCH decoders can also be used with randomized inputs to perform soft-decision decoding. This method is called stochastic Chase decoding [4] and finds the closest codeword to channel output by minimizing the Euclidean distance between the codewords and channel output. Recent results show by increasing the number of distinct decoding trials in stochastic Chase decoding record-breaking decoding performances can be achieved [15]. Asymptotically, stochastic Chase achieves ML decoding but recent simulation results show to achieve ML decoding, all possible codewords should be tested and it has no gain over Chase decoding algorithm. However, for limited trial budget, stochastic Chase performs significantly better than other soft decoding of RS and BCH codes including Chase algorithm. Generating distinct and uncorrelated randomness is one of the main challenges in stochastic Chase decoding.
For soft decoders, including belief propagation, the statically randomized inputs have been used to further improve the decoding performance. Belief propagation is suboptimal on graphs with cycles and by randomizing inputs and repeating the decoding process it is possible to asymptotically approach ML decoding. Ultimately, randomized inputs bring the channel outputs to the region of convergence of the ML codeword. However, the problem of right choice of randomness has not been explored yet.
B. Dynamically Randomized Decoders
In these decoders, the decoding process is dynamically randomized by substituting deterministic operations inside a decoder by randomized operations. Random parameters are changed within a decoding cycle. For example, random sign flip technique in [3], random timing violations in [14], and probabilistic scheduling in [8] are dynamically randomized decoders.
If randomness is included in the decoding process, it is not trivial to prove the decoder will ultimately approach ML decoding as the randomized trajectory may not necessarily lead to the ML codeword. For instance, in random sign flip technique in [3] occasionally the check node flips the calculated sign bit and this technique was successfully utilized for tackling early error floor in LDPC codes. However, simulation results showed that this dynamically randomized decoder was not ML achieving.

X
Y
Fig. 2. A short cycle in the Tanner graph representation of an (8,4) code. A cycle can be regarded as a communication channel where X is the input and Y is the output.
In the following, we investigate if adding randomness inside belief propagation decoding algorithm can alleviate the impact of cycles that lead to sub-optimal decoding performance.
Let’s consider an (n, k) linear block code that has cycles in its Tanner graph representation such as the code depicted in Figure 2. There is at least one variable node (Vγ) that has an incoming message (Y ) that is a function of one of the node’s outgoing messages (X) at the present or past iterations. In other words, Y has some information regarding X and H(X) > H(X|Y ), where H(X) is the entropy of the outgoing message X and H(X|Y ) is the conditional entropy of X given that Y has been observed [16]. For a deterministic system, H(X|Y ) = 0. On the contrary, in a cycle free graph, the received message has no information regarding the outgoing message and H(X) = H(X|Y ).
If randomness is included in belief propagation over a graph with cycles, we can consider X as a transmitter output that goes through a noisy communication channel corresponding to the cycle or cycles in the Tanner graph, which is not necessarily additive, and Y can be regarded as the channel output. Consequently, like a communication system, H(X|Y ) > 0. In other words, the added randomness reduces the impact of cycles. If the magnitude of the randomness tends to infinite, Y will provide no information about X and H(X|Y ) will be equal to H(X), which corresponds to a communication channel with zero capacity and cycles will be completely disabled. However, the added randomness will also stop the flow of useful information throughout the graph, which ultimately degrades the decoding performance.
In [13] a probabilistic analysis of the LDPC Gallager-B decoder [11] built out of noisy components was presented. Authors used density evolution method to find approximations for the optimal threshold of the noisy decoder. It was observed that adding noisy components will only degrade the threshold of infinite block length LDPC codes and consequently, degrades the decoding performance. However, density evolution technique does not provide any information for practical codes that have finite block lengths and have cycles in their Tanner graph representation.
For finite block length codes that have cycles in their Tanner graph representation, we hypothesize that there will be a trade off between alleviating the adverse impacts of cycles in the

727

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:44:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Tanner graph representation of the code and also facilitating free flow of information from one side of the Tanner graph to the other side of the graph. Therefore, it is expected to have an optimal randomness quantity in the dynamically randomized channel decoders to improve decoding performance in the waterfall region.
IV. CONCLUDING REMARKS
Randomizing deterministic hard and soft decision decoders create a new opportunity for developing new decoders with record-breaking decoding performance. Unlike conventional channel decoders, randomized decoders can trade decoding performance with decoding latency even for low-complexity decoders. These decoders also create an exciting opportunity for ML decoding on a cloud using a large number of independent low-complexity decoders [4], [17], [18].
This paper provided some preliminary results on the dynamics of ML approaching randomized channel decoders. It was shown that some statically randomized channel decoders provably achieve ML decoding performance. For the dynamically randomized channel decoders, it was shown that randomizing the decoder can alleviate the impact of cycles in the Tanner graph representation of the codes. However, some useful information will ultimately be lost in the decoding process that may adversely impact on the decoding performance.
Currently, randomized decoders have high decoding latency that limits their applications to retrieving valuable information. Potential applications include retrieving information in deep space communications or reading information in a damaged digital storage system such as a computer hard-disk when decoding latency is not a concern. It is desirable to speed up the decoding process by smartly utilizing randomness in the decoding process. In [15] it was shown that the decoding latency of the stochastic Chase decoding for RS and BCH codes can be significantly reduced if unique test patterns are utilized. Similarly, it is beneficial to develop suitable techniques for generating uncorrelated randomness in randomized channel decoders to efficiently explore the space near the region of convergence of the ML codeword.
It is interesting to note that in communication systems, the channel is random, many interesting codes have random structure, and we are proposing randomized channel decoders, which makes the encoding the only deterministic block in communication systems.

[5] D. Declercq, C. Winstead, B. Vasic, F. Ghaffari, P. Ivanis, and E. Boutillon, “Noise-aided gradient descent bit-flipping decoders approaching maximum likelihood decoding,” 2016 9th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), pp. 300304, 2006.
[6] S. Hemati and A. Yongacoglu, “On the Dynamics of Analog MinSum Iterative Decoders, an Analytical Approach,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 58, no. 8, pp. 2225-2231, August 2010.
[7] F. Lustenberger and H.-A. Loeliger, “On mismatch errors in analogVLSI error correcting decoders,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Symposium on Circuits & Systems, ISCAS’01, Sydney, Australia, May 6 - June 9, 2001, vol. IV, pp. 198-201.
[8] Y. Mao and A.H. Banihashemi,“Decoding low-density parity-check codes with probabilistic scheduling,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 414 - 416, Oct. 2001.
[9] V. C. Gaudet and A. C. Rapley,“Iterative decoding using stochastic computation,” Electronics Letters, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 299-301, 2003.
[10] S. Sharifi Tehrani, A. Naderi, G.-A. Kamendje, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross “Majority-Based Tracking Forecast Memories for Stochastic LDPC Decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 4883-4896, September 2010.
[11] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check codes. Ph.D thesis, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 1963.
[12] L. R. Varshney, “Performance of LDPC codes under faulty iterative decoding”, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 4427-4444, July 2011.
[13] S. M. S. Tabatabaei Yazdi, H. Cho, Y. Sun, S. Mitra, and L. Dolecek, “Gallager B Decoder on Noisy Hardware,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1660-1673, May 2013.
[14] F. Leduc-Primeau, F. R. Kschischang, and W. J. Gross, “Modeling and energy optimization of LDPC decoder circuits with timing violations,” IEEE Transactions on Communications , vol.66, no. 3, pp. 932 - 946, 2018.
[15] H. Mani and S. Hemati,“Symbolic Stochastic Chase Decoding of Reed-Solomon and BCH Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communication, currently under review, an early version is available at https://arxiv.org/abs/1707.04390.
[16] T. Cover, and J. Thomas. Elements of Information Theory, Second Edition. Wiley-Interscience, 2006.
[17] S. Hemati,“Mitigating Hardware CyberSecurity Risks in Error Correcting Decoders”, in the proceedings of the International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing, September 5-9, 2016, Brest, France.
[18] S. Hemati, “Homomorphic Channel Decoding,” the Workshop on Stochastic Computing and Related Topics, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, June 20, 2016.

REFERENCES
[1] V. Guruswami and A. Vardy,“Maximum-Likelihood decoding of ReedSolomon codes is NP-hard,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2249 - 2256, July 2005.
[2] M. R. Yazdani, S. Hemati, and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improving belief propagation on graphs with cycles,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 57-59, Jan. 2004.
[3] F. Leduc-Primeau, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Dithered belief propagation decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 60, no. 8, pp. 2042-2047, August 2012.
[4] C. Leroux, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Stochastic Chase decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 863-865, September 2010.

728

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:44:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

