IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

4793

The Generalized Area Theorem and Some of its Consequences
Cyril Méasson, Andrea Montanari, Thomas J. Richardson, Fellow, IEEE, and Rüdiger Urbanke

Abstract—There is a fundamental relationship between belief propagation (BP) and maximum a posteriori decoding. The case of transmission over the binary erasure channel was investigated in detail in a companion paper (C. Méasson, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “Maxwell’s construction: The hidden bridge between iterative and maximum a posteriori decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, submitted for publication). This paper investigates the extension to general memoryless channels (paying special attention to the binary case). An area theorem for transmission over general memoryless channels is introduced and some of its many consequences are discussed. We show that this area theorem gives rise to an upper bound on the maximum a posteriori threshold for sparse graph codes. In situations where this bound is tight, the extrinsic soft bit estimates delivered by the BP decoder coincide with the correct a posteriori probabilities above the maximum a posteriori threshold. More generally, it is conjectured that the fundamental relationship between the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) and the BP decoder which was observed for transmission over the binary erasure channel carries over to the general case. We finally demonstrate that in order for the design rate of an ensemble to approach the capacity under BP decoding the component codes have to be perfectly matched, a statement which is well known for the special case of transmission over the binary erasure channel.
Index Terms—Area theorem, belief propagation (BP), entropy, EXIT curve, maximum a posteriori, maximum-likelihood, Maxwell construction, phase transition, threshold.
I. INTRODUCTION
I T was shown in [3]–[5] that, when transmission takes place over the binary erasure channel (BEC) using sparse graph codes, there exists a surprising and fundamental relationship between the belief propagation (BP) and the maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) decoder. This relationship emerges in the limit of large block lengths. Operationally, this relationship is furnished for the BEC by the so-called Maxwell decoder. This decoder bridges the gap between BP and MAP decoding by augmenting the BP decoder with an additional “guessing” device. Analytically, the relationship between BP and MAP
Manuscript received November 10, 2005. Current version published October 21, 2009. The work of A. Montanari was supported in part by a Terman fellowship and by the NSF CAREER award CCF-0743978. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE Information Theory Workshop, San Antonio, TX, October 2004 and at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Adelaide, Australia, September 2005.
C. Méasson and T. Richardson are with Qualcomm, Flarion Technologies, Bridgwater, NJ 08807 USA.
A. Montanari is with the Electrical Engineering and Statistics Departments, Stanford University, Stanford CA 94305 USA.
R. Urbanke is with the EPFL, School for Computer and Communication Sciences, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland.
Communicated by H.-A. Loeliger, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of Figures 17–19 in this paper are available online at http:// ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2030457

Fig. 1. The EBP EXIT curve (double “S”-shaped curve), the corresponding

BP EXIT curve (dashed and solid line; the “envelope” of the EBP EXIT curve)

and the MAP EXIT curve (thick solid line; constructed by “cutting” EBP EXIT at the two “S”-shaped spots in such a way that there is a local balance of the

areas shown in gray) for the ensemble LDPC (

; x ).

decoding is given in terms of the so-called extended BP

EXIT (EBP EXIT) function. Fig. 1 shows this curve (double

“S”-shaped curve) for transmission over the BEC and the

LDPC (

) (the degree distributions are from an

edge perspective). The BP EXIT curve is the “envelope” of the

EBP EXIT curve (let a ball run slowly down the slope). The

MAP EXIT curve on the other hand is conjecture to be derived

in general from the EBP EXIT curve by the so-called Maxwell

construction. The Maxwell construction consists of converting

the EBP EXIT curve into a single-valued function by “cutting”

the EBP EXIT curve at the two “S”-shaped spots in such a way

that there is a local balance of the cut areas. A detailed discus-

sion of this relationship in the case of transmission over the

BEC can be found in [5]. Let us summarize. For transmission

over the BEC using sparse graph codes from ensembles with

long block length, BP decoding is asymptotically characterized

by its BP EXIT curve and MAP decoding is characterized

by its MAP EXIT curve. These two curves are linked via the

EBP EXIT curve.

A. Overview of Results
The pleasing picture shown in Fig. 1 seems to have a fairly complete analog in the general setting. Unfortunately, we are not able to prove this claim in any generality. On the other hand, we can show how several of the key ingredients can be suitably extended to the general case and we will be able to prove some of their fundamental properties.
Namely, we introduce a general area theorem (GAT). This area theorem, when applied to the BEC, leads back to the notion of EXIT functions as shown in the companion paper [5]. For the general case, however, it is necessary to use a distinct function (but similar in many respects to EXIT). We call it the generalized EXIT ( GEXIT) function. We then show that GEXIT functions share some of the key properties of EXIT functions. In particular, we are able to extend the upper bound on the MAP

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4794

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

threshold presented in [3] (or, more generally, the lower bound Gaussian channels. We finally conclude with some remarks in

on the conditional entropy) to general channels.

Section XII.

In [6], [7] Guo, Shamai, and Verdú showed that for Gaussian

channels the derivative (with respect of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)) of the mutual information, is equal to the mean square

II. REVIEW AND NOTATIONS

error (MSE), and in [6] they showed that a similar relationship holds for Poisson channels. One can think of GEXIT functions as providing such a relationship in a more general setting (where the generalization is with respect to the admissible channel families). For some channel families, GEXIT functions have particularly nice interpretations. For example, for Gaussian channels, we not only have the interpretation of the derivative in terms of the MSE detector, but this interpretation can be simplified even further in the binary case: the derivative of the mutual information can be seen as the “magnetization” of the system as was shown by Macris in [8]. The results in [9], which have appeared since the introduction of GEXIT functions in [1], can be reformulated to give an interpretation of GEXIT functions for the class of additive channels (see also [10]). It is likely that interpretations for other classes of channels will be found in the future.

Let denote the channel input alphabet (which we always

assume finite) and the channel output alphabet (typically,

). All channels considered in this paper are memoryless

. Rather than looking at a single memoryless channel, we

usually consider families of memoryless channels parameter-

ized by a real-valued parameter , which we denote by

.

Each channel from such a family is characterized by its transi-

tion probability density

(where

and

).

We adopt here the convention of formally denoting channels

by their transition density even when such a density does not

exist, and write

as a proxy for the corre-

sponding expectation.

Transmission over binary-input memoryless output-sym-

metric1 (BMS) channel plays a particularly important role. In

this case, it will be convenient to assume that the input bit

takes values

. The channel indexed by

B. Paper Outline
In Section II, we review the necessary background material and in particular recall the GAT first stated in [1]. Starting from this GAT, we introduce in Section III GEXIT functions. We will see that for transmission over the BEC, GEXIT functions coincide with standard EXIT functions, but that this is no longer true for general channels. In Section V we then concentrate on low-density parity-check (LDPC) ensembles. In particular, we define the quantities which appear in the asymptotic setting. In Section IV, we then prove one of the fundamental properties of GEXIT functions, namely, that GEXIT kernels preserve the ordering implied by physical degradation. This fact is then exploited in Section VI, where we show how to compute an upper bound on the threshold under MAP decoding (or, more generally, a lower bound on the conditional entropy) by considering the BP GEXIT function, which results from the

parameter is generically denoted by BMS .

In the sequel, we will often assume that the channel family

BMS is ordered by physical degradation (see [11] for a

discussion of this concept). It is well known that the standard

families BEC

(binary erasure channels with erasure

parameter ), BSC

(binary symmetric channels with

crossover probability ), and BAWGN

(binary-input

additive white Gaussian noise channels

where

takes values in and the noise has standard deviation and

zero mean) all have this property. For notational simplicity, we

will use a shorthand and say that a channel family is degraded.

In the binary case, an important role is played by the distribu-

tion of the log-likelihood ratio

, assuming

. We denote the corresponding density by and call it an -density. In fact, without loss of generality we can assume

that the log-likelihood ratio ( ) mapping,

,

regular GEXIT function if we substitute the MAP density by is already included in the channel description. This is justified

its equivalent BP density. In Section VII, we define extended since the random variable constitutes a sufficient statistic.

BP GEXIT (EBP GEXIT) functions which include the un- This inclusion of the -processing is equivalent to assuming

stable branches, present several examples of these function, and that

. Further facts regarding BMS channels

discuss how they provide a bridge between BP and MAP de- can be found in [11]. As far as LDPC and iterative coding sys-

coding. Several properties of EPB GEXIT functions are dis- tems are concerned, we will keep the formalism introduced in

cussed in Section VIII together with a numerical procedure for the companion paper [5] and which is found, e.g., in [12]–[15].

constructing them. We show that they satisfy an area theorem In the case of a nonbinary input alphabet , the log-likeli-

as well. Section IX presents some partial results on the smooth- hood mapping will be replaced by the “canonical” representa-

ness and uniqueness of EBP GEXIT functions. In Section X, tion of the channel output

we show the surprising fact that, in case the previously com- , where

. Notice that belongs

puted upper bound on the MAP threshold is tight, then the a pos- to the

-dimensional simplex

. In the binary case,

teriori probabilities on the bits are equal to the corresponding the log-likelihood ratio is just a particular parametrization of the

BP estimates. Section XI contains a proof that iterative coding one-dimensional simplex.

systems cannot achieve reliable communication above capacity, In what follows, we will often be concerned with how cer-

using only density evolution and the area theorem (and not the tain quantities (e.g., the conditional entropy

) behave

standard Fano inequality). A matching condition for compo- as we change the channel parameter. In order to ensure that the

nent codes of capacity achieving sequences follows. In the appendices, we collect some technical derivations and a discussion of several equivalent forms of the GEXIT functions for

1A binary memoryless channels is said to be symmetric (or, more precisely,
output-symmetric) when the transition probability verifies p (yj + 1) = p (yj 0 1).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4795

involved objects exits we need to impose some regularity conditions on the channel family with respect to the channel parameter. This can be done in various ways, but to be concrete we will impose the following restriction.

Definition 1 (Channel Smoothness): Consider a family of

memoryless channels with input and output alphabets and

, respectively, and characterized by their transition probability

(with taking the canonical form described above).

Assume that the family is parameterized by , where takes

values in some interval

. The channel family is said to be

smooth with respect to the parameter if for all

and all

bounded continuously differentiable functions on

,

the integral

exists and is a continuously dif-

ferentiable function with respect to , .

In the sequel we often say as a shorthand that a channel BMS is smooth to mean that we are transmitting over the channel BMS and that the channel family BMS is smooth at the point . If BMS is smooth, the derivative
exists and is a linear functional of . It is therefore consistent to formally define the derivative of
with respect to by setting

(1)

For a large class of channel families it is straightforward to check that they are smooth. This is, e.g., the case if is finite and the transition probabilities are differentiable functions of , or if it admits a density with respect to the Lebesgue measure, and the density is differentiable for each . In these cases, the formal derivative (1) coincides with the ordinary derivative.

Example 1 (Smooth Channels): It is straightforward to

check that the families BEC

BAWGN

are all smooth.

, BSC

, and

In the case of transmission over a BMS channel it is useful

to parameterize the channels in such a way that the parameter

reflects the channel entropy. More precisely, we denote by

the conditional entropy

when the channel input

is chosen uniformly at random from

, and the cor-

responding output is . Consider a family of BMS channels

characterized by their -densities. We then write this family of

-densities as h h if h , where the entropy operator

is defined as (see, e.g., [11])

we write BSC ( ) to denote the BSC with crossover probability

equal to

, where

, the binary entropy function. In the same manner,

BAWGNC ( ) denotes the BAWGNC with a standard deviation

of the noise such that the channel entropy is equal to .

We will encounter cases where it is useful to allow each bit

of a codeword to be transmitted through a different (family of)

BMS channel(s). By some abuse of notation, we will denote the

th channel family by BMS h . A situation in which this

more general view appears naturally is when we consider punc-

tured ensembles. We can describe this case by assuming that

some bits are passed through an erasure channel with erasure

probability equal to one, whereas the remaining bits are passed

through some other BMS channel. In such cases it is convenient

to assume that all individual families BMS h are param-

eterized in a smooth (differentiable) way by a single real pa-

rameter, call it , i.e.,

. In this way, by changing

all channels change according to and they describe a path

through “channel space.”

The GAT, first introduced in [1], plays center stage in the

remainder of this paper.

Theorem 1 (GAT): Let be chosen with probability

from . Let the channel from to be memoryless, where

is the result of passing through the smooth family

,

. Let be a further observation of so that

. Then

(3)

Proof: For

, the entropy rule gives . We claim that

(4)

which is true since the channel is memoryless and . Furthermore,
is differentiable with respect to as a consequence of the channel smoothness (it is straightforward to write the conditional entropy as expectation of a differentiable kernel, cf. Lemma 2 and remarks below). Therefore,
and

(2) From this the total derivate as stated in (3) follows immediately.

This integral always exists as can be seen by writing it in the equivalent form as Riemann–Stieltjes integral

III. GEXIT FUNCTIONS

. In the above definition, we have Let be chosen with probability

from . Assume

introduced the kernel

. For reasons that that the th component of is transmitted over a memoryless

will become clearer in Lemma 1, we call the EXIT kernel. erasure channel (not necessarily binary) with erasure probability

The channel family is said to be complete if ranges from to , denote it by EC . Then

. For the BEC. the natural parameter (the erasure probability)

already represents an entropy. Nevertheless, to be consistent we

will write in the future BEC . By some abuse of notation,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4796

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

Apply (3) in Theorem 1 assuming that

,

. To remind

ourselves that is a function of the parameter we write .

Then

The function

is known in the literature

as the EXIT function associated to the th bit of the given

code and

is the (average)

EXIT function.2 We conclude that for transmission over EC ,

. If we integrate this relationship with

respect to from to and note that

and

, then we get the basic form of the area

theorem for the EC :

. This statement

was first proved, in the binary case, by Ashikhmin, Kramer,

and ten Brink in [17] using a different framework.

Example 2 (Area Theorem for Repetition Code and BEC):

Consider the binary repetition code with parameters

,

where the first component describes the block length, the

second component denotes the dimension of the code, and the

final component gives the minimum (Hamming) distance. By

symmetry,

for all

. We have

, as predicted.

The above scenario can easily be generalized by allowing the various components of the code to be transmitted over different erasure channels. Consider, e.g., a binary repetition code of length in which the first component is transmitted through BEC , where is constant, but the remaining components are passed through BEC . In this case we have

code half the codewords take on the value and half the value in each given position.
Lemma 1 ( for Linear Codes and BMS Channels): Let be chosen uniformly at random from a proper binary linear code and assume that transmission takes place over the family BMS h. Define
(5)

and

. Let denote the density of , as-

suming that the all-one codeword was transmitted, and let

. Then

where is the entropy operator introduced in (2).

Proof: Note that

forms a Markov chain.3

In other words, we claim that is a sufficient statistic for .

From this we conclude that (see [22, Sec. 2.8])

Now note that since we assume that was chosen uniformly at random from proper binary linear codes, it follows that the prior for each is the uniform one. Therefore, is in fact a log-likelihood ratio, i.e.,
(6)

It is shown in [11, Lemma 3.37] that, assuming that is chosen

uniformly at random from a proper binary linear code, the bi-

nary “channel”

is symmetric. Further, note that the

density of conditioned on

is equal to the density

of conditioned that the all-one codeword was transmitted.4

By assumption, this -density is equal to . We conclude that

.

(assuming that is chosen uniformly at random from the set of codewords). We will get back to this point shortly when we introduce GEXIT functions in Definition 3.
The concept of EXIT functions extends to general channels in the natural way. To simplify notation somewhat let us focus on the binary case.

Definition 2 ( for BMS Channels): Let be a binary vector

of length chosen with probability

. Assume that trans-

mission takes place over the family BMS h. Then

As the next example shows, the EXIT function does not fulfill the area theorem in the general case.

Example 3 (EXIT Function for General BMS Channels):

Fig. 2 shows the EXIT function for the

repetition code

as well as for the

single parity-check code for BEC ,

BSC( ), and BAWGNC( ). For instance, the EXIT function

for the

single parity-check code over BSC( ) is

given by

3For z 2 p

, let y be an element of ( ) (z) so that z =  (y ). Then

(1 + x ) + (1 0 x )e

(x j y ; z) =

=p

2(1 + e )

(x j z):

This is the definition of the EXIT function introduced by ten Brink [17]–[21] (see footnote 2).

4To see this, note that, using the symmetry of the channel and the equal prior

on the codewords, we can write

p

(x j y) = c(y)

p (yx~ j +1)

We get a more explicit representation if we consider transmission using binary linear codes. In this context, recall that a binary linear code is proper if it possess a generator matrix with no zero columns. As a consequence, in a proper binary linear
2More precisely, EXIT functions are usually defined as I(X j Y ()) = H(X ) 0 H(X j Y ()), which differs from our definition only in a trivial way.

where c(y) is a constant independent of x , C denotes the code, and

+1 denotes the all-plus one codeword (we adopt binary phase-shift

keying (BPSK) notation here). In the same manner, if x 2 C, then

p

(x j yx ) = c (y)

p (yx x~ j x ). Compare the

density of the log-likelihood ratio assuming that the all-one codeword was transmitted to the one assuming that the codeword x was transmitted. The claim follows by noting that for any y 2 Y , p (y j 1) = p (yx j x ), and that in this case also p (yx~ j 1) = p (yx x~ j x ).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4797

Fig. 2. The EXIT function of the [3; 1; 3] repetition code and the [6; 5; 2]
parity-check code for the BEC(h) (solid curve), BSC(h) (dashed curve) and BAWGNC(h) (dotted curve).

where

. Note that these EXIT functions are “or-

dered.” More precisely, for a repetition code we get the highest

extrinsic entropy at the output for the channel family BSC h

and we get the lowest such entropy if we use instead the family

BEC h. Indeed, one can show that these two families are

the least and most “informative” families of channels over the

whole class of BMS channels for a repetition code, [23]–[25].

The roles are exactly exchanged at a check node. Since we know

that the EXIT function for the BEC fulfills the area theorem, it

follows from this extremality properties that the EXIT functions

for the BSC and the BAWGN do not fulfill the area theorem. In-

deed, for a single parity-check code with

and the BSC

the area under the EXIT function is given by

Although the above fact might be disappointing it is not surprising. As it should be clear from the discussion at the beginning of this section, the EXIT function is related to the GAT only in the case of the erasure channel. Let us therefore go back to the GAT and define the function which fulfills the area theorem in the general case.

Gaussian channels. We can imagine that we first only change the parameter of the Gaussian channel through which bit is sent from its initial to its final value, then the parameter of the second channel, and so on. Alternatively, we can imagine that all channel parameters are changed simultaneously. In the two cases, the integrals of the individual GEXIT functions differ but their sum is the same and it equals the total change of the conditional entropy due to the change of channel parameters. Therefore, GEXIT functions can be considered to be a “local” way of measuring the change of the conditional entropy of a system. One should think of the common parameter as a convenient way of parameterizing the path through “channel space” that we are taking.
In many applications, all channels are identical, and formulas simplify significantly. In Section VII, we will see a case in which the extra degree of freedom afforded by allowing different channels is important. The additional observation is useful if we consider the design of iterative systems and component-wise GEXIT functions. For what follows though we will not need it. Hence, we will drop in the sequel.
If we assume that the input is binary, we obtain a more explicit expression for the GEXIT functions.

Lemma 2 ( for BM Channels): Let be a binary vector of

length chosen with probability

. Let the channel from

to be memoryless, where is the result of passing over

the smooth family

h,

. Assume that all in-

dividual channel families are parameterized in a smooth (differ-

entiable) way by a common parameter , i.e.,

,

. Then the th and the (average) generalized EXIT ( GEXIT)

function are given by

(7)

Definition 3 (GEXIT Function): Let be a vector of length

chosen with probability

from . Let the channel from

to be memoryless, where is the result of passing

through the smooth family

,

. Assume that

all individual channels are parameterized in a smooth (differen-

tiable) way by a common parameter , i.e.,

,

.

Let be a further observation of so that

. Then the th and the (average) generalized EXIT

( GEXIT) function are defined by

(8)

where

and are defined as in (5).

Discussion: As mentioned above, the derivative of

in (7) has to be interpreted in general as in (1). Moreover, writing

the same expression as

h

, the exis-

tence of such derivative follows from the channel smoothness

and the differentiability of (if written as a function of the

log-likelihood

).

Proof: We proceed as in the proof of Lemma 1. We claim

that

forms a Markov chain (equivalently,

Discussion: The definition is stated in quite general terms.

constitutes a sufficient statistic). To see this, fix

First note that if we consider the integral

, then from and let be an element of

, so that

.

Theorem 1 we conclude that the result is

Then, using the fact that is conditionally independent of ,

. In words, if we smoothly change the indi- given

, we may write

vidual channel parameters as a function of , then the inte-

gral of

tells us how much the conditional entropy of the

system changes due to the total change of the parameters . To

be concrete, assume, for instance, that all bits are sent through

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

Since

forms a Markov chain (as already

shown in the proof of Lemma 1), we have

Substituting in the above equation, we get

family BMS h . Assume that all individual channels are

parameterized in a smooth (differentiable) way by a common

parameter , i.e.,

,

. Let the th channel be

characterized by its -density, which by some abuse of notation

we denote by

h . Let and be as defined in (5)

and let denote the density of , assuming that the all-one

codeword was transmitted. Then

as claimed. Therefore, we can rewrite as

h

where

h

h

Expand

as

Discussion: The remarks made after Lemma 2 apply in particular to the present case: We write
h

as a proxy for

h

This form has the advantage that the dependence of

upon the channel at position is completely

explicit. Let us therefore differentiate the above expression

with respect to , the parameter which governs the transition

probability

. The terms obtained by differentiating

with respect to the channel inside the vanish. For instance,

when differentiating with respect to the

at the numer-

ator, we get

When differentiating with respect to the outer the stated result.

, we get

Although the last lemma was stated for the case of bi-

nary channels, it poses no difficulty to generalize it. It is

in fact sufficient to replace

with any sufficient

statistic of , given

. For instance, one may take

, which takes value on

the

-dimensional simplex, or any parameterization of

it. The log-likelihood can be regarded as a particular param-

eterization of the one-dimensional simplex. More generally,

is a natural quantity appearing in iterative

decoding. The proof (as well as the statement) applies verbatim

to this case.

We get an even more compact description if we assume that

transmission takes place using a binary proper linear code and

that the channel is symmetric.

The latter expression exists, since

is contin-

uously differentiable as a function of and by assumption the

channel family is smooth. Note further that

h is con-

tinuous and nonnegative so that exists as well.

Proof: Consider the expression for

as given in (7).

By assumption,

is symmetric for all

. Further,

as already remarked in the proof of Lemma 1, the “channel”

is symmetric as well. It follows from this and the

fact that

(due to the assumption that the

code is proper and that codewords are chosen with uniform

probability) that the contributions to

for

and

are identical. We can therefore assume without loss

of generality that

. Recall that the density of as-

suming that

is equal to the density of assuming

that the all-one codeword was transmitted. The latter is by def-

inition equal to . As remarked earlier, is symmetric. Fur-

ther, as discussed in the Introduction, we can assume that the th

BMS channel outputs already log-likelihood ratios. Therefore,

within the . If

h . Finally, consider the expression then the numerator and denominator

are equal and we get one. If, on the other, hand

then

we get by the previous remarks the product of the likelihoods.

Putting this all together we get

h

The thesis follows by rearranging terms.
Example 4 (Alternative Kernel Representations): Note that because of the symmetry property of -densities we can write

Lemma 3 ( for Linear Codes and BMS Channels): Let

h

be chosen uniformly at random from a proper binary linear

code of length . Let the channel from to be memo-

h

h

ryless, where is the result of passing over the smooth

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4799

This means that the kernel is uniquely specified on the absolute

value domain

, but that for each

we can split

the weight of the kernel in any desired way between and

so that

h

h

equals the desired value. In

the sequel, we will use this degree of freedom to bring some ker-

nels into a more convenient form. Although it constitutes some

abuse of notation, we will in the sequel make no notational dis-

tinction between equivalent such kernels even though pointwise

they might not represent the same function.

As we have already remarked in the discussion right after

Definition 3, the GEXIT functions allow us to “locally”

measure the change of the conditional entropy of a system.

This property is particularly apparent in the representation of

Lemma 3, where we see that the local measurement has two

components: i) the kernel which depends on the derivative of

the channel seen at the given position and ii) the distribution ,

which encapsulates all our ignorance about the code behavior

with respect to the th position. This representation is very

intuitive. If we improve the observation of a particular bit

(derivative of the channel with respect to the parameter) then

the amount by which the conditional entropy of the overall

system changes clearly depends on how well this particular bit

was already known via the code constraints and the observa-

tions of the other bits (extrinsic posterior density): if the bit

was already perfectly known then the additional observation

afforded will be useless, whereas if nothing was known about

the bit one would expect that the additional reduction in entropy

of this bit fully translates to a reduction of the entropy of the

overall system. We will see some quantitative statements of this

nature in Section IV.

In the next three examples we compute the kernels

h for the standard families BEC h, BSC h,

and BAWGN h. If we consider a single family of BMS channels parameterized by the entropy it is convenient to

“normalize” the GEXIT kernel so that it measure the “progress

per .” This means, in the following examples we compute

h

h

(9)

h

the channel entropy. This family is defined in Example

1. Recall that the noise is assumed to be Gaussian with

zero-mean and variance . A convenient parameterization

for this case is

. This means that in the following

. After some steps of calculus shown

in Appendix A and Lemma 18, we get

h

In Appendix A, we give alternative representations and/or interpretations of this kernel. In particular, we discuss the relationship to the formulation presented by Guo, Shamai, and Verdú in [7], [26] using a connection to the MSE detector as well as the formulation by Macris in [8] based on the Nishimori identity.
One convenient feature of standard EXIT functions is that they are fairly similar for a given code across the whole range of BMS channels. Is this still true for GEXIT functions? GEXIT functions depend on the channel both through the kernel as well as through the extrinsic densities. Let us therefore compare the shape of the various kernels. It is most convenient to compare the kernels not in the -domain but in the -domain [11]. A change of variables shows that in general the -domain kernel, call it , and the associated -domain kernel, denote it by
, are linked by

(10)

For example, if we apply the above transformation to the previous examples we get the following results.

Example 8 (GEXIT Kernel, -Domain – BEC h): We

get

h

.

Example 9 (GEXIT Kernel, -Domain – BSC h): Some calculus shows that

h

Example 5 (GEXIT Kernel, -Domain – BEC h): If we

take the family

h h, where

denotes both, the

channel (intrinsic) entropy and the erasure probability, then a

quick calculation shows that

h

. In words, the GEXIT kernel with respect to the family

BEC h is the regular EXIT kernel.

Example 6 (GEXIT Kernel, -Domain – BSC h): Let us

now look at the family

h h. Some calculus shows that

The limiting values are seen to be h

h

and h

h

Example 10 (GEXIT Kernel, -Domain – BAWGN h): Using Example 7 and (10), it is straightforward to write the kernel in the -domain as

h

h

As shown in Appendix A, the limiting values are the same

where converges to is equal to

. For a fixed

and

, the kernel

as

, whereas the limit when

.

as for the BSC, i.e., h

h

, and

h

h

.

In Fig. 3 we compare the EXIT kernel (which is also the

GEXIT kernel for the BEC) with the GEXIT kernels for

Example 7 (GEXIT Kernel, -Domain – BAWGN h): BSC( ) and BAWGNC( ) in the -domain for several

Consider now the family

h h, where denotes channel parameters. Note that these kernels are distinct but

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4800

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

Fig. 3. Comparison of the kernels jdj

h (s) (dashed line) with jdj

(left), h = 0:5 (middle), and h = 0:9 (right).

h (s) (dotted line) and jdj

h (s) (solid line) at channel entropy rate h = 0:1

Fig. 4. The EXIT (dashed) and GEXIT (dotted) function of the [n; 1; n] repetition code and the [n; n 0 1; 2] parity-check code assuming that transmission takes place over BSC(h) (left) or the BAWGNC(h) (right), n 2 f2; 3; 4; 5; 6g.

Fig. 5. Comparison of the GEXIT functions for the [7; 4; 3] Hamming code and its dual. Left: Comparison between GEXIT functions when transmitting over the BEC (dashed line) and over the BSC (solid line). Right: Comparison between GEXIT (solid line) and EXIT (dashed line) functions when transmission takes place over the BSC.

quite similar. In particular, for

the GEXIT kernel

with respect to BAWGNC( ) is hardly distinguishable from the

regular EXIT kernel. The GEXIT kernel for the BSC shows

more variation.

Example 11 (Repetition Code): Consider the

rep-

etition code. Let h h characterize a smooth family of BMS

channels. For

, let h denote the -fold convolution of

h. The GEXIT function for the

repetition code is then

given by

h h . Explicitly, we get

. As a further example,

is given in para-

metric form by

Example 13 (Hamming Code): Consider the

Ham-

ming code. When transmission takes place over BEC( ), it is a

tedious but conceptually simple exercise to show that the EXIT

function is

, see, e.g., [3],

[16]. In a similar way, using the derivative of the conditional en-

tropy, one can give an analytic expression for the GEXIT func-

tion assuming transmission takes place over the BSC. Both ex-

pressions are evaluated in Fig. 5 (left). A comparison between

GEXIT and EXIT functions for the Hamming code and the

BSC is shown in Fig. 5 (right).

with

Example 12 (Single Parity-Check Code): Consider the dual

code, i.e., the

parity-check code. Some calculations

show that

is given in parametric form by

Example 14 (Simplex Code): Consider now the dual of the

Hamming code, i.e., the

simplex code. For transmission

over the BEC we have

. Fig. 5 compares

the GEXIT and EXIT functions for this code when transmission

takes place over the BEC and over the BSC.

IV. BASIC PROPERTIES OF GEXIT FUNCTIONS

GEXIT functions fulfill the GAT by definition. Let us state a

few more of their properties.

We first show that the GEXIT function preserves the partial

No simple analytic expressions are known for the case of order implied by physical degradation.

transmission over the BAWGN.

Lemma 4: Let be chosen with probability

from .

Fig. 4 compares EXIT to GEXIT curves for some repetition Let the channel from to be memoryless, where is the

and some single parity-check codes.

result of passing through the smooth and degraded family

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4801

,

. If

then

forms a Markov chain

(11)

Proof: Since the derivatives in (11) are known to exist almost everywhere (a.e.), the above statement is in fact equivalent to saying that, for any

Here,

and

are the result of transmitting through

the channels with parameter and , respectively. We claim

that

In case of linear codes, and communication over a smooth and degraded family of BMS channels, Lemma 3 provides an explicit representation of the GEXIT function in terms of
-densities. In this case, Lemma 4 becomes a statement on the corresponding kernel. For completeness, let us state the corresponding condition explicitly.

Corollary 1 ( h Preserves Partial Order): Consider

a smooth and degraded family of BMS channels characterized

by the associated family of -densities

h h. Let and

denote two symmetric -densities so that

, i.e., is

physically degraded with respect to . Then

h

h

The first claim follows from the assumption that the channel family is degraded and the second claim is also part of the assumption. Finally, the third claim is true since the channel is memoryless.
The thesis is therefore a consequence of Lemma 5 stated below by making the following substitutions:

An alternative proof of this statement is provided in Ap-

pendix B.

We continue by examining some limiting cases. In the sequel,

denotes the error-probability operator. In the -domain this

is defined as

.

Lemma 6 (Bounds for GEXIT Kernel): Let

h be

the kernel associated to a smooth degraded family of BMS chan-

nels characterized by their family of -densities

h h.

Then

h

Therefore, if is a symmetric -density, we have

Lemma 5: Assume that well as

,

, as

form Markov chains. Then

(12) Proof: The statement is equivalent to

h

Proof: In Appendix B, we show that

h

is

nonincreasing and concave. The upper bound follows from

h

h

. The lower bound is

proved in a similar way by using concavity and observing that

h

. The final claim now follows from the

fact that the -domain kernel associated to is equal to

.

Let us now condition on an event

. The

proof is completed by showing that (here the conditioning upon

is left implicit for the sake of simplicity)

Lemma 7 (Further Properties of GEXIT Functions): Let be the GEXIT function associated to a proper binary linear code of minimum distance larger than , and transmission over a complete smooth family of BMS channels. Then

(13)

This inequality can be written in terms of mutual information

as

. The statement is therefore a well-

If the minimum distance of the code is larger than , then

known consequence of the data processing inequality, see [22,

p. 33], if we can show that, conditioned on

,

forms a Markov chain. In formulas, we have

h

to show that

, Further, is a nondecreasing function in .

which in turn follows if we can show that

.

Proof: Consider the first two assertions. If , then the

The last equality can be shown by first applying Bayes law, associated -density corresponds to a “delta at infinity” (this is

then expanding all terms in the order

and , further an easy consequence of the minimum distance being at least ).

canceling common terms, and finally, repeatedly using the con- On the other hand, if

then the corresponding -density

ditions that

,

, as well as is a “delta at zero.” The claim in both cases follows now by a

form Markov chains.

direct calculation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4802

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

In order to prove the last claim, we use the definition of to write

h

h

Proof: The statement that

represents

the standard GEXIT function follows by unwinding the corre-

sponding definitions. The only statement that requires a proof is

the one concerning the area under the “dual GEXIT” curve. We

proceed as follows: Consider the entropy

. We have

In order to evaluate the last derivative, we can first assume that

the th bit is transmitted through a channel BMS . Next, we

take partial derivatives with respect to of the entropies .

Finally, we set

for all bits . We get therefore (neglecting

the factor )

Consider now get

. Using the previous representation we

h

Of course can be set to right at the beginning for all the bits that are not differentiated over. This is equivalent to passing the exact bits . We get the expression

to be evaluated at distance larger than , then any codeword and This finishes the proof.

. If the code has minimum bits determine the whole
.

So far we have used the compact notation for the GEXIT function. In some circumstance it is more convenient to use a notation that makes the dependence of the functional on the involved densities more explicit.

Definition 4 (Alternative Notation for GEXIT Functional):

Consider a binary linear code and transmission over a smooth

family of BMS channels characterized by the associated family

of -densities . Let

denote the associated family of

average extrinsic MAP densities (which we assume smooth).

Define

The first expression can be identified with the standard GEXIT

curve except that it is parameterized by a generic param-

eter . The second expression is essentially the same, but

the roles of the two densities are exchanged. Integrate now

this relationship over the whole range of and assume that

this range goes from “perfect” (channel) to “useless.” The

integral on the left clearly equals . To perform the integrals

on the right, re-parameterize the first expression with respect

to

so that the integral is

equal to the area under the standard GEXIT curve given by

. In the same manner, re-parameterize the

second expression by

. There-

fore, the value of the second expression is equal to the area

under the curve given by

. Since the sum of

the two areas equals one and the area under the standard GEXIT

curve equals , it follows that the area under the second

curve equals

. Finally, note that if we consider the

inverse of the second curve by exchanging the two coordinates,

i.e., if we consider the curve

, then the area

under this curve is equal to

, as claimed.

where

Example 15 (GEXIT Versus Dual GEXIT): Fig. 6 shows the

standard GEXIT function and the dual GEXIT function for the

code and transmission over the BSC. Although the two

curves have quite distinct shapes, the area under the two curves

is the same. Lemma 8 (GEXIT and Dual GEXIT Function): Consider a

binary code and transmission over a complete and smooth

family of BMS channels characterized by the associated family

of -densities . Let

denote the corresponding family

of (average) extrinsic MAP densities. Then the standard GEXIT

curve is given in parametric form by

. The

dual GEXIT curve is defined by

. Both, stan-

dard and dual GEXIT curve have an area equal to , the rate

of the code.

V. ENSEMBLES: CONCENTRATION AND ASYMPTOTIC SETTING
For simple codes, such as, e.g., single parity-check codes or repetition codes, and are relatively easy to compute. In general though it is not a trivial matter to determine the density of
required for the calculation. What we can typically compute are the extrinsic estimates if we use the BP decoder instead of the MAP decoder. It is therefore natural to look at the equivalent of EXIT and GEXIT functions if we substitute the extrinsic

Discussion: Note that both curves are “comparable” in that MAP estimates by their equivalent extrinsic BP estimates. Al-

the first component measures the channel and the second argu- though most of the subsequent definitions and statements can be

ment measure the MAP density . The difference between the as easily derived for EXIT as for GEXIT functions, we focus

two lies in the choice of measure which is applied to each com- on the latter. After all, these are the natural objects to study as

ponent.

suggested by the GAT.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4803

Fig. 6. Standard and dual GEXIT function of [5; 4; 2] code and transmission over the BSC.

Definition 5 ( for Linear Codes and BMS Channels):

Let be chosen uniformly at random from a proper binary

linear code. Let the channel from to be memoryless,

where is the result of passing through the smooth family

BMS h ,

. Assume that all individual channels

are parameterized in a smooth way by a common parameter ,

i.e.,

,

. Let

denote the extrinsic estimate

of the th bit at the th round of BP decoding, assuming an

arbitrary but fixed representation of the code by a Tanner graph

as well as an arbitrary but fixed schedule of the decoder. Then

the BP GEXIT function is defined as

For notational simplicity, we suppress the dependence of the above quantities on the dd pair and the channel family BMS h.

In the preceding definitions we have taken the average of the individual curves over the ensemble. Let us now justify this approach by showing that the quantities are concentrated. The proof of the following statement, which asserts the concentration of the conditional entropy, can be found in [5].

Theorem 2 (Concentration of Conditional Entropy): Let

be chosen uniformly at random from LDPC

. Assume

that is used to transmit over a BMS channel. By some

abuse of notation, let G

G

conditional entropy. Then for any

be the associated

G

G

G

where check-node degree.

and is the maximal

Theorem 3 (Concentration of ): Consider the sequence

of ensembles LDPC

, where

is fixed and tends

to infinity. Then the limits

G

The following statement, which is a direct consequence of the previous definition and Lemma 4, confirms the intuitive fact that the BP GEXIT function (which is associated to the suboptimal BP decoder) is at least as large as the GEXIT function itself, assuming only that the channel family is degraded.

Corollary 2 (GEXIT Versus BP GEXIT): Let be chosen

uniformly at random from a proper binary linear code. Let

the channel from to be memoryless, where is the

result of passing through a smooth and degraded family

BMS h ,

. Assume that all individual chan-

nels are parameterized in a smooth (differentiable) way by a

common parameter , i.e.,

,

. Let

and

be as defined in Definitions 3 and 5. Then

Definition 6 (Asymptotic BP GEXIT and GEXIT Functions):

Consider a degree distribution (dd) pair

and the corre-

sponding sequence of ensembles LDPC

. Further, con-

sider a smooth and degraded family BMS h. Assume that

all bits of are sent through the channel BMS . For

LDPC

and

, let

and

denote

the th MAP and BP GEXIT function associated to code .

By some abuse of notation, define the asymptotic (and average)

quantities

G

G

and

exist. Further, let

be chosen uniformly at random from

LDPC

. Assume that

is used to transmit over a

BMS channel. Then, for all

, there exists

,

such that, for large enough

(14)

Proof: Note that for a fixed iteration number , the distri-

bution of (with a uniformly random node), assuming that

the all-one codeword was sent, converges (at a speed of ) to

the corresponding distribution of density evolution, denote it by

. The result now follows by noting that

is the result of

applying a bounded linear operator to this distribution . The

proof of concentration is almost verbatim the same as the proof

in [11], which shows the concentration of the probability of error

under BP decoding, or the proof in [5], which relates to the con-

centration of the BP EXIT function. We will therefore skip the

details.

Theorem 4 (Concentration of ): Let be chosen uniformly

at random from LDPC

and consider the smooth and de-

graded family BMS h,

. Assume that is used to

transmit over the BMS channel. Let G

G

be the associated conditional entropy,

the corre-

sponding MAP GEXIT function, and

.

Let

be an interval on which

G

exists and is differentiable with respect to . Then, for any

and

there exist an

such that, for large

enough

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

VI. AN UPPER BOUND ON THE MAP THRESHOLD
One important consequence of the area theorem is that it gives rise to an easy to compute upper bound on the threshold of MAP decoding.
Definition 7 (MAP Threshold): Consider a dd pair and a smooth and degraded family BMS h. The threshold
is defined as
G

Fig. 7. BP GEXIT (solid curves) versus BP EXIT (dashed curves) for several regular LDPC ensembles for the BSC (left) and the BAWGN (right).

Furthermore, if with respect to such that

G is twice differentiable , there exists a strictly positive constant
.

The proof of this statement can be found in [5].

Let us summarize. We have seen that all the quantities which

we introduced in Definition 6 are concentrated and that the BP

quantities

and exist. Unfortunately, we had to use

for the definition of since to prove the existence of

the limit seems to be difficult. As discussed in [5], even in the

case of transmission over the BEC the existence of the corre-

sponding limit is not known in general but can only be proved in

those cases in which the MAP EXIT function can be constructed

explicitly, through the analysis of the Maxwell decoder.

Note that

and have again a convenient representa-

tion in terms of the asymptotic BP densities. More precisely, we

have

Discussion: Let us consider the operational meaning of

the above definition. Let

. Then by definition

of the threshold, there exists a sequence of block lengths

so that the normalized (divided by the block

length ) average conditional entropy converges to zero. By

Theorem 2 it follows that most of the codes in the corre-

sponding ensembles have a normalized conditional entropy less

than any fixed constant. For sufficiently large block lengths, a

conditional entropy which grows sublinearly implies that the

receiver can limit the set of hypothesis to a subexponential list

which with high probability contains the correct codeword.

Therefore, in this sense reliable communication is possible.

On the other hand, assume that

. In this case,

the normalized conditional entropy stays bounded away from

zero by a strictly positive constant for all sufficiently large block

lengths. By Theorem 2 this is not only true for the average over

the ensemble but for most elements from the ensemble. It fol-

lows that with most elements from the ensemble reliable com-

munication is not possible.

h

h

where

is the limiting density of

(with a uniformly

random node) under the all-one codeword assumption as tends

to infinity associated to the dd pair . This density can easily

be computed by density evolution. In a similar manner, is

the corresponding fixed-point density of density evolution.

In Fig. 7, we plot the BP GEXIT function for a few

regular LDPC ensembles and we compare them with the cor-

responding BP EXIT functions, which we denote by . We

see that the curves are quite similar.

Lemma 9 (

): Consider a dd pair

and trans-

mission over the smooth and degraded family BMS h.

Let

and

denote, respectively, the corresponding

asymptotic MAP and BP GEXIT functions as defined in Defi-

nition 6 when the code is chosen uniformly at random from the

ensemble LDPC

. Then

Proof: Using Corollary 2, we know that for any

LDPC

and

G

G

Theorem 5 (Upper Bound on MAP Threshold): Consider a

dd pair

whose asymptotic rate converges to the design

rate

, see [5, Lemma 7]. Assume further that transmission

takes place over a smooth and degraded family BMS h. Let

denote the associated BP GEXIT function. Then

G h
(15) Furthermore, if denotes the largest positive number so that

h

then

, where

denotes the MAP threshold.

Proof: Let be chosen uniformly at random from the en-

semble LDPC

. By the GAT

G

G

G h

We can exchange the expectation and the integral by Fubini’s

theorem: in fact

is measurable and

.

We can furthermore exchange the limit and the integral by the

Fatou-Lebesgue lemma. We get

If we take first the expectation over the elements of the en-

G

semble, then the

on both sides with respect to , and

h

finally the limit

, we get the desired result.

Equation (15) is proved by applying Lemma 9.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4805

The upper bound on the MAP threshold follows from the ob-

servation that the right-hand side (RHS) of (15) is nondecreasing

in . Therefore,

G

is bounded

away from for any

and the thesis follows from the

definition of

.

Let x curve, call it
x

x . The extended BP (EBP) GEXIT , is then given in parametric form by , where

x

x

Example 16: The following table presents the upper bounds

on the MAP threshold for transmission over the BSC as de-

rived from Theorem 5 for a few regular ensembles:

l,

r . The same threshold were first computed

using the (nonrigorous) replica method from statistical physics

[27]. In [28], they were shown to be upper bounds for even,

using an interpolation technique. The present proof applies also

to the case of odd . It can be proved that the three character-

Finally, the BP GEXIT curve, call it , is the “envelope” of

the

curve.

Discussion: Contrary to our usual notation, we have used to

parameterize the channel families and the function

and

we have assumed that x

(rather than x ). This

has the following reason: in general, the EBP GEXIT function

is not a single-valued function of the channel entropy but it is

izations of the threshold are indeed equivalent, i.e., they give a single-valued function of the fixed-point entropy (see Fig. 1).

exactly the same value.

We prefer to use the parameter instead of the usual param-

[29], [30]

eter , to remind ourselves that the channel x is the channel

which belongs to the fixed-point density x (and not the channel

h, which by our previous notational convention has entropy ).

Complete fixed-point families do not always exist. If, for in-

stance,

, then cannot be chosen arbitrarily close to .

This is easily seen for transmission over the BEC. In this case

Also shown is the result of the information-theoretic upper

with the smallest (nonvanishing) root of the equation

bound given in [29], which in turn is an improved version

.

of the bound developed in [30]. For the specific case of From the definition it is not immediately obvious that for

transmission over the BSC and regular codes it is given by a given dd pair

and a complete and degraded family

, where is the unique positive root of the equation BMS h, such a (complete or incomplete) fixed-point

r.

family always exists, or that it is unique. For the BEC we have

VII. THE EXTENDED BP GEXIT CURVE

an explicit formula for the family, but in the general case the existence is far from trivial. We will get back to this point in

A. Extended BP GEXIT Curve

As discussed in detail in [5] for the case of transmission

over the BEC, the fundamental relationship which appears

in the limit of large block lengths between the MAP and the

BP decoder is best described in terms of the extended EXIT

curve. For the BEC this is the curve with parametric description

x x

, where takes values in the

the next section. One of the important applications of the EBP GEXIT curve
is that it encodes very clearly the connection between MAP and BP decoding. As mentioned above, the BP GEXIT function is obtained as the “envelope” of the EBP curve. More precisely, one has to choose, for each value of the channel entropy , the branch of the EBP curve whose GEXIT value is the largest. As pointed out in the Introduction when discussing

subset

such that

( is in fact Fig. 1, a different single-valued function can be obtained by ap-

the union of a finite number of intervals). Note that the families plying the Maxwell construction, described in detail in [5], to

xx

BEC x and x x

BEC

x x

x, the EBP GEXIT curve. Motivated by the GAT as well as by the

, have the following property: For each

, x BEC case, we formulate the following.

constitutes a fixed-point density (of density evolution) for the

channel x. Furthermore, both channel families are smooth and

satisfy x . Finally, if

(a necessary condition

for this to happen is

) the families are said to be

Conjecture 1: The (MAP) GEXIT function

is ob-

tained by applying the Maxwell construction to the extended

BP GEXIT curve x

.

complete.

Let us consider a few typical examples. In each of the fol-

Definition 8 (Complete Fixed-Point Family,

and ):

Consider a dd pair

. We say that the families x x and

x x,

, form a complete fixed-point family for

lowing cases, the complete fixed-point family was computed by a numerical procedure, which will be explained in the next section.

if

Example 17 (LDPC( )–BSC): Consider the dd pair

(i) there exists a complete and degraded family BMS h

and the corresponding LDPC ensemble with

such that for each

, x BMS h

design rate

. We assume that transmission takes place

(ii) for each

, x is a fixed-point density with respect over the family BSC . Recall that for this code the BP

to the dd

and the channel x; this means that for threshold is given by the stability condition. From Fig. 8 we see

each

,x x

that, according to the numerical calculation, the EBP GEXIT

(iii) x x and x x are smooth with respect to ;

curve is a monotone function. Assuming this is true, it follows

(iv) x

.

that the EBP GEXIT is equal to the BP GEXIT curve for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

Fig. 8. EBP GEXIT curve for the cycle-code ensemble with dd pair (x; x ).
The EBP GEXIT, BP GEXIT, and MAP GEXIT curves coincide.

Fig. 9. EBP GEXIT curve for the (3; 6) ensemble. Left: EBP GEXIT curve and
corresponding BP GEXIT curve. Right: The conjectured MAP GEXIT curve according to the Maxwell construction.

this example. For any value of the channel parameter, a single fixed-point density (apart from the “delta at infinity”) is found. Also: a single fixed-point density exists for each value of the density entropy . The Maxwell construction is trivial in this case and yields a MAP GEXIT equal to the BP GEXIT curve.

Example 18 ( LDPC Ensemble – BSC): Consider the dd

pair

and the corresponding LDPC ensemble

with design rate

. We assume that transmission takes

place over the family BSC . Fig. 9 shows on the left the

EBP GEXIT curve and the corresponding BP GEXIT curve,

which has one jump. The picture on the right shows the con-

jectured MAP GEXIT curve according to the Maxwell con-

struction. For this ensemble, we have

. The MAP

threshold implied by the Maxwell construction coincides with

the one of Theorem 5:

.

Fig. 10. EBP GEXIT curve for the (; ) = (2=5x + 3=5x ; x ) ensemble.
Left: EBP GEXIT curve and corresponding BP GEXIT curve. Right: The conjectured MAP GEXIT curve according to the Maxwell construction.

Example 19 (LDPC(

)—BSC): Consider

the dd pair

and the corresponding

LDPC ensemble with design rate

. We assume that

transmission takes place over the family BSC . Fig. 10

shows on the left the EBP GEXIT curve and the corresponding

BP GEXIT curve, which has one jump. The graph on the

right shows the conjectured MAP GEXIT curve according to

the Maxwell construction. The BP threshold is given by the

stability condition. As a consequence of this and Conjecture 1,

.

Example 20 (LDPC(

)—BSC): Consider the

dd pair (

). We assume that transmission takes

place over the family BSC . Fig. 11 shows on the left the

EBP GEXIT curve and the corresponding BP GEXIT curve,

which has two jumps. The graph on the right shows the conjec-

tured MAP GEXIT curve according to the Maxwell construc-

tion: This curve has also two jumps.

Fig. 11. EBP GEXIT curve for the dd pair (

; x ). Left: EBP

GEXIT curve and corresponding BP GEXIT curve. Right: The conjectured

MAP GEXIT curve according to the Maxwell construction.

Example 21 (

—BSC): Consider the dd pair

and the corresponding LDPC ensemble. . We

assume that transmission takes place over the family BSC .

Fig. 12 shows on the left the EBP GEXIT curve and the corre-

sponding BP GEXIT curve, which has two jumps. The graph on the right shows the conjectured MAP GEXIT curve according to the Maxwell construction. This example shows that a dd pair can have more BP jumps than MAP jumps.

Fig. 12. EBP GEXIT curve for the dd pair (

; x ). Left: EBP

GEXIT curve and corresponding BP GEXIT curve. Right: The conjectured

MAP GEXIT curve according to the Maxwell construction.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4807

VIII. HOW TO COMPUTE EBP GEXIT CURVES:

evolution for the channel BMS with

, and cor-

BASIC PROPERTIES AND AREA THEOREM

responds to a point on the EBP GEXIT curve. Furthermore,

if a sequence of densities such that

x converges

In the preceding sections, we presented examples of (weakly) to a density , then is a fixed point of x, with en-

EBP GEXIT curves for several LDPC ensembles. In this tropy .

section, we explain how these curves have been computed and This motivates the following numerical procedure which has

we derive some of their basic properties, including the EBP been used to determine the GEXIT curves plotted in the pre-

Area Theorem.

vious section. (i) Set the initial condition

BMS . (ii)

We start by noticing that ordinary density evolution cannot For

, compute

x . In practice, the con-

be applied to the present case because of two reasons. First, volutions are evaluated numerically either by sampling or via

EBP curves include “unstable branches.” We refer by such a Fourier transforms as in ordinary density evolution. Due to the

term to branches along which the GEXIT curve is a decreasing monotonicity of h in , the value of

can be

function of the channel entropy. Such branches are expected to efficiently found by bisection. (iii) The current estimate of the

correspond to fixed-point densities which are locally unstable GEXIT function is given by

. Here

is

under density evolution (whence the name). This expectation the current estimate of the channel entropy, and

can be confirmed analytically for the BEC case, and numerically

for a general BMS channel. As a consequence, these fixed points cannot be approximated by iterating density evolution with a

h

(18)

generic initial condition. The second problem is related to values of the channel pa-
rameter for which multiple locally stable fixed-point densities coexist. This is the case for instance in the Examples 19 to 21 above. In this case, different initial conditions are required to achieve each of these densities by density evolution. A systematic way for constructing all such initial conditions is however not available.
The crucial observation for overcoming both these problems consists in noticing that EBP GEXIT curves are naturally parameterized by the entropy of the fixed point density. More precisely, consider a smooth and degraded family BMS and
. Then, we expect that there exists at most one value

with

. (iv) Halt when some convergence criterion

is met and return the current estimate

. In practice ,

one can require that (a properly defined) distance between

and becomes smaller than a threshold.

In all the examples discussed in the previous section, we

found that this procedure converges rapidly, and that the limit

point is (within numerical precision) independent of the initial

condition . Proving these statements seems a challenging

task (notice that unlike in ordinary density evolution, the se-

quence is in general not ordered by physical degradation).

However, it is easy to show that, if is such that x is “well

defined,” then this procedure has at least one fixed point.

of the channel parameter

and one density x, such that

x

and x BMS

x forms a fixed-point pair.

This naturally suggests to run density evolution at fixed den-

sity entropy. Let us denote by h the ordinary density evolution

operator at fixed channel BMS . Formally

Theorem 6: Let

be a dd pair,

, and x the

corresponding density evolution operator at fixed density en-

tropy defined as above, for the smooth, complete, and degraded

family BMS h. If

for any density with

, then there exists at least one density such that

x

. Equivalently,

and there exists

h

(16) such that is a fixed point of density evolution for the channel

BMS .

where is the density associated to the channel BMS . For

Proof: Consider the space x of -densities such that

any

, we define the density evolution operator at fixed

. Any element in x is a probability measure on

entropy , x as

the completed real line, satisfying the symmetry condition (for-

mally

). On the other hand, any such proba-

x

hx

(17) bility measure (to be denoted formally by its “density” ) with ) corresponds to a unique element of x.

where

is the solution of h

. Whenever no Notice that the completed linear line is a compact metric

such value of exists, x is left undefined. Since, for a space (we can for instance identify it with

through the

given , the family h is ordered by physical degradation, mapping

and use the Euclidean metric on

h is a nondecreasing function of . As a consequence,

). Therefore, the space of probability measure on

the equation h

cannot have more than a single so- is subsequentially compact under the weak topology by Pro-

lution. Furthermore, by the smoothness of the channel family horov’s theorem [31]. Both the symmetry condition and

BMS , h is continuous. Notice that

: are closed under the same topology, and therefore x is com-

if the channel is noiseless, the output density at a variable nodes pact as well.

is noiseless as well. Therefore, a necessary and sufficient condi- Let be the space of bounded Lipshitz function on (as

tion for a solution

to exist (when the family BMS h above, we identify with

and consider the Lipschitz

is complete) is that

.

condition with respect to the induced distance) with the corre-

Any fixed point of the above transformation x, i.e., any sponding norm . The space of probability measures on

such that

x , is also a fixed point of ordinary density can be viewed as a convex subset of the dual space , and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

topology induced by the dual norm

coincides with the

weak topology (cf. [31, Ch. III, § 7]). As a consequence, x is a

compact convex subspace of a normed linear space.

By hypothesis, the mapping

x is well defined

for any

x, and maps x into itself. Furthermore, it

is easily seen to be continuous with respect to the weak

topology. This is a consequence of the Lipschitz conti-

nuity of the functions

l

l and

r

r

.

Therefore, x is compact and, by Schauder’s fixed point the-

orem (cf. [32, Ch. 4 ]) it has at least one fixed point.

Proof: Apply the upper bounds of [23]–[25], [33] (simply interchange BEC and BSC).
Theorem 7 (Bounds on EXIT Function): Consider a dd pair and transmission over the degraded family BMS h.
Define the functions

and

(with the convention

, if the set is empty). Let denote any fixed point

of density evolution, i.e.,

h . If

then

Notice that the above procedure, as well as Theorem 6, holds unchanged if the entropy functional is substituted by any continuous linear functional which preserves physical degradation.
In checking the hypothesis of Theorem 6, as well as in applications, it is important to prove bounds on the entropy of fixed-point pairs . We start by recalling upper and lower bounds on the entropy of h which follows straightforwardly from [23]–[25], [33].

Lemma 10 (Lower Bound): Consider a dd pair

and

transmission over the channel BMS . Let

where

. If is an -density with

, then

h

Proof: Following [23]–[25], [33], for fixed

and

,

has minimum entropy if and are the densities

corresponding to a BEC. On the other hand, for the convolution

at a parity-check node the minimum is achieved when the input

densities correspond to a BSC. The lemma follows by applying

these bounds to random variable and check nodes with degree

distributions given by and .

This result can be used to check the hypotheses of Theorem 6.

We deduce that, if

for some

, then there

exists a fixed point pair with

and BMS

for some . For instance, for cycle codes (i.e., for

) this

implies that such a fixed point pair exists for any

.

Lemma 11 (Upper Bound): Consider a dd pair

and

transmission over the channel BMS . Let

where

In words, the entropy parameters of any fixed points of den-

sity evolution, and so in particular the function , are con-

tained in the union of rectangles as given above.

Proof: The first two inequality follow from Lemmas 10

and 11. From Lemma 10 we get

h

which gives the upper bound on . Analogously,

Lemma 11 implies

. Since

is mono-

tonically increasing in , this relation can be inverted as in the

thesis of the theorem.

Given the fixed point , the corresponding EXIT entropy at

variable nodes is

. The bounds are obtained

as in the proofs of Lemmas 10 and 11.

Discussion: The bounds given above are by no means best possible. First, the given bounds are “universal” in the sense that the are valid for all channel distributions. Better bounds for any specific channel family can be derived by taking the actual input distribution into account. Even in the universal case slightly better bounds can be given by taking into account that at the variable node before convolution with the channel, the incoming message density cannot be of arbitrary shape but that it is already the convolution of several message densities. Second, tighter bounds on the extremes of information combining have been derived in [34] and can be translated to giver tighter bounds on EXIT functions, albeit at the prize of more complex expressions. Finally, by using a similar techniques one can also give bounds on the entropy versus GEXIT parameter of any fixed point with respect to any smooth channel family.

Example 22 (LDPC(

)): Consider again the

dd pair

. Fig. 13 shows on the

left the construction of the bounded region (union of rectan-

gles) which contains all EBP GEXIT curves. The dashed lines

represent the individual curves traced out by the corner points

of the rectangles. On the right, this is compared to the actual

EBP GEXIT curves for transmission over the BSC and the BEC

families (solid lines).

, above. If is an -density with

, and , then

Theorem 8 (EPP Area Theorem): Consider the dd pair

and transmission over the smooth and degraded family

BMS . Let

denote the corresponding EBP GEXIT

function. Assume that the corresponding x x and x x,

as

, form a complete fixed-point family. Then

h Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4809

each edge emanating from this root node is connected to a check node whose degree is chosen according to the edge dd . As before, leaf nodes experience the channel characterized by , whereas the root node experiences the channel characterized by
. We apply the GAT to each such choice and average with the respective probabilities.

Fig. 13. Left: Construction of bounding region for all EBP EXIT curves for
the dd pair (; ) = (2=5x + 3=5x ; x ). Right: The EBP EXIT curves for
transmission over the BSC and the BEC families.
Fig. 14. Computation tree of depth one for the (2; 4)-regular LDPC ensemble.

This result imposes some strong constraint on BP GEXIT functions and their relation to MAP GEXIT functions. Here is an example.

Corollary 3: Consider communication over the smooth

and degraded family BMS h,

using uniformly

random codes from the ensemble LDPC

and assume

that the rate of this ensemble converges to the design rate,

see [5, Lemma 7]. Assume that the BP fixed-point family

BMS h , is smooth and complete. Then (MAP) GEXIT

function and BP GEXIT function coincide:

for

almost every

.

Proof: By hypothesis, we can apply Theorem 8 to the

BP GEXIT function. We get

Proof: First, let us assume that the ensemble is -reg-

ular. Consider a variable node and the corresponding compu-

tation tree of depth one as shown in Fig. 14. Let us assume

that the bit associated to the root node is passed through the

channel characterized by x, while the ones associated to the leaf

nodes are passed through a channel characterized by x. Apply

the GAT: let

l r be the transmitted

codeword chosen uniformly at random from the tree code and

be the result of passing the bits of through their re-

spective channels with parameter . Note that

. This follows since by as-

sumption the fixed-point family is complete. In particular, this

implies that the channel for

is the “noiseless” channel so

that

. By the GAT, this difference is equal

to the sum of the integrals of the individual curves, where the

integral extends from

to

. There are two types of in-

dividual curves, namely, the one associated to the root node,

call it , and the

ones associated to the leaf nodes, call

them . To summarize, the GAT states

Note that

since

the computation tree contains

variable nodes and

check nodes. Moreover,

. This follows by applying the GAT once again to a

single parity-check code. Collecting these observa-

tions and solving for

, we get

Further, by the GAT (and applying Fubini theorem and Fatou’s lemma as in the proof of Theorem 5)

The proof if completed by noticing that, because of Lemma 9,

for every

.

Proving that the hypotheses of this corollary hold for some dd

pair

is a challenging task (see also next section). On the

other hand, numerical computations show very clearly that this

is the case, for instance, for cycle ensembles, cf. Example 17.

IX. REGULARITY OF EXTENDED BP GEXIT CURVES

Theorem 6 ensures (for many LDPC ensembles) the existence

of a fixed-point pair x x for each value of

x . How-

ever, for applying the extended Area Theorem 8, the resulting

family has to be smooth with respect to the parameter . That

this is indeed the case is strongly suggested by the numerical

computation of the EBP curve, cf. Section VII. We provide here

some partial analytic results in this direction.

Throughout this section, we denote by

the Bhat-

tacharyya parameter for the -density . Furthermore, when

assuming communication through the channel BMS , we

denote by h the Bhattacharyya parameter of the channel.

Lemma 12: Assume communication over the degraded

family BMS h channel using the dd pair

. Then, for

any , there exists at most a unique fixed-point density h such

that

as claimed since

.

h

h

(19)

The irregular case follows in the same manner: we consider Furthermore, if such a density h exists, it coincides with the BP

the ensemble of computation trees of depth one where the de- fixed point. Finally, h is Lipschitz continuous with respect

gree of the root note is chosen according to the node dd and to h. More precisely, if the two fixed points h , h satisfy the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4810

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

condition h then there exists

h

for some

, a fixed-point density with Bhattacharyya parameter

,

, such that

then

h

h

h

h

Proof: Consider two channel parameters

and two

-densities and satisfying the condition h

h

for some . Assume that is physically

degraded with respect to . We prove in Appendix C that there

exists a constant

on , the channel family

and the dd, such that

h

h

h

h (20)

h

r

r

r

Proof: First notice that

h

where

rr

r , and denotes the convolution at check

nodes. It is convenient to write densities in terms of the variable

. With a slight abuse of notation, we

use the same symbol to denote the density with respect to .

We get

Let us show that this result implies the thesis. Denote by h the

BP fixed point for the channel BMS and notice that any other

fixed point h for the same channel is necessarily physically up-

graded with respect to h. Using the standard notation h h.

In fact,

h. By applying the density evolution operator,

we deduce that h

h, where

is the density after

iterations of BP. By taking the limit

we get h h.

Next notice that, if h satisfies (19) there cannot be a distinct

fixed point, physically upgraded with respect to h, also satis-

fying (19). If such a density h existed, we could apply (20) to get

hh

hh

h

h

with

. But, since h h h and h h h, this would

imply h

h which is impossible because h h.

Let us finally prove Lipschitz continuity, cf. (20). Under our

hypotheses, the two fixed points h, h are the BP fixed points for channels BMS and BMS . Consider therefore the BP

sequences h

,h

. For each , h (respec-

tively, h ) is physically degraded with respect to h (respec-

tively, h ), and therefore satisfies the condition (19), since the

latter does. Furthermore, assuming without loss of generality

, we have h

h . Let

h

Clearly

. By applying (20), we get

h , and therefore

h.
h

h

h

h

h

The thesis follows by taking the

limit.

It is worth mentioning that the Lipschitz condition (20) implies analogous regularity properties for other functionals of the density h. For instance, it is easy to show that

h

h

h

h

for some universal constant . Also, the Bhattacharyya parameter is, for most channel families, a smooth function of the channel parameter. Regularity with respect to h translates therefore immediately into regularity with respect to .
In applying the above result, it is helpful to have bounds on the Bhattacharyya parameter of the fixed point densities.

The proof is completed by using convexity with respect to the

together with the fact that

.

Example 23: Consider the

ensemble and communica-

tion over the BSC . In this case (19) is equivalent to

(21)

where denotes the channel Bhattacharyya parameter as a

function of the flip probability

. Lemma 13

implies (if we neglect the case

which corresponds

to a no-error fixed point)

. This lower

bound lies in the region described by (21) as soon as

, i.e.,

with

which yields

. The above results imply that

a unique fixed-point density (apart from the no-error one) ex-

ists for any

. On the other hand, numerical computations

suggest this to be the case for all values above the local sta-

bility threshold

. Fig. 15

shows the Bhattacharyya constant of the fixed-point density as

a function of the channel parameter of the BSC (solid line),

the bound stated in (21) (dotted line), as well as the bound

(dashed line).

As stressed in the preceding section, EBP curves are expected

to be single-valued smooth functions of the entropy

of

the fixed-point density. The same expectation holds if entropy

is replaced by any linear functional which preserves physical

degradation. The following result confirms that better regularity

properties can indeed be obtained by taking this point of view.

Lemma 14: Let BMS h be a degraded family. Assume and to be fixed-point densities for the channel parameters , , and that is physically degraded with respect to . If
, then there exists a constant such that

h

h

Lemma 13: Assume communication over the channel In words, the channel is a Lipschitz continuous function of the

BMS using random codes from the

ensemble. If is Bhattacharyya parameter of the fixed-point density.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4811

Fig. 15. The solid line shows the Bhattacharyya constant of the fixed-point

density as a function of the channel parameter of the BSC. The dotted line cor-

 0 B  responds to the bound stated in (21), whereas the dashed curve corresponds to

the bound ( )

2 () .

Proof: Proceeding as in the proof of (20), cf. Appendix C,

it is easy to show that if

, then

Let us stress that

implies a rather strict notion of cor-

rectness. We are not just requiring the hard decision reached by

BP to be (approximately) the same that would be provided by a

MAP decoder. Rather, BP should be able to reconstruct the full

information about , given the received message.

Our main result is presented below (here we refer to the

Tanner graph associated to the code parity-check matrix, which

is naturally related to BP).

Theorem 9: Consider communication using a linear code over a smooth channel BMS , and let be the channel output if the input is uniformly random codeword . Let denote the GEXIT kernel in the -domain and

Furthermore, if

, then

for some

.

Consider now the difference

h

h

.

Since are density evolution fixed points, this is equal to

. We get therefore

Assume that, for a uniformly random variable node in the Tanner graph, the shortest loop through has length larger than
with probability at least . Then

h

h

h

h

h

h h

Let us stress that this result holds, not just for random elements

of an LDPC

ensemble, but for any code with the pre-

scribed sparseness properties.

The proof makes use of a technical lemma, which we state below, and prove in Appendix D.

which implies the thesis after solving for h h .

Lemma 15: Consider a random variable taking values in

and assume that

forms a Markov chain.

X. MAP VERSUS BP MARGINALS

Let

be twice differentiable with

, and

As we saw in Sections VII and VIII, the MAP and BP GEXIT curves are strictly related for LDPC codes in the large block-

for any and

. If we denote , then

length limit. We conjectured that they can be connected through

the Maxwell construction. In particular, this would imply that

they are asymptotically equal above the MAP threshold for a

large family of ensembles, cf. for instance Example 18.

Proof of Theorem 9: The MAP GEXIT function can be

Does the coincidence of GEXIT curves mean that BP and written as

MAP decoding in fact coincide bit by bit? More precisely, BP

can be regarded as a low-complexity (approximate) algorithm

for computing the marginal distributions

. It is

well established [14], that the BP estimate is asymptotically cor-

rect in the low-noise regime

BP. We wonder whether the

same is true whenever the two GEXIT functions coincide.

Perhaps surprising, the answer is positive. In order to proceed,

An analogous expression holds for the BP GEXIT function if

we replace

with

. We claim that, if the shortest

loop through in the Tanner graph is longer than , then

it is convenient to introduce some notations. For the sake of

simplicity we consider the case of a binary channel. Rather than

the marginal distributions

, it is convenient to focus

(22)

on the extrinsic soft bits

The thesis follows by rearranging the terms, using the trivial

We will further denote by

the estimate of this

quantity provided by BP after iterations. Notice that

, and

.

A meaningful measure of how much “incorrect” is BP, is the

MSE

bound

whenever the shortest loop

through is not longer than and summing over .

In order to prove the above claim, let denote the subset

of received signals within a distance from the variable node

on the Tanner graph. Notice that

is a Markov

chain, and that

,

. We

can therefore apply Lemma 15, with

. This yields

(22), and thus concludes the proof.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4812

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

One may wonder whether the distortion measure

is

XI. WHY WE CANNOT SURPASS CAPACITY:

appropriate. One could, for instance, consider the actual soft

THE MATCHING CONDITION

bits, rather than the extrinsic ones. If we let

The upper bound on the MAP threshold, cf. Theorem 5 ,

, and denote as

the corresponding BP estimate, we cannot be larger than the Shannon threshold

. This fol-

may define

lows by noticing that the GEXIT kernel is not larger than ,

and implies that iterative coding systems do not allow to com-

municate reliably above capacity. Of course, this result is also a

straightforward consequence of Shannon’s channel coding the-

Recall that hard decoding decisions are taken in terms of ,

rather than

. We are therefore interested in knowing

whether

can be much larger than

. The answer

is generically negative, as shown by the following lemma.

orem. In this section, we shall provide yet another proof of this basic fact. The interest of the new proof is threefold: (i) it does not assume communication over a smooth channel family; (ii) it uses only quantities appearing in density evolution (and not just fixed points); (iii) component codes (and their “matching”)

Lemma 16: Assume communication over a BMS channel play a crucial role.

with -density . Then

For general BMS channels, and motivated by the geometric

statement observed for the BEC and the relationship between

the derivative of the mutual information and the MSE intro-

where

.

duced by [7], [26], a similar chart, called an MSE chart was constructed by Bhattad and Narayanan [35]. Assuming that the

The proof is deferred to Appendix D. Theorem 9 obviously implies that BP is “asymptotically correct” every time the BP and MAP GEXIT functions asymptotically coincide. We conjectured in Section VII that the MAP GEXIT function can be obtained from the EBP one through the Maxwell construction. This construction allows therefore to determine in which domain of BP and MAP GEXIT functions do coincide. It is worth stating the final result explicitly for a few simple cases.

Corollary 4: Consider communication over degraded,

smooth, and complete family BMS h, using uniformly

random codes from the ensemble LDPC

and assume

that the rate of this ensemble converges to the design rate. As-

input densities to the component codes are Gaussian, this chart

again fulfills the Area Theorem. In order to apply the MSE chart

in the context of iterative coding, the authors proposed to ap-

proximate the intermediate densities which appear in density

evolution by “equivalent” Gaussian densities. This was an im-

portant first step in generalizing the matching condition to the

whole class of BMS channels. In the following, we show how

to overcome the need for making the Gaussian approximation

by using GEXIT functions.

To start, let us review the case of transmission over the

BEC using a dd pair

. In this case, density evolution

is equivalent to the EXIT chart approach and the condition for

successful decoding under BP reads

sume that the BP fixed-point family BMS and complete. Then, for almost every

h , is smooth

h

This is shown in Fig. 16 for the dd pair

. The area under the curve

equals

and the area to the left of the curve

The proof follows easily from Corollary 3. A somewhat more general statement is the following.

h is equal to . By the previous remarks, a necessary condition for successful BP decoding is that these two areas do
not overlap. Since the total area equals we get the necessary

Corollary 5: Consider communication over degraded, condition

. Rearranging terms, this is

smooth, and complete family BMS h, using uniformly equivalent to the condition

random codes from the ensemble LDPC

and assume

that the rate of this ensemble converges to the design rate. As-

sume that the upper bound on the MAP threshold in Theorem 5

is tight:

. Then, for almost any

In words, the design rate

of any LDPC ensemble which,

for increasing block lengths, allows successful decoding over

the BEC , cannot surpass the Shannon limit . An argu-

ment very similar to the above was introduced by Shokrollahi

Proof: Proceeding as in the proof of Theorem 5, one obtain and Oswald [36], [37] (albeit not using the language and geo-

that

metric interpretation of EXIT functions and applying a slightly

different range of integration). It was the first bound on the per-

h

h

formance of iterative systems in which the Shannon capacity appeared explicitly using only quantities of density evolution. A

Since

for all , we have necessarily

substantially more general version of this bound can be found

for almost any

. The thesis follows by applying in [16], [38], [39]. The extension to parallel turbo schemes is

Theorem 9.

addressed in [40], [41]. See also [42].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4813

same statement is true for . If

, i.e., if BP

decoding is successful in the limit of large block lengths, then

the families are both complete.

Fig. 16. The EXIT chart method for the dd ((x) = x ; (x) = x ) and transmission over the BEC(h = 0:58).

Although the final result (namely, that transmission above capacity is not possible) is trivial, the method of proof is well worth the effort since it shows how capacity enters in the calculation of the performance of iterative coding systems. By turning this bound around, we can find conditions under which iterative systems achieve capacity: In particular, it shows that the two component-wise EXIT curves have to be matched perfectly. Indeed, all currently known capacity achieving degree distributions for the BEC can be derived by starting with this perfect matching condition and working backwards. Let us now show that, by using component-wise GEXIT functions, the perfect matching condition holds in the general case. This might in the future serve as a starting point to find capacity-achieving degree distributions for general BMS channels. We need one preliminary definition.

Definition 9 (Interpolating Channel Families): Consider a dd

pair

and transmission over the BMS channel character-

ized by its -density . Let

and

and set ,

, to

. The interpolating

density evolution families

and

are then de-

fined as follows:

where denotes the standard convolution of densities and denotes the density at the output of a check node, assuming that the input densities are and , respectively.

Discussion: First note that ( ),

, represents the se-

quence of -densities of density evolution emitted by the vari-

able (check) nodes in the th iteration. By starting density evo-

lution not only with

but with all possible convex combi-

nations of and , this discrete sequence of densities is com-

pleted to form a continuous family of densities ordered by phys-

ical degradation. The fact that the densities are ordered by phys-

ical degradation can be seen as follows: note that the computa-

tion tree for can be constructed by taking the standard com-

putation tree of and independently erasing the observation

associated to each variable leaf node with probability

.

It follows that we can convert the computation tree of to that

of by erasing all observations at the leaf nodes and by in-

dependently erasing each observation in the second (from the

bottom) row of variable nodes with probability

. The

Example 24 (Density Evolution and Interpolation): Consider

transmission over the BSC

using a -regular

ensemble. Fig. 17 depicts the density evolution process for

this case. This process gives rise to the sequences of densities

and

. Fig. 18 shows the interpolation of these

sequences for the choices

and and the

complete such family.

Lemma 17: Consider a dd pair

and transmission over

an BMS channel characterized by its -density so that density

evolution converges to . Let

and

denote

the interpolated families as defined in Definition 9.

Then the two GEXIT curves parameterized by

GEXIT of check nodes

inverse of dual GEXIT of variable nodes

do not cross and faithfully represent density evolution. Further,

the area under the “check-node” GEXIT function is equal to

and the area to the left of the “inverse dual variable node”

GEXIT function is equal to

. It follows that

, i.e., the design rate can not exceed the Shannon limit.

Proof: First note that

is the stan-

dard GEXIT curve representing the action of the check nodes:

corresponds to the density of the messages entering the check

nodes and

represents the density of the corresponding

output messages. On the other hand,

is the

inverse of the dual GEXIT curve corresponding to the action at

the variable nodes: now the input density to the check nodes is

and denotes the corresponding output density.

The fact that the two curves do not cross can be seen as fol-

lows. Fix an entropy value. This entropy value corresponds to a

density for a unique value of . The fact that

now follows from the fact that

and

that for any symmetric this relationship stays preserved by

applying the GEXIT functional according to Corollary 1.

The statements regarding the areas of the two curves follow

in a straightforward manner from the GAT and Lemma 8. The

bound on the achievable rate follows in the same manner as for

the BEC: the total area of the GEXIT box equals one and the

two curves do not overlap and have areas

and . It

follows that

, which is equivalent to the

claim

.

We see that the matching condition still holds for general channels. There are a few important differences between the general case and the simple case of transmission over the BEC. For the BEC, the intermediate densities are always the BEC densities independent of the degree distribution. This of course enormously simplifies the task. Further, for the BEC, given the two EXIT curves, the progress of density evolution is simply given by a staircase function bounded by the two EXIT curves. For the general case, this staircase function still has vertical pieces but the “horizontal” pieces have in general a nonvanishing slope. This is true since the -axis for the “check node”

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4814

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

Fig. 17. Density evolution for (3; 6)-regular ensemble over BSC(0:07).

Fig. 18. Interpolation of densities.

step measures

, but in the subsequent “inverse stays as before, i.e., it really corresponds to drawing a vertical

variable node” step it measures

. Therefore, one line. All this is certainly best clarified by a simple example.

should think of two sets of labels on the -axis, one measuring

, and the second one measuring

.

The “horizontal” step then consists of first switching from the

first -axis to the second, so that the labels correspond to the

same density and then drawing a horizontal line until it crosses

the “inverse variable node” GEXIT curve. The “vertical” step

Example 25 ( Ensemble and Transmission Over BSC): Consider the -regular ensemble and transmission over the BSC . The corresponding illustrations are shown in Fig. 19. The top-left figure shows the standard GEXIT curve for the check-node side. The top-right figure shows the dual GEXIT curve corresponding to the variable node side. In order to use

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4815

Fig. 19. Faithful representation of density evolution by two nonoverlapping component-wise GEXIT functions which represent the “actions” of the check nodes and variable nodes, respectively. The area between the two curves is proportional to the additive gap to capacity.
these two curves in the same figure, it is convenient to consider the inverse function for the variable-node side. This is shown in the bottom-left figure. In the bottom-right figure, both curves are shown together with the “staircase” like function which represents density evolution. As we see, the two curves to not overlap and have both the correct areas.
As remarked earlier, one potential use of the matching condition is to find capacity approaching dd pairs. Let us quickly outline further such potential application. Assuming that we have found a sequence of capacity-achieving degree distributions, how does the number of required iterations scale as we approach capacity. It has been conjectured that the number of required iterations scales like , where is the gap to capacity. This conjecture is based on the geometric picture which the matching condition implies. To make things simple, imagine the two GEXIT curves as two parallel lines, lets say both at a 45 angle, a certain distance apart, and think of density evolution as a staircase function. From the previous results, the area between the lines is proportional to . Therefore, if we halve , the distance between the lines has to be halved and one would expect that we need twice as many steps. Obviously, the above discussion was based on a number of simplifying assumptions. It remains to be seen if this conjecture can be proved rigorously.

We also presented several applications of this new tool. Most notably: (i) It allows one to prove an upper bound on the MAP threshold which is conjectured to coincide with the actual threshold for several classes of ensembles (e.g., regular ones). (ii) Via extended BP GEXIT curves, it provides some constraints on the relation between BP and MAP decoding. These constraints lead naturally to the Maxwell construction which provides the precise connection between the two. In particular, we found that the BP soft bit estimates are asymptotically exact for a noise range above threshold. (iii) It implies a matching constraint on component codes of capacity-achieving systems.
These results open many research directions. It may be worth to list a few of them.
Prove existence, uniqueness, and regularity properties of asymptotic MAP and extended BP GEXIT curves. In particular, we expect that the last one is a smooth single-valued function of the entropy of the fixed-point density. The iterative procedure which we presented in Section VIII only proves that for each message entropy there is at least one fixed point of density evolution. But, empirically, when running this algorithm, we found that indeed there seems to be a unique such fixed point and that all these fixed points seem to form a smooth manifold. Further, we proved several partial results in this direction (for instance, existence for EBP curves, uniqueness for MAP curves, etc.). However, the general question remains open.
Prove that the Maxwell construction indeed provides the correct connection between MAP and BP GEXIT curves. As particular case (which may well be simpler than the general statement), prove the upper bound (5) is indeed tight for some selected ensembles, e.g., for regular ones.
Use the interpolation construction of Section XI to prove a lower bound on the number of message passing iterations as a function of the gap to capacity.

APPENDIX A GEXIT KERNEL OVER GAUSSIAN CHANNELS
This appendix contains a few useful results concerning the GEXIT kernel for Gaussian channels.

Lemma 18 (GEXIT Kernel, -Domain – BAWGN ):

Consider the family

h of BAWGN channels, where

denotes the channel entropy. The channel model is therefore

, where takes values

and is Gaussian with zero mean and variance . Then the

following represent equivalent kernels:

XII. CONCLUSION

h

(i)

Since the introduction of EXIT functions for the analysis it-

erative coding systems [17]–[21], researchers have tried to sub-

h

(ii)

stantiate theoretically the empirical area rules that these seemed

to satisfy. In this paper, we showed how to prove these rules in a

h

(iii)

very general setting. The price to pay was to replace EXIT func-

tions by GEXIT functions. Fortunately, GEXIT functions are Hereby, denotes a further observation of which is con-

as simple to compute as ordinary EXIT functions and share in ditionally independent of , which is the result of passing

general many of their properties.

through a symmetric channel, and which is assumed to be in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4816

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

log-likelihood form (if we use coding, represents the extrinsic (ii) First, we claim that the previous expression can be written

estimate of in the -domain).

as

Discussion: This lemma provides several equivalent rep-

resentations of the kernel for the BAWGN channel. The expres-

sion (ii) shows the relationship between conditional entropy and

the MSE estimator. To see this, observe first that the denomi-

nator is a ( -independent) scaling factor depending on our pa-

rameterization of the channel through its entropy . Second, ob-

serve that the numerator

is the MSE estimator (which in this

framework includes the decoding estimate ). This elegant re-

lationship which connects a fundamental information-theoretic

quantity (the conditional entropy, or, equivalently, the mutual

information) to a measure widely used in signal processing was

first observed by Guo, Shamai, and Verdú in [7], [26]. In the

above lemma, the channel inputs are binary. In Lemma 20 , we

give an alternative way of deriving

h in the more

general context of nonbinary channel inputs.

The form (iii) provides a further simplification. This expres-

sion, in which the numerator shows the magnetization was first

stated in [8] using the Nishimori identity (in the context of

coding, this identity was first discussed in [28]).

Before proving Lemma 18, let us recall the following well-

known fact which will be used several times in the following:

Consider a BMS channel

and , a measurable

function. If is even, then

Proof: Under the all-one assumption, the channel density is

h

h
To see this, observe that

where comes from the definition of and from the independence of and when
where is the Bayes rule using Therefore

in Lemma 18, is given, and
.

This quantity (which is often called “soft bit” as in [43]) is a bit estimate in the -domain and the relationship
is in fact well known. Therefore, since

(i) The kernel, as stated in Lemma 3, is expressed in terms of h
the derivative of with respect to the channel parameter. To get a more pleasing analytic expression, we use the fact that for the Gaussian case we can express this derivative via the identity

Now, use the parameterization integration by parts (as in [8]), we get
h

. Then using twice

and the claim follows since, as discussed above, we can drop in

the last expression the conditioning on

.

Second, as discussed in Example 4, the kernel is in general not

unique in the -domain and we can use this degree of freedom

to get alternative kernels. Denote

and observe that

h

with this

notation. Then, for any symmetric density , the function

h

is also a valid kernel for the -domain

since

Therefore, an alternative kernel is

h

The computation of h is exactly the same if we set Therefore
h

.

(iii) For any symmetric random variable , a straightfor-

ward exercise shows that

;

see, e.g, [8], [28]. Applied to the symmetric random variable

under the all-one assumption, this

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4817

gives us

. Therefore, the denominator can be easily written

as

. We can not use directly this

argument for the term

at

the numerator (the random variable

being not sym-

metric). However, we can look for an equivalent kernel. This

is easily done by observing that the values are provided by

the symmetric random variable . The sum of two symmetric

random variables is again symmetric, therefore

is symmetric; see, e.g., [11]. We can then use the fact that

with

to write

. Therefore

h

is an equivalent kernel (but pointwise different from

h and

h ). The last equality comes

from the fact that

Using (10), we finally get

(ii) The case

corresponds to the full knowledge of the

channel input. The kernel in the -domain converges point-

wise to . As used for density evolution, see [11], in this case

becomes a Dirac at and a similar argument as for (i) can

be applied.

For

, the kernels in the -domain are ordered

because of Lemma 1.

As discussed before Lemma 18, the pleasing relationship presented in [7], [45], or [8] emerges for the BAWGNC. So far we have restricted ourselves to the case of binary inputs. But the nonbinary case as discussed in [7], [9], [45] is not much harder. This is presented in Lemma 20 using our framework.

Lemma 20 (AWGN( )): Consider a length- code,

call it . Assume transmission takes place over a family

AWGNC

where there is a global parameter such

that

is the entropy associated to the th channel

for all

. Let this parameter be

. Then

GEXIT and EXIT curves are in general very similar. The next lemma illuminates this fact: it shows that, in the limit of small SNR, the kernel for the BAWGNC behaves similarly to the kernel for the BSC discussed in Example 6.

Lemma 19 (Limiting Behavior of GEXIT Kernel): Consider

the family

h of BAWGN channels, where denotes

the channel entropy: The additive noise in the model

is Gaussian with zero-mean and variance . Then

h

(i)

h

(ii)

In the -domain, the kernels are ordered between those two extremal functions.
Proof: First recall the transform formula (10) and . (i) With expression (iii) of Lemma 18
we have

In words, the derivative of the conditional entropy with respect

to the particular parameter is equal to the MSE estimator.

Proof: We will prove the result in general settings when

the input alphabet can be any subset of . Temporarily, let

us denote

our running Gaussian channel model.

is the AWGN with zero-mean and variance . Now let us

normalize this model by to get the equivalent model

where

and is an AWGN with zero

mean and unit variance. In order to be a sufficient statistics,

the extrinsic MAP estimate

can no longer be a

log-likelihood ratio but, in general, a function of , i.e.,

. From (8), it follows that

Let us restrict ourself to the study of the term

When

, then the distribution of the channel inputs

(more exactly of the log-likelihood ratios in the -domain)

becomes a Dirac centered in

(since its variance

). For any function continuous

in , e.g., for the function

,

one can indeed replace, without committing much error when

, the integral

by

See, e.g., [44] for further details. Therefore

To simplify the computations, a few remarks are in order. First,

recall that we have chosen to be

. Second,

observe that the Gaussian density permits us to write

Therefore, integrating by parts with respect to

, we get

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4818
after having used
Let us now reorder as and use (with a slight abuse of notations)
to get

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

By Theorem 3.4 in [11], a -domain kernel preserves the partial order implied by physical degradation if it is nonincreasing and concave on , i.e., if its first two derivatives are nonpositive. This means we need to show that
h

for

. By the same Theorem 3.4, the above condition is

verified if both

, for

, are convex and nonde-

creasing. This in turn is true if

for

.

Now some further calculus shows that

(23)

(24)

This concludes our proof since is a sufficient statistic for

Note that (24) implies that

has a positive expansion

in (except for the constant term). Therefore, the derivatives

,

, are both positive and by symmetry of the

function

in its arguments and so is

. Finally

.

APPENDIX B PHYSICAL DEGRADATION: A CALCULUS PROOF

In this appendix, we provide a direct calculus proof of

Corollary 1, exploiting the explicit representation provided by

Lemma 3. As a byproduct, we show that the GEXIT kernel in

the -domain is nonincreasing and concave. This fact is also

used in the proof of Lemma 6.

For our purpose it is convenient to represent all quantities in

the -domain. Let

h h denote the family of -den-

sities characterizing the channel family. Let

h de-

note the GEXIT kernel in the -domain as introduced in (10).

We can rewrite it in the form

h

h

where

which has a positive Taylor series expansion as well. This confirms our claim that the GEXIT kernel preserves the partial order implied by physical degradation.

APPENDIX C PROOF OF (20)

In this appendix we prove the claim (20). First notice that

h

h

. Since

and

, we have

h

h

h

In order to estimate ,

, and write

h

h (25)

, define, for

(26)

with

. Finally,

let and denote the two symmetric densities in the -do-

main.

The claim of the theorem is then equivalent to the statement

that the GEXIT functional

h

pre-

serves the partial order implied by physical degradation. This

means that if

then

The derivative of the Bhattacharyya parameter is easily

computed (to lighten the notation we omit hereafter the

argument of

in the derivative). The result is most

conveniently expressed in terms of densities of the variable

, where is the log-likelihood ratio (this quantity is equivalent to the -variable and its expectation is Bhattacharyya parameter). If we denote the corresponding densities by the same symbols, we get

h

h

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(27)

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4819

where we introduced the density
r r r

Finally, for any random variable , taking values in ,

we have (here

is the variance of )

Using integration by parts with respect to in (27) and denoting by , the distributions corresponding to densities
, , we get

In fact, by Taylor expansion

, for any

. The claim is proved by

taking expectation of both sides and setting

.

These ingredients are put together as follows (here we use the

shorthands and for, respectively,

and

):

Since is physically degraded with respect to ,

for any

. Furthermore,

.

Therefore

(28)

where

and is a function on

nonnegative and with unit inte-

gral. In other words, is a probability density function. Since

, we obtain the bound

which completes the proof.

r r

Proof of Lemma 16: We claim (and will prove later) that
r

where we used the definition of . If we further notice that , we get
(29)

where is the log likelihood associated to the channel output

. If we square and take expectation with respect to (recalling

that

,

do not depend upon ), we get

The claim follows by putting together (26), (28), and (29).

APPENDIX D MAP VERSUS BP MARGINALS: SOME TECHNICAL DETAILS
In this appendix ,we present the proofs which were omitted in Section X.

The thesis follows by summing over . We are left with the task of proving the first claim above.
We recall that the conditional expectations can be represented in terms of extrinsic log likelihoods as

Proof of Lemma 15: Let us make a few preliminary remarks. The first one follows immediately from the definition

(30)

In fact, using the Markov property, the left-hand side can be

written as

that

is equal to

.

The second remark is that, by elementary calculus, for any

Analogous formulas hold if we replace

(respectively,

) with

(respectively,

), and

with

. The claim follows immediately form the

following calculus exercise below.

Fact 1: For any

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4820

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2009

Proof: Consider, without loss of generality,

and

. It is simple to realize that, for any

The last statement follows by writing

and taking the inverse of both sides.

The thesis is proved by multiplying these inequalities, and

integrating over

.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Nicolas Macris and Olivier Lévêque for useful discussions and Eran Hof and Igal Sason for a careful reading of the manuscript.

REFERENCES
[1] C. Méasson, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Life above threshold: From list decoding to area theorem and MSE,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, San Antonio, TX, Oct. 2004.
[2] C. Méasson, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Maximum a posteriori decoding and turbo codes for general memoryless channels,” in Proc. e IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 1241–1245.
[3] C. Méasson and R. Urbanke, “An upper-bound on the ML thresholds of LDPC ensembles over the BEC,” in Proc. 41th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003.
[4] C. Méasson, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “Maxwell’s construction: The hidden bridge between maximum-likelihood and iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 224.
[5] C. Méasson, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “Maxwell’s construction: The hidden bridge between iterative and maximum a posteriori decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory., vol. 54, no. 12, Dec. 2008.
[6] D. Guo, S. Shamai (Shitz), and S. Verdú, “Mutual information and conditional mean estimation in Poisson channels,” in Proc. IEEE Informormation Theory Workshop, San Antonio, TX, Oct. 2004, pp. 265–270.
[7] D. Guo, S. Shamai (Shitz), and S. Verdú, “Mutual information and minimum mean-square error in gaussian channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1261–1882, Apr. 2005.
[8] N. Macris, “Correlation inequalities: A useful tool in the theory of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 2369–2373.
[9] D. Guo, S. Shamai (Shitz), and S. Verdú, “Additive non-gaussian noise channels: Mutual information and conditional mean estimation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 719–723.
[10] M. Zakai, “On mutual information, likelihood-ratios and estimation error for the additive gaussian channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, submitted for publication.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[12] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[13] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[14] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[15] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[16] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel property,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
[17] S. ten Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 806–808, May 1999.

[18] S. ten Brink, “Iterative decoding for multicode CDMA,” in Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf. (VTC), May 1999, vol. 3, pp. 1876–1880.
[19] S. ten Brink, “Designing iterative decoding schemes with the extrinsic information transfer chart,” AEU Int. J. Electron. Commun., vol. 54, pp. 389–398, 2000.
[20] S. ten Brink, “Iterative decoding trajectories of parallel concatenated codes,” in Proc. 3rd IEEE/ITG Conf. Source Channel Coding, Munich, Germany, Jan. 2000, pp. 75–80.
[21] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[22] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York: Wiley, 1991.
[23] I. Land, P. Hoeher, S. Huettinger, and J. B. Huber, “Bounds on information combining,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 39–42.
[24] S. Huettinger and J. B. Huber, “Information processing and combining in channel coding,” in Proc. of the 3rd Int. Symp. on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003.
[25] I. Sutskover, S. Shamai (Shitz), and J. Ziv, “Extremes of information combining,” in Proc. 41th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, 2003.
[26] D. Guo, S. Shamai (Shitz), and S. Verdú, “Mutual information and MMSE in gaussian channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun./Jul. 2004, p. 349.
[27] A. Montanari, “The glassy phase of Gallager codes,” Eur. Phys. J. B, vol. 23, pp. 121–136, 2001.
[28] A. Montanari, “Tight bounds for LDPC and LDGM codes under MAP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Infm. Theory, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 3221–3246, Sep. 2005.
[29] G. Wiechman and I. Sason, “Improved bounds on the parity-check density and achievable rates of binary linear block codes with applications to LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, submitted for publication.
[30] D. Burshtein, M. Krivelevich, S. L. Litsyn, and G. Miller, “Upper bounds on the rate of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 2437–2449, Sep. 2002.
[31] A. N. Shiryaev, Probability. New York: Springer, 1996. [32] R. F. Brown, A Topological Introduction to Nonlinear Analysis. Cam-
bridge, MA: Birkhäuser, 1993. [33] I. Land, P. Hoeher, S. Huettinger, and J. B. Huber, “Bounds on informa-
tion combining,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 2, pp. 612–619, Feb. 2005. [34] I. Sutskover, S. Shamai(Shitz), and J. Ziv, “Constrained information combining: Theory and applications for LDPC coded systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, submitted for publication. [35] K. Bhattad and K. R. Narayanan, “An MSE based transfer chart to analyze iterative decoding schemes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2004. [36] A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2000, vol. 123, IMA Volumes in Mathematics and its Applications, pp. 153–166. [37] P. Oswald and A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, Jun. 2001, p. 48. [38] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: A model and two properties,” in Proc. Conf. Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), Mar. 2002. [39] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Code rate and the area under extrinsic information transfer curves,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002, p. 115. [40] C. Méasson and R. Urbanke, “Asymptotic analysis of turbo codes over the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. 12th Joint Conf. Communications and Coding, Saas Fee, Switzerland, Mar. 2002. [41] C. Méasson and R. Urbanke, “Further analytic properties of EXIT-like curves and applications,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, Jun./Jul. 2003, p. 266. [42] G. D. Forney, Lecture Notes. Cambridge, MA: MIT, 2005. [43] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996. [44] A. H. Zemanian, Distribution Theory and Transform Analysis. New York: Dover, 1965. [45] D. Guo, “Gaussian Channels: Information, Estimation and Multiuser Detection,” Ph.D. dissertation, Princeton University, Preinceton, NJ, 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MÉASSON et al.: THE GENERALIZED AREA THEOREM AND SOME OF ITS CONSEQUENCES

4821

Cyril Méasson received the M.S. from the Lehrsthul für Nachrichtentechnik of the Munich University of Technology (LNT-TUM), Munich, Germany, and received the “Ingénieur” degree from ENSEEIHT, Toulouse, France, both in 1998. He received the Ph.D. degree from the School of Computer and Communication Sciences of EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland, in March 2006.
From 1998 to 2000, he worked as a scientific assistant at LNT-TUM and as a consultant in the Physics Departement at Bell Labs, Murray Hill, NJ. He was an FNS Postdoctoral Fellow at Stanford University and in the Mathematics of Communications Department at Bell Labs. Since October 2007, he has been with Qualcomm, Flarion Technology, Bridgewater, NJ.

stitute of Technology, Cambridge, in 1990. His undergraduate and Masters work was done at the University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada.
From 1990 to 2000, he was a member of the Mathematical Research Center in Bell Laboratories, Lucent Technologies (originally AT& T Bell Labs). From 2000 until 2006, he was at Flarion Technologies where he held the title of Vice President and Chief Scientist. Since 2006, he has been employed by Qualcomm Inc., Bridgewater, NJ, through the acquisition of Flarion.
Dr. Richardson is a corecipient of the 2002 IEEE Information Theory Society Best Paper Award.

Andrea Montanari received the Laurea degree in physics in 1997, and the Ph. D. degree in theoretical physics in 2001 from Scuola Normale Superiore. Pisa, Italy.
He has been a Postdoctoral Fellow at Laboratoire de Physique Théorique de l’Ecole Normale Supérieure (LPTENS), Paris, France, and the Mathematical Sciences Research Institute, Berkeley, C. Since 2002, he has been Chargé de Recherche (a permanent research position with Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, CNRS) at LPTENS. In September 2006 he joined Stanford University as Assistant Professor in the Departments of Electrical Engineering and Statistics.
Dr. Montanari was coawarded the ACM SIGMETRICS best paper award in 2008. He received the CNRS bronze medal for theoretical physics in 2006 and the National Science Foundation CAREER award in 2008.

Rüdiger L. Urbanke received the Diplomingenieur degree from the Vienna Institute of Technology, Vienna, Austria, in 1990 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Washington University, St. Louis, MO, in 1992 and 1995, respectively.
From 1995 to 1999, he held a position at the Mathematics of Communications Department at Bell Labs. Since November 1999, he has been a faculty member at the School of Computer and Communication Sciences of EPFL, Lausanne, Switzerland.
Dr. Urbanke is a recipient of a Fulbright Scholarship. From 2000 to 2004 he was an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY and he is currently on the board of the series “Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory.” He is a corecipient of the IEEE Information Theory Society 2002 Best Paper Award and coauthor of the book Modern Coding Theory published by Cambridge University Press.

Thomas J. Richardson (S’01–SM’02–F’07) received the Ph.D. degree from the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems at the Massachusetts In-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:19:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

