IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

75

Transactions Papers

Multiple-Rate Low-Density Parity-Check Codes with Constant Blocklength
Andres I. Vila Casado, Wen-Yen Weng, Stefano Valle, and Richard D. Wesel, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper describes and analyzes low-density parity-check code families that support variety of different rates while maintaining the same fundamental decoder architecture. Such families facilitate the decoding hardware design and implementation for applications that require communication at different rates, for example to adapt to changing channel conditions. Combining rows of the lowest-rate parity-check matrix produces the parity-check matrices for higher rates. An important advantage of this approach is that all effective code rates have the same blocklength. This approach is compatible with well known techniques that allow low-complexity encoding and parallel decoding of these LDPC codes. This technique also allows the design of programmable analog LDPC decoders. The proposed design method maintains good graphical properties and hence low error floors for all rates.
Index Terms—Channel coding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, multiple-rate codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
P RACTICAL communication systems often need to operate at several different rates. To keep the implementation as simple as possible, the same basic hardware architecture should be able to decode the encoded data at all possible rates. One way to achieve this with Low-Density ParityCheck (LDPC) codes is to generate higher-rate codes by puncturing lower-rate codes, as proposed in [1], [2] and [3]. However, puncturing reduces the code blocklength, which degrades performance. For the highest-rate codes, where the puncturing is most severe, the performance degradation is significant when compared to an LDPC code with the original blocklength.
Paper approved by K. Narayanan, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received April 24, 2006; revised February 26, 2007 and August 30, 2007.
This work was supported by the state of California and three corporations; ST Microelectronics, Conexant, and Texas Instruments, through UC discovery grant COM 03- 2, UC MICRO grant 03-92, and UC MICRO grant 03-93 respectively. This paper was presented in part at the Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, 2004.
A. I. Vila Casado is with Mojix Inc, Los Angeles, CA 90025 USA (e-mail: andres@mojix.com).
W.-Y. Weng is with the Department of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Chung Hua University, Taiwan (e-mail: wenyen.weng@chu.edu.tw).
S. Valle is with STMicroelectronics Srl, Cornaredo (MI), Italy (e-mail: stefano.valle@st.com).
R. D. Wesel is with the Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA (e-mail: wesel@ee.ucla.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2009.0901.060256

Another way to achieve this is to generate lower-rate codes by shortening higher-rate codes, as described in [2]. As with puncturing, shortening reduces the code blocklength, which degrades performance. For the lowest-rate codes where the shortening is most severe, the performance degradation is significant when compared to an LDPC code with the original blocklength.
This paper presents a code structure that supports a wide range of rates while maintaining a constant code blocklength. The basic idea is to generate higher rate codes (called effective codes in this paper) from a low-rate code (called the mother code in this paper) by reducing the number of rows in its parity check matrix. From an implementation point of view, rows in the parity-check matrix correspond to check nodes. We propose to reduce the number of rows by linearly combining the mother code rows, which is equivalent to replacing a group of check nodes with a single check node that sums all the edges coming into each of the original check nodes. This is also equivalent to the code that results by connecting the check nodes of the mother code through a new check node, as seen in Fig. 1. These equivalences hold as long as the combined check nodes do not have any variable-node neighbors in common.
Multiple-rate codes can be designed by generating effective codes solely by combining rows as discussed above, and in this paper these codes are called Strict Row-Combining (SRC) codes. A performance improvement can be obtained by adding a few edges and deleting a few other edges in the graph as the rows are combined. This allows the code to have good variable-node degree distributions at each rate. In this paper these codes will be called Row Combining with Edge Variation (RCEV) codes. Both approaches will be presented in the following subsections.
Section II describes the row-combining approach in detail. Section III explains how row combining helps to simplify decoder architectures and consequently to reduce chip area. Section IV describes how to lower the complexity of the encoder and decoder of row-combining codes. A design method for SRC codes is proposed in Section V. Section VI describes the RCEV code design approach that results in an improvement in performance by relaxing some constraints imposed in the SRC design. Section VII compares the performance of SRC, RCEV, single-rate stand-alone codes, and punctured codes. Section VIII delivers the conclusions.

0090-6778/09$25.00 c 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

76

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

matrix,

⎛

⎞

111000111000

H3 = ⎝ 1 0 0 1 1 0 0 0 1 1 1 0 ⎠.

4

001011100011

(2)

It is easy to see that many different rates can be obtained

from the same mother code by changing the way rows are

combined. For example using the mother code described in

(1), combining three rows at a time generates the rate-5/6

LDPC matrix shown in (3). In this rate-5/6 matrix the first

row results from combining the odd rows of the mother matrix

and the second row results from combining the even rows of

the mother matrix,

H5 = 6

111011101110 101110111011

. (3)

In general, row combining changes the rate without changing the blocklength or the basic architecture of the decoder.

III. IMPACT OF ROW COMBINING ON THE HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE

Rate 1/2

Rate 3/4

A. Digital Decoders

The main goal of row-combining is to simplify the support

of multiple rates. In general, row-combining won’t lead to a

Fig. 1. Graph of a rate-3/4 LDPC code obtained from a rate-1/2 LDPC code faster decoder for any particular rate but provides a simple

via row combining.

overall architecture with a smaller chip area required to

support all the needed rates. Here are a couple of examples

of how decoder simplification might be accomplished.

II. ROW-COMBINING CODES

If the message passing is done through a memory, there is a list of memory addresses that tell the processor which

variable-to-check messages to compute in order to compute a

Consider the example mother LDPC matrix in (1),

check-to-variable message. With row-combining, changing the rate of the code can be achieved by replacing the lists for the

⎛

⎞

111000000000

H1 2

= ⎝⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜⎜

1 0 0 0

0 0 0 0

0 0 0 0

1 0 0 0

1 1 0 0

0 1 0 0

0 1 1 0

0 0 1 0

0 0 1 1

0 0 0 1

0 0 0 1

0 0 0 0

⎟⎠⎟⎟⎟⎟⎟ .

001000000011

(1)

This is a rate-1/2 mother LDPC matrix with blocklength 12

whose graph representation can be seen in Fig. 1. This is by

no means a good LDPC code but the reader should see it as

an example to explain row combining. Fig. 1 also shows that

replacing each pair of nodes with a new single node transforms

this rate-1/2 code into a rate-3/4 code. This is equivalent to

summing the rows of the mother LDPC matrix that correspond

to the check nodes that are combined, since the check nodes in

the example do not have any common neighbors. In general,

the mother matrix should be designed so that the rows that

will be combined don’t have ones in the same column.

combined check nodes with a single list that is the union of those lists, thus changing only the quantity of messages read. This is a simple change that can be done on the fly with a careful implementation.
Another possible hardware implementation can be developed using the fact that the code produced by row combining is equivalent to the code that results from connecting the check nodes through another check node as shown in Fig. 1. An efficient hardware implementation would decode the higher rate code by performing the extra-message generation on top of the message computing done for the low rate codes, thus maintaining the basic hardware architecture. This idea was used in [4], where an architecture that exploits our row-combining structure was implemented. These examples, while not exhaustive, capture the essence of the simplification facilitated by row combining.
On top of these simplified multiple-rate decoders, the fact that the codes are designed such that the check nodes that will be combined don’t have any neighbors in common guarantees

Eq. (2) gives the effective rate-3/4 LDPC matrix that results some degree of parallelism. Check nodes that will be com-

from the row combining described in Fig. 1, where combining bined can be processed in parallel because they will never try

rows 1 and 4 of the mother matrix produces row 1 of the to access the information of the same variable node. There are,

effective matrix, combining rows 2 and 5 of the mother matrix of course, many ways to achieve parallelism. Our point here

produces row 2 of the effective matrix, and combining rows is that row combining is completely compatible with LDPC

3 and 6 of the mother matrix produces row 3 of the effective codes that support highly parallel decoding architectures.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VILA CASADO et al.: MULTIPLE-RATE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES WITH CONSTANT BLOCKLENGTH

77

B. Analog Decoders

B. Low-complexity Encoding Using Back Substitution

Analog decoders of turbo-like codes were introduce simultaneously in 1998 by Hagenauer [5] and Loeliger et al. [6]. A good in-depth discussion of this alternative decoding hardware can be found in [7]. Analog decoders are analog circuits that oscillate until an equilibrium state is reached. Analog decoding shows promise because the decoders require low power and the convergence is typically faster than with digital decoders. Digital decoders can use the same hardware to decode different LDPC codes by re-programming the chip. Their analog counterparts are not programmable, and they need different circuits to decode different LDPC codes. Since many applications need various codes with different rates, the lack of programmability of analog decoders makes them less attractive than digital decoders when it comes to LDPC codes.
However, row-combining codes allow programmable analog decoders. An analog decoder that works for all the rates would consist of the circuit that decodes the mother code, with switches that turn on and off the connections to the new check nodes that increase the rate of the code. These connections are shown in Fig. 1 with dashed lines.

The parity-check matrix should also allow a simple encoder implementation. In [11] and [12] a low-complexity encoder for LDPC codes is found if its parity-check matrix H0 is composed of two matrices H0 = [H1|H2] where H2 is a square sub-matrix that has a particular structure. For those codes encoding complexity grows linearly with the code length. In [11] H2 is a bi-diagonal matrix so the encoding process is simply multiplying the input vector by H1T and then processing by an accumulator.
Unfortunately it is difficult or impossible to maintain a bidiagonal structure for the H2 portion of the mother LDPC matrix and all of the effective LDPC matrices in the context of row combining. One solution found to this problem is to use a model presented in [12] where H2 is a lower triangular matrix. This will allow a low-complexity encoder based on backsubstitution as explained in [12]. Back substitution obtains the parity bits by solving a sequence of linear equations that have only one unknown bit. This structure can be maintained for all the rates, as will be shown in the following subsection.

C. Structured Row-Combining Codes

IV. LOW COMPLEXITY ENCODING AND DECODING A. Block Structure for High-Speed Decoder Implementation

The challenge presented when trying to design a structured row-combining code is that the mother code (denoted by M ) and all the effective codes (denoted by E) must have both

Despite the intrinsic parallelism of the decoding process, the first attempts to design high-throughput LDPC decoders encountered significant interconnection problems. In fact, the exploitation of such parallelism requires the use of several check-and variable-node processors, each connected to different memories in order to access several messages simultaneously. The random character of the node connection in the Tanner graph results in difficult memory/processor placement and intractable-routing problems.
In order to solve these problems, LDPC codes can be designed to have an inherent structure as suggested by Mansour and Shanbag in [8]. This approach also enables the implementation of high -speed decoders without memory fragmentation such as those presented in [9] and [10]. In [8] the LDPC matrices have a block structure that consists of square sub-matrices each of size p. Each square sub-matrix is either a zero sub-matrix or a structured sub-matrix.
An example that illustrates the structured sub-matrices proposed in [8] for p = 4, is shown in (4). This sub-matrix, labelled as S2, results from performing a right cyclic shift of 2 columns on the identity matrix of size p. Each sub-matrix Si is produced by cyclically shifting the columns of an identity matrix to the right i places,

⎛

⎞

0010

S2 = ⎝⎜⎜

0 1

0 0

0 0

1 0

⎠⎟⎟ .

(4)

0100

the sub-matrix structure (for parallel decoding) and the lower triangular structure (for low-complexity encoding).
There is an easy way to maintain the sub-matrix structure for all the effective codes. Instead of combining individual rows, rows of sub-matrices will be combined so that if submatrix A and sub-matrix B are combined it implies that row i of A and row i of B will be combined for i = {1, ..., p}. The resulting sub-matrix will be equivalent to the superposition of sub-matrix A and sub-matrix B.
If the exact sub-matrix structure of [8] is to be maintained for all the effective codes, the mother code and all effective codes have to be designed so that among the combined sub-matrices at most only one is non-zero (and has the Si structure). However, if the sub-matrix that results from the superposition of two or more non-zero Si sub-matrices also has good parallel properties (which depends on the hardware architecture of the decoder), this design criteria can be relaxed to include such superpositions.
Furthermore, it’s desirable that the the square H2 submatrices of both the mother code and all effective codes have a lower triangular structure that would allow back-substitution encoding. This is achieved by imposing a constraint in selection of the rows to be combined, assuming that the H2 sub-matrix of the mother code is lower triangular. Let us assume that row-combining generates an effective code Ei that has ri check-nodes. As long as the bottom ri rows of the mother code remain in their pre-row-combining relative positions and are not combined among themselves, the square H2 sub-matrix (with size ri) of the effective code Ei is lower

This structured LDPC matrix allows the decoder to use triangular. The examples presented in Section II satisfy this

at least p processors in parallel and doesn’t preclude the condition. The size-6 square H2 sub-matrix of the rate-1/2 implementation of faster decoders that use a multiple of p mother LDPC matrix shown in Eq. (1) is lower triangular.

processors as suggested in [4].

The effective rate-3/4 code has ri = 3 check-nodes and the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

78

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

H0

As seen in Fig. 1, the number of neighbors of the variable

nodes remains the same as the rate changes, thus the variable-

Zero Matrix Si Matrix

node degree distribution will also remain unchanged. This implies that this degree distribution cannot be optimized for the different rates of the code, so a degree distribution that’s

Sa Matrix Sb’ Matrix

optimized for the highest-rate code is chosen. This is due to the fact that row-combining imposes some specific constraints on the variable-node degree distribution of the lower-rate codes,

Sd Matrix

which will be explained in detail in Section VI.

Sc Matrix

A concentrated degree distribution is a degree distribution in which every node has the same degree or all the degrees

H1

H2

are within one of each other. Concentrated check-node degree

Fig. 2. Structured LDPC matrix.

distributions tend to approximate theoretical optimality [13]. Therefore, the check node degree distribution of the mother

and effective codes should be concentrated, if possible.

combining is performed so that the bottom 3 rows are not

combined among themselves and remain in their pre-row-

combining relative positions. It can be seen in Eq. (2) that

the size-3 square H2 sub-matrix of the effective rate-3/4 code

is also lower triangular.

One way to combine the sub-matrix structure with the lower

triangular structure of H2 is to make H2 block lower triangu-

lar. This implies that the sub-matrices along the diagonal of

H2 will have the Si structure and all the sub-matrices that are

above this diagonal will be zero sub-matrices. The problem

with this structure is that the rightmost p columns (where p

is the size of the sub-matrices) will be degree-one columns

which will negatively affect the performance of the codes.

One possible solution of the problem is to make the bottom

right matrix have the bi-diagonal structure described in (5).

This structure allows back-substitution and only 1 column will

have degree 1,

⎛

⎞

1000

Ss

= ⎜⎜⎝

1 0

1 1

0 1

0 0

⎟⎠⎟ .

(5)

0011

The check-node degree distributions depend on the selection of the rows to be combined. This selection is the next step in the proposed design of SRC codes. Since the check-node degree distribution of the mother code is concentrated, then the check node degree distribution for the higher-rate effective code will also be concentrated if all the rows in the effective LDPC matrix result from combining the same number of rows of the mother LDPC matrix. It is also necessary that the row combining maintains the structure of the codes presented in Section IV.
There is a simple way to achieve this if the desired rates have the (a − 1)/a form. The mother code is set to have a square matrix with a concentrated check node degree distribution. Such a mother code has rate 0 and and is used only to generate effective codes; it is not a useful stand alone code. Combining a rows (or rows of sub-matrices in the case of structured codes) at a time, generates a code with rate (a − 1)/a as long as the total number of rows of the mother matrix is a multiple of a. This effective code will have a concentrated check node degree distribution. This shows that SRC codes can maintain a concentrated check node degree distribution among all its rates if they all are in the (a − 1)/a

Another solution can be seen in Fig. 2 which shows a LDPC structure that allows both parallel decoding and lowcomplexity encoding. In this structure the four bottom right matrices are carefully designed such that they allow backsubstitution encoding. For the Si sub-matrices with subscripts i = a, b, c, d, the subscripts (number of columns shifted) must satisfy (a − c + d − b) mod p = 1. The sub-matrix labelled Sb is an Si sub-matrix with the first row set to all zeros. This structure guarantees that the last 2p parity bits can be generated by solving one parity check equation with one unknown bit, thus allowing back substitution. In this structure only 1 column has degree 1.

form. Rates of this form comprise a useful set of rates. In standards such as IEEE 802.11n, all LDPC code rates have this form. Furthermore, puncturing and/or shortening can be used with row combining in order to support more rates. As long as the number of punctured and/or shortened bits is small, the effective blocklength of the code is not significantly diminished.
Given that two check nodes that will be combined cannot have any common neighbors, row combining introduces some constraints in the construction of the LDPC matrices. These constraints may limit the degrees of freedom of the LDPC design, especially in the case of structured LDPC codes where two sub-matrices that will be combined can’t be both non-

V. DESIGN OF STRUCTURED SRC CODES

zero. In order to minimize this problem, the overall number of row combinations across all rates must be as low as possible.

This section proposes a design method for structured row- This can be achieved by first choosing the row combining

combining codes given the blocklength of the code, the mother that generates the highest-rate code. Once this is done, the

and effective rates and the sub-block size p. Since only row row-combining that generates the second highest rate-code

combining is allowed to generate the high-rate matrices, these is chosen using as many row combinations from the highest

codes are called Strict Row-Combining (SRC) codes.

rate-code as possible. If all the row-combining strategies are

The first step is the selection of both the variable-node chosen this way the overall number of combinations will be

degree distribution and the check-node degree distribution. minimized. This minimization of the number of combinations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VILA CASADO et al.: MULTIPLE-RATE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES WITH CONSTANT BLOCKLENGTH

79

is also beneficial from an implementation point of view.

The design procedure of structured SRC codes is shown

The remaining issue is to assign the positions and right cyclic shifts of the non-zero sub-matrices in the mother code. It is well known that the performance of the LDPC codes is limited by the fact that their graphs contain cycles which compromise the optimality of the belief propagation decoding. These cycles generate error floors in the performance of LDPC codes in the high SNR regions. However, the negative effect of the cycles can be reduced using graph-conditioning techniques such as those described in [14] and [15]. So the last step in the design will be to use the ideas described in these works, adapting them to work on structured SRC codes.
As explained in [14] not all cycles degrade the performance of the code in the same way. Among the most dangerous

in Algorithm 1 where Vj denotes a set of variable nodes that belong to a sub-matrix, VjM denotes a column of submatrices in the mother code M and VjEi denotes a column of sub-matrices in the effective code Ei. Algorithm 1 may not converge because the conditions are too restrictive. In that case, we can relax the graph-constraints by lowering the values of dACE, ηACE, dSS, γc, and/or γp. However, even if there aren’t any graph-constraints, Algorithm 1 may not converge because there may be too many effective rates that impose too many constraints thus the number of effective-rates must be lowered.
Algorithm 1 SRC code design

structures that can be found in LDPC bi-partite graphs are 1: Choose rates, blocklength (n) and sub-matrix size (p)

stopping sets. A stopping set is a variable node set where 2: Choose variable node degree distributions

all its neighbors are connected to the set at least twice. This 3: Choose rows of sub-matrices to be combined in order to

implies that if all the variable nodes that belong to a stopping

generate the higher-rate codes

set are unreliable, the decoding will fail. Small stopping sets must be avoided. This is a complex
problem to attack directly. To indirectly increase the size of stopping sets, [14] proposes the ACE algorithm, which is based on maximizing the ACE metric of small cycles. The

4: for all columns of sub-matrices Vj do 5: Randomly generate VjM according to the degree distri-
bution selected in 2
6: if VjM doesn’t satisfy the graph constraints set for M then

ACE metric of a cycle is the sum of the number of neighbors 7:

Discard Vj and go to line 5

of each of the variable nodes in the cycle minus two times the 8: end if

number of variable nodes in the cycle.

9: for all effective codes Ei do

According to this algorithm, the LDPC matrix is constructed 10:

Compute VjEi according to the row combinations

by generating a single column randomly until one is found

selected in 3

where all the cycles of length less than or equal to a previ- 11:

ously specified threshold (denoted as 2dACE) that contain its 12:

corresponding variable node have an ACE metric higher than 13:

or equal to another previously specified threshold (denoted as 14:

ηACE). This process sequentially produces all the columns

starting from the one with the lowest degree.

15:

The constraints specified in [15] also help to avoid small 16:

if two non-zero sub-matrices are combined then
Discard Vj and go to line 5 end if if VjEi doesn’t satisfy the graph constraints set for Ei then
Discard Vj and go to line 5
end if

stopping sets in the graph, particularly if applied to the high- 17: end for

degree columns. In [15] two new metrics are defined called 18: end for βc and βp and they are the number check nodes connected only once to a cycle or a path respectively. In the same

manner as the ACE algorithm, random columns are generated
and they must satisfy some constraints based on previously
specified thresholds which are denoted here as dSS, γc and γp. Specifically, a randomly generated column is valid if all the cycles of length less than or equal to 2dSS that contain its corresponding variable node have a βc metric of value higher than or equal to γc and if all the paths of length less than or equal to dSS that contain its corresponding variable node have a βp metric of value higher than or equal to γp.
The generation of the mother and effective matrices is done

VI. ROW COMBINING WITH EDGE VARIATION (RCEV) CODES
The main disadvantage with SRC codes is that the mother code and all of the effective codes of an SRC code have the same variable-node degree distribution. With strict row combining, edges are neither created nor deleted. This is problematic since in principle different rates require different variable-node degree distributions for theoretical optimality, as stated in [13]. Row combining with edge variation (RCEV)

using simultaneous graph conditioning. This means that the codes allow the addition and deletion of edges as rows are

previously described column by column generation is still used combined so the degree-distributions can be different for

and every column generated must satisfy the graph constraints different rates. The key to maintaining a simplified decoder

specified for the mother code and all the effective codes. architecture is to make the number of additions and deletions

Different graph constraints can be used for different matrices, small compared to the total number of edges in the graph.

which is necessary because the achievable values of these One of the most critical differences in the optimal variable-

constraints change with the rate as shown in [16]. In the node degree distribution for different rates, is the number of

case of structured SRC codes, instead of a column by column degree-two variable nodes. In order to have good error floor

generation, all the columns that correspond to the same sub- properties the number of degree-two variable nodes cannot

matrices will be generated at the same time.

exceed the number of check nodes as shown in [16]. Having

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

80

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

more degree-two nodes than check nodes implies that there Algorithm 2 RCEV code design will be cycles composed by only degree-two nodes and check- 1: Choose rates, blocklength (n) and sub-matrix size (p)

nodes. These cycles are stopping sets and have been shown to degrade the performance of the codes [14]. These cycles will grow smaller and more numerous as the number of degree-

2: Choose variable node degree distributions 3: Choose the variable-node sets SCi
4: Choose rows of sub-matrices to be combined in order to

two nodes increases, further worsening the performance of the codes.
As a result, the maximum number of degree-two variable nodes for a family of SRC codes is given by the number of check nodes of the highest-rate effective code. This limits the performance of the lower rate codes since their optimal degree-distribution generally requires a significantly larger number of degree-two variable nodes [13]. The difference in the distributions depends on the rates of both the mother code and all the effective codes. The loss in performance due to this limitation increases as the range of possible rates of the SRC codes grows larger.
In order to avoid this problem in RCEV codes, the number of degree-two variable nodes in the mother code is set to be the optimal for the lowest-rate code. For high-rate effective codes, edges are added to some degree-two variable nodes so that the maximum number of degree-two nodes is less than or equal to the number of check nodes in the graph. Therefore, when generating the effective code Ei, there is a set of degree-two variable nodes (SEi) that have degree 3 in the code Ei.
This, unfortunately, is not the only problem generated by the common degree-distribution. Layered Belief Propagation (LBP), a decoding method that improves the convergence speed and allows a low complexity hardware architecture, was introduced in [17] and [18]. LBP decoding requires the paritycheck matrix to be divided into sub-matrices that can have at most one “1" per column and one “1" per row. Thus, in order to generate an LDPC code that can be decoded with LBP, the

generate the higher-rate codes

5: for all columns of sub-matrices Vj do 6: Randomly generate VjM according to the degree distri-
bution of the lowest-rate code

7: if VjM doesn’t satisfy the graph constraints set for M then

8:

Discard Vj and go to line 6

9: end if

10: for all effective codes Ei do

11:

Compute VjEi according to the row combinations

selected in 4

12: if two non-zero sub-matrices are combined then

13:

if The degree of VjM is less than maximum

variable-node degree then

14:

Discard Vj and go to line 6

15:

else

16:

Discard one of the non-zero sub-matrices

17:

end if

18:

end if

19:

if VjEi doesn’t satisfy the graph constraints set for

Ei then

20:

Discard Vj and go to line 6

21:

end if

22:

if Vj ∈ SEi then

23:

randomly add a non-zero sub-matrix to VjEi

24:

end if

25: end for

26: end for

maximum variable-node degree is the number of sub-matrices

in a column, which is the number check nodes divided by the size of the sub-matrices. For SRC codes that support LBP, the maximum variable-node degree must be the same for all rates, and it is given by the number of check nodes of the highest rate code divided by the size of the sub-matrices. As stated in [13], increasing the maximum variable-node degree results in a better code. The SRC common degree-distribution imposes a strict limit on the maximum variable-node degree, and thus a performance limit when LBP decoding is used.
The technique used in RCEV codes to avoid this problem is the following. If during the row combining, a non-zero sub-matrix is added to another non-zero sub-matrix, one of them is discarded in order maintain the structure mentioned before. This allows RCEV codes to have different maximum variable-node degrees for different rates which will improve the performance of the lower rate codes.
RCEV codes are designed using the steps for SRC codes given in Section V, along with the edge variation techniques described in this section as shown in Algorithm 2.

Fig. 3 shows the performance of a structured SRC code family and the corresponding four stand-alone codes selected for the IEEE 802.11n standard [19]. The specifications of the structured SRC code family are the following. The mother code has rate 0, while the four effective codes have rates 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, and 5/6. The blocklength of the codes is 1944 bits, the size of the sub-matrices is 27x27, a maximum of 15 iterations was used in the simulation. It has at most one “1" per column and one “1" per row given and therefore allows the simplified decoder proposed in [17].
Fig. 3 shows that the SRC codes perform very well under these conditions (blocklength, sub-matrix size, and number of iterations). The sub-matrix size is small enough to allow a sufficiently large maximum variable-node degree. The effect of the non-optimality of the variable-node degree distribution for the rate-1/2 code is small for 15 iterations. This is because for such a small number of iterations performance is dominated by the high-degree variable nodes. Thus, the lower-than-optimal number of degree-two nodes of the rate-1/2 code does not

VII. PERFORMANCE COMPARISON

dramatically affect performance. For fifty iterations, the rate1/2 code performance is affected, as we’ll see shortly.

The following figures show the performance of row- This comparison at 15 iterations is practically important

combining codes, designed using all the techniques presented since there are many applications that only allow a small

above, on the AWGN channel with a flooding LDPC decoder. number of iterations of the decoder. For example, in most

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VILA CASADO et al.: MULTIPLE-RATE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES WITH CONSTANT BLOCKLENGTH

81

TABLE I VARIABLE-NODE DEGREE DISTRIBUTIONS OF STRUCTURED SRC AND RCEV CODES

SRC

p=27

x

λx

1 .00014

2 .09496

3 .57151

7 .33338

SRC

p=54

x

λx

1 .00014

2 .09496

3 .52389

6 .38101

RCEV

R=1/2

x

λx

1 .00014

2 .2554

3 .29327

10 .45119

RCEV

R=2/3

x

λx

1 .00015

2 .19021

3 .42863

8 .38101

RCEV

R=3/4

x

λx

1 .00014

2 .13308

3 .46673

9 .40005

RCEV

R=5/6

x

λx

1 .00015

2 .09971

3 .60009

6 .30005

100 10−1 10−2

1/2

100

2/3

3/4

5/6

10−1

SRC

802.11n

10−2

1/2 2/3 3/4 5/6 SRC 802.11n RCEV

FER FER

10−3

10−3

10−4 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 Eb/No

10−4 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 Eb/No

Fig. 3. Performance of structured SRC with p=27 and IEEE 802.11n codes with blocklength 1944 on an AWGN channel. Maximum number of iterations equal to 15.

Fig. 4. Performance of structured SRC with p=54, structured RCEV, and IEEE 802.11n codes with blocklength 1944 on an AWGN channel. Maximum number of iterations equal to 50.

wireless applications the channel decoding must be done in a For the high rate codes there is very little difference between

very small amount of time, which limits the maximum number the performances of the RCEV and SRC codes, since their

of iterations allowed.

degree distributions are very similar. RCEV techniques allow

Fig. 4 presents another comparison of the performance of a the optimization of the degree distributions for each rate.

structured SRC code, the four stand-alone codes selected for Fig. 4 also shows that the RCEV codes perform close

the IEEE 802.11n standard, and a structured RCEV code. The to the IEEE 802.11n codes. As expected there is a small

row-combining codes have a mother code with rate 0, while loss due to the fact that RCEV codes must satisfy the row-

the four effective codes have rates 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, and 5/6. The combining constraints. This slightly reduces the degrees of

variable-node degree distribution of both codes can be found freedom during the design process, thus making the set of all

in Table I. The blocklength of the codes is 1944 bits, the size the possible RCEV codes a subset of all the possible stand-

of the sub-matrices of the row-combining codes is 54x54 and a alone codes. Table II shows the graph-conditioning constraints

maximum of 50 iterations was used in these simulations. SRC used to generate these row-combining codes and a detailed

and RCEV codes of the same rate have similar total number of description of them can be found in [20].

edges. The maximum difference, found in the rate-3/4 code, As mentioned before, the row-combining codes presented in

is a 7%.

this section have a rate-0 mother code. We previously designed

As expected, Fig. 4 shows the loss in performance of codes that had a rate-1/2 mother code with the same variable-

the SRC low rate codes. The SRC rate-1/2 code show a node degree distribution [21]. This mother code forces the

performance loss of more than 0.2 dB with respect to the effective rate-2/3 code to have a non-concentrated check-node

IEEE 802.11n codes with the same blocklength and this is degree distribution. This translates into a 0.3 dB loss at a

due to their inadequate variable-node degree distribution.

FER of 10−3 in the performance of the rate-2/3 code when

As observed in Fig. 4 the FER of the lower rates of the compared to the 802.11n rate 2/3 code. Having a rate-0 mother RCEV code are significantly better than those of the lower code reduces the loss to 0.1 dB as shown in Fig. 3.

rates of the SRC code. This gain follows from the improved A comparison in the performance of RCEV codes and

degree distributions of the RCEV codes over those of the SRC punctured LDPC codes is shown in Fig. 5. The punctured

codes. The magnitude of the difference between the degree codes correspond to the ones presented in [3]. The RCEV

distributions of the rate-1/2 codes can be seen in Table I. code was designed to have very similar degree distributions

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

82

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 57, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

TABLE II GRAPH-CONDITIONING CONSTRAINTS OF STRUCTURED SRC AND RCEV CODES

Code

SRC p=27

SRC p=54

RCEV

Rate 1/2 2/3 3/4 5/6 1/2 2/3 3/4 5/6 1/2 2/3 3/4 5/6

dACE 10 2 3 3 10 3 3 2 6 2 3 2

ηACE

3

4

3

3

3

3

3

4

3

4

3

4

dSS

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

4

γc

444333334443

γp

444333334443

FER Performance gap (dB)

100

1/2

4/5

10−1

9/10 Punct

RCEV

10−2

10−3

10−4

10−5

1

2

3

4

5

6

Eb/No

Fig. 5. Performance of RCEV codes and punctured LDPC codes.

0.24

0.22

0.2

0.18

0.16

0.14

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06 0

2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000 Blocklength of mother matrix

Fig. 6. Sphere-packing bound gap at a FER of 10−3 between row-combining codes and punctured codes. Both codes have the same rate (9/10) and have equal mother-code blocklength. The mother code of the punctured codes has rate 1/2.

to the punctured codes so that the comparison would be fair.

The blocklength of the mother code of the punctured codes is

1024 while the blocklength of the RCEV codes is 1030. There Multiple-rate LDPC codes that avoid this blocklength re-

is a clear performance gap between the higher rate codes. duction can be generated using a row-combining approach.

This is due to the fact that puncturing reduces the effective Structures that reduce complexity of both encoder and decoder

blocklength of the code.

can be applied and maintained through all the rates, and graph

Sphere-packing bounds [22] give a lower bound on the conditioning algorithms can be applied to the design of the

SNR that can support reliable communication as a function of codes to produce good error floor performances at all the rates.

blocklength. The gap between the sphere-packing bounds of several rate-9/10 row-combining code and rate-9/10 punctured codes with equal mother-code blocklength (based on the different blocklengths) can be seen in Fig. 6. The loss in performance of the punctured codes decreases as the mothercode blocklength increases. However, the theoretical gap at a blocklength of 1030 is half of the performance gap shown in Fig. 5. That punctured codes aren’t always the best codes for their effective blocklength may help to explain why there is a

Structured SRC codes allow the use of simple hardware architectures (or programmable analog-decoding circuits) that can be used to decode the mother and all the effective rates. The design of these codes imposes some constraints that barely affect the performance when the codes are used at a small number of iterations. As the maximum number of iterations increases, the performance gap between SRC codes and standalone codes also increases.

bigger gap in the actual performance of the codes.

RCEV codes relax the constraints required for SRC codes,

and show a gain in performance with respect to SRC codes

VIII. CONCLUSIONS
As we know from information theory, channel codes approach capacity-achieving performance as blocklength goes to infinity. Both theory and practice confirm that codes with

for a large number of iterations. This increase in performance comes at a cost of architecture complexity. The performance of RCEV codes is very close to the performance of stand-alone codes for a large number of iterations.

longer blocklengths perform better. Recently, puncturing and These codes become attractive for applications that re-

shortening have been used to provide a variety of rates in the quire both performance close to capacity and a low decoder

context of a single decoder architecture, but these techniques complexity due to the fact that RCEV codes have still a

shorten the code blocklength as rates move away from the rate strong inherent structure that can be exploited in the hardware

of the mother code.

decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VILA CASADO et al.: MULTIPLE-RATE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES WITH CONSTANT BLOCKLENGTH

83

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. Jun Shi at Intel for his help with the sphere-packing bounds.

[21] A. I. Vila Casado, W. Weng, and R. D. Wesel, “Multiple rate low-density parity-check codes with constant block length,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems Computers, Nov. 2004, pp. 2010–2014.
[22] C. E. Shannon, “Probability of error for optimal codes in a gaussian channel,” Bell System Technical J., vol. 38, pp. 611–656, May 1959.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Ha and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
[2] T. Tian, C. Jones, and J. Villasenor, “Rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT, July 2004, p. 152.
[3] J. Kim, A. Ramamoorthy, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Design of efficientlyencodable rate-compatible irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, June 2006, pp. 1131–1136.
[4] M. Rovini, N. E. L’Insalata, F. Rossi, and L. Fanucci, “VLSI design of high-throughput multi-rate decoder for structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. 8th Euromicro Conf. Digital System Design, Aug. 2005, pp. 202–209.
[5] J. Hagenauer, “Decoding of binary codes with analog networks,” in Proc. Information Theory Workshop, Feb. 1998, pp. 13–14.
[6] H.-A. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, and F. Tarko˝y, “Probability propagation and decoding in analog VLSI,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, page 146, Aug. 1998, p. 146.
[7] F. Lustenberger, “On the Design of Analog VLSI Iterative Decoders,” PhD thesis, diss., ETH No 13879, Nov. 2000.
[8] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Low power VLSI decoder architectures for LDPCCs,” Int. Symp. Low Power Electronics and Design, pp. 284–289, June 2002.
[9] M. Eroz, F.-W. Sun, and L.-N. Lee, “An innovative low-density paritycheck code design with near-Shannon-limit performance and simple implementation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, Jan. 2006.
[10] V. Novichkov, H. Jin, and T. Richardson, “Programmable vector processor architecture for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Conf. Inform. Systems Sciences, Mar. 2004, pp. 1141–1146.
[11] M. Yang, W. E. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of efficiently encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.
[12] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638– 656, Feb. 2001.
[13] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[14] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. Villasenor, and R. Wesel, “Avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPCC construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[15] A. Ramamoorthy and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of short block length irregular LDPCCs,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, June 2004, pp. 410–414.
[16] W. Weng, A. Ramamoorthy, and R. Wesel, “Lowering the error floors of irregular high-rate ldpc codes by graph conditioning,” in Proc. IEEE VTC-Fall, Sep. 2004, pp. 2549–2553.
[17] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput ldpc decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[18] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architechture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Signal Processing Systems (SIPS), Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[19] IEEE P802.11n/D1.05 October 2006, Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) specifications - Enhancements for Higher Throughput (Draft).
[20] [Online]. Available: http://www.ee.ucla.edu/∼csl/files/rccodes.html

RFID applications.

Andres I. Vila Casado received his B. S. in electrical engineering from the Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy in 2002. He received his M. S. and Ph. D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of California, Los Angeles in 2004 and 2007 respectively. At UCLA and at Politecnico di Torino he conducted research on communication theory with a focus on channel coding and information theory. He is currently a Research Scientist at Mojix, Inc. where he conducts research on physical layer communications and Bayesian estimation for
Wen-Yen Weng received his B.S. degree in electrical engineering from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan in 1997. He received his M.S. and Ph.D. in electrical engineering from the University of California, Los Angeles, in 2001 and 2007 respectively. He is currently an Assistant Professor in the Computer Science and Information Engineering Department in Chung-Hua University, HsinChu, Taiwan. His research interests include channel coding and signal processing for communication systems.

Stefano Valle was born in Milan (Italy) on 1969. He received the Electrical Engineering degree (1995) and the Electrical and Communications Engineering PhD (1999) from Politecnico di Milano, Milan, Italy. Until 2000 he was with the Digital Signal Processing group of Dipartimento di Elettronica e Informazione, Politecnico di Milano as a Research Assistant. In 2000, he joined STMicroelectronics (Italy), where he worked on modulation, channel modeling and error correction codes for wireless systems. He was voting member during the definition of the IEEE 802.11n standard where he contributed to channel model definition, the PHY emulation for MAC simulations and LDPC code definition. His research interests are digital transmission systems, mainly channel coding, modulation and estimation.

Richard D. Wesel is a Professor with the UCLA Electrical Engineering Department and is the Associate Dean for Academic and Student Affairs for the UCLA Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science. He joined UCLA in 1996 after receiving his Ph.D. in electrical engineering from Stanford. His B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering are from MIT. His research is in the area of communication theory with particular interest in channel coding. He has received the National Science Foundation (NSF) CAREER Award, an Okawa Foundation award for research in information and telecommunications, and the Excellence in Teaching Award from the Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Science. He has authored or co-authored over a hundred conference and journal publications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:59:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

