A Novel Credible Railway Traffic Wireless Information System
Guochun WAN1,2, Rongxing DUAN1, Decun DONG1 , L. CHEN2
1. Tongji University, Shanghai, P. R. China, 201804 2. Jiangxi Science and Technology Normal University, Nanchang, P. R. China, 330013
springbegins@126.com

Keywords: Credible transmission system, LDPC, Adapter, BER.
Abstract
Railway vehicle information collection is an important section for the traffic safety on the urban railway and it is helpful and necessary to monitor the fault behavior of railway vehicle. So probe-vehicle technique is an effective method of collecting real-time traffic information on train-ground networks. A technically feasible and cost-effective wireless communication network is in great demand so that large amounts of traffic data sampled by probe vehicles over a large geographical area can be sent to vehicle working condition dectect processing centre. However, how to design such a wireless network forms a major bottleneck of probe system, In this paper, we address a novel credible railway traffic wireless information system. We describe the architecture of a LDPC-based triple modular redundancy (TMR) traffic information system, and provide the details of adapter hardware implement. By means of computer simulation, we evaluate the train-ground system BER and FER performance, in the condition of the same redundancy and the same decoding complexity , the performance of joint source channel coding and sequential decoding using TDMP algorithm in AWGN channel is compared, and a lower error rate is obtained compared single and redundant channel decoding system. The LDPC-based train-ground system attains an order of magnitude improvement in coding gain at moderate to high SNR values.
1 Introduction
Under the general trend of the network about urban rail transport and the security of equipment operations and maintenance, the electrization, informazation, netlization, standardlization and intelligentization of the terrestrial equipment in urban orbit transportation show up early, being able to adapt to the needs of network operations. However, the status of networks, real-time, standardization and intelligent technology about monitor urban rail transport vehicles is very retardant. This will affect the development of urban orbit transportation network operations and security of maintenance and management. This show that the real-time collecting of the information of train traffic conditions and how to timely transfer it to the ground vehicle condition monitoring system are all have long-term significance to

make good urban rail transport network operation and well systems security and equipment maintenance and management network.
Real-time traffic information is an essential and important factor in such Intelligent Transportation System as congestion management, traffic control, route guidance, traffic accident detection and so on. Using vehicles as probes is a flexible and low-cost way to obtain real-time traffic information. The key idea of using probe vehicles to collect traffic information is that a vehicle running on the railroad which is a part of the traffic stream is reasonable representative of the behavior of the traffic and has the capability to provide a richer insight into network performance. The trajectory followed by a vehicle is an integral part of the highway travel experience and hence important for a traffic management system. Compared to the conventional stationary detectors, probe vehicles may provide benefits such as an easier implementation, more precise information and lowered costs for constructing and maintaining the information collection system [1].
The multi-path delay spread and Doppler shifts associated with the multi-path propagation have significant distortion effects on the performance of the communication system, and network topology changes so frequently when vehicles travel with high speed, wireless transmission techniques form a major bottleneck of the wireless data collection technique [2]. The channel encoder codes the information sequence so that it can recover the correct information after passing through a channel. The decoder reconstructs the original information by the knowledge of the code used by the channel encoder and the redundancy contained in the received data. Then, a source decoder decompresses the data and retrieves the original information. The probability of having an error in the output sequence is a function of the code characteristics, the type of modulation, and channel characteristics such as noise and interference level, etc.[3].
In this paper, we propose a novel traffic information system based on train-ground dectection system to gather real-time speed, location and other sensing data sampled by moving probe vehicles, focusing on wireless communication aspects. We address a system architecture which does not depend on any existing wireless cellular network.

36
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2 System architecture
2.1 The whole truss of the system
The whole truss of the system is showed in figure 1. The information is transmitted to the Ā existed vehicle detect systemāon the floor to realize the information processing of the black block in time; the statuses and faults of the vehicle detect systems are collected by the intellective complex sensors and the information of the black block is collected too. The collected information is saved by the vehicle information processor, the classify of the information and the faults, the intellective analysis of the faults and the alarm clew, the showing to the driver are all done by the processor. The interface of communication and the conversion of the protocol in the wireless channel, the multiplexing and demultiplexing of the information, and the source encode are all realized by the communication adapter. There are three methods of transmission in wireless channel. The information on the floor is transmitted by the existed communication network on the floor. The communication with the existed vehicle detect system is realized by the protocol convertor. The vehicle information detect system is explored independently according to the existed vehicle detect system to meet the need to repair the vehicles and maintenance management. The intellective arbiter of the vehicle information can do the option of the faults processing handed by the existed vehicle detect system and the vehicle information detect system, and the information is provided to the driver by the communication network on the floor, also through the wireless channel and the vehicle communication equipments.

system” in Fig.1 mainly adopt embedded hardware and software technique; “Vehicle working condition detect system” mainly adopts database, visual programming, 3D showing, visual presentation based on GIS-E, information intelligent processing ǃ systems modelling, computer and storage technology etc and system integration technology, especially the standard of system interface, information flow, system function and so on.

2.2 The concrete logical framework of vehicle condition detect system
The concrete logical framework of Vehicle Condition Detect System is shown as Fig.2. The overall framework of the vehicle working condition plan mainly contains four processes as information collection-information analysisinformation processing-information control from the running step viewpoint, and mainly contains four parts as vehicle transmission network-station-control center from the substantial hardware of the system.

Fig. 1 The whole truss of the system.

2.3 Implementation methods and technique of the system
Nowadays, embedded technique has rapidly developed and has been widely used in scientific research, engineering design, military technology and daily life of human beings because of its small size and low cost. Data interaction between communication modes based on embedded system is the main research direction of real-time monitoring equipment of track transportation.

“Intelligent compound sensor”, “Communication adapter”, “Vehicle-mounted information preprocessor”, “Protocol converter”, “Vehicle working condition detecting intelligent decision machine” and “Special wireless communicate

Fig.2 The logical framework of the system.

37
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3 LDPC-based communication adapter design
LDPC codes and Turbo codes are among the best known near Shannon limit codes that can achieve good BER performace for low SNR applications [3]-[7] as shown in Table 1. When compared to the decoding algorithm of Turbo codes, LDPC decoding algorithm has more parallelization, low implementation complexity, low decoding latency, as well as no error-floors at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs).

Table 1 BER performance for different codes

Rate 1/2 Code

SNR required for

BER<1e-5

Shannon,Random Code

0dB

(255,123)BCH

5.4dB

Convolutional Code

4.5dB

Iterative Code Turbo

0.7dB

Itertive Code LDPC

0.0045dB

3.1 LDPC codes [6]
An LDPC code is a linear block code defined by a sparse parity-check matrix H=[hij]mhn and is described by a bipartite or factor graph whose reduced adjacency matrix is H. The graph has on one side check nodes {c1,c2,…,cm} corresponding to the m rows of H, and on the other n bit nodes {b1,b2,…,bn} corresponding to the n columns of H . A bit-node bj is connected to a check node cj if the entry of hij is 1. The rate of the code is at least 1-m/n. In a regular (c , r)LDPC code, bit nodes have degree c and check nodes have degree r in the graph. The number of edges in the corresponding bipartite graph is the Hamming weight of H given by ¹(H)=nc=mr, and the density of H is defined as d(H)= ¹(H)/mn =c/m.=r/n. The minimum distance of these codes increases linearly with the block length n for a given code rate and node degrees r and cand.

passes through the source encoder and channel encoder.

LDPC codes are are used as channel encoders. The wireless

communication channel is the physical medium that is used to

send the signal between railway vehicles and ground systems.

The authors in [6] introduced the concept of turbo decoding

message (TDMP) using BCJR for their architecture-aware

LDPC codes. Owing to all kinds of noise from running

machine and diverse channel condition, vehicle-ground

wireless communication data error probability will inevitably

increase. we present a new design method of totally self

checking (TSC) TMR voter as shown in Fig.4.

Random packets generator

Padding

kbch

BB scrambling

Outer coding nbch Inner coding

kbch BCH (kldpc) LDPC nldpc

encoder

encoder

Block interleaver

nldpc

Mapping

IQ

Noise

FER

(From running BER

Wireless Channel

railway vehicle)

Depadding

LDPC decoder Model 1

Block deinterleaver 1

Soft

A

demapping

IQ

BCH

BB

decoder

descrambling kbch

kbch

Outer decoding

TSC/TMR Voter

LDPC decoder

Block

Soft

B

Model 2 nbch

deinterleaver 2 demapping

(kldpc) LDPC decoder

Block

Soft

C

Model 3

deinterleaver 3 demapping

nldpc Inner decoding

nldpc

Fig.4 Block diagram of traffic information system

Communication adapter

In the section, we propose a programmable decoder core architectures implenting the TDMP algorithm that builds upon the optimization performance according to the paper [8] as shown in Fig.5. All decoder architectures are layered strategies based on message scheduler. Normalized min-sum algorithms are adopted in check node refresh units.

In an irregular (CˈR) -LDPC code, the bit-node and check node degrees are drawn from the sets R and C, respectively. Typically, regular codes are easier to encode and have a simpler decoder architecture than irregular codes, however the latter achieve higher coding gain.

Fig. 3 Bipartite graph of a binary regular (2, 3)-LDPC code of Fig.5 Decoder architecture implementing TDMP algorithm length 9

4 Performance evaluation

3.2 The realization of system adapter design
Figure 4 shows an adapter block diagram of railway traffic wireless information. First, random packet train data or ground data is quantized to form a digital sequence, then it

To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed traffic wireless information system, we compare the FER and BER perforance. FER performance result based on AWGN of one channel (A or B) data input and three channel (ABC)

38
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

redundancy input are shown in Fig.6. Figure 7 compares the BER performance of credible train-ground information exchange system architectures in which TSC and TMR voter is working.

The proposal train-ground communication in this paper has a faster convergence speed compared with the standard decoding algorithm requiring on average 50% less iterations to converge, and attains an order of magnitude improvement in coding gain at moderate to high SNR values. The algorithm offers a better performance/complexity trade off when the number of decoding iterations is small.

References

[1] [2]

[3]

Fig.6 FER performance of traffic information system (4QAM,

interations:10, AWGN)

[4]

[5] [6] [7]

[8]
Fig.7 BER performance of traffic information system (4QAM, interations:10, AWGN)

K. K. Sanwal and J. Walrand, “Vehicles as probe,” California PATH research report, U. C. Berkeley-ITSPWP-95-11, Aug. 1995. Standard Specification for Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Roadside and Vehicle Systems - 5GHz Band Dedicated Short Range Communications (DSRC) Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, ASTM E2213-03,Sep. 2003. M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Turbo decoder architectures for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. (IEEE GLOBECOM), Taipei, Taiwan, Nov. 2002, pp.13831388. S. Chung, Jr., G. D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 db of the shannon limit,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 5, issue 2, pp. 58-60, Feb. 2001. A. Dholakia and S. Olcer, “Rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes fordigital subscriber lines,” in Proc. IEEE International Conference on Communications, Jun. 2004, pp. 415–419. M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag. “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans.VLSSyst, vol.11. No.6. pp. 976-996, Dec,2003. J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. COM-50, pp. 406-414, March 2002. WAN Guochun, LUO Yanfen, DONG Decun. “Research on LDPC Codes Based on VCDS,” 2009 4th IEEE Conference on Industrial Electronics and Applications, Xi’An, China, pp.955-959.

5 Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a novel credible traffic information system LDPC-based to gather real-time speed, location and other sensing data directly from moving probe vehicles and present a memory efficient multi-rate decoder architecture. We describe the system architecture and decoder architecture implementing TDMP algorithm. The system performance is evaluated through computer simulations.

39
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

