IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

53

The Trapping Redundancy of Linear Block Codes
Stefan Laendner, Student Member, IEEE, Thorsten Hehn, Student Member, IEEE, Olgica Milenkovic, Member, IEEE, and Johannes B. Huber, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We generalize the notion of the stopping redundancy in order to study the smallest size of a trapping set in Tanner graphs of linear block codes. In this context, we introduce the notion of the trapping redundancy of a code, which quantifies the relationship between the number of redundant rows in any parity-check matrix of a given code and the size of its smallest trapping set. Trapping sets with certain parameter sizes are known to cause error-floors in the performance curves of iterative belief propagation (BP) decoders, and it is therefore important to identify decoding matrices that avoid such sets. Bounds on the trapping redundancy are obtained using probabilistic and constructive methods, and the analysis covers both general and elementary trapping sets. Numerical values for these bounds are computed for the [2640; 1320] Margulis code and the class of projective geometry codes, and compared with some new code-specific trapping set size estimates.
Index Terms—Belief propagation (BP), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Margulis codes, projective geometry (PG) codes, trapping redundancy, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE performance of linear error-correcting codes (and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in particular) under iterative decoding depends on the choice of the parity-check matrix of the code. More precisely, the error rate of a code is influenced by a class of combinatorial entities determined by the choice of the parity-check matrix, such as stopping [1] and trapping sets [2], [3]. Stopping and trapping sets are defined in terms of constraints on the weights of rows in the parity-check matrix induced by subsets of its columns. Certain such restrictions on the weight distributions of the rows can only be satisfied if the parity-check matrix of the code has a sufficiently large number of judiciously chosen rows. Thus, recent work focused on introducing redundant rows into parity-check matrices of a code in order to ensure that the size of their smallest stopping sets are sufficiently large or equal to the minimum distance of the code [4]–[7]. Since adding

redundant rows to the parity-check matrix increases the de-

coding complexity of the code, it is important to understand the

inherent tradeoff between the size of the smallest stopping set

and the number of rows in a parity-check matrix. Several ideas

for addressing these issues that exploit properties of orthogonal

arrays and covering arrays [8] were described in [6], [4], and

[9].

The contributions of this work are three-fold. First, we gener-

alize the notion of the stopping redundancy for the case of trap-

ping sets, and term this combinatorial number the trapping re-

dundancy. Second, we describe simple probabilistic and deter-

ministic methods for upper-bounding the trapping redundancy

of binary linear block codes. Third, we present new analytical

techniques for estimating the sizes of small trapping sets in

the family of projective geometry (PG) codes and the Margulis

code, and compare these estimates with the upper

bounds.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides rele-

vant definitions and introduces the terminology used throughout

the paper. Section III contains the main results—probabilistic

and constructive upper bounds on the trapping redundancy of

codes. Section IV describes the relationship between trapping

sets and arcs in PG codes. In the same section, numerical results

for the trapping redundancy of the Margulis

and the

family of PG codes are compared with results concerning arcs

and elementary trapping sets in the family of Margulis codes.

Concluding remarks are given in Section V.

II. DEFINITIONS, BACKGROUND, AND TERMINOLOGY
We start by defining the notion of the restriction of (redundant) parity-check matrices and then proceed to introduce trapping sets and elementary trapping sets. Based on the notion of the restriction, we state the central definition of the paper, pertaining to the trapping redundancy of a linear block code.

Manuscript received December 29, 2006; revised May 30, 2008. Current version published December 24, 2008. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-0514921 awarded to O. Milenkovic, by a research fellowship from the Institute for Information Transmission, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, awarded to S. Laendner, and by a German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD) fellowship awarded to T. Hehn. The material in this paper was presented in part at the International Conference on Wireless Networks, Communications, and Mobile Computing (WirelessComm) 2005, Maui, HI, at the IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference (GlobeCom) 2006, San Francisco, CA, and at the Conference on Information Sciences and Systems (CISS) 2006, Princeton, NJ.
S. Laendner, T. Hehn, and J. B. Huber are with the Institute for Information Transmission, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, D-91058 Erlangen, Germany (e-mail: laendner@lnt.de; hehn@lnt.de; huber@lnt.de).
O. Milenkovic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL 61801-2918 USA (e-mail: milenkov@uiuc.edu).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associated Editor for Coding Theory.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2008.2008134

A. Near-Codewords and Trapping Sets

Decoding of LDPC codes is usually performed in an itera-

tive manner, using the suboptimal belief-propagation (BP) algo-

rithm. This decoding approach, also known as message passing,

can be seen as the process of exchanging reliability messages

along the edges of a bipartite Tanner graph. The incidence ma-

trix of the Tanner graph corresponds to the parity-check ma-

trix used for decoding, so that the code variables index the ver-

tices on the left-hand side of the graph, while the parity-check

equations index the right-hand side vertices of the graph. For a

more comprehensive treatment of LDPC codes and iterative de-

coding, the interested reader is referred to [10]–[12].

The error-floor phenomenon of iterative decoders was first

described by MacKay and Postol in [2], who observed that the

bit error rate curve of the

Margulis code exhibits a

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

54

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

sudden change of slope at signal-to-noise ratios approximately equal to 2.4 dB. This change of slope was attributed to the existence of near-codewords in the Tanner graph of the Margulis code with a parity-check matrix described in [13]. Nearcodewords are error vectors of small weight, with syndromes
that also have small weight. In his seminal paper [3], Richardson analyzed the effect of near-codewords on the performance of various classes of decoders and for a group of channels. He also introduced the notion of trapping sets to describe configurations of variable nodes in Tanner graphs of codes that cause failures of specific decoding schemes. There exist many different groups of trapping sets. For example, trapping sets of maximum-likelihood decoders are sets of variables containing the supports of codewords of the code; trapping sets of iterative decoders used for messages transmitted over the binary erasure channel are stopping sets [1]. For the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and BP decoding, no simple characterization of trapping sets is known. Nevertheless, extensive computer simulations revealed that a large number of trapping sets for this channel/decoder combination can be described in a simple and precise setting. Henceforth, we use the notion “trapping set” to refer exclusively to sets of the form described below. To define trapping sets, we first introduce the notion of the restriction of a matrix.

Definition 2.1: For a given

matrix

with

, the restriction of a set of columns

indexed by

is defined as an

submatrix of

consisting of the elements

.

For a given linear

code , with parity-check matrix

and corresponding Tanner graph , trapping sets are defined

as follows.

Definition 2.2: An

trapping set

is a collection

of variable nodes for which the subgraph in

induced

by

and its neighbors contains

odd-degree check

nodes.1 Equivalently, an

trapping set

of is a set

of columns with a restriction that contains odd-weight rows.

The class of trapping sets that exhibits the strongest influence on the performance of iterative decoders is the class of elementary trapping sets.

Definition 2.3: An elementary

trapping set is a set

of variable nodes for which all check nodes in the

subgraph induced by

and its neighbors have either

degree one or two, and there are exactly degree-one check

nodes. Alternatively, an elementary

trapping set is a

trapping set for which all nonzero rows in the restriction have

either weight one or two, and exactly rows have weight one.

For a fixed value of the parameter (or ), the problem of finding the trapping set with smallest parameter (or ) in a given parity-check matrix is NP-hard, and NP-hard to approximate [14]. This makes a general and complete characterization of the trapping set sizes and trapping redundancy prohibitively complex. We therefore focus our attention on deriving upper

= 0 1The case b 0 b > only.

corresponds to codewords. Henceforth, we consider the case

bounds on the trapping redundancy with set sizes restricted to

only, where denotes the minimum distance of the

code, and in particular, elementary trapping sets [15]. This is

motivated by recent studies that suggest that trapping sets most

detrimental to the code performance are elementary, and that

they have small

parameters, usually such that

[3], [16].

B. Redundant Parity-Check Matrices

For every linear

code , there exist many choices

for parity-check matrices, although for iterative decoding not

all of them may be adequate. This is due to the fact that some

parity-check matrices have irregular row- and column-weights

and that they contain a large number of stopping and trapping

sets [6]. In order to mitigate this problem, one may resort to

the use of redundant parity-check matrices, i.e., matrices that

contain more than

rows, although they have row-rank

equal to

. Examples of the use of redundant parity-check

matrices for signaling over the binary erasure channel can be

found in [6], [4], [17], [18].

Henceforth, we use the phrase redundant parity-check matrix

to refer to a parity-check matrix with row-rank

that has

more than rows. A redundant parity-check matrix contains

rows that are a linear combination of other rows that represent a

basis of the dual code . For a fixed basis, rows of this form are

referred to as redundant rows. On the other hand, a parity-check

matrix of full row-rank and dimension

is simply

termed a parity-check matrix. Redundant parity-check matrices

are used to impose specific constraints on the structure of their

corresponding Tanner graphs. Even one judiciously chosen re-

dundant row can be used to lower the error floor of the Margulis

code. This is achieved in terms of rendering the structure of a

selected small trapping set so as to increase the number of its

corresponding unsatisfied parity-check equations. From an ap-

plication point of view, it is of interest to identify one or a few

redundant rows that can be added to the parity-check matrix in

order to eliminate a trapping set causing a special instant of de-

coding failure. Note that one or a few redundant rows of low

weight do not significantly alter the performance of a code in the

waterfall region, although they may have a significant bearing

on its performance in the error-floor region. In what follows, we

consider the more general theoretical problem of determining

the smallest number of redundant rows needed to simultane-

ously eliminate the negative effect of classes of trapping sets

on the performance of iterative decoders. In this context, our re-

sults can be seen as a generalization of the findings in [6] for the

case of trapping sets.

An analytical study of the trapping redundancy is presented

in the following section.

III. THE TRAPPING REDUNDANCY: A PROBABILISTIC APPROACH
We investigate the fundamental theoretical tradeoffs between the number of rows in a redundant parity-check matrix of a code and the size of its smallest trapping set with a given set of parameters.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAENDNER et al.: THE TRAPPING REDUNDANCY OF LINEAR BLOCK CODES

55

A. Definition and Bounds of the Trapping Redundancy
In all our subsequent derivations, we make use of the following definition.

Definition 3.1: [8, p. 5] An orthogonal array of strength

is an array of dimensions

such that every

subarray

contains each possible -tuple as rows the same number of times.

The codewords of an

linear code form an orthog-

onal array of dimension

and strength

, where

denotes the dual distance of . Note that if is an array of

strength , then is also an orthogonal array of strength , for

all integers

.

Let

denote the number of

trapping sets in

the parity-check matrix . We have the following result for

corresponding to a matrix that consists of all

codewords of the dual code.

Proposition 3.2: Let consist of all

dual code of an

linear code , for

for all pairs

such that

.

codewords of the . Then , and

Proposition 3.2 shows that a parity-check matrix that consists

of all codewords of the dual code cannot contain trapping sets

with

variables with less than or more than

checks connected to them an odd number of times. This

is a direct consequence of the fact that in this case represents

an orthogonal array, so that each restriction of

columns of contains each vector of length the same number

of times. Consequently, there are

rows in the restriction

of the columns that have even weight and

rows that

have odd weight.

However, it is of much larger importance to determine if there

exist parity-check matrices with a number of rows significantly

smaller than

that are free of trapping sets with fixed pa-

rameters , for all

. For this purpose, we introduce

the notion of the

trapping redundancy of a code.

Definition 3.3: The

trapping redundancy

of

an

linear code is the smallest number of rows

of any (redundant) parity-check matrix which does not con-

tain trapping sets with parameters

. Sim-

ilarly, the smallest number of rows

in a (redundant)

parity-check matrix of avoiding elementary

trapping

sets with

is referred to as the

elementary trap-

ping redundancy of .

Theorem 3.4: Let be an

code and its dual. Use

to denote the ensemble of all

matrices with rows

chosen independently and at random, with replacement, from

the set of

codewords of . Furthermore, let

be fixed, let

be the number of trapping sets

with parameters

, in a randomly chosen

matrix from

, and let e denote the base of the natural

logarithm. If

rows that does not contain any

trapping

sets with

.

Note that

, for any satisfying (1), represents

an upper bound on the trapping redundancy of the code, i.e.,

.

Proof: The proof of the claimed result is based on Lovász

Local Lemma (LLL), stated below following the exposition of

[19].

Lemma 3.5: Let

be a set of events in an arbi-

trary probability space. Suppose that each event is indepen-

dent of all other events

, except for at most

of them, and that

for all

. If

(2)

then

.

Let be the event that the restriction of the th collection (out of ) of columns from a randomly chosen matrix in
contains fewer than odd rows. Then

(3)

Equation (3) follows from the fact that the codewords of the dual

code form an orthogonal array of strength , and that there-

fore even- and odd-weight rows in the restriction are equally

likely. This is true independent of the choice of , provided that

. The orthogonal array property of strength

implies that all row-vectors of length up to are equally

likely; henceforth, restricting the number of columns to lie in

the range

ensures that two events and

, are independent as long as their corresponding sets

of column indices are disjoint.

In the above setting,

denotes the probability that the

randomly chosen matrix is free of trapping sets with parameters

, for all

. In order to complete the proof, it

suffices to observe that the following relationship holds for the

dependence number of the events :

(4)
Expression (4) is a consequence of the fact that two collections of columns are “dependent” if and only if they share at least one column. In other words, if one collection of columns is fixed, another collection of the same size is deemed independent from it if its columns are chosen from the remaining set of columns. The last line of (4) follows from the Vandermonde convolution formula, which asserts that

(1)

then

. Consequently, if satisfies (1),

then there exists a parity-check matrix of with not more than where

denote nonnegative integers.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

56

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

In the worst case, additional

rows may be needed

to make the randomly chosen matrix have full row-rank

.

This is due to the fact that a matrix containing no

trapping

sets must have rank at least one.

Note that appending

additional rows to the selected

set of rows can only increase the number of odd-weight rows

in each restriction, and hence cannot reduce the value of the

parameter . This completes the proof of the theorem.

Although Theorem 3.4 ensures the existence of at least one

matrix in

that is free of trapping sets with given pa-

rameters , the actual probability of selecting such a matrix

may be very small. It is therefore of interest to identify values of

the parameter for which the probability of drawing a matrix

of the desired form from the ensemble

is close to one.

then

. Consequently, if satisfies (7),

then there exists a parity-check matrix of with no more than

rows that does not contain any elementary

trapping sets with

.

Note that

, with any satisfying (7) repre-

sents an upper bound on the elementary trapping redundancy,

i.e.,

.

Proof: The proof follows the proof of Theorem 3.4. Let

be the event that the restriction of the th collection of columns

from a randomly chosen matrix in

contains only rows

of weight at most two. Among these rows, fewer than rows are

required to have weight one.

Let denote the number of rows of weight in the restric-

tion of columns. Then

Theorem 3.6: For a linear code , let

be the number

of trapping sets with parameters

that exist in an arbitrarily chosen

array

from the

ensemble. If

(5) (8)

then

, where is given by (4), and

where

is a real number.

Consequently, if satisfies (5), then for small values of one

can find with high probability a (redundant) parity-check matrix

for with not more than

rows that does not contain

any

trapping sets with

.

Proof: The result in (5) is obtained from the high-proba-

bility variation of LLL [19], stated below.

where the second equation is a consequence of the fact that

Lemma 3.7: Let

be a set of events in an ar-

bitrary probability space, and let

. Suppose that each

event is independent of all other events , except for at most

of them. If

(6)

Equation (8) follows from the observation that the codewords of the dual code form an orthogonal array of strength , and that therefore all -, -, and -collections of rows of weight
and are equally likely, respectively.

then

.

To prove the theorem, let

denote the event

that the th collection of columns contains

rows

of odd weight. Replace the expression for

in (6) by the

right-hand side of (3) and use the formula for stated in (4).

We derive next upper bounds on the elementary trapping redundancy of linear block codes.

Theorem 3.8: Let be an

code and its dual. Let

be the ensemble of all

matrices with rows chosen

independently and at random, with replacement, from the set of

codewords of . Furthermore, let

be fixed and let

be the number of elementary trapping

sets with parameters

, in a randomly chosen

matrix of

. If

Similarly, based on the high-probability variation of LLL, one

can derive upper bounds on the number of rows needed to guar-

antee that a randomly chosen matrix has no elementary trap-

ping sets with a given set of parameters with probability at least

. The following theorem is an analogue of Theorem 3.6 for

the case of elementary trapping sets, i.e., with

defined

by (8).

Theorem 3.9: For a linear code , let of elementary trapping sets with parameters
in an ensemble. If

be the number array from the

(9)

(7) where is given in (4) and .

, then

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAENDNER et al.: THE TRAPPING REDUNDANCY OF LINEAR BLOCK CODES

57

For satisfying (9) and small values of , every randomly

constructed parity-check matrix of with no more than

rows does not contain elementary

trapping sets

with

.

If

is used to denote the event that the th col-

lection of columns contains only rows of weight at most two,

and less than rows of weight one, then the result represents a

straightforward application of the high-probability variation of

LLL. The proof is therefore omitted.

B. The Trapping Redundancy: A Constructive Approach

The problem of finding the trapping redundancy of a linear block code can also be addressed in a deterministic manner, by invoking arguments similar to those used for upper-bounding the stopping redundancy of codes. The results of this analysis are summarized in the theorem below, for the case that the parameter of the trapping set is bounded from above by .

Theorem 3.10: Let be an

rameter

, and let

Then

linear code. Fix the pa.

where

and , i.e., (10)

Furthermore, the smallest number of rows in a (redundant)

parity-check matrix avoiding elementary trapping sets with

parameters

, is upper-bounded by

If

and

, (10) can be substantially

tightened. In this case, it reads as

for general trapping sets, and

for elementary trapping sets.

Let denote the number of odd-weight rows in an arbitrary

restriction of columns on a parity-check matrix . Since

has full rank, contains at least one odd-weight row and

therefore

holds. It is now easy to show that

adding all linear combinations of two rows to the parity-check

matrix ensures that

holds for all -sets of columns.

For

, there are

odd-weight rows among all

linear combinations of pairs of rows. Adding those linear

combinations to the parity-check matrix brings the number of

odd-weight rows to

. This

follows from the simple observation that the weight of the sum

of one odd- and one even-weight word is always odd. Therefore,

to avoid

trapping sets with

, at most

rows suffice.

As a final remark, note that in many applications, decoding

failure caused by trapping sets can only be detected upon com-

pletion of the decoding process. In this case, one can choose

to add only a small number of judiciously chosen redundant

rows to the parity-check matrix of the code in order to elimi-

nate the influence of one particular trapping set. How this can

be accomplished is illustrated on the example of the Margulis

code, in Section IV-A.

(11)

Note that both claims in Theorem 3.10 also hold for all trap-

ping sets with parameters , where .

Proof: Let be an arbitrary parity-check matrix of the

code of full row rank

. Consider the restriction

of on an arbitrary subset of of its columns. Due to the fact

that

, these columns are linearly independent, so that

the row-rank of must be . Hence, there exist rows in

that form a basis for .

From , form a new redundant parity-check matrix by

adding all linear combinations of at least two, but not more than

rows of , where will be determined later. The total

number of rows in in this case equals the right-hand side

of the expression in (10). Since adding all possible linear com-

binations of not more than rows of to would ensure

that

, leaving out sums involving

rows

can reduce the number of odd-weight rows in by at most

. This completes the proof of the first claim. The

C. Asymptotic Formulas for the Trapping Redundancy
Although there is no explicit formula for as defined by (1) and (5) that holds for all possible parameter values and , such a formula can be found in the asymptotic regime
, by using the following results from [20, p. 240] and [21].
Let

where

, and

. Since small values for

the parameter are of special interest, assume that

. In

this case, we have

where the notation

describes the following

relationship between two functions

and

of :

.

For

, with

, and

, (1)

reduces to

proof of the second claim represents a straightforward exten-

sion of the results in [6], and is therefore omitted.

Simple inspection reveals that the bounds in (10) are loose By invoking the well-known asymptotic formula

when compared to the random bounds described in the previous section.

(12)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

58

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

where

denotes Shannon’s binary entropy function, and Using the above expression, (7) reduces to

represents the logarithm with base two, it follows that

with

(13)

Also, for

, with

, and

, This leads to a bound

with

the high-probability variation of LLL given in (5) reduces to

(14)

(17)

Using (12) once again results in an upper bound on the

number of rows in a parity-check matrix free of

trapping sets,

, i.e.,

with

where we used (12) to rewrite the right-hand side of the above

expression. Similarly, for the high-probability variation of LLL

and for elementary trapping sets, we obtain as a consequence of

(9) the bound

with

(15)

Note that for sufficiently large , the right-hand side is not

(18)

dependent on as

.

D. Asymptotic Formulas for the Elementary Trapping Redundancy
Likewise, it is also of interest to find an explicit formula for given by (7) for the case of elementary trapping sets. To this end, we use the following asymptotic result taken from [21], stating that

Based on the results of the previous sections, it is also straightforward to see that the asymptotic formula for the trapping redundancy of Theorem 3.10 is of the form
(19)

where

.

(16)

where and rewritten as

is a positive integer, . By observing that the summands in (7) can be

it follows from substituting

and

that

Remark: Note that the matrices from the ensemble

,

for large , may have highly nonuniform row and column

weights. The variable- and check-node degrees of their cor-

responding Tanner graphs may be very large, leading to the

emergence of short cycles. It is therefore important to compare

the derived bounds with some benchmark values, the latter

corresponding to redundant matrices that are known to have

a small number of redundant rows, no short cycles, as well

as no small trapping sets. Two such examples, including the

aforementioned Margulis and projective geometry codes, are

discussed in the next section. Other families of codes, such as

codes based on Latin squares and designs, are analyzed in more

detail in the companion paper [22].

IV. TRAPPING REDUNDANCY: ANALYTICAL COMPARISONS

We perform next a numerical study of the probabilistic upper

bounds derived in Section III for the Margulis

code

and the class of projective geometry codes. The goal of the com-

parative study is to both assess the tightness of the bounds of

Section III and to demonstrate that structured LDPC codes with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAENDNER et al.: THE TRAPPING REDUNDANCY OF LINEAR BLOCK CODES

59

TABLE I
UPPER BOUNDS ON THE (a; b) TRAPPING REDUNDANCY T
MARGULIS CODE

(C) OF THE

TABLE II
UPPER BOUNDS ON THE (a; b) ELEMENTARY TRAPPING REDUNDANCY T (C)
OF THE MARGULIS CODE

redundant parity-check matrices can avoid small trapping sets in their Tanner graphs.
Note that the presented results only capture the tradeoff between the smallest size of general and elementary trapping sets and the number of rows in the corresponding (redundant) paritycheck matrix, without taking into consideration other important matrix properties such as variable- and check-nodes degree, girth, and cycle length distribution.

A. The

Margulis Code

Numerical values of the trapping redundancy derived in Sec-

tion III for the

Margulis code are listed in Tables I

and II. The labels LLL (std), LLL (hp) refer to the bounds based

on LLL in standard form and its high-probability variation, re-

spectively. The symbol denotes the number of rows required

by the LLL approach, while refers to the number of rows of

a redundant, rank

parity-check matrix, which is an upper

bound on the trapping redundancy,

. As the exact

minimum distance is not known for this code, a method [23]

for approximating the minimum distance, proposed in [24], was

used instead. The estimate at hand is

, and we restrict our

attention to values of the parameter strictly (and significantly)

smaller than

.

The full-rank

parity-check matrix of the Mar-

gulis code, constructed in the standard manner [25], contains

no cycles of length less than eight, but includes a large number

of

and

elementary trapping sets [3], [16]. The

LLL-based bounds reveal that there exists a matrix of full rank

with at most 1336 rows that does not contain elementary

trapping sets, with , and that adding at most 19 additional

rows ensures that the matrix does not contain elementary

trapping sets either.

It can also be seen from Table I that there exists a matrix of

row-rank with 1394 rows that is free of trapping sets

of size

. However, for a parity-check matrix free of

elementary trapping sets of the same parameters, Table II shows

that only 1351 rows are needed.

These bounds cover the case of fixed values only. Note that

finding analogs of these results that cover a range of general

trapping set sizes instead may be desirable for certain prac-

tical applications. Due to the monotonic increase of the trapping

redundancy with the value of the parameter , one can see that

if a set of rows, randomly drawn from the codewords of the dual

code, does not contain trapping sets of size with high proba-

bility, then this set is also very unlikely to support trapping sets

of size smaller than . For example, to obtain a matrix free of

trapping sets,

, according to the high-probability

version of LLL with

one needs

216 rows, so

that

. With high probability, this matrix does also

avoid

trapping sets, , due to the LLL-based study.

Note that for elementary trapping sets, Table I indicates that

the larger the value of the parameter , the smaller the number

of redundant rows that is needed to eliminate such trapping sets.

This result may seem counterintuitive, but it follows from the

fact that trapping sets are deemed elementary only as their re-

striction does not contain rows of weight larger than two—an

event that becomes less likely with the increase of the param-

eter .

We complete this section by illustrating how a simple struc-

tured method can be used to add only one redundant parity-

check equation so as to increase the value of the parameter

in any given

or

trapping set.

Example 4.1: The knowledge about the structure of specific

trapping sets—such as the elementary

and

trap-

ping sets—in the

Margulis code can be used to

eliminate single instances of such sets.

First, we observe that the support of any

trapping

set contains the support of a

trapping set—i.e., the sets

are nested. Throughout the remainder of this section, we call

the variables and checks introduced by extending a

to a

trapping set expansion variables and expansion checks,

respectively. The notation B, E, and O is used to refer to the

basic

trapping set, its expansion variables and checks,

and the graph outside (i.e., complementary to) the

trap-

ping set, respectively. Since the Margulis code is regular, with

variable node degree

and check node degree

,

an elementary

trapping set with variables and check

nodes of degree one2 has a fixed number of checks. Therefore,

in order to extend an elementary

trapping set to an el-

ementary

trapping set, two variables and three checks

have to be added. The notions of basic, expansion, and outside

variables and check nodes are illustrated in Fig. 1.

Since the Margulis code has no four-cycles, at most one

expansion check can be connected to both the expansion

variables. Consequently, either three or four edges emanating

from the expansion variables are connected to expansion check

nodes, while the remaining edges are connected to check nodes

whose degree in the basic

trapping set is one. Thus,

there exist only two possible configurations for such trapping

sets, as shown in Fig. 1.

Now, based only on the knowledge of check nodes of de-

gree one within the basic

trapping set, it is straightfor-

ward to determine the whole expansion set: in the first case,

2These check nodes, incidentally, correspond to unsatisfied check nodes, that can be readily identified upon termination of the iterative decoding process.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

60

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

Fig. 1. Trapping set structure of a (12; 4) trapping set and its expansion. (Left) First configuration; (right) second configuration.

TABLE III

three different methods for linearly combining the parity-check

RESTRICTION OF THE BASIC TRAPPING SET AND THE EXPANSION VARIABLES equations with restrictions as shown in Table III.

Method

refers to adding the rows indexed by

, and

. Method refers to adding the rows indexed

by

and

. Observe that all these combi-

nations have a restriction of weight one within the expansion

variables. Method differs from the previous methods in so

far that it may generate redundant parity-check equations with

odd-weight restrictions that are not necessarily of weight one.

the two degree-one checks of the basic

trapping set are

connected through two variable nodes to one additional check

node. These two variable nodes are the expansion variables. In

the second configuration, the expansion variables do not share

a check node.

For the first configuration, denote the two expansion variables

by and . Furthermore, denote the check node connected

to both these variables by . The degree-one check nodes in the

basic trapping set neighboring the expansion variables are de-

noted by

and , while the variable nodes in the basic

trapping set connected to check nodes

and

are de-

noted by

and , respectively. The check nodes of de-

gree one in the expansion of the trapping set are named

and . The two remaining check nodes of degree one in the

basic trapping set are termed

and , and the variable

nodes within the basic

trapping set connected to them

are

and , respectively (see Fig. 1(left)). The config-

uration involving all the aforementioned checks and variables is

illustrated in Table III.

The parity-check equations containing the restriction de-

scribed in Table III can be linearly combined to generate a

redundant parity-check equation that has a restriction of odd

Candidate equations are obtained by adding the rows indexed

by

,

,

,

and

,

The Hamming weight of the constructed

rows is an even integer between and . The lower bound

is obtained if the supports of two added parity-checks share

exactly one element. The intersection of the supports cannot

have more than one element, since the code has no four-cycles.

The upper bound is met when four parity-check equations

are added and none of the variables listed in Table III occur in

the support of more than one parity check.

If a trapping set of the form shown in Fig. 1(right) is present in

the code graph, then the two expansion variables cannot have a

common check node. Consequently, the expansion variable

is connected to two of the degree-one check nodes of the basic

trapping set.3 If there is only one variable node connected to two

degree-one checks, denoted by

and , the variable of

interest is the expansion variable , which is also connected

to expansion check node . Observe that the expansion vari-

able is strongly influenced by its two neighboring check

nodes connected to the outside graph and it cannot be uniquely

determined. Due to this limited knowledge of the expansion

weight in both the

and the

trapping set. There are 3One must keep in mind that the choice for such a variable may not be unique.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAENDNER et al.: THE TRAPPING REDUNDANCY OF LINEAR BLOCK CODES

61

set, there are only two possible ways to generate a redundant

parity-check with an odd restriction weight on the basic trap-

ping set, involving the sums of the rows

as well as

. A similar analysis can be conducted for

trapping sets. Details regarding this procedure are omitted.

As illustrated by the example, knowledge about the structure of trapping sets allows one to exactly determine the choice of the redundant row to be added to the parity-check matrix. Unfortunately, since there are at least 1320 trapping sets of each such form in the code graph, adding this many rows to the code matrix is undesirable. Nevertheless, as already pointed out, only one row can be added upon detecting the presence of a decoding failure caused by a given trapping set.

mainder of the paper, we consider projective plane codes,

, and codes based on projective geometries with

only.

Definition 4.2: An -arc in PG is a collection of points such that no three of them are collinear. The lines incident to an -arc are either unisecants (they intersect the arc in exactly one point) or bisecants (they intersect the arc in exactly two points). Similarly, an -cap in PG is a set of points, no three of which are collinear.

The following results pertaining to unisecants and bisecants are taken from [28, Ch. 8] and [29, Ch. 16].

Lemma 4.3: Let and denote the number of unisecants and bisecants of an -arc in PG , respectively. Then

B. Projective Geometry Codes

and

(21)

Projective geometry codes are linear block codes with many Similarly, for an -cap in PG well-known combinatorial parameters and properties. As will

it holds that

be shown next, it is also straightforward to characterize a large

(22)

subfamily of trapping sets in these codes. We start our derivations by introducing the relevant termi- where denotes the number of unisecants of .

nology.

Lemma 4.4: The largest arc in PG contains at most

Definition 4.1: [26] A finite projective geometry PG

of

dimension , over a finite field GF , for some prime power

, is a set of points and subsets thereof, called lines.

The following axioms hold for the points and lines of a finite

points, for even, and points, for odd. Arcs with

and

are called ovals and hyperovals, respectively. The

size of any -cap in PG satisfies

. For , a

-cap is called an ovaloid.

geometry.

• Two distinct points determine a unique line.

• Every line consists of more than two points.

• For every pair of distinct lines and , intersecting at

some point , there exist two pairs of points

and

that differ from , such that the lines

determined by

and

intersect as well.

• For each point and for each line, there exist at least two

lines and two points that are not incident to them, respec-

tively.

The points of a projective geometry PG

can be repre-

sented by nonzero

-tuples

such

that

GF . Points of the form

and

GF

, are con-

sidered equivalent. A line through two distinct points

and

consists of all

points that can be expressed as

,

where

GF and are not both simultaneously

zero. Consequently, a projective geometry PG

has

points, and each line in the geometry

contains

points. The number of lines in a projective

geometry is given by

The results of Lemmas 4.3 and 4.4 can be used to establish the following simple results regarding trapping sets in the Tanner graph of type-I projective geometry codes. Note that all stated results restrict the parameter sets for which trapping sets may potentially exist, although they do not imply the existence of such sets.

Corollary 4.5: All elementary trapping sets of a PG ,

type-I, projective geometry code have parameters

. Consequently, the number of degree-one check nodes of

such trapping sets for odd is necessarily larger than or equal

to the number of variables in the trapping set. For even values of

, an exception to the aforementioned rule is a hyperoval, which

represents a codeword. The trapping sets with the smallest ratio

have parameters

( odd) and

( even),

respectively, and those with the largest ratio

.

Proof: Note that the parity-check matrix of a PG

code is the line-point incidence matrix of the underlying PG.

Arcs correspond to a collection of columns, the restriction of

which has rows of weight at most two only, and exactly of

these rows have weight one. This is equivalent to the definition

of an

trapping set, where

and also

( odd) or

( even), respectively, according to

(20)

Lemma 4.4. The smallest and largest ratios of are defined

by the limits of . Hyperovals have

points and

It is straightforward to see that the number of lines and points

coincide for

, since

to

unisecants, and therefore correspond trapping sets, which are codewords.

holds.

Corollary 4.6: All elementary trapping sets of a PG ,

A type-I projective geometry code is defined in terms of a type-I projective geometry code have parameters

parity-check matrix representing the line-point incidence ma-

. Provided that the PG contains an -arc with

trix of a projective geometry PG

[27]. Throughout the re-

, the trapping sets with the smallest and largest ratio

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

62

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

TABLE IV
UPPER BOUNDS ON THE (a; b) ELEMENTARY TRAPPING REDUNDANCY OF PG CODES

have parameters

and

,

respectively.

Proof: The proof follows along the lines of the proof of

Corollary 4.5, with

for PG .

. Upper bounds on these combinatorial numbers were

derived using Lovász Local Lemma and variations thereof. Also

presented were numerical results for the trapping redundancy of

the Margulis

and type-I PG codes.

A complete classification of trapping sets in projective geometry codes is probably an impossible task. This is due to the fact that very little is known about the number and existence of arcs and caps of different sizes in projective spaces. One aspect of this problem that is better understood is the existence and enumeration of complete arcs (and caps)—i.e., arcs and caps not

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for their constructive comments that significantly improved the exposition of the work. In addition, they would like to thank Dr. Tom J. Richardson for carefully handling the manuscript.

contained in any larger arc or cap. The interested reader is re-

ferred to [28], [29] for more information regarding the problem

of complete arc enumeration.

We compare next the upper bounds derived in Section III with

the results of the study presented in this section. We consider

elementary trapping sets only.

In order to apply the results of the lemmas in this section, one

has to consider a parity-check matrix that represents a complete

line-point incidence structure [27]. For this reason, the standard

parity-check matrices of PG codes contain exactly rows, and

are therefore redundant.

Table IV lists the number of rows required to avoid elemen-

tary trapping sets of a given size, computed according to LLL

and its high-probability variation. The values for are derived

using the minimum distance and the rank results taken from

[27].

Observe that Table IV indicates that there exists a parity-

check matrix for the PG

code with at most 175 rows and

no

, elementary trapping sets. This is significantly

less than

as for the PG code, but might also include

rows of large weight.

On the other hand, to obtain a matrix without such trapping

sets with probability larger than – , at most 309 rows are

required, a number clearly larger than .

Although there exist parity-check matrices for the PG codes

that have smaller row redundancy and do not contain elemen-

tary trapping sets of small sizes, the matrix defined by the PG

construction presents a way to generate a parity-check matrix

with limited redundancy, small row weight, and no four-cycles,

which also performs well in the waterfall region. As can be seen

from the comparison table, PG codes represent an attractive sys-

tematic construction of LDPC codes without small trapping sets,

whose redundancy lies between the bounds based on the stan-

dard case and the high-probability version of LLL.

V. CONCLUSION

We introduced the notion of the trapping redundancy of

a code, representing the smallest number of rows in any parity-

check matrix of the code that avoids

trapping sets with

REFERENCES
[1] C. Di, D. Proietti, I˙. E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[2] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and RamanujanMargulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science vol. 74, 2003 [Online]. Available: http:// www.cs.toronto.edu/~mackay/margulis.pdf, [Online]. Available
[3] T. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticallo, IL, Sep. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[4] J. Han and P. H. Siegel, “Improved upper bounds on stopping redundancy,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 90–104, Jan. 2007.
[5] R. Koetter, W.-C. W. Li, P. Vontobel, and J. Walker, “Characterizations of pseudo-codewords of LDPC codes,” Adv. Math., accepted for publication.
[6] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and stopping redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 922–932, Mar. 2006.
[7] J. Weber and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Stopping and dead-end set enumerators for binary hamming codes,” in Proc. 26th Symp. Information Theory in the Benelux, Brussels, Belgium, May 2005, pp. 165–172.
[8] A. Hedayat, N. Sloane, and J. Stufken, Orthogonal Arrays: Theory and Applications. New York: Springer-Verlag, 1999.
[9] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Stopping and trapping sets in generalized covering arrays,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Conf. Information Sciences and Systems (CISS), Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2006, pp. 259–264.
[10] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[11] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[12] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of LDPC codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[13] J. Rosenthal and P. Vontobel, “Constructions of regular and irregular LDPC codes using ramanujan graphs and ideas from margulis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory (ISIT), Washington, DC, June 2001, p. 4.
[14] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets in LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Lake Tahoe, CA, Sep. 2007.
[15] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[16] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Networks, Communications, and Mobile Computing (WirelessComm), Maui, HI, Jun. 2005, pp. 630–635.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAENDNER et al.: THE TRAPPING REDUNDANCY OF LINEAR BLOCK CODES

63

[17] H. Hollmann and L. Tolhuizen, “On parity-check collections for iterative erasure decoding that correct all correctable erasure patterns of a given size,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 823–828, Feb. 2007.
[18] T. Hehn, S. Laendner, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “Permutation decoding and the stopping redundancy hierarchy of cyclic codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5308–5331, Dec. 2008.
[19] N. Alon and J. Spencer, The Probabilistic Method, ser. Interscience Series in Discrete Mathematics and Optimization. New York: Wiley, 2000.
[20] M. Hofri, Analysis of Algorithms. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1995.
[21] P. Brockwell, “An asymptotic expansion for the tail of the binomial distribution and its application in queuing theory,” J. Appl. Probab., vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 163–169, Jun. 1964.
[22] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Codes based on latin squares: Cycle structure, stopping set, and trapping set analysis,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 303–312, Feb. 2007.
[23] X.-Y. Hu, “Source Code for Approximating the MinDist Problem of LDPC Codes. Error-Correcting Codes,” Website by D. MacKay [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/ MINDIST_ECC.html
[24] X.-Y. Hu, M. Fossorier, and E. Eleftheriou, “On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC), Paris, France, Jun. 2004, pp. 767–771.
[25] G. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, Mar. 1982.
[26] F. MacWilliams and N. Sloane, The Theory of Error-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977.
[27] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[28] J. Hirschfeld, Projective Geometeries Over Finite Fields. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1979, Oxford Mathematical Monographs.
[29] J. Hirschfeld, Finite Projective Spaces of Three Dimensions. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 1985, Oxford Mathematical Monographs.
Stefan Laendner (S’05) received the M.S. degree and the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Colorado at Boulder, in 2003 and the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, in 2004, respectively.
From 2004 to 2007, he was a graduate student in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering at the University of Colorado at Boulder. Since 2007, he has been with the Institute for Information Transmission, University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, where he is working towards the Ph. D. degree. His research interests include information theory, error-control coding, low-density parity-check codes, and iterative decoding algorithms.

Thorsten Hehn (S’04) received the diploma degree in electrical engineering from the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, in late 2003.
He is now with the Institute for Information Transmission at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, working towards the Ph. D. degree. In early 2006, he was a visiting researcher at the University of Colorado at Boulder, supported by the German Academic Exchange Service (DAAD). His research interests include channel coding, iterative decoding algorithms, low-density parity-check codes, and information theory.
In late 2006, a publication coauthored by T. Hehn received an award from the the German Society of Information Technology (ITG).
Olgica Milenkovic (S’01–M’03) received the M.S. degree in mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, in 2002.
She is currently with the University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. Her research interests include the theory of algorithms, bioinformatics, constrained coding, discrete mathematics, error-control coding, and probability theory.
Johannes B. Huber (M’87–SM’02–F’06) received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical engineering from the Technische Universitaet, Muenchen, Germany, in 1977. From 1977 to 1982, he was a research assistant at the Lehrstuhl für Nachrichtentechnik at Universität der Bundeswehr, München, from which he received the Dr.-Ing. degree with a thesis on coding for channels with memory. From 1982 to 1990, he was an Akademischer Oberrat at Universität der Bundeswehr, and received the Dr. habil. degree with a thesis on trellis coded modulation.
In 1991, he joined the IBM Research Laboratory, Zürich, Switzerland. Since the Autumn of 1991, he has been Professor at the Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany. His research interests are information and coding theory, modulation schemes, algorithms for signal detection and adaptive equalization for channels with severe intersymbol interference, signaling, detection, and equalization for multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) channels and concatenated coding together with iterative decoding. He is author or coauthor of a textbook on trellis coding and about 200 papers in international journals or conference records.
Prof. Huber was a Member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society from January 1999 to December 2001 and again from January 2004 to December 2006. From 1994 to 2004, he was a member of the Editorial Board of the International Journal on Electronics and Communications (AEÜ) and between 1997 and 2002, he was Editor-in-Chief of this journal. From 1996 to 1999, he was an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS. He has also been Chairman and member of the program committees of several international conferences on information theory and coding. Papers authored or coauthored by him were awarded by the Best Paper Award of the German Society of Information Technology (ITG) in 1988, 2000, and 2006. He also received the Vodafone award for innovations in mobile communications 2004. Since 2008, he has been a Corresponding Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh, Scotland.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:03:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

