2150

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 27, NO. 12, JUNE 15, 2009

On Analyzing Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Over Modified Welch–Costas-Coded Optical CDMA System
Jen-Fa Huang, Chao-Chin Yang, and Chun-Ming Huang

Abstract—A modified Welch–Costas (MWC) code family for the spectral-amplitude-coding (SAC) optical code-division multiple-access (OCDMA) system is proposed. On utilizing the property of the MWC codes, more compact coder/decoders can be realized via waveguide and fiber gratings. This system has a superior performance as compared to the previous Walsh–Hadamard-coded OCDMA system. In addition, we propose a new class of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes to improve the transmission performance over the MWC-coded OCDMA system when the data rate is high. Simulation results show that the coding gain of the proposed QC-LDPC codes is larger than that of the Reed–Solomon codes, and the performance of the MWC-coded OCDMA system can be greatly improved by these QC-LDPC codes when data rate is 2.5 Gb/s.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, modified Welch–Costas (MWC) code, optical code division multiple access (OCDMA), spectral amplitude coding (SAC).
I. INTRODUCTION
I N METRO and local networks, optical code-division multiple-access (OCDMA) techniques are getting more attractive, as multiple users can access the network asynchronously and simultaneously with a high level of transmission security. Early optical CDMA systems used time-spreading techniques to encode signals by unipolar sequences with low cross correlation, but the code length should be long enough to support more users. The nonzero cross correlation value caused serious multiple-access interference (MAI), especially when large number of users were involved. Among all OCDMA techniques, spectral amplitude coding (SAC) can eliminate the MAI when using balanced detection [1]–[4].
For the SAC-OCDMA system with a flat power spectral density (PSD) of light sources in the coded bandwidth, the system capacity is mainly limited by phase-induced intensity
Manuscript received July 03, 2008; revised October 22, 2008. First published April 17, 2009; current version published June 24, 2009. This work was supported in part by the Advanced Optoelectronic Technology Center, National Cheng Kung University, under project grants from the Ministry of Education and the National Science Council of Taiwan, and in part by the Kun Shan University, under a project grant from the National Science Council, NSC 97-2221-E-168007.
J.-F. Huang and C.-M. Huang are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70146, Taiwan (e-mail: huajf@ee.ncku.edu.tw; q3894103@mail.ncku.edu.tw).
C.-C. Yang is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Kun Shan University, Yung-Kang City, Tainan Hsien, 710, Taiwan (e-mail: ccyang@mail.ksu. edu.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JLT.2008.2009548

noise (PIIN) when the signal power is relatively high. It has been shown that the effect of PIIN is proportional to the square of photocurrent and the electrical bandwidth of the receiver [2]. The system performance cannot be improved by increasing the received optical power when PIIN is the major noise. Therefore, several codes with ideal cross correlation were proposed to reduce the influence of PIIN, such as cyclic difference set (CDS) codes [3] and shifted prime (SP) codes [4]. Note that both CDS codes and SP codes can be implemented by the arrayed waveguide grating (AWG) router. On utilizing the fully cyclic property of the CDS codes and the AWG router, all the CDS codes can be simultaneously generated by one
AWG router. The SP codes in [4] can be divided into code groups, and the code words in the same groups are partially cyclic to each other. The encoder for the SP codes can be implemented by cascading two AWG routers of different characteristics.
In this paper, we first propose one new code family, which is modified from the Welch–Costas (WC) sequences [5], to realize a compact OCDMA system with superior performance. The code construction and properties of this modified WC (MWC) code family is demonstrated in Section II. Compared with the CDS codes and SP codes, the MWC codes have advantages for commercial applications. The AWG routers used to construct the CDS codes and SP codes must have an odd number of ports, but the proposed MWC codes can be easily implemented by the AWG router with an even number of ports. Since the AWG routers with an even number of ports are more common, the associated coding structure of the MWC-coded OCDMA system is more compact for practical implementation.
With the increasing demand for high-speed optical transmission, how to construct a low-cost OCDMA system with high performance is an important topic. Ayotte and Rusch [6] showed that forward error correction (FEC) schemes can be used to improve the performance of SAC-OCDMA systems when the transmission rate is 1.25 Gb/s. In wavelength-division-multiplexing (WDM) systems, several FEC schemes were proposed to meet the high-speed optical transmission in recent years, such as Reed–Solomon (RS) codes [7], turbo codes [8], [9], and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [10]–[12]. The RS (255, 239) code, already specified by the International Telecommunications Union Telecom (ITU-T) G. 975 standard, is used to protect the synchronous transport module (STM)-16 information against in-line errors in the optical fiber submarine cable system. Sab and Lemaire [8] proposed the use of turbo codes for Alcatel long-haul submarine transmission system.

0733-8724/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:12:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: ON ANALYZING QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES OVER MWC-CODED OPTICAL CDMA SYSTEM

2151

However, the turbo decoding algorithm may be incompatible with optical transmission technology due to its high complexity. Vasic et al. [12] prove that the error performance and hardware complexity of LDPC codes outperform turbo codes, and we have demonstrated the performance of LDPC codes over -sequence coded OCDMA system with transmission rate 155 Mb/s in [13]. Therefore, in this paper, we focus our attention on improving the performance of the MWC-coded OCDMA system through the LDPC codes when the data rate is high.
LDPC codes were originally invented by Gallager [14] and resurrected in the mid-1990s with the work of MacKay and Neal [15] and Alon and Luby [16]. Based on methods of construction, LDPC codes can be divided into two categories: random codes [15]–[17] and structured codes. Structured codes, especially cyclic or quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes [18]–[20], in general have advantages in encoding over the random codes. As far as hardware implementation is concerned, their encoding process can be done efficiently by using shift registers. Moreover, the near-capacity performance can be achieved by iterative message-passing decoding and sufficiently long LDPC codes.
When transmitting over high-rate OCDMA networks, the signal suffers serious noise and the bit error rate (BER) performance is degraded. Therefore, one new class of QC-LDPC coding scheme is adopted to combat such noise effects, as examined in Section III. This family of QC-LDPC codes has a girth greater than or equal to 6. Simulation results show that the coding gain of the proposed LDPC codes is larger than that of the RS codes. In addition, the performance of the MWC-coded OCDMA system when the data rate is high can be greatly improved by the proposed QC-LDPC codes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces the construction and implementation of the MWCcoded OCDMA system. Some numerical results of the system performance are also present. In Section III, the construction of the proposed QC-LDPC codes is described. The performance of the MWC-coded OCDMA system with and without RS codes and LDPC codes are also showed in this section. Section IV summarizes the results and concludes the paper.

II. CONSTRUCTION AND ANALYSIS OF MWC-CODED OCDMA SYSTEM

A. Code Design

The proposed MWC code family can be constructed by using

the following two steps.

Step 1) Let

denote a finite field over an odd prime

and is a primitive element of

. We can con-

struct a multilevel sequence

with elements

of

by using

= 5 = 1 = 2 TABLE I
SEQUENCES y AND S WHEN p , d , AND 

Fig. 1. Generation process of S from y .

elements. Since each MWC code has code groups,

total

different sequences can be generated.

Because is the primitive element of

, all

the nonzero elements of

can be generated

through the powers of . We can add another se-

quence without affecting the original code property

into each code group for

by using the fol-

lowing expression:

(2)

Therefore, a full set of MWC sequences are ob-

tained.

Step 2) Let represent the th MWC code word in the

code group , and

denote the th code chip

of . We next construct the MWC code from the

generated sequences by the following new map-

ping method, which is different to that in [2] and

[4]. The row-wise spreading is applied to the first

elements of to generate the first blocks

of , and each of these blocks has

el-

ements. Since each MWC code has code groups,

the column-wise spreading is applied to the last el-

ement of to make the last block of have

elements

if for
if otherwise

,

, for

(3)

where

. Therefore, each has

(1)

elements that can be divided into

blocks,

where

,

,

and we can construct total different MWC code

and

. The sequences with

words for fixed and .

the same value of are said to be in the code group Table I shows the MWC code with parameters , ,

. Each code group has

different sequences and

. Fig. 1 shows the procedure for generating the MWC

when and are fixed, and each resulting has code word based on the MWC sequence in Table I.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:12:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2152

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 27, NO. 12, JUNE 15, 2009

Fig. 2. Encoder for the MWC codes in code group #0.

B. Properties of MWC Codes

By exploiting the cyclic property of the AWG router and the

By using different values of parameter , we can construct

distinctive MWC codes. Each MWC code has code

words, which have the following properties.

P1. Each codeword has elements that can be divided

into

blocks, and each code word has “1”s and

“0”s.

P2. The first

MWC code words in each code group

are partially cyclic to each other.

P3. The cross correlation between and is

property P2 of MWC codes, we propose a novel AWG-based encoding structure to generate the MWC code words in the same code group simultaneously. This AWG-based encoder can be incorporated with the two-code keying scheme to realize one compact OCDMA system, and commercial AWG routers of even ports can be used for practical implementation.
Assume that each wavelength chip has a spectral width , the spectrum width of the broadband light source (e.g., LED amplified spontaneous light emission source) should be with center wavelength . The proposed AWG-based encoder

contains one fiber Bragg grating (FBG) with specific central

(4)

wavelength, one bandwidth

thin-film filter (TFF) with channel

, and one

AWG router

where is the dot product of two vector [4]. For a compact presentation of the paper, detailed proofs of the above three properties are summarized in the Appendix.

with channel bandwidth and free spectral range

. The bandwidth of the FBG and the AWG are the

same. Take the encoder

in Fig. 2 as an example. After

light passes into the FBG, the wavelength component is re-

C. Implementation of Coder/Decoder
Since the cross correlation between any two MWC codewords from the same code group is different to that from any two different code groups, the traditional OCDMA correlation subtraction scheme [1]–[3] cannot be used directly for the proposed MWC code family. Two methods can be used to solve this problem.
Method 1: Stuffed MWC (SMWC) Codes To adopt the correlation subtraction scheme in traditional SAC-OCDMA systems, one chip can be stuffed after each MWC code word to make the cross correlation between any two code words be equal to 1. Thus, this SMWC codes have the same property as stuffed SP (SPP) codes [4] and modified QC (MQC) codes [2]. Method 2: Two-Code Keying Scheme Due to the property P3, the two-code keying scheme in [4] is another method for the MWC codes to eliminate the MAI without chip stuffing. Each user is assigned two MWC code words in the same code group to realize the two-code keying scheme. Suppose user transmits information bit “1” (or “0”) with code word (or ), then the decoder of this user can use the following scheme for MAI elimination:

flected, and the remaining optical signals are broadcast to the 1 6 TFF. The wavelength chips of , , , at the TFF
output port #0 are combined with the reflected wavelength chip to realize the MWC code word in Table I. The other
output ports of the TFF are connected to four specific AWG input ports according to the adopted MWC code words. The TFF’s output port #1 and #5 are connected to the input port #3 of the 4 4 AWG router, and the output port #2, #3, and #4 of the TFF are connected to the 4 4 AWG router’s input port #0, #2, and #1, respectively. Then, the other four MWC code words
, , , can be obtained at the AWG port #0 #3, respectively. Therefore, the MWC code words in code group #0 can be simultaneously generated by this compact encoder. The other MWC code words in different code groups can be generated by similar encoding structure.
As shown in Fig. 2, two MWC code words in the same code group and one 2 1 optical switch are assigned to each user to realize the two-code keying scheme. Each 2 1 optical switch is connected to the AWG output ports in the encoder according to each user’s code words. Suppose user #0 transmits information bit “1” (or “0”) with code word (or ), then the input ports of the corresponding 2 1 optical switch should connect to the first and second output ports of the AWG. Thus, by providing the control input of the optical switch with suitable volt-

ages, each user can select the right MWC code word for trans-

(5) mission. By this way, both the optical-to-electrical conversion and encoding processes can be achieved at the same time.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:12:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: ON ANALYZING QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES OVER MWC-CODED OPTICAL CDMA SYSTEM

2153

# Fig. 3. Decoder for user k.

After the encoding process, the coded spectral signals are combined in a star coupler and broadcast to the links connected to the receiver. The received signal spectrum is the summation of all users’ transmitted signal spectrum,

(6)

where

is the th user’s data bit, and

.

Fig. 3 shows the structure of user ’s decoder, which is

composed of FBG arrays [4]. Since two MWC code words

and are assigned to user under discussion, the FBG ar-

rays in this decoder are arranged according to these two code

words. Then, the decoder of user can use the following

scheme for MAI elimination:

Fig. 4. BER versus number of active users.
TABLE II TYPICAL PARAMETERS USED IN THE CALCULATION

user # user #

transmits bit 1 transmits bit 0.

(7)

As discussed above, the two-code keying scheme will re-

duce the cardinality to

. To support more users in

the network, parts of the MWC code words can be separated

and adopted by the one-code keying (ON–OFF keying) scheme.

Certainly, the two-code keying possesses better BER than the

one-code keying scheme. Since these two schemes can coexist

in one network and they obtain different BERs, differentiated

services can be provided.

is the number of active users. Therefore, the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) can be calculated as follows:

(9)

PIIN

th

D. Performance Analysis

is the variance of thermal noise [2]. Since the two-code keying scheme is used for information transmission, the BER

In the analysis of the proposed system, the PIIN and thermal can be obtained by using Gaussian approximation and reprenoise are considered to be the main noise sources. Assume each sented as

unpolarized light source has a flat PSD over the optical source

bandwidth with magnitude sr , where sr is the ef-

fective power of the broadband source at the receiver. Thus, the

(10)

power of average photocurrents obtained from one balanced de-

tector when user transmits bit “1” is

sr , where

is the responsivity of the photodiodes. If the desired user is

active, the variance of PIIN for MWC codes is [4]

Fig. 4 shows the relation between the BER and the number

of active users when the prime number used in the MWC

code construction is

,

, and

, respectively.

The parameters used in our analysis are listed in Table II.

sr

For comparison, the BER of the Walsh–Hadamard-coded

OCDMA system are also shown as a reference. It has been

clearly shown that the MWC-coded OCDMA system has a

much lower BER than the Walsh–Hadamard-coded OCDMA (8) system. This is because that the in-phase cross correlation of

the Walsh–Hadamard code is , where is the code length.

Here denotes the largest integer less than or equal to , Therefore, the Walsh–Hadamard-coded OCDMA system suf-

is the noise-equivalent electrical bandwidth of the receiver, and fers more serious PIIN than the MWC-coded OCDMA system.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:12:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2154

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 27, NO. 12, JUNE 15, 2009

Thus, the proposed parity-check matrix can be represented by an array of circulant permutation matrices as following:

...

...

...

...

(13)

Fig. 5. BER versus number of active users.

The relation between the BER and the number of active users with different data bit rates is presented in Fig. 5. Since both PIIN and thermal noise are proportional to the noise-equivalent bandwidth of the photodetector, the BER is unsatisfactory when the data bit rate is higher. Therefore, we propose a simple method to design the QC-LDPC codes based on another new class of MWC sequences to improve the BER performance of the 2.5 Gb/s MWC-coded OCDMA systems in the next section.

III. CONSTRUCTION OF QC-LDPC CODES AND SIMULATION RESULTS
A binary -regular LDPC code is defined as the null space of a sparse parity-check matrix over GF(2). In this section, we introduce a simple method to construct a -regular QC-LDPC code by using another class of MWC sequences as the following shows.

A. Construction of LDPC Codes

First, we construct two random sequences

and

, where

for

and

for

, and

is an odd prime. Note that

and

, if . Then

we can form a

preliminary matrix with elements from

as follows:

...

...

...

...

(11)

where the

th element of can be calculated by the fol-

lowing (12) with the corresponding values of and , for

fixed parameters and .

Here

is one

identity matrix and

repre-

sents the circulant permutation matrix with a one at column

for row ,

, and zero else-

where.

Hence, the resulting , which has ones in each column

and ones in each row, represents a -regular LDPC code.

(This LDPC code is also an

regular LDPC

code, where

is the block length of the QC-LDPC

code and

is the number of message bits). The size of the

parity-check matrix is

, and due to linear dependence

among the rows of , it has code rate

.

Since the cycles of short length may degrade the performance

of LDPC codes, it is necessary to ensure that the Tanner graph

of the LDPC codes is free of cycles of length 4 and hence has a

girth of at least 6. As in [19], a cycle of length in a QC-LDPC

code is expressed as a block sequence

(14)

where

stands for the th row and th column block of

, and the semicolon between

and

can

be considered as the block

. Certainly,

and

for (14) to become a valid block sequence for a

cycle. In addition, the necessary and sufficient condition for the

existence of the cycle of length can be represented as [19]

(15)

where

,

, and

.

From (15), the necessary and sufficient condition for the ex-

istence of the cycle of length 4 can be rewritten as

(16)

where

,

, and

,

.

Theorem: The Tanner graph of the proposed parity-check

matrix has a girth greater than or equal to 6.

Proof: Let

. From (16), we

know that the value of will never be equal to 0 if the Tanner

graph of the LDPC codes is free of cycles of length 4. It is easy

to prove that the parity-check constructed by the proposed

method can satisfy this.

1) If

,

and

,

(17)

where

2) If (12)

,

, and

,

and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:12:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(18)

HUANG et al.: ON ANALYZING QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES OVER MWC-CODED OPTICAL CDMA SYSTEM

2155

3) If

,

4) If

,

,

5) If

,

, and

,

(19)

, and

(20)

,

, and

(21)

6) If

,

,

, and

Fig. 6. BER performance of the MWC-coded OCDMA system with and
(22) without RS codes, random LDPC codes, and the proposed QC–LDPC codes.

7) If

,

,

, and

B. Simulation Results

(23)

8) If

,

,

, and

9) If

,

(24)

,

, and

(25)

Because is the primitive element of

,

,

and

, the values of obtained from

(17)–(25) will never be equal to 0. Therefore, the girth of the

QC-LDPC code constructed by these MWC sequences is greater

than or equal to 6.

Example: A [248, 127] QC-LDPC Code

:

Let

,

. First, we construct two sequences

and {

}

. Note that

and are randomly selected as mentioned above. By using

(12) with fixed parameters

,

, we can form the

following parity-check matrix:

H

where is a 31 31 identity matrix with rows shifted cyclically to the right by positions. is an 124 248 matrix and describes a (4, 8)-regular LDPC code with code rate
. (By using Gaussian elimination, we can know that has a rank of 121.)

In this section, we present the simulation results of several

LDPC codes with different block lengths and code rates, which

are constructed by the proposed method. The sum-product al-

gorithm (SPA) in log-domain [12], [20] is used for decoding

the LDPC codes, and the maximum number of decoding itera-

tions is 50. From (9), we can obtain the variances of the noise

when different active users are involved. Then, these variances

are modified by considering the code rate of LDPC codes and

input to the SPA for simulations. These results are compared

with the RS(255, 239) code [7] and random LDPC codes [15].

The RS(255, 239) code is a nonbinary code (the FEC al-

gorithm operates on 8-bit symbols) and belongs to the family

of systematic linear cyclic block codes. Assuming that each

symbol consists of bits, the relationship between the and

the BER can be written as

. Therefore,

the decoded symbol error rate (SER) of the

code can

be calculated as

(26)
where the symbol denotes the largest integer less than or equal to . Then, the decoded BER can be calculated as
. Fig. 6 shows the BER performance of the MWC-coded OCDMA system with and without RS codes, random LDPC codes and the proposed QC-LDPC codes when STM-16 information (2.5 Gb/s) is transmitted. These LDPC codes have similar code lengths but different code rates. As shown in Fig. 6, the proposed QC-LDPC codes perform as well as the random LDPC codes. At a similar code rate, the coding gain [21] of the LDPC codes is about 2 dB larger than that of the RS codes and about 5.5 dB higher than that of the uncoded MWC-coded

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:12:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2156

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 27, NO. 12, JUNE 15, 2009

much larger coding gain is expected for lower BERs. It has been shown that this new MWC code family can be incorporated with these QC-LDPC codes to realize one compact 2.5 Gb/s OCDMA system with superior performance.

Fig. 7. BER performance of the MWC-coded OCDMA system with and without RS codes and the proposed (4, 8) QC-LDPC codes.

OCDMA system with a BER of

. Naturally, more

redundancy will result in better BER performance. The coding

gain of a code rate

, [3992, 1999] QC-LDPC code is

about 4.5 dB higher than that of the RS codes and about 8 dB

higher than that of the uncoded MWC-coded OCDMA system

when the BER is

.

Fig. 7 shows the performance of the MWC-coded OCDMA

system with and without RS codes and some

, (4, 8)-reg-

ular QC-LDPC codes with different block lengths. The coding

gain of the [248, 127] QC-LDCP code in the example is about

2 dB larger than that of the RS codes and about 6 dB higher

than that of the uncoded MWC-coded OCDMA system when

the BER is

. The simulation results show that a larger

coding gain can be obtained by increasing the block lengths of

the QC-LDPC codes.

Notice that the lowest BERs in Figs. 6 and 7 are around .

Actually, after those points, we were not able to count any er-

rors for at least

transmitted. We believe that a much

larger coding gain is expected for lower BERs. These simula-

tion results show that these QC-LDPC codes are more suitable

than the RS codes for improving the performance of the 2.5 Gb/s

MWC-coded OCDMA system.

APPENDIX

In this Appendix, we give detailed proofs on the properties of

the proposed MWC codes.

P1: Each code word has elements that can be divided into

blocks, and each code word has “1”s and

“0”s.

Proof: From (1) and (2), we know that each

for

. Then, by the mapping

method in step 2, the corresponding MWC code word has

elements that can be divided into

blocks, and each code-

word has “1”s and

“0”s.

P2: The first

MWC code words in each code group

are partially cyclic to each other.

Proof:

Case 1) If

and

.

The first

elements of the MWC sequences

are all different, when

and

. It can be easily proved as follows:

Because
. In group

is the primitive element of

,

will never be zero except when

, and can be represented as

(27) and

(28) Without loss of generality, (28) can be written as

(29)

IV. CONCLUSION

It means that the to the

th element of is equal th element of .

In this paper, we have proposed a MWC-coded optical CDMA

From (29), we observe that the MWC sequences

system. This system has a superior performance than the Walsh–

’s are cyclic to each other in group , for

Hadamard-coded OCDMA system, and the associated coding

and

.

structure is compact for practical implementation. Since the per-

Then, by using (3) and (29), the “1”s mapping from

formance of this system is unsatisfactory when the data rate is

and

will appear in the

2.5 Gb/s, a new class of QC-LDPC codes, derived from another

th and

th positions of the

MWC sequences, is proposed to improve the OCDMA perfor-

th [e.g.,

th] block of

mance. Simulation results show that these QC-LDPC codes can

and , respectively, where

perform as well as the random LDPC codes. The coding gain of

. Therefore, for the first

, MWC code words

the proposed QC-LDPC codes with an overhead of 6% is about

in group , the positions of “1”s in the

2 dB larger than that of the RS(255, 239) codes and about 5.5

th blocks of these code words are cyclic to each

dB higher than that of the uncoded MWC-OCDMA system; a

other.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:12:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HUANG et al.: ON ANALYZING QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES OVER MWC-CODED OPTICAL CDMA SYSTEM

2157

Case 2) If

and

.

From (1) and (2), we know that

for

. Therefore, it can be

observed that the th block of the code words

and are cyclic to each other.

From these two cases, we prove that the first

MWC code words in each code group are partially

cyclic to each other.

P3: The cross correlation between and is

Case 3) When

, then (31) becomes

(33)

1) When , there are solutions for in (33).

2) When

, only one solution,

, is

obtained.

From the above three cases, we have proved that (30)

has no incongruent solution when , ; one

incongruent solution when ; and incongruent

solution when

,

.

where is the dot-product of two vector.

Proof: Actually, the property P3 comes from the fol-

lowing:

Let be a constant number and be an odd prime. Then,

the following congruent equation has no incongruent solution

when

,

; one incongruent solution when

; and

incongruent solution when

,

.

(30)

To solve (30), we substitute (1) and (2) into it and consider the

following cases.

Case 1) When ,

, then (30) becomes

(31)

1) When

and , there are solutions for

in (31).

2) When

and

, no solution can be

obtained.

3) When

and

, only one solution,

, is obtained.

4) When

and

, by the Fermat’s

little theorem, we know that the values

for

are

all different since is the primitive element

of

. Also

and

are constants, thus (31) has one

incongruent solution.

Case 2) When

and

, then (30)

becomes

(32)

1) When

, no solution can be obtained.

2) When

, we know that the values

for

are

all different as stated in Case 1. Because

is a constant, (32) also has one

incongruent solution.

Note that the same results can be obtained when

and

.

REFERENCES
[1] M. Kavehrad and D. Zaccarin, “Optical code-division-multiplexed systems based on spectral encoding of noncoherent sources,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 534–545, Mar. 1995.
[2] Z. Wei, H. M. H. Shalaby, and H. Ghafouri-Shiraz, “Modified quadratic congruence codes for fiber Bragg-grating-based spectral-amplitude coding optical CDMA systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 19, no. 9, pp. 1274–1281, Sep. 2001.
[3] C. C. Yang, “Compact bi-directional optical CDMA encoder/decoder with low power dissipation,” Opt. Fiber Technol., vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 254–259, Jul. 2007.
[4] C. C. Yang, “Optical CDMA passive optical network using prime code with interference elimination,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 19, no. 7, pp. 516–518, Apr. 2007.
[5] Z. Kostic and E. L. Titlebaum, “The design and performance analysis for several new classes of codes for optical synchronous CDMA and for arbitrary-medium time-hoppingsynchronous CDMA communication systems,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 42, no. 8, pp. 2608–2617, Aug. 1994.
[6] S. Ayotte and L. A. Rusch, “Increasing the capacity of SAC-OCDMA: Forward error correction or coherent sources?,” IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 1422–1428, Oct. 2007.
[7] Forward Error Correction for Submarine Systems, , ITU Telecommunication Standardization Sector, Geneva, Switzerland, 1996, Tech. Rec. G.975.
[8] O. A. Sab and V. Lemaire, “Block turbo code performances for long-haul DWDM optical transmission systems,” in Proc. Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf., 2001, vol. 3, pp. 280–282.
[9] T. Mizuochi, Y. Miyata, T. Kobayashi, K. Ouchi, K. Kuno, K. Kubo, K. Shimizu, H. Tagami, H. Yoshida, H. Fujita, M. Akita, and K. Motoshima, “Forward error correction based on block turbo code with 3-bit soft decision for 10-Gb/s optical communication systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 376–386, Mar./Apr. 2004.
[10] J. Youn, H. Jang, K. Kim, and J. Jeong, “BER performance due to irregularity of row-weight distribution of the parity-check matrix in irregular LDPC codes for 10-gb/s optical signals,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 23, no. 9, pp. 2673–2680, Sep. 2005.
[11] O. Milenkovic, I. B. Djordjevic, and B. Vasic, “Block-circulant lowdensity parity-check codes for optical communication systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 294–299, Mar./Apr. 2004.
[12] B. Vasic, I. B. Djordjevic, and R. Kostuk, “Low-density parity check codes and iterative decoding for long haul optical communication systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 438–446, Feb. 2003.
[13] C. M. Huang, C. C. Yang, and J. F. Huang, “Construction of quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes to combat optical CDMA interference noise,” in Proc. 7th IASTED Int. Conf. Wireless and Optical Communications, Montreal, QC, Canada, 2007, pp. 256–261.
[14] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[15] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[16] N. Alon and M. Luby, “A linear time erasure-resilient code with nearly optimal recovery,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1732–1736, Nov. 1996.
[17] D. MacKay, “Good error correcting code based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[18] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D.J. Costello, Jr., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:12:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2158

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 27, NO. 12, JUNE 15, 2009

[19] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[20] C. M. Huang, J. F. Huang, and C. C. Yang, “Construction of quasicyclic LDPC codes from quadratic congruences,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 313–315, Apr. 2008.
[21] L. Kazovsky, S. Benedetto, and A. Willner, Optical Fiber Communication Systems. London, U.K.: Artech House, 1996.
Jen-Fa Huang received the M.A.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 1981 and 1985, respectively.
Since 1991, he has been a Faculty Member of the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, where he is currently an Adjunct Professor at the Institute of Computer and Communication Engineering and at the Institute of Optoelectronic Science and Engineering. Prior to 1991, he was with MPB technologies, Montreal, QC, Canada, in the Optical Communication Laboratories working on the TAT-9 transatlantic undersea lightwave transmission project. His current research interests include optical communications, all-optical data networking, and fiber-grating-based optical sensors.

Chao-Chin Yang received the B.S. degree in communication engineering from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, in 1996 and 2004, respectively.
In August 2004, he joined the Faculty of Kun Shan University of Technology, Tainan, Taiwan, where he is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Electronic Engineering. His current research interests include multiuser optical communications and radio over fiber networks.
Chun-Ming Huang received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, in 2000 and 2005, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in optical code division multiple-access communications at National Cheng Kung University.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:12:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

