IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

27

A Finite-Length Algorithm for LDPC Codes Without Repeated Edges on the Binary Erasure Channel
Sarah J. Johnson, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper considers the performance, on the binary erasure channel, of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes without repeated edges in their Tanner graphs. A modification to existing finite-length analysis algorithms is presented for these codes.
Index Terms—Binary erasure channels, finite-length analysis, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
A low-density parity-check (LDPC) code is a block code defined by a sparse parity-check matrix, . LDPC codes are typically decoded iteratively with message-passing decoding [1]. The Tanner graph, , of an LDPC code is a bi-partite graph which represents the parity-check matrix. Each bit in the codeword corresponds to a column of , and a bit vertex of , and each parity-check equation corresponds to a row of , and a check vertex of . The th entry of is “ ”, and an edge connects the th bit vertex and th check vertex of , if the th codeword bit is included in the th parity-check equation. The LDPC code is -regular if every bit vertex is degree and every check vertex is degree . An irregular LDPC code has vertices with varying degrees, given by its degree distribution.
For a given degree distribution, an LDPC code can be defined by the permutation, , of Tanner graph edges between the check and bit vertices. An LDPC ensemble is the set of all such permutations for a particular degree distribution. For a given degree distribution, an expurgated ensemble is the subset of all edge permutations which also satisfy a particular constraint, such as not allowing certain edge configurations.
Using the concept of ensembles, the performance of infinitelength LDPC codes has been well studied and infinite-length irregular LDPC ensembles have been shown to be capacity-approaching [2]. In the special case of the binary erasure channel (BEC), irregular LDPC codes are in fact capacity-achieving [3].
Manuscript received August 18, 2006; revised July 21, 2008. Current version published December 24, 2008. This work is supported by the Australian Research Council under Grants DP0449627 and DP0665742. The material in this paper was presented in part at the Asia Pacific Conference on Communications (APCC), Perth, Australia, October 2005.
The author is with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, The University of Newcastle, Callaghan 2308, NSW Australia (e-mail: sarah.johnson@newcastle.edu.au).
Communicated by T. J. Richardson, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of Figs. 1–4 in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2008.2008118

Using the BEC, some progress has also been made on understanding the performance of finite-length (FL) LDPC codes. Using a combinatorial characterization of decoding failures, expressions for the exact average bit and block erasure probabilities are derived in [4]–[6] for various LDPC ensembles, when decoded iteratively with message-passing decoding. This finitelength analysis provides both a method to predict the average performance of the codes in an LDPC ensemble, without the need for time-consuming simulations, and a context for better understanding the performance of message-passing decoding of finite-length LDPC codes.
On the binary erasure channel, a transmitted symbol is either received correctly or completely erased, the latter with probability . If only one of the bits in any given code parity-check equation is erased, the erased bit can be determined exactly by choosing the value which satisfies that parity-check equation. Message-passing iterative decoding of an LDPC code, transmitted over a binary erasure channel, is a process of finding parity-check equations which check on only one erased bit. In a decode iteration all such parity-check equations are found and the erased bits corrected. Due to the correction of these bits, new parity-check equations checking on only one erased bit may be created and these are then used to correct further erased bits in the subsequent iteration.
A stopping set, , is a subset of bit vertices in for which every check vertex connected by a graph edge to a bit vertex in is connected to at least one other bit vertex in . A stopping set is thus a set of codeword bits with the property that every parity-check equation checking on a bit in the stopping set checks on at least two bits in the set. Consequently, if all of the bits in a stopping set are erased, the message-passing decoder will be unable to correct any of the erased stopping set bits. Indeed, the collection of stopping sets in an LDPC Tanner graph determines exactly the erasure patterns for which the message-passing decoding algorithm will fail [4]. A stopping set containing bit vertices is said to be a size- stopping set.
In [4] the FL performance of regular LDPC ensembles is considered. This is extended in [6] to allow for irregular bit degrees and in [5] to allow for expurgated ensembles. The finite-length ensembles considered in [4]–[6], which we will call traditional ensembles, include graphs with repeated edges. That is, permutations are allowed which include more than one edge between the same two bit and check vertices. Since repeated edges cannot be represented in a binary parity-check matrix, LDPC codes are not constructed with repeated edges in practice. As a consequence, the performance predicted by traditional finite-length analysis algorithms is more pessimistic than the average performance of LDPC codes obtained, for example, by Monte Carlo

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

28

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

simulation of randomly constructed LDPC codes with the required degree distribution.
In this paper, a modified finite-length analysis is presented for new LDPC ensembles, defined as the set of all permutations, , except those which include repeated edges. The finitelength analysis algorithm presented in this paper builds upon the approach in [5, Sec. 3.2] and so this algorithm is outlined in Section II, with a small initialization modification presented in Section II-A. Section III then details the proposed FL algorithm and compares its performance to Monte Carlo simulation results.
II. TRADITIONAL FINITE-LENGTH ANALYSIS
The ensembles considered in [5, Sec. 3.2], and in the remainder of this section, are the set of regular Tanner graphs with
check vertices of degree at most , and bit vertices of degree . We will say that the check vertices have ‘sockets’ available for graph edges to connect to. As discussed above, this ensemble definition allows a single bit vertex to be connected to a single check vertex by more than one edge.
In general, FL analysis calculates the word erasure probability for an LDPC ensemble, given that bits are erased, by calculating the total number of constellations on a fixed set of
bit vertices, , and the number of those constellations which contain stopping sets, . Then gives the conditional probability of unsuccessful decoding given that erasures occur.
In [5, Sec. 3.2] and are calculated combinatorially with found by iteratively building up graphs one bit vertex at a time and counting the total number of ways that this can be done. We outline this process here as it forms the basis for our modifications in the following sections.
Firstly, a -bit subgraph, , of a Tanner graph contains bit vertices, all of the edges emanating from them, and all of the check vertices connected to one or more of these edges. The total number, , of all possible subgraphs on a fixed set of bit vertices is given by [5]:

bits such that some subset of the bits erases a stopping

set. To incorporate these potential decoding failures,

is

found by starting with the known stopping sets in (2), iteratively

building up larger subgraphs by adding one bit vertex at a time

and counting the total number of ways that this can be done. To

track stopping sets, we track the number of degree-1 check ver-

tices in , denoted by , and the number of degree check

vertices in , denoted by . Using this notation, the subgraphs,

, which are stopping sets are easily seen to be the subgraphs

with . The term

is used to denote the number

of stopping sets of size within a subgraph containing

unordered degree- bit vertices, check vertices with degree

and degree- check vertices.

is then found by summing

the contribution for a given over every possible and .

is initialized by the total number of possible

stopping sets with size exactly , from (2), [5]

(3)

where the factor

calculates the fraction of codeword bits

in a stopping set, which is necessary if the bit error rate

, rather than the word error rate

, is required. For

expurgated ensembles without stopping sets of size smaller than

, or greater than , these stopping sets are discounted

by setting

if

or

[5].

Next,

can be calculated for all values of and

, by examining every way an extra bit vertex can be added to

each size

subgraph and tracking the values for and for

each of the newly formed size- subgraphs [5]:

(1)

as there are in total available sockets to choose for the

graph edges, which can be done in

ways, and pos-

(4)

sible permutations of these edges.

where

[5]. When adding the new

The total number of possible subgraphs on a fixed set of bit degree- bit vertex, the new edges can either: 1) create new

vertices which are a stopping set is given by [5]

degree- check vertices, increasing by ; 2) add edges to

(2)

of the existing degree- check vertices, decreasing by and increasing by (called covering the degree- check vertices);

where

3) add new degree- check vertices, increasing by ; 4) add edges to cover free slots in the existing check vertices with

degree ; 5) add extra edges to free slots in the

newly

created check vertices with degree ; or some combination of

and

denotes the coefficient of in . The term the above where

gives the number of ways that edges can

be allocated to check vertices with sockets such that each

check vertex receives two or more edges. The term counts

all the possible permutations of these edges.

For example, Fig. 1 shows a possible addition of bit vertices to

Erasing the bits corresponding to a stopping set will cause an existing subgraph. Note that , and will denote the final

the message passing decoder to fail, but so too will erasing number of each vertex type after the extra bit vertex has been

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JOHNSON: FINITE-LENGTH ALGORITHM FOR LDPC CODES

29

= 3 = 2 = 2 1 = 2 Fig. 1. Addition of two degree l vertices, in bold, to a subgraph which originally contained v bit vertices, s degree- check vertices, and t  2 = 1 1 = 1 = 4 = 1 degree check vertices. The three extra edges of the fist additional vertex are divided as  and t , to give a subgraph with t and s . The = 2 1 = 1 = 4 = 2 three extra edges of the second additional vertex are divided as  and s , to give a final subgraph with t and s .

added. The number of each vertex type in the original subgraph,

to which a bit vertex is being added, are thus

, and

.

If

new check vertices are created there are

choices of location for them. For the

new degree- check vertices there are ways to choose the

check vertex socket which can be done in ways. Which

of the

original degree- vertices to cover can be

chosen in

ways. Then the

edges allocated to the

new degree- vertices must be

added so that each check vertex has at least two sockets filled.

This can be done in

ways where

Lastly, the extra edges are allocated to remaining slots in the

original degree check vertices. There are

slots in the

original check vertices with degree ,

however the existing

bit vertices are using

of these slots. Thus the free slots can be chosen in

The ensemble average bit,

, and word,

, erasure rates following decoding is the probability that an

erasure of size will occur multiplied by the probability that

such an erasure will include a stopping set [5]:

(6)

A. A Small Initialization Modification

The process described above may count subgraphs that, while

not the expurgated stopping sets themselves, contain them as

subgraphs. For example, initialization via (3) can expunge

graphs of size

which are stopping sets. However, the

expression (2) may include graphs of size

which are

themselves stopping sets but which also contain as subgraphs

stopping sets of size less than . In this first modification

and

are initialized recursively to avoid the

inclusion of these expurgated stopping sets.

We define a new function

in (7)to calculate the

number of possible stopping sets on bits recursively so that

stopping sets on bits which contain subgraphs which are stop-

ping sets with size

are not included.

is ini-

tialized with the single empty graph,

, and graphs

are built up one bit vertex at a time, in a similar manner to (4),

with the exception that subgraphs with both

and

or

, i.e., the expurgated stopping sets, are not included:

Initialization

except for

Then

and

ways. Finally, assuming that an extension with parameter is

counted times, the same constellation, with parameter , can

be constructed in different ways giving the term [5].

Putting this altogether and recursively adding one bit vertex at

a time in (4) calculates (for a given , and ) the contribution

of all the possible stopping set constellations including those

stopping sets on some subset of the bits.

Finally,

sums the contribution for a given over

every possible and . Thus

denotes the number of stop-

ping sets of size or less, on a fixed set of degree- bit vertices

[5]:

Then

and/or is used to initialize

(7) :

(5)

(8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

30

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

Fig. 2. The ensemble average erasure correction performance of (3; 6)-regular, rate-1=2, length-32 LDPC codes on a binary erasure channel. Shown is the results of: traditional FL (solid curves); modified FL (dashed curves) and Monte Carlo simulation (no curve).

Similarly, counts the total number of ways a subgraph on message vertices can be constructed as
(9)

Again is calculated using

to avoid the inclusion

of graphs, which, while not expurgated graphs themselves, con-

tain them as subgraphs. Equations (4)–(6) are unchanged.

The upper bound is derived by assuming that the existing

edges are evenly distributed amongst the

check vertices

and then counting the number of ways edges can be added to

different check vertices. An uneven distribution of free slots

in the check vertices will give fewer options for allocating the

edges.

In the existing graph on

bit vertices there are

edges, however,

of them are allocated to the

degree- check vertices and so there are

III. FINITE-LENGTH ANALYSIS FOR ENSEMBLES WITHOUT

REPEATED EDGES

The new ensembles considered in this section are the set of edges into the existing

degree , check vertices. As-

regular Tanner graphs with check vertices of degree at most suming an even distribution of the edges into the existing

, and bit vertices of degree , with the condition that a single check vertices, each vertex has

free slots. Which

bit vertex can be connected to a single check vertex by at most check vertices to cover use can be chosen in

one edge. This ensemble definition more closely maps to the LDPC codes commonly used in practice, such as those from

the slot to use for each check chosen in

ways and ways giving

[7], which are never constructed with repeated edges. The explicit addition of repeated edges in FL analysis can be

(10)

avoided by setting and to zero, however repeated edges

may still be added if

when is greater than 1 (consider

the second vertex added in Fig. 1). This is because the number

of ways these edges can be added is counted by choosing

of the free slots in the degree check vertices even if two

of the free slots are contained in the same vertex. Here upper

can be lower bounded by assuming the most uneven dis-

tribution of existing edges to the

check vertices. Given

edges into check vertices, and at least two edges into each

check vertex, the maximum number, , of check vertices which

can be full are

and lower bounds on the number of ways these edges can be

added, without allowing repeated edges, are derived.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JOHNSON: FINITE-LENGTH ALGORITHM FOR LDPC CODES

31

Fig. 3. The ensemble average erasure correction performance of (3; 6)-regular, rate-1=2, length-200 LDPC codes on a binary erasure channel. Shown is the results of: traditional FL (solid curves); modified FL (dashed curves) and Monte Carlo simulation (no curve).

The remaining check vertices have only two edges each, except for a single check vertex which has any extra remaining extra edges allocated to it to give

Then:

and and/or

of its slots taken. Thus in total there are full check vertices, one

half full check vertex, and the remaining

check

vertices that have only two slots taken.

Choosing of the

check vertices with only two slots

taken, to add one edge to each, can be done in

(12)
then and

ways, while choosing one of the free slots in each of the chosen

vertices can be done in

ways. However, one of the

edges could also be allocated to the half empty vertex. In this

case that slot can be chosen in

ways and the remaining

edges allocated to the degree- check vertices in

ways. Thus, in total

(11)

The recursions for the new FL analysis are given in (12) and (13).

Initialization:

except for

(13)

where

. The recursions in (12) and (13) are actu-

ally less computationally demanding than the original computa-

tions in (4) and (7) because there are half as many summations.

For an upper bound on

from (10), is substi-

tuted into (12) while for a lower bound on

from

(11) is substituted into (12). Similarly, for an upper bound on

from (10), is substituted into (12) and (13),

while for a lower bound on

from (11) is sub-

stituted into (12) and (13). An upper bound on

in (6) is

found by using the upper bound on when calculating

and the lower bound when calculating . Similarly a lower

bound on

in (6) is found by using the lower bound

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

32

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 1, JANUARY 2009

Fig. 4. The ensemble average erasure correction performance of (3; 6)-regular, rate-1=2, length-1000 LDPC codes on a binary erasure channel. Shown is the results of: traditional FL (solid curves); modified FL (dashed curves) and Monte Carlo simulation (no curve).

on when calculating and the upper bound when calculating . Applying this modification gives FL analysis which is both a more accurate predictor of the performance of typical LDPC codes and computationally simpler. This prediction improvement is a result of choosing an ensemble definition which more accurately models the LDPC codes used in practice, while the computation simplification is because fewer parameters are required for the modified FL analysis.
Figs. 2–4 show the ensemble average performance of finitelength, rate- , LDPC code ensembles on a binary erasure channel. Both the upper and lower bounds for the new FL algorithm are plotted, however, the bounds are sufficiently tight that the difference between the two can only be seen at large channel erasure probabilities. Monte Carlo simulation results, averaged over randomly chosen codes from the ensemble, constructed using the method from [7], [8], are compared to the FL analysis results. The modified FL analysis algorithm presented in this paper accurately predicts the performance of regular LDPC ensembles.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have presented a modified finite-length analysis for the performance of LDPC codes without repeated edges on the binary erasure channel. Comparison to Monte Carlo simulation results shows that the new finite-length analysis algorithms accurately predict the performance of regular LDPC ensembles on the binary erasure channel.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author would like to thank Prof. Rudiger Urbanke for helpful comments on finite-length analysis of expurgated ensembles and for pointing out that the FL initialization process

required modification. I am also very grateful to the Associate Editor, Prof. T. Richardson, for his many helpful suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[3] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[4] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, June 2002.
[5] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length density evolution and the distribution of the number of iterations on the binary erasure channel,” [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/papers/RiU02.ps unpublished manuscript, available at
[6] H. Zhang and A. Orlitsky, “Finite-length analysis of LDPC codes with large left degrees,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT’2002), Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30–July 5 2002, p. 3.
[7] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[8] R. M. Neal, [Online]. Available: www.cs.toronto.edu/~radford/
Sarah Johnson (S’00–M’03) received the B.E. degree in electrical engineering (with honors and university medal) in 2000 and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering in 2004, both from the University of Newcastle, Australia.
She then held a postdoctoral position with the Wireless Signal Processing Program, National ICT Australia. Currently, she is with the University of Newcastle, Australia. Her research interests are in the field of information theory and error correction, and in particular, the area of low-density parity-check and repeat-accumulate codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

