1190

IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 17, SEPTEMBER 1, 2009

LDPC Code Design and Performance Analysis on OOK Chi-Square-Based Optical Channels
Stephanie Sahuguede, Damien Fafchamps, Anne Julien-Vergonjanne, Member, IEEE, Georges Rodriguez, Jean-Pierre Cances, and Philippe Gallion

Abstract—Without being restrictive, optical signal propagation simulations performed in the case of a new concept of packet ring network pointed out that the Gaussian model is not sufficiently accurate to constitute a valuable model of noise-corrupted optical systems. This fact can be generalized to any common wavelengthdivision-multiplexing systems, using on–off keying transmissions where amplified spontaneous emission is the main noise source. In this letter, we propose an alternative chi-square model, which is more accurate and corrects deficiencies of the Gaussian model. In such specific channel, we design an error-correcting scheme based on low-density parity check (LDPC) codes associated to soft decoding. The performance of a chi-square-based LDPC soft decoder and a Gaussian-based one are compared, both applied to a real chi-square optical channel. We point out that the design can be done assuming an additive white Gaussian noise statistic but also that considering the real channel statistics is essential to achieve optimal performance.
Index Terms—Chi-square statistics, Gaussian statistics, low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, optical channel.

I. INTRODUCTION
I N order to support high-speed real-time applications, innovative optical network architectures are investigated. Our study focuses on an optical packet ring, where optical amplifiers in nodes have a severe impact on the signal quality.
The optical channel under study, using an on–off keying (OOK) modulation, is generally assumed to be Gaussian. However, in optically amplified transmissions and because of amplified spontaneous emission (ASE), noise statistic after photodetection is non-Gaussian and signal dependent.
We present an alternative chi-square channel model and, we point out that this model corrects deficiencies of the Gaussian one. By analyzing propagation simulations, we estimate the photocurrent distribution. We show that a chi-square statistic is in accordance with simulation results and constitutes a proper model of the optical OOK noise-corrupted channel.

Manuscript received December 09, 2008; revised March 25, 2009. First pub-

lished June 30, 2009; current version published August 14, 2009. This work

was supported by the French Ministry of Research through the ECOFRAME

Project.

S. Sahuguede, A. Julien-Vergonjanne, and J.-P. Cances are with the XLIM,

Department of High Frequency Devices, Circuits Signals and Systems (C2S2),

Unite Mixte de Recherche Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (UMR

CNRS) 6172, National Higher School of Engineering of Limoges (ENSIL), Uni-

versity of Limoges, 87068 Limoges Cedex, France (e-mail: s_sahuguede@ensil.

unilim.fr; anne@ensil.unilim.fr; cances@ensil.unilim.fr).

D. Fafchamps, G. Rodriguez, and P. Gallion are with the Laboratoire

Traitement et Communication de l’Information (LTCI), Centre National de la

Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) 46, Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Télécom-

munications, TELECOM ParisTech, 75013 Paris Cedex 13, France (e-mail:

damien.fafchamps@telecom-paristech.fr;

georges.rodriguez@telecom-

paristech.fr; philippe.gallion@telecom-paristech.fr).

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LPT.2009.2023627

Forward error correction (FEC) using low-density parity check (LDPC) codes have been shown to be an efficient solution to compensate for the performance degradation in optical networks [1], [2]. However, no detailed analysis of an FEC design constrained by optical packet specifications and assuming a chi-square statistic has been reported so far.
Here, we present FEC design taking into account optical constraints and chi-square channel statistics. We consider at the reception a decoder based on belief propagation (BP) algorithm [3], [4]. We particularly point out that it is necessary to adapt the LDPC decoder to ensure the optimal performance.

II. NETWORK AND OPTICAL CHANNEL CHARACTERISTICS

Our study has been done in the frame of a new optical network

concept: the metro-access packet ring network ECOFRAME

[5], using wavelength-division-multiplexing (WDM) transmis-

sions. Nodes of this network benefit from transparency for tran-

sient traffic, thus an optical packet is not regenerated until it is

extracted from the ring. Consequently, the signal accumulates

impairments from its whole path and not only from a node-to-

node propagation span. This network based on the optical packet

commutation does not need packet demodulation and label pro-

cessing nor spatial or spectral switching. The data rate per wave-

length

is 10 Gb/s. Packets have a constant duration equal

to

s. The structure of the optical packet imposes the

LDPC dimensions but does not impact the channel statistics. So,

the channel model we propose in the following is valid for var-

ious WDM packet ring networks, which uses transparent nodes

and where ASE is the main noise source.

The statistical model generally assumed for noise-limited

OOK optical communications on fibers is Gaussian [6]. In this

model, noises are additive and the photocurrent probability

density function (pdf) is Gaussian with a different variance

on “1” and “0” in order to take into account beatings between

noise and signal due to photodetection. However, in practice,

it is easy to notice asymmetry in the photocurrent distributions

[7], so symmetrical pdf and additive noises are inappropriate

models. Moreover, the postphotodetection thermal noise is

generally negligible and in this case the photocurrent takes

only positive values. Therefore, the Gaussian model, allowing

negative photocurrent values, is not appropriated. We propose

an alternative model based on a simple but more accurate

description of the photocurrent. We start from the description

of the total electromagnetic field in the optical domain:

(1)

and refer to the polarizations, respectively, parallel and orthogonal to the signal. , is the signal amplitude coding an emitted bit . and are independent real and imaginary

1041-1135/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SAHUGUEDE et al.: LDPC CODE DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS ON OOK CHI-SQUARE-BASED OPTICAL CHANNELS

1191

Fig. 1. Simulation results: histograms of symbols (a) “0” and (b) “1.”

Fig. 2. Gaussian and chi-square fitting of histograms of (a) “0” and (b) “1.”

parts of the complex Gaussian noise for each polarization referred by or . Denoting the photodetector responsivity, the photocurrent is expressed as

(2)
Fig. 3. FEC frame specifications.

In this case, the photocurrent is the sum of four squared variables

of variance . Its pdf is given by

higher depending on the parameters of the simulation (noise fac-

(3) tors, extinction rate, etc). As a remark, our simulator estimates the best parameters and . We notice that is slightly different

for “0” and “1.” Actually, this parameter refers to the variance

where we define

and

.

is the first of the optical noise (ASE) and it should be identical for “1” and

kind modified Bessel function of order 1. The distribution (3) “0.” This small difference is linked to the impact of nonlinear

is a noncentral chi-square of order 4. This model intrinsically effects inducing a small perturbation.

takes into account the beating process. It corrects the problem Nevertheless, the photodetection process keeps the photocur-

of negative photocurrent of the Gaussian model, and it brings rent distribution asymmetrical even with nonlinear distortions.

out the photocurrent distribution asymmetry.

That is why our model remains a more accurate channel descrip-

Previous works propose chi-square models [8] based on a tion than the Gaussian one.

linear expansion of noises. They deal with filtering leading to

high-order chi-square models and to validation of the Gaussian approximation. However, the hypothesis established for these models is not verified for the channel under study.
In order to evaluate channel statistics resulting from the optical signal propagation over the specific network, we have developed a simulator of optical WDM signal propagation, taking into account noises added by optical amplifiers, fiber dispersion, and nonlinear effects such as self-phase modulation (SPM) and cross-phase modulation (XPM).
Our simulations of propagation are performed in a case where nonlinear effects are not the main cause of distortion, thus they can be considered as a small perturbation of our model. The network is composed of 10–20 nodes with a large range of noise factor (from 6 to 12 dB) separated by spans ranging from 50 to 80 km. We have simulated 4–10 WDM channels around 1550 nm and separated by 100 to 200 GHz. We have chosen “flat” dispersion maps in order to have the same cumulated dispersion at each node. We assume that the ASE generated by optical amplifiers at each node is Gaussian. Our simulator provides samples of the photocurrent from which typical simulation re-

III. FEC DESIGN AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

Although previous works have focused on modeling optical

channel statistics [8], none has used it to improve performances

of soft decoding algorithms applied to optical systems that gen-

erally assume Gaussian distributions [1], [2]. In this letter, we

design LDPC codes and associate soft decoders, taking into ac-

count the optical channel specificity.

In addition, we consider the packet duration constraint

s for the LDPC code design. The total number of bits in the

optical packet

is set to 100 000 bits. Each packet is split

into an integer number of FEC frames, and its length

is

kept constant with stuffing bits (Fig. 3).

We focus in this letter on a balanced incomplete block de-

sign LDPC (BIBD-LDPC) construction [9], which is determin-

istic. This method, where all rows of the parity check matrix are

constructed from vector permutations, simplifies implementa-

tion and avoids short length girths, ensuring the decoder algo-

rithm convergence. Two parameters and (a prime number)

define the LDPC

dimensions:

sults are presented by histograms on Fig. 1. These histograms

reveal an asymmetry of the photocurrent distributions, which is

particularly evident on symbols “0.” This is in accordance with We aim at reducing the bit-error rate (BER) from

to

the chi-square model since (3) is more asymmetrical for low

. This corresponds to a minimal net coding gain (NCG)

values of the noncentrality parameter and tends to a Gaussian of 4.5 dB (defined as the SNR difference for which the uncoded

for high .

BER is equal to

and the one for which the uncoded BER

Fig. 2 shows fittings of the previous histograms by the chi- equals ). This NCG value theoretically determined using

square distribution (3) and the Gaussian one. In this example, the [10] has been verified by extrapolating simulation results.

mean squared error (mse) of the Gaussian fitting is three times To evaluate the effective NCG in the coded case, we have

higher than the chi-square one and it can be up to five times designed LDPC code over the additive white Gaussian noise

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1192

IEEE PHOTONICS TECHNOLOGY LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 17, SEPTEMBER 1, 2009

(AWGN) channel before analyzing computer simulations results over both channels. From computer simulations over an AWGN channel we have obtained that all codes with have an NCG higher than 6.5 dB, i.e., 2 dB higher than the requirement.
The available data rate is thus the specification being taken into account for the LDPC code design. It is calculated with

(4)

The number of information bits per frame increases with

, which should be as high as possible. However, also de-

pends on the packet duration and on the number of frames

per packet. For each tested code, we searched the optimal

value maximizing and among them, the LDPC(6176, 5983)

(

,

) maximizes the data rate (9.69 Gb/s).

We now investigate the LDPC codes over an optical ring net-

work having a chi-square statistic of order 4, as described in part

II. We consider that the amplitude is normalized to 1, is

equal to 0, and that the responsivity is equal to 1. The real

values differ, but the ratio

is generally high, so sim-

ilar results are obtained and no generality is lost. In simulations,

a chi-square variable, for which each of the four squared vari-

ables follows a normal law (

, ) distribution is

affected to the emitted bit. The performances are evaluated as a

function of the factor defined by

Fig. 4. BERs for several LDPC codes of 5.6% redundancy (a) and with the LDPC(6176, 5983) (b).

The solid lines refer to the chi-square channel. In the coded

case (circles), the soft decoder assumes chi-square statistics

via the use of (8). The two curves in the coded case have the

same shape and are drifted along the axis as in the uncoded

case. Therefore, by extrapolation, the BIBD-LDPC correction

capacity and thus the effective NCG are identical in AWGN and

chi-square cases. However, if the decoder assumes a Gaussian

distribution while the optical channel has a chi-square statistic,

performances are strongly degraded. This is illustrated by the

solid curve marked with squares in Fig. 4(b). In such a scheme,

a BER of

is reached at a minimal value of 11 dB,

whereas it is reached at 8 dB with the accurate LLR calculation

(8). This value difference between the two cases (3 dB at

) increases as the targeted BER is low.

(5)

IV. CONCLUSION

where , , , and are the means and standard deviation of the photocurrent for “1” and “0.” In the investigated case, is directly linked to the optical noise variance by
(6)

A key parameter of the soft decoding algorithm is the calculation of logarithmic likelihood ratio [4] for each incident bit at the decoder input ( being the emitted bit):
(7)

The right evaluation of this parameter is a determining factor of

the FEC performance. It is consequently important to have ac-

curate channel knowledge to correctly evaluate the probabilities

in (7). In the case of AWGN channel of variance , the LLR

are simplified to LLR

[4]. However, for a noisy op-

tical channel modeled by a chi-square distribution with

,

we have developed the LLR expression from (3):

(8)

BER results of the coded chain with several LDPC codes of different lengths but of same redundancy (5.6%) are reported on Fig. 4(a). As expected the BER enhancement increases with the code length for a given redundancy, illustrating the tradeoff between the performance and the complexity.
Let us now focus on Fig. 4(b), representing the BERs (with circles) obtained with the 3% redundant LDPC(6176, 5983). The dashed line curves are obtained considering an AWGN channel with classical LLR calculation [4] for the coded case.

Physical simulations of the optical network under study reveal that a chi-square model accurately describes the optical channel statistics. Computer simulation results have shown that the effective NCG are identical over AWGN and chi-square channel. However, the analysis permits us to conclude that even if the AWGN model can be an appropriate channel representation for designing the LDPC FEC dimension, the soft decoder requires the chi-square statistics in order to achieve the best possible performance.
REFERENCES
[1] I. B. Djordjevic, O. Milenkovic, and B. Vasic, “Generalized low-density parity-check codes for optical communication systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 1939–1946, May 2005.
[2] B. Vasic, I. B. Djordjevic, and R. K. Kostuk, “Low-density parity check codes and iterative decoding for long-haul optical communication systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 21, pp. 438–446, Feb. 2003.
[3] D. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[4] J. L. Fan, Constrained Coding and Soft Iterative Decoding. Boston, MA: Kluwer, 2001.
[5] D. Chiaroni, M. Le Pallec, C. Simonneau, S. Borne, D. Bayart, and J. P. Hamaide, “Cascadability issues in a multi-service optical packet ring network,” in Proc. Photonics in Switching 2007, San Francisco, CA, pp. 25–26.
[6] G. P. Agrawal, Fiber Optic Communication Systems, 3rd ed. New York: Wiley Interscience, 2002.
[7] D. Fafchamps, G. Rodriguez, and P. Gallion, “Chi-square statistical models as a good base for the optimisation of optical communication systems,” in Photonics in Switching, to be published.
[8] D. Marcuse, “Derivation of analytical expressions for the bit-error probability in lightwave systems with optical amplifiers,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 1816–1823, Dec. 1990.
[9] B. Amar, B. Honary, Y. Kou, J. Xu, and S. Lin, “Construction of lowdensity parity-check codes based on balanced incomplete block designs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1257–1269, Jun. 2004.
[10] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 4th ed. New York: McGrawHill, 2000.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:57:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

