2009 International Conference on Communications and Mobile Computing
Irregular Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Design with Generalized ACE Constraint

Huan He, Youyun Xu, Yueming Cai Institute of Communications Engineering of PLAUST, Nanjing, 210007, China

Abstract
In this paper, we proposed a construction of irregular QC-LDPC codes with improved Approximated Cycle Extrinsic Message Degree (ACE) properties. The codes construct using the algorithm proposed have simple structure with good performance. Simulation results show that the proposed algorithm outperforms original PEG algorithm in the error-floor region.
1. Introduction
Quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC codes have low encoding complexity with simple structure [1]-[4], and well designed QC-LDPC codes can achieve the same performance as well designed random regular or irregular LDPC codes [5], [6]. Thanks to the low encoding complexity and low error floors of QCLDPC codes, they are more popular in practical applications than random codes.
Conventionally, it’s used to minimize the influence of short cycles to the performance of LDPC codes by increasing the girth (shortest cycle length) of check matrix. The progressive-edge-growth (PEG) is one of the most powerful algorithms for constructing shortblock-length LDPC codes with large girth [7]. This algorithm maximizes the girth of the Tanner graph at variable nodes with a greedy design. But large girth does not automatically imply a large minimum distance [8], and not all cycles of the same length have the same influence to the performance, the connectivity of cycles plays an important role in the error-floor performance too[9]. As the stopping distance determines the performance of LDPC codes under iterative decoding in the error-floor region, and ACE metric is a simple and effective connection between the cycles and stopping sets, an ACE constrained design algorithm constructed irregular LDPC codes with low error-floor [10], and the more flexible and efficient generalized ACE constrained design based on ACE spectrum was proposed in [11] too.

Motivated by the low encoding complexity and simple structure of QC LDPC codes, and the previous work by D. Vukobratović, and V. Šenk [12], in this paper, we propose a modified PEG algorithm for constructing irregular QC LDPC codes. By the proposed algorithm, we can achieve an improvement of performance in the error-floor region.

2. Introduction of QC-LDPC codes

A QC-LDPC code is a null space of an array of sparse circulant matrices, and the check matrix can be denoted as:

⎡ A1,1 A1,2 " A1,t ⎤

H QC

=

⎢ ⎢

A2,1

⎢#

A2,2 #

" %

A2,t

⎥ ⎥

#⎥

(1)

⎢ ⎢⎣ Ac,1

Ac,2

"

⎥ Ac,t ⎥⎦

Where t and c are positive integers, Ai, j (i = 1,", c, j = 1,",t) is circulant matrix with
size b × b over GF (2) , the weight of Ai, j is small
compared with b . Circulant matrix is square matrices, and each row of a circulant matrix is the cyclic shift of the row above it. Obviously, each row weight and column weight of a circulant matrix are the same, we denote it as w . And when w = 1 , the circulant matrix is called circulant permutation matrix.
In this paper, we set each Ai, j as circulant
permutation matrix or all-zero matrix. In a check matrix HQC , since there is only one 1-component in
each row and each column of a circulant permutation matrix and it has a cyclic form, the cycle property and ACE property of each 1-component in Ai, j will be the
same. Thus when we construct a check matrix of LDPC code with permutation matrices, we can concern any one 1-component in each circulant permutation matrix as the other 1-components have the same properties. Since a circulant matrix can be

This work is supported by the project of NSFJS (BK2006701, BK2007002) and the Pre-researching Task for Military (41001060303)

978-0-7695-3501-2/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE

196

DOI 10.1109/CMC.2009.192

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

characterized by its first column, so it can be fully characterized by the location of 1-component in the first column too. For the properties of circulant permutation matrix, we can construct a check matrix with concerning the location of 1-component in the first column of each Ai, j only.
3. Introduction of ACE metric
Extrinsic Message Degree (EMD) is a metric of extrinsic connective of the cycle with the rest of the Tanner graph; it is defined as the number of extrinsic constraint nodes of a set of variable nodes, where an extrinsic constraint node of a variable-node set is a constraint node that is singly connected to this set. And Approximate Cycle Extrinsic Message Degree (ACE) is an approximate metric of EMD of a cycle [10], it can
be calculated as ∑ (ds − 2) , where ds is the degree of
symbol node s , and the sum is taken over all symbol nodes of the cycle. A cycle with length lcyc and ACE value of ηcyc can be denoted as an
( ) lcyc ,ηcyc − cycle .With the algorithm proposed in [10],
the irregular LDPC codes with (dmax ,ηACE ) constraint
( ) were constructed, where each lcyc ,ηcyc − cycle in the
Tanner graph satisfy that if lcyc ≤ 2dmax ,thenηcyc ≥ ηACE . By the algorithm, some improvement of the performance in the error-floor region was achieved.
In [11], the ACE spectrum of LDPC codes as a generalization of ACE metric is proposed. The ACE
spectrum of a Tanner graph G ( H ) is defined
( ) ( ) as η G ( H ) = η2 ,η4 ,",η2dmax , where dmax is the
spectrum depth, andη2i is the minimum ACE value of
all cycles of length 2i in G ( H ) . In [12], a generalized
ACE constrained PEG algorithm which improves the ACE spectrum is proposed too.
As computer-generated random LDPC codes are too complex to be practically implemented, we use a transformed generalized ACE constrained PEG algorithm to construct QC-LDPC codes with extremal ACE spectrum property.
4. Transformed PEG algorithm for QCLDPC codes
Generalized ACE constrained PEG algorithm is a powerful algorithm for constructing low error-floor irregular LDPC codes, and the algorithm can be used for constructing irregular QC-LDPC codes with low

error-floor too. In this section we describe the transformed PEG algorithm for QC-LDPC codes with generalized ACE constrained.
4.1. PEG algorithm and generalized ACE constrained PEG algorithm
The original PEG algorithm processes as “to search the constraint nodes shortest path first, and then to select a constraint node” when adding a new edge to the Tanner graph. At the constraint node selecting step, there always be multiple choices. In original PEG algorithm, the first of the multiple choices will be selected, or the selection will be randomly from the multiple choices [8]. Whereas in the generalized ACE constrained PEG algorithm, the constraint node selecting step is made up of some sequences of selection criterion. If multiple choices are survived after a selection criterion, the next selection criterion is applied. After the last selection criterion applied, the selection is randomly from the survivors. The selection criterions are as follow:
Select constraint nodes from the nodes never reached or from nodes of the longest path to the variable node added → Select survivors with largest minimum path ACE metric → Select survivors with smallest number of minimum ACE shortest paths → Select survivors with smallest total number of shortest paths → Select minimum degree survivor.
4.2. Transformed PEG algorithm
As described in Section 2, we can construct a check matrix of QC-LDPC code with concerning only the location of 1-component in the first column of each Ai, j if each Ai, j is a circulant permutation matrix or all-zero matrix. Thus some modification on the sequence of adding new edge to the Tanner graph of PEG algorithm can be efficient for constructing QCLDPC codes.
For constructing irregular QC-LDPC codes, the column weight of each column must according to the QC-LDPC code form. That is the weights of columns
from ( j −1) ∗b +1 to j *b ( j = 1, 2,",t ) must be the
same, say d j . Since if Ai, j is a circulant permutation
matrix, the weight of each column of Ai, j is 1, thus for Ai, j (i = 1, 2,"c, j = a) ( a is anyone chosen from
set {1, 2,",t} ), there are da circulant permutation
matrices and c − da all-zero matrices of size b × b among the Ai, j (i = 1, 2,"c, j = a) set. Hence, in PEG algorithm,

197 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

da edges must be added to every variable node
from (a −1) ∗b +1to a *b .
As the analysis above, in transformed PEG algorithm, the constraint node select procedure can be
processed in columns ( j −1) ∗ b +1( j = 1, 2,",t) only,
once the constraint node is selected, we can set Ai, j as a circulant permutation matrix according with the location of the constraint node added, where i is determined by the circulant permutation matrix in HQC the constraint node selected belong to, And we say this procedure a expansion procedure. Of cause the constraint nodes in Ai, j cannot be the selection of the following constraint node selecting procedures in the same column. Obviously, this may cause some lose to the code performance. We say these constraint nodes as expansion nodes.
The transform PEG algorithm for QC-LDPC codes is summarized follow:
Transformed PEG algorithm for QC-LDPC codes for i = 1 to t do begin
for k = 1 to di do begin
if k = 1 select the constraint node to the variable
node (i −1)*b +1 with minimum degree, and then
process the expansion procedure. elseif not every constraint node is reachable from
variable node (i −1)*b +1
select the constraint node with minimum degree from the nodes which cannot reached excluding the expansion nodes, then process the expansion procedure. else process the selection criterion of generalized ACE constrained described in Section 4.1 excluding the expansion nodes, then process the expansion procedure. end end
5. Simulation results
In this section, we compare irregular LDPC code designed with original PEG algorithm and irregular QC-LDPC code designed with transformed PEG algorithm proposed. For comparison, both codes have the same code length n = 1008 , and code rate 1/2. The degree distribution of code designed by original PEG algorithm is density evolution (DE) optimized. For

irregular QC-LDPC code, we set b = 7,t = 144, c = 72 ,
and the degree distribution is close to that of code designed by original PEG algorithm. The BER performances are got using Monte-Carlo (MC) simulation, BPSK modulation over the AWGN channel, and decoding by log-BP algorithm with 50 iterations.
The BER and FER performance of the two coeds are depicted in Fig. 1. It is clear that the algorithm proposed can provide a lower error-floor than original PEG algorithm in the error-floor region, although the performance is a little depress in the low SNR region.

-1
10

BER Tranformed PEG

10-2

FER Tranformed PEG

BER Original PEG

-3

FER Original PEG

10

Error Rate

-4
10

-5
10

-6
10

-7
10

-8

10

1.5

2

2.5

3

Eb/N0(dB)

Fig. 1. BER and FER performance of codes constructed by original PEG algorithm and transformed PEG algorithm proposed respectively

6. Conclusion

Irregular LDPC codes with ACE constrained have a low error-floor performance. For low error-floor performance and simple structure, in this paper we have proposed a transformed PEG algorithm for constructing irregular QC-LDPC codes. Simulation results shows that the algorithm proposed can provide a lower error-floor than original PEG algorithm.

10. References

[1] M. P. C. Fossorier, Quasi-cyclic low-density paritycheck codes from circulant permutation matrices [J], IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788-1793, Aug. 2004.
[2] Hao Zhang and Tong Zhang, Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach [J], IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems_I: Regular Papers, April 2005, Vol.52, No.4, pp. 766-775.

198 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[3] Chanho Lee, Design of encoder and decoder for LDPC codes using hybrid H-Matrix [J], ETRI Journal, Oct. 2005, Vol. 27, No. 5, pp. 557-562.
[4] Seho Myung, Kyeongcheol Yang and Jaeyoel Kim, Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding[J], IEEE Trans. Information Theory, Aug. 2005, Vol.51, No.8, pp. 2894-2901
[5] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, Near-Shannonlimit quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes, IEEE. Trans. Commun. vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038-1042, Jul. 2004.
[6] J. Xu, L. Chen, L-Q. Zeng, L. Lan, and S. Lin, Construction of low-density parity-check codes by superposition, IEEE Trans. Commun. vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 243251, Feb. 2005
[7] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs, in Proc. IEEE GLOBLECOM 2001, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 995-1001.

[8] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, Regular and irregular progressive edge growth Tanner graphs, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386-398, Jan. 2005.
[9] T. Richardson, Error floors of LDPC codes, in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. on Communication, Control, and Computing, Urbana-Champaign, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[10] T. Tian, C. Johns, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction, IEEE Trans. Commun. Vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 12421248, Aug, 2004.
[11] D. Vukobratović, A. Djurendić, and V. Šenk, ACE spectrum of LDPC codes and generalized ACE design, in Proc. IEEE ICC 2007, pp. 665–670.
[12] D. Vukobratović, and V. Šenk, Generalized ACE constrained progressive edge-growth LDPC codes design. IEEE Commun. Lett. vol. 12, no. 1, pp 32-34.

199 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:58:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

