Decoding a Family of Dense Codes using the Sum-Product Algorithm

Jorge Pe´rez-Chamorro, Fabrice Seguin, Cyril Lahuec, Michel Je´ze´quel and Gerald Le Mestre Electronics Department, TELECOM Bretagne - Technopoˆle Brest Iroise CS 83818
Email: {jorge.perez, fabrice.seguin, cyril.lahuec, michel.jezequel, gerald.lemestre}@telecom-bretagne.eu

Abstract—Cortex codes are a family of block codes with good minimum distance properties whose parity-check matrices are very dense. Digital implementations of Cortex decoders using standard decoding algorithms have not shown an acceptable performance. Motivated by the encoder structure, a new bipartite graph is introduced and exemplified for the Cortex construction of the extended Hamming code.
The Cortex graph has longer girth and approximately 80% less cycles than the Tanner graph. A Cortex and an LDPC-like decoder were implemented for the same code using identical PMOS-based Gilbert multipliers. This makes them the first reported analog decoders using mainly PMOS transistors. The Cortex outperforms the LDPC-like decoder in Bit Error Rate and at the same time saves 44% of die surface. The results are supported using data from a test chip designed for a 0.25 µm CMOS process.
I. INTRODUCTION
This work presents an analog decoding technique and a proof-of-concept silicon realization for a family of short block codes known as Cortex codes [1]-[3]. The Cortex coding scheme [1] is suited for the construction of self-dual codes but it has lacked well performing decoders. This failure has been attributed to the high density of ‘1’s in the parity-check matrices. The possibility of finding a class of dense codes that could be optimally decoded using a belief propagation algorithm is an open problem.
The message-passing used through this paper is the analog Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) [4]. Bipartite graphs are direct representations of the codes seen as equations systems that are composed by vertices and connecting edges. The two types of vertices used on Tanner graphs implementations are the soft-equality and soft-check nodes. Every connecting edge relates any two nodes using a bidirectional communication of extrinsic information. The latter means that every node evaluates the local function for every of its neighbors using the soft information received from any other neighbors. This also implies that a node with only two neighbors performs no computation since it simply passes the information from one into the other.
The parallelism found at the Cortex encoder and its modular construction motivate the proposition of this paper. Section II details the construction of the Cortex codes and exemplifies for the extended Hamming code. It also introduces a new bipartite graph and the analog decoding approach for this family of dense codes. Section III presents the circuit implementations of

a Cortex (the first for this family of codes) and an LDPC-like decoder. These are the first analog decoders fabricated using subthreshold PMOS Gilbert multipliers. Section IV presents the measurement results. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.

II. CORTEX CODES

The Cortex construction is presented as a solution for imple-

menting short codes with good minimum distance properties.

This

family

of

codes

was

originally

proposed

in

[1]

as

a

rate-

1 2

block codes family, though the construction can be generalized

to several rates.

A. Construction

Looking forward to the construction of a code Ck of

parameters (n = 2k, k, dmin), for {a, b, k, s} ∈ N, let Ca be

the base code of dimension a with generator matrix given by

G(a,b,dmin)= [Ib |Pb ] where a = 2b, b|k, Ib is the identity matrix of size b × b and Pb is the corresponding parity matrix.

Also, let πi be a permutation on Nk for i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , s}.

In order to determine the k redundancy bits associated to

the

k

information

bits

X

=

{x0, . . . , xk−1},

X

is

split

in

k b

messages so they can be independently encoded using Ca. The

new word is Y = XP where P is the squared matrix of size

k given by eq. (1).

 Pb 0b×b · · · 0b×b 

 0b×b Pb · · · 0b×b 

P=  

...

...

...

...

  

(1)

0b×b 0b×b · · · Pb

Then, the word Y is permuted according to π1 and encoded again according to P. This process repeated s times is represented by eq. (2)

f (s) (X) = XPΠ1P · · · ΠsP

(2)

where Πi is the matrix representation of πi. Then, the code Cn is the set of vectors of length n defined by

Cn = X f (s) (X) : X ∈ GF (2)n−1 .

(3)

The generator matrix of a Cortex code is given by

G(n,k,dmin) = [Ik |PΠ1P · · · ΠsP ] .

(4)

978-1-4244-3828-0/09/$25.00 ©2009 IEEE

2685

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:15:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 1. Cortex-graph construction of the extended (8,4,4) Hamming code.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 3. Modular construction of a Cortex decoder: (a) Tanner and simplified bipartite graphs of the (4, 2, 2) Hadamard decoder, (b) Cortex bipartite graph of the (8, 4, 4) Hamming code obtained using (a). The dotted lines show one of the shortest cycles.

Fig. 2. Tanner graph of the extended Hamming decoder. The dotted lines show one of the shortest cycles.

Neither the number of encoding stages (s + 1) nor the permutations πi have been defined using a deterministic procedure (it is indeed an open problem). In general, the permutations are neither unique nor identical. For the interested reader, [2]-[3] expand on the permutations and base codes used in the construction of several (and in many cases extremal) Cortex codes.
For instance, the (8, 4, 4) Hamming code has a Cortex construction using π1 = π2 = {2, 1, 0, 3} and the (4, 2, 2) Hadamard code as base code (or brick). Its generator matrix is G(4,2,2) = [I2|P2] where

P2 =

01 11

.

(5)

The Cortex encoder of the (8, 4, 4) Hamming code is presented in Fig. 1. The redundancy bits (r0, r1, r2, r3) are obtained after three successive encoding stages of the information bits (x0, x1, x2, x3) by means of elementary base encoders separated by interleavers. The variables obtained after the encoding stages 0 and 1, are called hidden variables. The Cortex generator matrix is G(8,4,4) = [I4|PΠPΠP].

B. A New Bipartite Graph

The SPA gives an exact solution to the error-correcting

problem only in cycle free factor graphs [5]. Cycles are not

desired because they affect the independence of the extrinsic

information exchanged in the decoding process.

Cortex codes have parity-check matrices that are not sparse.

Hence, their Tanner graphs have a large quantity of short

cycles and the SPA performs far from optimal. The Tanner

graph of the Hamming code is given in Fig. 2.

Inspired by the codes construction, a new Cortex bipartite

graph is presented. Basically, it is obtained by replacing the

encoding boxes from the encoder with the factor graph of

the brick code. For decoding, all edges become bidirectional

connections and exchange extrinsic information. A Cortex

decoder has s + 1 decoding stages separated by s interleavers.

Every

decoding

stage

is

composed

of

k b

decoders

of

the

brick

code Ca.

The construction of the Cortex graph for the extended Hamming code is illustrated next. Fig. 3(a) presents the brick decoding structures (i.e. the (4, 2, 2) Hadamard decoder): the Low-Density Pairty-Check (LDPC)-like decoder (left) and a simplified graph-based decoder (right). The latter simplification was obtained after noticing that nodes of degree 2 perform no computation. Fig. 3(b) presents the Cortex graph of the (8, 4, 4) Hamming code.
C. Analog Decoding
Analog decoders are analog networks that implement SoftInput Soft-Output forward error correcting algorithms. Such analog structures can be used to map decoding graphs in a straightforward way.
Over the last decade many advantages over their digital counterparts have been proven in terms of silicon area, complexity and power consumption [6, 7]. Moreover, the evident continuous parallel exchange makes them very attractive since this operating mode is already a challenge for digital implementations.
For validation, the analog decoding computing cells were described in Simulink R using Matlab R subroutines. The essential model features are the fully-parallel continuous information exchange and the presence of interconnection delays (RC time constant). This is the type of behavioral model traditionally used to estimate analog decoders Bit Error Rate (BER) [7]. The performance of the analog models of the Cortex and LDPC-like decoders are contrasted in Fig. 4. The analog Cortex decoder outperforms the digital LDPC-like decoder by approximately 1dB at BER=10−6.
Note that the LDPC-like decoder uses the graph in Fig. 2 and its BER is similar to that found in [8] using an equivalent graph. Comparison with the the redundant Tanner graph used in [9] is not valid since the decoding process is modified due to a doubling of the number of parity-checks. The latter approach doubles the required bidirectional connections and increases the number of required computing nodes to more than 310% with respect to the Cortex graph and more than 235% with respect to the standard Tanner graph.
III. CIRCUITS IMPLEMENTATION
Analog circuits provide implementations of adders and multipliers for real numbers with a relatively low complexity.

2686
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:15:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1

0,1

0,01

1E-3

BER

1E-4

1E-5 1E-6

Cortex analogue decoder LDPC-like analogue decoder Maximum-Likelihood decoder Non-coded BPSK

1E-7

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Eb/No (dB)

Fig. 4. Bit Error Rate (High-level model in Simulink and MATLAB) of the LDPC-like and Cortex analog decoders for the extended Hamming code.

TABLE I ARCHITECTURAL COMPARISON FOR THE HAMMING DECODERS

Decoder
Base computing nodes Maximum nodes degree Bidirectionnal connections Cycles (of any length) Girth (length of shortest cycle) Number of girth-cycles

Cortex
12 3 8 6 6 2

LDPC-like
16 4 12 28 4 4

Fig. 6. Die microphotograph and floor planning of the Cortex and LDPC-like analog decoders. The total silicon area is 4.82mm2

Fig. 5. Schematic of a PMOS soft-equality node used in both decoders’ implementations. The soft-check node is simply obtained by chaging the connections of the bottom diffential pairs. All transistors have VBS = 0.
This is due to the exponential characteristics of either Bipolar Junction Transistors (BJT) or subthreshold MOSFETs. BJTs are a power-hungry choice mostly used when high throughput is mandatory. On the other side, MOSFET implementations aim, in general, at applications requiring a very-low power consumption. That is the approach of this work.
A. Computing Nodes
The authors proposed in [10] a set of guidelines on the design of subthreshold MOSFET circuits. These were used for the transistors sizing and circuits configuration presented in this paper. Remarkably, the multipliers are implented using PMOS transistors rather than NMOS as usually done (Fig. 5). In a PMOS-based topology, independent n-wells can be used so that independent bulk-source connections are possible for all transistors (i.e. VBS = 0). This brings several advantages when compared to NMOS-based realizations [10].
As shown in [10], VBS = 0 yields a closer to ideal exponential dependence of the transistor current on the gate voltage. This is due to a reduction of the fluctuation of both the subthreshold slope and the threshold voltage. Thus the PMOS computing nodes are more precise than the NMOS ones. Moreover, the PMOS transistors improve shielding against substrate noise.

B. Decoders Complexity Comparison
The decoders’ graphs used for the implementation are those in Figs. 2 and 3(b). From graphs analysis it can be found that the LDPC-like graph (Fig. 2) has girth 4 and several cycles: six length-4, sixteen length-6 and six length-8. The Cortex bipartite graph (Fig. 3(b)) has girth 6; only two length-6 and four length-8 cycles. The dotted lines in both figures shows one of the shortest cycles.
Despite the fact that both decoders are based on bipartite graphs and use the same basic cells, the Cortex decoder is considerably less complex than the LDPC-like decoder. The latter requires sixteen computing nodes and twelve bidirectional connections whereas the former just uses twelve and eight respectively.
The considerations above imply that the Cortex decoder requires 25% less transistors and 33% less bidirectional connections than the LDPC-like decoder. Table I summarises both decoders’ characteristics.
C. Chip description
A 0.25 µm CMOS technology from NXP Semiconductors was used for the implementation. The die microphotograph and its floor plan are presented in Fig. 6. The fabricated silicon area is 4.8 mm2 and it can be seen that the Cortex decoder is much smaller than the LDPC-like one.
Given the small frame length, no storage memories are used at the inputs. Instead, the input log-likelihood ratios (LLR) are fed in parallel to the analog decoders. Special care was taken to separate analog from digital cores [11] using a Deep Trench Isolation (DTI) and passive guard rings. The hard decision

2687
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:15:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1

0,1

0,01

BER

1E-3 1E-4 1E-5 1E-6

Cortex analog decoder: High-level model Transistor-level model Chip measurements
LDPC-like analog decoder: High-level model Transistor-level model Chip measurements

1E-7

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Eb/No (dB)

Fig. 7. Bit Error Rates using a high-level model (Simulink), a transistor-level model (Cadence) and chip measurements of the Cortex and LDPC-like analog decoders.
TABLE II MEASUREMENT RESULTS COMPARISON FOR THE HAMMING DECODERS

Decoder
Gilbert Multipliers Silicon area mm2 Energy per decoded bit (pJ) Throughput (Mbps)

Cortex
PMOS-based 0.56 222 2

LDPC-like
PMOS-based 1.00 160 2

outputs are serialized (Parallel-Input Serial-Output register) for test convenience. Each decoder can be enabled separately and has independent digital and analog power supplies equal to 1.4V. The biasing current at the multipliers is 1 µA and the reference voltages VBIAS1 and VBIAS2 are equal to 0.50V and 0.85V respectively.
IV. TRANSISTOR-LEVEL SIMULATIONS AND EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The transistor-level model (Cadence) is compared with the high-level model (Section II-C). Given the short frame length, the transistor-level simulation of several thousands of frames is still computationally tractable.
The circuit was fabricated and successfully tested. The test-bench was programmed in an FPGA VIRTEX-II PRO (Xilinx) interfacing eight 12-bit digital-to-analog converters DAC128S085 (National Semiconductor). Fig. 7 compares chip measurements to simulation results. At the time of writing only partial BER measurements (down to 10−6) could be provided. However, it is enough to verify the correct functioning of the circuits. Measurements confirm the transistor-level simulations and show that the Cortex decoder outperforms the LDPClike decoder in terms of error correction. The Cortex decoder consumes 28% less power when compared to the LDPC-like decoder. Table II summarises these results.
V. CONCLUSIONS
Cortex codes are a family of codes with good minimum distance properties and dense parity-check matrices that have a modular construction. No functional decoders have been

reported to date. Through the proposition of a new bipartite graph, called Cortex graph, a general construction for Cortex decoders is introduced. The first Cortex decoder has been designed and fabricated for the Hamming code. Compared to the LDPC-like decoder of the same code, the analog Cortex decoder is better by approximately 1dB at a BER of 10−6. Moreover, the Cortex decoder is less complex than the LDPClike decoder saving 44% of silicon area and 28% in terms of power consumption. Both decoders were implemented using the same basic cells and are the first reported analog implementations using PMOS-based Gilbert multipliers. Given the observed implementation improvements against standard LDPC-like decoders, the construction of longer Cortex codes are a promising solution for industrial applications requiring short codes with large minimum distances.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors would like to thank especially Claude Toquin for fabricating the test board and Dr. Gammand’s team from NXP Semiconductors for their technical support.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Cadic, J. Carlach, G. Olocco, A. Otmani, and J. Tillich, 14th International Symposium on Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error-Correcting Codes, Melbourne, Australia. SpringerLink, November 2001, ch. Low Complexity Tail-Biting Trellises of Self-dual codes of Length 24, 32 and 40 over GF(2) and Z4 of Large Minimum Distance, pp. 57–66.
[2] A. Otmani, “Codes cortex et construction de codes auto-duaux optimaux,” Ph. D. thesis - Mathe´matiques et ses applications, Universite´ de Limoges, 2002.
[3] J. Carlach and A. Otmani, “A systematic construction of self-dual codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. IT-49, no. 11, pp. 3005– 3009, Nov. 2003.
[4] F. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sumproduct algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb 2001.
[5] J. Yedidia, W. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free-energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282–2312, 2005.
[6] F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, H.-A. Loeliger, F. Tarkoy, and G. Moschytz, “An analog VLSI decoding technique for digital codes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, vol. 2, 30 May-2 June 1999, pp. 424–427.
[7] M. Arzel, C. Lahuec, F. Seguin, D. Gnaedig, and M. Jezequel, “Semiiterative analog turbo decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 1305–1316, June 2007.
[8] M. Frey, H. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, P. Merkli, and P. Strebel, “Measurements on an analog (8,4,4) Hamming Code Decoder Chip,” Signal and Information Processing Laboratory, ETH Zurich, Switzerland, Tech. Rep. 200402, 2004.
[9] C. Winstead, N. Nguyen, V. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, “Low-voltage CMOS circuits for analog iterative decoders,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 829–841, April 2006.
[10] J. Pe´rez-Chamorro, C. Lahuec, F. Seguin, and M. Je´ze´quel, “Design rules for subthreshold MOS circuits,” in 5th Analogue Decoding Workshop, Torino, June 5-6 2006, pp. 23–26. [Online]. Available: http://portail.telecombretagne.eu/publi/public/download.jsp?id publication=2294
[11] C. Lahuec, G. Le Mestre, M. Arzel, F. Seguin, and M. Je´ze´quel, “Design and test of a 0.25-µm BiCMOS doublebinary analogue APP decoder,” in 5th Analog Decoding Workshop, Torino, June 5-6 2006, pp. 35–38.

2688
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:15:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

