3540

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 27, NO. 16, AUGUST 15, 2009

Soft Decision LDPC Decoding Over Chi-Square Based Optical Channels
Stéphanie Sahuguede, Anne Julien-Vergonjanne, and Jean-Pierre Cances

Abstract—In this paper, we consider low density parity check (LDPC) codes as a solution to enhance the optical transmission performance. The decoding algorithm based on message passing algorithm uses the probability density function of the received signal. Its efficiency thus depends on the right evaluation of the signal distribution. We do not make here the classical additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) assumption, but we investigate a chi-square based channel model which is more accurate for the description of optical impairments. As opposed to previous chi-square based models, no assumption on the signal power of 0 and 1 data is done. The calculation of the logarithmic likelihood ratio (LLR) needed to implement soft LDPC decoder is thus developed for a chi-square channel in a general manner. Computer simulations validate the efficiency of the soft decoder for this type of channel. The results also confirm that the adaptation of LDPC decoder to the specific chi-square channel statistic is necessary to obtain the optimal performance.
Index Terms—Chi-square statistics, forward error correction (FEC), iterative decoding, low density parity check (LDPC) codes, optical channel.
I. INTRODUCTION
O PTICAL network systems have intensively been studied these recent years since they are able to support a diversity of large bandwidth applications. However, they are subject to many impairments from which amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) is a major one and severely degrade the performance [1]–[3]. Generally modelled as having an asymmetric distribution, the ASE noise contribution cannot be dissociated from the signal one. Therefore, the commonly used additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) or asymmetrical AWGN models describing the noise as an independent process do not fit the real noise process. It has been shown that a chi-square distributed variable [4], based on the summation of several squared Gaussian variables, permits well modelling the detected signal [3], [5]–[8].
In order to mitigate the impact of optical impairments on the performance, Forward Error Correction (FEC) can be used [6]–[14] as an efficient and inexpensive solution. More particularly, soft decision based FEC using low density parity check codes (LDPC) appears to be one of the most efficient FEC schemes and is subject to many investigations [9]–[12].
Manuscript received January 15, 2009; revised April 17, 2009. First published May 05, 2009; current version published July 24, 2009. This work was supported in part by the French Ministry of Research and in part by the RNRT project
C S ECOFRAME. The authors are with the University of Limoges, XLIM DptUMR CNRS 6172, ENSIL Parc ESTER, BP 6804, 87068 Limoges Cedex, France (e-mail: s_sahuguede@ensil.unilim.fr; anne@ensil.unilim.fr; cances@ensil.unilim.fr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JLT.2009.2022194

Previous studies have concluded that the design of error correction codes can be done over an AWGN channel assumption [6]–[8]. However, the a priori knowledge of the channel statistics is essential for soft decision decoding algorithm in order to reach optimal performance. Whereas iterative decoding schemes have been intensively studied for optical communications [6]–[12], no detailed analysis giving the expressions of the initial likelihoods for a chi-square based channel in a general manner has been reported so far. In [6], precisions are given neither on the FEC used to correct errors nor on the characteristics of the chi-square channel. The analysis and the results in [7] and [8], dealing about product accumulate codes and turbo codes, are presented only for an ideal chi-square channel assuming that the signal power of a “0” datum is exactly null. This model is inaccurate for optical links, where spontaneous emission and amplifications lead to a non-null power for a “0” emitted datum. In [9], the probability density function (pdf) of the channel output is estimated by simulations, giving to the decoder the accurate signal knowledge. However, in this case, results from several simulation scenarios are averaged and the resulting pdf has limited accuracy [9].
In this paper, we consider a simple but general chi-square based model for the postdetector signal distribution. As opposed to previous works dealing about ideal chi-square model, we assume that the optical signal corresponding to a “0” emitted can also be non-null. Our contribution is to analytically determine in a general manner the logarithmic likelihood ratios (LLR) [13], [14] required by the LDPC decoder using the belief propagation (BP) algorithm [15]. The expressions we develop can be used for any optical noise amount and any optical power ratio between “1” and “0” emitted data.
To illustrate the adapted decoder efficiency and thus validate the LLR expressions for this accurate chi-square based channel, we study the performance of LDPC codes over an optical network modeled by a chi-square statistic for several scenarios.
II. STATISTICAL CHANNEL MODEL
The first step of the decoding algorithm in a FEC scheme is the initialization step, fed by the information obtained from the whole block of the detected signal. It consists in the evaluation of the a priori LLRs. For each incident information at the decoder input, the a priori LLR is defined, by [14]
(1)
where is the emitted datum of the block, supposed to be equiprobable (0 or 1).
After the initialization step, the iterative LDPC decoding operates by exchanging messages according to the equivalent

0733-8724/$26.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SAHUGUEDE et al.: SOFT DECISION LDPC DECODING OVER CHI-SQUARE BASED OPTICAL CHANNELS

3541

Tanner graph of the parity check matrix (see Appendix A for further information). Since all the iterative calculations are fed by the a priori LLR values, the right evaluation of (1) is a key parameter for the soft decoder efficiency.
In most FEC studies, a common practice consists in modeling the channel as an AWGN one. In this case, for an On Off Keying (OOK) transmission, the received signal can be written as:
where is an AWGN variable of variance , which probability density function (pdf) is given as follows:
(2)
This pdf expression (2) permits evaluating the two probabilities searched in (1) replacing by
(3)
The ratio of the two probabilities (3) permits obtaining the wellknown expression of the a priori LLR for an OOK transmission over an AWGN corrupted channel

pends on the channel characteristic and can be evaluated for a

particular scenario by fitting simulation results [5].

As a consequence, we assume that the detected signal is chi-

squared distributed, with an order

[2], [3]; [7]

where and refer to the optical and electrical bandwidths.

Moreover, without loss of generality, we assume that the pho-

todetector responsivity is equal to 1. To model this distribution,

each emitted value is affected to a chi-square variable repre-

senting the photo-detected signal. The photocurrent expression

is thus given by

(5)

where refers to the signal component and to the AWGN

contribution, both projected into the dimension basis [3].

In each dimension, the sum of these two terms denoted

is a random variable following the normal distribution

, where is the noise variance over the

bandwidth and the signal field amplitude corresponding to

datum

.

With this model, the photocurrent pdf is given in a general

manner for both emitted value

or 1, by [4]

(4) (6)

Note that this expression is equivalent to the one classically

evaluated on bipolar AWGN channel and given by [13]–[15]:

with

and

for the unipolar

to bipolar conversion.

Several studies [6]–[9] have highlighted that the AWGN

model is inaccurate for the description of the optical channel

impairments. In [9], the probability density functions (pdf) for

marks and spaces have been calculated by averaging simulation

results of the received signal distribution. Specific impairments

are taken into account in addition to AWGN which results in

is the first kind modified Bessel function of order .

A characteristic parameter of the optical channel transmission

is the input extinction ratio noted defined by the ratio of the

power between a “1” or a “0” emitted datum:

.

The particular case of ideal chi-square channel corresponds

to the case where

and

. In this limit case, the

photocurrent pdf expression for a “0” emitted datum is simpli-

fied to

asymmetrical pdf. In addition they show that when the number

(7)

of spans increases the pdf for a ‘0’ emitted shifts to the right for

a given launched power. This illustrates the inaccuracy of using

central chi-square distribution for ‘0’ emitted datum as done in [6]–[8]. Actually, by definition, the mean of a central chi-square distributed variable [4] depends only on the chi-square order and on the noise variance. The number of spans, for example, thus has no influence on this mean value.
In this paper, we propose to use a generalized chi-square based model instead of the commonly used one [6]–[8] for the noise statistic after photodetection. We assume that before pho-

III. ITERATIVE DECODING BASED ON CHI-SQUARE MODEL
We suppose that the emitted data are equiprobable and follow uniform law. In this case, we can use Bayes’ rule
and the statistical expression (6) to determine the probabilities searched in (1) for the LLR calculation. The general expression of the LLR corresponding to a chi-square signal distribution is thus given by

todetection, all impairments are modeled by an AWGN. With

these considerations, the photocurrent follows a chi-square dis-

tribution, of order depending on the optical filter characteristics.

Contrary to previous studies done on chi-square based models,

we consider that the pdf for “0” emitted data can be a noncentral

(8)

one. This statistic well describes the post photodetector signal

distribution, even if fiber nonlinearities, dispersion or cross-talk

effects are considered before postdetection. Actually, a noncen- In order to compare the performance of LDPC with previous

tral chi-square pdf for “0” emitted data means that the optical ones over classical AWGN channels, performances can be eval-

power corresponding to a “0” datum is not null. Its value de- uated for a given value as a function of the factor. Ac-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3542

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 27, NO. 16, AUGUST 15, 2009

tually, , defined by the following expression is similar to the electrical signal-to-noise ratio (SNR):

(9)

and for

or 0, are the means and variances of the

chi-square variable corresponding to the emitted datum .

They are linked to the optical noise variance and the signal

field amplitudes with

(10)

which permits expressing rameters , , and

as a function of the physical pa-
Fig. 1. BERs for the LDPC(1810,1630) and LDPC(2715,2535) over a chi-
(11) square channel with ER = 10 dB.

In the ideal case where

, the photocurrent

pdf when a “0” is emitted is reduced to (7). Considering (6) and

(7) for the LLR calculation (1), we obtain for

First, we can note that the coded curves follow the same shape as the ones usually obtained over an AWGN channel as a function of the SNR. Actually, there is a waterfall region where the BER drastically decreases for a few variation of . For

the considered LDPC codes, this corresponds to between

7.5 dB–8 dB.

Our results concerning the LDPC(2715,2535) are similar to

the ones presented in [17] and obtained over a bipolar AWGN

(12) channel. To compare the results it is necessary to make the nor-

malization

dB due to unipolarity. This jus-

This expression is equivalent to the one obtained in [7] which

deals only on the ideal chi-square channel, with the notations

,

,

,

.

In the following, the performances are evaluated over a chi-

square channel via the use of (8) for

and via the use

of (12) for

. Moreover, we have also investigated the

cases where a classical LLR calculation under the AWGN as-

sumption is done, i.e., using (4) with the equivalent noise vari-

ance given by (10). This permits illustrating the importance of

taking into account specific chi-square statistic for the soft de-

coder implementation.

tifies the LDPC decoder efficiency over the chi-square channel

using the particular LLR calculation (8) since optimal BERs are

reached.

In addition, we can remark that as expected, the higher re-

dundant the code is, the better the performances are. For ex-

ample, a BER of is reached at a value of 7.8 dB for the

LDPC(1810,1630) whereas a value of 8.2 dB is necessary

with the LDPC(2715,2535) of lower redundancy.

The performances have also been evaluated for different

values. For example, results are reported as a function of the

factor in Fig. 2(a) for

dB and for

(limit case) for the LDPC (6176,5983) obtained with

IV. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

and

. As a comparison purpose, performances over an

AWGN channel are also reported (curves with crosses).

To illustrate the decoder efficiency, performances are evalu- Regarding to the impact, we can remark that for high

ated with LDPC codes using a deterministic based construction

values the performances, represented as a function of the

called BIBD (see Appendix B for notations and further informa- factor, are better than the one obtained for smaller values.

tion) [16], [17], but any other LDPC code could be used. With Actually, tending to the infinity corresponds to tending

the considered class of codes, the code rate of the

to 0 which means that “0” emitted data are less disrupted. On

defined by

depends only on the ns value:

the contrary, for low ER values, the results approach the ones

.

obtained over the AWGN channel. Actually, since we have rep-

Consequently, to evaluate the error correction as a function resented the BER results as a function of and since in this

of the code rate, simulations have been done for a fixed case and tend respectively to and , this approaches

(

, e.g.,) and

or

. This leads to the the symmetrical AWGN case.

LDPC(1810,1630) and the LDPC(2715,2535) of redundancies Concerning the results in the uncoded case, we can remark

respectively equal to 10% and 6.6%.

in Fig. 2(a) that the uncoded AWGN curve is equivalent to the

Results are reported on Fig. 1 for a chi-square channel of one obtained from the relation

.

order

and as a function of the factor for a given ex- However, as we can see in Fig. 2(a), the uncoded curves in the

tinction ratio

dB with the corresponding specific LLR chi-square cases are not the same than in the AWGN case, so

calculation (8).

this relation is not true for a chi-square based channel.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SAHUGUEDE et al.: SOFT DECISION LDPC DECODING OVER CHI-SQUARE BASED OPTICAL CHANNELS

3543

1 Fig. 3. BERs with LDPC (6176,5983) over a Chi-square channel, ER = .

Fig. 3 displays the results obtained with this configuration

for

in addition to the ones obtained with the accurate

LLR calculation. By comparison, the performances under the

Gaussian statistic assumption are strongly degraded. Actually,

with the AWGN assumption, the error correction performance is

effective for uncoded BER lower than whereas it is effec-

tive with the chi-square assumption from a BER of . More-

over, for a given uncoded BER, the difference between the two

coded ones is very important. For example, an uncoded BER of

leads to with the right LLR calculation whereas

it is of

with the AWGN approximation.

This difference is all the more high as the uncoded BER is

low. Thus, assuming that the optical channel statistic follows a

chi-square law, it is worth considering at the LDPC decoder this

specific photocurrent statistic.

Fig. 2. (a) BERs for the LDPC (6176,5983) with accurate LLR calculation, as a function of the Q factor. (b) BERs for the LDPC (6176,5983) with accurate LLR calculation, as a function of the uncoded BER.

V. CONCLUSION
We have presented in this paper a solution using LDPC codes to enhance the performance of an optical network suffering from

noise and beatings resulting from photodetection process. To be

efficient, the decoding algorithm based on Belief Propagation

To evaluate the decoder efficiency, we have also plotted the requires accurate initial bit reliabilities expressed under the form

coded BER as a function of the uncoded one in Fig. 2(b). Since of LLR.

the relations between and the uncoded BER are not the same To take into account the optical impairments, we have mod-

in different cases (AWGN and chi square cases with different eled the detected signal statistic by a noncentral chi-square dis-

value), Figs. 2(a) and 2(b) are not obtained by a simple tribution, which is more general and more accurate than the clas-

change of variables. As a consequence, contrary to Fig. 2(a), sical one using a central chi-square distribution. Considering

the curves merge in Fig. 2(b).This means that whatever the

this particular statistic, we have developed the analytical expres-

value is, the error correction capacities are identical in both sion of the accurate LLR required for the soft decoder initial-

AWGN and chi-square cases. This confirms and extends to the ization. This calculation has been performed for any amount of

general chi-square channel model what is claimed in [6]–[8], noise and any optical power ratio between a “1” emitted or a

i.e., that the code design can be done assuming an AWGN “0.”

statistic.

As a result, thanks to this accurate initialization, optimal per-

However, regarding to the error correction performance, it is formance for chi-square based optical channel can be reached

important to implement the accurate LLR at the LDPC decoder. by using LDPC codes. Moreover, our study confirms that the

Simulations have been done over a chi-square channel while FEC design can be done assuming the simple AWGN distribu-

assuming a Gaussian distribution, i.e., using the classical LLR tion but that the LLR calculation must be adapted to the specific

calculation (4).

channel statistic.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3544

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 27, NO. 16, AUGUST 15, 2009

Fig. 4. Equivalent Tanner graph representation of the H matrix.

LDPC

is defined with this construction method by the

two parameters, ns and (prime number):

and

.

Due to the BIBD construction with

, [16], [17], each

vector of the matrix is orthogonal to any other one, so there are

not two columns having the same entries. In this case, short

cycles of order 4 in the Tanner graph are avoided (the girth is

at least 6) and the BP algorithm is well suited.

BIBD-LDPC codes with girth equal to 8 can be obtained [12]

in order to reach better performance, especially for short length

codes where short cycles are more probable.

APPENDIX B

APPENDIX A LDPC CODES AND PARITY CHECK MATRIX

ITERATIVE DECODING ALGORITHM
After the initialization process consisting in the evaluation of a priori LLR, a posteriori messages pass from variable nodes

Forward Error Correction (FEC) principle is to add redundancy to a block of information bits. Redundant data are calculated at the emission as a function of the information data via the use of a generator matrix . This matrix is specific to each code and is associated at the reception to a parity check matrix
, giving the set of parity check equations and such as
.

to check nodes and inversely, through the nodes that are in-

terconnected. This decoding process called Belief Propagation

(BP) algorithm may be described as follows, dealing with LLR

instead of handling probabilities [15]. First, messages passing

from variable node to check node , noted

, are ini-

tialized with the a priori LLR values corresponding to the

received bit

Iterative decoding is based on Message Passing Algorithm,

well illustrated with the equivalent representation of the parity

check matrix which is the Tanner graph (or bipartite graph).

For each iteration, the first step is to update the messages to

An example of Tanner graph is shown in Fig. 4 where the be passed from check node to variable node noted

are the check nodes and the are the variable nodes. The with

variable nodes represent the columns of the parity check matrix

whereas the rows are represented by the check nodes. A check

node is connected to a variable node if

. Because of

the iterative process, the decoding algorithm will not converge where is calculated for each check node and variable node

if the Tanner graph contains short cycles. An example of cycle as

is given in Fig. 4: the nodes

are linked and form

a cycle of order 4. This corresponds in the parity check matrix

to the fact that the third and the sixth columns ( and ) have

the same entries.

The second step consists in updating the

LDPC codes are constructed such as the parity check matrix following:

is very sparse which means that the number of links between

values

variable nodes and check nodes is low (this is not the case for

the example in Fig. 4).

Among the different LDPC code constructions, balanced incomplete block design (BIBD) based ones which are determin- The last step consists in computing updated LLR, noted istic ones appear as a tradeoff between performance and imple- to take a decision, noted for each variable node according to

mentation complexity [16], [17].

With the construction method, entirely described in [17],

each column is composed of a vector of length , which is

and

a prime number. This vector can be permuted times to

if

constitute different columns of the parity check matrix. For

otherwise.

a given column weight (number of elements set to 1 in

each column), with BIBD considerations, one can determine

different vectors having a cross corre-

lation

.

The iterative process ends when a valid codeword

is generated (if it satisfies

) or

when the maximal number of iteration is reached.

Therefore, by choosing a number ns less or equal than ,

and permuting each of these vector times, a

column

parity check matrix can be constructed. Consequently, the

REFERENCES
[1] G. P. Agrawal, Fiber Optic Communication Systems, 3rd ed. New York: Wiley InterScience, 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SAHUGUEDE et al.: SOFT DECISION LDPC DECODING OVER CHI-SQUARE BASED OPTICAL CHANNELS

3545

[2] D. Marcuse, “Derivation of analytical expressions for the bit-error probability in lightwave systems with optical amplifiers,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 1816–1823, Dec. 1990.
[3] P. A. Humblet and M. Azizoglu, “On the bit error rate of lightwave systems with optical amplifiers,” J. Lightw.Technol., vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 1576–1582, Nov. 1991.
[4] J. G. Proakis, Digital Communications, 4th ed. New York: McGrawHill, 2000.
[5] D. Fafchamps, G. Rodriguez, and P. Gallion, “Chi-square statistical models as a good base for the optimization of optical communication systems,” presented at the Int. Conf. Photonics in Switching, Aug. 4–7, 2008.
[6] Y. Cai et al., “On channel models for predicting soft-decision error correction performance in optically amplified systems,” presented at the Optical Fiber Communication Conf., Mar. 23, 2003.
[7] J. Li et al., “On the bit-error rate of product accumulate codes in optical fiber communications,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 640–646, Feb. 2004.
[8] Y. Cai, J. M. Morris, T. Adali, and C. R. Menyuk, “On turbo code decoder performance in optical-fiber communication systems with dominating ASE noise,” J. Lightw. Technol, vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 727–734, Mar. 2003.
[9] I. B. Djordjevic, S. Sankaranarayanan, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Low-density parity-check codes for 40-gb/s optical transmission systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 12, pp. 555–562, Jul.–Aug. 2006.
[10] I. B. Djordjevic, O. Milenkovic, and B. Vasic, “Generalized low-density parity-check codes for optical communication systems,” J. Lightw. Technol, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 1939–1946, May 2005.
[11] B. Vasic, I. B. Djordjevic, and R. K. Kostuk, “Low-density parity check codes and iterative decoding for Long-Haul optical communication systems,” J. Lightw. Technol, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 438–446, Feb. 2003.
[12] B. Vasic and I. B. Djordjevic, “A forward error correction scheme for ultra long haul optical transmission systems based on low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communication, May 11–15, 2003, vol. 2, pp. 1489–1493.
[13] D. MacKay, Information Theory, Inference and Learning Algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[14] J. L. Fan, Constrained Coding and Soft Iterative Decoding. Boston, MA: Kluwer, 2001.
[15] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[16] B. Vasic and I. B. Djordjevic, “Low density parity check codes for long haul optical communication systems,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 1208–1210, Aug. 2002.

[17] B. Amar et al., “Construction of low-density parity-check codes based on balanced incomplete block designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 1257–1268, 2004.
Stéphanie Sahuguede received the Diplôme d’Ingénieur degree from the Ecole Nationale Supérieure d’Ingénieurs de Limoges (ENSIL), University of Limoges, France, in 2006.
She is currently in the research group of XLIM-ENSIL. Her research work deals with error correction process based on LDPC, applied to optical communications.
Anne Julien-Vergonjanne received the Ph.D. degree in microwave and optical communications from the University of Limoges, France, in 1987.
She is Professor at the Ecole Nationale Supérieure d’Ingénieurs de Limoges (ENSIL), University of Limoges, and Head of the Electronics and Telecommunications Department. Her current research interests deal with optical communications, optical CDMA, forward error correction, LDPC, and cooperative communications.
Jean-Pierre Cances graduated in electrical engineering from the Ecole Nationale Supérieure des Télécommunications (ENST) Bretagne, France, in 1990. He received the Ph.D. degree from ENST Paris, France, in satellite communications engineering in 1993.
He is now an Assistant Professor at the Ecole Nationale Supérieure d’Ingénieurs de Limoges (ENSIL), University of Limoges, France. His current research interests include satellite communication systems, CDMA multiuser detection, multicarrier modulation, and synchronization algorithms.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

