2009 First International Conference on Evolving Internet

QoE/QoS Improvement in Wireless Internet

William W Wu, Advanced Technology Mechanization, Co. (ATMco), 6 Spruce Tree Court, Bethesda, MD 20814 USA www@atmco.org. Tel: 301 564-9799. Mars U Wu. Information & Technology Directorate, Maryland State Public Service Commission, mwu@psc.state.md.us. Bechien U Wu, Harvard University, School of Medicine/Brigham Medical Center, Boston MA

Abstract - Error coding techniques are proposed to enhance the efficiency and reliability, and to minimize the delay of the future Internet. The need of such enhancement is established. Internally, a method is proposed for the replacement of all the Internet transmission protocol Checksums. An optimal coding algorithm is presented for all protocol applications beyond the Internet. Externally, a systematic method to generate a large number of low - density parity-check codes is demonstrated through statistical block designs. For wireless, a simple Internet-satellite channel model is derived for on-the-move handheld Internet users with mobile satellite communications. The paper outlines background information, brings forth the challenges, identifies problems, lists difficulties, and recommends solutions.
Keywords: Checksum replacement; code generations.
I. INTRODUCTON

obtained without additional complexity. In addition, the results can be obtained without requiring new definition, new classification, or new standardization. Section II brings forth the challenges, problems, and outlines the need of good solutions. Section III discusses some of the difficulties in order to provide good solutions. Section IV highlights related work. Section VI derives an optimal coding algorithm to convert convolutional codes to block structured codes for protocol applications. Section VII presents lowdensity parity check codes generation method from statistical block designs.
In terms of distance, the ultimate wireless communications is using satellites, which are multifaceted subjects and encompass many diversified specializations. In Section VIII, the Internet satellite channel is modeled with a set of simple discrete memoryless channels. Section IX concludes the paper with some remarks.

Worldwide, research and development effort ha2s. continued ever since Internet has been known. Quality of services (QoS) through quality of engineering (QoE) is a significant part of this effort. Among the many, the Internet2 QoS Working Group deals exclusively with the problems and solutions on QoS of Internet. Since diversified causes such as delay, jitter, dropping packets, increasing in message traffic, bandwidth, transmission noise and interference can all affect the end service quality, QoS in Internet can be a complicated issue [1-6]. In this paper, through error correction techniques, some significant causes of QoS degradation can be minimized. The proposed solution of Checksum replacement by error coding exhibits the simultaneous effects of bandwidth conservation, capacity amelioration, message delay reduction, efficiency enhancement, reliability improvement, transmission speed increase, and minimizing traffic congestion. Each effect is

II. THE NEED
A small minority blogs in the Internet advocate titles such as “Why there is no Internet QoS and likely never will be.” The views are specific for VoIP and the reasons are cost for ordinary users. Ref. [7] investigated the Internet path failure. Extensive experimental measurements over 13 months with 31 diverse Internet hosts were performed. This reference concluded with a section entitled “Failure Appear Often and Everywhere.” And remarked, “the global Internet will not achieve the reliability levels needed for some applications.” In Telemedicine, most applied, suggested, and used existing telecommunication methods included the Internet. The problem of using existing Internet “has inadequacy and limitation of providing real needs in the most demanding medical requirements, such as images transmission” Spacecraft control and monitoring by Internet have been proposed by

978-0-7695-3748-1/09 $256.00 © 2009 IEEE

125

DOI 10.1109/INTERNET.2009.35

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NASA/OMNI (Operating Missions as Nodes on the Internet) team. In addition, the IPN (Interplanetary Internet) researchers have already assigned Internet addresses to all the planets, satellites, and spacecraft in the solar system [8]. Identifications are made on the inability of the Internet to control quality [9]. For these applications the conclusion is that “QoS over the Internet is poor.”
III. THE DIFFICULTIES
Some of the significant difficulties for the improvement of QoE/QoS in Internet are highlighted below:
3.1 The difficulty of changing standards
Many good ideas have been advanced and proposed for the improvement of Internet. But the present Internet is the result of years International standardization. Large amount of costs and efforts have been invested in the architectures, designs and operations of the standardized Internet based on the standards. Changes are not likely to happen just because a few good ideas.
3.2 The difficulties of non-coding methods
Integrated services have been addressed. For bandwidth and capacity improvement, the Internet next generation groups have devoted a large amount of effort to window size scaling, variable rate transmission, slow-start modification, timestamping, fast retransmit and recovery, and selective acknowledgement. Internet network operators are using load balancing algorithms, message sensing methods, scheduling techniques, renaming network elements, rotating servers, and user message behavior in order to optimize the network utilization. These procedures require constant monitoring and updating. These operations not only are complicated and costly, but also decrease the network efficiency and potential error causing. Differential Service technique and its variation have been proposed in order to conserve bandwidth [11]. But, these techniques cause delay and create uncertainty. Some address the issue of interprovider service quality in the Internet [9], which identified the problem of QoS beyond the boundaries of a single network. The solutions in Ref [9] require new definition, new classification, and new standardization. A sample of non-coding methods are referenced in [11-14]

3.3 The difficulty of standardized Internet protocols
The International standardized 15 transmission protocols are the backbones of Internet. The main protocols are: TCP (Transmission Control Protocol), IP (Internet Protocol), ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol), IGMP (Internet Group Management Protocol), PPP (Point to Point Protocol), TFTP (Trivial File Transfer Protocol), UDP (User Datagram Protocol), IMP (Internet Multicast Protocol). Each protocol has a header. ICMP is an integral part of IP that handles error and control messages. Specifically, routers and hosts use ICMP to send abnormal conditions. In ICMP there are six sub-protocols, each of them contains a Checksum for error protection. The IP is the heart of the Inter-network Layer, which does not provide measure of link reliability. IP uses error detection in its header. At the receiving end, if an error is detected in the header, the entire datagram is discarded. There is no provision for re-transmission request. If an acknowledgment is not received in a timely manner, the entire block is re-transmitted automatically from the transmitter. The error protection mechanism in the IP is a simple error detection scheme for the protection of the Header.
The definitions, structures, detail functions, and inner workings of these protocols can be found in [15-17]. Each protocol has its unique format, structure, and functions. Each transmission protocol contains the Checksums for error detection and retransmission, or no re-transmission in the case of IP.
3.4 The difficulty of Checksum replacement
The key reliability mechanism of the Internet, not considering outside add-ons, depends solely on the Checksums, which are embedded in the protocols. In Checksums the numbers are represented by a set of polynomials in a radix system. For every number, there is a unique binary representation in terms of the powers of the radix and coefficients +1, -1, or 0. To encode a number n, multiply n by a factor of the radix r, and then add a value b. The coded form is c = nr + b. To decode, the decoder first subtract b from c, then divide by r. If the division produces a nonzero remainder, an error is detected. Radix base r
16
is chosen to be 2 . Every 16-bit byte is considered as a number, which is the message. The

126 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

16
implementation of Checksum is based on r = 2 - 1
j
for any digit D in radix r [18]:D * r = D mod (r – 1). Any D in radix r multiplying any power of the radix division. The Checksum operation is summarized as:
• Two adjacent 8-bit symbols are pair-wise checksum to form 16-bit integers.
• The 1’s complement sum of these 16-bit integers is then formed.
• The 16-bit 1’s complement sum is computed over the set of message symbols.
• The 1’s complement of this sum is the 16-bit Checksum for encoding.
• To perform error detection, the 1’s complement sum is computed over the same set of message symbols.
• If the computed result is all 1’s, (- 0 in 1’s complement arithmetic) check is completed.
In the present Internet operation, efficiency is limited by the Checksums. Whenever transmission error(s) or interference is encountered, re-transmissions are initiated except for IP. Re-transmission decreases efficiency. If re-transmission is eliminated, not only network transmission efficiency is enhanced, but also the simultaneous effects of bandwidth conservation, capacity amelioration, message delay reduction, reliability improvement, transmission speed increase, and minimizing traffic congestion can be realized.
The present Internet relies on Checksums for improved reliability. It has not been changed for the last 20 years since Braden, Borman and Partridge developed the scheme [18]. The Checksum approach has been so successful for the applications originally designed. But such simple error detection mechanism no longer meets the new demands as cited in Section II. On the other hand, it is very difficult to replace the Checksums.
IV. RELATED WORKS
A number of solutions have been proposed, notably, the Resilient Overlay Network (RON) [7],

Communication and Navigation Demonstration on Shuttle (CANDOS) [8], Multi-path streaming [9], ARQ in the Transport Protocol [24], and in the Overlay network [7].
There is no direct published and patented work related to error coding for the internal mechanism of Internet to be described in Sections V and VI, other than by the author [19,20]. But there are plenty of works mentioning error coding applications, as Internet external add-ons, or proposed different from the existing Internet architecture.
V. THE INTERNAL METHOD (within the basic Internet networks) - Checksum Replacement
Without adding or deleting a single bit from the established International standards, the objective is to replace the contents of the Checksums in all the Internet Transmission Protocols with specific forward error correction (FEC). All Checksums are identified to be 16-bits. In Figure 1(a), the 16-bits IP Header Checksum is located in the third segment of the 32-bits frame. For the TCP, the Checksum is located in the 5th or last frame of the TCP protocol structure as shown in Figure 1(b). For UTP, the Checksum can be found as the last 16-bits of the second protocol frame. As shown in Figure 1(c) UTP has only two 32-bits frames and checksum replacement is in the last segment. Similarly, other Checksums of other transmission protocols can also be identified and replaced.
Example 1. Among the known block codes, the rate ½ (n = 16, k = 8, d = 5) code with modified BCH
min
decoding meets the Checksum length of 16 bits requirement.
Example 2. With two minimum polynomials the following code can be used in the protocol Checksums. The parity check polynomials of the code in octal representation is: H (x) = 125344…13171.
VI. OPTIMAL BLOCK CODE CONSTRUCTION from CONVOLUTIONAL CODES
All protocols are block structured and short length but short length block codes are few in numbers and poor in performance. Direct matching of existing

127 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

codes with protocols becomes difficult. All the powerful codes such as Turbo codes, Reed-Solomon codes and Low-density Parity Check codes cannot be applied in the case of coding for protocols. The impressive performances of the powerful codes are obtained only through long length codewords or many iterations in decoding.
Although basic convolutional codes are powerful, large in numbers, short code constraint lengths, and simple in decoding. But, continuous bit streams are required in convolutional encoding and decoding. Ad hoc schemes, such as bit stuff, bit flushing, tail biting, and signal regeneration have been proposed [25]. But these schemes cause decoding delay, rob channel capacity, create inefficiency, and waste bandwidth. Thus an optimal method for protocols is necessary to convert convolutional codes to block structured codes without degrading the efficiency and error correcting capability.
The idea of this procedure is recognizing the convolutional code constraint length to the protocol block length, and then performs parallel encoding and multiplexing, parallel decoding and demultiplexing. The code constraint length determines the multiplex timing.
Applicable to all convolutional codes with maximum likelihood (Viterbi) decoding, sequential decoding, threshold decoding, the optimum solution of conversion from any convolutional code to block code is described in Figure 2. The basic idea is to recognize of block structured code lengths to match the Checksums, and switching between the two parallel encoders. The convolutional code constraint length determines the switching time (if the code length is 20 bits, the switching is 20 bit time. In decoding the same switching time is maintained between the two parallel decoders. With the functions of multiplexing and de-multiplexing, the procedure is described in the following steps [19]:
Step 1: Set the two parallel convolutional Encoding Processors E-1 and E-2 to all 0 states. Load E-1 with information digits [A] from its input up to the code constraint length N (1).
A
Step 2: As E-1 is fully loaded, the input is switched to E-2 with message [B]. At the same time, E-1

generates parity checks P1, and input all zero’s. The

number of zero’s Z 1

is

N (1) A

in

bits.

Step 3: When E-1 completes encoding, its contents

are all zero, the encoding switch is enabled for E-2

input

[B].

Z 2

=

N (2) A

zeros

to

produce

parity

P1.

In decoding, [ ]* in Figure 2 denotes the estimate of its content and procedure continues as:

Step 4: Set the convolutional decoding processors D1 and D-2 initially all to 0. The received coded digits [A+ P ]* are first fed into D-1 for decoding.
1
Meantime, Z zeros are fed into D-1. As D-1 1
decodes, it produces the estimate [A]*.

Step 5: As decoding switch switches to D-2,

the sequence [B+ P ]* is decoded to recover [B]*. 2
The combined block structured code length is N =

N (1) + N (2).

A

A

The above procedure is simplified when E-1 is

identical to E-2 and D-1 is identical to D-2. In this

case, Z = Z = N (1) = N (2) = N for a single

1

2

A

A

A

convolutional code constraint length. The above

steps are nothing more than simple multiplexing and

de-multiplexing procedures with forced zeros. The

key is to recognize the switching 5 time, or

multiplexing duration equal to the convolutional

code short constraint length. As a result, the

proposed method is independent of decoding

algorithms for convolutional codes.

Example 3. For a rate R = ½, minimum distance

d = 5 threshold decodable systematic convolutional

min

3

4

code with generator polynomial g (D) = 1 + D + D

T

5

+ D , the constraint length of the code is N = 12.

A

Step 1: Assuming two parallel identical encoders,

(E-1) = (E-2) and N (1) = N (2) = N = 12. Load E-

A

A

A

1 with any information sequence [A] of length 12.

Step 2. When E-1 is fully loaded, it produces the

parity checks P = [A]g (D). At the same time the

1

T

incoming information sequence [B] switches to E-2.

Z =N (1) = 12 0’s. 1A

Step 3. Since the codes are identical, E-2 with {B]

generates P = [B]g (D) and Z =N (2) = 12 0’s.

2

T

2A

128 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Step 4. D-1 decodes {[A] + [A]g (D)}* to recover T
[A] and twelve 0’s are fed into D-1. With an error sequence E(D), the syndrome sequence is S(D) = E(D)[1 + g (D) ].
T
Step 5. When the decoding de-multiplexing switches to D-2, it attempts to recover [B] from {[B] + [B]g (D)}* as in Step 4. The block structured
T
code has codeword length N = 24.
Example 4: For a rate R = ½ non-systematic maximum likelihood Viterbi decodable convolutional code with free distance d = 10, the
free
code generator polynomials: are G = 11111001, and 1
G = 10100111. The constraint length of the code is 2
N = 8. Again use identical encoders and decoders in A
the proposed scheme and the same steps as above, the resultant code has the block structure of length N = 16. Compare with the block code of Example 1, the proposed coding approach of this example is much more powerful under the same conditions.
VII. THE EXTERNAL METHOD – Generation of Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes
From error coding viewpoint, external add-ons are simpler to any transmission network including the Internet. Without considering the internal mechanism of the Internet transmission protocols, encoders and decoders can always be implemented at the ends of a transmission link. Many existing error-correcting codes are available for such applications. Among the known coding techniques, LDPC codes are known for superior performance [26,27,28].
Gallager formulated, analyzed, and constructed LDPC codes. This class codes with parameters (n, j, k) is defined from a parity check matrix of n columns that have j ones in each column, k ones in each row, and zero. Low density implies that both j and k values are small in comparison to n. Each digit in a received code word is checked by j parity check equations because the number of 1’s is sparse, other code word digits are not likely to be checked by the j equations. With higher probability an error digit is more likely to be checked by more number of check equations. Decoding decision is based on an estimated digit that is in error if more than a certain number of check digits are incorrect [26, pp 12-20] .

But LDPC codes are few in existence. Based on block designs, the following code generation method is shown to produce LDPC codes. As an old branch of statistical study, a block design is defined as an arrangement of v elements in b sets, each of which contains k elements; each element can be shared by exactly r sets; every pair of elements occurs in exactly O sets, and every element occurs at most once in a set. Thus a block design is characterized by the five parameters v, b, k, r, and O. The necessary conditions for the existence of a block design are: bk = vr, and r (k-1 ) = O (v – 1 ). The conditions directly come from the definition: the first condition says that there are a total of v elements; each of the v/b elements in a set has klr shared elements. The second one states that the total number of paired v elements is O (v - 1), which is equal to the total elements in the shared sets, which is r(k - 1). A block design is described by its corresponding incidence matrix of v rows and b columns [29]. The matrix contains only binary elements aij such that aij = 1, if vi incident on bj; with aij = 0, otherwise. Many block codes owe their origins to block designs.
Example 5: The original code matrix of the LDPC code by Gallager with parameters n = 20, j = 3, and k = 4 has 4x20 = 80 ones out of 20x20 = 400 entries. The rest 400 – 80 = 320 are zeros. The density of the code is 80/400 = 0.20 [26]. The block design with parameters v = 15, b = 20, k = 3,and r = 5 can provide a LDPC code matrix as the original Gallager code [20].
Example 6: Since LDPC only requires low matrix, the following block design with value of j and k in a (n, j, k) parity check parameters v = b = 21, k = r = 5, and O = 1, the incidence matrix of this design can be found in Ref [20]. For this block design it has 5x21 = 105 ones out of 21x21 = 441 entries, and the rest 441 - 105 = 336 are zeros. The density of the code is (105/441) = 0.23.
Example 7: There exist two block designs, which exhibit low parity check densities. the block design parameters are: (a) v = 81, b = 90, k = 9, r = 10, and O = 1. And (b) v = 91, b = 91, k = 10, r = 10, and For LDPC codes, the (a) block design gives the density (81 x 9)/(81 x 90) = 0.11. The (b) block design yields a density of 0.10.

129 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Example 8: The blocks of v = 9, b = 12, k = 3, r = 4, and O = 1 design are:

B B B B B B B B B B B B 0B 1

2

3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

B

1 47123123123

2 5 8 4 5 6 5 6 4 6 45

3 697899788 97

The corresponding incidence matrix is:

100100100100 100010010010 100001001001 010100001010 010010100001 010001010100 001100010001 001010001100 001001100010

This block design has 3 x 12 = 4 x 9 = 36 ones out of 9 x 12 = 108 entries with 72 zeros. The density of the code is 0.33.

VIII. A SIMPLE INTERNET SATELLITE CHANNEL MODELING
Wireless Internet has been designed and practiced with protocols [30,31,32]. When Internet handheld users are on the move with mobile satellites, the transmission channel becomes complicated due to power, bandwidth limitations, signal deflection, fading and interferences. Error coding for severe satellite channel condition is discussed in [33]. Since Internet transmissions are all binary, a simple three stage binary symmetric channels (BSC) in cascade may justify its usefulness [34]. The channel needs not to be symmetric. The derivation and sample evaluations of channel capacities are provided in [34].
Each BSC has a transitional probability, which is different for each of the three cascade segment. The channel capacity is a 3-dimentional structure. With a satellite channel in the middle and two terrestrial low error rate optical channels at ends, the channel capacity is shown to be improved from 0.690 to 0.998 by error coding the satellite channel from 0.1 to 10-5. The simplicity is achieved without the need of the multiple physical channel elements.

IX.

CONCLUDING REMARKS

Error coding has been successful in much aspect of information transmission systems. Many have addressed error coding for Internet. But many good ideas cannot be realistically implemented due to either impractical or in violations of the established International Internet standards. That is why very little contribution of error coding has been introduced into the Internet despite error coding has been around for a half century and the need of improvement is shown to exist. From practical usefulness viewpoint, this paper suggests to treat the error coding problem for Internet in two fronts: Replace all the 15 Internet Transmission Protocol internal Checksums with specific forward error correction, and the use of low density parity check codes externally. For Checksum replacement, a recent patented error coding scheme is described. For low density parity check codes, also a recent patented systematic code generation method based on statistical block designs is presented. For Internet handheld users and land mobile satellite communication channels, a simple Internet satellite channel model is brought forth through three cascade binary channels. The overall channel capacity can be significantly improved by means of error coding in the wireless portion of the Internet transmission.

Discussed, intended and presented as a conceptual paper, eight simple examples are included for illustration. Detail numerical comparisons and evaluations are too spacious to be included.

The information cited in Sections I and II, without specific references. can be found in any search engine, such as Google, and they are omitted in the paper also.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

The supports of U.S. National Science Foundation multi-year grants DMI-996040 and NASA/Glenn Research Center under the Small Business Innovation Research (SBIR) multi-phase contracts 920771 to the Advanced Technology Mechanization Company (ATMco, formerly Consultare) are gratefully acknowledged.

The authors wish to thank Dr. Petre Dini and anonymous reviewers for helpful comments in the paper.

130 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

REFERENCES
[1] Special Issue on Internet Quality of Services: Challenges and Technologies, IEEE Communications Magazine, June 2005. [2] J. Evans and C. Filsfils, “Deploying IP and MPLS QoS for Multiservice Networks: Theory and Practice,” The Morgan Kaufman Series 2007. [3] S. Jha and M. Hassan, Engineering Internet QoS, Artect House Publication. 2002. [4] Z. Wang, Internet QoS: Architectures and Mechanisms for Quality of Services, The Morgan Hauffman Series in Networking, 2001. [5] W. Zhao, D. Olshefski, and H. Schulzrinne, “Internet Quality of Service: An Overview,” Columbia University Research Report 2000. [6] X. Xiao and L. Ni, “Internet QoS: A Big Picture,” IEEE Network, 03/04 1999. [7] N, Feamster,. D. Andersen, H. Balakrishnan, and M. Kaashoek, “ Measuring the Effect of Internet Path Faults ,” ACM June 2003. [8] J. Jackson, “The Interplanetary Internet,” The IEEE Spectrum, August 2005. [9] B. Abdouni, W. Cheng, A. Chow, L. Golubchik, and J. Lui, “Picture-Perfect Streaming over the Internet: Is there Hope?” IEEE Communications Magazine, August 2004. [10] On the Internet, THE STANDARDS ISSUE, An International Publication of the Internet Society, spring/Summer 2001. [11] Scoglio, C., Anjali, T, Oliveira, J., Akyildiz, J., and Uhl, G., “TEAM: a traffic Engineering Autiomated Manager for DiffServ-Based MPLS Networks,” IEEE Communication Magazine, October 2004. [12] Special Issue on IPv6: The Basis for the Next Generation Internet, IEEE Communications Magazine, January 2004. [13] E. Hall, “The Next Century TCP/IP,” IEEE Network Magazine, September 2004. [14] Proceedings of the International Conference on Network Protocols, 2004. [15] D. Comer, Internetworking with TCP/IP : Principles, Protocols, and Architectures, Prentice Hall, 2000. [16] W. R. Stevens, TCP/IP Illustrated, The Protocols, Addison-Wesley, 1999. [17] Special Issue on Evolution of Internet Architecture and Protocols, IEEE Communications Magazine, 2003. [18] R. Braden, D. Borman, and C. Partridge, “Computing the Internet Checksum,” Internet network Working Group RFC 1071, Sept. 1988. [19] W. W. Wu, Forward Error Correction Techniques, Patent No: US 6.601,208 B2, Issued Date: July 29, 2003.

[20] W. W. Wu, Error Coding in Asynchronous Transfer Mode, Internet, and Satellites, Patent No: US 7,190,681 B1, Issue Date: March 13, 2007. [21] J. Bolot, S. Fosse-Parisis, and D. Towsley, “Adaptive FEC-based error control for Internet telephone,” the Proceedings of INFOCOM, 1999. [22] L. Rizzo and L. Vicisano, “RMDP: An FEC based reliable multicast protocol for wireless environments,” Mobile Computing and Communications Review, 2(2) 1998. [23] L. Subramanian, I. Stoica, H. Balakrishnan, and R. Katz, “Over QoS: An Overlay based Architecture for Enhancing Internet QoS,” The 1st Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation, March 2004. [24] S. Farrell and V. Cahill, “Evaluating LTP-T: A DTN-Friendly Transport Protocol,” proceedings of the IEEE/IWSSC, September 2007. [25] R. Koetter and A. Vardy: “The Structure of TailBiting Trellises Minimality and Basic Principles,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Sept 2003. [26] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, MIT Press 1963. [27] G. MacDonald, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, April 21, 2006 http://cadigweb.ew.usna. edu/ ~wdj/mcdonald/mcdonald-honorsthesis/ [28] G. Liva, M. Chiani, M. Berioli, and S. Scalise, “Some Remarks on Sparse Graph Codes for Packet Loss Recovery,” Proceedings of IEEE/IWSSC Sept. 2007. [29] M. Hall, Combinatorial Theory, WileyInterscience Series in Mathematics, 1986. [30] P. R. Kumar, “Capacity, Architecture, Protocols, and Sensing in Wireless Networks,” Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE Information Theory Workshop. [31] V. Kawadia and P. R. Kumar, “Experimental Investigations Into TCP Performance Over Wireless Multihop Networks,” ACM Workshop on Experimental Approaches to Wireless network Design and Analysis, 2005. [32] Z. Luo, Z. Sun, H. Cruickshank, “TCP Throughput Enhancement via Link Layer Relay in Multi-hop Satellite IP Networks,” Proceedings of the 2007 International Workshop on Satellite and Space Communication, September, 2007. [33] W. W. Wu, “Blockage Mitigation Techniques in Satellite Communications,” IEEE Wireless Special Issue on Present and Future Satellite Communications October, 2005. [34] W. W. Wu and M. U. Wu, “Simple Digital Satellite Channel Modeling with Bandwidth, Capacity and Efficiency Evaluations,” Proceedings of the IEEE/IWSSC, Salzburg, Austria, September 2007.

131 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

132 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:17:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

