Connections Between Computation Trees and Graph Covers
Deanna Dreher and Judy L. Walker Department of Mathematics
University of Nebraska-Lincoln Lincoln, NE 68588, USA.
Email: {s-dturkl, jwalker}@math.unl.edu

Abstract-Connections between graph cover pseudocodewords and computation tree pseudocodewords are investigated with the aim of bridging the gap between the theoretically attractive analysis of graph covers and the more intractable analysis of iterative message-passing algorithms that are intuitively linked to graph covers. Both theoretical results and numerous examples are presented.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity-check codes, along with their iterative message-passing decoders such as min-sum and sum-product, have been shown to achieve good bit error rates and perform close to capacity on channels of practical interest. While these iterative message-passing decoders are optimal on trees, iterative message-passing decoders are, in general, computationally efficient sub-optimal decoders for low density paritycheck codes, and their efficiency makes them ideal for implementation. On the other hand, there is still little theoretical understanding of the effectiveness of these codes. One notable contribution in this direction is that of density evolution, which examines ensembles of codes [8], [9]. However, density evolution does not explain the non-codeword errors that arise in iterative message-passing decoding of a particular code.
The iterative message-passing decoders work, roughly speaking, as follows: initially, probabilities are assigned to each variable node based on the received word. The variable nodes send their information to their neighboring check nodes, which make calculations based on the information they receive and send some information back to their neighboring variable nodes. The variable nodes make some calculations with the information coming in from their neighboring check nodes and their original information, and send another message to their neighboring check nodes; this process continues until a stopping criteria is reached.
In particular, the decoders work locally: at each step of the algorithm, all that is needed for a particular vertex to make its calculation is data stored at that vertex and at its immediate neighbors. Intuitively, this leads one to considerfinite covers of the Tanner graph, which look locally identical to the original Tanner graph but may be significantly larger.
Based on this intuition, many authors (see, e.g., [5], [6], [10]) have studied graph cover pseudocodewords, developing both a rich general theory and examining several specific examples in great detail. For example, zeta functions have

been used to cleanly characterize pseudocodewords of cycle codes, and the fundamental cone gives a compact description of pseudocodewords for general codes. Additionally, there has been significant progress in characterizing problematic pseudocodewords for certain families of codes, such as codes constructed using finite geometries [7].
On the other hand, one thing we know for sure about both the min-sum and sum-product algorithms is that their behavior on Tanner graphs is precisely modeled by their behavior on computation trees. More precisely, Wiberg [11] showed that the output of the min-sum algorithm after m iterations is the vector whose i th entry is the value assigned to the root node by a minimal cost configuration on a computation tree of depth m rooted at the i th variable node.
The downside of Wiberg's characterization of these iterative message-passing algorithms is that computation trees are extremely difficult to study. Their size grows exponentially with each iteration, and the number of configurations on a tree is typically exponential with the size of the tree.
Thus, we seek a way to connect the well-developed theory of graph covers and graph cover pseudocodewords to the much less well-developed, but more precisely related to decoding, theory of computation trees. One approach to this problem is via the universal cover of the Tanner graph. The universal cover is simultaneously the infinite computation tree of the Tanner graph (for any root node) and a cover of the Tanner graph that also covers every finite connected cover of the Tanner graph. Thus, if one can fully understand configurations on the universal cover and devise a decoder on the universal cover that simultaneously extends both graph cover decoding [10] and min-sum decoding, then one can possibly use the theory of graph covers and graph cover pseudocodewords to better understand computation trees and computation tree pseudocodewords, and, ultimately, the behavior of min-sum decoding. This is precisely what is attempted by the authors and their collaborators in [2]-[4].
In this paper, we take a different approach. Rather than lift computation trees and graph covers up to the universal cover and then come back down, we aim to relate computation trees and graph covers more directly. The remainder of this section introduces some definitions and relevant background. In Section II we give theoretical results on the relationship between the set of graph cover configurations and the set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of computation tree configurations, and we present examples
illustrating these results in Section III.
We now formalize some of the above discussion with the
following definitions.
Definition 1.1: An unramijied cover, or simply a cover, of
a finite graph G is a graph G along with a surjective graph homomorphism 1r : G---- G, called a covering map, such that for each vertex v of T and each v E 1r-1 (v), the neighborhood
v of is mapped bijectively to the neighborhood of v. For a
positive integer M, an M -cover of G is cover 1r : G ---- G
such that for each vertex v of G, 1r-I (v) contains exactly M
vertices of G. If Gis an M-cover of G, we say the degree of
Gis M.
We say that a graph G is connected if, for any two vertices
u, v of G, there is a path u = Vo, VI, ••• , Vk = v from u to v
in G. In the remainder of this paper, we will assume that the
Tanner graphs for our codes are connected.
Definition 1.2: Let G = (X U F, E) be a bipartite graph. A configuration on G is a an assignment c = (CX)XEX of O's and 1's to the vertices in X such that for each f E F, an even number of the neighbors of f are assigned a 1 and the rest
are assigned a O.
Given a Tanner grl!Ph T with variable nodes XI. ... , Xn and an M -cover 1r : T ---- T of T, we label the elements of 1r- I (Xi) as Xi,I. ... , Xi,M'
Definition 1.3: Let T be a Tanner graph for a binary linear
code C and let C = (CI,I, ... , CI,M : ';.' : Cn,l. ... , Cn,M)
be a configuration on some M -cover T of T. Two kinds
c: of graph cover pseudocodewords are associated to The c unscaled graph cover pseudocodeword corresponding to is
the vector

of nonnegative integers, where, for 1 ~ i ~ n,

Pi = #{j ICi,j = I}.

The normalized graph cover pseudocodeword corresponding

c to is the vector

w(c) = ~p(c).

Definition 1.4 (Wiberg [11]): Let T be a Tanner graph, and assume an iterative message-passing algorithm has been run on T for a total of m iterations, where a single iteration consists of message-passing from the variable nodes to the check nodes and then back to the variable nodes. The depth m computation tree for T with root node v is the tree R obtained by tracing the computation of the final cost function of the algorithm at the variable node v of T recursively back through time, along with a surjective graph homomorphism 1r : R ---- T, such that
v for each vertex v of T and each E 1r-I (v) that is not on v level m, the neighborhood of is mapped bijectively to the
neighborhood of v. Since computation trees are necessarily connected, any
computation tree configuration that is induced by a graph cover configuration is induced by a connected graph cover configuration. Thus, it is important to determine which graph cover pseudocodewords have connected realizations.

The authors and their collaborators have shown [1] that with a very basic restriction on our Tanner graph, every normalized graph cover pseudocodeword has a connected realization. The restriction on the Tanner graph is given by

2 ac

(1-~) av

>_

,

where ac and av are the average check node degree and average variable node degree, respectively. Thus, for the majority of practical codes and a significant portion of cycle codes, every normalized graph cover pseudocodeword has a connected realization, and so every normalized graph cover pseudocodeword induces computation tree configurations. The inverse question of which computation tree configurations are induced by graph cover configurations is investigated in the next section.

II. REALIZATIONS OF COMPUTATION TREE
PSEUDOCODEWORDS

A different way to ask how computation tree configurations

and graph cover pseudocodewords relate is to ask whether,

given a computation tree configuration, there is a graph cover

configuration that induces it. As a first step in this direction,

we show that every computation tree is contained in a finite

cover of the Tanner graph.

Proposition 2.1: Let T be a Tanner graph and let (R,1rR)

be a computation tree for T. Then there exists a finite cover

(T, 1rji) that contains a subgraph isomorphic to (R, 1rR). More

precisely, let T' be any spanning tree of T and let M be

the number of connected components of 1rRI (T') in R. Then

there is an M-cover (T,1rji) of T that contains a subgraph S

such that there is a graph isomorphism ¢ : S ---- R satisfying

1rR 0 ¢ = 1rjils.

ProoL Note that the final condition of the proposition

says that T contains a subgraph S that is isomorphic to R in

a way that respects the labels on the nodes, i.e. if X is a node

in R that is a copy of the vertex v of T, then the corresponding
node in S is also a copy of v in T.

Let T' be a spanning tree of T and let M be the number

of connected components of 1rRI (T') in R. Since there are at

most M copies of each vertex v of T in R, we may first form

a forest R* by taking the disjoint union of R with sufficiently

many appropriately labeled isolated vertices so that there are

exactly M copies of each vertex v of T in R*. We now add

edges to R* as follows: For each edge e = xu of T, there

are M copies of x in R*, M copies of u in R*, and me :=
11rRI ( e)I copies of e in R*. Thus there are exactly M - me

copies of x in R* that are not adjacent to any copy of u in

R*, and there are exactly M - me copies of u in R* that are

not adjacent to any copy of x in R*. This means that there is a

matching between these copies of x and of u, and we form an

edge between each matched pair. Repel!!ing this procedure for

each edge e of T creates an M -cover T of T that contains R

as a subgraph so that the respective vertex labels (projection

maps) agree.

•

Proposition 2.1 shows that every computation tree is con-

tained in a graph cover, but what we really want to know is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

whether every computation tree configuration is induced by a graph cover configuration. In other words, given a computation
tree configuration, is there a graph cover configuration that is, in this sense, compatible with it? To answer this question, we
need a definition.
Definition 2.2: Let 8 = (X U F, E) be a bipartite graph
and let (e, 8) be a configuration on 8. A configured subgraph of (e, 8) is a configuration (e', 8'), where 8' is a subgraph of
8, and e' is the restriction of e to 8'.
Let T be a Tanner graph. For i = 1,2, let (8i ,7I"i) be a
bipartite graph along with a bijective graph homomorphism 7I"i : 8 i = (Xi U Fi , E i ) --t T, and let (ei, 8i ) be a configuration on 8 i • Then (e!, 8 1) and (e2' 8 2) are isomorphic if there is a graph isomorphism ¢ : 8 1 --t 82 such that
71"2 0 ¢ = 71"1 and el assigns a value of 1 to x E Xl if and only
if e2 assigns a value of 1 to ¢(x) E X 2 •
The following results show that the connection between
computation tree configurations and graph cover configura-
tions is extremely strong: given a computation tree R for a Tanner graph T and a c~nfiguration e on R, there is a graph
cover configuration (c, T) that not only induces (e, R), but
also contains a configured subgraph isomorphic to (e, R). In the case of cycle codes, the result is very clean:
Theorem 2.3: Let T be the Tanner graph of a cycle code
with minimum degree at least two, let R be a computation tree for T, and let e be a configuration on R. Then there is a finite
cover T of T and a configuration c on T such that (e, R) is i~omorphic to a configured subgraph of (c, T). Furthermore,
T can be taken to be a cover of degree either M or 2M, where M is as in Proposition 2.1.
The proof_of this theorem goes, roughly speaking, as follows: Let T be an M -cover of T that contains a subgraph isomorphic to R, as guaranteed by Proposition 2.1, and then
copy the configuration e onto that subgraph. One then proves
t!!at e can ~ extended to a configuration on all of either T or
T', where T' is_a 2M-cover of T formed by twisting together two copies of T in a manner determined bye.
In the general case, the result is not as clean. In particular,
the degree of the cover is not so simply described. Theorem 2.4
below gives an upper bound on the necessary degree of a
cover that has a configuration that induces the computation tree configuration we started with, but that cover need not contain
the computation tree as a configured subgraph. Corollary 2.5
asserts that there is a cover that contains the computation tree as a configured subgraph, but does not give us information
on the degree of that cover. As a curious side-result, it
follows from the proof of Theorem 2.4 that the rational point (~, ... , ~) is a normalized graph cover pseudocodeword for any parity-check matrix with minimum row degree at least
two.
Theorem 2.4: Let H be a parity-check matrix with mini-
mum row weight at least two, let T = T(H) = (X U F, E)
be its Tanner graph, and let R be a computation tree for T of
some finite depth d. For each f E F, let M f be the number of copies of f on R. Set M = maxf Mf.
Then, for any configuration e on R, there is a 4M-cover T

of T and a configuration c on T such that
f) • (c, induces the configuration (e, R),
• (c, T) contains a configured subgraph that is isomorphic

to (e', R'), where (e', R') is the configured computation

tree subgraph of (e, R) of depth d - 1, and

• the normali!:ed graph cover pseudocodeword correspondm. g to (e-, T)'is (12"'" 21)'

Although the 4M-cover T ensured by Theorem 2.4 need

not be connected, the configured subgraph of it isomoThic

t2 (e', R') is contained in some connected component T' of

T. The_first two bullets in the theorem clearly still apply to (-e', T') ,where -e, is th~ con~uration on T- ' ensured by

the theorem. However, if T' =F T, then the third bullet will
almost certainly not be valid for c'; see Example 3.3. Thus,

although the theorem implies that every computation tree

configuration is related to the graph cover pseudocodeword
(~, ... , ~), the corresponding realization (c, T) of this graph

cover pseudocodeword need not be connected. Moreover,

it is the graph cover pseudocodeword ~rresponding to the
connected graph cover configuration (c', T') that has any hope

of sharing properties under an appropriate cost function [10],

[11] with (e, R).

As a corollary to Theorem 2.4, we obtain a version of

Theorem 2.3 for the general case.

Corollary 2.5: Let H be a parity-check matrix with mini-
mum row weight at least two, let T = T(H) be its Tanner

graph, and let (e, R) be a computation tree configuration for
T. Th.zn there exists a finite cover T of T and a configuration
con T ~uch that (e, R) is isomorphic to a configured subgraph
of (c, T).

Proof: Let R" be the computation tree for T obtained

by extending R for an additional iteration. Then there is

a configuration e" on R" that restricts to (e, R). Applying

Theorem 2.4 to (e", R") gives the result.

•

As we will see in Secti..sm III below, there are often graph
cover configurations (c, T) that satisfy the conclusions of
Theorem 2.4 but with the degree of T significantly smaller

than 4M. By taking into account the specific computation

tree configuration under consideration, a tighter bound can be

obtained:

Theorem 2.6: Let H be a parity-check matrix with mini-
mum row weight at least two, let T = T(H) = (X U F, E)

be its Tanner graph, and let (e, R) be a computation tree
configuration for T of some finite depth d. For each f E F, let Mf (c) be the number of copies of f on R such that at least one

adjacent vertex (which is necessarily a copy of some x E X)

is assigned a "I" bye, and let Nf(e) be the number of copies
of f on R such that every adjacent vertex is assigned a "0"
bye. Set M(e) = maxf Mf(e) and N(e) = maxf Nf(e).
Then there is a J3M(e) + N(e))-cover T of T and a

configuration c on T such that
f) • (c, induces the configuration (e, R),
• (c, T) contains a configured subgraph that is isomorphic

to (e', R'), where (e', R') is the configured computation

tree subgraph of (e, R) of depth d - 1, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

• the normalized graph cover pseudocodeword correspond-

.
109

to

(- T-)'
C, IS

( 2M (c)
3M(c)+N(c)"'"

2M(C)) 3M(c)+N(c) .

Theorem 2.6 again has this curious side-result about the

fundamental polytope containing a certain constant vector of

rational numbers. One might ask how far that result can be

pushed. The next proposition gives the answer.

Proposition 2.7: Let H be a parity-check matrix with min-

imum row weight at least two, let T = (X U F, E) be the

corresponding Tanner graph and let c be a nonnegative real
number. If at least one I E F has odd degree, set 0 = M M 1,
where M is the smallest odd integer such that some I E F

has degree M. Otherwise, set 0 = 1. Then (c, ... , c) is a

normalized graph cover pseudocodeword if and only if c :::; O.

(~, ~, ~, ~). Thus (c, T) satisfies all of the conclusions of

Theorem 2.4, except that we needed only a 2-cover rather than
a 4-cover to do so. Of course, two disjoint copies of (c, T) is a

4-cover of T that satisfies the theorem as well, thus showing

that the 4M-cover guaranteed by Theorem 2.4 need not be

connected. On the other hand, Figure 3 gives an example of

a connected 4-cover of T that contains the entire configured

computation tree (c, R) of Figure 1.

0

It

III. EXAMPLES

In this section, we present a series of examples that illustrate the results of Section II.
Our first example shows that, with M as in Theorem 2.4, the minimal degree of a graph cover configuration satisfying the conditions in Theorem 2.4 may be smaller than 4M.
Example 3.1: Figure 1 shows a Tanner graph T and a computation tree configuration (c, R) for T.

11
X'~X4

X

•

2

h
Fig. 1. The Tanner graph T and a computation tree configuration (c, R) for the Tanner graph T of Example 3.1. Vertices are assigned a value of I by c if they are circled and 0 otherwise.

It c Fig. 3. A configuration on a 4-cover f of the Tanner graph T of
Example 3.1.
The next example illustrates that sometimes only the smaller computation tree configuration (c', R') can be obtained.
Example 3.2: Consider the Tanner graph T in Figure 4 and the computation tree R for T shown in Figure 5.
Xl

Since every check node of T appears in R once, we
have M = 1 in Theorem 2.4. Further, the computation tree
configuration (c', R') of that theorem is simply the single vertex x .. assigned a value of I._Therefore, we know by Theorem 2.4 that there is a 4-cover T of T and a configuration
c on T such that (c, TUnduces (c, R), assigns a value of 1
to some copy of Xl in T, and has corresponding normalized graph cover pseudocodeword (~, ~, ~, ~).
It
11 c Fig. 2. A configuration on a 2-cover f of the Tanner graph T of
Example 3.1.
F!gure 2 shows a 2-cover T of T and a configuration_c on T. The bold edges show a configured subgraph of (c, T)
that induces (c, R) and contains a subgraph that is isomorphic to the depth one truncation (c', R') of (c, R), and such that
the graph cover pseudocodeword corresponding to (c, T) is

X2
Fig. 4. The Tanner graph T for Example 3.2.
Xl

Fig. 5. A computation tree R for the Tanner graph T of Example 3.2.

In this example, we again have M = 1 in Theorep1 2.4.

Thus Theorem 2.4 asserts the existence of a 4-cover T of T

with certain properties. However, since there are six copies

of X2 in R, no computation tree configuration (c, R) could

be isomorphic to a configured subgraph of (c, T) for any

configuration c on T.

0

As mentioned previously, if (c, R) is a computation tree
configuration, then the realization (c, T) of (~, ... , ~) that

induces (c, R) in Theorem 2.4 need not b! connected. How-

ever, there is a connected component of T that also induces

(c, R), since R is connected; call this connected component
(c', T'), where c' is the configuration T' inherits from T. Then (c', T') is connected and induces (c, R), but its normalized
graph cover pseudocodeword may no longer be (~, ... , ~).

Example 3.3 shows an occurrence of this.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

h Example 3.3: Figure 6 shows a Tanner graph T and a
computation tree configuration (c, R) for T.
Xl
x,~x,

~:@j~:
14 Xl h
Fig. 8. The Tanner graph T of Example 3.4.

h
Fig. 6. The Tanner graph T and a computation tree configuration (c, R) for the Tanner graph T of Example 3.3.

hNhXl

•2

•3

Fig. 9. A computation tree configuration (c, R) for the Tanner graph of Example 3.4.

Fig. 7. A disconnected 4-cover T and a configuration c on T that induces
the configuration in Figure 6.

c The configuration on the 4-cover T of T in Figure 7

satisfies all of the requirements of Theorem 2.4. However,

the configuration on the component on the left, which is

isomorphic to the original graph T, induces (c, R) and has

normalized graph cover pseudocodeword (0,1,1).

0

Our final example concerns the relationship between The-

orem 2.4 and Theorem 2.6. It was asserted in Section II

that, given a specific computation tree configuration (c, R)

for the Tanner graph T, Theorem ~.6 gives a better upper

bound on the degree of the cover T of T needed to admit
c a configuration that induces (c, R) and that contains a

configured subgraph isomorphic to (c', R'), the configuration

obtained by restricting c to the computation tree R' of depth

one less than the depth of R. To see this, recall that Theo-

rem 2.4 guarantees the existence of a 4M-cover that admits
the desired c, where M is the maximum number of copies of any I E F in R. On the other hand, Theorem 2.6 guarantees the existence of a (3M(c) + N(c))-cover that does the trick,

where M(c) = maxfEF Mf(c), N(c) = maxfEF Nf(c) and, for any IE F, we have that Mf(c)+Nf(c) is the total number of copies of I in R. Thus M(c) :::; M and N(c) :::; M, and
so 3M(c) + N(c) :::; 4M. In fact, the bound in Theorem 2.6

can yield a significant improvement over that of Theorem 2.4.

Our final example illustrates this.

Example 3.4: Let T be the Tanner graph given in Figure 8,

and let (c, R) be the computation tree configuration for T

given in Figure 9.

Since there are three copies of 15 in the computation tree R

of Figure 9, Theorem 2.4 asserts the existence of a 12-cover

that induces the configuration (c, R) of Figure 9. However,

since M (c) = 1 and N (c) = 2, Theorem 2.6 tells us that

there is a graph cover configuration on a 5-cover that does the

trick.

0

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was supported in part by National Science Foundation grant #DMS-0602332.

REFERENCES
[I] N. Axvig, D. Dreher, K. Morrison, E. Psota, L. C. Perez, and J. L. Walker, Analysis of connections between pseudocodewords, Submitted to IEEE Transactions on Iriformation Theory, March 2008.
[2] N. Axvig, K. Morrison, E. Psota, D. Dreher, L.c. Perez, and J. L. Walker, Towards a universal theory of decoding and pseudocodewords, SGER Technical Report 0801, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, March 2008.
[3] N. Axvig, K. Morrison, E. Psota, D. Turk, L. C. Perez, and J .L. Walker, Universal cover decoding, In preparation, 2008.
[4] N. Axvig, E. Price, E. Psota, D. Turk, L.C. Perez, and J.L. Walker, A universal theory of pseudocodewords, Proceedings of the 45th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, September 2007.
[5] C. Kelley and D. Sridhara, Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 53 (2007), 4013-4038.
[6] R Koetter, W.-C. W. Li, P. O. Vontobel, and J. L. Walker, Pseudocodewords ofcycle codes via zeta functions, Proc. IEEE Inform. Theory Workshop (San Antonio, TX, USA), 2004, pp. 7-12.
[7] P. O. Vontobel R. Smarandache, Pseudo-codeword analysis of Tanner graphs from projective and euclidean planes, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory IT-53 (2007), no. 7, 2376-2393.
[8] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity check codes, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 47 (2001), no. 2, 619-637.
[9] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding, IEEE Transactions on Information Theory 47 (2001), no. 2, 599-618.
[10] P. Vontobel and R. Koetter, Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes, To appear in IEEE Transactions on Iriformation Theory.
[II] N. Wiberg, Codes and decoding on general graphs, Ph.D. thesis, Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 05:14:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

