2009 International Conference on Communications and Mobile Computing
Structured LDPC Codes with Linear Complexity Encoding
Vinay Bhardwaj, N.P. Pathak and Arun Kumar
Department of Electronics and Computer Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, Roorkee- 247667 (India)
vvinaybhardwaj@gmail.com

Abstract
Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes have stimulated a lot of interest in recent years due to their capacity approaching performance and availability of fast decoding algorithms. The existing encoding scheme for LDPC code usually incurs too high complexity and should be changed to encoding scheme with low complexity An elementary Turbo Structured Tanner graph construction and encoding scheme for a family of regular LDPC codes attaining desired high girth is studied in this paper. The construction provides flexibility in choice of
parameters like column weight (j ≥ 2), row
weight k and arbitrary girth g. Turbo Structured low density parity check ( TS-LDPC) codes are regular LDPC codes with their Tanner graph consists of two trees connected by an interleaver. Linear complexity is attained with few alterations and restrictions of in Tanner graph of Turbo Structured LDPC codes. Simulation results demonstrates that not only the bit error rate (BER) performance of TSLDPC codes at low signal to noise ratio (SNR) is comparable with error performance of corresponding Random LDPC codes, with better error performance at high SNR but linear encoding considerably reduces simulation time..
1. Introduction
IN the wake of the phenomenal success of
turbo codes [1], another class of codes exhibiting similar characteristics and performance were rediscovered [2]. This class of codes, called lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, were first introduced by Gallager in his thesis in 1962 [3,4]. In the period between Gallager’s thesis and the invention of turbo codes, LDPC codes and their variants were largely neglected. The advantage of LDPC codes are lower decoding complexity, but its’ disadvantage is higher

encoding complexity to get the optimal LDPC codes. This complexity is in contrast to the turbo code, which has linear encoding complexity.
Encoding of LDPC codes can be done
similarlily as of linear Block codes. A generator
matrix for a code can be found by performing Gauss-Jordan elimination on H to obtain it in the form H = [ A, In-k ], Where A is a (n-k) x k binary matrix and In-k is size n-k identity matrix. The generator matrix is then G = [ Ik , AT ]. However, the drawback of this approach is that, unlike H, the matrix G will most likely not be sparse and so the matrix multiplication c = uG, at the encoder will have complexity in the order of n2 operations. As n is large for LDPC codes, from thousands to hundreds of thousands of bits, the encoder can become prohibitively complex. Hence for LDPC code Encoder should be of liner complexity.
In [5], it is suggested that using an approximate triangular parity check matrix to construct LDPC codes can reduce the encoding complexity significantly without performance degradation. But, It takes a long time to reconstruct parity-check matrix, H to satisfy nonsingular matrix, and its procedure is too complex and irregular to implement in hardware.
This paper considers a class of structured regular LDPC codes, the turbostructured LDPC (TS-LDPC) codes that can be designed with arbitrary large girth g by appropriately choosing the code block length n [6]. The specific structure of the Tanner graph of a particular type of TS-LDPC codes----encodingfriendly TS-LDPC (EFTS-LDPC) codes is exploited in [7] to derive an encoding algorithm with linear complexity.
The Tanner graph of TS-LDPC codes is composed of two trees, an upper tree TU and a lower tree TL , that are connected in a turbo-like manner by an interleaver I. This turbo structure is exploited to facilitate the systematic design of LDPC codes with large girth g . TS-LDPC codes are hardware friendly: they are structured, and their parity-check matrix H , which can be very

978-0-7695-3501-2/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEE

200

DOI 10.1109/CMC.2009.316

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

large, is determined from a much smaller object, the shift matrix S, so that their memory requirements can be negligible. Simulation results shows that the BER performance of these structured LDPC codes is competitive with that of random LDPC codes, with better performance at higher SNR.
2. TS-LDPC Codes
Here we discuss briefly, the design of TS-LDPC code. A more extensive review on design of TS-LDPC codes is in [7]. As shown in Fig.1, the Tanner graph of TS-LDPC codes is composed of three components: two heightbalanced trees, denoted as an upper-tree TU and a lower-tree TL , and an interleaver I that connects TU and TL. The leaf nodes of TU are bit nodes (circles), whereas the leaf nodes of TL are check nodes (squares). The number of layers or tiers in the trees TU and TL is kept the same and given by h .We require h to be an even number because we start the upper tree from a check node and require its leaf nodes to be bit nodes, and, similarly, we start the lower tree from a bit node and require its leaf nodes to be check nodes. The two trees are ‘‘coupled’’ in a turbo-like manner such that many edges join the leaf nodes of TU and TL together, see Fig. 1. The structure formed by the edges connecting the leaf nodes of TU and the leaf nodes of TL is named the interleaver I .

are no restrictions on the upper tree TU of the EFTS-LDPC code, which can be exactly the same as the part of the standard TS-LDPC codes. The TL of the EF-TSLDPC code is restricted so that the degree of its bit nodes is two. In addition, the root of the TL is changed from a bit node to a check node, as shown in Fig. 2.
Design presented in [7] doesn’t put any restriction on the degree of root node of TL. If we consider all check nodes of lower tree TL with uniform degree, than design presented in [7] does not lead to successful implementation of lower tree TL with restriction of bit node degree to two. It is proposed that, while constructing lower-tree TL for EF TS LDPC code, the degree of the root of TL (check node) should be
h
( j −1) 2 while other check nodes in TL have
uniform degree (k-1) where j, k, h are column weight, row weight, and height of TL, respectively. Degree of bit nodes still remains same as two. One can always build a regular TS LDPC code first, and then build a corresponding EF TS LDPC code from the TS LDPC code. The Tanner graph for an EFTS-LDPC code is shown in Fig.2. EFTS-LDPC codes are slightly irregular. These modifications enable EFTSLDPC codes to be encoded with linear complexity.

Fig. 1. The Tanner graph of a TS-LDPC code: h = 4, j = 3, and k = 4 [7].
For the TS-LDPC code in Fig. 1, the height of the tree is h=4 , and the column and row weights are, respectively, j=3 and k=4 .
3. Encoding Friendly TS-LDPC Codes
The Tanner graph of an EFTS-LDPC code is derived from Tanner graph of Turbo Structure LDPC [7]. Similar to TS LDPC codes it contains an upper tree TU and a lower tree TL that are interconnected by an interleaver I. There

Fig. 2. EFTS-LDPC codes: A variant of TSLDPC codes (EFTS-LDPC codes) [7].
3.1. Linear-Complexity Encoding of TS-LDPC Codes
Encoding of EFTS-LDPC codes can be explained using their Tanner graph because LDPC codes are represented by Tanner graph. To achieve linear-complexity encoding, the root (a check node) of the lower tree TL from the Tanner graph of the EFTS-LDPC codes is

201 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

removed first. This check node is removed because its degree is (j-1)h/2 while other check nodes in TL have uniform degree (k-1) and number of tiers in TL will also be same as of TU . Following Lemma states that removing the root of TL will not alter the underlying tree structure. Detailed proof of this lemma is given in [7].
Lemma 1: The parity-check equation denoted by the root of TL is redundant and can be removed from the parity-check matrix H without changing the underlying code structure.
3.2 Encoding For EFTS-LDPC Codes
Encoding for Encoding Friendly Turbo Structured (EF-TS) LDPC code is done step by step, first upper tree TU is encoded. To encode TL first acquire information bits and than compute parity check bits by parity check equation (i.e. parity bit x1 will come from parity check
equation C1: x1=x2 ⊕ x3. ) Next, lower tree TL
will be encoded based on the information provided by interleaver. It is noticed that all the bit nodes in TL represent parity bits (Fig 3).
Fig. 3. Tanner graph for an EFTS-LDPC code [7].
Let h represent the number of tiers in TL. Since the degree of every bit node x in TL is two, the value of bit nodes x depends only on the values of the bit nodes in the lower tier. Particularly, the values of the bit nodes in tier h-1 of TL are based only on the values of the leaf nodes of TU. Hence, the values of the bits in TL can be computed tier by tier, starting from the bottom tier. Each time the values all the bits in a given tier, say, the (2i)th tier are computed, the values of all the bits in the (2i-1)th tier can be computed. This encoding process keeps going on until the

values of all the bits the second tier are known (the first tier has been removed by Lemma1). In this way, all the bits in TL are encoded. Hence final encoded word will be combination of upper tree encoded bits and lower tree bits.

4. Computational Complexity

As discussed previously, encoding of

random LDPC codes by Gauss-Jordan

elimination on H, leaves with computational complexity of the order of n2. Now, let us

evaluate the computational complexity of EF-TS

encoding scheme to understand why this scheme

can achieve better performance. Let the number of bits contained in the lth parity-check equation

denoted by kl, l = 1, 2…m. The value of parity bit is obtained by each of the m parity-check

equations. (kl-2) XOR operations are needed while employing the lth parity-check equation to

determine the value of a parity bit. So,

m
∑ (kl − 2) XOR operations are required to
l =1

obtain all m parity bits. Let the average number

of bits in the m parity-check equations denoted

∑ by

−
k

=

1 m

m
kl
l =1

,

then

the encoding

complexity

−
can be expressed as O(m(k − 2) ). For LDPC

codes with uniform row weight k, the encoding

complexity is O(m(k − 2) ) , hence it is clear

that the encoding process of Encoding Friendly Turbo Structured ( EF-TS) LDPC codes can be accomplished in linear time. This process doesn’t involve any matrix multiplication as compared to other encoding schemes.

5. Simulation and Discussion

We perform simulation results for BER of the Encoding Friendly TS-LDPC codes, which are constructed with arbitrary column weight (j >2) and row weight k and arbitrary girth g. The performance for the code is evaluated in additive white Gauss noise (AWGN) channels. The codes are decoded with the sum–product algorithm [8]. We adopt the rate normalized SNR, as defined in [2]: SNR = 10 log10[Eb / ( 2r σ2 )] where r denotes the code rate. Maximum numbers of iterations for sum product algorithm (SPA) are kept at 30. Here EF-TS-LDPC code corresponding to (1688, 3, 8) TS-LDPC code with desired girth 8 is constructed. Column weight and row weight are

202 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3 and 8 respectively. TU is 211 X 1477, TL is 456 X 456, Interleaver is 392 X 1372, and size of
S matrix is 2 X 7. Number of check nodes in interleaver are 392. Degree of last check node will be (3-1)6/2 =8, which is connected to 8 bit
nodes of tier h-5. This root check node is
removed for construction of EF TS LDPC codes.
Bit Error Rate 100
(1933,3,8) EF-TS LDPCCode with g=8 (1933,1266) Random LDPC code 10-1

BER

10-2 10-3

10-4

-5

10

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

SNR(dB)

Fig.4 BER performance comparison

between a (1933,3,8) EF-TS-LDPC code with

girth 8 and Randomly constructed(1993,1266)

LDPC codes

In Figure 4 we compare the performance of (1933,3,8) EF-TS-LDPC codes with girth g=8 and the random LDPC code (1993,1266) free of length 4 cycles. Simulation results demonstrate that simulation time taken for encoding the EFTS LDPC code is much - much lower than the Random LDPC code. Random LDPC codes are encoded with the help of creation of Generator matrix (G) with Gauss-Jordan elimination on H. It is also clear that EF-TS LDPC code outperforms random LDPC code at higher SNR value. For Low SNR both these codes have similar error correcting performance.

6. Conclusion
In this paper, linear complexity encoding for a new class of well structured LDPC codes – TS LDPC codes is discussed. Design modification for EF-TS LDPC codes of [7] is presented. One can develop TS LDPC code first than build corresponding Encoding Friendly TS-LDPC code. This linear complexity LDPC code can be designed for flexible row and column weights.
7. References
[1] C.Berrou, A.Glavieux,and P.Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding,” in Proc. Int. Communications Conf. (ICC’93) Geneva, Switzerland, pp. 1064–1070, May 1993. [2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963. [4] Gallager, R. G., “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan 1962. [5] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp, 638-656, Feb 2001. [6] J Lu and J. M. F. Moura, “Turbo design for LDPC codes with large girth,” in IEEE Int. Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC), Rome, Italy, pp. 90–94, Jun 2003 . [7] Jin Lu and M. F. Moura, , “TS-LDPC codes:Turbo Structured Codes With Large Girth,” IEEE Transaction on Information Theory, vol.53, No.3, pp. 1080-1094, Mar2007 . [8] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, ‘‘Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,’’ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498--519, Feb 2001.

203 Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

