Towards Flexible LDPC Coding for 6G
Paul Bezner, Jannis Clausius, Marvin Geiselhart, Tim Janz, Felix Krieg, Simon Obermu¨ller, Daniel Tandler, and Stephan ten Brink Institute of Telecommunications, Pfaffenwaldring 47, University of Stuttgart, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany {bezner, clausius, geiselhart, janz, krieg, obermueller, tandler, tenbrink}@inue.uni-stuttgart.de

2024 58th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers | 979-8-3503-5405-8/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/IEEECONF60004.2024.10942769

Abstract—Current communication standards employ a variety of different channel coding schemes, complicating hardware implementation. We present a novel low-density parity-check (LDPC) coding scheme for 6G that aims to reduce complexity and increase implementation efficiency. The scheme uses only a single base matrix, while offering a similar flexibility as the current 5G LDPC code at an improved communication performance. Moreover, addressing the need for larger transport block sizes to achieve higher throughput, the proposed code supports longer block lengths than those of 5G. The code can be decoded using the well-known belief propagation (BP) algorithm, as well as automorphism ensemble decoding (AED) for improved error correction in the short block length regime, allowing a tradeoff between performance and complexity to suit a wide range of application requirements.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Motivation
In order to meet the future demands of wireless communications, the upcoming 6G standard will need a suitable scheme for error correction coding. Such a scheme has to cover the usage scenarios outlined in [1], most notable hyper-reliable low-latency communications (HRLLC), immersive communication (i.e., ubiquitous broadband access) and massive communication (i.e., large numbers of machine-type clients). It should support a peak data rate of 200 Gbit/s and latency down to 0.1 ms. Moreover, energy efficiency is of paramount importance, requiring both large coding gains for high spectral efficiency and low complexity decoding algorithms. As the applications of 6G are highly diverse, the coding scheme needs to be flexible in length and rate. To account for varying channel conditions while avoiding full re-transmissions, it also needs to support hybrid automatic repeat request (HARQ), i.e., the generation of additional parity bits on-the-fly.
While the error correction scheme in the 5G standard is HARQ-enabled, highly flexible and performs well with respect to the bit error rate, the 6G standard demands even higher peak throughput, which leads to the need of larger blocklengths. In order to achieve high rates and a better decoding threshold, the 5G low-density parity-check (LDPC) code introduced punctured message bits (state variables). However, these lead to slower convergence in the decoder [2], and the necessity of decoding even when no error occurred in transmission, which is sub-optimal from an energy efficiency perspective. Regarding short blocklengths, 5G uses polar codes that are typically decoded using a successive cancellation list (SCL) decoder.
This work is supported by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research (BMBF) within the project Open6GHub (grant no. 16KISK019).

This decoder does not allow for a on-the-fly complexity versus performance trade-off as can be done with belief propagation (BP) decoding by controlling the number of iterations.
Our vision for the 6G standard is to unify the error correction scheme with one code that fits all scenarios [3]. This rate and length flexible code should correct errors using a simple fallback decoder that covers all possible parameters while potentially sacrificing some performance, or with a decoder designed for the specific use case, thus optimizing latency, throughput, error-rate or energy efficiency.
B. Problem Formulation
A coding scheme is best evaluated in light of the challenges it aims to address. Consequently, it makes sense to design the scheme to specifically meet these challenges. As some of the scenarios and challenges are not yet known, the code design must be versatile enough to handle a wide range of possible scenarios.
We think that the most promising candidates for a versatile, unified coding scheme are polar codes and LDPC codes. Polar codes are known for their exceptional performance in the short block length regime [4], but the challenge is to show competitive performance compared to LDPC codes for longer block lengths. The opposite is true for LDPC codes, which excel at long lengths and fall short at small block lengths. We believe that the most promising way is to choose a code family that is good in the common case, which is likely a high data rate scenario with long block lengths and high code rates. Therefore, we focus on designing a unified LDPC code with a BP-based decoding scheme that also works well for short block lengths and low rates.
Next to being versatile in rate and length, the unified coding scheme needs to support HARQ, low-latency decoding for short block lengths and decoding with a variable complexity versus performance trade-off everywhere. The complexity versus performance trade-off relates to the number of decoding iterations in BP decoding and the complexity per iteration. Thus, to be energy efficient, the design should allow for good performance even with a small number of decoding iterations and low complexity per iteration.
C. Design Philosophy
As a basis for the unified LDPC code, we choose a protograph-based raptor-like (PBRL) LDPC code. It inherently provides rate and length flexibility while potentially being

979-8-3503-5405-8/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

1119

Asilomar 2024

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Lifting size Z

200

[5] (girth 8)

[6] (girth 8)

150

proposed (girth 6)

100

for realistic use cases with few BP iterations. Moreover, the special structure of the code allows further performance improvements using automorphism ensemble decoding (AED) for small code lengths, resulting in a similar performance as the 5G polar code.

50

E. Notation

0 6

8 10 12 14 16 18 20 Base matrix block length nHRC

Fig. 1: Required lifting size for different highest rate code (HRC) designs for
mHRC = 4.

Let [a, b) for b > a denote the set {a, a + 1, . . . , b − 1}, with [b) being shorthand for [0, b). For a matrix W of size M × N , the submatrix at row indices A ⊆ [M ) and column indices B ⊆ [N ) is denoted by WA,B ≜ [wi,j]i∈A,j∈B.

quasi-cyclic (QC), which allows hardware-friendly implementations. Furthermore, their feasibility is proven, as PBRL codes are prominently used in the 5G standard. The design process of a PBRL code can be divided into the design of the core and the extension. To further facilitate hardware implementations, we constrain the core to be regular, but allow for some irregularities in the extension part. Moreover, we restrict the core part to be 4-cycle free, improving the decodability with a BP decoder. Although techniques such as those described in [5] can be employed to increase the girth beyond 6, the constraints imposed by these methods significantly limit the flexibility needed for designing an adaptive coding scheme. This is shown in Fig. 1 (red), where the required lifting size for high-girth designs is comparably large and thus does not allow for short block length codes.
One particularly interesting aspect of a unified LDPC code design is the handling of short block lengths. We propose a code design that enables a special case of multiple-bases belief propagation (MBBP) [7] called automorphism ensemble decoding (AED). In order to offer that option, we design the core to be rank-deficient.
In addition, we do not puncture any variable nodes, which improves the performance for few decoding iterations at the cost of slightly degrading the asymptotic performance. This is an optimization for the most prevalent use cases. In energylimited devices, the number of decoding iterations per message transmission is typically constrained well below the iteration count considered in asymptotic LDPC code design. Optimizing for a finite number of decoding iterations follows the design principle of making the common case efficient. Achieving better performance at this operational point is beneficial, even if it comes at the cost of asymptotic decoding performance.
With all the constraints in mind, we propose a carefully hand crafted core and a data driven extension design allowing for flexible design goals and a unified code.

II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes
LDPC codes [8] represent a class of linear block codes characterized by a sparse parity-check matrix (PCM) H of size M × N and code dimension K = N − rank(H). The sparsity of H is both a defining feature and a key element in their widespread success, allowing efficient decoding using message-passing algorithms such as the famous BP [8] algorithm. Besides the PCM representation, LDPC codes can be also be described using their Tanner graph [9]. The Tanner graph is a bipartite graph consisting of check nodes (CNs) and variable nodes (VNs). A variable node vj is connected with a check node ci, if Hij = 1. The degree of a node vj (ci) in the graph refers to its number of connected neighbouring nodes, and is equal to the weight of the j-th (i-th) column (row) of H. A LDPC code is called row- (column-) regular if the number of nonzero entries in each row (column) of H is constant.

B. Belief Propagation (BP) Decoding

BP decoding is an iterative message-passing algorithm operating on the Tanner graph of a code. In its log-domain formulation, the exchanged massages take the form of loglikelihood ratios (LLRs). The algorithm begins by initializing the messages from the VNs to the CNs as the LLRs obtained from the channel observations Lch. Subsequently, the BP algorithm iterates between updating the CNs and the VNs. In the CN update step, the extrinsic messages Lci→vj from each CN ci to all its neighboring VNs are updated according to





Lci→vj = 2 · tanh−1 

tanh Lvj′ →ci  , 2

j′∈N (ci)\{j}

D. Contributions
In this paper, we introduce a novel, flexible LDPC channel code. It is a check node (CN)-regular quasi-cyclic raptor-like LDPC code supporting a wide range of lengths and rates using one basegraph only. Besides a compact description, the code is HARQ-ready. The proposed code outperforms the 5G LDPC code in a large regime of parameters and is optimized

where N (ci) refers to the neighborhood of node ci, i.e., the set of indices of the nodes connected to ci. Following this, the VNs are updated in a similar fashion, where the extrinsic messages Lvj→ci from VN vj to the connected CNs are given by

Lvj →ci = Lch,j +

Lci′ →vj .

i′∈N (cj )\{i}

1120
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Shift value wi,j

This iterative process continues until a maximum number of

nHRC

iterations or a stopping criterion is reached. The final VN

k

LLRs are determined using

mHRC

···

42

Lvj = Lch,j +

Lci→vj .

i∈N (j)

Performing a hard decision on the above equation yields the mIRC

···

codeword bit estimates of the decoder. Although only optimal

for graphs without cycles, the BP decoder still performs well

if the number of cycles, particularly 4-cycles, in the Tanner graph is sufficiently low.

0
Fig. 2: Base matrix W of the proposed code.

C. Protograph-based LDPC Codes

Protograph-based LDPC codes [10] are results of research efforts to increase hardware friendliness through structure yielding length-flexible LDPC codes. The construction starts with the design of the base matrix W of size m × n defining the macroscopic properties of the code through the row and column weights. To obtain the Tanner graph of the actual code, the protograph is lifted by a factor of Z, resulting in Z copies of the graph, that are interconnected by interleaving their edges. Most prominently, for QC LDPC codes, circular shifts are used as interleavers, corresponding to replacing the elements of W by a circulant Z × Z matrices to obtain the PCM H. For the single-edge type protographs considered in this paper, the circulant matrices are either identity matrices of size Z × Z circularly shifted by the corresponding wj,i or the all-zero matrix if wj,i = −1. Since the base matrix is lifted with circulant matrices, the result is a QC matrix. The choice of Z results in the code length N = nZ, and for a fullrank PCM, the code dimension is K = kZ. Furthermore, the design allows for parallelism in the decoder by guaranteeing Z contention free memory accesses to the VNs. The shifts are designed according to the microscopic properties of the code, e.g., being 4-cycle free. To ensure that after lifting, the PCM does not contain any 4-cycles, the rows of W must fulfill the RD-constraint [11], which is that for each pair of rows i1, i2 and columns j1, j2 with wi,j ̸= −1,

wi1,j1 − wi1,j2 ≠ wi2,j1 − wi2,j2 mod Z.

(1)

D. Protograph-Based Raptor Like (PBRL) Codes

PBRL codes [12] form a class of rate flexible LDPC codes

based on Raptor codes [13], characterized by a PCM with

a specific structure. It is constructed from a highest rate

code (HRC) part HHRC concatenated with an incremental redundancy code (IRC) part HIRC, also called the extension,

yielding

H=

HHRC 0 HIRC I

,

where I is the identity matrix. Both HHRC and HIRC are constructed as protograph-based PCMs with lifting size Z. Since this structure allows the addition or removal of checks from the HIRC part without changing the checks in the HHRC part, length and rate flexibility is achieved. Furthermore, HARQ is facilitated by the fact that the IRC bits can be encoded independently of the HRC bits. Even though the imposed

structure reduces the degrees of freedom, PBRL codes can achieve almost the same decoding thresholds as fixed-rate codes.

E. Automorphism Ensemble Decoding
Since protograph-based LDPC codes with circulant lifting are quasi-cyclic, automorphism ensemble decoding (AED) [14] is enabled. In general, the ensemble decoder approach [15] can achieve near maximum likelihood (ML) performance in the short block length regime by using M parallel decoding attempts and selecting the best candidate using the ML-in-thelist criterion. In AED, the different candidates are produced by using permutations from the automorphism group Aut(C) of the code C, which is the set of permutations π(·) such that any codeword c ∈ C is permuted into another codeword c′ ∈ C. This is called the symmetry of a code. By definition, a QC code has QC automorphisms of the form

i + d − Z if i mod Z + d ≥ Z

πd,Z (i) = i + d

else,

(2)

with 0 ≤ d < Z. If the decoder is not equivariant to the permutation, a permuted version of the decoder input may lead to a different decoding result. However, decoding on a QC PCM is equivariant to QC automorphisms, since they are equivalent to rearranging the CNs. A practical way to circumvent this is decoding on a non-QC PCM of the code, i.e., breaking these decoder symmetries, e.g., by adding rows, deleting rows, or the summing up rows [14].

III. CODE DESIGN
The structure of the base matrix W of our proposed QC PBRL code and its key parameters is shown in Fig. 2. The code consists of two parts:
1) A regular, QC HRC that enables AED by having a small number of redundant checks which can be removed to obtain a non-equivariant PCM.
2) A raptor-like extension scheme designed in a data-driven fashion for rate-flexibility and support of HARQ.
We first establish the theoretical foundations regarding the rank of regular PCMs that is used to construct an AED-ready code. We then turn to particular design aspects namely the highest rate code, the extension and how to achieve length flexibility.

1121
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. Rank of Regular QC Parity Check Matrices
Theorem 1. Let W be a fully-populated single-edge type base matrix with dimensions m × n where 2 ≤ m ≤ n and H the mZ × nZ PCM obtained from QC lifting W with factor Z. Then, rank(H) ≤ mZ − m + 1.
Proof: Let Hi denote the i-th row of W after lifting with Z. We find that
rank(H) = dim(span(H)) = dim ⟨span(Hi)⟩im=−01
m−1
≤ dim(span(Hi))
i=0 m−1
− dim (span (H0) ∩ span(Hi)) .
i=1
Since the basegraph is fully populated, span(Hi) contains at least the all-one vector, and therefore
dim (span H0 ∩ span Hi) ≥ 1,
for all i > 0. Thus, rank(H) ≤ mZ − (m − 1). The rank of regular QC PCMs has been investigated in
literature. In particular, [16, Theorem 4], provides sufficient conditions on Z for rank(H) = mZ − m + 1. However, we observe that in practice, equality holds for a much wider range of cases.
The rank deficiency of a regular PCM for the HRC by Theorem 1 is inherited by the PBRL, as the raptor-like extension only adds linearly independent rows. Hence, the PCM of a PBRL code whose HRC has a basegraph with mHRC checks is rank deficient by mHRC − 1. To decode using AED, one can obtain a full-rank PCM by removing mHRC − 1 linearly independent rows from the HRC part. This matrix is nonequivariant towards QC shifts and, thus, enables potentially different codeword candidates during decoding when multiple such automorphisms are used [17].

B. Design of the Highest Rate Code

To select the size of the regular, mHRC × nHRC base matrix

of the HRC, both the required rates and the decoding perfor-

mance need to be considered. To achieve a good performance

under BP decoding, we select dv,HRC = mHRC = 4. For a

maximum code rate of Rc,max

=

1−

mHRC nHRC

= 0.9, nHRC

= 40

columns are required1.

While naturally, lower code rates shall be achieved by the

extension (IRC, see subsection III-C), it can be beneficial to

shorten the base graph (BG) instead (i.e., remove columns

from W, reducing k < nHRC − mHRC). For short block

lengths, it is known that shortening leads to superior perfor-

mance than extension, as larger lifting factors can be used

to achieve the same block length [18]. This is especially

important in the case of LDPC codes without any punctured

variable nodes, as the number of columns in W needs to be

rather large to achieve a high maximum code rate. Hence, our

proposed construction shall support BG shortening.

1Note that due to the rank-deficiency, the actual code rate is slightly higher than this design rate.

Algorithm 1: Progressive Lifting Design of WHRC

Input : Matrix dimensions m = mHRC, n = nHRC

Output: Base matrix WHRC

1 wi,0 ← 0 ∀i < m;

2 w0,j ← 0 ∀j < n;

3 Z ← 2; j ← 1;

4 while j < n do

5 for w ∈ {0, 1, . . . , Z − 1}m−1 do

6

W[1,m),j ← w;

7

if W[m),[0,j) fulfills RD-constraint then

8

j ← j + 1;

9

break;

10

end

11 else //if not broken out of for loop

12

Z ← Z + 1;

13 end

14 end

15 WHRC ← hroll(W, −m);

In [11], a construction of W based on Latin squares is proposed, naturally fulfilling the RD-constraint. The maximum value in W dictates the smallest value of Z such that the RD-constraint is fulfilled, lower bounding K. Hence, the construction from [11] requires Z > nHRC, resulting in large minimum block lengths, limiting the flexibility of the code design. To overcome this limitation, we design a base matrix whose maximum shift value per column increases from left to right, enabling smaller values of Z when BG shortening is applied. Algorithm 1 lists the pseudo-code for the proposed design algorithm. For each column, shift values smaller than Z are found, such that the sub matrix to the left of the current column fulfills the RD-constraint. If no such values exist, Z is incremented. Without loss of generality, the first row and column of W are 0, corresponding to identity matrices that are not shifted during lifting. Finally, the first m columns of W are circularly shifted to the end, such that they correspond to the parity bits when encoding systematically. For this reason, the shortened base matrix W(k) can be obtained by selecting the first k columns and the last mHRC columns of W. For our selection of mHRC = 4 and all values of k and Z we verified that the rank is indeed exactly 4Z − 3. The required minimum lifting size to fulfill the RD-constraint using the proposed HRC construction is visualized for different base graph block lengths in Fig. 1 (blue).

C. Design of the Extension
Designing efficient PBRL LDPC codes in the short-length regime presents significant challenges due to the need for a balance of multiple interdependent factors such as avoiding short cycles, ensuring suitable degree distributions, and preventing trapping sets. Traditional design methods, e.g., optimizing degree distributions using extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts [19], often rely on simplifying assumptions including infinite block lengths and unlimited decoding iterations, which are not practical in real-world scenarios with finite resources. A genetic algorithm (GenAlg) offers a robust alternative by efficiently navigating the large search space

1122
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Crossover X(P, u) u times

Mutation µ(P, v) v times

Tournament selection

Tournament Population P at selection
generation i

Parent A

Parent B

Individual

Elite

shift mutation

Child A

Child B

Mutant

Population P at generation i+1

basegraph mutation

New random
Fig. 3: Overview of the steps of the genetic algorithm (GenAlg) used to
optimize each row of W for the IRC extension.

of possible code structures [20]. For this reason, we use a GenAlg for designing the incremental redundancy code. In this paper, we restrict the design to rate matching on a BG level, in other words, only coarse granularity (lifting size Z) is considered. Finer granularity for rate matching can be achieved by applying puncturing and shortening to the code after lifting. Algorithm 2 lists the pseudo-code for the proposed GenAlgbased design algorithm and can be summarized as follows.
In order to achieve code rate flexibility, the optimization problem shall consider block error rate (BLER) performance over multiple different code rates. In our incremental approach, optimization starts with the highest rate, where code performance is most critical. Ensuring strong performance at higher rates enables efficient high throughput use cases and also provides a solid foundation for lower-rate extensions. We jointly optimize both the BG and the shift values row-by-row until the target number of check nodes mIRC in the BG of the incremental redundancy code is reached.
The initial generation P consists of the base matrix Win = WHRC extended by a random parity check and shift values respectively, where a constraint on the maximum shift value at each index is considered to keep the benefits of the incremental shift design of the highest rate code. The individuals W′ ∈ P of the current generation are evaluated using a fitness function. In addition to the rate-flexibility, it is necessary to support BG level shortening. Therefore, the extension matrix is optimized to perform reliably across different values of k by considering the joint fitness

f (W′) = −

log Pˆerr (W′, γ, k) ,

k∈Φ(r)

where Φ(r) denotes a function that returns a subset of k values

that can be used to construct a code with parameters inside

the

design

regime

e.g.,

1 3

≤

R

≤

9 10

and

32

≤

N

≤

2440.

The BLER estimate obtained from Monte-Carlo simulation

and the signal-to-noise-ratio (SNR) are denoted by Pˆerr and

γ, respectively. The SNR is set to the threshold necessary to

achieve a target BLER of 10−3 using the 5G LDPC code with

Algorithm 2: Genetic Optimization of Extension Matrix
Input : Base matrix Win, extension size mIRC, hyperparameters gmax, P , t, u, v
Output: Extended base matrix W

1 W ← Win 2 for r ← 0 to mIRC − 1 do 3 g ← 0; P ← {};

4 for p ← 0 to P − 1 do

5

P ←P∪{

W0 random row 1

}

6 while g < gmax ∧ not stopping criterion do

7

foreach W′ ∈ P do

8

f ← 0 foreach k ∈ Φ(r) do

9

W(k) ← Shorten(W′, k)

10

H ← Lift

W(k), Z

=

max
i,j

wi(,kj)

+

1

11

Pˆerr ← Monte-Carlo (H, γ = Γ5G)

12

f ← f − log(Pˆerr)

13

P′ ← {t best W′} ∪ {X(P, u)} ∪ {µ(P, v)}

14

while |P′| < P − 1 do

15

P′ ← P′ ∪ {

W0 random row 1

}

16

g ← g + 1; P ← P′;

17 W ← W′ with highest f

18 return W

Table I: Hyperparameters for GenAlg-based design of the extension.

Hyperparameter
Maximum Iterations per Row Population Size Elite Count Crossover Count Mutation Count Shift Mutation Probability BG Mutation Probability

Symbol
gmax P t u v
Pshift PBG

Value
100 160 10 54 48 5% 10%

parameters K and N , denoted by Γ5G(K, N ). The PCM H

used for decoding is obtained by shortening W′ according

to k and subsequently lifting the shortened matrix W(k) =

W′
[mHRC +r),[nHRC +r)\[k,nHRC )

with

Z

=

maxi,j wi(,kj)

+ 1.

The composition of the next generation P′ is visualized in

Fig. 3. It consists of an elite, individuals from crossover and

mutation, and new random individuals. The elite is obtained

by keeping the t individuals with highest value f (W′). Two

children are obtained via crossover of two parents by swapping

random parts of their genome, i.e., the BG and shift values.

The functions X(P, u) and µ(P, v) describe the crossover

and mutation. Both take a set of individuals P and output

2u and v new individuals, respectively. Elements from P are

chosen using a tournament selection considering the fitness

f (W′) of the respective individuals and a number of rounds.

Mutation introduces the mutation probability PBG for the BG

and Pshift for the shift value respectively as hyperparameters.

Both functions only apply changes to the last row of the

matrix. After reaching the maximum number of iterations gmax or if a stopping criterion is fulfilled, the candidate W′ with

respective highest fitness is selected as initialization for the

1123
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

optimization of the subsequent row. The hyperparameters used

100

in the proposed design are listed in Table I.

D. Achieving Length Flexibility

The BG and shift value design for both HRC and IRC is

optimized

for

lifting

sizes

Z0

=

max
i,j

wi(,kj) +1.

For

lifting

sizes

Z < Z0, WHRC does not necessarily fulfill the RD-constraint,

and for Z > Z0 (which is needed to construct codes with

K > Z0 · (nHRC − mHRC) + mHRC − 1 = 2199), the lifting

size is larger than the highest shift value, which can cause

the BLER performance to suffer. In order to overcome these

issues, we make use of so called power towers [21], a concept

also used in 5G LDPC codes. The shift values are increased

for higher lifting sizes at some indices by applying a masking
Wtower = W + i∈{0,1,... } ∆(i) · α · 2i, where ∆(i) is a binary masking matrix with the same shape as W, and α is

an integer. The advantage of this design is that when selecting Z = α · 2j, the shift values for different lifting sizes can be

obtained from one single base matrix by applying the modulo operation Wtower mod Z = W+ i∈{0,1,...,j−1} ∆(i)·α·2i. The masks are also optimized using a GenAlg. The set of

supported lifting sizes is dependent on the designed power

towers, i.e., the choices of α and the ranges for i.

IV. RESULTS
In this section, we present the performance evaluation of various channel coding schemes using Monte-Carlo simulations over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation.
Fig. 4 displays the BLER performance of the baseline (5G LDPC code and polar code under CRC-aided successive cancellation list (CA-SCL) decoding with list size 4) and of the proposed scheme for a short length scenario with N ≈ 132 and R = 1/4. For eight BP iterations, the proposed scheme results in small gains compared to the 5G LDPC baseline. By applying AED, the gap to the polar code baseline is closed even further, however, there is still room for improvement. Notably, even for a larger maximum number of 48 BP iterations the 5G LDPC code is outperformed by the 5G polar code decoded with SCL-4, while our proposed scheme shows a similar performance to the polar code baseline. If the total number of iterations is constrained, our proposed design with BP-8 and AED-6 performs similar to the LDPC baseline with 48 BP iterations, while providing a lower latency due to the parallelism of AED.
A scenario with medium rate (R = 1/2) and length N = 957 is shown in Fig. 5. The proposed scheme outperforms the 5G LDPC code by roughly 0.4 dB. However, we observe that the gain achieved by using AED diminishes for these longer block lengths.
Furthermore, Fig. 6 compares the proposed scheme in a high rate R = 9/10 scenario for N = 8960, and N = 64000, in order to show the applicability of the power towers. As a baseline, we use the 5G LDPC code (with N = 8960) and the DVB-S2 LDPC code (with N = 64800), because the 5G LDPC code is not specified for such long lengths. For the shorter block length N = 8960, the gain of the proposed

10−1

BLER

10−2

10−3

5G LDPC BP-8 5G LDPC BP-48

5G Polar CA-SCL-4

10−4

prop. BP-8 prop. BP-8 AED-6

prop. BP-48 AED-6

10−5 1

2

3

4

5

6

Eb/N0 in dB

Fig. 4: Short length performance for R = 1/4 and N ≈ 132.

100

10−1

BLER

10−2

10−3

5G LDPC BP-8 proposed BP-8

proposed BP-8 AED-6

10−4 1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Eb/N0 in dB

Fig. 5: Medium length performance for R = 1/2 and N = 957.

scheme is more than 0.5 dB compared to the 5G LDPC code. Comparing to the 5G LDPC code in general, we observe that the larger the block length, the larger the gain of the proposed scheme. This is due to the absence of punctured variable nodes and an optimization for a finite number of decoding iterations. In comparison to the DVB-S2 code, the proposed scheme demonstrates a gain of 0.3 dB for the long block length.

100 10−1 10−2

5G LDPC BP-8 DVB-S2 LDPC BP-8 proposed BP-8

BLER

10−3

10−43.8 4 4.2 4.4 4.6 4.8 5 5.2 Eb/N0 in dB
Fig. 6: Long length performance for R ≈ 9/10 and N ≈ 64800 (solid), as
well as N = 8960 (dashed).

1124
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

R
Avg. Iter. @ BLER= 10−2

Fig. 7 shows the code rate R over the necessary SNR to achieve a BLER of 10−3 at a fixed message size of K = 1078. Starting with only the HRC part, extension checks from the IRC part are added to lower the rate and the resulting codes are evaluated to find the needed SNR. Note that the highest rate code has rate R < 0.9, because of base graph shortening k = 25 < 36 to enable the use of a larger lifting size Z. We observe that the proposed scheme exhibits a smoother and better rate matching performance than the 5G LDPC code.

0.9 HRC

0.8

IRC

0.7

proposed

0.6

5G (BG1)

3.2 3.6

4

4.4 4.8 5.2

Eb/N0 in dB

Fig. 7: Incremental redundancy performance for fixed message size K =
1078 for a target BLER of 10−3 under BP decoding with 8 iterations.

Finally, to evaluate the decoding latency, we compare the average number of decoding iterations of the proposed scheme and the 5G LDPC code over a range of rates and block lengths as shown in Fig. 8. We set the maximum number of BP iterations to eight for the proposed code and decode the 5G LDPC code with X BP iterations, where X is the required maximum number of decoding iterations to match the error-rate performance of our scheme. The proposed scheme demonstrates a lower number of iterations, and consequently reduced latency, particularly for high-rate codes.

1

1

8

R

0

0

1

0

N

1000 0

N

1000

a) 5G LDPC BP-X

b) proposed BP-8

Fig. 8: Average number of iterations for various rates and block lengths.
The maximum number of iterations (X) for the 5G LDPC code is set to match the performance of the proposed code using eight iterations for each configuration.

V. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK
In this work, we have presented a flexible PBRL LDPC coding framework for 6G. The code outperforms the 5G LDPC code for finite number of decoding iterations using one basegraph only. Moreover, we showed that a rank-deficient HRC part enables improved error-rate performance in the short blocklength regime using AED, while having a regular structure beneficial for implementation.

The proposed framework marks an important initial step
towards enabling flexible LDPC coding for 6G applications.
Building on this foundation, future research will focus on fine-
tuning the rate matching parameters (i.e., selection of k and
Z) and extending the code to spatial coupling [22].
REFERENCES
[1] International Telecommunication Union Radiocommunication Sector, “Recommendation ITU-R M. 2160-0 Framework and overall objectives of the future development of IMT for 2030 and beyond,” Tech. Rep., 2023.
[2] R. Wiesmayr, D. Nonaca, C. Dick, and C. Studer, “Optimizing Puncturing Patterns of 5G NR LDPC Codes for Few-Iteration Decoding,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.21267
[3] M. Geiselhart, F. Krieg, J. Clausius, D. Tandler, and S. ten Brink, “6G: A Welcome Chance to Unify Channel Coding?” IEEE BITS the Information Theory Magazine, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 67–80, 2023.
[4] M. C. Cos¸kun, G. Durisi, T. Jerkovits, G. Liva, W. Ryan, B. Stein, and F. Steiner, “Efficient Error-Correcting Codes in the Short Blocklength Regime,” Physical Communication, vol. 34, pp. 66–79, 2019.
[5] G. Zhang, A. Sun, L. Liu, and Y. Fang, “Short Regular Girth-8 QC-LDPC Codes From Exponent Matrices with Vertical Symmetry,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.14962
[6] A. Tasdighi, A. Banihashemi, and M.-R. Sadeghi, “Symmetrical Constructions for Regular Girth-8 QC-LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. PP, pp. 1–1, 10 2016.
[7] T. Hehn, J. B. Huber, S. Laendner, and O. Milenkovic, “Multiple-Bases Belief-Propagation Decoding of High-Density Cyclic Codes,” in 2007 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory. IEEE, 2007, pp. 311–315.
[8] R. Gallager, “Low-density Parity-check Codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[9] R. Tanner, “A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, 1981.
[10] J. Thorpe, “Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes Constructed from Protographs,” IPN progress report 42.154, Tech. Rep., 2003.
[11] L. Zhang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and I. F. Blake, “Quasicyclic LDPC codes on Latin squares and the ranks of their parity-check matrices,” in 2010 Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), 2010, pp. 1–7.
[12] T.-Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “ProtographBased Raptor-Like LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, 2015.
[13] A. Shokrollahi and M. Luby, “Raptor Codes,” Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory, vol. 6, no. 3–4, pp. 213–322, 2011. [Online]. Available: http://dx.doi.org/10.1561/0100000060
[14] M. Geiselhart, M. Ebada, A. Elkelesh, J. Clausius, and S. ten Brink, “Automorphism Ensemble Decoding of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes by Breaking Graph Symmetries,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 26, no. 8, pp. 1705–1709, 2022.
[15] T. Hehn, J. B. Huber, S. Laendner, and O. Milenkovic, “Multiple-Bases Belief-Propagation for Decoding of Short Block Codes,” in IEEE Inter. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2007, pp. 311–315.
[16] P.-C. Yang, C.-H. Wang, and C.-C. Chao, “Rank Analysis of ParityCheck Matrices for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes,” in 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), 2018, pp. 491–495.
[17] F. Krieg, J. Clausius, M. Geiselhart, and S. ten Brink, “A Comparative Study of Ensemble Decoding Methods for Short Length LDPC Codes,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.23980
[18] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of Low-Density Parity Check Codes for 5G New Radio,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, 2018.
[19] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes for Modulation and Detection,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, 2004.
[20] Y. Liu, M. Jiang, and Y. Zhang, “A GenAlg Optimization of LengthScalable QC-LDPC Codes,” in 2021 7th International Conference on Computer and Communications (ICCC), 2021, pp. 16–21.
[21] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Lifted Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes,” European Patent Application EP3 852 276A1, 2021.
[22] Y. Ren, L. Zhang, Y. Shen, W. Song, E. Boutillon, A. BalatsoukasStimming, and A. Burg, “Edge-Spreading Raptor-Like LDPC Codes for 6G Wireless Systems,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/ abs/2410.16875

1125
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

