2024 5th International Conference on Big Data, Artificial Intelligence and Internet of Things Engineering (ICBAIE)

2024 5th International Conference on Big Data, Artificial Intelligence and Internet of Things Engineering (ICBAIE) | 979-8-3503-9007-0/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICBAIE63306.2024.11117122

Image Transmission Based on DnCNN Adaptive

Selection of Significant Bit Optimization

Qinglin Tang School of Automation and Information Engineering
Sichuan University of Science & Engineering Yibin, China
322085404214@stu.suse.edu.cn

Xu Zhan* School of Automation and Information Engineering
Sichuan University of Science & Engineering Yibin, China
* Corresponding author: zhanxu@suse.edu.cn

Yong Sun School of Automation and Information Engineering
Sichuan University of Science & Engineering Yibin, China
306371404@qq.com

Feilong Wang School of Computer Science and Technology University of Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China wangfeilong23@mail.ucas.as.cn

Yurong Chen School of Automation and Information Engineering
Sichuan University of Science & Engineering Yibin, China
322085404215@stu.suse.edu.cn

Yanmei Zhu School of Automation and Information Engineering
Sichuan University of Science & Engineering Yibin, China
351584470@qq.com

Abstract—To address the problem of low reliability in soft decoding for wireless image transmission in extremely low signalto-noise ratio environments, a method based on Deep Convolutional Neural Network combined with an adaptive highposition bit selection algorithm(DnCNN-AHPBS) is proposed to enhance quality of image transmission in low signal-to-noise ratio environments. Firstly, the image information is mapped to a bitstream for 16QAM modulation, and then the modulation information is encoded by 5G new radio access technology LDPC channel coding, and then transmitted wirelessly through the MIMO-OFDM communication system. Secondly, after being wirelessly transmitted in a low signal-to-noise ratio environment, the bits are restored to the image structure in DnCNN assisted optimization. Finally, the high position bit information selected by the DnCNN- AHPBS algorithm is mapped into a constellation diagram for flipping and replacement. This method adjusts the initial log-likelihood ratio information of the Minimum Offset Sum (OMS) algorithm to obtain an optimized log likelihood ratio and reduce the error rate of image transmission in low signal-to-noise ratio environments. The simulation results indicate that a specific bit error rate will result in a 1.4dB bit signal-to-noise ratio gain at extremely low signal-to-noise ratios. The DnCNN- AHPBS algorithm has to some extent improved the reliability of wireless transmission soft decoding in extremely low signal-to-noise ratio environments.
Keywords-Image Transmission; DnCNN; QC-LDPC; Spacetime coding; MIMO- OFDM; Significant Bit.
I. INTRODUCTION
With the rapid development of wireless communication technology today, wireless image transmission is known as one of the most widely used and efficient ways of information transmission. Wireless image transmission faces important problems of image quality and transmission delay [1]. Especially in the low signal-to-noise ratio, the poor channel environment
The Second Edition of Key Research and Development Project of Science and Technology Department of Sichuan Province(2022YFS0554) and Sichuan Earthquake Bureau Earthquake Science and Technology Special Youth Project(LY2225).

leads to image distortion at the receiving end, which results in the loss of a large amount of image information, and at the same time leads to the decryption of the encrypted image at the receiving end after transmission is abnormal [2]. For example, the pixel values of the DNA-encoded encrypted images are very different when decrypted. Many technologies have been proposed to ensure communication quality [3]. 5G-LDPC and MIMO-OFDM communication models are becoming mature, widely used in image transmission [4]. The impact of channel coding technology on image quality is crucial in the fight against noise interference [5].
The channel coding scheme is continuously optimized. 5GLDPC codes fulfill 5G deployment scenarios due to their low decoding complexity and suitability for parallel decoding as well as support for high throughput [6]. 5G-LDPC can indeed improve the quality of wireless image transmission, in addition, we should also consider using the special characteristics of image signals to improve the quality of images after transmission. There is correlation between the pixel values of the image, which leads to spatial structural correlation in the transmitted information. The work of this paper is to further enhance the soft decoding performance by applying this correlation.
Numerous scholars have been utilizing the correlations mentioned above in order to improve the reliability of information transmission. The JSCC scheme of adaptive unequal error protection was proposed by Hu et al [7]. The image information compressed by wavelet transform is divided into importance levels, The channel encoder adjusts the bit rate adaptively to achieve the purpose of transmitting high-quality images, Compared with equal error protection algorithm and unequal error protection algorithm, it has 0.2~0.4 dB improvement in image PSNR. Bourtsoulatze [8] proposed a

979-8-3503-9007-0/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

625

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:08:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

deep JSCC wireless image transmission scheme and proved to be superior to JPEG and JPEG2000 compressed digital transmission and has good reliability in low SNR environments for channels where additive white noise exists, and excellent performance in terms of PSNR value of the image at the receiving end. Song et al. [9] proposed new Adaptive Model Joint Source Channel Coding for Semantic Communication (AMJSCC), which consumes more computational power than the deep JSCC scheme, but performs an enhancement in the quality of image restoration at the receiver side, and the image PSNR is improved by 17.3% relative to the deep JSCC scheme. The transmission schemes given above apply to image features, but none of them address the impact of the features that image information brings in soft information. Our proposed DnCNNAHPBS algorithm is able to demining the underlying correlation of image features from soft information and optimize its own reliability, and adopts the advanced 5G-LDPC code applied to the transmission system, while optimizing the image quality problem in very low SNR environments. Our proposed DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm is non-conflicting with the above algorithms and can be combined with the above algorithms to further improve the image transmission quality.
In this paper, we propose a wireless image transmission system and DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm for use in low SNR environments, in response to the practical problem of poor performance of soft decoding algorithms in low SNR. By performing DnCNN deep convolution neural network assisted optimization of the initial log-likelihood ratio information at the receiver side. The DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm performs one iteration of the OMS algorithm for soft information to be transferred to the image domain, and DnCNN feature mining is performed with the help of highly adjacent information correlation provided by the image spatial structure as a way to get the optimized soft information. The DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm optimizes the soft information optimization position by locking the soft information, mapping the information on the high bit position to be optimized to the constellation map for mirror flipping, in order to optimize the post-transmission signal offset and cover the original soft information, and finally achieve the purpose of optimizing the log-likelihood ratio of the initial channel. This scheme will have a gainful effect on most soft information based soft decoding. The experimental results show that the method has 1.4dB SNR gain in BER and 7dB SNR gain in PSNR over the original method.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
A. 5G NR LDPC Code
The 5G-NR-LDPC coding uses QC-LDPC coding, in which the LDPC coding Parity-Check Matrix (PCM) is designed to improve the overall performance of the LDPC code again by selecting the Base Graph (BG) and determining the number of columns Kb corresponding to the information bits and the number of columns Mb corresponding to the check bits, based on the code length Kbit to be coded and code rate R[10]. In the 5G standard TS38.212, the Base Graph HBG242×52 is selected for Kbit within 308, Kbit between 308 and 3840 code rate R of [1/5,2/3] and Kbit greater than 3840 code rate R within 0.25. In other cases we select the Base Graph HBG146×68. The cyclic shift coefficient matrix P is expanded by shifting the sub-matrix according to the

expansion factor ZC = A2a. The 16 cyclic shift coefficient matrices are first selected based on the selected base matrix model. The sub-matrices are then expanded by the −1, 0 and Pij>0 contained in the internal elements of the cyclic shift coefficient matrices. The check matrix H is obtained by expanding the base matrix according to the expansion factor, After encoding, the result C = [s1, s2, ..., sk−2ZC , P1, P2], S is the sequence of information bits with a length of, K is the code length after coding, The check bits P1 and P2 need to be solved by accumulating the check matrix and the information bit sequence in the following (1).

 


P1T P2T <

< , B,1 AS T ,CS T , DP1T

∋0(

Use the HBG1 core matrix and the check matrix expanded according to the expansion factor to accumulate P1 = [p0, p1, p2, p3] in the following (2), p0 and p3 of HBG2 are accumulated through HB3,1, Perform modulo-2 operation on iterative accumulation to obtain P1.

   
 p0 <

kb

H H S ∗ H 2 ,kb ∗1 4 , j j

,1 2 ,kb ∗1

3

kb
H i, jS j



j <1

i <1 j <1



kb

 

 p1 < H p 1,kb ∗1 0 ∗

H 1, j S j

j <1

∋1(

  

kb

 p2 < H p 2,kb ∗1 0 ∗ H p 2,kb ∗ 2 1 ∗

H 2, j S j



j <1

 

kb
 p3 < p2 ∗ H 3, j S j



j <1

Perform modulo-2 operation according to the check matrix H and the information bit S iterative accumulation to solve P2 = [p5, p6, ..., pcol−kb], as shown in (3) below.

col,kb kb ∗k ,1

  pk <

Hk, jS j

∋2(

k <5 j <1

In (3), col is the number of HBG lines.
B. STBC-OFDM Communication Model
In digital image transmission, MIMO technology uses multi antenna transmission to improve the communication efficiency and anti-interference of image transmission, OFDM modulation can also divide the spectrum into multiple subcarriers for parallel transmission [11]. In this paper, multi-user antenna diversity MIMO-OFDM technology is used for digital image transmission to improve transmission reliability. At the receiving end, after OFDM demodulation and Alamouti encoding scheme, the ML signal is detected to remove the correlation of x2 signal in antenna 1. The channel matrix is transposed by Hermite to remove the independent correlation of x2 in y1 antenna, which is expressed as (4) below.

∋ ( 
 

y1 y*2

  

<

hh12**

h2 ,h1

  

  

y1 y2

  

<

h1 2 ∗ h2 2

  

x1 x2

  

∗

nn12**

  

∋3(

626
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:08:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

For 2-transmitter-2-receiver space-time block code (STBC), the signal redundancy is increased through data joint coding to reduce the bit error rate signal caused by channel fading or noise impact, so as to improve the transmission reliability, same as SISO transmission rate, But the signal reliability has been improved, the image transmission quality is improved at the receiving end [12].
III. DNCNN BITSTREAM HIGH BIT OPTIMIZATION DENOSING
A. Deep convolutional neural network DnCNN
The additive Gaussian noise during image transmission is expressed as the following (5).

g(x, y) < H * f (x, y) ∗ n(x, y)

∋4(

In (5), f(x, y) is pure image signal,n(x, y)is complex Gaussian noise,g(x, y) is the image noise signal via additive Gaussian noise after convolution of pure signal image degradation coefficient.
VGG model is improved by DnCNN, The residual image is trained through Conv+BN+ReLU combined cascade architecture for noisy images to restore the original image to a certain extent. The network structure is shown in Figure 1 below.

through the correlation between adjacent pixels, and mapping it in the bit stream will enable error correction of bits at a certain position. The high bit error correction accuracy of P will be affected by different signal-to-noise ratio intervals. The bit error rate is reduced by adaptive selecting the number of bits based on pilot information. Therefore, adaptive bit selection is proposed, and the bit error rate is estimated according to (6).

Pt , Pr

ρ

F
D√S√N

∗k

<

EBER

∋5(

In (6), Pt and Pr represent the pilot information at the receiving end and the pilot information at the transmitting end, D represents the total number of pilots, S represents the number of OFDM symbols, and N represents the number of antennas, σ and K is the specific model parameters.
The bit stream positions that need to be optimized are locked according to EBER and the rules of (7). The number of bits locked varies between different EBER intervals, and the selected bit positions are optimized.

8

 Ζ ∴ P < n sgn(EBER ,σ2n) ,sgn(EBER ,σ2n,1)

∋6(

n<0

In (7), SGN(t) is the step activation function, τ = (0.53988, 2.35934).
Select mapping at the P position of the soft information bit stream to be replaced and adjusted by DNCNN neural network. LLR(h, k) is the replacement area for transmitting soft information after 5G-LDPC encoding, as shown in (8) below.

Figure 1. DnCNN Network Architecture
DnCNN network can denoise noisy images, However, adding only Gaussian noise to the training set is difficult to truly simulate the noise impact on the modulated signal in the actual information transmission process, Therefore, in the production of training set, the image signal is coded and modulated by bit channel coding, and then the iterative OMS algorithm decoding is carried out for analog generation, It can effectively simulate the impact of noise on the signal in the actual bit transmission process.
B. Adaptive high bit selection
In low signal-to-noise ratio environments, image transmission can cause numerous bit information errors, but there is a certain degree of adjacent information correlation in the image. By optimizing the pixel values of the image through adjacent information correlation, the errors in the bit stream can be reduced. The image pixels are between (0)D and (255)D, and the binary values are between (00000000)B and (11111111)B. The higher the number of bits, the greater the contribution to the correlation between adjacent pixels. This article aims to reduce the error rate by correcting high bit errors through adjacent information within a certain range of low signal-to-noise ratio. The essence of image deep Convolutional neural network denoising is to optimize image pixels by removing noise

 h

<

4n

,

3≥

1

∗

(,1)n



,

3



2

∋7(

   

k ⊆ N ∗ 

k＜

  

k

_

B cb ,

L

  

  

In (8), parameter n is a positive integer not greater than kcb − L − 2×Zc, parameter B is the size of the transmission block, and parameter kcb is the maximum code block size, and parameter Zc is the extension factor.
C. DnCNN Soft Information Optimization
The offset minimum sum (OMS) algorithm is based on the addition of a correction factor to the MS algorithm β. Thus, error compensation is generated for the update stage of the verification node in the decoding of the OMS′ algorithm.

L(t) (rji )

<


iϒ⊆Rj

sgn L(t,1) (qiϒj ) √ max min 

L(t,1) (qiϒj )
iϒ⊆Rj

, α,0 

∋8(

In (9), parameters β for additive correlation factors, the parameter L(qij) represents the information passed from the variable node to the validation node.
The position P in the soft information is adaptive selected

627
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:08:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

based on the energy level of image noise, flipping the modulation constellation position at position P in b1 information, instead of retaining the soft information at position P or b1 = b2 in P.
Through the DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm proposed in this paper for the local optimization of soft information, in order to reduce the soft decoding algorithm initial channel loglikelihood ratio information of the error rate, to go to improve the reliability of the confidence propagation algorithm variable nodes and check nodes back and forth to pass the information, as a way to promote the soft decoding algorithm tends to be stabilized by the optimal judgment of the data.
D. DnCNN-AHPBS Algorithm
The DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm decodes the output Boolean matrix of the LLR message at the receiver in one iteration, and the decoding algorithm uses the OMS algorithm. We reconstruct the Boolean matrix b1 as the image structure I1 according to the following Eq.(10) in order to mine the feature extraction of the image structure in the bit information. According to the following formula (10) output image information I1 and then input into DnCNN network for denoising and mining related features, and finally produce image information I2.

(i,1)≥N ∗ j ∗8

 I1(i, j) <

2n,1 ≥ b1(n)

n<(i,1)≥N ∗ j

∋0/(

In (10) the parameter N is the input image column wise dimension.
Then the image information I1 and I2 are dimensionalized into one-dimensional Boolean vectors b1 and b2. At this point the image information is characterized in the bit stream. The output of LLR is optimized by the following (11).

LLR* i, j

<

L L Ri , j √ [ S G N (b1 ℘ b2 )]i≥ j ∗ 2 Z c ∗1

s.t. i < ζi ⊆ N ∗ i ′ C |

ζ | j < j ⊆ N ∗ j ′ K p , L , Z c

∋00(

In (11), the operator is a Boolean dissimilarity operation, the parameter ZC is the expansion factor, and the parameter Kp is the length of the sub-block representing the positive halfcycle.
First, The equation generates the flip vector by a simple Boolean dissimilarity operation. This flip vector represents a visual low-dimensional representation of the optimization of the image structure in the bitstream. Second, the DnCNNAHPBS algorithm transforms the flip vectors into bipolar data and reconstructs them into a 2D structure, and the reconstructed 2D structure is pruned to output Flip Matrix-Crop according to the set 5G-LDPC coding parameter specification. Finally, Flip Matrix-Crop performs flip-optimized replacement of LLR information, and the optimization scheme uses the Hadamard product of Flip Matrix-Crop and LLR to output the optimized LLR.

IV. SIMULATION EXPERIMENTS AND RESULT ANALYSIS
A. Parameter settings
To confirm the performance of DnCNN high level soft information assistance, simulation experiments are conducted on the proposed model. Experimental environment: Windows 11 operating systems, IntelR CoreTM i7-12700H CPU-2.30GHz, 16GB, simulation platform MATLAB R2022a. The experimental simulation of the LTE system has a bandwidth of 20MHz, a carrier frequency of 5GHz, a base-band sampling frequency of 15.4MHz, a number of users of 2, a number of antennas of 2 × 2, a modulation method of 16QAM and a cyclic prefix of 1/4. The user input image is a Lena 128 × 128 standard map and the training set is the unspach standard library. The network layer parameters are detailed in Table 1, and the optimization algorithm uses Adam.

TABLE I. DNCNN NETWORK LAYER PARAMETER

Network layer

Neuron parameters

Project Normalization

Activation function

Input layer

(50×50×1)

Convolutional Layer(1) (64,3×3)

Relu

Convolutional Layer(18) (64,3×3)

Batch Normalization

Relu

Convolutional Layer(1) (64,3×3)

Regressive layer

The DnCNN network uses 802 images from the unspach standard library and splits the pixel size into 50×50 PX is used to expand the data set of the training set, and each image is iterative decoded by the OMS algorithm as the training set, which can effectively simulate the impact of noise during transmissions. The ratio of training set, validation set, and test set is 7:2:1. The hyper parameter settings are shown in Table 2.

TABLE II. NETWORK HYPERPARAMETERS

Project

Parameter setting

Optimization algorithm

Adam

Initial learning rate

0.005

Learning rate decline cycle

6

Learning rate decline factor

0.5

Learning rate scheduling strategy

piecewise

Maximum Number Of Iterations

200

Verification frequency

40

Minimum batch number

8

Execution environment

GPU

The maximum number of iterations for 5G-LDPC encoding parameters is set to 50, with an encoding rate of 0.4. The encoding length B is the standard image bit length, and the decoding algorithm uses the CRC-OMS algorithm. The CRC check bit L = 24, and the number of CBS code words is set based on the block length. The DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm is analyzed for the advantages of BER, Peak Signal to Noise Ratio (PSNR) and the Euclidean norm in AWANG channel and verified to be equally feasible on CRC-MS algorithm and CRC-NMS algorithm.

628
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:08:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Analysis of simulation results
The DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm proposed in this paper will adaptively select the locations to be optimized in conjunction with the actual channel interference. The following Figure 2 show the effect of different location optimization schemes on the BER performance of MS decoding algorithm, NMS decoding algorithm and OMS decoding algorithm respectively. The BIT1 and BIT2 optimization schemes of the three decoding algorithms have absolutely good performance advantages over the unoptimized BIT0 at Eb/B0 of −6 to 1.7 dB, Eb/B0 of −6 to 2.6 dB, and −6 to 2.6 dB, in that order. It also verifies that the BIT8 all-position optimization scheme is highly deficient, and the DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm is relevant to optimize the specific position according to the actual situation. This is also due to the fact that images distortion is severe at low SNR, which can lead to poor performance of DnCNN for image feature extraction and reduced reliability of optimization at low bits. For this reason adaptive high bit selection is performed to optimize the initial channel log-likelihood ratio of the high bits through the estimation of the channel state by the guide frequency to achieve the correctness of the optimization direction.

while reducing the selection weight for the BIT8 optimization scheme.
Figure 3. PSNR diagram for soft decoding
Figure 4 below show how the Euclidean paradigm behaves in the bit dimension. The Euclidean norm for different optimization schemes is described as the following (12). The BIT1 and BIT2 optimization schemes have lower Euclidean distances compared to the bit vectors that are not disturbed by noise. The BIT8 all-position optimization scheme expands the Euclidean distance to the bit vectors that are not disturbed by noise, which corroborates the phenomenon in the BER analysis.

Figure 2. BER diagram for soft decoding
The following Figure 3 show the effect of different positional optimization schemes on the PSNR performance of MS decoding algorithm, NMS decoding algorithm and OMS decoding algorithm respectively. The P SNR of the BIT1 and BIT2 optimization schemes is higher than that of the unoptimized BIT0, which is in line with the performance of BER. The BIT8 all-position optimization is different from the performance of BER. The PSNR performance of the BIT8 allposition optimization scheme is better than the other optimization schemes in all cases. Combined with the BER case, this is due to the fact that the DnCNN convolution layer extracts features with reduced relative difference to neighboring pixels. The BIT8 optimization scheme is an all-position replacement scheme that will fully inherit this relative difference in PSNR, but this approach will make the image blurrier. To avoid this, the DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm will ultimately choose either the BIT1 or BIT2 optimization scheme based on the interference,

Figure 4. Euclidean norm plot for soft decoding

 P≥M≥N

2

Euclidean norm <

b , a mod(i,P)≥P∗i

mod(i,P)≥P∗i ∋01(

i<1

In (12), parameter b is the optimized bit vector of DnCNNAHPBS algorithm, parameter a is the bit vector not interfered by noise, parameter P is the optimization scheme adjudicated by DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm, and M and N are the size of transmitted image specifications, respectively.
Figure 5 shows the BER curve of the impact of the DnCNNAHPBS algorithm judgment on the performance of soft

629
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:08:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decoding, with simulation experiments in the Eb/B0 range of −6 to 3 dB. The error bit rate of the DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm with optimized OMS decoding is significantly better than that of unoptimized OMS decoding, leading to up to 1.4 dB bit SNR gain. At Eb/B0 >2.4, the feature information extraction gain of the DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm on the image decreases as the noise interference decreases, and the image bitstream high level information gradually stabilizes to unoptimized. The advantages brought by the optimization of the DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm on the decoding performance are evident at Eb/B0 <2.4. It also confirms that the gains from optimizing the initial channel loglikelihood ratio information will be applicable to other soft information-based soft decoding algorithms.
Figure 5. Impact of DnCNN-AHPBS algorithm on decoding performance
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper aims at improve the performance of decoding in image transmission with low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Images are an information carrier and have a large amount of data. Images′ bit information have strong correlation between them. The strong correlation between images bit information some extent leads to correlation between the initial channel loglikelihood ratio information in image transmission. In addition, the characteristic of image transmission can theoretically be used to improve the performance of soft decoding algorithms based on iterative decision-making based on initial channel loglikelihood ratio information. Therefore, the DnCNN network assisted adaptive high-position bit selectivity optimization algorithm (DnCNNAHPBS) was proposed to optimize and adjust soft information. The optimization process is to map the soft information to a Constellation diagram of 16QAM, flip the high position bit constellation selected by DnCNN-AHPBS, and remap the optimized constellation to soft information. This method can filter out erroneous initial log likelihood ratios (i.e. soft information) in order to retain correct optimized information, ultimately reducing transmission errors in the bitstream. The simulation results show that in image transmission in a low signal-to-noise ratio environment, the bit signal-to-noise ratio gain of bit error rate (BER) is up to 1.4dB, and the bit signal-tonoise ratio gain of the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR) of the image is up to 7dB. This algorithm significantly improves the performance of the soft decoding algorithm based on iterative

decision-making using soft information, and the bit error rate after DnCNN-AHPBS selection optimization is significantly reduced. Additionally, because it is verified that there are correlation between adjacent bits in the image bitstream affected by noise interference. In further research, this technology can be applied to image encryption algorithms to improve the security and quality of images in harsh transmission environments.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is partially supported by the Second Edition of Key Research and Development Project of Science and Technology Department of Sichuan Province(2022YFS0554) and Sichuan Earthquake Bureau Earthquake Science and Technology Special Youth Project(LY2225).
REFERENCES
[1] Mala S, Kukunuri A. An intelligent wireless channel corrupted imagedenoising framework using symmetric convolution-based heuristic assisted residual attention network[J]. Network: Computation in Neural Systems, 2024: 1–34.
[2] Mohsin M J, Saad W K, Hamza B J, et al. Performance analysis of image transmission with various channel conditions/modulation techniques[J]. TELKOMNIKA, 2020, 18(3): 1158-1168.
[3] Ravichandran D, Padmaa M, Rajagopal N, et al. Chaos and DNA blended hybrid encryption algorithm for secure image transmission over dct precoded ofdm[J]. Wireless Personal Communications, 2023, 129(3): 703– 727.
[4] Nga N T. The Effectiveness of LDPC Decoding Algorithms in 5G Channel Modelling of MIMO-OFDM System under the Influence of Spatial Correlation[J]. Smart Systems and Devices, 2022, 32: 6-13.
[5] Erdemir E, Tung T Y, Dragotti P L. Generative joint source-channel coding for semantic image transmission[J]. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, 2023, 41(8): 2645-2657.
[6] Bae J H, Abotabl A, Lin H P, et al.An overview of channel coding for 5g NR cellular communications[J]. APSIPA Transactions on Signal and Information Processing, 2019, 8: 1-14.
[7] Hu B J, Liu C G. Design of wireless image transmission strategy based on joint source channel coding[J]. XINXIJISHU, 2023, 47(2): 7-11.
[8] Bourtsoulatze E, Kurka D, Gunduz D. Deep Joint source-channel coding for wireless image transmission[J]. IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2019, 4774–4778.
[9] Song M S, Ma N, Dong C, et al. Deep joint source-channel coding for wireless image transmission with adaptive models[J]. Electronics, 2023, 12(22): 1-18.
[10] Kadhimi M K, Abdulkareem A E, Tsimenidis C C. Performance enhancement of LDPC codes based on protograph construction in 5G-NR standard[J]. Tikrit Journal of Engineering Sciences, 2023, 30(4): 1-10.
[11] Dharavathu K, Mosa S A. Efficient Transmission of an Encrypted Image Through a MIMO–OFDM System with Different Encryption Schemes[J]. Sens Imaging, 2020(1), 13.
[12] Gupta P, Soni V. Application of STBC in MIMO-OFDM Broadband Wireless Communications[J]. Computer Simulation, 2020, 37(3): 177180.

630
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:08:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

