2024 IEEE Future Networks World Forum (FNWF) | 979-8-3503-7949-5/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/FNWF63303.2024.11028745

2024 IEEE Future Networks World Forum (FNWF)

Heuristic Rate-Adaptive Reconciliation in Continuous-Variable Quantum Key Distribution

1nd Yilun Hai Deutsche Telekom Chair of Communication Networks
Dresden University of Technology Dresden, Germany
yilun.hai@tu-dresden.de
3th Riccardo Bassoli Deutsche Telekom Chair of Communication Networks
Dresden University of Technology Dresden, Germany
riccardo.bassoli@tu-dresden.de

2st Yingjian Wang Deutsche Telekom Chair of Communication Networks
Dresden University of Technology Dresden, Germany
yingjian.wang@tu-dresden.de
4th Frank H. P. Fitzek Deutsche Telekom Chair of Communication Networks
Dresden University of Technology Dresden, Germany
frank.fitzek@tu-dresden.de

Abstract—In continuous-variable quantum key distribution (CV-QKD), the information reconciliation step plays a crucial role in ensuring the security and efficiency of the key exchange process. This paper investigates the use of heuristic and reinforcement learning-based methods to adaptively adjust the low-density parity check (LDPC) code rate in response to the time-varying channel signal-noise-ratio (SNR), with the goal of maximizing the final key rate. Leaving the SNR to fluctuate by ±1dB around a fixed value, we analyze the trade-off between the reconciliation efficiency and the frame error rate (FER). We propose a rate-adaptive reconciliation scheme that leverages reinforcement learning to select the optimal LDPC code rate, comparing its performance against traditional fixed-rate approaches. The results demonstrate that the proposed adaptive scheme significantly enhances the key rate and shows potential in applying for a wide range of SNR.
Index Terms—CV-QKD, time-varying SNR, rate-adaptive reconciliation, LDPC code, reinforcement learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
The Quantum Key Distribution (QKD) protocol BB84, introduced by Bennett and Brassard in 1984 [1], marked the first demonstration of quantum secure communication, enabling two legitimate parties Alice and Bob to securely share a cryptographic key by utilizing the principles of quantum mechanics. Continuous-Variable QKD (CV-QKD), such as the GG02 protocol [2], uses continuous variables such as electromagnetic quadratures for encoding, offering advantages in compatibility with the telecom infrastructure and higher secret key rate, making it suitable for long-distance communications. In CV-QKD, postprocessing is essential to correct
The authors acknowledge the financial support by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research of Germany in the project 6G-QuaS, project identification number: 16KISQ120; by the German Research Foundation (DFG, Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft) as part of Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC 2050/1 – Project ID 390696704 – Cluster of Excellence “Centre for Tactile Internet with Human-in-the-Loop” (CeTI) of Technische Universita¨t Dresden; by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research of Germany in the programme of “Souvera¨n. Digital. Vernetzt.”. Joint project 6G-life, project identification number: 16KISK001K.

errors and ensure that Alice and Bob share identical keys after quantum transmission. Information reconciliation is a critical step in this process, allowing the correction of errors caused by noise in the quantum channel. Without efficient information reconciliation, the discrepancies between the keys would make them unusable for secure communication, compromising the protocol’s security. Given the inherent noise in quantum channels, this step requires efficient error correction. Among the error correction codes available, low-density parity check (LDPC) codes have been extensively used in CVQKD due to their near-optimal error correction performance in approaching the Shannon limit [3]. LDPC codes offer flexibility through adjustable code rates, allowing the system to adapt to varying channel conditions. Reconciliation efficiency β and frame error rate (FER) are key factors that influence overall performance in post-processing, and LDPC codes play a central role in maintaining an optimal balance between them. However, in real-world implementations, signal-noiseratio (SNR) fluctuations in quantum channels pose significant challenges. Fixed-rate LDPC codes can lead to suboptimal key rates as they fail to adapt to changing channel conditions, but it is time and resource consuming to construct and store varying LDPC codes. To address this, recent research has focused on rate-adaptive LDPC codes that dynamically adjust the code rate to provide solutions under varying SNR. Approaches such as rate-compatible punctured LDPC (RC-LDPC) codes [4] and the storage of pre-designed LDPC code tables have been explored [5], although both methods face practical limitations in terms of storage and complexity.
Recent research has explored the use of machine learning techniques to optimize various aspects of CV-QKD postprocessing. Neural networks have been applied to predict secret key rates in real time, significantly reducing the computational overhead typically associated with traditional numerical methods [6], [7]. Additionally, deep neural networks have been employed to enhance the performance and speed of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

979-8-3503-7949-5/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

903

2024 IEEE Future Networks World Forum (FNWF)

LDPC code decoding, improving reconciliation efficiency and reducing the FER [8]. Machine learning has also been used to optimize key system parameters, such as modulation variance and excess noise, adapting to real-time channel fluctuations for higher key rates [9], [10]. These advancements show that machine learning not only improves computational efficiency but also enables dynamic adjustments in CV-QKD systems, paving the way for more sophisticated, real-time optimization techniques. This makes it an ideal solution for real-time rate adaptation, and it is particularly well-suited for addressing the challenges of fluctuating SNR conditions in quantum channels [11].
In this paper, we propose a heuristic online self-rateadaptive reconciliation scheme for CV-QKD by applying reinforcement learning (RL). The proposed online algorithm could dynamically adjust the optimal rate of LDPC codes based on observed channel conditions, balancing the trade-off between FER and the reconciliation efficiency β, to obtain the maximum secret key rate in the communication channel that varies over time. Compared to a fixed code rate, this method does not require the storage of predefined LDPC code tables while being able to effectively increase the key rate.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we introduce the secret key model in CV-QKD information reconciliation, analyse the impackness of FER and reconciliation efficiency β on secret key rate, respectively. We build up the optimization model of the secret key rate and design the algorithm of QLearning to maximizing the secret key rate in Section III and in Section IV we set up the main parameters for simulation and evaluate the performance of the proposed online schema in comparison with fix code rate. Finally, in Section V we conclude this paper.

II. SECRET KEY RATE AND ADAPTIVE CODE RATE IN INFORMATION RECONCILIATION

A. Secret key rate

In the post-processing of CV-QKD, before information

reconciliation, key sifting and parameter estimation will be

executed for channel evaluation, thus partial number of trans-

mitted states m, from the total number of N , will be assumed

for this step and only n = N − m states will be left. In

the reconciliation phase, error correct codes are applied due

to the error caused for instance by the channel noise, and in

terms of error correction the the failure of error correction

also needs to be taken into account due to the non-perfection

of error correction codes, which could be described as frame

error ratio for the information to be corrected are divided into

frames. Then the secret key rate can be calculated from the

difference between the mutual information between Alice and

Bob, IAB, and the Holevo bound [12] between Bob and Eve,

χBE, given by [13]

n

k

=

(1 − N

F ER)(βIAB

−

χBE )

(1)

where β is the reconciliation efficiency defined as

R

β=

(2)

C

with R represents the code rate of error correction code and

C

=

1 2

log2(1

+

SN

R)

the

channel

capacity

for

Gaussian

vari-

ables [14]. Specifically, for the Gaussian modulated coherent

state protocol considering the additive white Gaussian noise

channel, IAB is equal to C, leading to the special case:

n

k

=

(1 − F ER)(R N

−

χBE )

(3)

This explicitly indicates the negative correlation between FER and the key rate, as well as the positive correlation between the code rate and the key rate.

B. Adaptive LDPC Code Rate
For the key rate in (1), assuming that the same LDPC code is used for error correction, two primary parameters are affected by fluctuations in the SNR of the classical channel, as the entire post-processing occurs within this channel. These parameters are the FER and the reconciliation efficiency β. FER decreases as the SNR increases, since a higher SNR indicates improved channel conditions, leading to lower error levels caused by channel noise. Consequently, if the performance of LDPC decoding remains unchanged, a higher SNR results in a lower FER [15]. In contrast, when using the same LDPC code for error correction, the reconciliation efficiency decreases with increasing SNR. The fixed code rate R limits the upper bound of the key rate, while the channel capacity C increases with SNR.
Addressing the SNR fluctuation problem in real situation, recent research has explored various strategies to enhance CVQKD systems by improving the efficiency and adaptability to changing SNR conditions. Rate-compatible LDPC codes have been introduced to handle a wide range of SNR regimes, where puncturing and shortening techniques are used to adjust the code rate dynamically without needing separate code tables for each rate, resulting in a high reconciliation efficiency under fluctuating conditions [16]. Another study focuses on multiedge-type LDPC (MET-LDPC) codes, leveraging flexible degree distributions and combining them with rate-compatible techniques, allowing these codes to maintain robustness in both high-error and low-error scenarios while efficiently adapting to channel changes [17]. Furthermore, a rate-adaptive reconciliation protocol proposes adjusting the LDPC code rate in real time based on observed SNR variations, using feedbackbased control to maintain a balance between reconciliation efficiency and frame error rate (FER) in practical systems [18]. A high-efficiency rate-adaptive reconciliation has been demonstrated through the use of incremental redundancy schemes, where extra parity bits are added as needed to adapt to current channel conditions, significantly boosting secret key rates in real-time communications [19]. These studies highlight how adaptive techniques can optimize post-processing in CV-QKD and lay the groundwork for more advanced machine learning approaches.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
904

2024 IEEE Future Networks World Forum (FNWF)

III. HEURISTIC SCHEMA TO GENERATE ADAPTIVE CODE RATES
Given the previously discussed conflicting effects of FER and β on the key rate, as well as the complex impact of the code rate on β, achieving the optimal key rate under varying SNR conditions is not a straightforward task. We thus propose a heuristic schema to adaptively adjust the code rate of LDPC code to the optimum, in order to get the highest final key rate within the vary of SNR values.

A. Problem Formulation
From (1) we can see that the final secret rate in the reconciliation step is affected by both the FER and the efficiency β. Nevertheless, the two parameters influence the final key rate in the opposite way, i.e., a higher FER will decrease the key rate while better efficiency results in a key rate increasing, and vice versa. Moreover, these two middle parameters are directly influenced by SNR and code rate R (error correction performance of LDPC code). Thus, the secret key rate could be seen as a function of SNR and R, i.e., k = k(R, SN R) and a tradeoff between FER and β needs to be considered. For this tradeoff we can formulate it into an optimization problem:

P roblem : k∗ = max k(R, SN R)

s.t. ∀SN R ∈ [SN Rmin, SN Rmax]

(4)

C1 : 0 < R < Rthreshold

C2 : F ER ≤ F ERthreshold

In (4), the problem is to solve for a maximum key rate in a given SNR fluctuation interval with changeable LDPC code rate R, where C1 represents the constrain of the code rate threshold, for a LDPC code has a maximum rate that could correct errors with a known SNR [20], and specifically for AWGN channel R < C where C denotes the channel capacity. C2 is the constrain of the FER, it is usually a value that can not be directly calculated from the formula since it’s related to the performance of LDPC code which is more likely to be obtained from the decoding result, and the threshold could be set manually with appropriate expected values.

B. Reinforcement Learning-Based Rate Adaptation
In order to solve the optimization problem formulated in (4), RL is particularly suited for this problem because it is modelfree, allowing the system to adapt to complex, dynamic SNR conditions without needing predefined models or code tables. Then we propose an online learning-based algorithm using Qlearning, a model-free reinforcement learning approach. The goal of the algorithm is to continuously learn the optimal LDPC code rate R dynamically as the SNR varies within the given range, [SN Rmin, SN Rmax], thereby maximizing the secret key rate k(R, SN R). In this Q-learning framework we define:
• State st: The SNR value at step t. • Action at: The selected LDPC code rate R at step t. • Reward rt: The secret key rate k(R, SN R) achieved by
choosing action at in state st.

• Q-value Q(s, a): A value function that approximates the expected reward for taking action a in state s, representing the secret key rate.
The algorithm iteratively updates the Q-values according to the following update rule:

Q(st, at) ← Q(st, at)+α

rt

+

γ

max
a′

Q(st+1,

a′)

−

Q(st,

at)

(5)

where:

• α is the learning rate, controlling how much the Q-value is updated in each step.A higher α means the Q-value will be updated more quickly based on new SNR information.
• γ is the discount factor, determining the importance of future rewards. A higher γ gives more weight to future rewards, encouraging long-term optimization of the key rate.
• rt is the immediate reward (k(Rt, SN Rt)) for action at at state St.

The algorithm proceeds as follows:

Algorithm 1 Q-learning based rate adaptive reconciliation

1: Input: SNR range [SN Rmin, SN Rmax], code rate range

[Rmin, Rmax]

2: Initialize: Q-table Q(s, a) with 0 values, learning rate α,

discount factor γ, exploration parameter ϵ

3: for each episode do

4: Observe initial SNR state s0

5: for each time step t do

6:

Select action at (LDPC code rate Rt) using ϵ-greedy

strategy 1

7:

Apply action at and observe reward rt =

k(Rt, SN Rt)

8:

Observe new state st+1 (updated SNR)

9: Update Q-value use (5)

10:

Update SNR state: st ← st+1

11: end for

12: Reduce exploration parameter ϵ

13: end for

14: Output: Optimized LDPC code rate

R∗ = arg maxa Q(s, a) for each SNR

1 The epsilon-greedy strategy selects a random action with probability ϵ (exploration) and chooses the best-known action with probability 1 − ϵ (exploitation), allowing the agent to balance learning and optimization.
C. Simulation Setup
The goal of the algorithm is to maximize the final key rate in a CV-QKD system by dynamically adjusting the LDPC code rate in response to the variation in SNR. To simulate the performance of the schema, we assume an AWGN channel with the SNR fluctuating randomly by ±1dB around a fixed average value of 6dB, that is, SNR∈ [5dB, 7dB]. A regular LDPC code of code length 1000 bits with rate range R ∈ [0.02, 0.15] with accuracy of 0.005 is used as the original code since the focus in this paper is not on the design of high performance LDPC code. The key rate models to which we refer are (1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
905

2024 IEEE Future Networks World Forum (FNWF)

and (2). Note that the Holevo bound can be computed after the quantum transmission phase and is primarily influenced by the properties of the quantum channel (e.g., excess noise and transmission efficiency), thus for simplicity in the classical post-processing phase the item χBE in (1) will not be taken into consideration. For F ERthreshold we set 50%, a higher FER will be regarded as an invalid error correction.
For the Q-Learning parameters, we set the training episodes 5000 times, and the learning rate α = 0.1, balancing the speed of learning and convergence, discount factor γ = 0.9. The exploration parameter starts at ϵ = 1 and decays exponentially by ϵ = 0.998 after each episode to change from exploration to exploitation as the system learns the optimal LDPC code rate. The reward function is defined as the final secret key rate, and the Q-table Q(s, a) is initialized with zeros and updated as the system interacts with the environment.
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
In this section, we present the simulation results and analyze the performance of the online Q-learning-based rate-adaptive reconciliation algorithm. This includes the convergence of Q-values, the selection of the optimal code rate within the SNR range, the secret key rate, BER, and the reconciliation efficiency β. It is important to note that, since the χBE term is disregarded in the simulation, the key rate does not represent the practical value in real-world scenarios, but rather serves as a basis for comparison with the fixed code rate values.

The optimal LDPC code rate obtained after training is presented in Fig. 2. As observed, the optimal rate rises gradually with the increase in SNR, aligning with the intuitive expectation that higher SNR values require less stringent LDPC decoding performance. Consequently, the code rate can be increased to achieve a higher key rate.
Fig. 2. Optimal LDPC code rate after training

Fig. 1. Q-value convergence
Fig. 1 illustrates the convergence of the Q-value, defined as the difference between the current and previous steps, indicating whether the agent discovered a better code rate for the given SNR. Although the number of training episodes is set to 5000, the ”Training Steps” on the horizontal axis reach nearly 100,000. This is because during each episode the agent performs between 1 and 100 learning steps. Initially, the Q-value increases, reflecting a period of exploration in which the agent attempts various actions. Gradually, the Qvalue decreases and converges toward zero, indicating a shift toward exploiting the learned experience. This suggests that the agent has identified the optimal code rate to maximize the secret key rate.

Fig. 3. secret key rate comparison Fig. 4. Reconciliation efficiency comparison

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
906

2024 IEEE Future Networks World Forum (FNWF)

Fig. 5. FER comparison

Fig. 6. secret key rate comparison in a wider SNR range

Fig. 3 compares the secret key rates generated by the adaptive rate and fixed rates of 0.02, 0.09, and 0.15. Since our model does not calculate the Holevo bound, no units are added to the vertical axis representing the rate. However, this does not affect the comparative analysis of our model. To minimize the impact of LDPC decoding fluctuations, we used the average key rate obtained from 1000 decoding trials at each SNR value. As shown in the figure, the adaptive rate consistently outperforms the fixed rates at every SNR value. Additionally, it is important to note that, despite using averaging to smooth the fixed rate curves, fluctuations within the given SNR range are still observable. This indicates that in practical CV-QKD systems, the secret key rate is indeed influenced by SNR variations. Thus, employing an adaptive rate theoretically helps to mitigate the impact of SNR fluctuations on the key rate. However, the larger fluctuations in the adaptive rate observed in Fig. 3 are due to the discrete nature of the code rates used. For example, the key rate drops significantly at SNR values of 5.6 dB and 5.8 dB. Referring to Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 for the corresponding values with the same SNR, this is because, while increasing the rate improves the reconciliation efficiency β, the FER also increases, resulting in a lower overall key rate.
Fig. 6 illustrates the algorithm’s performance over a wider SNR range. With the exception of a few points, such as when the SNR is around 8 and 9, where the performance is slightly lower than that of the fixed rate LDPC with a rate of 0.15 (though still close), the key rate in other regions is almost always equal to or greater than that of the other fixed rate LDPC codes. Notably, in the lower SNR region, ranging from -5 dB to 2.5 dB, the adaptive rate closely aligns with the performance of the low fixed rate LDPC code (r = 0.03). In this region, a lower code rate is necessary to ensure high performance by reducing the FER. In contrast, in the higher SNR range, from 12 to 15 dB, the adaptive rate more closely matches the high fixed rate LDPC code (r = 0.15). At these higher SNR levels, the BER for fixed rate codes is already zero, allowing the algorithm to pursue higher code rates to further enhance the key rate.

V. CONCLUSION
This paper proposes a heuristic rate-adaptive reconciliation scheme for CV-QKD, leveraging reinforcement learning to dynamically adjust the LDPC code rate based on time-varying SNR. The approach successfully balances the reconciliation efficiency β and the BER, leading to an optimized final key rate and extended transmission distance. Future work could focus on splitting the adaptive LDPC code rate into finer segments or even continuous, and more importantly, integrating this adaptive scheme into real-world CV-QKD systems and further refining the learning algorithms, particularly for high-performance LDPC codes under extremely low SNR conditions, where the secret key rate is more sensitive to SNR fluctuations.
REFERENCES
[1] C. H. Bennett and G. Brassard, “Quantum cryptography: Public key distribution and coin tossing,” Theoretical computer science, vol. 560, pp. 7–11, 2014.
[2] F. Grosshans, G. Van Assche, J. Wenger, R. Brouri, N. J. Cerf, and P. Grangier, “Quantum key distribution using gaussian-modulated coherent states,” Nature, vol. 421, no. 6920, pp. 238–241, 2003.
[3] D. Elkouss, J. Martinez-Mateo, and V. Martin, “Information reconciliation for quantum key distribution,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1007.1616, 2010.
[4] A. Dixon and H. Sato, “High speed and adaptable error correction for megabit/s rate quantum key distribution,” Scientific reports, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 7275, 2014.
[5] M. Milicevic, C. Feng, L. M. Zhang, and P. G. Gulak, “Quasi-cyclic multi-edge ldpc codes for long-distance quantum cryptography,” NPJ Quantum Information, vol. 4, no. 1, p. 21, 2018.
[6] M.-G. Zhou, Z.-P. Liu, W.-B. Liu, C.-L. Li, J.-L. Bai, Y.-R. Xue, Y. Fu, H.-L. Yin, and Z.-B. Chen, “Neural network-based prediction of the secret-key rate of quantum key distribution,” Scientific Reports, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 8879, 2022.
[7] Z.-P. Liu, M.-G. Zhou, W.-B. Liu, C.-L. Li, J. Gu, H.-L. Yin, and Z.B. Chen, “Automated machine learning for secure key rate in discretemodulated continuous-variable quantum key distribution,” Optics Express, vol. 30, no. 9, pp. 15 024–15 036, 2022.
[8] J. Xie, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, and D. Huang, “Deep neural network based reconciliation for cv-qkd,” in Photonics, vol. 9, no. 2. MDPI, 2022, p. 110.
[9] D. Jin, Y. Guo, Y. Wang, Y. Li, and D. Huang, “Key-sifting algorithms for continuous-variable quantum key distribution,” Physical Review A, vol. 104, no. 1, p. 012616, 2021.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
907

2024 IEEE Future Networks World Forum (FNWF)
[10] L. Ma, J. Yang, T. Zhang, Y. Shao, J. Liu, Y. Luo, H. Wang, W. Huang, F. Fan, C. Zhou et al., “Practical continuous-variable quantum key distribution with feasible optimization parameters,” Science China Information Sciences, vol. 66, no. 8, p. 180507, 2023.
[11] D. Huang, S. Liu, and L. Zhang, “Secure continuous-variable quantum key distribution with machine learning,” in Photonics, vol. 8, no. 11. MDPI, 2021, p. 511.
[12] F. Laudenbach, C. Pacher, C.-H. F. Fung, A. Poppe, M. Peev, B. Schrenk, M. Hentschel, P. Walther, and H. Hu¨bel, “Continuous-variable quantum key distribution with gaussian modulation—the theory of practical implementations,” Advanced Quantum Technologies, vol. 1, no. 1, p. 1800011, 2018.
[13] A. Leverrier, F. Grosshans, and P. Grangier, “Finite-size analysis of a continuous-variable quantum key distribution,” Physical Review A—Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, vol. 81, no. 6, p. 062343, 2010.
[14] A. Leverrier, R. Alle´aume, J. Boutros, G. Ze´mor, and P. Grangier, “Multidimensional reconciliation for a continuous-variable quantum key distribution,” Physical Review A—Atomic, Molecular, and Optical Physics, vol. 77, no. 4, p. 042325, 2008.
[15] M. Almeida, D. Pereira, M. Faca˜o, A. N. Pinto, and N. A. Silva, “Reconciliation efficiency impact on discrete modulated cv-qkd systems key rates,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 41, no. 19, pp. 6134– 6141, 2023.
[16] X. Fan, Q. Niu, T. Zhao, and B. Guo, “Rate-compatible ldpc codes for continuous-variable quantum key distribution in wide range of snrs regime,” Entropy, vol. 24, no. 10, p. 1463, 2022.
[17] S. Jeong, H. Jung, and J. Ha, “Rate-compatible multi-edge type lowdensity parity-check code ensembles for continuous-variable quantum key distribution systems,” npj Quantum Information, vol. 8, no. 1, p. 6, 2022.
[18] X. Wang, Y.-C. Zhang, Z. Li, B. Xu, S. Yu, and H. Guo, “Efficient rate-adaptive reconciliation for continuous-variable quantum key distribution,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1703.04916, 2017.
[19] H. Yang, S. Liu, S. Yang, Z. Lu, Y. Li, and Y. Li, “High-efficiency rateadaptive reconciliation in continuous-variable quantum key distribution,” Physical Review A, vol. 109, no. 1, p. 012604, 2024.
[20] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE transactions on information theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, 2001.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:05:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
908

