IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

4611

LLD: Lightweight Latency Decrease Scheme of LDPC Hard Decision Decoding for 3-D TLC NAND Flash Memory
Debao Wei , Member, IEEE, Yongchao Wang , Hua Feng , Huqi Xiang, and Liyan Qiao , Member, IEEE

Abstract— The low-density parity-check code (LDPC) has been widely used to significantly enhance the reliability of 3-D NAND flash memory. However, in cases where the raw bit error rate (RBER) of the data is high, it not only demands more sense levels but also requires a large number of iterations, leading to a notable read latency issue. To mitigate this challenge, this paper introduces an innovative lightweight latency decrease (LLD) scheme. Initially, by examining the correlation between the number of iterations and the hard decision level (HDL), a functional model that encapsulates the relationship between iteration and offset is established. Building upon this model, the all-wordlines latency decrease (AWLD) scheme is proposed. In an effort to further decrease latency, an in-depth analysis of the similarities among different wordlines within a flash memory block is conducted, leading to the development of an optimized one-wordline lightweight latency decrease (OWLLD) scheme. For scenarios involving random reading of small data volumes, the interplay between function models of various overlapping regions is delved into, which ultimately results in the proposal of a further optimized one-page lightweight latency decrease (OPLLD) scheme. Experimental findings reveal that the OPLLD scheme can enhance the iterative performance of LDPC by up to 94.63% and reduce latency by up to 66.89% compared to traditional algorithms, while incurring minimal storage and computational overhead. This clearly indicates that the proposed scheme substantially enhances the read latency performance of LDPC in flash memory.
Index Terms— NAND flash memory, LDPC codes, hard decision level, iteration.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N THE information age, where the amount of data is increasing, all kinds of electronic devices need to store a
Manuscript received 13 May 2024; revised 14 July 2024; accepted 1 August 2024. Date of publication 16 September 2024; date of current version 2 October 2024. This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province under Grant LH-2023F015, in part by the Aeronautical Science Foundation of China under Grant JZJJX20210009, and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant HIT.NSFJG202209. This article was recommended by Associate Editor X. Fong. (Corresponding author: Liyan Qiao.)
Debao Wei, Yongchao Wang, Huqi Xiang, and Liyan Qiao are with the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150080, China (e-mail: weidebao@hit.edu.cn; 22b305017@ stu.hit.edu.cn; 23S105150@stu.hit.edu.cn; qiaoliyan@hit.edu.cn).
Hua Feng is with the Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100029, China, and also with the School of Electronic, Electrical, and Communication Engineering, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China (e-mail: 19B905059@stu.hit.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TCSI.2024.3438789.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2024.3438789

growing amount of data and information, so high-capacity, high-performance storage media have become the current hot demand. NAND flash memory has the advantages of nonvolatility [1], high speed of reading and writing [2], large storage capacity [3], and low power consumption [4] compared with other traditional storage methods, so it has been extensively used [5]. With the development of technologies such as improved manufacturing processes to reduce the feature size of flash memory cells [6], the use of multi-layer technology to store more bits of data in a flash memory cell [7], and 3-D stacking technology to increase the integrated density of chips [8], [9], storage capacity has been increasing [10]. However, with increasing storage density, the data reliability problem has become more critical.
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) code is extensively used in 3-D NAND flash memory as a technique to reduce the noise interference in flash memory channel [11]. LDPC code includes two decoding methods, hard decoding and soft decoding [12]. Hard decoding is first applied when the data is read, and the sense level is applied for soft decoding after the hard decoding fails [13]. However, as the reliability of flash memory decreases, the number of sense levels that need to be applied for LDPC decoding grows, and the read latency problem is intensified. Therefore, how to reduce the latency of LDPC codes in 3-D NAND flash memory has become an urgent problem.
For LDPC latency in 3-D NAND flash memory, a large number of scholars have done optimization work. In literature [14], a non-uniform storage sensing strategy is proposed to improve storage sensing accuracy and thereby reduce sensing latency. An error pattern-aware LDPC decoding optimization method is proposed in the literature [15] to optimize the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) information using error patterns, which leads to fast convergence of decoding. A strategy to reduce the number of sensed levels is proposed in the literature [16], which reduces the read latency of LDPC decoding while maintaining the LDPC error correction performance. An LDPC sense level prediction method with fine granularity is proposed in the literature [17], which effectively reduces the excessive number of read retries by using the results of the first two iterations of LDPC decoding and thus predicting the error-prone regions. A frame feedback information-aware decoding algorithm is proposed in the literature [18], utilizing the decoding feedback information of one frame to effectively

1549-8328 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

reduce the number of decoding iterations of other frames. Although the algorithms proposed by the above scholars reduce the reading latency to a certain degree, they are all aimed at LDPC soft decision decoding, and they are essentially designed to improve the accuracy of the acquired LLR rather than fundamentally reduce the raw bit error rate (RBER) of data reading. And LDPC hard decision decoding should be prioritized in practical applications of flash memory [19]. Therefore, in this article, we will focus on LDPC hard decision decoding to fundamentally reduce the RBER of the data and consequently reduce the read latency of LDPC.
This paper aims to address the read latency issue of LDPC in 3-D TLC NAND flash memory. By analyzing the relationship between RBER and the number of iterations, a novel approach to characterize RBER in terms of iterations is proposed, which in turn overcomes the problem that traditional algorithms utilizing the RBER to optimize the read latency have to face a significant storage overhead in practical applications. In this paper, the correlation between the number of iterations and the offset of the hard decision level (HDL) is investigated, and a model is established that describes the relationship between these iterations and offsets. This analysis led to the development of the all-wordlines latency decrease (AWLD) scheme, which is suitable for a variety of scenarios but incurs a relatively large read a priori overhead. Building on this foundation, this paper delves into an extensive investigation of the distinct characteristics of individual wordlines within a block. Consequently, a novel one-wordline lightweight latency decrease (OWLLD) scheme is proposed, which not only applies to diverse scenarios but also exhibits a significantly reduced read a priori overhead. To address the issue of lowering latency when randomly accessing a small amount of data, this paper further explores the relationship between iterations in different overlapping regions and the offset function model. As a result, an innovative one-page lightweight latency decrease (OPLLD) scheme with a notable advantage in latency reduction is introduced. The efficacy of the proposed scheme is demonstrated through the real flash chip testing. The experimental results reveal that the OPLLD scheme can enhance iterative performance by up to 94.63% and reduce total read latency by up to 66.89% when compared to traditional algorithm.
The main contributions made in this paper are as follows: (1) Based on extensive experimental tests, the feasibility of the iteration number to characterize RBER is demonstrated, the relationship between the number of LDPC iterations and the HDL offset is analyzed, and the function model of iteration and offset is constructed. (2) Based on the function model of iteration and offset, an AWLD scheme is proposed to utilize the number of iterations to reduce the RBER and thus significantly reduce the read latency. (3) By further exploring the correlation of different wordlines in a flash block, an OWLLD scheme that is designed to diminish read latency further is proposed, and the performance of the scheme is evaluated by real experiments. (4) Focusing on the scenario of random reading of small data sets, the correlation of the function models of each

overlapped region is further explored in depth, and as a result, an OPLLD scheme with even better latency reduction performance is proposed, and the performance of the proposed scheme is verified to be significant with very low overhead through real experiments.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the research background and motivation for LDPC read latency optimization in flash memory. Section III introduces the proposed scheme by analyzing the relationship between iteration and voltage offset. Section IV presents an experimental test of the proposed scheme to compare and analyze its reliability, latency performance, and overall overhead. Section V concludes the paper.
II. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
This section begins with a detailed description of the process for implementing LDPC code application in 3-D NAND flash memory. It then provides an overview of related works focused on LDPC read performance optimization. Finally, the motivation for this work is presented, which involves verifying the relationship between the iteration of LDPC and the RBER.
A. LDPC in 3-D NAND Flash Memory
Flash memory achieves data storage by controlling the number of electrons within the cells. And two types of 3-D NAND flash memory that are commonly used include floating gate [20] and charge traps [21]. Regardless of the memory chip type, an increase in program/erase (P/E) cycles and retention time results in reduced data reliability [22]. Therefore, error correction codes (ECC) are typically utilized to enhance the reliability of stored data [23], [24]. However, as cell density increases, the space between neighboring threshold voltage states decreases [25], necessitating a higher demand for ECC. The evolution of ECC in flash memory has progressed from the use of Hamming code in single level cell (SLC) to Bose Chaudhuri Hocquenghem (BCH) code in multi-level cell (MLC) [26], [27], and finally to the widespread adoption of LDPC code in triple-level cell (TLC)/ quad level cell (QLC) [28].
Fig. 1 delineates the complete process of LDPC code implementation in 3-D NAND flash memory. Upon receiving the data, the initial step involves executing the LDPC encoding process, resulting in the inclusion of both the data bits and parity bits within the encoded data. Subsequently, this encoded data is inscribed onto the flash chip, typically accomplished through the completion of read/write operations employing the smallest unit of a page [29]. For the Micron B16A TLC flash memory chip used in the experiments of this paper, a wordline consists of three distinct pages, namely, the least significant bit (LSB) page, central significant bit (CSB) page, and most significant bit (MSB) page, featuring a total of eight states, and the encoding method and code word corresponding to each state are shown in Fig. 1.
During the data reading stage, a minimum of seven reading voltages is required. Specifically, the LSB page necessitates a single reading voltage, V4, for data retrieval. If the threshold voltage exceeds V4, the data is interpreted as 0; otherwise, it is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: LLD SCHEME OF LDPC HARD DECISION DECODING FOR 3-D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

4613

Fig. 1. The flowchart of LDPC code operation in 3-D NAND flash memory.

necessitates significant storage overhead. For instance, as outlined in literature [35], the decoding results of certain specific stored data are utilized to aid in optimizing the decoding algorithm, inevitably leading to increased storage requirements.
The third method involves fundamentally reducing the decoding iteration latency of LDPC by minimizing the RBER [36], [37], [38], which is suitable for LDPC hard decoding and can be applied throughout the use of the flash memory chip. Nevertheless, certain existing strategies solely focus on read reference voltage optimization, thus not fully harnessing the decoding characteristics of LDPC and leading to multiple read retries that augment read latency [39]. Another aspect of the optimization entails a known RBER, necessitating the storage of some sentinel cell components [40]. This not only increases storage overhead and substantially elevates read latency each time a section of the data is accessed, but also diminishes the flash chips reliability by frequently reading a specific location in high density.

interpreted as 1. For the CSB, two reading voltages, V2 and V6, are needed. If the reading threshold voltage surpasses V2 but is below V6, the reading is interpreted as 0; otherwise, it is recognized as 1. As for the MSB page, four distinct reading voltages, V1, V3, V5, and V7, are essential. If the threshold voltage exceeds V1 but is lower than V3, or surpasses V5 but is below V7, the reading voltage is identified as 0; otherwise, it is determined as 1.
Upon completion of the reading process, LDPC hard decision decoding is executed. The aforementioned seven reading voltages are associated with LDPC hard decision reading voltages, and should hard decision decoding fail, the number of reading voltages will need to be increased. The read data is then transformed into LLR for subsequent soft decision decoding [30]. It is apparent that hard decision decoding is a vital step in the subsequent decoding process, with the performance of hard decision decoding directly impacting the subsequent sense level placement and therefore significantly influencing the read latency performance. Consequently, this paper will concentrate on optimizing the read performance of the LDPC hard decision decoding process.
B. Related Work
The strategies for optimizing LDPC read performance in 3-D flash memory are broadly categorized into three approaches. One method involves effectively reducing the number of sense levels by adjusting the sense level placement strategy [31], [32], [33], ultimately decreasing LDPC read latency. This approach primarily addresses the soft decoding process, applied after the failure of hard decoding. However, it does not minimize the read latency at the initial read stage and is generally utilized in the mid- to late-life of the flash memory, representing a limited stage of use in comparison to hard decoding.
The second method involves optimizing the LDPC decoding algorithm by extracting external information and leveraging this auxiliary data to reduce the number of decoding iterations [15], [18], [34]. However, this approach typically

C. Research Motivation
Based on the assessment of LDPC read performance optimization in 3-D flash memory, the primary challenge for hard decoding revolves around the knowledge of the RBER of specific data segments. If the RBER is known, it becomes unavoidable to store part of the data, consequently increasing storage overhead and indirectly contributing to heightened read latency. Conversely, if the RBER is not known, multiple read retry operations are essential, exacerbating the latency issue. This study will concentrate on mitigating read latency under the condition of unknown RBER during the hard decoding process.
In LDPC decoding, the focus is typically on the bit error rate (BER) obtained from decoding. However, acquiring this parameter involves comparing the decoded data with the original data, which is often unattainable beforehand in practical usage scenarios. Therefore, directly utilizing BER information is not feasible. Another crucial parameter in the decoding results is the number of iterations, which does not require knowledge of the initial data and can be accurately obtained in real-world applications. This paper delves deeper into the relationship between the number of iterations and RBER. Fig. 2 depicts results obtained using actual measurement data from the Micron B16A chip under various P/E and retention scenarios, with the iteration limit set to 40 in this experiment. From the graph, it is evident that the number of iterations increases with the rise of RBER for LSB, CSB, and MSB. Consequently, the number of iterations can be harnessed as a characterization of the RBER, enabling optimization of LDPC read performance.
III. PROPOSED LLD SCHEME FOR LDPC HARD DECISION DECODING
In this section, we first construct a functional model of the number of iterations and voltage offset by analyzing them, then propose the AWLD scheme, subsequently optimize on this basis to propose the OWLLD scheme, and finally further

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 2. Iteration and RBER relationship in 3-D NAND flash memory.

optimize for the situation of random and small amount of read data to propose the OPLLD scheme.

A. Iteration and Voltage Offset Model Construction
The analysis in the preceding section demonstrates that decoding iterations can be accurately obtained without the need for additional auxiliary information during the use of flash memory. Additionally, the number of iterations Niter increases with the rise of RBER, with the increasing RBER indicating a higher probability of data errors at this time, reflecting on the poorly positioned HDL read. This observation underscores the close relationship between the number of iterations and HDL placement, implying the feasibility of using iterations to optimize the setup of HDL for LDPC.

Niter ∝ R B E R

(1)

Fig. 3 presents a schematic showing the optimal and default HDL offsets in TLC flash memory. The solid lines in the illustration represent the distribution of the eight threshold voltages under default conditions. Over time, with a small amount of P/E wearout and extended retention time, electron leakage in the cell elements causes a shift in the threshold voltages. As shown by the dashed line in Fig. 3, this results in a shifted distribution of the threshold voltages. The solid red line in the illustration marks the default HDL. From the figure, it is evident that the default HDL no longer aligns with the demarcation point of the neighboring threshold voltage overlap region after the voltage shift. At this point, the distance between the default HDL and the optimal HDL is represented as V of f set .

V of f set = |VDH DL − VO H DL |

(2)

Fig. 4 displays the performance of RBER versus the number of decoding iterations under default and optimal HDL for different wordlines in 3-D TLC flash memory. The graph presents actual measurement data obtained using the Micron B16A chip after 600 P/E cycles with 7 days of retention. The iterations in the graph are averaged over every 100 wordlines. It is evident from the figure that, irrespective of whether in LSB, CSB, or MSB pages, the RBER of data read with

Fig. 3. Schematic of the relationship between the optimal and default HDL offset positions.
the optimal HDL is significantly lower than that read with the default HDL. A lower RBER requires fewer iterations. Additionally, the decoding iteration performance under the optimal HDL is also notably improved compared to the default HDL. Therefore, approximating the location of the optimal HDL could significantly enhance the read performance of LDPC. The estimation of the optimal HDL placement location can be accomplished using V of f set and the default HDL. Hence, the association between iteration and V of f set will be further investigated in the subsequent analysis.
Fig. 5 depicts the experimental flowchart aimed at establishing the relationship between iteration and offset, with the entire experimental process conducted offline. The process can be roughly divided into four stages. The first involves setting up the parameters, including different P/E cycles and retention times, and identifying the optimal read reference voltage offset. Where the optimal read reference voltage offset is obtained by constantly adjusting the read reference voltage offset test, i.e., the read reference voltage offset at the lowest number of errors measured in multiple real experiments. The next stage encompasses the data reading process, involving the completion of data reading for both the default HDL and the optimal HDL. Subsequently, the data processing phase entails decoding the data obtained from the default and optimal HDL readings and recording the iteration. Finally, by calculating the difference in the number of iterations between the default read and optimal read cases, and the difference between the offsets of the optimal and default read reference voltages. Thus, a functional model of the relationship between the number of iterations and the offset is constructed.
Fig. 6 displays the plotted relationship between iteration and hard decision voltage offset, constructed using the test

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: LLD SCHEME OF LDPC HARD DECISION DECODING FOR 3-D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

4615

Fig. 4. RBER and number of iterations performance comparison at default and optimal hard-decision read levels in 3-D NAND flash memory.

Fig. 5. Flowchart for establishing iteration and offset relationship experiment.

i − th overlapping zone, and ai and bi denote the coefficients of each fitting function. Moreover, δ serves as the constant of the fit, which is set to 1/15. The voltage offset calculated by utilizing Eq. (3) is an approximate optimal read reference voltage, not an exact optimal read reference voltage. Therefore, the depicted approximate relationship between the number of iterations of each overlapping zone and the voltage offset in Fig. 6 can be modeled as a function. In addition, for flash memory chips of the same type, even if produced in different batches, the same model exhibits similar characteristics, so the function model is also applicable. Although different types of flash chips exhibit varying characteristics, an increase in the RBER will inevitably lead to more iterations and an increase in the offset of the read reference voltage, regardless of the flash chip type. Therefore, for various types of flash memory chips, the aforementioned process can also be employed to establish the corresponding iteration and offset model functions.
Yi Vof f set = δ · (ai · Xi + bi ) (i = 1, 2 · · · 7) (3)

steps outlined in Fig. 5. The data represents real experiments conducted under 600 P/E cycles retention of 7 days, 30 days, 90 days, and 180 days using Micron B16A chips, with the maximum decoding iteration number per frame set to 40. The vertical axis in Fig. 6 represents the total difference in the number of iterations for seven frames of data on a page. This difference is calculated between the number of iterations at the default read reference voltages and the optimal read reference voltages in Fig. 5. In addition, the experiments in Fig. 6 were done in different blocks of a flash memory chip, and four sets of data were included in each subgraph for a total of eight blocks. The values of each set of data were obtained by averaging the data from 10,416 frames. And the size of each frame is 18,432 bits. For subfigures (a) to (g) in Fig. 6, they correspond to different overlap regions in the TLC flash memory and the corresponding page types, respectively. Based on the figure, it is evident that the voltage offset of each overlapping region increases as the number of iterations rises, demonstrating an approximately linear relationship. Consequently, a functional relationship can be established between the number of iterations and the voltage offset, represented by Eq. (3). In this equation, Yi stands for the offset of the i − th overlapping zone, Xi represents the number of iterations of the

Additionally, the functional relationship between iteration and offset is determined through approximate fitting from extensive experimental results. This relationship is found to be closest to a linear function. And the approximation result is applicable not only to the fitted region but also to other regions. Therefore, the function model has an excellent applicability.
B. Design of Proposed AWLD Scheme
In the above paper, the function model of iteration and offset has been successfully built. As a result, the offset of the corresponding HDL can be calculated by utilizing the number of decoding iterations of the read data. Based on this concept, the paper introduces the AWLD scheme for enhancing the read performance of LDPC.
Algorithm 1 represents the entire process of the proposed AWLD scheme, which is executed in an online manner. Upon receiving the read request, the initial step involves determining all the wordlines to be read. Subsequently, the data for all the wordlines is read with HDL. If the decoding is successful, the process returns a read success. However, in the event of decoding failure, the wordlines where the decoding fails are recorded, and the number of decoding iterations of the LSB, CSB, and MSB pages of the wordlines are also recorded.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4616

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 6. Relationship between iteration and hard-decision voltage offsets in 3-D NAND flash memory.

Utilizing the number of decoding iterations, the HDL offset at this time is calculated based on the established iteration and offset function models. The HDL reading position is then adjusted according to the obtained offset, initiating the next reading process. If the decoding is successful at this point, the read is considered successful; otherwise, it indicates a failure in hard decision reading. When hard decision reading fails, intervention with LDPC soft decision is necessary. Nonetheless, through the use of the AWLD scheme, the majority of cases can be read successfully in one attempt, a detailed analysis of which will be presented in the following section.
In the AWLD scheme, it is important to note that when recording the number of iterations for the LSB, CSB, and MSB pages within a wordline, only one iteration can be obtained for each page type, and this iteration count represents the total number of iterations for all the frames of the page. This iteration count for the LSB pages is used to derive an offset corresponding to an overlap region. For a CSB page, a set of iteration counts is utilized to derive the offset for each of the two overlap regions, with the corresponding iteration and offset functions displayed in (b) and (c) in Fig. 6. Similarly, for the MSB page, a set of iterations can be utilized to derive offsets for each of the four overlapping regions of the MSB page, with the corresponding fitting functions represented by (d) to (g) in Fig. 6.
C. Design of Proposed OWLLD Scheme
Building upon the foundation of the AWLD scheme, this paper delves deeper into the distinct characteristics of various wordlines within the same block of flash memory. Consequently, a further optimized OWLLD scheme is proposed with the aim of enhancing the read performance of LDPC. In the following sections, detailed explanations for this scheme will be provided.

Algorithm 1 Workflow of the AWLD Scheme

1: Determine the all wordlines that need to be read

2: Start read

3: HDL reads all wordlines 4: if read success then 5: return READ SUCCESS 6: else

7: Record the wordlines where the decoding failed

8: Record the number of iterations for the LSB, CSB,

and MSB pages of the decoding failure wordlines,

respectively

9: Take the number of iterations of the LSB, CSB, and

MSB pages into iteration and offset function and cal-

culate offset

10: Adjust HDL read location according to offset

11: Read again

12: if read success then

13:

return READ SUCCESS

14: else

15: return HARD-DECISION READ FAILURE

16: end if

17: end if

In the AWLD scheme, all the wordlines need to be read to obtain the offset of each wordline. To further reduce the read overhead, one of the wordlines is considered in this paper to characterize the number of iterations of the other wordlines. Since the LDPC decoding successfully has a certain range of redundancy and the relationship between the read reference voltage offsets of the chips used in this experiment at different wordlines is given in the literature [41]. Among them, the performance of LSB, CSB, and MSB is relatively stable at the 200th to 300th wordlines. Therefore, it is recommended to choose one of the wordlines as an approximate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: LLD SCHEME OF LDPC HARD DECISION DECODING FOR 3-D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

4617

characterization of the block. For different types of chips, the same idea can be used to find the wordline with relatively stable performance as the approximate characterization of the whole block. In this experiment, the first step is to prove that the performance of each wordline in the range is similar, so five wordlines in the range were randomly selected for comparative performance analysis.
Fig. 7 presents a performance comparison of iterations conducted on five randomly selected wordlines ranging from 200 to 300. And this real-life experiment was accomplished with 600 P/E cycles and 180 days of retention. The OWLLD in the figure refers to the one wordline lightweight latency decrease scheme, which selects one wordline as a representation of the entire block. The vertical axis represents the percentage reduction in the number of iterations relative to the traditional scheme. The traditional scheme refers to reading with the default read voltage first [42], and if it fails then reading with a fixed offset voltage set in advance until the read is successful. The iteration performance of the whole block is compared, as shown in Fig. 7. Since the AWLD scheme reads the data of the whole block as a priori information, it is not affected by the selected wordline. Whereas the OWLLD scheme varies the performance of the whole block depending on the wordline selected, the figure shows that the performance is not much different no matter which wordline is selected. The Average Approximate Reduction (AAR) in the figure represents the percentage reduction in the number of iterations compared to the traditional scheme. From this figure, it is evident that the iterative number of AWLD demonstrates an AAR of 90 %, while that of OWLLD shows an AAR of 82 %. This is due to the higher RBER of the LSB pages, which leads to a larger number of iterations for the traditional scheme as well. Therefore, the proposed scheme has a higher scope of improvement in LSB pages than MSB and CSB pages. Furthermore, it is noteworthy that there is minimal variance in the performance of each wordline, irrespective of whether it is an LSB, CSB, or MSB page. Consequently, any of them can be chosen to represent the entire block.
Algorithm 2 represents the entire workflow of the proposed OWLLD scheme. From this algorithm, it is evident that the initial step involves determining the block based on the read data and identifying the wordlines within that block for reading. Subsequently, a specific wordline is chosen as the target for reading, followed by the HDL initiating the reading process for the LSB, CSB, and MSB pages of the selected wordline. The algorithm then proceeds to decode and record the number of iterations. This information is utilized within the constructed iteration and offset model of the LSB, CSB, and MSB pages to calculate the corresponding offset. Subsequently, the HDL adjusts the reading position and attempts to read all the data within the wordline. If the read operation is successful, a read success status is returned; otherwise, a hard decision read failure status is returned, necessitating soft decision intervention. However, the employment of the OWLLD scheme results in successful reads in the vast majority of cases. Further detailed analysis of this scheme is provided in the subsequent sections of the paper.

Algorithm 2 Workflow of the OWLLD Scheme 1: Determine the blocks where the wordlines needs to be read 2: Select a specific wordline from each of these blocks 3: Start read 4: HDL reads the LSB page, CSB page, and MSB page of the selected wordline 5: Decode and record the number of iterations 6: Take the number of iterations of the LSB, CSB, and MSB pages into iteration and offset function and calculate offset
7: Adjust the HDL read location according to the offset 8: Read all selected wordlines again 9: if read success then 10: return READ SUCCESS 11: else 12: return HARD-DECISION READ FAILURE 13: end if
D. Design of Proposed OPLLD Scheme
In practical applications of flash memory, besides numerous scenarios involving large-scale data reads, there are also instances where a small amount of data needs to be randomly accessed, which are quite common. In this section, the characteristic relationship between different pages in the same wordline of flash memory is investigated in depth, and for the case of randomly reading a small amount of data, the OPLLD scheme is further proposed as an effective solution for reducing latency on the basis of the OWLLD scheme.
The aforementioned paper demonstrates that a single wordline can be utilized to represent the offset characteristics across an entire block, encompassing three distinct page types: LSB, CSB, and MSB. To better accommodate the scenario of randomly accessing small data and to further mitigate read latency and storage overhead, this paper proposes a novel approach. It suggests characterizing a wordline through a representative page within it, thereby facilitating the characterization of the entire block.
In Fig. 6, seven different overlapped regions within a wordline have been modeled, each with a linear fitting function. As a result, any one of the fitting functions can be used to characterize the others. The LSB page only necessitates a single read level, prompting this paper to propose using the fitting function of the LSB page as a standard to characterize the fitting functions of the other pages. This OPLLD scheme results in a six-fold reduction in the number of a priori read levels compared to the OWLLD scheme. Eq. (4) represents the characterization function, where Fj denotes the fitting functions of the other six overlapped regions, while α j and β j denote the respective fitting coefficients, and YLSB4 represents the fitting function of the LSB page.
Fj Y j = α j · YL SB4 + β j ( j = 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7) (4)
This paper introduces the OPLLD scheme, which constructs a model characterizing the offset properties of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4618

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 7. The iteration performance of the proposed LLD schemes are similar for different wordlines.

Algorithm 3 Workflow of the OPLLD Scheme 1: Determine the blocks where the wordlines needs to be read 2: Select a specific wordline from each of these blocks 3: Select the LSB page from this wordline 4: Start read 5: HDL reads selected LSB pages 6: Decode and record the number of iterations 7: The number of iterations is carried over into the iteration and offset functions for each overlapped region and the offset is calculated 8: Adjust the HDL read location according to the offset 9: Read all selected wordlines again 10: if read success then 11: return READ SUCCESS 12: else 13: return HARD-DECISION READ FAILURE 14: end if
entire block by utilizing the LSB pages within a wordline. Additionally, as depicted in Fig. 7, it is evident that the AAR of the OPLLD scheme for any randomly selected wordline is also approximate, signifying the feasibility of the scheme.
Algorithm 3 is the entire workflow of the proposed OPLLD scheme. From Algorithm 3, the block location is determined based on the read data, and the specific wordline within the block is selected for reading. Subsequently, a specific wordline is chosen for reading, and the LSB page is selected for the read operation. The HDL then proceeds to exclusively read the wordline of the LSB page. Following this, the number of iterations is recorded and decoded, and then input into the constructed iteration and offset model to calculate the offset. The read position of the HDL is adjusted, and the wordline is read once again. If the read operation is successful, the process returns a successful read outcome, whereas if the read fails, it returns a failed hard decision, necessitating intervention in the soft decision, and soft decision reading is initiated. However, with the application of the OPLLD scheme, successful reads are achieved in the majority of cases, as detailed analysis will be provided in the article in the following section.

IV. TEST RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, the reliability performance of the proposed scheme is firstly compared and analyzed, followed by another comparison of the proposed scheme in terms of latency performance improvement from the perspective of latency, and finally the overhead of the proposed scheme is analyzed. The experimental outcomes consistently highlight the superior performance of the proposed scheme.
In this section, all the test data is accomplished by utilizing the ZYNQ-7000 SOC test platform developed by our own group [43]. This test platform can fully meet the demand for customized high-speed testing of the underlying characteristics of flash memory, and the appearance of the test platform is shown in Fig. 8. All the test results in this section were obtained through a large number of real tests on Micron B16A chips using this platform.
Additionally, it is important to note that the schemes proposed in this paper are implemented by flash memory controller manufacturers. These schemes are integrated into the flash memory controllers. Fig. 9 illustrates the architecture of the proposed schemes within the controllers. As shown, selecting the appropriate scheme based on the data reading scenario is sufficient. Users do not need to worry about how to utilize the proposed schemes.
A. Analysis of Reliability Performance Improvement
In assessing the performance of a scheme, the initial consideration is its effectiveness. For LDPC codes in flash memory, the success of decoding serves as the fundamental prerequisite for evaluating a scheme performance. Therefore, the reliability of the proposed AWLD scheme, OWLLD scheme, and OPLLD scheme will be the primary focus of comparison and analysis in this section. The experiments in this section are conducted based on the following experimental parameters: the Micron B16A chip type is utilized, the LDPC code rate is 8/9, the code length is 18432, the minimum sum decoding method is employed, and the maximum number of iterations is capped at 40.
Fig. 10 depicts the BER comparison plot of different schemes. This figure utilizes 600 P/E cycles and employs the Arrhenius model for high-temperature accelerated tests with equivalent room-temperature retention of 7, 30, 90,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: LLD SCHEME OF LDPC HARD DECISION DECODING FOR 3-D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

4619

Fig. 11 displays a heatmap depicting the percentage of different wordlines in a block successfully decoded by different schemes in the case of 600 P/E cycles with a retention of 180 days. The figure illustrates that, for LSB pages, the proposed AWLD scheme enhances the decoding success rate by 56.99 % compared to traditional schemes, while the proposed OPLLD scheme achieves a decoding success rate of 72.18 %. Owing to the high reliability of CSB pages, all schemes achieve successful decoding. Additionally, for MSB pages, the proposed schemes demonstrate a decoding success rate exceeding 99 %. These findings demonstrate a significant improvement in reliability with the proposed schemes in comparison to traditional schemes.

Fig. 8. Zynq-based tester used for operating 3-D NAND flash samples that BGA-132 packaged.
Fig. 9. Architecture diagram of the process used by the proposed scheme in the flash memory controller.
and 180 days. Analysis of the figure reveals a continuous increase in RBER as the retention time rises. Notably, for both the LSB and MSB pages, as well as the CSB page, the BER after decoding experiences a substantial reduction with both traditional and proposed schemes. In this section, the traditional scheme is the same as in Fig. 7. While the performance difference between the proposed schemes and the traditional scheme is not significant for the CSB page due to its low RBER, all schemes demonstrate successful decoding. Due to the inherent characteristics of Micron B16A flash memory chips, both LSB and MSB pages exhibit a higher RBER. The proposed schemes for these two types of pages show a significantly better error rate improvement compared to the traditional scheme.

B. Analysis of Latency Performance Reduction
For LDPC codes in flash memory, the most serious problem it faces is latency. Therefore, it is crucial to assess the latency performance of different schemes. Since the process of building iterations and offsets in the proposed scheme is performed offline, it takes no time during the actual reading of the data. Therefore, it is only necessary to compare and analyze the total latency of the online processes of the various schemes.
The number of iterations is a pivotal factor impacting latency, and Fig. 12 provides a comparison of the iteration performance among different schemes. The figure reveals that, for the LSB page, the proposed AWLD scheme achieves a remarkable improvement in iterative performance, up to 95.19%, while the OPLLD scheme demonstrates a minimum improvement of 78.59%. The superior performance of the AWLD scheme over the OWLLD and OPLLD schemes can be attributed to its enhanced access to a priori information, resulting in more accurate data and significant iterative performance improvements.
Given the high reliability of the CSB page, all schemes achieve near-immediate successful decoding at the onset of the iteration, resulting in minimal performance differences. Notably, for the MSB page, the maximum iteration performance improvement reaches 85.04%, showcasing significant enhancements in iterative performance with the proposed schemes.
In addition to the iteration latency, the total latency also includes the level sensing latency, and the transmission latency. In this paper, the hard decision sensing latency is set to 25µs, the transmission latency is set to 20µs [44], and the decoding iteration latency is set to 0.5µs [36], which results in a total latency of

Ttotal = Thard + Ttra + Titer

(5)

In Eq. (5), Ttotal represents the total latency, Thard indicates the hard decision sensing latency, Ttra signifies the transmission latency, and Titer denotes the iteration latency. These elements are reflected in the total latency performance comparison graph presented in Fig. 13. The traditional schemes latency serves as a standard reference. The graph highlights substantial improvements in total latency performance across LSB, CSB, and MSB pages. Specifically, the maximum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4620

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

Fig. 10. Comparison of BER performance after decoding in different schemes.

Fig. 11. Comparison of decoding success rates of LSB, CSB, and MSB pages in different schemes.

Fig. 12. Comparison of iteration decrease for LSB, CSB, and MSB pages under different schemes.

reduction reaches 66.89% for LSB pages, 61.02% for CSB pages, and 62.37% for MSB pages.
Both the OWLLD scheme and the OPLLD scheme are LLD schemes, resulting in a substantial reduction in total latency when compared to the traditional and AWLD schemes. However, the distinction between these two schemes is relatively minor, as observed in Fig. 13, which presents experimental data obtained from reading substantial sets of test data. Despite the OPLLD scheme exhibiting a lower a priori read latency than the OWLLD scheme, it requires a slightly greater number of iterations. Consequently, in scenarios involving the reading of large datasets, both

schemes exhibit comparable performance in terms of latency reduction.
For the scenario of reading a small amount of data randomly, the OPLLD scheme exhibits a more significant improvement in latency reduction. Fig. 14 shows the percentage of latency reduction of the OPLLD scheme compared to the OWLLD scheme in the scenario of reading a small amount of data, where the latency of the OWLLD scheme is used as the comparison standard. From the figure, it can be seen that the OWLLD scheme has similar performance to the OPLLD scheme when reading data with a number of 100 wordlines. Therefore, this paper will use reading data of 100 wordlines

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: LLD SCHEME OF LDPC HARD DECISION DECODING FOR 3-D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

4621

Fig. 13. Comparison of the total latency performance improvement of LSB, CSB, and MSB pages under different schemes.
TABLE I PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT SCHEMES

Fig. 14. The percentage of latency reduction of the OPLLD scheme compared to the OWLLD scheme in the scenario of reading a small amount of data.
as a judgment threshold to distinguish between large or small amount of data scenarios. In addition, the latency of the OPLLD scheme compared to the OWLLD scheme decreases with the reduction of the number of wordlines read, no matter if it is an LSB, CSB, or MSB page. The maximum latency reduction recorded is 30.98% for LSB pages, 53.79% for CSB pages, and 53.71% for MSB pages. This demonstrates that the OPLLD scheme proposed in this paper offers superior performance for the random small-data reading scenario.
Furthermore, the proposed OPLLD scheme is benchmarked against other methodologies in terms of iteration and latency performance to generate the performance comparison table presented in Tab. I. These comparisons are made against traditional schemes using identical criteria, facilitating direct performance assessment. Tab. I clearly indicates that in terms of both iteration count and total latency, the OPLLD scheme introduced in this work significantly outperforms the EMAL [15] and ABEL [45] algorithms. Although the total latency of the ILD [46] algorithm is not substantially different from the OPLLD scheme, its iteration performance falls well short of the proposed OPLLD scheme. Additionally, the ILD algorithm is more complex to implement, making it overall less favorable than the scheme proposed in this paper.
C. Overhead Analysis
The overhead of the AWLD scheme and the two LLD schemes proposed in this paper includes both storage and

calculation overheads. In terms of storage, both the AWLD scheme and the LLD schemes require the storage of the fitted iteration and offset function models. Each coefficient R occupies 4 bytes, with 2 coefficients N f needed for each fitted function model and a total of 7 fitted functions Nv. Therefore, the total storage overhead can be calculated using Eq. (6) to be 56 bytes. It is worth noting that the storage capacity of the Micron B16A chip utilized in this experiment is 256 GB, so the storage overhead is calculated as 56/238. This demonstrates that the proposed algorithm in this paper has an exceptionally low storage overhead.

Overheadstorage = R · N f · Nv

(6)

Another aspect to analyze is the calculation overhead of the proposed schemes, which entails computing the corresponding offsets based on the number of iterations obtained from hard decision decoding. For example, if the data to be read is distributed across M blocks containing a total of m wordlines and m is not less than M, then the AWLD scheme necessitates a total of 7m multiplications and 7m additions. In contrast, the LLD scheme only requires 7M multiplications and 7M additions. The LLD scheme demonstrates an extremely low computational overhead when reading data in the form of whole blocks. Thus, both the storage and calculation overheads of the scheme proposed in this paper are exceptionally minimal.

V. CONCLUSION
To mitigate latency in LDPC codes within 3-D NAND flash memory, this paper introduces an LLD scheme. Initially, the relationship between the number of iterations and the HDL offset is investigated, followed by independently constructing a function model for the iterations and offsets of each of the seven overlapping regions in TLC flash memory. This

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4622

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 71, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2024

analysis leads to the proposal of the AWLD scheme, which promptly enhances read performance. Seeking further latency reduction, the similarity of different wordlines in the flash memory block is also deeply explored, which gives rise to the OWLLD scheme. Addressing the challenge of random reading of small data sets, the correlation of the function models within different overlapped regions is further explored, and as a result, the OPLLD scheme with better performance is proposed. Finally, the efficacy of the proposed scheme is ultimately confirmed through experimentation. The results demonstrate that the OPLLD scheme, with a modest storage overhead of 56/238 and negligible computation overhead, can decrease the iteration count by up to 94.63% and reduce latency by up to 66.89% when compared to traditional algorithms in LSB pages with a higher RBER. In scenarios involving the reading of small data amounts, the OPLLD scheme can reduce latency by up to 30.98% relative to the OWLLD scheme in LSB pages with similarly higher RBER.
REFERENCES
[1] Y.-M. Lin, H.-T. Li, M.-H. Chung, and A.-Y. Wu, “Byte-reconfigurable LDPC codec design with application to high-performance ECC of NAND flash memory systems,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1794–1804, Jul. 2015.
[2] D. Wei, L. Qiao, S. Wang, and X. Peng, “Fixation ratio of error locationaware strategy for increased reliable retention time of flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 24, no. 10, pp. 3145–3155, Oct. 2016.
[3] D. Wei, H. Feng, L. Qiao, C. Hu, and X. Peng, “Experimental verification and analysis of the acceleration factor model for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 3543–3547, Oct. 2022.
[4] K. Takeuchi, “Novel co-design of NAND flash memory and NAND flash controller circuits for sub-30 nm low-power high-speed solid-state drives (SSD),” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 1227–1234, Apr. 2009.
[5] Q. Li et al., “Characterizing and optimizing LDPC performance on 3D NAND flash memories,” ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 1–25, May 2024.
[6] M.-C. Lu, “Considerations on integration of through silicon via with 3D NAND scaling,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Electron. Packag. Technol. Conf. (EPTC), Dec. 2019, pp. 6–12.
[7] P. Kalavade, “4 bits/cell 96 layer floating gate 3D NAND with CMOS under array technology and SSDs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop, Dresden, Germany, Jun. 2020, pp. 1–4.
[8] Y.-H. Hsiao et al., “Modeling the impact of random grain boundary traps on the electrical behavior of vertical gate 3-D NAND flash memory devices,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 2064–2070, Jun. 2014.
[9] Y. Du, S. Huang, Y. Zhou, and Q. Li, “Towards LDPC read performance of 3D flash memories with layer-induced error characteristics,” ACM Trans. Design Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 28, no. 3, pp. 1–25, May 2023.
[10] S. Huang, Y. Du, Y. Fan, and C. Ji, “Extending SSD lifetime via balancing layer endurance in 3-D NAND flash memory,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), Mar. 2024, pp. 1–2.
[11] J. Kim and W. Sung, “Low-energy error correction of NAND flash memory through soft-decision decoding,” EURASIP J. Adv. Signal Process., vol. 2012, no. 1, pp. 1–12, Dec. 2012.
[12] M. Jia, Y. Kong, X. Zhan, M. Zhang, F. Wu, and J. Chen, “Optimal program-read schemes toward highly reliable open block operations in 3-D charge-trap NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 4797–4807, Nov. 2022.
[13] K.-K. Yong and L.-P. Chang, “Error diluting: Exploiting 3-D NAND flash process variation for efficient read on LDPC-based SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 3467–3478, Nov. 2020.
[14] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.

[15] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3-D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020.
[16] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020.
[17] Y. Du, Y. Gao, S. Huang, and Q. Li, “LDPC level prediction towards read performance of high-density flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 3264–3274, Apr. 2023.
[18] Y. Li, G. Han, C. Liu, M. Zhang, and F. Wu, “Exploiting the singlesymbol LLR variation to accelerate LDPC decoding for 3-D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 12, pp. 5146–5150, Dec. 2023.
[19] Q. Li et al., “Read latency decrease schemes based on check node error rate for 3D NAND flash memories,” Microelectron. Rel., vol. 136, Sep. 2022, Art. no. 114596.
[20] K. Sakuma, H. Kusai, S. Fujii, and M. Koyama, “Highly scalable horizontal channel 3-D NAND memory excellent in compatibility with conventional fabrication technology,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 1142–1144, Sep. 2013.
[21] M.-K. Jeong et al., “Characterization of traps in 3-D stacked NAND flash memory devices with tube-type poly-Si channel structure,” in IEDM Tech. Dig., Dec. 2012, pp. 9.3.1–9.3.4.
[22] S. Kim, K. Lee, C. Woo, Y. Hwang, and H. Shin, “Analysis of failure mechanisms during the long-term retention operation in 3-D NAND flash memories,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 67, no. 12, pp. 5472–5478, Dec. 2020.
[23] T. Nakamura, Y. Deguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “Adaptive artificial neural network-coupled LDPC ECC as universal solution for 3-D and 2-D, charge-trap and floating-gate NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 745–754, Mar. 2019.
[24] Y. Lv, L. Shi, L. Luo, C. Li, C. J. Xue, and E. H.-M. Sha, “Tail latency optimization for LDPC-based high-density and low-cost flash memory devices,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 544–557, Mar. 2022.
[25] Y. Kong, M. Zhang, X. Zhan, R. Cao, and J. Chen, “Retention correlated read disturb errors in 3-D charge trap NAND flash memory: Observations, analysis, and solutions,” IEEE Trans. Comput.Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 11, pp. 4042–4051, Nov. 2020.
[26] S. Kayser and P. H. Siegel, “Constructions for constant-weight ICI-free codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2014, pp. 1431–1435.
[27] E. Yaakobi, J. Ma, L. Grupp, P. H. Siegel, S. Swanson, and J. K. Wolf, “Error characterization and coding schemes for flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops, Dec. 2010, pp. 1856–1860.
[28] M. Fukuchi, S. Suzuki, K. Maeda, C. Matsui, and K. Takeuchi, “BER evaluation system considering device characteristics of TLC and QLC NAND flash memories in hybrid SSDs with real storage workloads,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Daegu, South Korea, May 2021, pp. 1–4.
[29] W. Zhang, Q. Cao, H. Jiang, and J. Yao, “PA-SSD: A page-type aware TLC SSD for improved write/read performance and storage efficiency,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Supercomputing, Jun. 2018, pp. 22–32.
[30] L. Cui, F. Wu, X. Liu, M. Zhang, R. Xiao, and C. Xie, “Improving LDPC decoding performance for 3D TLC NAND flash by LLR optimization scheme for hard and soft decision,” ACM Trans. Design Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 27, no. 1, pp. 1–20, Jan. 2022.
[31] S. Qi, D. Feng, and J. Liu, “Optimal voltage signal sensing of NAND flash memmory for LDPC code,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), Oct. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[32] Y. Wang, D. Wei, M. Liu, H. Feng, and L. Qiao, “EBDN: Entropybased double nonuniform sensing algorithm for LDPC decoding in TLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1914–1918, Jun. 2024.
[33] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Read and write voltage signal optimization for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 4, pp. 1613–1623, Apr. 2016.
[34] Y. Yeh, A. Fazeli, and P. H. Siegel, “Optimal placement of read thresholds for coded NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2021, pp. 1–7.
[35] Q. Li et al., “Optimal read voltages decision scheme eliminating read retry operations for 3D NAND flash memories,” Microelectron. Rel., vol. 131, Apr. 2022, Art. no. 114509.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WEI et al.: LLD SCHEME OF LDPC HARD DECISION DECODING FOR 3-D TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY

4623

[36] R.-S. Liu, M.-Y. Chuang, C.-L. Yang, C.-H. Li, K.-C. Ho, and H.-P. Li, “Improving read performance of NAND flash SSDs by exploiting error locality,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 65, no. 4, pp. 1090–1102, Apr. 2016.
[37] Q. Xu, P. Gong, and T. M. Chen, “Concatenated LDPC-TCM coding for reliable storage in multi-level flash memories,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Commun. Syst., Netw. Digit. Sign (CSNDSP), Jul. 2014, pp. 166–170.
[38] J. Guo, W. Wen, J. Hu, D. Wang, H. Li, and Y. Chen, “FlexLevel NAND flash storage system design to reduce LDPC latency,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 36, no. 7, pp. 1167–1180, Jul. 2017.
[39] C. Kim et al., “A 512-gb 3-b/Cell 64-stacked WL 3-D-NAND flash memory,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 124–133, Jan. 2018.
[40] Q. Li et al., “Shaving retries with sentinels for fast read over high-density 3D flash,” in Proc. 53rd Annu. IEEE/ACM Int. Symp. Microarchitecture (MICRO), Jun. 2020, pp. 483–495.
[41] H. Feng, D. Wei, S. Gu, Z. Piao, Y. Wang, and L. Qiao, “Random flip bit aware reading for improving high-density 3-D NAND flash performance,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 71, no. 5, pp. 2372–2383, May 2024.
[42] M. Ye et al., “Achieving near-zero read retry for 3-D NAND flash memory,” in Proc. 29th ACM Int. Conf. Architectural Support Program. Lang. Operating Syst., vol. 2, 2024, pp. 55–70.
[43] D. Wei, Y. Gong, L. Qiao, and L. Deng, “A hardware-software co-design experiments platform for NAND flash based on Zynq,” in Proc. IEEE 20th Int. Conf. Embedded Real-Time Comput. Syst. Appl., Sep. 2014, pp. 1–7.
[44] Y. Du, D. Zou, L. Qiao, S. Liang, and C. J. Xue, “LaLDPC: Latencyaware LDPC for read performance improvement of solid state drives,” in Proc. 33rd Int. Conf. Massive Storage Syst. Technol. (MSST), 2017, pp. 1–11.
[45] B. Zhang et al., “Monitor units assisted LDPC decoding algorithm based on page BER variation of 3D NAND flash memory,” Microelectron. Rel., vol. 147, Aug. 2023, Art. no. 115034.
[46] X. Yu et al., “Interleaved LDPC decoding scheme improves 3D TLC NAND flash memory system performance,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 4191–4204, Jan. 2023.

Yongchao Wang received the B.S. degree from Henan University (HENU), Kaifeng, China, in 2018, and the M.S. degree from Harbin Engineering University (HEU), Harbin, China, in 2021. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin.
His research interests include coded modulation technology and highly reliable storage systems.
Hua Feng received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from North University of China (NUC), Taiyuan, China, in 2016 and 2019, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China, in 2024.
Currently, he is a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China. His research interests include the development of highly reliable storage systems and automatic test systems.
Huqi Xiang received the B.S. degree from Harbin Institute of Technology at Shenzhen (HITSZ), Shenzhen, China, in 2023. She is currently pursuing the M.S. degree with Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China.
Her research interests include reliable NAND flash memory systems and error correction coding.

Debao Wei (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT) at Weihai, Weihai, China, in 2009 and 2011, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from HIT, Harbin, China, in 2016.
He has been an Associate Research Fellow and the Ph.D. Supervisor with the School of Electronics and Information Engineering, HIT. His research interests include highly reliable storage systems, embedded data processing systems, and flight test systems.

Liyan Qiao (Member, IEEE) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), Harbin, China, in 1996, 1998, and 2005, respectively.
He has been a Professor and the Ph.D. Supervisor with the Automatic Test and Control Department, HIT, since 2009. His current research interests include data acquisition technology, massstorage data record technology, and test information processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:03:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

