2024 15th International Conference on Information and Communication Technology Convergence (ICTC) | 979-8-3503-6463-7/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICTC62082.2024.10826987

On the Decoding Complexity of Error Correction Code Transformer
Seungjun Kim, Jeongwon Choe, and Youngjoo Lee Department of Electrical Engineering
Pohang University of Science and Technology (POSTECH), Pohang, South Korea {sjkim99,choejw,youngjoo.lee}@postech.ac.kr

Abstract—Belief propagation (BP) decoding achieves nearoptimal performance with large block lengths but faces performance degradation with short blocks. Recent advances in deep learning have spurred research into neural decoders to overcome the limitations of BP decoding. The error correction code transformer (ECCT) offers state-of-the-art decoding performance, yet it demands substantial computational complexity and memory usage. This paper analyzes the hardware complexity of ECCT compared to the basic neural decoder, neural BP (NBP). We also explore strategies for model simplification, showing that applying quantization techniques can reduce resource overhead while maintaining high performance. This paper highlights the potential for advancing neural decoders to achieve greater efficiency and performance.
Index Terms—Deep learning, Transformer, Belief propagation, LDPC codes
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were first introduced by Gallager in the 1960s [1] and have been selected as one of the coding schemes for 5G New Radio (NR) system due to their bit error rate (BER) performance approaching Shannon’s limit. Belief propagation (BP) is the main decoding method for LDPC codes and provides near-optimal performance for large block lengths with sufficient message passing, but the performance degrades for short block lengths.
In recent years, there has been significant research into neural decoders that utilize deep learning techniques to enhance BP. In [2], Nachmani et al. proposed the neural BP (NBP) decoder, which improves BER performance by applying trainable weights to each propagated message. Even with various efforts [3]–[5] to develop NBP, its performance gain is limited since the model is fundamentally based on BP.
Transformer [6], a deep learning architecture based on the multi-head self-attention mechanism, has achieved remarkable success in numerous fields beyond natural language processing (NLP). In [7], the authors proposed a novel transformer-based architecture, termed error correction code transformer (ECCT) for decoding algebraic block codes. ECCT has achieved stateof-the-art decoding performance surpassing BP and NBP de-
This work was supported by Institute of Information & communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (RS-2024-00398449, Network Research Center: Advanced Channel Coding and Channel Estimation Technologies for Wireless Communication Evolution), and the National Research Foundation of Korea(NRF) grant funded by the Korea government(MSIT) (No. 2022R1A2C2092521). (Corresponding Author: Youngjoo Lee)

coders. However, ECCT suffers from increased computational complexity and a large memory footprint. In this paper, we analyze the performance and complexity of ECCT decoder in comparison to BP and NBP decoders. We address the challenges posed by high computational complexity and memory requirements of ECCT, and explore potential strategies for model simplification, such as quantization techniques employed in the I-ViT [8].
II. SYSTEM MODEL
A. Neural Belief Propagation Decoder
The BP decoder is constructed from the Tanner graph, which represents the parity check matrix (PCM) of the code. In the graph, variable nodes and check nodes are connected via edges according to the PCM, and the log-likelihood ratio messages are iteratively exchanged between the nodes.
The NBP decoder [2] extends the iterative process of BP by unrolling it into a trellis structure and modeling it with a neural network. Each transmitted message is augmented with trainable weights, which leads to increased computational complexity and additional memory resources.
B. Error Correction Code Transformer Decoder
The ECCT decoder [7] takes as input the concatenation of the magnitude of the channel output and the syndrome sequence, which is then extended into a high-dimensional embedding vector. Then the decoder performs self-attention mechanism to learn relationships between bits, selectively focusing on connections meaningful for decoding by applying a mask derived from the PCM. In the final step, a fully connected network in the output layer estimates the information bits by inferring the multiplicative noise.
The computational complexity of the ECCT arises from the attention and feedforward blocks [7]. Specifically, the complexity of the attention block is O(N n2d), where N , n, and d denote the number of encoder layers, the length of codeword, and the dimension of the embeddings. Similarly, the feedforward block requires a complexity of O(N nd2). The high computational complexity from these blocks poses significant challenges, especially in environments where computational power, memory, and energy resources are limited. Therefore, it is crucial to explore optimization strategies that can effectively reduce these overheads while preserving the high performance.

979-8-3503-6463-7/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

749

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:06:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ICTC 2024

Fig. 1. BER simulation result. (N, d) = (10, 32) for ECCT

Fig. 2. Comparison of (a) FLOPs and (b) the number of parameters

III. ANALYSIS RESULT
A. Bit Error Rate Performance
We conducted simulations to compare the BER performance of BP, NBP, and ECCT decoders for short LDPC codes (49,24) over an AWGN channel using BPSK modulation. As shown in Fig. 1, with 5 iterations (L = 5), NBP achieves a 0.1 dB gain over BP. However, this gain diminishes at 50 iterations (L = 50), where the performance of BP and NBP converge. In contrast, ECCT achieves a 0.2 dB gain over NBP at L = 50, with the potential for even greater performance improvement as N and d increase. When applying integer-only quantization from FP32 to INT8, as proposed in the I-ViT model [8], ECCT maintains comparable error correcting performance. This slight loss in gain suggests that with further advancements in compression techniques, ECCT could develop into a more competitive and efficient decoder.

shown in Fig. 2 (b), ECCT demands 50 times more parameters than NBP with L = 5. Even after reducing the model size to 25% through FP32 to INT8 quantization, ECCT still demands substantial memory usage, indicating the need for further model compression techniques.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we analyzed the computational complexity and memory requirements of ECCT, a neural decoder designed to enhance belief propagation. Our findings reveal that while ECCT outperforms BP-based neural decoders for short block lengths, it comes with substantial hardware demands. This underscores the need for solutions to address the high resource demands for the practical implementation of ECCT decoder. Future work should focus on strategies that optimize the performance and resource efficiency of ECCT, including innovative compression methods and hardware-efficient designs.

B. Computational Complexity
To evaluate the computational complexity of each decoder, we performed FLOPs analysis under the conditions discussed in Section A. For the NBP, the weights to each message result in a linear increase in computational complexity, proportional to the number of edges and layers in the model. In contrast, the ECCT requires a significant number of multiplication and accumulation (MAC) operations within the attention and feedforward blocks. Fig. 2 (a) shows that even after reducing the computational load of the attention block to 20% through masking, the ECCT still demands 30 times more complexity than the NBP of L = 5. Additionally, the nonlinear layers, such as layer normalization, softmax, and GELU, further increase the cost when implementing ECCT on hardware.
To compare the hardware resources required by each decoder, we conducted a model parameter analysis. While BP needs no parameters, NBP requires parameters for the weights in each layer. For ECCT, the number of parameters increases with the code length in the attention block and with the square of the embedding dimension in the feedforward block. As

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in 2016 54th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), 2016, pp. 341–346.
[3] M. Lian, F. Carpi, C. Ha¨ger, and H. D. Pfister, “Learned beliefpropagation decoding with simple scaling and SNR adaptation,” in 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), 2019, pp. 161–165.
[4] J. Dai, K. Tan, Z. Si, K. Niu, M. Chen, H. V. Poor, and S. Cui, “Learning to decode protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1983–1999, 2021.
[5] L. Wang, S. Chen, J. Nguyen, D. Dariush, and R. Wesel, “Neural-networkoptimized degree-specific weights for LDPC minsum decoding,” in 2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding (ISTC), 2021, pp. 1–5.
[6] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez, L. u. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2017, pp. 5998–6008.
[7] Y. Choukroun and L. Wolf, “Error correction code transformer,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 38 695–38 705, 2022.
[8] Z. Li and Q. Gu, “I-ViT: Integer-only quantization for efficient vision transformer inference,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), October 2023, pp. 17 065– 17 075.

750
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:06:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

