An Improved WBF Algorithm for Higher-Speed

Decoding of LDPC Codes

MA Ke-xiang, LI Yong-zhao, ZHU Cai-zhi, ZHANG Hai-lin and QI Feng

(The National Key Laboratory on ISN, Xidian University, Xi’an 710071, China)

Abstract: Due to the speed limitation of the range. Consequently, the BP-based algorithms

conventional bit-chosen strategy in the existing are unsuitable for fast decoders. However,

weighted bit flipping algorithms, a high-speed LDPC with the increase of data services, the

decoder cannot be realized. To solve this problem, we communication systems require much higher

propose a fast weighted bit flipping (FWBF) data transmission speed. For example, for the

algorithm. Specifically, based on the stochastic error next generation of optical communications

bitmap of the received vector, a partially parallel systems operating at 40 Gb/s, the current

bit-choose strategy is adopted to lower the delay of circuit technology does not accommodate

choosing the bit flipped. Because of its partially BP-based decoding and only BF-based

parallel structure, the novel strategy can be well decoding is possible [7].

incorporated into the LDPC decoder [1]. The analysis

Because of the shortcomings of BP-based

of the decoding delay demonstrates that, the decoding algorithm mentioned above, BF-based

speed can be greatly improved by adopting the algorithm has abstracted extensive study in

proposed FWBF algorithm. Further, simulation results recent year. Kou provided weighted BF (WBF)

verify the validity of the proposed algorithm.

[5], which first bridged the performance gap

Key words: stochastic error bitmap; bit-choose between BP-based algorithm and BF-based

strategy; partially parallel; pipelined.

algorithm, and a series of improved algorithms

I. Introduction

are proposed to further improve the decoding

Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2], performance of WBF algorithm, defined as

were first proposed by Gallager in the 1960s WBF-based algorithms. By incorporating the

and later resurrected by MacKay and Neal [3]. received value into the metric value, J. Zhang

LDPC has attracted considerable attention due presented a modified WBF (MWBF)

to its near Shannon-limit performance and algorithm [8]. In terms of the update of the

inherently parallelizable decoding structure [4] check message in the min-sum algorithm, an

[5]. There have been two main kinds of improved MWBF (IMWBF) algorithm was

algorithms to decode the LDPC codes, further proposed [9]. To improve the

BP-based algorithm and BF-based algorithm. convergence speed of IMWBF algorithm, X.

BP-based algorithms have been extensively Wu proposed a parallel version of the IMWBF

applied for its great decoding performance, algorithm (PWBF) [10]. Further, an approach

especially normalized min-sum algorithm and is proposed for PWBF algorithm to obtain the

offset min-sum algorithm. However, because optimal thresholds [11]. On the other hand,

of the huge check-parity matrix of the LDPC introducing a fully different metric value, Liu

codes, a BP-based decoder results in huge and Pados proposed a new WBF algorithm,

hardware expenditure. Furthermore, due to the defined as LP-WBF [12]. Like the PWBF,

limitation of the hardware resource, especially multi-bit LP algorithm is proposed to improve

the memory resource [6], almost LDPC the decoding speed [13], defined as MLP-

decoders adopt a partial parallel structure, WBF in this paper.

which limits the decoding speed to a narrow

This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation of China (No.61072069), the 111 Project (B08038).

As is discussed above, because of their low computation complexity, BF-based algorithms can be utilized to design a high-speed LDPC decoder, and two multi-bit flipping algorithms are adopted to improve the convergence speed obviously [11] [13]. In the multi-bit flipping algorithms, it is critical to choose the bits flipped in every iteration. The method proposed by Wu is efficient to obtain well decoding performance. However, its complex structure limits the decoding speed of the LDPC decoder. MLP-WBF has a simple method to choose the flipped bits. However, the process of the bits choose can only been executed sequentially, which also limits the decoding speed. For further improving the decoding speed of the LDPC decoder, we propose a partially parallel choose mechanism, which utilizes the received vector with stochastic distribution noise. Correspondingly, a new WBF-based algorithm with low decoding delay is proposed, defined as fast WBF (FWBF) algorithm.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce the basic notation and provide the required background material. In Section III, a fast weighted bit flipping is proposed, which has a quite low decoding delay. Section IV provides a detailed analysis of the decoding delay of the proposed algorithms. We illustrate numerical results in Section V, and this paper is concluded in the last section.
II. Conventions and Preliminaries
An LDPC code is a linear block code given by the null space of a “sparse” parity-check matrix H, and “sparse” means that non-zero entries are far more than the zero entries in the parity-check matrix. A LDPC code is defined as a (r,q) -regular code if its parity-check matrix has exactly r “non-zero” entries in each row and q “non-zero” entries in each column. For almost of LDPC codes, the following constraint is imposed on the rows

and columns of the parity-check matrix H of a code: no two rows (or two columns) can have more than one place where they both have “non-zero” entries, i.e., the famous rowcolumn (RC) constraint. Let C be a (N,K ) LDPC code of block length N and dimension
K , which has a parity-check H = [hMN ] of

M rows, and N columns. Let Rc = K/N

denote its code rate. In this paper, we assume BPSK modulation, which maps a code

c = [c1 c2

cN ] into a transmitted

sequence s = [s1 s2

sN ] , according to

sn = 1 - 2cn , for every n ∈ (1, 2… N ) . Then, s
is transmitted over an AWGN channel, and
y = [ y1 y2 … yN ] is the received
codeword corresponding to the transmitted sequence s . zk (0 < k ≤ Kmax ) represents the
tentative binary hard-decision vector at the
end of the k-th decoding iteration and Kmax is
the maximum number of the decoding iteration. The weight of the syndrome vector sk = zk × H T is denoted by wk . Let M(n) =
{m : hmn = 1} denote the set of check nodes
including the bit node n, namely, the position of ones in the n-th column of H ; the set of bit nodes participating in check node m is
denoted by N (m) = {n : hmn = 1} , namely, the
position of ones in the m-th row of H . In addition, M(n) \ m represents the set M(n) , excluding the m-th check node and N (m) \ n represents the set N (m) , without the n-th bit node.

In IMWBF algorithm [9], the metric value

of the n-th bit node is computed as follows,

∑ En =

(2sm −1)wn,m - α yn

(1)

m∈M (n)

where wn,m = min yi . At each iteration, the i∈ N ( m )\ n

bit node with the largest metric value E MAX n
will be flipped.
III Proposed Algorithm
In this section, based on IMWBF algorithm, we propose a fast weighted bit-flipping algorithm. In order to show the advantages of such algorithm by corresponding analysis, the existing PWBF algorithm and MLP-WBF algorithm are introduced as a comparison. PWBF algorithm is a multi-bit flipping algorithm of IMWBF algorithm, which has a well decoding performance and convergence speed. However, because of its complex calculation process, the bit-choose strategy in PWBF algorithm is hard to be implemented with hardware under certain condition. Therefore, the MLP-WBF algorithm with a simple bit-choose method in is proposed as a proper alternative of PWBF algorithm in this manuscript, which is more convenient to design a LDPC decoder and has a satisfied decoding performance and convergence speed as well.
In the MLP-WBF, the steps of choosing the bits with the λ largest metric value to flip can be merely executed sequentially. Furthermore, due to the limitation of the hardware resource, the choosing for each flipped bit can only be realized in partially parallel. Consequently, the choosing of the flipped bits in MLP-WBF will lead to a considerable decoding delay, and cannot satisfy the demand of the high-speed communication. The drawback of MLP-WBF mentioned above also represents the main disadvantages of existing PWBF algorithm. The FWBF proposed in this paper will solve

the problems effectively, which is discussed by contrasting to MLP-WBF in detail in following paragraphs.
When the signal is transmitted in the AWGN channel, error bits will be randomly uniformly distributed in the received vector. If it is transmitted in the fading channel, burst error will appear. Consequently, burst error will result in too much contiguous error bits in one received vector, which may exceed the decoding ability of error-correct codes. However, almost all the communication systems transmitted in the fading channel adopt interleavers to randomize noise, for example IEEE 802.16 [14]. Correspondingly, the error bits will be uniformly distributed in every received vector, and then the received vectors with burst error can be correctly decoded. Therefore, we can suppose that all the received vectors sending to the decoder have a uniformly distributed error bits in most communication systems. Therefore, when the codeword is divided into several blocks, it is reasonable to consider that error bits are uniformly distributed in every block. Combined with the common structure of the LDPC decoder [15], we propose a partially parallel bit choose algorithm. Specifically, in the process of the iterative decoding, we divide the metric value vector into several blocks, and then choose one bit to flip in every block at most. The decoding performance of FWBF is similar to that of MLP-WBF, and its significant advantage in decoding speed makes it a better choose in the high-speed communication systems. The proposed algorithm (FWBF) is described as follow:
Initialization: Set the iterative number
k = 0 , and let the initial decision vector
z0 = (1 − sgn( y))/2 ; For each check node m,
0 ≤ m < M , compute wn,m for every bit
nodes in it.

Step1: compute the weight wk of syndrome vector. If ( wk = 0 or k > Kmax ), stop the decoding process and output zk ; Step2: for each p-length block i ( i ∈[1, N/p] ), compute the metric values of all the bit nodes in the i-th block by Eq. (1), and then find the bit node b which has the biggest metric value in the current block; if (Enb > 0) flip zb . k= k+1, go to Step 1.
Fig. 1. 3-stage comparator network
IV. Delay Analysis
The LDPC decoders are commonly implemented by the partially parallel structure. In this paper, we also utilize this structure to discuss delay performance of the FWBF and MLP-WBF. Suppose that both two algorithms have the same basic decoding unit (calculate En ), and 2q metric values can be calculated in parallel. Correspondingly, they both require N /(2q) clk to calculate all the metric values. Besides, we also utilize the comparator network with the similar structure (Fig. 1) to implement the bit choose for both the algorithms. In this comparator network, there are q = 4 comparators at the first stage, which can simultaneously implement the comparison between 2q = 8 metric values, and its comparators are divided into α = log2 (2q) = 3 stage. Correspondingly, after inputted 2q = 8 metric values, comparator

network outputs their largest value after

log2 (2q) = 3 clk. Because of the pipelined

structure of the comparator network, the intermediate data of different block simultaneously goes down the α -stage comparator network by clock. For example, the data of the first block is operated in the first stage in the first clk, and its obtained results are inputted into the second stage in the second clk. Meanwhile, the data of the second block enters in the first stage. Therefore, for

the general case, after log2 (2q) + N/(2q) clk,

all the local maximum values of every block can be figured out, and then additional

log2 (N / 2q) clk is required to obtain the
maximum of the N /(2q) local maximum values, i.e., the global maximum. In MLP-WBF, the different maximum can only be calculated one by one. Therefore, the total decoding delay (one iteration) to calculate the λ largest metric value is described by:

λ × (log2 (2q) + N /(2q) + log2 (N/ 2q)) (2)

For the proposed algorithm, we also utilize the same comparator network to calculate the maximum. Once obtained metric values of some block, they will be immediately inputted into the comparator network. Contributing to the pipelined structure, we only spend

log2 (2q) clk to obtain the maximum of the

last block after its metric values were calculated. Therefore, the total decoding delay (one iteration) to choose the bits flipped in the proposed algorithm (FWBF) is:

log2 (2q) + N /(2q)

(3)

Taking the EG (255, 175) LDPC codes for instance, we discuss the decoding delay of the two proposed algorithms in detail. The 255 metric values are calculated by 16 parallel

-1
10

-1
10

-2
10

-2
10

-3
10

-3
10

BER BER

-4
10

-4
10

-5

FWBF iterations=10 p=51

10

FWBF iterations=10 p=15

FWBF iterations=5 p=15

MLP-WBF iterations=10

-6

BP iterations=10

10

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

E /N
b0

Fig. 2. Performance comparison of BP, PWBF and IPWBF
decoding for EG (255,175) code
basic decoding units1, and only spend 16 clk. For FWBF and MLP-WBF, there are 8 comparators in the first stage of the comparator network, separately. By Eq. 2, we calculate that the decoding delay caused by the choosing of the bits flipped is 24λ in MLP-WBF. However, for FWBF, the corresponding decoding delay is only 20. In the decoding process of MLP-WBF, the typical value of λ is about 10. Furthermore, from the next section, it is noticed that the two algorithms have similar average iterative numbers. Therefore, we can conclude that FWBF has a significant advantage in the decoding delay, compared with MLP-WBF. Furthermore, MLP-WBF requires storing the metric value of every bit, consuming considerable memory resource. Because of the scarcity of the memory resource [16], it increases the implement hardness of MLPWBF to a certain extent, especially for long codes.
V. Simulation Analyses
In the following, numerical results for the

1 We introduce a “null” metric value, and then all the metric value can be divided into 16 equal blocks.

-5

FWBF iterations=10 p=93

10

FWBF iterations=10 p=31

FWBF iterations=5 p=31

MLP-WBF iterations=10

-6

BP iterations=10

10

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Eb/N0

Fig. 3. Performance comparison of BP, PWBF and multi

LP-WBF decoding for EG(1023,781)code
proposed algorithms are provided. EG (255, 175) code and EG (1023,781) are adopted [5]. For the convenience of description, we refer to them as code 1 and code 2, separately. Moreover, an AWGN channel with zero mean and variance N0/2 is assumed. BPSK modulation is adopted. For each SNR, 100 codeword errors are watched.
In Fig. 2 and Fig. 3, a series of performance comparisons between the proposed algorithm and the existing algorithms are provided. We noticed that the performance of FWBF is similar to that of MLP-WBF for the two codes under different block length. For both code 1 and code 2, the decoding performance under two different kinds of block length is also provided. With the increase of the block length, decoding performance is gradually increased, but performance gap is not significant. Furthermore, the performance gap between 5 iterations and 10 iterations is not distinct for the two codes. This means 5 iterations is enough to make the proposed algorithm converge well, which is abstractive to implement a high- speed decoder. Specially, BP is 0.5 dB better than FWBF when the BER is 10-4 for code 1. However, for some communication systems, such as the satellite communications system and optical communications system, they have a well channel environment and a super high data rate. Therefore, a faster algorithm is more required than the algorithm which has a little better decoding performance. Furthermore, because of its low computational complexity,

FWBF is a more comparative algorithm under those systems.
Tab. 1. The averaged iterations of MLP-WBF and FWBF decoding (KMAX =10 and N=1023).
3.0 3.5 4.0 4.5 dB dB dB dB MLP-WBF 8.86 6.20 4.54 3.83 FWBF (p=93) 9.29 7.37 6.06 5.12 FWBF (p=31) 8.62 5.60 4.19 3.64 In Tab 1, the average iterative numbers are provided for MLP-WBF and FWBF algorithm. With the increase of the block length, for FWBF algorithm, the averaged iterative number is gradually increased. Therefore, the secondary largest block number can obtain a faster decoder. In view of the limitation of the hardware resource, for the two codes, we also choose the secondary largest block number to design a decoder rather than the largest one, although the latter one has a little better decoding performance. Furthermore, we also notice that MLP-WBF and FWBF have similarly averaged iterative number. Provided that FWBF requires far fewer clocks to implement one iteration, a faster decoder can be constructed by this algorithm.
VI. Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed a fast
weighted bit flipping algorithm for LDPC
codes. Compared with the existing algorithm,
the proposed one has similar decoding
performance but very higher decoding delay.
Therefore, the proposed algorithm is a better
choose for the high-data communications
systems. Furthermore, its inherently partially
parallel structure makes it easier to implement.
The validity of the proposed algorithm for
different LDPC codes is verified by the
simulation results.
References
[1] Junho Cho, Jonghong Kim, Wonyong Sung. VLSI
Implementation of a High-Throughput Soft-Bit
-Flipping Decoder for Geometric LDPC Codes [J].
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular
Papers, 2010 57(5):1083-1094.
[2] R.G. Gallager. Low-Density Parity-Check codes
[J]. Ire Transactions on Information Theory, 1962,
8(1):21-28.
[3] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal, Near Shannon
limit performance of low density parity check codes

[J]. Electronics Letters. 1996, 32(18):1645–1646. [4] Li Zongwang, Chen Lei, Zeng Lingqi, Lin Shu, Fong W.H. Efficient encoding of quasi- cyclic low-density parity-check codes [J]. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 2006, 54(1):71-81. [5] Kou Y, Lin S, M.P.C. Fossorier. Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results [J]. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 2001, 47(7):2711-2736. [6] Chen Xiaoheng, Kang Jingyu, Lin Shu, V. Akella. Memory System Optimization for FPGA-Based Implementation of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Decoders [J]. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, 2011, 58(1):98-111. [7] N. Miladinovic, Marc P.C.Fossorier. Improved Bit-Flipping Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes [J]. IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 2005, 51(4):1594-1606. [8] Zhang J, M.P.C. Fossorier. A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low density parity-check codes [J]. IEEE Communications Letters, 2004, 8(3):165–167. [9] Jiang M, Zhao C, Shi Z, Chen Y. An improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes [J], IEEE Communications Letters, 2005, 9(9): 814–816. [10] Wu X, Zhao C, You X. Parallel weighted bit-flipping decoding [J]. IEEE Commun. Lett., 2007, 11(8):671–673. [11] Wu X, Ling C, Jiang M, Xu E, Zhao C, You X. New insights into weighted bit- flipping decoding [J]. IEEE Communications Letters, 2009, 57(8):21772180. [12] Liu Z, D. A. Pados. A decoding algorithm for finite-geometry LDPC codes [J]. IEEE Transactions on Communications, 2005, 53(3): 415-421. [13] T.M.N. Ngatched, F. Takawira, M. Bossert. An improved decoding algorithm for finite-geometry LDPC codes [J]. IEEE Trans. Commun., 2009, 57(2): 302-306. [14] IEEE Std 802.16e-2005, IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks Part 16:Air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems [S]

[15] Seok-Min Kim, Chang-Soo Park, Sun-Young Hwang. A novel partially parallel architecture for high-throughput LDPC Decoder for DVB-S2 [J]. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronic, 2010, 56(2):820-825.

[16] Chen Xiaoheng, Kang Jingyu, Lin Shu and V. Akella, Memory System Optimization for FPGABased Implementation of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Decoders [J]. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, 2011, 58(1):98-111.

