Velocity Pausing Particle Swarm Optimization 
Algorithm based Universal High-Throughput and 
Low-Complexity LDPC Decoder for Laser 
Communications 
 
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering, 
School of Engineering, Mohan Babu University,  
Tirupati, India 
Email: bhanupriya4a4@gmail.com
Abstract—This work presents Lower-Density Parity-Check 
(LDPC) decoder that is distinguished by its low complexity and 
highest throughput to fulfil the highest data rate of needs of 
laser communications and overcome the difficulties caused by 
propagation channel impairments. Existing techniques have 
issues with error correction, latency, and resource efficiency. In 
this manuscript, Velocity Pausing Particle Swarm Optimization 
Algorithm based Universal High-Throughput with Lower-
Complexity Lower-Density Parity-Check Decoder used for 
Laser Communications (LDPC-LC-VPPSOA) is proposed. The 
primary goal of this decoder, depending upon Inter-Frame 
Pipeline with Intra-Frame Parallel (IFPP-IFP) system, is 
particularly designed to optimize the effectiveness of processing 
units, most important to enhance in decoding throughput. The 
performance of IFPP is enhanced through the Unitary 
Approximate Message Passing (UAMP) approach and the 
Velocity Pausing Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm 
(VPPSOA), 
differentiating 
from 
existing 
solutions. 
Furthermore, the decoder uses a message packing approach 
and lower-complexity data alignment units to efficiently attain 
IFP. Then the proposed LDPC-LC-VPPSOA method is 
implemented in Xilinx XCKU060 FPGA and the performance 
metrics like decoding throughput, hardware complexity and Bit 
error rate are analyzed. Then, the LDPC-LC-VPPSOA 
approach attains 18.34%, 16.23%, 19.56% higher decoding 
throughput, 16.55%, 24.12% and 27.22% lower Hardware 
Complexity compared with existing techniques like Universal 
Higher-Throughput and Lower-Complexity Lower-Density 
Parity-Check Decoder used for Laser Communications 
(UHTLC-LDPCD-LC), Scalable High-Throughput with Lower-
Latency DVB-S2(x) Lower-Density Parity-Check Decoders on 
SIMD Devices (SHTLL-LDPCD-SIMD) and Highly Reliable 
with Secure Scheme and Multi-Layer Parallel Lower-Density 
Parity-Check 
with 
Kyber 
for 
fist 
the 
generation 
Communications (HRSS-LDPC-KC) respectively. 
 
Keywords: Low-Density Parity-Check decoder, Inter-Frame 
Pipeline and Intra-Frame Parallel scheme, Velocity Pausing 
Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm Unitary Approximate 
Message Passing Algorithm. 
 
I. 
INTRODUCTION 
The need for laser communications, which provide greater 
bandwidth (several gigabits per sec), decreased weight, 
increased suppleness, and improved security, is being driven by 
the approaching bandwidth limit of traditional radio frequency 
(RF) 
communications 
[1]. 
However, 
environmental 
considerations including atmospheric attenuation, loss of free 
space, and refraction index turbulence make the laser 
communications propagation channel less than ideal, leading to 
channel fading [2]. Channel coding is therefore necessary to 
shield the transmit signal from the consequences of 
transmission channel limitations [3]. Additionally, a specific 
physical layer design is needed for laser communications in 
order to achieve high data speeds [4]. Nevertheless, traditional 
channel coding sometimes uses a lot of storage and processing 
power, which is a barrier to reaching ultra-high throughput [5]. 
Innovative, fast, and low-complexity codecs are therefore 
desperately needed, especially for the onboard side where 
embedded limitations that are consistent with a space location 
are quite challenging [6]. The performance of LDPC codes is 
near the Shannon limit, which makes them popular. LDPC was 
selected 
as 
the 
channel 
coding 
code 
by 
numerous 
communication standards, like as DVB-S2, CCSDS, 5G, and 
others [7]. For this application space, the effectiveness of pairs 
of lower-density parity-check codes with decoders has 
previously been demonstrated currently [8, 9]. The CCSDS 
optical working group (SLS-OPT) has been presented with a 
novel forward error correction (FEC) network as a competitive 
substitute for the existing standardised solutions for radio 
frequency telemetry downlinks, including SCCC, DVB-S2 with 
ARJA/C2 LDPC codes [10]. 
The challenge is to provide a low-complexity, high-
throughput, universal LDPC decoder for laser communications. 
Existing approaches frequently have to choose between 
hardware complexity and decoding efficiency. Conventional 
decoders, such as sum-product algorithms or belief propagation, 
need a lot of computing, and simplified methods don't work as 
well with high-speed laser communication systems. 
Effective decoding methods are required due to the growing 
need for high data rates in laser communications as well as 
propagation channel impairments. Using an IFPP-IFP scheme 
with UAMP and VPPSOA, this work introduces a lower-
complexity, higher-throughput LDPC decoder with the goal of 
improving performance in laser communiqué systems while 
reducing latency and resource consumption. This motivates us 
to do this work. 
The novelty involves the creation of a low-complexity, 
high-throughput LDPC decoder especially made for laser 
communications, which tackles the difficulties caused by 
propagation channel impairments. The UAMP method and the 
Bhanu Priya Y, Kishore Kumar A
2025 IEEE 5th International Conference on VLSI Systems, Architecture, Technology and Applications (VLSI SATA) | 979-8-3315-0286-7/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/VLSISATA65374.2025.11070064
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:21:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
VPPSOA method optimize processing efficiency in the 
proposed decoder, which integrates an IFPP-IFP scheme. The 
performance of the decoder is further improved by the use of 
message packing as well as lower-complexity data alignment 
units. The proposed LDPC-LC-VPPSOA decoder, which is 
implemented in FPGA for practical usage, outperforms current 
methods in terms of decoding throughput, latency, and resource 
efficiency. 
The contribution of this manuscript is summarized below, 
 
In this manuscript, LDPC-LC-VPPSOA is proposed. 
 
To achieve inter-frame pipeline (IFPP), a Unitary 
Approximate Message Passing Algorithm and Velocity 
Pausing Particle Swarm Optimization Algorithm are 
proposed as ways to optimise processing unit utilisation. 
 
 Intra-frame parallel (IFP) is achieved by using low-
complexity data alignment units and efficient message 
packing to further increase throughput. 
 
The performance of different designs is systematically 
computed and assessed, and a thorough FPGA execution 
of the proposed decoder on Xilinx FPGA is 
demonstrated. 
The rest of the paper is organised as below: section 2 explains 
literature review, section 3 deliberates materials and procedures 
utilized in paper, and section 4 presents outcomes with 
discussion, section 5 conclusion 
II. 
 LITERATURE REVIEW 
Numerous research works are suggested in the literatures 
based on LDPC Decoder for Laser Communications, some 
current works are surveyed here, 
Kang, et.al, [11] have presented the Universal Higher-
Throughput with Lower-Complexity low-density parity-check 
Decoder for Laser Communications. This suggested paper 
presents the decoder's distinctive architecture, which is based 
on an intra-frame parallel (IFPP-IFP) system and an inter-frame 
pipeline, is especially made to optimise processing unit 
efficiency, which results in a significant boost in decoding 
throughput. In contrast to existing methods, IFPP is 
implemented using a dynamic address access (DAA) algorithm 
and a revolutionary full-overlap message passing (FOMP) 
technique. It provides high throughput and high complexity. 
Le Gal, et.al, [12] have suggested the Scalable Higher-
Throughput with Lower-Latency DVB-S2 (x) low-density 
parity-check Decoders On SIMD Devices. This suggested paper 
presents an effective SIMD parallelisation technique for DVB-
S2(x) low-density parity-check codes. With ten stacked 
decoding rounds, it can reach throughputs ranging between 6 
Gbps to 11 Gbps on an INTEL Xeon Gold objective. The 
latencies are less at the same time. These performances 
outperform CPU and GPU-related works comparable to FPGA-
based solutions. It provides high accuracy and low latency.  
Nguyen, et.al, [13] have presented the High dependable 
with Secure Scheme and Multi-Layer Parallel low-density 
parity-check with Kyber for fifth generation Communications. 
The suggested paper presents KyMLP-LDPC a unique 
technique that combines the multi-layer parallel low-density 
parity-check 
(MLP-LDPC) 
approach 
and 
Kyber, 
a 
cryptography after quantum technology in order to speed up 
and enable dependable with secure communication. In order to 
expedite error correction procedures by reducing message 
collisions during transmission and streamlining parallel 
decoding. It provides high decoding throughput and low 
hardware complexity. 
III. 
PROPOSED METHODOLOGY 
In the proposed segment, the LDPC-LC-VPPSOA is 
described. Initially, the channel buffer is used to route quantised 
channel log-likelihood ratio (LLRs) of Q bits. 2nd-frame 
communications are initialized with channel log-likelihood 
ratios, while first-frame extrinsic messages are set to zero. The 
LLRs of both frames are divided and stored in the Channel 
Memory Bank (CMB) RAMs. A maximum iteration count Imax 
is determined, and the iteration count is set to zero. Updates 
have been made to the second-frame check nodes and first-
frame variable nodes. Effective extrinsic message management 
in CMB is guaranteed by UAMP and VPPSOA methods. 
Updates are synchronised using data aligners. Alongside CNU, 
PCU does parity-check computations. Repeat for the first-frame 
check nodes and second-frame variable nodes. In the 
termination, repeat until the iterations approach Imax or the 
symptoms are zero. The output HDMB is used to read decoded 
hard choices. The description about the LDPC-LC-VPPSOA is 
given below. The architecture of the proposed LDPC-LC-
VPPSOA decoder is illustrated in Figure 1. 
XY
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
)1
( 
Y
X
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
)1
( 
Y
X
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
1

Y
XY
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
XY
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
XY
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
Y
 
Figure 1: The Architecture of the proposed LDPC-LC-VPPSOA Decoder 
A. The AMSA Iterative MP decoding 
The AMSA is a two-step Iteration-based decoding 
technique that enables simultaneous adjusting of each variable 
or check node. Let 𝐾௦೜→௔೛(𝑉2𝐶)symbolise the variable 
node's𝑠௤ extrinsic message to check the node𝑎௣, and let 
𝑛௔೛→௦೜(𝐶2𝑉)denotes the external message delivered between 
the node of check 𝑎௣ to the node of variable 𝑠௤.  The 
associated Tanner graph computes and exchanges these two 
messages along its edges. 𝑁൫𝑠௤൯\𝑎௣indicates the neighbouring 
check nodes of 𝑠௤except for 𝑎௣, and 𝑁൫𝑎௣൯\𝑠௤indicates the 
neighbouring variable nodes of 𝑎௣ except for 𝑠௤. The 
modification factor is denoted by 𝜆. The decoded bits are 
represented by 𝑟௤, whereas 𝐷௦೜represents the inherent LLR 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:21:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
from the variable node  𝑠௤channel. The following is the 
decoding procedure:
 
1) Initializing: 
 𝐾௦೜→௔೛= 𝐷௦೜, 𝑛௔೛→௦೜= 0 
         
 
        (1) 
2) Iteration: 
 𝑛௔೛→௦೜= 𝜆⋅
𝑚𝑖𝑛
௦್∈ே(௔೛)\௦೜ቀቚ𝐾௦್→௔೛ቚቁ× ∏
𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛ቀ𝐾௦್→௔೛ቁ
௦್∈ே(௔೛)\௦೜
    
(2)  
 
𝐾௦್→௔೛= ∑
𝑛௔೛→௦೜
ௗೌ∈ே(௦೜)\௔೛
+ 𝐷௦೜       
        
(3)        
Hard Decision:  
𝑟௤= ൜0,
𝑖𝑓𝐷௦೜= ∑
𝑛௔೛→௦೜+ 𝐷௦೜> 0;
௖೛∈ே൫௦೜൯
1,
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒
ൠ         (4) 
The decoding process is deemed complete when the decoded 
bit assures every parity check formulas or when the maximal 
count of repetitions is achieved. Otherwise, return to step 2. 
B. Typical Partially-Parallel Decoder Architecture 
Three main elements of typical partially-parallel decoder 
architecture 
are 
RAMF, 
RAMM, 
and 
RAMC. 
Hard 
judgements, intrinsic messages, and received log-likelihood 
ratios are all stored in these memories. m parity-check equation 
calculation module (PCUs), m represents CNUs and 𝑛 denotes 
VNUs. 𝑠or𝑛is the parallel degree. In other words, during the 
C2V (V2C) phase of message updating, 𝑚 rows (𝑛 columns) 
between various block rows (columns) are rationalized 
concurrently. In 𝐾 clock cycles, every block's rows (columns) 
are updated serially. Static addressing is used in RAMM to 
manage extrinsic messages, meaning that each node's read and 
write addresses are fixed. The RAMM access address during 
the 
C2V 
message 
update 
phase 
is 
𝑔௣,௤, 𝑔௣,௤+
1, . . .0,1, . .. 𝑔௣,௤−1,. The memory access address during the 
V2C message update phase is 0,1, . . . , 𝐾−1, 𝐾. 
C. The Low-Complexity, High-Throughput, Universal LDPC 
Decoder 
Variable Node Units with Check Node Units work in tandem 
during normal decoding, which results in idle times and lower 
FPGA resource usage. This is addressed by the proposed 
UAMP system and VPPSOA, which improve resource 
efficiency by allowing two frames to be stored and accessed 
simultaneously within a single RAM block. Packing several 
messages into a single memory word, denoted by parameter P, 
significantly increases throughput and enables P time’s 
performance enhancement. Alignment issues and possible 
conflicts with memory access are introduced by this, though. To 
maximise efficiency, conflicts are avoided and extra logic 
overhead is reduced by using effective message packing 
systems and data alignment units. 
D. Message passing using Unitary Approximate Message 
Passing Algorithm  
In this section, UAMP [14] is discussed for the core decoding 
mechanism (message passing) operates with high accuracy and 
low complexity. During LDPC decoding, UAMP is made to 
effectively manage the Inter-Frame Pipeline (IFPP). It 
guarantees that information can move between frames without 
interruption, enabling fast parallel processing without adding a 
great deal of complexity. It increases decoding speed through 
the use of effective approximations. It lowers processing 
requirements, which makes it appropriate for FPGAs and other 
hardware implementations. It improves dependability in 
difficult communication situations with different types of 
channel limitations. Because of its low complexity, AMP, 
which was formed from the looping BP and Gaussian with 
Taylor-series estimation, can be effectively employed to tackle 
linear inverse problems. Since two unitary matrices and any 
matrix to accomplish a unitary transformation results in the 
model that follows in equation (5) 
𝑒= Ψ𝑎+ 𝛿 
 
        
 
 
(5) 
where 𝑒 is the rectangular diagonal matrix, Ψ is the a length 
observation vector, 𝑎is the zero-mean Gaussian noise vector 
with zero mean 𝛿 .Given the UAMP algorithms return a column 
vector containing 
the 𝑚௧ℎ 
element[𝑦௔(𝑟, 𝜈௥)]௠, 
where 
𝑦௔(𝑟, 𝜈௥)is connected to the prior of 𝑎.By approximating 
intricate calculations, UAMP streamlines the mathematical 
procedures necessary for message conveyance is expressed as 
in equation (6), 
[𝑦௔(𝑟, 𝜈௥)]௠=
∫௔೘௦(௔೘)Μ൫௔೘;௥೘,ఔೝ೘൯ௗ௔೘
∫௦(௔೘)Μ൫௔೘;௥೘,ఔೝ೘൯ௗ௔೘  
 
(6) 
Where observe that a generic known prior for 𝑎௠ is represented 
by 𝑠(𝑎௠). Μ൫𝑎௠; 𝑟௠, 𝜈௥೘൯denotes a Gaussian distribution with 
𝑎௠ as random variable, 𝑟௠as mean, and 𝜈௥as variance. The 𝑚௧ℎ 
element is represented as[𝑦௔
′ (𝑟, 𝜈௥)]௠, 𝑦௔ is the generic prior, 
where the derivative is taken with regard to 𝑟௠.The function 
𝑦௔
′ (𝑟, 𝜈௥)outputs a column vector.  
E. Optimization using Velocity Pausing Particle Swarm 
Optimization Algorithm  
In this section, VPPSOA [15] is discussed in order to maximise 
performance the LDPC decoder's parameters are optimised 
using VPPSOA. It effectively explores the solution space, 
lowering computational overhead. It increases the decoder's 
flexibility to accommodate different communication situations. 
It guarantees resource efficiency, which is essential for FPGAs 
and other hardware implementations. The innovative concept of 
velocity pausing, in which every particle doesn’t need to inform 
its velocity at every iteration, is put forth in this study. The 
primary benefit of velocity pausing is that it adds a third 
movement option (fixed speed), which can prevent the extreme 
premature convergence of the standard VPPSOA and aid in 
striking a harmonize among exploitation and exploration. The 
following is a mathematical expression for the velocity halting 
concept in equation (7) as follows, 
 
𝐷௣(𝑡+ 1) = ቊ
𝐷௣(𝑡)
𝑖𝑓𝑟𝑎𝑛𝑑< 𝛾
𝑠𝐷௣(𝑡) + 𝑢ଵ𝑧ଷ൫ℎ𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡௔(𝑡) −𝐷௣(𝑡)൯+ 𝑢ଶ𝑧ସ൫𝑗𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡௔(𝑡) −𝐷௣(𝑡)൯
𝑜𝑡ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒ቋ     (7)
 
 
here𝛾 represents  parameter of velocity pausing and 𝐷௣(𝑡) 
and𝐷௣(𝑡+ 1) denotes  particle velocities 𝑝 at iterations 𝑡 and 
𝑡+ 1,global best particle is denoted as 𝑗𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡, personal best 
position is denoted as ℎ𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡, 𝑢ଵ, 𝑢ଶ are random variables, 𝑧ଷ, 
𝑧ସ represents the cognitive as well as coefficient of social 
acceleration correspondingly. The velocity equation of the 
traditional VPPSOA approach is altered by removing its inertia 
weight component and altering the initial velocity term in order 
to better assist VPPSOA in avoiding premature convergence is 
represented in equation (8), 
 
𝐷௣(𝑡+ 1) = 𝐷௣(𝑡)௭ఋ௫(௧) + 𝑢ଵ𝑧଺൫ℎ𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡௔(𝑡) −𝐷௣(𝑡)൯+ 𝑢ଶ𝑧଻൫𝑗𝑏𝑒𝑠𝑡௔(𝑡) −𝐷௣(𝑡)൯  (8) 
 
where, 𝛿𝑥(𝑡) is the maximum inertia value of the swarms. 
VPPSOA optimizes the system-level parameters, ensuring that 
the overall decoder attains maximum throughput, lower latency, 
and efficient hardware utilization. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:21:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
F. Data Alignment Unit and Massage Packing 
Several messages are processed simultaneously and condensed 
into a single RAMM word to increase throughput. An 
optimised low-complexity data aligner that precomputes offsets 
for data alignment prevents memory conflicts. With just two Q-
bit registers and additional clock latency, this technique 
streamlines multiplexers and lowers decoding latency. 
Hard choices and extrinsic messages are packed during the 
VNU phase to minimise memory usage; Q-bit extrinsic 
messages are saved in RAMM, whereas 1-bit hard decisions are 
kept in RAMM. This eliminates the need for further address 
generation and enables Check Node Units and parity-check 
units to function in parallel, sharing address information. 
To avoid memory conflicts while obtaining final hard decisions, 
𝑋× 𝑛 hard decisions are recorded to RAMC during the VNU 
phase, while RAMM is written to the outputs. 
By using this method, the necessary number of RAMC memory 
banks is decreased from n to 1. 
G. Entire Architecture of the Decoder 
Hardware decoder implementations are created in order to 
verify the proposed methodologies. This decoder architecture's 
main advantages are its high throughput, low hardware 
complexity, and universality. All QC-LDPC codes can use this 
architecture, which is especially well-suited for devices with 
limited resources. 
Three modules in the processing units carry out the vital 
decoding function. Equation (2) is carried out by the V2C 
message update module (VNU), which consists of 𝑛×
𝑋separate variable node processing units with γ + 1 inputs as 
well as outputs. The hard decision bit and channel-received 
LLR are handled by the additional input and output, while γ is 
the column weight. Using CTSM modules, input log-likelihood 
ratios in two's complement system are transformed into sign-
magnitude (SM) system. For the sign-magnitude - log-
likelihood ratios, the magnitudes are managed by the 
Attenuated Modification Module (AMM) and the First Two 
Minima Find Modules (FTMFM), while the Unit of Sign (SU) 
manages the signs. The PCU verifies the authenticity of the 
modified SM-LLRs after they have been changed back to two’s 
harmonize. Dual-port RAMs with 𝑋× 𝑌 width and L/P depth 
are employed to save channel received log-likelihood ratios for 
two frames in the Channel Memory Bank (CMB). Extrinsic 
messages are stored in the Intermediate Memory Bank (IMB), 
which uses read-first RAMs with a width of 𝑋× (𝑌+ 1). Hard 
decisions with a width of 𝑛× 𝑌bits with deepness of L/P are 
stored in the Hard Decision Memory Bank (HDMB). 
The entire decoding process is managed by the controller. The 
following is the decoding procedure:  
1) Initialization: Q bits of quantised channel log-likelihood 
ratios are received at the input side of the decoder and routed 
via the channel buffer. Then, using the parity-check matrix 
columns H as a guide, the log-likelihood ratios for 2 frames are 
divided up and saved in RAMs inside the CMB. RAMA saves 
data of initial-frame, whereas RAMB supplies 2nd-frame data. 
All these RAMs have an address range of 0 to L/P−1L/P - 
1L/P−1. Notably, the external communications in the initial 
frame of the CMB are initiated to each zeros, whereas those in 
the second frame are initialized with the log-likelihood ratios 
obtained from the channel. Furthermore, 𝐼௠௔௫ is specified as 
the maximum iteration count, and the iteration count is set to 0. 
2) Changing the variable nodes in the data of initial frame and 
the check nodes in the 2nd frame data: The difficult choices are 
made as extrinsic communication is upgraded in column in 
Variable Node Units. Extrinsic messages are updated in CNU 
in row order concurrently. In CMB, extrinsic messages are read 
and written using VPPSOA. Throughout the process, the data 
aligner may also align data that has been converting out from 
the Channel Memory Bank or upgraded via the processing unit. 
Once align, the data can be transmitted to the CPU or later 
written back to the Intermediate Memory Bank and Hard 
Decision Memory Bank.  It is significant that PCU completes 
the parity-check equation calculation concurrently with CNU. 
3) The procedure specifics are the same as in step 2: Prior to 
check the nodes for the first-frame data, update the variable 
nodes for the second-frame data.. 
4) Termination decision: The iterations end and go on to step 5 
if the count of iterations attains the maximal iteration number 
𝐼௠௔௫ or if the symptoms are zero. If not, repeat the decoding 
iterations by returning to step 2. 
5) Output decoding: Read the hard choices between RAMB as 
well as RAMA in HDMB individually for the two decoded 
frames. 
IV. 
RESULT AND DISCUSSION 
The 
stimulation 
outcomes 
of 
the 
LDPC-LC-VPPSOA 
technique are discussed in this segment. The LDPC-LC-
VPPSOA method is implemented Xilinx XCKU060 FPGA and 
examined utilizing different performance measures comprising 
decoding throughput, hardware complexity and Bit error rate. 
The obtained results of LDPC-LC-VPPSOA technique are 
evaluated with existing UHTLC-LDPCD-LC [3], SHTLL-
LDPCD-SIMD [4] and HRSS-LDPC-KC [5] 
methods 
respectively. 
A. Performance Measures 
The performance of proposed technique is evaluated under 
mentioned measures. The following matrixes are required to 
calculate the performance metrics. 
a) Decoding Throughput 
The rate at which the LDPC decoder successfully decodes data 
is referred to as decoding throughput. It is expressed by using 
equation (9), 
 
𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔𝑇ℎ𝑟𝑜𝑢𝑔ℎ𝑝𝑢𝑡=
ே௨௠௕௘௥௢௙஽௘௖௢ௗ௘ௗ௕௜௧௦
஽௘௖௢ௗ௜௡௚்௜௠௘
             
(9) 
 
 
b) Hardware Complexity 
The resources required to construct the LDPC decoder in 
hardware are referred to as hardware complexity. It is 
evaluated by using equation (10) 
 
𝐻𝑎𝑟𝑑𝑤𝑎𝑟𝑒𝐶𝑜𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒𝑥𝑖𝑡𝑦=
ோ௘௦௢௨௥௖௘௦௨௦௘ௗ௕௬௧ℎ௘ௗ௘௖௢ௗ௘௥௦
்௢௧௔௟௔௩௔௜௟௔௕௟௘௥௘௖௢௨௥௖௘
  
(10) 
 
c) Bit error rate 
A bit error rate (BER) calculates the proportion of bits received 
incorrectly to all bits sent. It is represented by using equation 
(11) 
 
𝐵𝐸𝑅=
ே௨௠௕௘௥௢௙௕௜௧௘௥௥௢௥௦
்௢௧௔௟௡௨௠௕௘௥௢௙௕௜௧௦௧௥௔௡௦௠௜௧௧௘ௗ          
      
(11) 
 
 
B. Performance Analysis 
Figure 2-4 shows simulation outcomes of LDPC-LC-VPPSOA 
technique. Then, the proposed LDPC-LC-VPPSOA techniques 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:21:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
are compared with existing UHTLC-LDPCD-LC, SHTLL-
LDPCD-SIMD and HRSS-LDPC-KC models. 
 
Figure 2: Performance Analysis of Decoding Throughput 
Figure 2 depicts Performance Analysis of Decoding 
Throughput. Here, the VPPSOA effectively handles extrinsic 
message updates and reduces decoding delays, enabling 
optimized parallel processing those results in a high decoding 
throughput. The proposed LDPC-LC-VPPSOA method attains 
18.34%, 16.23%, 19.56% higher decoding throughput at 
number of iteration of 100: 16.07%, 17.56%, 15.44% higher 
decoding throughput at number of iteration of 300; 12.33%, 
15.23% and 17.35% higher decoding throughput at number of 
iteration of 500; compared with existing UHTLC-LDPCD-LC, 
SHTLL-LDPCD-SIMD and HRSS-LDPC-KC models 
 
Figure 3: Performance Analysis of Hardware Complexity 
Figure 3 depicts Performance Analysis of Hardware 
Complexity. As a result of the effective usage of an Intra-
Frame Parallel scheme and Inter-Frame Pipeline, which are 
optimised by VPPSOA, the hardware complexity is low, 
allowing for high throughput while minimising resource 
consumption. 
The 
LDPC-LC-VPPSOA 
method 
attains 
16.55%, 24.12% and 27.22% lower Hardware Complexity; 
compared with the existing UHTLC-LDPCD-LC, SHTLL-
LDPCD-SIMD and HRSS-LDPC-KC models. 
 
Figure 4: Performance Analysis of Bit error rate 
Figure 4 depicts Performance Analysis of Bit error rate. 
The VPPSOA-based LDPC decoder's low Bit Error Rate 
(BER) is the result of effective decoding parameter 
optimization, which reduces errors and increases decoding 
accuracy in laser communications. The LDPC-LC-VPPSOA 
method attains 18.36%, 20.45% and 21.67% lower Bit error 
rate at number of iteration of 100; 25.67%, 26.45% and 
27.34% lower Bit error rate at number of iteration of 
300;22.34%, 25.38% and 27.45% lower Bit error rate at 
number of iteration of 500; compared with the existing 
UHTLC-LDPCD-LC, SHTLL-LDPCD-SIMD and HRSS-
LDPC-KC models. 
C. Discussion 
In this section, the proposed LDPC-LC-VPPSOA approach is 
discussed. Decoders attain highest throughput at the rate of 
highest source expenditure. Using a integration of five 
decoders, the proposed decoder achieves a 50% reduction in 
resource usage and a throughput that is 1.3 times higher than 
that of a single decoder. Even with a single decoder, this 
architecture delivers more than double the throughput 
compared to designs from existing approaches, while 
maintaining the same level of resource usage. The proposed 
decoder leverages ASIP structure to minimize hardware 
difficulty while enhancing throughput decoding. Notably, the 
decoder makes efficient use of flip-flop (FF) resources, which 
remain relatively low, but it exhibits a higher reliance on 
lookup tables (LUTs). Implementation comparisons further 
demonstrate that achieving lower critical path delays is 
facilitated by a well-optimized allocation of hardware 
resources. The FPGA frequency is constrained to 260 MHz 
due to the critical path. However, the proposed decoder makes 
a more balanced use of both LUT and FF resources, which 
could result in higher decoding throughput and reduced critical 
path latency. Comparisons reveal that the proposed decoder 
maintains 
low 
hardware 
complexity 
while 
delivering 
impressive throughput. 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
This research presents a Lower-Density Parity-Check decoder 
used for future laser transportation, assisted through the 
advanced Inter-Frame Pipeline and Intra-Frame Parallel 
architecture. The decoder generates efficient IFPP by 
maximizing the use of processing units through the VPPSO 
algorithm and the UAMP scheme. To achieve IFP, it also 
employs low-complexity data alignment units and integrates 
efficient message-packing strategies. Xilinx XCKU060 FPGA 
is utilized to implement the proposed approach. The LDPC-
LC-VPPSOA approach attains 18.34%, 16.23%, 19.56% 
higher decoding throughput18.36%, 20.45% and 21.67% lower 
Bit error rate when analyzed with the existing methods like 
UHTLC-LDPCD-LC, SHTLL-LDPCD-SIMD and HRSS-
LDPC-KC respectively. The future work involves, extending 
the 
proposed 
LDPC 
decoder 
for 
more 
extensive 
communication systems, like satellite and underwater optical 
communications, improving resilience to various channel 
impairments, and investigating integration with quantum error 
correction for next-generation networks. 
 
 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:21:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
REFERENCES 
[1] Barakatain, M., Hashemi, Y., Karimi, B., Ebrahimzad, H. and Li, C., 
2023. Low-complexity zipper-LDPC and low-latency zipper-BCH 
concatenated codes. Journal of Lightwave Technology. 
[2] Ma, L., Yang, J., Zhang, T., Shao, Y., Liu, J., Luo, Y., Wang, H., 
Huang, W., Fan, F., Zhou, C. and Zhang, L., 2023. Practical 
continuous-variable 
quantum 
key 
distribution 
with 
feasible 
optimization parameters. Science China Information Sciences, 66(8), 
p.180507. 
[3] Verma, A. and Shrestha, R., 2022. Low computational-complexity 
SOMS-algorithm and high-throughput decoder architecture for QC-
LDPC codes. IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology, 72(1), 
pp.66-80. 
[4] Venkatesh, D.Y., Mallikarjunaiah, K. and Srikantaswamy, M., 2023. A 
High-Throughput Reconfigurable LDPC Codec for Wide Band Digital 
Communications. Journal Européen des Systèmes Automatisés, 56(4). 
[5] Le Gal, B., 2024. Scalable High-Throughput And Low-Latency DVB-
S2 (x) LDPC Decoders On SIMD Devices. IEEE Open Journal of the 
Communications Society. 
[6] Shi, H., Luo, Z. and Li, C., 2024. An LDPC-RS Concatenation and 
Decoding Scheme to Lower the Error Floor for FTN Signaling. 
Electronics, 13(8), p.1588. 
[7] Li, Y., Xue, J., Wu, X., Zhang, Y. and Zhang, Y., 2025. Application of 
LDPC Code in PM-DQPSK System of Consumer Internet of Things 
Networks. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics. 
[8] Haddadi, S., Farhang, M. and Derakhtian, M., 2022. Reliability‐based 
quantization for soft decoding of LDPC codes in short‐reach optical 
links. IET Communications, 16(1), pp.91-99. 
[9] Li, H., Yu, Z., Lu, T., Zheng, W., Feng, H., Ma, Z. and Zhu, F., 2022. 
Novel memory efficient LDPC decoders for beyond 5G. Physical 
Communication, 51, p.101538. 
[10] Almazmomi, N.K., 2025. Enhanced Reed–Solomon Error Correction 
Framework for Reliable Data Transmission in Noisy Communication 
Systems. Internet Technology Letters, p.e634. 
[11] Kang, J., An, J. and Zhu, Y., 2024. Universal High-Throughput and 
Low-Complexity LDPC Decoder for Laser Communications. IEEE 
Access. 
[12] Le Gal, B., 2024. Scalable High-Throughput And Low-Latency DVB-
S2 (x) LDPC Decoders On SIMD Devices. IEEE Open Journal of the 
Communications Society.  
[13] Nguyen, L., Phan, Q.B. and Nguyen, T.T., 2024. Highly Reliable and 
Secure System with Multi-Layer Parallel LDPC and Kyber for 5G 
Communications. IEEE Access. 
[14] Luo, M., Guo, Q., Jin, M., Eldar, Y.C., Huang, D. and Meng, X., 2021. 
Unitary 
approximate 
message 
passing 
for 
sparse 
Bayesian 
learning. IEEE transactions on signal processing, 69, pp.6023-6039. 
[15] Shami, T.M., Mirjalili, S., Al-Eryani, Y., Daoudi, K., Izadi, S. and 
Abualigah, L., 2023. Velocity pausing particle swarm optimization: A 
novel variant for global optimization. Neural Computing and 
Applications, 35(12), pp.9193-9223. 
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:21:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
