216

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Message Passing-Based Decoding of Convolutional Codes: Performance and Complexity Analysis
Hossein Mani, Student Member, IEEE, and Hamid Saeedi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this letter, we propose to apply message passing algorithms to decode standard convolutional codes and assess the resulting performance and the required complexity compared to conventional decoding algorithms for convolutional codes by concentrating on the Viterbi algorithm (VA). We show that, in contrast to the VA for which the decoding complexity increases exponentially with m, the number of memory blocks for the proposed framework, such an increase, is only linear in m. This suggests that applying message passing algorithms can provide considerable savings in the required computational power if it can also exhibit a comparable bit-error-rate performance to that of the VA. In this letter, we show via simulations that this is in fact the case for convolutional codes.
Index Terms—Convolutional codes, message passing algorithm, low-density parity-check codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
E RROR correction is an essential part of almost any communication system to provide a reliable and error free data transmission. Convolutional Codes (CC) and their parallel concatenated version (Turbo codes) [1] are two well-known error correction codes. One of the most important benefits of CC’s is their simple encoding structure for implementation. As for decoding, several optimal and sub-optimal methods have been proposed.
Viterbi algorithm (VA) [2] provides the maximum likelihood sequence-wise decoding and is widely adopted in communication systems. The downside of VA is that it can not generate soft output data which is essential when CC’s are to be used within an iterative framework such as turbo codes. Consequently, the more complex BCJR algorithm [3] was adopted where it can provide bitwise Maximum A Posteriori (MAP) decoding. This is also known as the log-MAP algorithm. Due to its rather high complexity, several suboptimal methods were presented such as Max-log-MAP and Soft-Output Viterbi Algorithm (SOVA) [4]. In [5] a modified version of SOVA is presented which is shown to be equivalent to the Max-Log MAP decoding. Despite their differences, all these algorithms share a common characteristic: their decoding complexity increases exponentially with the number of CC memory blocks.
Shortly after introduction of turbo codes, Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes were rediscovered [6] and have exhibited a competing performance to that of turbo codes.
Manuscript received June 2, 2015; revised November 23, 2015; accepted November 27, 2015. Date of publication December 17, 2015; date of current version February 12, 2016. This work was supported by the Iran National Elites Foundation. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was E. Paolini.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Tarbiat Modares University, Tehran 14115-194, Iran (e-mail: hsaeedi@modares.ac.ir).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2015.2508459

A family of iterative message passing (MP) algorithms have been proposed for bitwise decoding of LDPC codes which are performed on the equivalent Tanner graph representation [7] of the code parity check matrix. Among them, the Belief Propagation (BP) decoding is the most well-known algorithm and is shown to provide near optimal performance for large enough block lengths as long as the parity check matrix is sparse. A suboptimal approach called Min-Sum (MS) [8] is usually deployed in practice to have more numerical stability but causes some performance loss compared to BP. Consequently, a modified version of the MS algorithm, Offset Min-Sum (OMS), was proposed [9] which can partly compensate for such a performance loss. The complexity of both BP and MS algorithms to decode LDPC codes grow almost linearly with respect to the block length.
Given the above discussions, a natural question is whether MP decoding can be deployed to decode CC’s and if so, whether there is any advantage in terms of performance and complexity compared to the existing algorithms. In particular, one may ask if the corresponding MP decoding complexity also grows exponentially with number of CC memory blocks. In this paper, we first show that the corresponding parity check matrix of a CC is sparse, making it a suitable candidate for MP decoding. Moreover, we show that the decoding complexity growth versus the number of memory blocks, denoted by m, is linear which is much slower than the exponential growth corresponding to conventional decoding algorithms. Then by choosing VA as a representative among the conventional decoding algorithms, through simulations, we show that for CC’s with practical memory sizes, OMS decoding provides almost the same performance as that of VA while exhibiting a much lower complexity compared to that of VA. In fact, by increasing the number of memory blocks, the complexity gap keeps increasing while the performance stays approximately the same. Given that MP decoding generates soft output, it can also be deployed within a turbo code framework in contrast to the VA.
It is important to note that the idea of decoding CC’s based on MP has already been proposed [10] in the context of the so-called LDPC Convolutional codes (LDPC-CC) [11]. LDPCCC’s are CC’s designed in such a way that they can be decoded based on MP algorithms with satisfactory performance results. The main purpose of their invention is to take advantage of low-complexity encoding property of CC’s as well as their low decoding latency, while maintaining the powerful decoding capability of LDPC codes. Since their introduction, a large volume of research has been to devoted to analyse such codes and to improve their performance, see e.g., [12]–[16]. In particular in [10], three different classes of LDPC-CC’s are introduced. A comprehensive comparison between LDPC block codes and

1558-2558 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANI AND SAEEDI: MESSAGE PASSING-BASED DECODING OF CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

217

LDPC-CC’s is presented in [13]. One of the best known examples of LDPC-CC’s, array convolutional LDPC code, has been introduced in [14]. Improving minimum distance and girth of such codes has been investigated in [15], [16].
We would like to mention that our work is conceptually different than the works on LDPC-CC’s. In our case, we consider some existing CC’s that are already designed/optimized for VA decoding and perhaps have already been deployed in communications systems and standards. We then suggest using MP-based decoding to reduce the decoding complexity while maintaining the performance. LDPC-CC’s on the other hand, are specifically designed to meet the criteria necessary for successful implementation of MP decoding algorithms.
We also remind that deployment of the MP algorithms instead of the VA, will automatically impose a latency equal to the decoding block length on the system. However, as far as the block length is not too long, this added latency is tolerable [17]. This is in fact the case in this paper as the deployed block length is only 1000 bits.
The rest of this letter is organized as follows: In Section II, we show how to obtain the equivalent parity check matrix for a CC. Section III presents a complexity comparison framework for VA and OMS algorithms. Simulation results are presented in Section IV and Section V concludes the paper.

II. EQUIVALENT PARITY CHECK MATRIX FOR CC’S

Any CC with p input sequences and q output sequences,

denoted by C(q, p, m), can be completely described by the so-

called D-domain generator matrix G(D). A general form of

a p × q D-domain generator matrix can be demonstrated as

follows:

⎛

⎞

g1,1(D) g1,2(D) · · · g1,q (D)

G(D)

=

⎜⎜⎜⎝

g2,1 ( D ) ...

g2,2 ( D ) ...

··· ...

g2,q ( ...

D)

⎠⎟⎟⎟

,

(1)

gp,1(D) gp,2(D) · · · gp,q (D)

where gi, j (D) s, i ∈ {1, · · · , p}, j ∈ {1, · · · , q} are called

generator polynomials.

Each element in G(D) can be described by its binary

or octal equivalence. For example consider a rate 1/2 con-

volutional code described by G(D) = [1 + D + D2 + D3 +

D6, 1 + D2 + D3 + D5 + D6]. Then the binary and octal

forms are Gbin = [1111001, 1011011] and Goct = [171, 133],

respectively. Based on the invariant-factor theorem [18], for

any CC C(q, p, m), the corresponding G(D) can be trans-

formed into its canonical form called D-domain basic gener-

ator matrix. In [19], the authors propose an algorithm called

extended invariant factor algorithm in which one can efficiently

obtain the equivalent D-domain parity check matrix, denoted

by H (D), using the basic generator matrix corresponding to

G(D). In general, the D-domain (q − p) × q parity check

matrix H (D⎛) can be demonstrated as follows:

⎞

h1,1(D) h1,2(D) · · · h1,q (D)

H (D) = ⎝⎜⎜⎜

h 2,1 ( D ) ...

h 2,2 ( D ) ...

··· ...

h2,q (D) ...

⎟⎟⎟⎠ ,

(2)

hq−p,1(D) hq−p,2(D) · · · hq−p,q (D)

where hi, j (D) are generator polynomials of H (D), ∀ i ∈

{1, · · · , q − p} and ∀ j ∈ {1, · · · , q} for which hi, j (D) =

m 0

hli, j Dl .

In

order

to

be

able

to

apply

the

MP

algorithm,

we need to obtain the actual binary version of the parity check

matrix corresponding to H (D). To do so, we define the binary

(q − p) × q matrix Hl as

⎛ Hl = ⎜⎜⎜⎝⎜

hl1,1 hl2,1
...

hl1,2 hl2,2
...

··· ··· ...

hl1,q hl2,q
...

⎞ ⎟⎟⎟⎟⎠ .

(3)

hlq− p,1 hlq− p,2 · · · hlq− p,q

Now the parity matrix Hbin is obtained as follows:

⎛

⎞

Hm · · · H1 H0

Hbin = ⎝⎜⎜⎜

Hm · · · H1 H0 Hm · · · H1 H0

⎠⎟⎟⎟ .

(4)

... ... ... ...

Note that each row of Hbin, itself is a matrix with q − p rows. In each row of such a matrix, there are (m + 1) × q nonzero columns. These columns constitute a (q − p) × (m + 1)q matrix where we call it an edge block. In (4), the matrix [Hm · · · H1 H0] is in fact the aforementioned edge block. As can be seen, the parity check matrix Hbin is composed of circularly shifted versions of its matrix-based first row. It can be
easily proved that the resulting matrix is sparse.

III. COMPUTATIONAL COMPLEXITY
In this section, we present the decoding computational complexity for the two decoding categories of CC’s. As mentioned before, we choose the VA to represent the conventional category. Note that other algorithms have, in general, a higher complexity than the VA. This algorithm is performed based on the so-called add-compare-select (ACS) operations. Consider a rate p/q convolutional code with 2m states. The VA performs 2m ACS operations for each received symbol at each time. Each ACS operation for each state contains 2p additions and 2p comparisons. Thus, VA performs 2p+m additions and the same number of comparison for each block of length N .
To be able to compare the decoding complexity of the two categories, we chose the OMS [9] algorithm among the ones in the MP decoding category. Similar to the VA, this algorithm is also performed based on addition and comparison operations which makes it a good candidate to be compared with the VA from complexity point of view. Note, however, the OMS algorithm genially performs inferior to the BP, the optimal MP algorithm.
In LDPC code literature, for a given (N − K ) × N parity check matrix corresponding to an (N , K ) code, the average number of ones in each row is called average check node degree and is denoted by dc. Similarly, dv denotes average variable node degree, which is the average number of ones in columns of the parity check matrix. It has been shown that for a code of rate R, we have: R ≥ 1 − dv/dc. The MS complexity per iteration has been obtained in [20] for a given ensemble of an LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

218
TABLE I DECODING COMPLEXITY FOR THE OMS AND VA

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 20, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

TABLE II STANDARD CC’S WITH RATE 2/3
TABLE III STANDARD CC’S WITH RATE 1/2

Fig. 1. Decoding complexity of rate 1/2 CC’s for different values of m.
TABLE IV RATE 1/2 CC’S MODIFIED TO REMOVE LENGTH 4 CYCLES

code with average variable and check node degrees of dv and dc. The OMS complexity can be assumed almost the same.
In our case, dc is equal to the number of ones in different rows of the edge block which should be averaged over. To be able to have a general formulation, we replace this value with its upper bound, i.e., q(m + 1) (this corresponds to an all-one edge block.). Using the results of [20], for a rate p/q CC with memory m, the number of comparisons is obtained as I × q(m + 1)(N − K ) where I is the maximum number of iterations. The same value is also obtained for the number of additions. A summary for number of additions and comparisons as a function of m has been given in Table I.
As can be seen, for the VA, the complexity grows exponentially with m while this increase is linear in m when the OMS decoding is applied. This suggests huge savings in computational power, specially for larger values of m, as far as the performance of both decoders remain close.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we focus on rate 2/3 and 1/2 CC’s and compare the VA and OMS decoding from performance and complexity points of view for different values of m. For a given number of memory blocks, we consider the best CC’s designed based on the maximum free distance criteria [21]. The corresponding generator polynomials have been reported in Tables II and III for rate 2/3 and 1/2, respectively. We also set block length to N = 1000 bits. For OMS decoding, we have set the maximum number of iterations to 20. We have illustrated the number of comparisons and additions for both decoding algorithms in Fig. 1.
As predicted in the previous section, as m increases, we observe a huge gap between the complexity of OMS decoding and that of the VA. In fact, this gap is as large as one order of magnitude for larger values of m.

Fig. 2. Performance of rate 2/3 CC’s with different number of memory blocks.
It is important to note that an effective factor in the performance of MP decoding algorithms is the number of cycles with short length in the corresponding Tanner graph of the code. The length of the shortest cycle in a graph is called the graph girth. In particular, a graph with girth of length 4 might not be a good candidate for MP decoding. All codes in Tables II and III have girth of length 4. By a slight modification in the generator polynomials, we can simply remove cycles of length 4. The resulting generator polynomials have been reported in Table IV.
Bit and message error rate performances for both decoding cases have been reported in Figures 2 and 3 for codes corresponding to Tables II and III, respectively. As can be seen, for rate 2/3, the performance of both decoders is very close. However, for codes of rate 1/2, the Viterbi decoder outperforms the OMS decoder for larger values of m.
The performance of MS decoding of the modified codes corresponding to Table IV has been reported in Fig. 4 and is compared against the codes in Table III when decoded by the VA. As can be seen, removal of short cycles has improved the performance such that even for m = 10, the performance is very close to that of VA.
It is important to note that one can take advantage of the ability of OMS decoding to generate soft outputs and use it to decode Turbo codes. We actually did so and compared the performance of 2 turbo codes of rate 1/3, consisting of 2 rate

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MANI AND SAEEDI: MESSAGE PASSING-BASED DECODING OF CONVOLUTIONAL CODES

219

performance while exhibiting complexity much lower than that of the VA. Another advantage of the proposed scheme is that OMS decoding can provide soft output in contrast to the VA. Given the fact that the BCJR algorithm exhibits even higher complexity than the VA, the proposed scheme was applied to turbo decoding and similar performance results were obtained while decoding complexity was considerably reduced.

Fig. 3. Performance of standard rate 1/2 CC’s.
Fig. 4. Performance of rate 1/2 CC’s modified to remove length 4 cycles.
1/2 CC’s with memory size of 4. The first turbo code uses the second CC from Table III as its component codes and is decoded using the standard BCJR-based algorithm. The second turbo code uses the second CC from Table IV as its component codes. This code uses OMS decoding with 20 iterations for each CC at each turbo iteration. The number of turbo iterations is set to 5. Simulation results show a very close performance between 2 codes but are not reported here due to space limitations. The complexity reduction in this case is even more pronounced compared to previous examples as now we have 2 CC’s to be decoded through several turbo iterations. Moreover, note that the BCJR algorithm is in general more complex than the VA.
V. CONCLUSION In this letter, we applied the OMS algorithm to decode CC’s and analysed the resulting performance and the required decoding complexity compared to that of VA. It was shown that the complexity associated with the OMS decoding increases linearly with respect to m, the number of memory blocks. This is while the complexity for the VA increases exponentially in m. Through simulations, we then showed that for rate 2/3 and 1/2 CC’s, the OMS algorithm provides approximately the same

REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[2] A. Viterbi, “Error bounds for convolutional codes and an asymptotically optimum decoding algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 13, no. 2, pp. 260–269, Apr. 1967.
[3] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 284–2–287, Mar. 1974.
[4] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 1986, pp. 1680–1686.
[5] M. P. C. Fossorier, F. Burkert, S. Lin, and J. Hagenauer, “On the equivalence between SOVA and max-log-MAP decodings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 2, no. 5, pp. 284–2–287, May 1998.
[6] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[7] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[8] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[9] C. Jinghu and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BPbased decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[10] M. Lentmaier, G. Fettweis, K. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello Jr., “Convolutional codes for iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Symp. Spread Spectr. Techn. Appl. (ISSSTA), 2008, pp. 785–789.
[11] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. Fuja, and D. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 1996.
[12] G. Cancellieri, Polynomial Theory of Error Correcting Codes. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 2015.
[13] N. Hassan, M. Lentmaier, and G. Fettweis, “Comparison of LDPC block and LDPC convolutional codes based on their decoding latency,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Nov. 2012, pp. 225–229.
[14] M. Baldi, G. Cancellieri, and F. Chiaraluce, “Array convolutional lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 336– 339, Feb. 2014.
[15] O. Milenkovic, N. Kashyap, and D. Leyba, “Shortened array codes of large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3707–3722, Aug. 2006.
[16] T. Asamov and N. Aydin, “LDPC codes of arbitrary girth,” in Proc. Can. Workshop Inf. Theory, Jun. 2007, pp. 69–72.
[17] S. Maiya, D. J. Costello Jr., and T. Fuja, “Low latency coding: Convolutional codes vs. LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 5, pp. 1215–1225, May 2012.
[18] G. D. Forney, “Convolutional codes I: Algebraic structure,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 720–738, Nov. 1970.
[19] R. J. Mceliece and I. Onyszchuk, “The extended invariant factor algorithm with application to the Forney analysis of convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), San Antonio, TX, USA, Jan. 1993, pp. 142–142.
[20] M. Sabbaghian and D. Falconer, “Comparison between convolutional and LDPC code-based turbo frequency domain equalization,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2006, pp. 5432–5437.
[21] Y. P. Labonov, “Asymptotic bit error probability for convolutional codes,” Problemy Peredaci Informacii (Prob. Inf. Transmiss.), vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 89–94, 1991.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

