IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 34, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

345

On the Waterfall Performance of Finite-Length SC-LDPC Codes Constructed From Protographs
Markus Stinner, Student Member, IEEE, and Pablo M. Olmos, Member, IEEE

Abstract—An analysis of spatially coupled low-density paritycheck (SC-LDPC) codes constructed from protographs is proposed. Given the protograph used to generate the SC-LDPC code ensemble, a set of scaling parameters to characterize the average finite-length performance in the waterfall region is computed. The error performance of structured SC-LDPC code ensembles is shown to follow a scaling law similar to that of unstructured randomly constructed SC-LDPC codes. Under a finite-length perspective, some of the most relevant SC-LDPC protograph structures proposed to date are compared. The analysis reveals significant differences in their finite-length scaling behavior, which is corroborated by simulation. Spatially coupled repeat-accumulate codes present excellent finite-length performance, as they outperform in the waterfall region SC-LDPC codes of the same rate and better asymptotic thresholds.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs, iterative decoding, finite-length analysis, capacity-achieving codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
S PATIALLY-coupled low-density parity-check (SC-LDPC) codes can achieve the channel capacity of binary-input memoryless symmetric (BMS) channels under belief propagation (BP) decoding [1]–[3]. The Tanner graph of a block code with M variable nodes, referred to as the uncoupled LDPC code graph, is duplicated L times to produce a sequence of identical graphs, where L is the chain length of the SC-LDPC code. The different copies are connected to form a chain by redirecting (spreading) certain edges. The resulting graph has L positions with M bits each and a so-called “structured irregularity” since parity check nodes located at both ends of the chain are connected to a smaller number of variable nodes than those in the middle [4]. As a result, the nodes at the ends of the graph form strong “sub-codes” and the reliable information generated there during BP decoding propagates through the chain toward the center in a wave-like fashion [2]. The
Manuscript received April 01, 2015; revised September 04, 2015; accepted October 23, 2015. Date of publication November 26, 2015; date of current version January 14, 2016. The work of M. Stinner was supported by an Alexander von Humboldt Professorship endowed by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research. The work of P. M. Olmos was supported by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation ALCIT (TEC201238800-C03-01) and Comunidad de Madrid (project ‘CASI-CAM-CM,’ id. S2013/ICE-2845).
M. Stinner is with the Institute for Communications Engineering, Technische Universität München, München, Germany (e-mail: markus.stinner@tum.de).
P. M. Olmos is with the Signal Theory and Communications Department, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Getafe, Spain. He also with Gregorio Marañón Health Research Institute, Spain (e-mail: olmos@tsc.uc3m.es).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSAC.2015.2504279

asymptotic analysis of SC-LDPC code ensembles shows that they exhibit a BP threshold close to the maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) threshold of the uncoupled LDPC code ensemble for sufficiently large L. In addition, SC-LDPC code ensembles can be designed with a linear growth of the minimum distance with M [5], [6]. Indeed, the minimum distance growth rate for the coupled LDPC ensemble is often better than for the uncoupled ensemble [5], [7].
Multiple families of SC-LDPC codes have been proposed and analyzed. In [1], [2], the authors consider a family of codes generated by coupling a series of (l, r )-regular LDPC codes following a random pattern, which simplifies asymptotic analysis via density evolution (DE). Alternatively, SC-LDPC codes can be constructed with a predefined coupling structure using protographs [8], defining a particular subclass of multiedge type (MET) ensembles [9]. The structure of the code imposed by the protograph offers advantages such as smaller memory requirements due to a simplified graph representation, high-speed decoding by exploiting the parallel structure of the graph [10], and the ability to combine low error floors and good thresholds [11], [12].
A. Asymptotic Analysis
Several SC-LDPC code ensembles constructed from protographs are compared in [7], [13]–[15] using asymptotic arguments, namely BP threshold and minimum distance growth rate. Among others, SC-LDPC protograph structures constructed by coupling (l, r )-regular LDPC codes, repeataccumulate (RA) codes [16], accumulate-jagged-accumulate (ARJA) codes [11] and MacKay-Neal (MN) codes [17] are analyzed. By increasing the density of the uncoupled code, most code families show thresholds close to capacity and vanishing error floors. Apart from small differences, no particular SC-LDPC code family clearly outperforms the others. For instance, in [7] it is concluded that an SC-LDPC code ensemble based on coupling (3, 6)-regular LDPC codes presents a worse threshold and minimum distance rate growth than the SCARJA code ensemble. However, the (4, 8)-regular SC-LDPC code ensemble is already competitive to the SC-ARJA code. In this regard, the search of a good SC-LDPC code for an specific application requires to compare additional practical aspects such as the code performance under sliding window decoding [18], the encoding/decoding complexity [19], the code robustness against puncturing to obtain high-rate codes and the SC-LDPC code performance in the waterfall region for short to moderate block lengths. These aspects remain open research problems [20].

0733-8716 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

346

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 34, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

B. Peeling Decoder and Finite-Length Analysis
The performance of finite-length LDPC codes using a BP decoder can be analyzed for the binary erasure channel (BEC) by studying an alternative decoder with equivalent performance, namely the peeling decoder (PD) [21]. Any time the value of a variable node is determined, this variable node and all attached edges are removed from the graph. Variable nodes are determined either due the received word or later during the decoding process if they are connected to a degree-one check node. In this way, a sequence of residual graphs is obtained. The analysis of the decoding process consists of studying the statistical evolution of this residual graph as a function of time. Following these ideas, a scaling law was proposed in [22], [23] to predict the finite-length performance of a random (l, r )regular SC-LDPC code ensemble, and methods to analytically compute some of the scaling parameters were discussed. The use of a random construction (not based on protographs) greatly simplifies the finite-length analysis, at the expense of using SC-LDPC code ensembles that have worse properties such as smaller minimum distance growth rate [7].

obtained insights, we derive general design rules to improve the finite-length performance of SC-LDPC codes.
Finally, we exploit the scaling law for SC-LDPC codes constructed from protographs to obtain analytic solutions to relevant questions that typically arise in the design process. We predict how the SC-LDPC code performance varies if either M or L (or both) are modified or which M needs to be chosen for a (4, 8)-regular LDPC code ensemble to match the performance of the (3, 6)-regular LDPC code ensemble with fixed M. Similarly, we use the proposed scaling law to compare the finite-length performance of SC-LDPC codes designed for a fixed constraint-length [24]. The constraintlength of a SC-LDPC code is an important parameter to design a window-decoder [25]. Finally, we also investigate if the structure inherited from the protograph construction improves the waterfall finite-length performance of the unstructured randomconstructed SC-LDPC code ensemble with the same design rate and degree distribution. These questions are of practical importance and can be addressed using the analysis presented in this paper without expensive and time-consuming simulations.

C. Summary of Results
In this paper, we analyze the waterfall performance of finite-length SC-LDPC code ensembles constructed from protographs. By generalizing the analysis proposed in [22], [23], we analytically compute a set of scaling parameters for each SC-LDPC code ensemble. This set of parameters characterizes the finite-length performance of the code over the binary erasure channel (BEC). The formulation proposed to obtain the scaling parameters is flexible and involved protograph structures with multiple edges between nodes and punctured bits can be analyzed. We also propose alternative and simpler methods to compute some of the scaling parameters.
From this perspective, we analyze some of the most relevant SC-LDPC code structures proposed to date: (l, r )-regular SCLDPC codes [4], SC-RA LDPC codes [15] and SC-ARJA codes [7]. All these codes exhibit capacity-approaching BP thresholds and low error floors. However, we show that their finite-length performance differs significantly for moderate block lengths M, i.e., a few thousand bits per position of the SC-LDPC code. For instance, at fixed L and M, the (4, 8)-regular SC-LDPC code is outperformed by an SC-RA LDPC code ensemble with equal average node density. This result is unexpected, as the SC-RA LDPC code ensemble has a worse threshold and a higher coding rate. We can explain and predict this behavior on the basis of finite-length properties, that is, the scaling parameters computed for each SC-LDPC code ensemble. In addition, in the same scenario the (4, 8)-regular SC-LDPC code ensemble clearly outperforms the SC-ARJA code ensemble, although these two ensembles are asymptotically comparable [7]. Beyond simulation-based comparisons, we are able to predict these results over the BEC using the scaling parameters computed analytically for each ensemble. Simulation results suggest that the main conclusions drawn from the scaling parameters for different ensembles are extensible to other channels such as the binary-input AWGN channel. Based on the

D. Organization
The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, we review the construction of the SC-LDPC code ensembles that are analyzed in the rest of the paper. In Section III, we give the equations that describe the expected graph evolution during PD of an SC-LDPC code graph constructed from protographs. They are used to derive some scaling parameters relevant for finitelength analysis. The graph covariance evolution is discussed in Section V. In Section VI, we present the scaling law to predict the SC-LDPC block error rate and we compare several SC-LDPC code ensembles. In Section VII, we compare the finite-length performance of structured protograph SC-LDPC code ensembles and unstructured ensembles of the same degree distribution and design rate. In Section VIII, we include further experimental results to demonstrate the accuracy of the scaling law and to understand the behavior of finite-length SC-LDPC codes. Finally, in Section IX we provide some concluding remarks and potential future lines of research.
II. SC-LDPC CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM PROTOGRAPHS
We describe SC-LDPC code ensembles proposed in the past years that are constructed using protographs [7], [13], [15]. A protograph [8], or projected graph, is a Tanner graph with a relatively small number of nodes. It can be also represented in a compact form by its bi-adjacency matrix B, called the base matrix. An N c × N v parity-check matrix H can be derived from a protograph with c check nodes and v variable nodes. A lifting procedure with lifting factor N replaces each 1 in B by an N × N permutation matrix and each 0 by an N × N all-zero matrix1. The code ensemble consists of the set of all possible matrices H derived from all possible combinations of N × N
1Integer entries larger than one in B, representing multiple edges between a pair of nodes, are replaced by a sum of permutation matrices.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

STINNER AND OLMOS: ON WATERFALL PERFORMANCE OF FINITE-LENGTH SC-LDPC CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS

347

Fig. 1. Construction of the (l, r, L) = (3, 6, 3) coupled protograph. The edges are labelled to parameterize the degree distribution of the corresponding SCLDPC code ensemble, as described in Section III.

Fig. 2. A coupled SC-RA protograph with q = a = 4 and L = 3.

permutation matrices. Since the Tanner graph of H inherits the degree distribution (DD) and graph neighborhood structure of the protograph, the design rate of the ensemble can be directly computed from the protograph itself.

A. SC-LDPC Code Ensembles Based on (l,r)-regular LDPC Codes

The most common construction of a SC-LDPC code ensem-

ble is based on coupling (l,r)-regular LDPC codes [4]. Assume

r l

=

k

∈N

and

L

protographs

of

a

(l,r)-regular

LDPC

code

ensemble. Each uncoupled protograph has nu = k variable

nodes and a single parity-check node. Fig. 1 depicts an exam-

ple with l = 3 and r = 6. To generate the coupled protograph,

each variable node at position u, u = 1, . . . , L, is connected to

the check nodes at positions u, u + 1, . . . , u + l − 1 as shown

in Fig. 1 for L = 3. The ensemble of codes generated using

the resulting (coupled) protograph is denoted by (l, r, L). The

design rate of the ensemble is

r(l ,r, L )

=

1

−

(L

+l − kL

1) ,

(1)

and the code block length is n = nu L N = k L N bits.

Fig. 3. A coupled SC-ARJA protograph with L = 3. Punctured variable nodes are white.

We restrict to the case q = a and we denote the resulting SC-LDPC code ensemble by RA(q, L). Fig. 2 shows the protograph of a RA(4, 3) code ensemble. While the message variable node of position u, u = 1, . . . , L, is connected to the check nodes at positions u, . . . , u + q − 1, the accumulator variable node at position u has two edges to the check node at the same position to keep the RA code accumulator structure as described in [15]. There are also added q − 1 accumulator variable nodes at the termination to avoid check nodes connected to a single variable node (to which we refer as a deg-1 check node). The design code rate is

rRA(q , L )

=

1

−

L + (q − 1) nu L + q − 1

=

1

−

L + (q − 1) 2L + q − 1

,

(2)

and the code block length is n = (nu L + q − 1)N = (2L + q − 1)N .

B. SC-LDPC Code Ensembles Based on RA Codes

Regular repeat-accumulate (RA) codes were first proposed in [16]. We consider uncoupled (q, a)-regular RA codes, constructed from a rate-1/q repetition code and a 1/(1 + D) convolutional code, called the accumulator, with an interleaver,
, and an optional rate-a combiner between them. RA codes can be encoded using a serial concatenation of the constituent encoders and decoded using iterative decoding, thus presenting low encoding and decoding complexity. Fig. 2 depicts an example of the RA protograph for q = a = 4, where the accumulator node is marked grey. Note that for q = a, the uncoupled protograph has nu = 2 variable nodes and a single check node, and thus the rate is r = 0.5. Unlike regular LDPC codes, the minimum distance of (q, a)-regular RA code ensembles does not grow linearly with the block length n, so they are not considered to be asymptotically good codes [26]. As shown in [27], [26], the minimum distance of this ensemble grows with n as O(nν), where (q − 2)/q − ξ < ν < (q − 1)/q and ξ can be made arbitrarily small. For sufficiently large q, RA codes with acceptable minimum distance can be found.
Spatially coupled RA codes (SC-RA codes) have been recently proposed in [15]. The coupling creates SC-RA code ensembles with capacity-achieving properties as q increases.

C. SC-LDPC Codes Based on ARJA Codes

The construction of repeat-accumulate codes in [16] was generalized to irregular RA structures [11], [28] in order to obtain ensembles with good iterative decoding thresholds and linear minimum distance growth. An interesting example is the accumulate-repeat-jagged-accumulate (ARJA) and accumulate-repeat-by-4-jagged-accumulate (AR4JA) family of codes [11]. We focus on the ARJA protograph since it has r = 0.5. The ARJA protograph is illustrated in Fig. 3. The white nodes represent punctured variable nodes, i.e. these bits are not transmitted. In a Tanner graph generated by this protograph, the N copies of the punctured variable node are also punctured. In Fig. 3 we also include the coupled protograph as proposed in [13], [7]. We denote the ensemble of codes generated by this protograph by ARJA(L). The design rate is

L −1

rARJA(L) = 2L .

(3)

The number of bits in the uncoupled protograph is nu = 5 and hence the block length of the terminated SC-LDPC code is n = nu L N = 5L N.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

348

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 34, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

TABLE I

CODING RATE r, BEC BP THRESHOLD ∗, UNCOUPLED BEC BP

THRESHOLD

∗ UN

COU

PL

ED

,

UNCOUPLED

AVERAGE

VARIABLE

dv

AND CHECK dc DEGREES AND UNCOUPLED MINIMUM DISTANCE

GROWTH RATE δUNCOUPLED FOR DIFFERENT SC-LDPC CODE

ENSEMBLES WITH L = 100

D. Asymptotic Performance
Table I lists the design coding rate r, BP threshold for the BEC ∗ and average degrees of variable nodes, dv, and check nodes, dc, for the SC-LDPC code ensembles described above, where we fix L = 100. We also include the minimum distance growth rate δuncoupled of the uncoupled LDPC code ensemble and the BP threshold for the uncoupled ensemble u∗ncoupled. The minimum distance growth rate δuncoupled is defined that, with high probability, the minimum distance of any code of the uncoupled LDPC code ensemble is at least as large as nδuncoupled [7]. Recall also that if the uncoupled LDPC code ensemble has a linear growth of the minimum distance as a function of the block length, this property is maintained, and for some cases improved, for the SC-LDPC code ensemble [20], [29]. The uncoupled RA code ensemble does not present a linear minimum distance with the block length and the corresponding δuncoupled entry is left blank. Nonetheless, it is guaranteed that the minimum distance of the uncoupled code ensemble (and thus also for the coupled RA(q, L) ensemble) improves with higher q [27], [26].
Based on the results in Table I, the ARJA(L) ensemble offers the best trade-off between coding rate and iterative decoding threshold. Its minimum distance is worse than that of the (3,6,100) or (4,8,100) ensembles but also grows linearly with the block length n. Observe that for the RA(q, L) ensemble, the threshold improves for increasing q. However, for q = 6, the density of the code is equivalent to the (4,8,100) ensemble, but the latter has a BP threshold closer to capacity. The gap to capacity ( ∗ − ) is 0.0173 for the (4,8,100) ensemble and 0.0187 for the RA(6, 100) ensemble. The (4,8,100) code ensemble also has linear minimum distance properties.
III. BEC TRANSMISSION AND PEELING DECODING
Consider transmission over the BEC with erasure probability and decoding using the peeling decoder (PD) [9]. At each step, the PD removes one deg-1 check node and its connected variable node as well as all edges connected to these two nodes. As a result, the PD process gives rise to a sequence of residual graphs. Applying the PD to codes of an LDPC code ensemble, the expected sequence of graphs or expected graph evolution can be computed by solving a system of coupled differential equations [30]. In [31], scaling laws (SLs) were proposed to predict the PD finite-length performance of the (l,r)-regular LDPC code ensemble in the waterfall region. The parameters

for the scaling law were also computed from the degree distribution (DD) of the ensemble, in particular (i) the threshold, (ii) the “critical time(s)” of the process, i.e. the time at which the expected number of deg-1 check nodes reaches a local minimum, (iii) the expected number of deg-1 check nodes at the critical time(s), and (iv) the variance of this quantity at the critical time(s). The first three parameters can be determined from the expected graph evolution. To determine the fourth parameter, an augmented system of differential equations must be solved [31].
In [22], [23] a scaling law was proposed to predict the finitelength performance of an unstructured randomized SC-LDPC code ensemble constructed from (l, r )-regular LDPC codes over the BEC, and methods to analytically compute some of the scaling parameters were discussed. In the following, we generalize the analysis to SC-LDPC code ensembles constructed using protographs. The analysis methodology remains essentially the same than in [22]. However, deriving and solving the set of differential equations that determine the statistical evolution of the graph along the decoding process is significantly more complex since the number of terms that define the DD of the graph in structured code ensembles is typically much larger than in unstructured ensembles.

A. Notation

Vectors are denoted with d = (d1, d2, . . . , dn). 0∼i, j,k

denotes a vector where all entries are zero except the entries

at positions i, j and k, whereas 1 denotes a vector where all

entries are ones. |d| =

n i =1

di

is

the

sum

of

all

entries

of

d.

B. Degree Distribution of Protograph-based Ensembles
Protograph-based codes are a subclass of MET LDPC codes. To parameterize the DD of a protograph-based code ensemble, we label each edge in the protograph connecting a different pair of nodes from 1 to m. For example, the protograph of an uncoupled (2, 4) LDPC ensemble is plotted in Fig. 4, including a labeling for each edge. Observe there are two edges of type 1 and two of type 2. In the Tanner graph of a code H generated by such a protograph, we say that a particular edge is of type, j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , m} if it connects a variable node and a check node that are copies of the two nodes that edge j connects in the protograph. We also define the type of a variable node by a vector d = (d1, . . . , dm), where d j ∈ N0 represents the number of edges of type j connected to this variable node. Similarly, for a check node, we define its type by a vector c. Let Vd (Rc) represent the number of variable (check) nodes of type d (c) in the Tanner graph of H. We denote the set of variable (check) node types in the graph by Fv (Fc). The set of parameters Vd, ∀d ∈ Fv, and Rc, ∀c ∈ Fc, constitute the DD of the code ensemble defined by the protograph2. For instance, the
2Note that the DD notation introduced here is only valid for protographbased LDPC code ensembles and does not apply for general MET LDPC ensembles. For MET ensembles, the DD is typically described using multinomials that, among other possible structure features, includes the channel parameter for each variable node [9]. For protograph-based ensembles a new edge type is defined for every edge in the protograph that connects a different pair of nodes whereas in MET ensembles, arbitrary type edge definitions are allowed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

STINNER AND OLMOS: ON WATERFALL PERFORMANCE OF FINITE-LENGTH SC-LDPC CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS

349

protograph in Fig. 4, the expected DD after PD initialization is as follows:

m = 2,

Fv = {(2, 0), (0, 2)} ,

Fig. 4. At the left, we show the protograph of a (2, 4)-regular LDPC code. At the right, we show different check types that may appear in the residual code Tanner graph after BEC transmission and PD initialization. Some residual graphs, e.g. (b), or (d) can result from different outcomes of the channel.

Fc = {(2, 0), (0, 2), (2, 2), (0, 0), (1, 1), (1, 0), (0, 1), (2, 1), (1, 2)} ,
V(2,0) = V(0,2) = N , R(2,0) = R(0,2) = 2(1 − )2 N , R(2,2) = 4 N , R(0,0) = (1 − )4 N ,

DD of the code ensemble generated from the (2, 4) protograph in Fig. 4 is as follows:
m = 2,
Fv = {(2, 0), (0, 2)} ,
Fc = {(2, 2)} ,
V(2,0) = V(0,2) = N ,
R(2,2) = N ,
where recall that N is the lifting factor. Note that the number of terms in the DD will quickly grow as we consider protographs with many variable and check nodes, such as the coupled protographs presented in Section II. For instance, according to the edge labeling in Fig. 1, the DD of the (3, 6, 3) SC-LDPC ensemble has 18 edge types which results in a vector of length 18 for every variable and check node type. There are 6 variable node types in Fv and the set of check node types Fc contains 5 terms.
C. PD Initialization
Assume a parity-check matrix H of the ensemble of codes spanned by a given protograph is used for transmission over a BEC with erasure probability . Consider the Tanner graph associated to H. To initialize the PD, we remove from the graph any variable node correctly received at the channel output and all its attached edges. As a consequence, the residual Tanner graph may contain check nodes with types that are not included in Fc. This is illustrated in Fig. 4 for an LDPC code generated from the (2, 4)-regular protograph. However, the set of variable node types Fv remains the same, as variables are either removed from the graph or remain in it without losing any edge.
Given a check node of type c, we define D(c) as the set of all possible check node types that can appear in the graph when edges are removed from a check node of type c. The extended set of all possible check node types in the residual graph after PD initialization is given with Fc = ∪c∈Fc D(c). Denote by Vd(0) (Rc(0)) the number of variable (check) nodes of type d(c) after PD initialization.
Based on these definitions, we compute the expected DD of the ensemble of residual graphs obtained after PD initialization. For the LDPC code ensemble generated by the (2, 4)-regular

R(1,1) = 4 2(1 − )2 N , R(1,0) = R(0,1) = 2 (1 − )3 N , R(2,1) = R(1,2) = 2 3(1 − )N .

Note that for the (3, 6, 3) ensemble with protograph in Fig. 1, Fc after PD initialization contains 104 terms. For an arbitrary protograph-based code ensemble with DD Vd, ∀d ∈ Fv, and Rc, ∀c ∈ Fc, the expected DD of the ensemble of residual graphs obtained after PD initialization is computed as follows:

Vd(0) = Vd,

(4)

Rc(0) =

Rq |c|−punc(q)(1 − )|q|−|c|+punc(q) (5)

q∈Fc :c∈D(q)

for d ∈ Fv and c ∈ Fc = ∪c∈Fc D(c), where punc(q) is the number of punctured variables connected to a check node with
type q (these variables are erased with probability 1).

D. Statistical Graph Evolution During PD

Denote time by ∈ N if measured in discrete steps and by τ

once it is rescaled to pass to the continuous limit for the diffe-

rential equations. At each iteration, the PD removes a deg-1

check node, the variable node itself and all attached edges. We

define the normalized DD as

τ =. , M

rc(τ )

=.

Rc(τ ) , M

vd(τ )

=.

Vd(τ ) , M

(6)

where is the PD iteration index, Rc(τ ) (Vd(τ )) is the number of check (variable) nodes in the graph of type c(d) at time τ ,

and M = nu N is the number of variable nodes in every position of the SC-LDPC code. Note that, in average, n variables

nodes are present in the graph after PD initialization and thus

τ ∈ [0, (L)), where

(L) = n = L + a

(7)

M

nu

and a is zero for the ensembles (l, r, L) and ARJA(L), and

a = (q − 1) for the RA(q, L) ensemble.

Following [31], we investigate the finite-length performance

of SC-LDPC code ensembles by analyzing the statistical evolu-

tion of the DD in (6) during the decoding process. The expected

value of rc(τ ) and vd(τ ), rˆc(τ ) and vˆd(τ ), is computed by solving the following system of differential equations:

∂vˆd(τ ) ∂τ

=

f(

Vd (τ ))

= E[ Vd (τ ) {vˆd(τ ), rˆc(τ )}d∈Fv,c∈Fc ]

(8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

350

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 34, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

∂rˆc(τ ) = f ( ∂τ

Rc (τ ))

= E[ Rc (τ ) {vˆd(τ ), rˆc(τ )}d∈Fv,c∈Fc ], (9)

where

1

Vd (τ )

=

Vd(τ

+

) M

−

Vd(τ ),

(10)

1

Rc (τ ) = Rc(τ + M ) − Rc(τ ).

(11)

Hence, the derivative of rˆc w.r.t. τ in (9) is evaluated by com-
puting how many check nodes of type c are created or removed
after one PD iteration if the DD at τ is exactly at its mean. A similar result holds for (8). We denote by Gˆ (τ ) the expected DD at τ , i.e. Gˆ (τ ) = {vˆd(τ ), rˆc(τ )}d∈Fv,c∈Fc .
The sol√ution to (8) and (9) is unique and with probability 1 − O(e− M ), any particular realization of the normalized DD in (6) deviates from its mean by a factor of less than M−1/6
[9, Appendix C] for the initial conditions

rˆc(0) = E[rc( = 0)] = E[Rc( = 0)]/M

(12)

vˆd(0) = E[vd( = 0)] = E[Vd( = 0)]/M, (13)

which have been computed in (4) and (5). The computation of the expectations f ( Vd (τ )) and f ( Rc (τ )) in (8) and (9) is given in Appendix A.
The decoding process lasts until all variable nodes have been
resolved or until there are no deg-1 check nodes left in the
graph. Since deg-1 check nodes correspond to check node types of the form 0∼ j , j = 1, . . . , m, we focus on the statistical evolution of the process

c1(τ ) =. m r0∼ j (τ ).

(14)

j =1

The BP threshold of the SC-LDPC code ensemble is given by the maximum for which the mean of the total fraction of deg-1 check nodes in the SC-LDPC residual graph, i.e.

c1(τ ) around cˆ1(τ ) in (15). As shown in [31], the covariance function between any pair of DD components rc(τ ) and rc (τ ), (c, c ) ∈ Fc × Fc, is given by δc,c (τ )/M, where δc,c (τ ) is the solution to the following differential equation:

∂δc,c (τ ) ∂τ

=

CoVar[

Rc ,

Rc

Gˆ (τ )]

+

∂ δc,u(τ )

f

(

Rc
∂ru

(τ ))

u∈Fc

Gˆ (τ )

+

δc

,u(τ

)

∂

f

(

Rc
∂ru

(τ

))

u∈Fc

Gˆ (τ )

+

d∈Fv

∂f δc,d(τ )

(

Rc
∂ vd

(τ ))

Gˆ (τ )

+

d∈Fv

δc

,d(τ

)

∂

f

(

Rc
∂ vd

(τ

))

,
Gˆ (τ )

(16)

where f ( Rc (τ )) and Rc were defined in (9) and (11). Note that the differential equation for δc,c (τ ) in (16) is coupled with similar differential equations for δc,u(τ ) and δc,d(τ ) for all u ∈ Fc and d ∈ Fv. Besides, all these equations are coupled with
(8) and (9). Following [31], the solution is unique and deviates from the true covariance by less than O(M−1/2). Additionally,
the following holds as M → ∞:
I) rc(τ ) is Gaussian distributed with mean rˆc(τ ) and variance δc,c(τ )/M.
II) For any pair (c, c ) ∈ Fc × Fc, rc(τ ) and rc (τ ) are jointly Gaussian distributed with cross covariance δc,c (τ )/M.
III) δc,c (τ )/M → 0 as M → ∞ for any pair (c, c ) ∈ Fc ×
Fc.
The above results imply that, for sufficiently large M, the
process c1(τ ) in (14) is a Gaussian process with mean cˆ1(τ ) and variance Var[c1(τ )] = δ1(τ )/M, where

δ1(τ ) =. m

m
δ0∼ j ,0∼k .

j=1 k=1

(17)

cˆ1(τ ) =. m rˆ0∼ j (τ ),

(15)

j =1

is positive for any τ ∈ [0, ). The solution to the system of equations given by (8) and (9) can be used not only to characterize the asymptotic behavior, i.e. to compute the decoding threshold of the ensemble, but also to determine quantities needed to assess the finite-length performance of the code. We refer to critical points as the points in time for which cˆ1(τ ) has a local minimum. As shown in [31], [32], the average (over the ensemble of codes) error probability is dominated by the probability that the process c1(τ ) survives, i.e. does not go to zero around the critical points. Therefore, characterizing the critical points and the expected number of correctable deg-1 check nodes in the graph at those points in time determines the SC-LDPC finite-length performance.
To obtain a final prediction of the survival probability of c1(τ ) at critical points, we must determine the variance of

IV. EXPECTED GRAPH EVOLUTION FOR SC-LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES CONSTRUCTED FROM PROTOGRAPHS
The solution of the system of differential equations in (8) and (9) is the expected evolution of the DD components along the decoding process. It can be obtained for each ensemble and value using numerical integration techniques, e.g. Euler’s method with a sufficiently small step size. Fig. 5 (a) shows the computed solution to cˆ1(τ ) for the (3,6,50) ensemble with varying . We also plot actual decoding trajectories for = 0.45 and the solution to cˆ1(τ ) for the same ensemble with L = 100. In Fig. 5 (b), we reproduce the experiments for the ARJA(L) ensemble. The solutions obtained in both cases are qualitatively similar to those obtained for the random SC-LDPC code ensemble in [22]. The evolution of cˆ1(τ ) can be clearly divided in three phases:
1) The curves present an initial phase of decay, which corresponds to the PD eliminating the fraction of deg-1 check nodes created along the SC-LDPC code chain after

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

STINNER AND OLMOS: ON WATERFALL PERFORMANCE OF FINITE-LENGTH SC-LDPC CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS

351

Fig. 5. Figure (a) shows the computed solution to cˆ1(τ ) for the (3,6,50) ensemble and varying . Actual decoding trajectories for = 0.45 are included as well as the solution to cˆ1(τ ) for the same ensemble with double chain length, L = 100. In Figure (b), we reproduce the results for the ARJA(100) code ensemble.

initialization. During this phase, deg-1 check nodes are removed roughly uniformly along the chain. If is greater than the threshold of the uncoupled LDPC block code ensemble, the initial phase phase ends when the graph runs out of deg-1 check nodes except at the end positions. Denote this time by τ ∗. 2) The second phase starts at τ ∗ and corresponds to the “decoding wave” moving throughout the graph at constant speed [2], [1], [33]. Note that in this second phase, there is no single critical point at which the decoder is most likely to fail. The expected number of deg-1 check nodes is essentially constant throughout this critical phase. cˆ1(τ ) during this phase is denoted by cˆ1(∗). Note that during the critical phase, cˆ1(∗) does not depend on the chain length L. As illustrated in Fig. 5, at fixed , we obtain the same value for either L = 50 and L = 100. 3) A third phase takes over when the two decoding waves started at the two ends of the chain are meeting in the middle of the chain. The expected fraction of deg-1 check nodes in the residual graph at both the first and third phase is significantly larger than in the critical phase. It is unlikely that the decoder gets stuck in either the first or the last phase and we concentrate on the intermediate critical phase to analyze the error probability of the SC-LDPC code ensemble. The impact of the length of the critical phase on the actual final performance will be discussed in Section VI. We first concentrate on the analysis of cˆ1(∗) for different ensembles and values. Observe in Fig. 5 that cˆ1(∗) → 0 as approaches the ensemble threshold given in Table I. In order to relate the average block error probability with the channel parameter , an approximate scaling of the mean and the variance of the process c1(τ ) in (14) as a function of is convenient. Following [31], we resort on a first order Taylor expansion of both quantities around the ensemble threshold ∗. For cˆ1(∗), we have
cˆ1(∗)| ≈ cˆ1(∗)| ∗ + γ ( ∗ − ) + O(( ∗ − )2). (18)

Since cˆ1(∗)| ∗ = 0 by definition, γ can be estimated from the numerical solution of cˆ1(∗) for < ∗ by

γ

≈

cˆ1(∗)| (

− cˆ1(∗)| ∗− )

∗

=

cˆ1(∗)| ( ∗−

).

(19)

In Fig. 6, we plot cˆ1(τ )/( ∗ − ) for the two ensembles considered in Fig. 5. For each ensemble, observe that all curves for varying values converge to the same constant, which indicates that ignoring the quadratic term (and all the rest of high order terms) in (18) is legitimate. During the critical phase, we assume

cˆ1(∗) ≈ γ ( ∗ − ).

(20)

We now augment the comparison between the different SC-
LDPC code ensembles, summarized so far by Table I, with the γ value computed for each ensemble. In all cases, we compute γ for L = 100 and ( ∗ − ) = 10−2. Recall that at fixed , the larger γ , the more deg-1 check nodes are expected in the graph during the critical phase. All other parameters (in particular the
variance) being equal, the larger the mean, the less likely errors
will be. The values of γ computed for different protograph-based
SC-LDPC ensembles are summarized in Table II. Observe that while the RA(q, L) ensemble does not have a robust asymptotic behavior in Table I, it has the largest γ in Table II. Further, for increased q, the thresholds of the RA(q, L) ensemble are closer to channel capacity and γ increases. This indicates both asymptotic and finite-length improvements. On the contrary, note that for the (l, r, L) ensemble, γ does not increase with l.
The ARJA(L) ensemble has the lowest γ , which suggests that this ensemble is not robust in the finite-length regime
despite having the BP threshold closest to capacity. For instance, consider the ensembles RA(6, L) and ARJA(L) with same M and some below the BP threshold of the RA(6, L) ensemble, e.g. = 0.46. By (20), for the RA(6, L) code the graph contains in average 7.89(0.4935 − )M = 0.264M deg1 check nodes during the critical phase. The ARJA(L) code

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

352

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 34, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 6. Solution to cˆ1(τ )/( ∗ − ) for the (3,6,50) ensemble (a) and ARJA(50) ensemble (b) for varying .

graph only contains in average 3.75(0.4996 − )M = 0.148M deg-1 check nodes.
One could argue that such a comparison between both codes is not fair for the ARJA(L) code ensemble since it contains punctured bits. Assume now that both codes are designed
with an equal number of transmitted bits per position. If the RA(6, L) code has M bits per position, the ARJA(L) code is constructed with M = 1.25M bits per position, from which only M bits are transmitted. For = 0.46, the average number of deg-1 check nodes in the RA(6, L) code graph during the critical phase is still 1.42 times higher than for the ARJA(L) code.
While the discrepancies of γ parameter are practically relevant, an analysis of the variance of the process c1(τ ) around cˆ1(τ ) is required before drawing further conclusions.

TABLE II CODING RATE r, BEC BP THRESHOLD ∗ AND γ PARAMETER FOR
SC-LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES WITH L = 100

V. ESTIMATING THE VARIANCE OF THE c1(τ ) PROCESS

The numerical integration of the system of differential equa-
tions in (16) is cumbersome due to the large number of coupled equations. Denote with |Fv| and |Fc| the number of variable and check node types in the original SC-LDPC code
graph (before PD initialization). After PD initialization, the DD of the residual graph is described by |Fv| and |Fc| variable and check node types, where |Fc| grows with O( c∈Fc 2|c|). Hence, the system of differential equations in (16) contains |Fc|2 + |Fc||Fv| + |Fv|2 coupled equations. For instance, for the (4,8,100) code ensemble, we have |Fv| = 200 and |Fc| = 2.5 × 104 which makes the direct resolution of covariance
evolution equations prohibitively complex.
In [22], the same system of equations was numerically inte-
grated for a random unstructured SC-LDPC ensemble where
the number of terms in the DD is manageable. The solution to Var[c1(τ )] = δ1(τ )/M was computed. As the mean of the process c1(τ ), it was reported that δ1(τ ) is constant during the critical phase. It was also noted that for far enough from the threshold ∗, the dependency of δ1(τ ) on is weak.
For SC-LDPC codes constructed from protographs, simulations show a similar behavior for δ1(τ ) during the critical phase. In Fig. 7 we plot a Monte Carlo estimate to Var [c1(τ )]

Fig. 7. Variance of the process c1(τ ) for the (4, 8, 100) ensemble computed after simulation for M = 1000, M = 2000 and M = 4000 and = 0.45 (solid lines), respectively = 0.46 (dashed lines).
computed from 5000 simulations for the (4,8,100) ensemble and M = 1000, M = 2000 and M = 4000. Solid lines correspond to = 0.45 and dashed lines to = 0.46. Observe that Var [c1(τ )] decays with M according to δ1(τ )/M. In addition, Var [c1(τ )] (and thus δ1(τ )) is approximately constant during the critical phase. Denote by δ1(∗)/M the variance during this period. Since no significant differences can be observed between = 0.45 and = 0.46, we assume that δ1(∗) is constant w.r.t. . Despite these simplifications, computing δ1(∗) by solving the complete system of covariance evolution equations in (16), even for a single value of , is too complex.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

STINNER AND OLMOS: ON WATERFALL PERFORMANCE OF FINITE-LENGTH SC-LDPC CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS

353

TABLE III CODING RATE r, BEC BP THRESHOLD ∗, δ˜1(∗) PARAMETER AND
α PARAMETER COMPUTED FOR DIFFERENT SC-LDPC CODE
ENSEMBLES WITH L = 100.

Fig. 8. Estimated variance δ˜1(τ ) given by (21) for = 0.45 and Monte Carlo estimate of δ1(τ ) for the (3,6,100) ensemble computed with M = 2000.

(22) is a simple figure of merit to characterize the finite-length performance of SC-LDPC code ensembles.
From the previous discussion, the ratio between the mean and standard deviation of the process c1(τ ) during critical phase can be computed with

We propose an approximation to δ1(∗) based only on the expected evolution of the DD during the decoding process,

computed from (8) and (9). Recall that this system contains

only |Fv| + |Fc| coupled equations. For any τ during the critical phase, we approximate the variance of the process after the

next iteration δ1(τ + 1/M) by

δ˜1(τ + 1/M) =. Var[ 1|Gˆ (τ )],

(21)

where 1 is a random variable that represents how many deg-1 check nodes are created (or removed) in the PD iteration from time τ to time τ + 1/M if the graph DD at time τ is exactly the one predicted by (8) and (9). Note that the approximation in (21) ignores that the process c1(τ ) is correlated along the time since we do not take into account the state of the graph DD in
previous iterations. We assume that the variance of the process
is dominated by the statistical graph evolution after a single PD iteration from the most likely state at time τ , i.e. the expected DD at τ Gˆ (τ ).
Fig. 8 compares a Monte Carlo estimate to δ1(τ ) for M = 2000 and δ˜1(τ ) for the (3,6,100) ensemble. The approximation is accurate during the critical phase of the decoder. As shown
in Section VI, during the critical phase the temporal correlation of the process c1(τ ) decays exponentially fast in time, reducing the impact in the computation of δ1(τ ) of the state of the graph in the recent past. We conjecture that this benefits our approxi-
mations. In Appendix B, we compute (21) from the solution of
the expected graph evolution equations in (8) and (9).
The finite-length performance of the different SC-LDPC
code ensembles can be analyzed using the moments computed for the process c1(τ ). We now focus on the following quantity to compare the different ensembles:

√cˆ1(∗) ,

(22)

δ1(∗)

where cˆ1(∗) is the minimum value of cˆ1(τ ) along the decoding process and δ1(∗) is the corresponding variance around cˆ1(∗). As shown in [31] for LDPC code ensembles and in [22] for a
random SC-LDPC code ensemble, the average waterfall finite-
length performance improves exponentially fa√st with (22), as the block error rate scales by O(exp(−cˆ1(∗)/ δ1(∗))). Thus,

√cˆ1(∗)

√

γ( ∗ −

M≈

)√ M

= α(

∗

−

√ ) M,

(23)

δ1(∗)

δ˜1(∗)

where

we

define

α

=.

√γ .
δ˜1(∗)

In

Table

III,

we

summarize

δ˜1(∗)

computed for the different SC-LDPC code ensembles. δ˜1(∗) is

computed for each ensemble at ( ∗ − ) = 10−2 and we also

include the corresponding α. Note that RA(q, L) code ensem-

bles have higher variances as we increase q but, nonetheless,

they offer the highest nentially fast w.r.t. α(

α∗ .−Sin)c√eMpe, rsfmoramllandcifefeirmenpcreosveins

expoα are

relevant for codes with similar thresholds.

Fig. 9 plots the simulated performance for SC-LDPC codes

with L = 100 and M = 2000 and M = 4000. In the right plot,

we include the performance for M = 8000 for the best two

codes, i.e. the RA(6, 100) code and the (4, 8, 100) code. For each point, we simulated 105 transmissions. As expected from

Table III, the ARJA(L) code has a poor finite-length perfor-

mance. Due to the high structure of the protograph with 5

variable nodes in the uncoupled protograph, at fixed M, the lift-

ing factor N for the ARJA(L) code is less than half than the

lifting factor used for the rest of code ensembles, which has

only 2 nodes in the uncoupled protograph. Even if the punc-

tured variables in the ARJA(L) ensemble are not counted, at

fixed M, N for the ARJA(L) ensemble is still exactly half of N

we use for the other codes. Such small N limits the ARJA(L)

performance.

Observe also the substantial performance gain for the

RA(6, 100) ensemble as compared to the (4,8,100) ensemble, although this ensemble has a worse ∗ and a higher r. This gain

is still significant for very large M, e.g. M = 8000. Consider α( ∗ − ) for both code ensembles and varying . For = 0.47, α( ∗ − ) is 0.167 for the RA(6, L) ensemble and 0.144 for the

(4,8,100) ensemble. This is consistent with the better perfor-

mance reported in Fig. 9. However, for = 0.4875 we obtain

0.0426 and 0.0531, respectively, but simulation results still

show that the RA(6, 100) ensemble performs better. In addi-

tion to a higher α, further scaling behavior aspects that explain

the gain achieved by the RA(q, L) ensemble are discussed in

following sections.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

354

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 34, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 9. Simulated Block Error Rate for different SC-LDPC constructions with L = 100 with M = 2000 bits (a) and M = 4000 bits (b). In (b), we also include results for M = 8000 bits in dotted lines for the RA(6, 100) and (4, 8, 100) codes.

VI. THE SCALING LAW FOR SPATIALLY COUPLED LDPC CODES

Rather than analyzing a particular critical point in time, we estimate the error rate by computing the probability that the process c1(τ ) in (14) hits zero at some point during the critical phase. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the decoder remains in a critical state during a period of length (L). Recall that we ignore errors which may happen in either the initial or the final phase. To estimate the error probability during the critical phase, we must take into account the covariance of the c1(τ ) process over time:

φ1(ζ, τ ) =. E[c1(ζ )c1(τ )] − cˆ1(ζ )cˆ1(τ ),

(24)

each variable node of the RA(6, 100) protograph is connected to the first 5 positions in the right while in the (4,8,100) code each variable node is connected only to the first three positions in the right. In the ARJA(100) code, the coupling spreads only the first next position. Table IV summarizes θ estimated from Monte Carlo simulation for different codes.
Based on the statistics described for the c1(τ ) process, c1(τ ) can be modeled by an Ornstein-Uhlenbeck (OU) process [35] during the critical phase. Following [22], the zerocrossing probability is equal to the probability of an error during the decoding process and it can be estimated using the expression

⎛

⎞

where τ and ζ are two distinct time instances. The expectation is defined over the joint probability distribution of the DD at times τ and ζ . The quantity φ1(ζ, τ ) can be computed analytically by a procedure similar to covariance evolution. This
approach is complex and computationally challenging. In order
to assess how (24) depends on the SC-LDPC code construc-
tion, we resort on Monte Carlo simulation. Fig. 11 shows an empirical estimate to φ1(ζ, τ ) for ζ = 25 computed after 1000 simulations at = 0.45 for a RA(6, 100) code, a (4,8,100) code and a ARJA(100) code, all with M = 2000. The curves are normalized by the value at ζ = τ , which corresponds to Var[c1] = δ1(∗)/M. In this way, the maximum for all curves is one. Observe that, as in [22], the covariance φ1(ζ, τ ) decays exponentially fast with |ζ − τ |:

φ1(ζ, τ )

=

δ1(∗) e−θ|ζ −τ | M

(25)

where θ depends on the SC-LDPC construction. Note that the covariance decays more slowly as we consider codes with larger coupling length. The coupling memory is directly connected to the constraint length of the SC-LDPC code [34]. For instance,

P∗ ≈ 1 − exp ⎝⎜⎜⎜− √ 2π

θ(
√ αM

L−
( ∗−

τ
)

∗

) (z)e

1 2

z2

dz

⎠⎟⎟⎟

,

(26)

0

where ( L − τ ∗) is the duration of the critical phase, ∗ is the SC-LDPC ensemble threshold and (z) is the cumulative function of the standard Gaussian distribution. As described in Section IV, τ ∗ is the time at which the process c1(τ ) enters the critical phase. Note that it can be analytically computed for any
SC-LDPC code for each from the solution of the expected
graph evolution given by the system of differential equations in
(8) and (9). Among the set of analyzed SC-LDPC code ensembles, τ ∗ does not differ significantly. For sufficiently large L, we approximate ( L − τ ∗) ≈ L and we refer to θ L as the effective length of the critical phase. P∗ in (26) constitutes a
reasonable estimate of the actual performance of the code for
sufficiently large M. Fig. 10 compares the actual simulated per-
formance (dashed lines) and predicted performance with (26).
Observe in the left figure that the shift between them decreases
for larger M values.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

STINNER AND OLMOS: ON WATERFALL PERFORMANCE OF FINITE-LENGTH SC-LDPC CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS

355

Fig. 10. Finite length prediction P∗ in (26) (solid lines) and actual block-error rate (dashed lines) for different SC-LDPC codes with L = 100 and various lifting factors.

In addition, note that P∗ in (26) suggests that the performance improves exponentially fast with α. More precisely, we

have

∂ P∗ ∼ O −e−α2( ∗− )2 M .

(27)

∂α

A small increase in α can result in a significant decay in the error rate. A smaller effective length also gives a smaller error rate. Having the largest α in Table III and the smallest effective length, the RA(6, 100) ensemble achieves the best performance in Fig. 9.
Finally, we discuss how the construction of the RA(q, L) code ensemble is linked to its strong finite-length scaling properties. The drawn conclusions can be used to derive design rules to improve the finite-length performance of SC-LDPC codes:
• Larger Coupling length. In the RA(q, L) ensemble, the node with degree q in the uncoupled code concentrates almost all the edges. After the edge spreading to couple the individual graphs, each degree-q variable node is connected to the next q − 1 positions which creates a code with large constraint length. As reported in Table IV, the θ value computed for the RA(q, L) ensemble is much lower than for the rest of considered ensembles. By (26) this improves the finite-length code performance.
• Robust terminations at low rate-loss. The terminations of the coupled chain constitute strong “sub-codes” that start the wave-like decoding effect. Typically, robust terminations are created with check nodes of lower degree. Unlike the rest of ensembles, observe that for the RA(q, L) ensemble in Fig. 2 all positions in the code (including terminations) contain variable nodes. In this way, we manage to create long terminations and, at the same time, keep the rate loss small. For instance, the terminations of the RA(6, L) code ensemble are defined by 5 consecutive positions with check nodes of degrees 3,4,5,6

Fig. 11. Monte Carlo estimate to the temporal covariance of c1(τ ) in (25) for the code ensembles RA(6, 100), ARJA(100) and (4,8,100).
TABLE IV PARAMETER θ IN (25) ESTIMATED VIA MONTE CARLO SIMULATION
WITH 1000 SIMULATIONS FOR M = 2000 FOR SC-LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES WITH L = 100
and 7, respectively. These positions also contain variable nodes. The termination of the (4, 8, L) code ensemble consists of only three consecutive positions with check nodes of degrees 2, 4 and 6 and without variable nodes. The resulting rate loss is higher. • The uncoupled RA code ensemble. Combining low-degree variable nodes, typically degree-two variable nodes, with variable nodes with very large degree is a well known

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

356

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 34, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 12. Figure (a) shows the solution to cˆ1(τ )/( ∗ − ) for the (3,6,100), (3, 6, 100)u , (4,8,100) and (4, 8, 100)u code ensembles at = 45. For the same scenario, in Figure (b) we show a Monte Carlo estimate to δ1(τ ) computed for M = 4000 bits.

technique to improve the BP threshold of uncoupled

irregular LDPC codes [9]. At the same average node

degree, the uncoupled RA code ensemble has a better
threshold, u∗ncoupled, than the (l, r )-regular LDPC code ensemble, as can be seen in Table I. In particular, observe

that the uncoupled RA code with q = a = 6 has the same

average degrees than the (4, 8)-regular LDPC ensemble

and

∗ uncoupled

is

0.41

and

0.38,

respectively.

By

cons-

tructing the spatially-coupled code ensemble from a bet-

ter uncoupled code, it follows that the RA(L , 6) code

ensemble presents more robust finite-length properties

than the (4, 8, L) code ensemble. Recall that during the

first part of the decoding process, deg-1 check nodes

are removed all along the SC-LDPC chain as described

in Section IV. A larger

∗ uncoupled

increases

the

fraction

of deg-1 check nodes removed during this stage, thus

increasing the amount of reliable information available

when the decoder enters the critical phase.

• Lighter structure. From the above point, we conclude

that coupling irregular LDPC block codes (with better

BP thresholds) is a way to implement SC-LDPC codes

with better finite-length scaling behavior. Note that the

uncoupled ARJA ensemble offers an interesting trade-

off, as it presents a threshold

∗ uncoupled

larger

than

that

of the (3, 6) uncoupled code with the smallest average

check node degree in Table I, which is important from

the encoding/decoding complexity point of view. On the

other hand, an over-structured uncoupled code with se-

veral variable nodes in the uncoupled protograph would

be counterproductive. We have compared the different

finite-length SC-LDPC code ensembles by fixing the

same number M of variable nodes per position. In this

setup, the more variable nodes in the uncoupled proto-

graph, the smaller the lifting factor N is, which explains

the poor finite-length properties reported for the ARJA(L)

code ensemble. Therefore, our aim is to improve the

threshold

∗ uncoupled

of

the

uncoupled

code

and

at

the

same

time maintain a simple uncoupled graph. Apart from the

(q, a)-regular RA code, there is little choice among the

set irregular LDPC codes with only 2 variable nodes in the

protograph that can improve the threshold of (l, r )-regular LDPC codes at equal node average degrees.
VII. COMPARISON TO RANDOM SPATIALLY COUPLED LDPC CODES
As discussed in the introduction, constructing LDPC codes using protographs [8] brings several advantages w.r.t. unstructured LDPC codes, randomly constructed from a given DD [9], e.g. improved error floors and thresholds [11]. In addition, using the finite-length analysis proposed, we can show that structured finite-length SC-LDPC codes constructed from protographs will offer much better error rates in the waterfall region than unstructured SC-LDPC codes at the same block lengths and design rates.
We compare the computed scaling parameters for the (3,6,100) and (4,8,100) code ensembles with those computed in [22] for unstructured SC-LDPC codes denoted by (3, 6, 100)u and (4, 8, 100)u, respectively. They have the same degree distributions and asymptotic thresholds than their protograph-based counterparts. Fig. 12 (a) shows cˆ1(τ )/( ∗ − ) computed for these 4 ensembles at = 0.45. We have computed γ = 4.31 for the (3, 6, 100)u ensemble and γ = 4.24 for the (4, 8, 100)u ensemble. Observe that γ of both (3,6,100) and (4,8,100) is roughly 1.25 times higher than for their random counterparts.
In Fig. 12 (b), we show a Monte Carlo estimate to δ1(τ ) along the decoding process, computed from simulation using codes with M = 4000 bits. There is no significant disparity in δ1(∗) between structured and unstructured ensembles, as the variance of the process c1(τ ) is nearly identical during the critical phase. Combining the increased γ and√approximately equal δ1(∗) parameter, the increased α = γ / δ1(∗) for the protographbased ensembles indicates a significantly lower error rate in the waterfall region, as corroborated by simulation in Fig. 13. For the 4 ensembles and M = 4000 bits, we include the predicted performance using the scaling law in (26) (solid lines) and the actual simulated performance (dashed lines). These results strongly suggest to use the more structured protograph-based constructions than solely random constructions.
Further, observe in Fig. 13 that the gap between the estimated performance using (26) and the actual simulated performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

STINNER AND OLMOS: ON WATERFALL PERFORMANCE OF FINITE-LENGTH SC-LDPC CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS

357

Fig. 13. Finite length scaling prediction P∗ in (26) (solid lines) and actual block-error rate (dashed lines) for random and protograph-based SC-LDPC codes for L = 100 and M = 4000.

Fig. 14. Simulated performance (dashed lines) for the RA(4, 150) and RA(4, 200) code ensembles with a prediction for the RA(4, 200) performance (solid line) obtained by multiplying the RA(4, 150) curve by 4/3. Results are also included for the ensembles ARJA(100) and ARJA(150).

is smaller for protograph-based ensembles. This suggests that, for a fixed M value, protograph-based code ensembles present a smaller dispersion around the waterfall average behavior, which is what the scaling law in (26) aims to capture.

VIII. ESTIMATES BASED ON THE SCALING LAW

In the previous sections, we have demonstrated that for sufficiently large M, the performance of an SC-LDPC code ensemble constructed from protographs can be accurately estimated using (26). Our goal in this section is to show that the scaling law captures the correct scaling between the ensemble block error rate and the different structural parameters, in particular the gap to threshold ( ∗ − ), M and L. Consequently, the SL can predict the performance improvement or degradation when one of the parameters is modified around a certain value. We illustrate this idea with three examples.
Example 1: The performance of a SC-LDPC code ensemble scales linearly with L
We illustrate the problem in the low error rate regime. For large M, the error probability predicted by (26) is small and we can simplify the expression with a first order Taylor expansion:

P∗ ≈ √ 2π

θ( L − τ∗)

√ α M(

∗−

)

.

(z

)e

1 2

z

2

dz

(28)

0

This suggests that the block error probability scales linearly
with the effective length. In Fig. 14 we plot simulated error probability curves (dashed lines) for the ensembles RA(4, 150) and RA(4, 200) with M = 4000. We also plot the curve for the RA(4, 150) code multiplied by 4/3 (solid line), which serves as a predictor for the RA(200) code performance. Note that for small error error rates, the prediction is indeed accurate. We also reproduce the experiment for ARJA(100) and ARJA(150) ensembles with M = 4000.

Example 2: The scaling law predicts the performance difference between two SC-LDPC ensembles
An alternative way to interpret the results from Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 is that some SC-LDPC code ensembles achieve a targeted error rate with smaller M than others, which reduces the system complexity. Since the scaling law in (26) captures the scaling behavior of the SC-LDPC code, we use it to calculate M for a certain ensemble to match the performance of another one. For instance, at fixed L, we compute at which M(4,8,L) the (4, 8, L) ensemble achieves the performance of the (3, 6, L) ensemble with a certain M(3,6,L). Since (26) is dominated by the exponential growth of the divergent integral in the denominator of the exponent, we propose to match the upper-limit of the integral as a first approach, obtaining

M(4,8,L) =

α(23,6, L )

(

∗ (3,6, L )

−

)2

α(24,8, L )

(

∗ (4,8, L )

−

)2

M(3,6, L ) .

(29)

Note that M(4,8,L) depends on both M(3,6,L) and . For instance,at = 0.475 we have M(4,8,L)/M(3,6,L) = 0.4094. This is a large complexity reduction. Simulation results show that this estimate is indeed conservative and M(4,8,L) could be even further reduced. The solid lines in Fig. 15 compare the predicted performance of these two ensembles using the scaling law (26) where M(4,8,L) is computed for each with (29). The simulated performance is plotted with dashed lines. Observe that the estimate is accurate.
Example 3: Comparisons at equal constraint length So far, we restricted ourselves to comparisons of finite-length of protograph-based SC-LDPC codes at equal M, i.e were the number of bits per position of the coupled code is fixed. With this last experiment, we want to stress that the scaling law in (26), along with the scaling parameters computed for the different constructions in former sections, can be used to compare codes under different criteria. It is also practically relevant to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

358

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 34, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

Fig. 15. Performance of a (4, 8, 100) code using (29) to match the performance of a (3, 6, 100) code with M(3,6,100) = 2000 and M(3,6,100) = 4000 bits. Solid lines represent the estimated performance for both ensembles with (26) and
dashed lines represent simulated performance.

Fig. 16. Finite length prediction P∗ in (26) (solid lines) and actual blockerror rate (dashed lines) for RA(6, 100) and ARJA(100) SC-LDPC codes with L = 100 and constraint length 8000 bits.

TABLE V COUPLING MEMORY ms FOR DIFFERENT SC-LDPC CODES
CONSTRUCTED FROM PROTOGRAPHS
compare codes at equal constraint length [24]. This parameter is important to the design of a window decoder for a given SC-LDPC code, since the window size is typically chosen at least three times the constraint length of the code [36], [25]. The constraint length of an SC-LDPC code is computed as (ms + 1)nu N = (ms + 1)M, where ms is the coupling memory. ms for the different SC-LDPC codes analyzed in this paper is given in Table V.
Note that comparing codes at equal constraint length implies the code with the smallest coupling memory, such as the ARJA(L) code ensemble, can place more bits per position than a code with larger coupling memory, thus having a larger M. For instance, assume we compare the performance of the ARJA(L) and RA(6, L) code ensembles. At equal constraintlength, we have MARJA(L) = 3MRA(6,L). In Fig. 16, the performance estimate from (26) is plotted with solid lines for MRA(6,L) = 1332 and MARJA(L) = 4000. For both codes, the constraint length is roughly 8000 bits. The prediction of similar performance of both codes under equal constraint-length is confirmed by simulations which are plotted with dashed lines.
IX. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE LINES OF RESEARCH We have analyzed the decoding of finite-length SC-LDPC codes constructed from protographs over the BEC. By extending the methodology of [22], we derived the differential

equations that describe the expected evolution of the graph DD during the decoding process. The solution shows that the performance of finite-length SC-LDPC codes constructed from protographs follows the same scaling law than those constructed from random ensembles in [22]. Protograph-based codes are a subclass of MET LDPC codes and thus the DD contains a large set of terms, making the resolution of the system of differential equations that describe the covariance evolution of the graph prohibitively complex. We showed that the covariance of the random variable that gives the total number of deg-1 check nodes during the critical phase can be accurately estimated using the solution to the expected graph evolution, which brings a large complexity reduction.
Several SC-LDPC code constructions have been jointly analyzed with the proposed finite-length analysis. We have considered (l, r )-regular SC-LDPC codes, SC-RA codes and SC-ARJA codes. One of the main conclusions is that comparing these ensembles using exclusively asymptotic quantities such as minimum distance growth and threshold ignores significant differences from the finite-length perspective. In particular, we analytically predict that SC-LDPC codes constructed from (q, a)-regular RA codes with sufficiently large q outperform the other SC-LDPC codes due to good finite-length scaling properties. SC-RA codes achieve such gains at even higher coding rates although their threshold is worse. We also observe that unstructured constructions are not competitive to their protograph-based counterparts. All results are confirmed via simulation. From the analysis of the SC-RA code ensemble, we have determined some general design guidelines that improve the finite-length performance of an SC-LDPC code design. The SC-RA code ensemble combines long robust terminations with a low rate loss since all positions in the terminations contain coded bits. Additionally, the (q, a)-RA uncoupled code ensemble has a better (uncoupled) BP threshold than a (l, r )-regular LDPC code with same density and this improves the finitelength robustness of the corresponding coupled code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

STINNER AND OLMOS: ON WATERFALL PERFORMANCE OF FINITE-LENGTH SC-LDPC CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS

359

Finally, we have shown the potential of the proposed finitelength analysis to provide quick and accurate estimates to relevant questions that appear in code design. Once the scaling parameters of a particular ensemble are known, the performance of finite-length SC-LDPC codes can be compared quickly under a variety of designing constraints such as fixing the number of bits per position, or fixing the constraint-length of the code.
We plan to use the gained insight to optimize SC-LDPC ensembles from the finite-length perspective. However, important practical aspects still need to be addressed, e.g. deriving an analytical estimate to θ , which is the parameter that controls the effective length of the critical phase. We also plan to extend the method to spatially coupled generalized LDPC (SC-GLDPC) codes [37], [38] and spatially-coupled non-binary LDPC codes [39], [40] which both can offer better compromises between performance, block length and decoding complexity.

APPENDIX A EXPECTED GRAPH EVOLUTION IN A SINGLE PD STEP

Assume the graph DD {ld(τ ), rc(τ )}d∈Fv,c∈Fc at a particular time τ is known. In this section, we describe how to compute the expectation (9):

E[ Rc (τ

+

1) M

−

Rc(τ )

{ld(τ ), rc(τ )}d∈Fv,c∈Fc ]

(30)

for all c ∈ Fc. For the PD, only deg-1 check nodes can be directly removed. In every PD iteration, a deg-1 check node is

directly removed from the graph along with the variable nodes

connected to it and all attached edges. When these edges are

removed, a certain number of check nodes in the graph lose one edge3, so that the type of each one of these constraint nodes

is modified from c1 ∈ Fc to c2 ∈ Fc. This corresponds to the indirect removal of a check node of type c1 from the graph and the addition of a check node of type c2. Only the type of this check node was changed. Note that deg-1 constraint nodes

can be removed from the graph in either a direct way or in an

indirect way.

1) Direct Removal of deg-1 Check Nodes: deg-1 check

nodes are directly removed from the graph with uniform proba-

bility. The probability that a particular deg-1 check node of type

0∼ j , j = 1, . . . , m, is directly removed from the graph is

P0−∼ j ,dir(τ ) =

r0∼ j (τ )
m

= r0∼ j (τ ) . c1(τ )

(31)

r0∼i (τ )

i =1

2) Indirect Removals: To compute the expected number of
check nodes of type c that are indirectly removed from the
graph after a PD iteration, we first focus on a particular sce-
nario. Suppose the PD removes a deg-1 check node of type 0∼ j , j = 1, . . . , m, and the variable connected to it. We compute the expected number Ec−,k, j (τ ) of constraint nodes of type c ∈ Fc that are indirectly removed from the graph because they lose one edge of type k, k = 1, . . . , m, as depicted in Fig. 17.

3We ignore the probability of double edges in the SC-LDPC code graph, which is a good approximation for large M.

Fig. 17. Indirect resolving of a check node with type c. A check node of type
0∼ j is resolved with probability P0∼ j ,dir (t) and thus a variable node of type d→ j is also removed. Since this variable node has an edge of type k, this edge
will be resolved too.

By definition of the SC-LDPC protograph-based ensemble, there is a single variable type in Fv, denoted by d→ j , that has d j > 0. Conditioning on the case that a deg-1 check node con-
nected to a type j edge has been removed, the type of the connected variable must be d→ j . Note that the k-th component dk→ j of d→ j gives the number of edges of type k that the variable node (to be removed) has. If k = j, dk→ j edges of type k are also removed from the graph. Since each one of these edges
is connected to a type c check node with probability

ck rc(τ ) ,

(32)

ek re(τ )

e∈Fc

we compute

Ec−,k, j (τ ) = dk→ j

ck rc(τ ) , ek re(τ )

k = j.

(33)

e∈Fc

When

k

=

j,

the

variable node removed

has

d

→ j

j

type- j

edges

but one is connected to the deg-1 check node removed. There

are

d

→ j

j

−

1

edges

left

that

can

be

connected

to

a

type

c

check

node:

Ec−,k, j (τ ) = (dk→ j − 1)

c j rc(τ ) , e j re(τ )

k = j.

(34)

e∈Fc

Finally, the expected number of constraint nodes of type c

indirectly removed after a PD iteration is obtained by averaging

over all possible deg-1 check node types

m

m

Ec−(τ ) =

P0−∼ j ,dir(τ )

Ec−,k, j (τ ) .

(35)

j =1

k=1

3) Adding New Check Node Types: As discussed above, for

every edge indirectly removed from the graph, we add to the

graph a new constraint node of a differing type. If a constraint

node of type c loses a type k edge, then a constraint node of

type c is indirectly removed from the graph and a constraint

node of type c is added to the graph, where ci = ci for i = k

and ck = ck − 1. We compute the

expected

number

Ec+(τ

)

of

constraint

nodes

of type c that are created after a PD iteration. A constraint node

of type c can be created only if a constraint node of type c +

0∼1, c + 0∼2, . . ., or c + 0∼m is indirectly removed from the

graph. With (35), we obtain

m

m

Ec+(τ ) =

P0−∼ j ,dir(τ )

Ec−+0∼k ,k, j (τ ) .

(36)

j =1

k=1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

360

IEEE JOURNAL ON SELECTED AREAS IN COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 34, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2016

4) Expected Evolution in a Single PD Update: We can now

compute the expected evolution of the number of check nodes

of type c in the graph in a single PD update. For any check node

type c ∈ Fc such that c = 0∼ j for some j ∈ [1, m], the over-

all

evolution

is

E[ Rc (τ

+

1 M

)

−

Rc(τ )]

=

Ec+(τ )

−

Ec−(τ ).

In

addition, any deg-1 check node type 0∼ j for j = 1, . . . , m,

is also directly removed with probability Pc−(τ ), so that the

expected evolution is given by

Fig. 18. f (|c|) for |c| ∈ {2, 1, 0}. If one edge of the corresponding check node is removed, we gain, have no change, or loose one of the deg-1 check nodes.

E[R0∼ j (τ

+

1) n

−

R0∼ j (τ )]

=

=

E

+ 0∼

j

−

E0−∼ j

−

P0−∼ j (τ ).

(37)

APPENDIX B COMPUTING THE VARIANCE IN THE NUMBER OF
DEG-1 CHECK NODES AT ONE PD STEP
1 is a random variable that represents how many deg-1 check nodes are created (or removed) in the PD iteration from time τ to time τ + 1/M if the graph DD at τ time is exactly the one predicted by (8) and (9). Hence, it is a random variable that takes values in {−l, . . . , l − 2} if l is the maximum variable node degree. We want to calculate

with u ∈ {−l j , l j − 2}.

Suppose that a check node connected to the i-the edge of the

removed variable is of type c. If |c| > 2, the remaining check

node after deleting the i-th edge of the variable node has a

degree > 1. We do not change the number of deg-1 check nodes

and, hence, 1( j, i) = 0. However, if |c| = 2, then the resulting check node is a deg-1 check node and 1( j, i) = +1. Finally, if |c| = 1 then a deg-1 check node is indirectly removed and

we have 1( j, i) = −1. To denote this change in deg-1 check
nodes, as illustrated in Fig. 18, we define f (|c|) as ⎧ ⎪⎨0, |c| > 2

f (|c|) = ⎩⎪1−,1,

|c| = 2 |c| = 1.

(43)

Var[ 1|Gˆ (τ )] = E 12(τ ) − E [ 1(τ )]2

(38)

and, to this end, we have to evaluate the p.m.f. of 1:

p 1 (u) = P ( 1 = u) , u ∈ {−l, . . . , l − 2}. (39)

We use the auxiliary random variable Tτ to represent the type of the deg-1 check node removed from the graph at τ :

pTτ ( j )

=.

P

(Tτ

=

j)

=

rˆ0∼ j (τ ) cˆ1(τ )

(40)

for j ∈ {1, . . . , m}. If Tτ = j, we know that the degree (num-

ber of edges) check node is l

jo=f.

the variable node connected to the deg-1 |d→ j |. Thus, l j edges are removed from the

graph where the last one is attached to the (directly) removed

deg-1 check node. Let 1( j, i) denote the change of the num-

ber of deg-1 check nodes in the graph after the i-th edge,

i = 1, . . . , l j , of the variable node is removed. For sufficiently

large M, 1( j, i) for i = 1, . . . , l j − 1 are independent random

variables and we have 1( j, i) ∈ {−1, 0, +1}.

Conditioned on Tτ = j, the total change in the number of

deg-1 check nodes in the graph is

l j −1

1( j ) = −1 +

1( j, i ),

(41)

i =1

where 1( j) ∈ {−l j , l j − 2}. To calculate the p.m.f. of 1( j), we consider all possible combinations of deg-1 check nodes gained and lost via the corresponding edges i = 1, . . . , l j − 1, namely

If the type of the i-th edge of the removed variable node is ki , ki = 1, . . . , m, then the check node connected to this edge is of type c with probability

cki rˆc(τ ) .

(44)

eki rˆe(τ )

e∈Fc

We are now in a position to compute the p.m.f. of 1( j, i), i.e. P ( 1( j, i) = a) , a ∈ {−1, 0, +1}. Taking into account all possible check types c and using the results derived in Appendix A, the probability P ( 1( j, i) = a) can be computed as follows

P ( 1( j, i) = a) =

cki rˆc(τ ) . (45)

c∈Fc

eki rˆe(τ )

f (|c|)=a e∈Fc

By inserting (45) into (42), we obtain the p.m.f. on the
variation of the total number of deg-1 check nodes in the graph conditioned to the case Tτ = j. Combining (44) and (42), we finally obtain (39) by averaging over all possible Tτ values:

p

1 (u) =

m j =1

rˆ0∼ j (τ ) cˆ1(τ )

P(

1( j) = u) ,

(46)

for u ∈ {−l, . . . , l − 2}.

REFERENCES

P ( 1( j) = u) =

l j −1

=

P(

a∈{−1,0,+1}l j −1 i =1 ai =u

1( j, i ) = ai ) ,

(42)

[1] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[2] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

STINNER AND OLMOS: ON WATERFALL PERFORMANCE OF FINITE-LENGTH SC-LDPC CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM PHOTOGRAPHS

361

[3] S. Kumar, A. J. Young, N. Macris, and H. D. Pfister, “Threshold saturation for spatially coupled LDPC and LDGM codes on BMS channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 7389–7415, Dec. 2014.
[4] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct. 2010.
[5] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Exact free distance and trapping set growth rates for LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), St. Petersburg, Russia, 2011, pp. 1096–1100.
[6] M. Lentmaier, D. G. M. Mitchell, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Asymptotically good LDPC convolutional codes with AWGN channel thresholds close to the shannon limit,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ITSC), Brest, France, 2010, pp. 324–328.
[7] D. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sep. 2015.
[8] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, USA, INP Progress Report 42-154, 2003.
[9] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[10] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Construction of protograph LDPC codes with linear minimum distance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Seattle, WA, USA, Jul. 2006, pp. 664–668.
[11] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacityapproaching protograph codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 876–888, Aug. 2009.
[12] N. Obata, Y.-Y. Jian, K. Kasai, and H. Pfister, “Spatially-coupled multiedge type LDPC codes with bounded degrees that achieve capacity on the BEC under BP decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Istanbul, Turkey, Jul. 2013, pp. 2433–2437.
[13] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “New families of LDPC block codes formed by terminating irregular protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Austin, TX, USA, Jun. 2010, pp. 824–828.
[14] K. Kasai and K. Sakaniwa, “Spatially-coupled MacKay-Neal codes and Hsu-Anastasopoulos codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), St. Petersburg, Russia, 2011, pp. 747–751.
[15] S. Johnson and G. Lechner, “Spatially coupled repeat-accumulate codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 373–376, Feb. 2013.
[16] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. McEliece, “Coding theorems for turbolike codes,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, 1998, pp. 201–210.
[17] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[18] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. Siegel, J. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2011.
[19] A. E. Pusane, A. Jiménez Felström, A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, K. Sh. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Implementation aspects of LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 1060–1069, Jul. 2008.
[20] D. J. Costello, Jr., L. Dolecek, T. Fuja, J. Kliewer, D. G. M. Mitchell, and R. Smarandache, “Spatially coupled sparse codes on graphs: Theory and practice,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 168–176, Jul. 2014.
[21] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[22] P. M. Olmos and R. Urbanke, “A scaling law to predict the finite-length performance of spatially-coupled LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 3164–3184, Jun. 2015.
[23] P. M. Olmos and R. Urbanke, “A closed form scaling law for spatially coupled LDPC codes over the BEC,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Sevilla, Spain, 2013, pp. 1–5.
[24] K. Huang, D. G. M. Mitchell, L. Wei, X. Ma, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Performance comparison of LDPC block and spatially coupled codes over GF (q),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 3, pp. 592–604, Mar. 2015.
[25] A. Iyengar, P. Siegel, R. Urbanke, and J. Wolf, “Windowed decoding of spatially coupled codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2277–2292, Apr. 2013.

[26] J. Kliewer, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “New results on the minimum distance of repeat multiple accumulate codes,” in Proc. IEEE Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., 2007, pp. 1097–1102 [Online]. Available: http://www.ece.nmsu.edu/~jkliewer/ paper/KZC\_Allerton07.pdf
[27] A. Perotti and S. Benedetto, “An upper bound on the minimum distance of serially concatenated convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 5501–5509, Dec. 2006.
[28] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ITSC), Brest, France, 2000, pp. 1–8.
[29] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Minimum distance and trapping set analysis of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 254–281, Jan. 2013.
[30] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[31] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength scaling for iteratively decoded LDPC ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 473–498, Feb. 2009.
[32] A. Amraoui, R. Urbanke, and A. Montanari, “Finite-length scaling of irregular LDPC code ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW), Rotorua, New Zealand, 2005, pp. 473–498.
[33] V. Aref, L. Schmalen, and S. ten Brink, “On the convergence speed of spatially coupled LDPC ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., 2013, pp. 342–349.
[34] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 835–857, Feb. 2011.
[35] M. U. Thomas, “Some mean first-passage time approximations for the Ornstein-Uhlenbeck process,” J. Appl. Probab., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 600– 604, 1975.
[36] A. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. Siegel, J. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. Corazza, “Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303–2320, Apr. 2012.
[37] M. Lentmaier and K. Sh. Zigangirov, “On generalized low-density paritycheck codes based on hamming component codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 3, no. 8, pp. 248–250, Aug. 1999.
[38] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, “On the minimum distance of generalized spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Istanbul, Turkey, Jul. 2013, pp. 1874–1878.
[39] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low-density parity check codes over GF(q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 6, pp. 165–167, Jun. 1998.
[40] K. Huang, D. G. M. Mitchell, L. Wei, X. Ma, and D. J. Costello, Jr., “Performance comparison of non-binary LDPC block and spatially coupled codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Hawaii, USA, Jun. 2014, pp. 876–880.
Markus Stinner (S’12) received the Diploma degree in electrical engineering from the University Ulm, Ulm, Germany, in 2011. He is currently pursuing the Doctoral degree at the Institute of Communications Engineering, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany, where he works mainly on channel coding.
Pablo M. Olmos (S’09–M’11) was born in Granada, Spain, in 1984. He received the M.Sc./B.Sc. degrees in telecommunication engineering and the Ph.D. degree in telecommunication engineering from the University of Sevilla, Seville, Spain, in 2008 and 2011, respectively. He is currently an Assistant Professor with the University Carlos III de Madrid, Getafe, Spain. He has held appointments as a Visiting Researcher at Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, USA, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), Lausanne, Switzerland, Notre Dame University, Notre Dame, IN, USA, École Nationale Supérieure de l’électronique et de ses Applications (ENSEA), Cergy, France, and Bell Labs. His research interests range from approximate inference methods for Bayesian machine learning to information theory and digital communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:51:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

