NOVEL INTENTIONAL PUNCTURING SCHEMES FOR FINITE-LENGTH IRREGULAR
LDPC CODES
Jingjing Liu, Rodrigo C. de Lamare
University of York
Department of Electronics
York, YO10 5DD, United Kingdom
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we investigate rate-compatible (RC) short/ mod-
erate length irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes
and propose three different novel puncturing schemes to de-
termine the preferred puncturing positions so as to achieve
less performance degradation. The first one is based on a
short cycle counting algorithm as well as grouping variable
nodes which have the equal length of short cycles in the Tan-
ner Graph; the second scheme can be seen as an improved ver-
sion of the first one by means of introducing another metric
called Extrinsic Message Degree (EMD); and the last scheme
relies on a simulation-based exhaustive search in order to find
the best puncturing pattern among several random punctur-
ing patterns. The simulation results show that all three pro-
posed schemes can achieve the rate flexibility and minimize
the performance loss over the additive white Gaussian noise
(AWGN) channel.
Index TermsвҖ” rate-compatible, puncturing, irregular
LDPC codes, counting short cycles, extrinsic message degree
1. INTRODUCTION
When transmissions occur over a time-varying channel pro-
vided the channel state information (CSI) is known at the
transmit end, an error control coding scheme only with a fixed
code rate is not regarded as the best solution. In such a situ-
ation, an error-correction code flexible in terms of rates be-
comes optimal since it is able to encode at higher/lower rates
depending on that the channel is more/less reliable at any mo-
ment. The implementation of rate flexibility by either exten-
sion or puncturing can suitably fulfill this requirement since
it does not need to deploy a number of encoder/decoder pairs
with an impractically high cost [1]. Puncturing refers to gen-
erating a family of higher rate code resulting from a lower
rate code (as known as the mother code or parent code). A
family of punctured codes based on the same mother code is
said to be rate-compatible in the case that the bipartite graph
of any punctured code in the family is a subgraph of the bi-
partite graph of a lower rate code within the same family [2].
In order to puncture the mother code, several encoded bits are
removed from the encoded bits due to the channel conditions.
Puncturing is a quite practical method to achieve the
rate flexibility and it has been well studied on a variety of
error-correction codes especially for convolutional codes [3].
Recently, the design and analysis of puncturing schemes for
LDPC codes evoked many researchersвҖҷ interests.
How to
prevent dramatic performance degradation while to realize a
family of LDPC codes with flexible rates becomes the central
issue and brings about a lot of challenges in terms of choos-
ing a suitable mother code, finding the puncturing threshold
and designing the puncturing distribution. In [1], the authors
illustrated good puncturing distributions over a broad range
of code rates but only for those mother codes with arbitrarily
long codelength. It is well-known that the design of finite
length punctured LDPC codes is much more difficult than
that of infinite length punctured LDPC codes. A variety of
puncturing approaches have been reported in [4]-[7], ranging
from using a differential evolution procedure to search for a
sequence of codes which are relatively good at each rate [5]
to minimizing the excessive performance loss in-between a
certain range of rates as much as possible [6]. However, all
of them are based on random puncturing, i.e. the locations
of the punctured bits are arbitrarily chosen which leads to
a part of the punctured bits to be unrecoverable. Different
from all these puncturing schemes, Ha et al.
[8] found a
novel approach in which the variable nodes in the Tanner
Graph are sorted into рқ‘ҳgroups (рқ‘ҳ< рқ‘ӣwhere рқ‘ӣis the code-
length) according to the number of iterations is required to
recover them. Due to their simulation results, that puncturing
algorithm dramatically improves the performance after punc-
turing as the resulting rate increases. More recently in [2],
an improved version of this algorithm is studied where less
performance loss is achieved without grouping operation.
In this paper, we investigate new intentional puncturing
schemes for a specific irregular LDPC mother code generated
by a Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) algorithm [9]. Let us
consider an LDPC code whose original rate is рқ‘…= рқ‘ҳ/рқ‘ӣin
which рқ‘ҳand рқ‘ӣare the number of information bits and the
codelength, respectively. A family of codes with higher rates
is generated by puncturing a subset of a codeword and in the
mean time sending the rest to the receiver. To decode this
message by the Belief Propagation (BP) algorithm, the Log-
likelihood Ratio (LLR) values corresponding to the punctured
bits are zeroes at the first decoding iteration. Notice that send-
ing side information regarding the punctured pattern is needed
if the decoder does not know the position of the punctured
bits.
The first proposed idea aims to obtain an optimized
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
978-1-4577-0274-7/11/$26.00 В©2011 IEEE                                                                                 DSP2011
puncturing pattern by means of exploiting the counting cy-
cle algorithm on a parity-check matrix рқ‘Ҝ, which successfully
transforms the problem of counting short cycles in a Tanner
Graph into that of counting the so-called lollipop walks [10].
There are two criteria to determine the subset of punctured
nodes: 1) to find nodes having the shortest cycles passing by;
2) to find nodes having more such cycles than others. Given a
desirable rate, a subset of punctured nodes would be formed.
On the other hand, for the selection of punctured nodes we
can change the latter criterion above by introducing the Ap-
proximate Cycle EMD (ACE) metric [11] which gives rise
to our second puncturing scheme: 1) to find nodes having
the shortest cycles passing by; 2) to find nodes having the
smaller average ACE value than others for the same length of
short cycle. Moreover, our third proposed scheme relies on
a simulation-based exhaustive search for the best puncturing
pattern among a number of randomly generated patterns.
The organization of this paper is as follows: the next sec-
tion explains the system and data model. Section III describes
each puncturing scheme in detail. The simulation results are
presented and analyzed in Section IV. And Section V con-
cludes this paper.
2. SYSTEM MODEL AND BASIC NOTATIONS
2.1. Punctured LDPC codes
Encoder
G
Decoder
SPA,H
AWGN
Channel
Puncturing
Scheme
m
c
'c
ЛҶm
r
Fig. 1. System transmission model.
The system model is depicted in Fig. 1 where рқ’Һrepre-
sents the рқ‘ҳвҲ’tuple information bits from the source, рқ’„refers
to the рқ‘ӣвҲ’tuple encoded bits while рқ’„вҖІ is the (рқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘қ) вҲ’tuple
encoded bits after puncturing., and ЛҶ
рқ’Һdenotes the estimate of
the original information by the BP decoding algorithm pro-
vided with the received bits рқ’“. The puncturing rate is рқңҢ=
рқ‘қ/рқ‘ӣwhere рқ‘қis the number of punctured bits while the re-
sulting code rate рқ‘…вҖІ is defined as рқ‘…вҖІ = рқ‘ҳ/(рқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘қ). As we
stated in the last section the decoder has a perfect knowl-
edge about the puncturing pattern, i.e. the position of those
punctured bits in a codeword. Otherwise, some side infor-
mation may be needed to send the puncturing pattern to the
receiver end. In some works on puncturing like [12], the au-
thors only remove the parity bits in order to protect the origi-
nality of the information bits. In fact, the information bits and
the parity bits are equally vulnerable to be corrupted during
the transmission over the channel with additive white Gaus-
sian noise (AWGN). As a consequence, we would puncture
a certain number of both types of bits according to our de-
cision rules. On the other hand, the generator matrix рқ‘®and
parity-check matrix рқ‘Ҝare specifically generated by the PEG
algorithm not only for it is flexible on nodesвҖҷ degree distribu-
tion but also because it is able to produce LDPC codes with
good graph structures.
2.2. Review of existing algorithms
Consider a Tanner graph as рқҗә(рқ‘ү, рқҗё) in which рқ‘үdenotes the
set of vertices and рқҗёdenotes the set of edges respectively. For
a graph рқҗә, рқ‘ү= рқ‘үрқ‘җ
вҲӘрқ‘үрқ‘ where рқ‘үрқ‘җis the set of check nodes
and рқ‘үрқ‘ is the set of variable or symbol nodes. рқҗёrefers to the
set of edges which only connect two nodes from two different
sets such that рқҗёвҠҶрқ‘үрқ‘җГ— рқ‘үрқ‘ and the edge рқ‘’рқ‘–,рқ‘—(рқ‘җрқ‘–, рқ‘җрқ‘—) вҲҲрқҗёif
and only if в„Һрқ‘–,рқ‘—вҲ•= 0, where в„Һрқ‘–,рқ‘—is the entry of рқ‘Ҝat рқ‘–рқ‘Ўв„Һrow
and рқ‘—рқ‘Ўв„Һcolumn. Denote the symbol degree sequence by рқҗ·рқ‘ =
{рқ‘‘рқ‘ 0, . . . , рқ‘‘рқ‘ рқ‘ӣвҲ’1} where рқ‘‘рқ‘ рқ‘—is the degree of symbol node рқ‘ рқ‘—
(0 вүӨрқ‘—вүӨрқ‘ӣвҲ’1). And we put the symbol degree sequence
in an increasing order, i.e. рқ‘‘рқ‘ 0 вүӨрқ‘‘рқ‘ 1 . . . вүӨрқ‘‘рқ‘ рқ‘ӣвҲ’1. Similarly,
denote the check degree sequence by рқҗ·рқ‘җ= {рқ‘‘рқ‘җ0, . . . , рқ‘‘рқ‘ рқ‘ҡвҲ’1}
, where рқ‘‘рқ‘җрқ‘–is the degree of check node рқ‘җрқ‘–(0 вүӨрқ‘–вүӨрқ‘ҡвҲ’1),
also рқ‘‘рқ‘җ0 вүӨрқ‘‘рқ‘җ1 . . . вүӨрқ‘‘рқ‘җрқ‘ҡвҲ’1. According to a given degree
sequence the degree distribution is defined for both variable
nodes and check nodes as рқңҮ(рқ‘Ҙ) and рқңҲ(рқ‘Ҙ), respectively.
рқңҮ(рқ‘Ҙ) =
вҲ‘
рқ‘–вүҘ1
рқңҮрқ‘–рқ‘Ҙрқ‘–вҲ’1,
рқңҲ(рқ‘Ҙ) =
вҲ‘
рқ‘—вүҘ1
рқңҲрқ‘—рқ‘Ҙрқ‘—вҲ’1,
(1)
where рқңҮрқ‘–is the fraction of variable nodes connected to рқ‘–check
nodes and рқңҲрқ‘—is the fraction of check nodes connected to рқ‘—
variable nodes. Shorts cycles in the Tanner graph deteriorate
the coding performance as they cause correlations with re-
spect to the LLR values of variable nodes, which is against the
assumption on the independence of variable nodes in the BP
decoding algorithm [9]. However, some recent results [11]-
[13] show that not all short cycles are harmful to the operation
of the BP algorithm such that the ACE metric is introduced for
evaluation of short cycles in a bipartite graph. It is necessary
to roughly interpret the PEG and counting cycle algorithm in
this paper as they play key roles in our proposed schemes.
Generally speaking, the PEG algorithm optimizes the parity-
check matrix рқ‘Ҝso as to refine the graph structure correspond-
ing to it, which refers to maximizing the girth рқ‘”as well as to
minimizing the number of short cycles. As it literally means
(Progressive Edge-Growth), this algorithm spreads a Tanner
Graph from each variable node рқ‘ рқ‘—as the root until depth рқ‘ҷin
an edge by edge manner. As the neighbor of рқ‘ рқ‘—within depth рқ‘ҷ,
the most distant check node from рқ‘ рқ‘—is carefully chosen for the
purpose of lengthening the local girth рқ‘”рқ‘ рқ‘—which is the shortest
cycle рқ‘ рқ‘—is involved [9]. In other words, since рқ‘”= minрқ‘—{рқ‘”рқ‘ рқ‘—}
a new placement of an edge barely influences the girth such
that a PEG Tanner Graph is generated which has larger girth
than the original one. The reason why we apply the PEG al-
gorithm to create the parity-check matrix is not only that it
generates good Tanner Graphs with flexible degree distribu-
tions, but it also gives us some convenience for implementing
the proposed ACE-based puncturing technique. We will ex-
plain this later. Due to the space limit, only an overview of the
counting cycle algorithm is presented here. More details can
be found in [10]. This algorithm successfully transforms the
problem of counting cycles into that of counting the so-called
lollipop walks since exactly counting all the short cycle in a
bipartite graph is seen to be computationally impossible. The
term (рқ‘ҡ, рқ‘ӣвҲ’рқ‘ҡ)-lollipop walk refers to length рқ‘ӣwalks, i.e.
a sequence of vertices {рқ‘Һ1, . . . , рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ+1} where all vertices are
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
distinct and рқ‘Һрқ‘ӣ+1 = рқ‘Һрқ‘ҡ+1. Thus, cycles of length 2рқ‘ҡare
(0, 2рқ‘ҡ)-lollipop walks. Given a bipartite graph рқҗә(рқ‘ү, рқҗё), de-
fine рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘җ
2рқ‘ҳas a вҲЈрқ‘үрқ‘җвҲЈГ— вҲЈрқ‘үрқ‘җвҲЈmatrix in which the (рқ‘–, рқ‘—)рқ‘Ўв„Һ
element is the number of paths of length 2рқ‘ҳfrom рқ‘Јрқ‘җрқ‘–вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘җ
to рқ‘Јрқ‘җрқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘җ; Similarly define рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘җ
2рқ‘ҳ+1 as a вҲЈрқ‘үрқ‘җвҲЈГ— вҲЈрқ‘үрқ‘ вҲЈ
matrix in which the (рқ‘–, рқ‘—)рқ‘Ўв„Һelement is the number of paths
of length 2рқ‘ҳ+ 1 from рқ‘Јрқ‘җрқ‘–вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘җto рқ‘Јрқ‘ рқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘ . Also define
рқ‘ірқ‘Јрқ‘җ
2рқ‘ҳвҖІ,2рқ‘ҳвҲ’2рқ‘ҳвҖІ as a вҲЈрқ‘үрқ‘җвҲЈГ— вҲЈрқ‘үрқ‘җвҲЈmatrix in which the (рқ‘–, рқ‘—)рқ‘Ўв„Һ
element is the number of (2рқ‘ҳвҖІ, 2рқ‘ҳвҲ’2рқ‘ҳвҖІ)-lollipop walks from
рқ‘Јрқ‘җрқ‘–вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘җto рқ‘Јрқ‘җрқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘җ; Similarly define рқ‘ірқ‘Јрқ‘җ
2рқ‘ҳвҖІ+1,2рқ‘ҳвҲ’2рқ‘ҳвҖІ as a
вҲЈрқ‘үрқ‘җвҲЈГ— вҲЈрқ‘үрқ‘ вҲЈmatrix in which the (рқ‘–, рқ‘—)рқ‘Ўв„Һelement is the
number of (2рқ‘ҳвҖІ + 1, 2рқ‘ҳвҲ’2рқ‘ҳвҖІ)-lollipop walks from рқ‘Јрқ‘җрқ‘–вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘җ
to рқ‘Јрқ‘ рқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘ .
рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘җ
2рқ‘ҳ+1 = рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘җ
2рқ‘ҳрқ‘¬вҲ’
рқ‘ҳвҲ’1
вҲ‘
рқ‘–=0
рқ‘ірқ‘Јрқ‘җ
(2рқ‘–+1,2рқ‘ҳвҲ’2рқ‘–),
(2)
рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘җ
2рқ‘ҳ= рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘җ
2рқ‘ҳвҲ’1рқ‘¬рқ‘ҮвҲ’
рқ‘ҳвҲ’1
вҲ‘
рқ‘–=0
рқ‘ірқ‘Јрқ‘җ
(2рқ‘–,2рқ‘ҳвҲ’2рқ‘–),
(3)
рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘ 
2рқ‘ҳ+1 = рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘ 
2рқ‘ҳвҲ’1рқ‘¬рқ‘ҮвҲ’
рқ‘ҳвҲ’1
вҲ‘
рқ‘–=0
рқ‘ірқ‘Јрқ‘ 
(2рқ‘–+1,2рқ‘ҳвҲ’2рқ‘–),
(4)
рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘ 
2рқ‘ҳ= рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘ 
2рқ‘ҳвҲ’1рқ‘¬вҲ’
рқ‘ҳвҲ’1
вҲ‘
рқ‘–=0
рқ‘ірқ‘Јрқ‘ 
(2рқ‘–,2рқ‘ҳвҲ’2рқ‘–),
(5)
рқ‘ірқ‘Јрқ‘җ
(0,2рқ‘ҳ) = (рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘җ
2рқ‘ҳвҲ’1рқ‘¬рқ‘Ү) вҲҳрқ‘°,
(6)
рқ‘ірқ‘Јрқ‘ 
(0,2рқ‘ҳ) = (рқ‘·рқ‘Јрқ‘ 
2рқ‘ҳвҲ’1рқ‘¬) вҲҳрқ‘°,
(7)
where вҖҷвҲҳвҖҷ means element-wise matrix multiplication, рқ‘¬is the
edge matrix and рқ‘°is the identity matrix. And the total number
of cycles of length 2рқ‘ҳis
рқ‘Ғ2рқ‘ҳ= 1
2рқ‘ҳрқ‘Үрқ‘ҹ
(
рқ‘ірқ‘Јрқ‘җ
(0,2рқ‘ҳ)
)
= 1
2рқ‘ҳрқ‘Үрқ‘ҹ
(
рқ‘ірқ‘Јрқ‘ 
(0,2рқ‘ҳ)
)
,
(8)
where вҖҷрқ‘Үрқ‘ҹвҖҷ means the trace of a related matrix. In order to
find the girth рқ‘”and to count cycles of length рқ‘”, рқ‘”+ 2 and
рқ‘”+ 4 in a Tanner Graph, (2)-(7) are expanded and updated
with each other such that counting short cycles is equal to
counting lollipop recursions.
3. PROPOSED PUNCTURING TECHNIQUES
In this section, three proposed puncturing schemes are pre-
sented in detail which result in distinct Bit Error Rate (BER)
performances but also various computational complexities.
The proposed intentional puncturing applies the counting cy-
cle algorithm [10] as a puncturing criterion for the first time.
And then we devise an improved version of our puncturing
technique with the employment of the ACE metric [11]. Fi-
nally, this section considers another puncturing scheme devel-
oped on the basis of an exhaustive search with the Relative-
Mean-Square Error (R-MSE) calculation among a number of
random puncturing patterns.
Table 1. THE INTENTIONAL PUNCTURING ON LDPC
CODES
Step 1:
Given the number of variable nodes, the number of check nodes
and the degree distributions, Generate the parity-check matrix
рқ‘Ҝ(рқ‘ҡГ—рқ‘ӣ) by the PEG algorithm;
Step 2:
Based on рқ‘Ҝ(рқ‘ҡГ—рқ‘ӣ) expand and update (2)-(7) so as to compute
рқ‘”вҲ’cycle, (рқ‘”+ 2) вҲ’cycle and (рқ‘”+ 4) вҲ’cycle with respect to
each variable nodes;
Step 3:
Provided with the knowledge from Step 2 define the vector
рқ‘Әрқ‘ рқ‘—= {рқ‘Ғрқ‘”, рқ‘Ғрқ‘”2, рқ‘Ғрқ‘”4}рқ‘Үfor every variable node рқ‘ рқ‘—(рқ‘ рқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘ ).
If рқ‘Ғрқ‘”вҲ•= 0, рқ‘ рқ‘—is picked as one of the candidates;
Step 4:
For all the candidates chosen in Step 3, define the vector
рқ‘Әрқ’ҡрқ’„рқ‘”рқ‘ рқ‘—(рқ‘ рқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘ ). Puncture the first рқ‘қcandidates in рқ‘Әрқ’ҡрқ’„рқ‘”рқ‘ рқ‘—.
3.1. The Intentional Puncturing Scheme
Our proposed intentional puncturing technique, summarized
in Table 1, is developed based upon the knowledge of the PEG
algorithm [9] and the counting cycle algorithm [10]. Espe-
cially the latter one inspired us to consider if the informa-
tion of the number of short cycles with regard to every vari-
able node could be employed to explore a puncturing scheme
which may reduce the performance degradation because of
puncturing. On the basis of graph theory, variable nodes cor-
responding to an irregular Tanner graph have diverse recov-
ery abilities in the BP decoding process depending on their
degrees and the graphвҖҷs cycle structure. Consequently, those
variable nodes which are less recoverable can be preferably
removed since they contribute less in the iterative decoding
than others do. As stated before, the counting cycle algorithm
is able to find the shortest cycle рқ‘”in the Tanner Graph, based
on which the number of cycles of length from рқ‘”to рқ‘”+ 4 can
be calculated. Given a Tanner Graph рқҗә(рқ‘ү, рқҗё), its short cy-
clesвҖҷ structure and a resulting rate рқңҢ= рқ‘қ/рқ‘ӣ, our goal is to
locate and puncture those variable nodes which are less help-
ful to recover the source bits in the BP decoding. Define the
vector рқ‘Әрқ‘ рқ‘—= {рқ‘Ғрқ‘”, рқ‘Ғрқ‘”2, рқ‘Ғрқ‘”4}рқ‘Үwhich refers to the number
of рқ‘”вҲ’cycle, (рқ‘”+ 2) вҲ’cycle and (рқ‘”+ 4) вҲ’cycle passing
through any given variable node рқ‘ рқ‘—(рқ‘ рқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘ ). And the vector
рқ‘Әрқ’ҡрқ’„рқ‘”рқ‘ рқ‘—whose elements are arranged in a decreasing order
is formed as
рқ‘Әрқ’ҡрқ’„рқ‘”рқ‘ рқ‘—= {рқҗ¶рқ‘Ұрқ‘җрқ‘”рқ‘ 0, рқҗ¶рқ‘Ұрқ‘җрқ‘”рқ‘ 1, . . . , рқҗ¶рқ‘Ұрқ‘җрқ‘”рқ‘ рқ‘ӣвҲ’1}рқ‘Ү,
рқ‘ рқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘ ,
(9)
where each element represents the number of length рқ‘”cycle
passing through any variable node рқ‘ рқ‘—. Similarly, we can de-
fine either рқ‘Әрқ’ҡрқ’„рқ‘”2 рқ‘ рқ‘—or рқ‘Әрқ’ҡрқ’„рқ‘”4 рқ‘ рқ‘—too if needed. there are two
criteria to determine the subset of punctured nodes: 1) to find
variable nodes having the shortest cycles passing through; 2)
to find variable nodes having more such cycles than others.
Actually, we also tried to sort candidates in an increasing or-
der on their short cycle statistics but the performance dramat-
ically degenerates when compared to those resulting from the
other sorting ways. In the case that candidates on рқ‘”вҲ’cycle
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
are less than рқ‘қ, we puncture them at first and then sort out
the rest of candidates with respect to (рқ‘”+ 2) вҲ’cycle and
(рқ‘”+ 4) вҲ’cycle. However, that situation seldom occurs in our
simulations given a reasonable puncturing rate рқңҢ.
3.2. The ACE-Based Puncturing Scheme
Table 2.
THE ACE-based PUNCTURING ON LDPC
CODES
Step 1:
Generate the parity-check matrix рқ‘Ҝ(рқ‘ҡГ—рқ‘ӣ) by the PEG algorithm
and index every variable node within each рқ‘”вҲ’cycle
Step 2:
Based on рқ‘Ҝ(рқ‘ҡГ—рқ‘ӣ) expand and update (2)-(7) to compute
рқ‘”вҲ’cycle, (рқ‘”+ 2) вҲ’cycle and (рқ‘”+ 4) вҲ’cycle with respect to
each variable node;
Step 3:
Provided with the knowledge from Step 2 define the vector
рқ‘Әрқ‘ рқ‘—= {рқ‘Ғрқ‘”, рқ‘Ғрқ‘”2, рқ‘Ғрқ‘”4}рқ‘Үfor every variable node рқ‘ рқ‘—(рқ‘ рқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘үрқ‘ ).
If рқ‘Ғрқ‘”вҲ•= 0, рқ‘ рқ‘—is picked as one of the candidates;
Step 4:
For all candidates chosen in Step 3, use the index information
from Step 1 to calculate рқҗҙрқҗҙрқҗ¶рқҗёрқ‘”then sort candidates in an
increasing order on рқҗҙрқҗҙрқҗ¶рқҗёрқ‘”. Puncture the first рқ‘қcandidates in
рқ‘Әрқ’ҡрқ’„рқ‘”рқ‘ рқ‘—.
The second proposed puncturing scheme, summarized in
Table 2, can be seen as an improved version of the intentional
puncturing scheme presented above. It is called ACE-based
puncturing algorithm due to the application of the ACE met-
ric. Since not all short cycles of the same length are equally
detrimental in the iterative decoding, the approximate cy-
cle extrinsic message degree (ACE) has been introduced by
Vukobratovic and Senk [11] in order to evaluate the influence
of cycles of a certain length in a bipartite graph. Given a
cycle рқҗ¶in which all variable nodes form a set рқ‘үрқҗ¶all the
edges relevant to it can be classified into three groups:
вҲҷрқҗёрқ‘җрқ‘Ұрқ‘җ(рқ‘үрқ‘җ): Cycle edges in the cycle рқҗ¶.
вҲҷрқҗёрқ‘җрқ‘ўрқ‘Ў(рқ‘үрқ‘җ): Cut edges incident to those check nodes not
in рқҗ¶but at least doubly connected to рқ‘үрқҗ¶.
вҲҷрқҗёрқ‘’рқ‘Ҙрқ‘Ў(рқ‘үрқ‘җ):
Extrinsic edges incident to those check
nodes with a single connection to рқ‘үрқҗ¶.
Approximate Cycle EMD (ACE) with respect to рқҗ¶is sim-
ply defined as
рқҗҙрқҗ¶рқҗё(рқҗ¶) = ОЈрқ‘ рқ‘—вҲҲрқ‘үрқҗ¶(рқ‘‘(рқ‘ рқ‘—) вҲ’2),
(10)
where рқ‘‘(рқ‘ рқ‘—) denotes the degree of the variable node рқ‘ рқ‘—. For
short cycles of the same length, the greater ACE value indi-
cates less negative impact to the whole graph structure. Here
we use рқҗҙрқҗҙрқҗ¶рқҗёрқ‘”= 1/рқ‘Ғрқ‘”
вҲ‘рқ‘Ғрқ‘”
1
рқңӮрқҗҙрқҗ¶рқҗёto denote the average
ACE value for all рқ‘”вҲ’рқ‘ҷрқ‘’рқ‘ӣрқ‘”рқ‘Ўв„Һcycles regarding a certain vari-
able node рқ‘ рқ‘—. The ACE-based puncturing algorithm still has
two criteria to determine the subset of the punctured nodes:
1) to find variable nodes having the shortest cycles passing
through; 2) to find variable nodes having smaller рқҗҙрқҗҙрқҗ¶рқҗёрқ‘”. As
a consequence, the vector рқ‘Әрқ’ҡрқ’„рқ‘”рқ‘ рқ‘—now has its elements rep-
resenting all variable nodesвҖҷ average ACE value with respect
to the рқ‘”cycle in an increasing order.
In Table 2, notice that there are only a few modifications
in Step 1 and Step 4 when compared the ACE-based scheme
to the intentional puncturing scheme. However, slight differ-
ences lead to considerable performance gains but much more
computational complexity with storage space needed.
3.3. The Simulation-Based Puncturing Scheme
Table 3. THE Simulation-based PUNCTURING ON LDPC
CODES
Step 1:
Generate the parity-check matrix рқ‘Ҝ(рқ‘ҡГ—рқ‘ӣ) by the PEG algorithm
Step 2:
Given the resulting rate рқ‘…вҖІ, randomly generate a number of
puncturing patterns in which рқ‘қbits are removed from the encoded
bits.
Step 3:
By running simulations, obtain and store performance results of
all random puncturing patterns including the one simulated
under the original rate.
Step 4:
Compute R-MSE on BER values between each randomly
punctured and the unpunctured. And select the pattern with the
smallest R-MSE as the best-pattern.
The last proposed puncturing scheme summarized in Ta-
ble 3 is developed on the basis of an exhaustive search among
several random puncturing patterns (at least 100 random pat-
terns).
Then the best puncturing pattern is determined by
choosing the one with the smallest R-MSE when compared to
the unpunctured performance. Given two BER-SNR curves рқҗҙ
and рқҗө, we set рқҗҙas the standard curve such that the R-MSE
value of рқҗөwith respect to рқҗҙis
рқ‘…вҲ’рқ‘Җрқ‘Ҷрқҗё(рқҗөрқҗҙ) =



вҺ·1
рқ‘ӣ
рқ‘ӣ
вҲ‘
1
(вҲЈрқ‘Һрқ‘–вҲ’рқ‘Ҹрқ‘–вҲЈ
вҲЈрқ‘Һрқ‘–вҲЈ
)2,
рқ‘–= 1, . . . , рқ‘ӣ,
(11)
where рқ‘ӣis the number of SNR points, for each of them
рқ‘Һрқ‘–and рқ‘Ҹрқ‘–are the corresponding BER values with respect to рқҗҙ
and рқҗө, respectively. If we replace рқҗҙby the performance curve
simulated under the original rate and рқҗөby the the perfor-
mance curve resulting from the punctured pattern, (11) quan-
tifies the difference in performance between the punctured
and the unpunctured such that the pattern with the smallest
R-MSE value manages to produce the result closest to what
the original rate generates.
4. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we present our simulation results which com-
pare the three proposed puncturing schemes described in the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
last section to the puncturing scheme reported in [2], which
is currently well-known as an efficient puncturing method re-
sulting in relatively small performance degradation over the
AWGN channel. We show that our proposed puncturing al-
gorithms can achieve a very good performance over a wide
range of resulting rates. The irregular mother LDPC code
used for simulations is generated by the PEG algorithm with
codelength рқ‘ӣ= 1000 and code rate рқ‘…= 0.5. For all simula-
tion results, the decoder applies the Log-BP algorithm which
terminates after 60 iterations. We assume that the decoder
has perfect knowledge of the puncturing position such that
the LLR values corresponding to the punctured bits are set to
be 0 at the first decoding iteration. After counting short cy-
cles in the Tanner graph, we are aware of that for our mother
code the girth рқ‘”= 8 and there are 2024 8 вҲ’cycle, 25487
10 вҲ’cycle and 212357 12 вҲ’cycle in the Tanner Graph. If
our intentional puncturing scheme is applied, then the vector
рқ‘Әрқ’ҡрқ’„рқ‘”рқ‘ рқ‘—informs us that there are 324 variable nodes involved
in 2024 8 вҲ’cycle which are the candidates for 200 punctured
nodes if рқңҢ= 0.2. Then the 324 candidates are sorted in a
decreasing order with respect to the number of 8 вҲ’cycle. At
last, the first 200 candidates are located and removed. On
the other hand, if the ACE-based scheme applied, the vector
рқ‘Әрқ’ҡрқ’„рқ‘”рқ‘ рқ‘—is formed by including 324 variable nodesвҖҷ average
ACE values on рқ‘”cycle in an increasing order.
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
10
вҲ’6
10
вҲ’5
10
вҲ’4
10
вҲ’3
10
вҲ’2
10
вҲ’1
BER
Eb/No (dB)
 
 
Unpunctured R=0.5
Unpunctured R=0.625
Best pattern
Proposed ACE
IntentвҲ’punct [2]
Proposed intent
Fig. 2. Comparisons of proposed puncturing schemes with
existing puncturing scheme in [2] for the irregular PEG LDPC
code. The mother codeвҖҷs parameters are рқ‘ӣ= 1000, рқ‘ҡ= 500,
рқңҮ(рқ‘Ҙ) = 0.21 Г— рқ‘Ҙ5 + 0.25 Г— рқ‘Ҙ3 + 0.25 Г— рқ‘Ҙ2 + 0.29 Г— рқ‘Ҙ,
рқңҲ(рқ‘Ҙ) = рқ‘Ҙ5.
Fig. 2 shows the performance of all proposed schemes
with the mother code (original rate рқ‘…= 0.5), where the re-
sulting rate рқ‘…вҖІ is 0.625 with puncturing rate рқңҢ= 0.2 which
means 200 bits are required to be punctured before transmis-
sion. The вҖҷProposed intentвҖҷ refers to our intentional punctur-
ing scheme while the вҖҷProposed ACEвҖҷ denotes the proposed
ACE-based puncturing scheme and the вҖҷBest-patternвҖҷ results
from the simulation-based scheme. The вҖҷIntent-punctвҖҷ de-
notes the intentional puncturing algorithm from Vellambi and
Fekri [2]. According to Fig. 2, it is obvious that at BER
10вҲ’5 the ACE-based scheme obtains 0.15 dB gain and the
simulation-based scheme achieves 0.25 dB gain against the
вҖҷIntent-punctвҖҷ.
For comparison purposes, we also gener-
ate the performance curve of an unpunctured irregular PEG
LDPC code which has less codelength (рқ‘ӣ= 800), higher
rate (here рқ‘…= 0.625) but the same degree distributions as
our mother code does. Notice that there is a performance
gap only less than 0.2 dB between our вҖҷBest patternвҖҷ and
the вҖҷUnpuncturedвҖҷ code generated under the resulting rate
рқ‘…= 0.625. Nevertheless, the ACE-based scheme outper-
forms our intentional puncturing scheme by 0.25 dB at most
even though it sacrifices more computational complexity as
well as it requires storage for indices of variable nodes. For
the simulation-based algorithm, much more storage is needed
so as to stock puncturing patterns while nearly no other com-
putation is required except for R-MSEsвҖҷ calculation.
1
2
3
4
5
6
10
вҲ’6
10
вҲ’5
10
вҲ’4
10
вҲ’3
10
вҲ’2
10
вҲ’1
BER
Eb/No (dB)
 
 
Unpunctured R=0.5
X0.526 (50 punct)
Y0.526 (50 punct)
X0.625 (200 punct)
Y0.625 (200 punct)
X0.714 (300 punct)
Y0.714 (300 punct)
Fig. 3. Comparisons of proposed intentional puncturing with
different resulting rates in which the number after рқ‘Ӣor рқ‘Ң
refers to the resulting rate while вҖҷ50 punctвҖҷ refers to 50 bits
are punctured so on and so forth.
On the other hand, even though the вҖҷProposed intentвҖҷ has
0.1 dB loss in performance when compared to the вҖҷIntent-
punctвҖҷ it is able to achieve much more flexible resulting rates
without neither further performance degradation nor any ad-
ditional computational cost as reported by the method in [2],
which will be explained in detail as follows. We illustrate the
comparison on puncturing performances over a range of dif-
ferent puncturing rates between three proposed schemes (de-
noted by рқ‘Ң) and the puncturing scheme in [2] (denoted by рқ‘Ӣ)
in Fig. 3 for the intentional puncturing, in Fig. 4 for the ACE-
based and in Fig. 5 for the Simulation-based, respectively.
In Fig. 3, рқ‘Ңperforms 0.25 dB better than рқ‘Ӣat BER 10вҲ’5
after the resulting rate 0.625 since the maximum rate рқ‘Ӣcan
obtain is only about 0.65 after which the performance gain be-
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
gins to decrease and an additional algorithm has to be applied
for higher rates [2]. At this point, all our proposed schemes
are designed for flexibly constructing rate-compatible irreg-
ular LDPC codes codes while keeping less performance loss
due to puncturing. On the other hand, рқ‘Ңoutperforms рқ‘Ҙat
each selected rate in both Fig. 4 and 5.
1
2
3
4
5
6
10
вҲ’6
10
вҲ’5
10
вҲ’4
10
вҲ’3
10
вҲ’2
10
вҲ’1
BER
Eb/No (dB)
 
 
Unpunctured R=0.5
X0.526 (50 punct)
Y0.526 (50 punct)
X0.625 (200 punct)
Y0.625 (200 punct)
X0.714 (300 punct)
Y0.714 (300 punct)
Fig. 4. Comparisons of proposed ACE-based puncturing with
different resulting rates in which the number after рқ‘Ӣor рқ‘Ң
refers to the resulting rate while вҖҷ50 punctвҖҷ refers to 50 bits
are punctured so on and so forth.
1
2
3
4
5
6
10
вҲ’6
10
вҲ’5
10
вҲ’4
10
вҲ’3
10
вҲ’2
10
вҲ’1
BER
Eb/No (dB)
 
 
Unpunctured R=0.5
X0.526 (50 punct)
Y0.526 (50 punct)
X0.625 (200 punct)
Y0.625 (200 punct)
X0.714 (300 punct)
Y0.714 (300 punct)
Fig. 5. Comparisons of proposed Simulation-based punctur-
ing with different resulting rates in which the number after рқ‘Ӣ
or рқ‘Ңrefers to the resulting rate while вҖҷ50 punctвҖҷ refers to 50
bits are punctured so on and so forth.
5. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have employed the counting cycle algorithm
with the ACE metric to devise novel puncturing techniques
for the finite-length irregular LDPC codes. We have veri-
fied that the proposed approaches have managed to gener-
ate a wide range of codes with various resulting rates and at
the same time have resulted in very good puncturing perfor-
mances as compared to the other existing puncturing scheme.
We have also proposed a simulation-based puncturing scheme
that outperforms other existing methods. From the punctur-
ingвҖҷs point of view, our simulation results have shown that the
short cycle structure as well as the evaluation on the impact
of short cycles do influence the performance of LDPC codes.
6. REFERENCES
[1] J. Li and K. R. Narayanan, вҖқRate-Compatible Low Density Parity
Check (RC-LDPC) Codes for Capacity-Approaching ARQ Schemes
in Packet Data Communications,вҖқ Proceeding of International Con-
ference on on Communications, Internet and Information Technol-
ogy (CIIT), US Virgin Islands, pp. 201-206, Nov. 2002.
[2] B. N. Vellambi and F. Fekri, вҖқFinite-length rate-compatible LDPC
codes: a novel puncturing scheme,вҖқ IEEE Transaction on Communi-
cations, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 297-301, Feb. 2009.
[3] J. Hagenauer, вҖқRate-compatible punctured convolutional codes
(RCPC codes) and their applications,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol.
36, no. 4, pp. 389-400, Apr. 1988.
[4] A. Shokrollahi and R. Storn, вҖқDesign of efficient erasure codes with
different evolution,вҖқ in Proc. 2000 IEEE International Symposium
on Information Theory (ISIT), pp. 5, Jun 2000.
[5] D. Bi amd L. C. Perez, вҖқRate-compatible low-density parity-check
codes with rate-compatible degree profiles,вҖқ IEE Electron. Lett., vol.
42, no. 1, pp. 41-43, Jan. 2006.
[6] M. R. Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, вҖқOn comstruction of rate-
compatible low-density parity-check codes,вҖқ IEEE Commun. Lett.,
vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 159-161, Mar. 2004.
[7] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, вҖқResult on punctured low-density parity-
check codes and improved iterative decoding techniques,вҖқ in Proc.
2004 IEEE Infor. Theory Workshop, pp. 24-29, San Antonio, TX,
Oct. 2004.
[8] J. Ha, J. Kim, D. Klinc, and S. W. Mclaughlin, вҖқRate-compatible
punctured low-density parity-check codes with short bolck length,вҖқ
IEEE Trans. Infor. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 728-738, Feb. 2006.
[9] Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou and D. M. Arnold, вҖқRegular and irregular pro-
gressive edge-growth tanner graph,вҖқ IEEE Transaction on Informa-
tion Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386-398, Jan. 2005.
[10] T. R. Halford, K. M. Chugg, вҖқAn algorithm for counting short cycles
in bipartite graph,вҖқ IEEE Trans. on Infor. Theory, vol. 52, no. 1, pp.
287-292, Jan. 2006.
[11] D. Vukobravic, V. Senk, вҖқEvaluation and design of irregular LDPC
codes using ACE spectrum,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 8,
pp. 2272 - 2279, Aug. 2009.
[12] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke,
вҖқFinite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the bi-
nary erasure channel,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Infor. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570-
1579, Jun. 2002.
[13] D. Vukobravic, V. Senk, вҖқGeneralized ACE constrained progressive
edge-growth LDPC code design,вҖқ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no.
1, pp. 32-34, Jan. 2008.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:53:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
