IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

4427

Performance of LDPC Codes Under Faulty Iterative Decoding
Lav R. Varshney, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Departing from traditional communication theory where decoding algorithms are assumed to perform without error, a system where noise perturbs both computational devices and communication channels is considered here. This paper studies limits in processing noisy signals with noisy circuits by investigating the effect of noise on standard iterative decoders for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Concentration of decoding performance around its average is shown to hold when noise is introduced into message-passing and local computation. Density evolution equations for simple faulty iterative decoders are derived. In one model, computing nonlinear estimation thresholds shows that performance degrades smoothly as decoder noise increases, but arbitrarily small probability of error is not achievable. Probability of error may be driven to zero in another system model; the decoding threshold again decreases smoothly with decoder noise. As an application of the methods developed, an achievability result for reliable memory systems constructed from unreliable components is provided.
Index Terms—Communication system fault tolerance, decoding, density evolution, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, memories.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE basic goal in channel coding is to design encoder-decoder pairs that allow reliable communication over noisy channels at information rates close to capacity [1]. The primary obstacle in the quest for practical capacity-achieving codes has been decoding complexity [2]–[4]. Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have, however, emerged as a class of codes that have performance at or near the Shannon limit [5], [6] and yet are sufficiently structured as to have decoders with circuit implementations [7]–[9].
In addition to decoder complexity, decoder reliability may also limit practical channel coding.1 In Shannon’s schematic di-
Manuscript received April 29, 2009; revised January 12, 2011; accepted January 12, 2011. Date of current version June 22, 2011. This work was supported in part by a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship and was performed in part when the author was with École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Lake Tahoe, CA, September 2007.
The author was with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, and the Research Laboratory of Electronics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: varshney@alum.mit.edu).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2145870
1One may also consider the effect of encoder complexity [10], however encoder noise need not be explicitly considered, since it may be incorporated into channel noise, using the noise combining argument suggested by Fig. 3.

agram of a general communication system [1, Fig. 1] and in the traditional information and communication theories that have developed within the confines of that diagram, noise is localized in the communication channel. The decoder is assumed to operate without error. Given the possibility of unreliable computation on faulty hardware, there is value in studying error-prone decoding. In fact Hamming’s original development of paritycheck codes was motivated by applications in computing rather than in communication [11].
The goal of this paper is to investigate limits of communication systems with noisy decoders and has dual motivations. The first is the eminently practical motivation of determining how well error control codes work when decoders are faulty. The second is the deeper motivation of determining fundamental limits for processing unreliable signals with unreliable computational devices, illustrated schematically in Fig. 1. The motivations are intertwined. As noted by Pierce, “The down-to-earth problem of making a computer work, in fact, becomes tangled with this difficult philosophical problem: ‘What is possible and what is impossible when unreliable circuits are used to process unreliable information?’” [12].
A first step in understanding these issues is to analyze a particular class of codes and decoding techniques: iterative message-passing decoding algorithms for LDPC codes. When the code is represented as a factor graph, algorithm computations occur at nodes and algorithm communication is carried out over edges. Correspondence between the factor graph and the algorithm is not only a tool for exposition but also the way decoders are implemented [7]–[9]. In traditional performance analysis, the decoders are assumed to work without error. In this paper, there will be transient local computation and message-passing errors, whether the decoder is analog or digital.
When the decoder itself is noisy, one might believe that achieving arbitrarily small probability of error (Shannon reliability) is not possible, but this is indeed possible for certain sets of noisy channels and noisy decoders. This is shown by example. For other sets of noisy channels and noisy decoders, Shannon reliability is not achievable, but error probability tending to extremely small values is achievable. Small probability of error, , is often satisfactory in practice, and so
-reliable performance is also investigated. Decoding thresholds at -reliability decrease smoothly with increasing decoder noise. Communication systems may display graceful degradation with respect to noise levels in the decoder.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II reviews motivations and related work. Section III formalizes notation and Section IV gives concentration results that allow the density evolution method of analysis, generalizing re-

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

physical defect, imperfection, or flaw that occurs within some

hardware or software component. An error is the informational

manifestation of a fault. A permanent fault exists indefinitely

until corrective action is taken, whereas a transient fault appears

and disappears in a short period of time. Noisy circuits in which

the interconnection pattern of components are trees are called

formulas [34], [35].

In an error model, the effects of faults are given directly in

Fig. 1. Schematic diagram of an information system that processes unreliable the informational universe. For example, the basic von Neu-

signals with unreliable circuits.

mann model of noisy circuits [27] models transient faults in

logic gates and wires as message and node computation noise

sults in [13]. A noisy version of the Gallager A decoder for processing the output of a binary symmetric channel is analyzed in Section V, where it is shown that Shannon reliability is unattainable. In Section VI, a noisy decoder for AWGN channels is analyzed. For this model, the probability of error may be driven to zero and the decoding threshold degrades smoothly as a function of decoder noise. As an application of the results of Section V, Section VII precisely characterizes the information storage capacity of a memory built from unreliable components. Section VIII provides some conclusions.

that is both spatially and temporally independent; this has more recently also been called the Hegde–Shanbhag model [36], after [37]. This error model is used here. Error models of permanent faults [38], [39] or of miswired circuit interconnection [28], [40] have been considered elsewhere. Such permanent errors in decoding circuits may be interpreted as either changing the factor graph used for decoding or as introducing new potentials into the factor graph; the code used by the encoder and the code used by the decoder are different.
There are several design philosophies to combat faults. Fault avoidance seeks to make physical components more reliable.

II. BACKGROUND

Fault masking seeks to prevent faults from introducing errors. Fault tolerance is the ability of a system to continue performing

A. Practical Motivations

its function in the presence of faults. This paper is primarily

Although always present [11], [14], recent technological concerned with fault tolerance, but Section VII considers fault trends in digital circuit design bring practical motivations to masking.

the fore [15]–[17]. The 2008 update of the International Technology Roadmap for Semiconductors (ITRS)2 points out that C. Related Work

for complementary metal-oxide-silicon (CMOS) technology, increasing power densities, decreasing supply voltages, and decreasing sizes have increased sensitivity to cosmic radiation, electromagnetic interference, and thermal fluctuations. The ITRS further says that an ongoing shift in the manufacturing paradigm will dramatically reduce costs but will lead to more transient failures of signals, logic values, devices, and interconnects. Device technologies beyond CMOS, such as single-electron tunnelling technology [18], carbon-based nanoelectronics [19], and chemically assembled electronic nanocomputers [20], are also projected to enter production, but they all display erratic, random device behavior [21], [22].
Analog computations are always subject to noise [23], [24]. Similar issues arise when performing real-valued computations on digital computers since quantization, whether fixed-point or floating-point, is often well-modeled as bounded, additive stochastic noise [25].

Empirical characterizations of message-passing decoders have demonstrated that probability of error performance does not change much when messages are quantized at high resolution [26]. Even algorithms that are coarsely quantized versions of optimal belief propagation show little degradation in performance [13], [41]–[46]. It should be emphasized, however, that fault-free, quantized decoders differ significantly from decoders that make random errors.3 The difference is similar to that between control systems with finite-capacity noiseless channels and control systems with noisy channels of equal capacity [50]. Seemingly the only previous work on message-passing algorithms with random errors is [51], which deals with problems in distributed inference.4
The information theoretic problem of mismatch capacity [52] and its analog for iterative decoding [53] deal with scenarios where an incorrect decoding metric is used. This may arise, e.g., due to incorrect estimation of the channel noise power. For mes-

B. Coding and Computing
Information and communication theory have provided limits for processing unreliable signals with reliable circuits [1], [13], [26], whereas fault-tolerant computing theory has provided limits for processing reliable signals (inputs) with unreliable circuits [12], [27]–[31]. This work brings the two together.

sage-passing decoding algorithms, mismatch leads to incorrect parameters for local computations. These are permanent faults rather than the kind of transient faults considered in this paper.
Noisy LDPC decoders were previously analyzed in the context of designing reliable memories from unreliable components [54], [55] (revisited in Section VII), using Gallager’s original

A brief overview of terms and concepts from fault-tolerant 3Randomized algorithms [47] and stochastic computation [48] (used for decomputing, based on [32], [33], is now provided. A fault is a coding in [49]) make use of randomness to increase functionality, but the ran-
domness is deployed in a controlled manner.

2The overall objective of the ITRS is to present the consensus of the semiconductor industry on the best current estimate of research and development needs for the next fifteen years.

4If the graphical model of the code and the graph of noisy communication links in a distributed system coincide, then the distributed inference problem and the message-passing decoding problem can be made to coincide.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VARSHNEY: PERFORMANCE OF LDPC CODES UNDER FAULTY ITERATIVE DECODING

4429

that connect to nodes with degree . The design rate is

.

In the communication system of Fig. 1, a codeword is se-

lected by the transmitter and is sent through the noisy channel.

Channel input and output letters are denoted

and

.

Since binary linear codes are used, can be taken as

.

The receiver contains a noisy message-passing decoder, which

is used to process the channel output codeword to produce an

estimate of that is denoted . The goal of the receiver is

to recover the channel input codeword with low probability of

error. Throughout this work, probability of bit error is used

as the performance criterion6

The message-passing decoder works in iterative stages and

Fig. 2. Schematic diagram of a factor graph-based implementation of a noisy decoder circuit. Only one variable-to-check message and one check-to-variable message are highlighted. Other wires, shown in gray, will also carry noisy messages.

the iteration time is indexed by

. Within the de-

coder, at time , each variable node has a realization of ,

. A message-passing decoder exchanges messages between

nodes along wires. First each variable node sends a message to

a neighboring check node over a noisy messaging wire. Gener-

methods [26]. Several LPDC code analysis tools have since been developed, including simulation [56], expander graph arguments [57], [58], EXIT charts [59], [60], and density evolution [13], [61], [62]. This work generalizes asymptotic characterizations developed by Richardson and Urbanke for noiseless decoders [13], showing that density evolution is applicable to

ically, sent messages are denoted as v c, message wire noise realizations as v c, and received messages as v c: assume without loss of generality that v c, v c, and v c are drawn from a common messaging alphabet .
Each check node processes received messages and sends back
a message to each neighboring variable node over a noisy mes-

faulty decoders. Expander graph arguments have also been ex- sage wire. The noisiness of the check node processing is gener-

tended to the case of noisy decoding in a paper [63] that appeared concurrently with the first presentation of this work [64]. Note that previous works have not even considered the possibility that Shannon reliability is achievable with noisy decoding.

III. CODES, DECODERS, AND PERFORMANCE

This section establishes the basic notation of LDPC channel

codes and message-passing decoders for communication sys-

tems depicted in Fig. 1. It primarily follows established nota-

tion in the field [13], [65], and will therefore be brief. Many of

the notational conventions are depicted schematically in Fig. 2

using a factor graph-based decoder implementation.

Consider the standard ensemble of v c -regular LDPC

codes of length , v c , defined by a uniform measure on

the set of labeled bipartite factor graphs with variable node de-

gree v and check node degree c.5 There are variable nodes

corresponding to the codeword letters and v c check nodes

corresponding to the parity check constraints. The design rate

of the code is v c, though the actual rate might be higher

since not all checks may be independent; the true rate con-

verges to the design rate for large [65, Lem. 3.22]. One may

also consider irregular codes,

characterized by the de-

gree distribution pair

. Generating functions of the vari-

able node and check node degree distributions, and ,

are functions of the form

and

, where and specify the fraction of edges

5A factor graph determines an “ordered code,” but the opposite is not true [66]. Moreover, since codes are unordered objects, several “ordered codes” are in fact the same code.

ically denoted by an input random variable c . The check

node computation is denoted

c

. The no-

tations c v, c v, and c v are used for signaling from check

node to variable node; again without loss of generality assume

that c v, c v, c v

.

Each variable node now processes its and the messages it

receives to produce new messages. The new messages are pro-

duced through possibly noisy processing, where the noise input

is generically denoted v . The variable node computation

is denoted

v

. Local computations

and message-passing continue iteratively.

Message passing induces decoding neighborhoods, which in-

volve nodes/wires that have communicated with one another.

For a given node , its neighborhood of depth is the induced

subgraph consisting of all nodes reached and edges traversed

by paths of length at most starting from (including ) and

is denoted . The directed neighborhood of depth of a wire

, denoted by v c, is defined as the induced subgraph containing all wires and nodes on paths starting from the same

place as

but different from

. Equivalently for a

wire

, c v is the induced subgraph containing all wires

and nodes on paths starting from the same place as

but

different from

. If the induced subgraph (corresponding

to a neighborhood) is a tree then the neighborhood is tree-like,

otherwise it is not tree-like. The neighborhood is tree-like if and

only if all involved nodes are distinct.

6An alternative would be to consider block error probability, however an exact evaluation of this quantity is difficult due to the dependence between different symbols of a codeword, even if the bit error probability is the same for all symbols in the codeword [67].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

Note that only extrinsic information is used in node computations. Also note that in the sequel, all decoder noises ( c, v,
v c, and c v) will be assumed to be independent of each other, as in the von Neumann error model of faulty computing.
A communication system is judged by information rate, error probability, and blocklength. For fixed channels, information theory specifies the limits of these three parameters when optimizing over the unconstrained choice of codes and decoders; Shannon reliability is achievable for rates below capacity in the limit of increasing blocklength. When decoders are restricted to be noisy, tighter information theoretic limits are not known. Therefore comparing performance of systems with noisy decoders to systems using identical codes but noiseless decoders is more appropriate than comparing to Shannon limits.
Coding theory follows from information theory by restricting decoding complexity; analysis of noisy decoders follows from coding theory by restricting decoding reliability.

Note, however, that it is not obvious that this is the best format for noisy message-passing [65, Appendix B.1]. The symmetry conditions can be restated for messages in other formats.
The several symmetry conditions are:
Definition 2 (Channel Symmetry): A memoryless channel is binary-input output-symmetric if it satisfies

for all channel usage times

.

Definition 3 (Check Node Symmetry): A check node message map is symmetric if it satisfies

c

c

c

c c

IV. DENSITY EVOLUTION CONCENTRATION RESULTS

for any sequence

c . That is to say, the signs of

the messages and the noise factor out of the map.

Considering the great successes achieved by analyzing the Definition 4 (Variable Node Symmetry): A variable node noiseless decoder performance of ensembles of codes [13], [61], message map is symmetric if it satisfies [65] rather than of particular codes [26], the same approach is

pursued for noisy decoders. The first mathematical contribution

of this work is to extend the method of analysis promulgated in

[13] to the case of decoders with random noise.

and

Several facts that simplify performance analysis are proven.

First, under certain symmetry conditions with wide applicability, the probability of error does not depend on which codeword is transmitted. Second, the individual performances of codes in an ensemble are, with high probability, the same as the average performance of the ensemble. Finally, this average behavior converges to the behavior of a code defined

v

v

for

. That is to say, the initial message from the variable

node only depends on the received value and internal noise and

there is sign inversion invariance for all messages.

on a cycle-free graph. Performance analysis then reduces to determining average performance on an infinite tree: a noisy formula is analyzed in place of general noisy circuits.
For brevity, only regular LDPC codes are considered in this

Definition 5 (Message Wire Symmetry): Consider any mes-

sage wire to be a mapping

. Then a message

wire is symmetric if

section, however the results can be generalized to irregular

LDPC codes. In particular, replacing node degrees by maximum node degrees, the proofs stand mutatis mutandis. Similarly, where is any message received at a node when the message

only binary LDPC codes are considered; generalizations to sent from the opposite node is and is message wire noise

non-binary alphabets also follow, as in [68].

with distribution symmetric about 0. An example where the message wire symmetry condition

A. Restriction to All-One Codeword
If certain symmetry conditions are satisfied by the system, then the probability of error is conditionally independent of the codeword that is transmitted. It is assumed throughout this section that messages in the decoder are in belief format.
Definition 1: A message in an iterative message-passing decoder for a binary code is said to be in belief format if the sign of the message indicates the bit estimate and the magnitude of the message is an increasing function of the confidence level. In particular, a positive-valued message indicates belief that a bit is whereas a negative-valued message indicates belief

holds is if the message wire noise is additive and symmetric

about 0. Then

and is symmetric

about 0.

Theorem 1 (Conditional Independence of Error): For a given

binary linear code and a given noisy message-passing algorithm,

let

denote the conditional probability of error after the

th decoding iteration, assuming that codeword was sent. If

the channel and the decoder satisfy the symmetry conditions

given in Definitions 2–5, then

does not depend on .

Proof: Modification of [13, Lem. 1] or [65, Lem. 4.92].

Appendix A gives details.

that a bit is . A message of magnitude 0 indicates complete

uncertainty whereas a message of infinite magnitude indicates Suppose a system meets these symmetry conditions. Since

complete confidence in a bit value.

probability of error is independent of the transmitted codeword

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VARSHNEY: PERFORMANCE OF LDPC CODES UNDER FAULTY ITERATIVE DECODING

4431

and since all LDPC codes have the all-one codeword in the codebook, one may assume without loss of generality that this codeword is sent. Doing so removes the randomness associated with transmitted codeword selection.

B. Concentration Around Ensemble Average

The next simplification follows by seeing that the average performance of the ensemble of codes rather than the performance of a particular code may be studied, since all codes in the ensemble perform similarly. The performances of almost all LDPC codes closely match the average performance of the ensemble from which they are drawn. The average is over the instance of the code, the realization of the channel noise, and the realizations of the two forms of decoder noise. To simplify things, assume that the number of decoder iterations is fixed at some finite . Let be the number of incorrect values held among all v variable node-incident edges at the end of the th iteration (for a particular code, channel noise realization, and decoder noise realization) and let be the expected value of
. By constructing a martingale through sequentially revealing all of the random elements and then using the Hoeffding-Azuma inequality, the following holds.

Theorem 2 (Concentration Around Expected Value): There

exists a positive constant

v c such that for any

The concentration and convergence results directly imply concentration around the average performance of a tree ensemble.

Theorem 4 (Concentration Around Cycle-Free Case): There

exist positive constants

v c and

vc

such that for any

and

,

v

v

Proof: Follows directly from Theorems 2 and 3.

D. Density Evolution

With the conditional independence and concentration results,

all randomness is removed from explicit consideration and all

messages are independent. The problem reduces to density evo-

lution, the analysis of a discrete-time dynamical system [62].

The dynamical system state variable of most interest is the prob-

ability of bit error, .

Denote the probability of bit error of a code

after

iterations of decoding by

, where is a channel

noise parameter (such as noise power or crossover probability)

and is a decoder noise parameter (such as logic gate error

probability). Then density evolution computes

v
Proof: Follows the basic ideas of the proofs of [13, Th. 2] or [65, Th. 4.94]. Appendix B gives details.
A primary communication system performance criterion is probability of error ; if the number of incorrect values concentrates, then so does .

where the expectation is over the choice of the code and the various noise realizations. The main interest is in the long-term behavior of the probability of error after performing many iterations. The long-term behavior of a generic dynamical system may be a limit cycle or a chaotic attractor, however density evolution usually converges to a stable fixed point. Monotonicity (either increasing or decreasing) with respect to iteration number need not hold, but it often does. If there is a stable fixed point, the limiting performance corresponds to

C. Convergence to the Cycle-Free Case

The previous theorem showed that the noisy decoding algorithm behaves essentially deterministically for large . As now shown, this ensemble average performance converges to the performance of an associated tree ensemble, which will allow the assumption of independent messages.
For a given edge whose directed neighborhood of depth is tree-like, let be the expected number of incorrect messages received along this edge (after message noise) at the th iteration, averaged over all graphs, inputs and decoder noise realizations of both types.

In channel coding, certain sets of parameters

lead to

“good” performance, in the sense of small , whereas other

sets of parameters lead to “bad” performance with large . The

goal of density evolution analysis is to determine the boundary

between these good and bad sets.

Though it is natural to expect the performance of an algo-

rithm to improve as the quality of its input improves and as

more resources are allocated to it, this may not be so. For many

decoders, however, there is a monotonicity property that lim-

iting behavior improves as channel noise decreases and

Theorem 3 (Convergence to Cycle-Free Case): There exists

a positive constant

v c such that for any

and

,

as decoder noise decreases. Moreover, just as in other nonlinear estimation systems for dimensionality-expanding signals [70]–[72], there is a threshold phenomenon such that the limiting probability of error may change precipitously with the

v

v

values of and . In traditional coding theory, there is no parameter , and the

The proof is identical to the proof of [13, Th. 2]. The basic goal is often to determine the range of for which is zero.

idea is that the computation tree created by unwrapping the code The boundary is often called the decoding threshold and may

graph to a particular depth [69] almost surely has no repeated be denoted

. A decoding threshold for optimal codes

nodes.

under optimal decoding may be computed from the rate of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4432

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

code and the capacity of the channel as a function of , .

Since this Shannon limit threshold is for optimal codes and de-

coders, it is clearly an upper bound to

for any given code

and decoder. If the target error probability is non-zero, then

the Shannon limit threshold is derived from the so-called -ca-

pacity,

, rather than .7

In the case of faulty decoders, the Shannon limits also

provide upper bounds on the -boundary for the set of

that achieve good performance. One might hope for a Shannon

theoretic characterization of the entire

-boundary, but as

noted previously, such results are not extant. Alternately, in

Sections V–VIII, sets of

that can achieve -reliability

for particular LDPC codes

are characterized using the

density evolution method developed in this section.

V. EXAMPLE: NOISY GALLAGER A DECODER

Fig. 3. Local computation noise may be incorporated into message-passing noise without essential loss of generality.

Gallager algorithm A is passed over an independent and iden-

tical BSC wire with crossover probability .

The density evolution equation leads to an analytic character-

ization of the set of

pairs, which parameterize the noisi-

ness of the communication system.

Section IV showed that density evolution equations de-

termine the performance of almost all codes in the large

blocklength regime. Here the density evolution equation for

a simple noisy message-passing decoder, a noisy version of

Gallager’s decoding algorithm A [26], [74], is derived. The

algorithm has message alphabet

, with messages

in belief format simply indicating the estimated sign of a bit.

Although this simple decoding algorithm cannot match the

performance of belief propagation due to its restricted mes-

saging alphabet , it is of interest since it is of extremely low

complexity and can be analyzed analytically [74].

Consider decoding the LDPC-coded output of a binary sym-

metric channel (BSC) with crossover probability . At a check

node, the outgoing message along edge is the product of all

incoming messages excluding the one incoming on , i.e., the

check node map is the XOR operation. At a variable node, the

outgoing message is the original received code symbol unless

all incoming messages give the opposite conclusion. That is

if

v

otherwise.

Proposition 1: There is no essential loss of generality by combining computation noise and message-passing noise into a single form of noise.
Proof: It is possible to integrate stochastic kernels and disintegrate joint measures in a well-defined and almost surely unique way, [75, Prop. 7.28] and [75, Cor. 7.27.2].
The desired result, demonstrated schematically in Fig. 3, is a special case and holds since the computation noise kernel and wire noise kernel can be integrated in a well-defined and almost surely unique way.

A. Density Evolution Equation

The density evolution equation is developed for general ir-

regular LDPC ensembles. The state variable of density evolu-

tion, , is taken to be the expected probability of bit error at

the variable nodes in the large blocklength limit, denoted here

as

.

The original received message is in error with probability ,

thus

The initial variable-to-check message is in error with proba-

bility

, since it is passed through a

.

For further iterations, , the probability of error,

, is

found by induction. Assume

for

.

Now consider the error probability of a check-to-variable mes-

sage in the

th iteration. A check-to-variable message

emitted by a check node of degree c along a particular edge is the product of all the c incoming messages along all other edges. By assumption, each such message is in error with proba-

bility and all messages are independent. These messages are

passed through

before being received, so the proba-

bility of being received in error is

Due to the XOR operation, the outgoing message will be in error if an odd number of these received messages are in error. The probability of this event, averaged over the degree distribution, yields the probability

This noise combining is performed in the sequel to reduce the

number of decoder noise parameters and allow a clean exami-

nation of the central phenomenon. Thus, each message in the
7The function h (1) is the binary entropy function. The  -capacity ex-
pression is obtained by adjusting capacity by the rate-distortion function
of an equiprobable binary source under frequency of error constraint  , R( ) = 1 0 h ( ) [73].

Now consider

, the error probability at the vari-

able node in the

th iteration. Consider an edge which is

connected to a variable node of degree v. The outgoing vari-

able-to-check message along this edge is in error in the

th

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VARSHNEY: PERFORMANCE OF LDPC CODES UNDER FAULTY ITERATIVE DECODING

4433

iteration if the original received value is in error and not all incoming messages are received correctly or if the originally received value is correct but all incoming messages are in error. The first event has probability

with

. The recursion does not have a fixed point at zero,

and since error probability is bounded below by zero, it must

increase. The derivative is

v
The second event has probability
v
Averaging over the degree distribution and adding the two terms together yields the density evolution equation in recursive form:
(1)

which is greater than zero for

and

; thus

the error evolution forms a monotonically increasing sequence.

Since the sequence is monotone increasing starting from zero,

and there is no fixed point at zero, it follows that this converges

to the smallest real solution of

since the fixed point

cannot be jumped due to monotonicity.

3) Noisy Channel, Noisy Decoder: The same phenomenon

must also happen if the starting is positive, however the value

to which the density evolution converges is a non-zero fixed

point solution of the original (1), not of (2), and is a function

of both and . Intuitively, for somewhat large initial values

of , the noisy decoder decreases the probability of error in

the first few iterations, just like the noiseless one, but when the

error probability becomes close to the internal decoder error, the

probability of error settles at that level. This is summarized in

the following proposition.

The expressions

Proposition 2: Final error probability

for any LDPC

ensemble decoded using the noisy Gallager A system defined

in Section V, for every decoder noise level

and every

channel noise level .

and evolution recursion.

are used to define the density

B. Performance Evaluation

With the density evolution equation established, the perfor-

mance of the coding-decoding system with particular values of

quality parameters and may be determined. Taking the bit

error probability as the state variable, stable fixed points of the

deterministic, discrete-time, dynamical system are to be found.

Usually one would want the probability of error to converge to

zero, but since this might not be possible, a weaker performance

criterion may be needed. To start, consider partially noiseless

cases.

1) Noisy Channel, Noiseless Decoder: For the noiseless de-

coder case, i.e.,

, it has been known that there are thresh-

olds on , below which the probability of error goes to zero as

increases, and above which the probability of error goes to some

large value. These can be found analytically for the Gallager A

algorithm [74].

2) Noiseless Channel, Noisy Decoder: For the noisy Gal-

lager A system under consideration, the probability of error does

not go to zero as goes to infinity for any

. This can

be seen by considering the case of the perfect original channel,

, and any

. The density evolution equation reduces

to

The fact that probability of error cannot asymptotically be driven to zero with the noisy Gallager decoder is expected yet is seemingly displeasing. In a practical scenario, however, the ability to drive to a very small number is also desirable. As such, a performance objective of achieving less than is defined and the worst channel (ordered by ) for which a decoder with noise level can achieve that objective is determined. The channel parameter

is called the threshold. For a large interval of values, there is a

single threshold value below which -reliable communication is

possible and above which it is not. Alternatively, one can deter-

mine the probability of error to which a system with particular

and can be driven,

, and see whether

this value is small.

In order to find the threshold in the case of

and ,

the real fixed point solutions of density evolution recursion (1)

need to be found. The real solutions of the polynomial equation

in ,

are denoted

.8 The

final probability of error is determined by the , since these

are fixed points of the recursion (1).

8The number of real solutions can be determined through Descartes’ rule of
(2) signs or a similar tool [76].
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4434

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

Fig. 4. Thick line shows final error probability,  , after decoding a C (3; 6) code with the noisy Gallager A algorithm,  = 0:005. This is determined by the fixed points of density evolution, r (; "), shown with thin lines.

Fig. 5. Decoding a C (3; 6) code with the noisy Gallager A algorithm. Region where it is beneficial to use decoder is below  and above  .

The real solutions of the polynomial equation in

TABLE I PERFORMANCE OF NOISY GALLAGER A ALGORITHM FOR (3, 6) CODE
(3)

are denoted

.8 The threshold as

well as the region in the plane where the decoder improves

performance over no decoding are determined by the , since

(3) is obtained by solving recursion (1) for and setting equal to

zero. For particular ensembles of LDPC codes, these values can

be computed analytically. For these particular ensembles, it can

be determined whether the fixed points are stable or unstable.

Moreover, various monotonicity results can be established to Notice that the previously known special case, the decoding

show that fixed points cannot be jumped.

threshold of the noiseless decoder, can be recovered from these

Analytical expressions for the

and

are deter- results. The decoding threshold for the noiseless decoder is de-

mined for the (3, 6) regular LDPC code by solving the appro- noted

and is equal to the following expression [74]:

priate polynomial equations and numerical evaluations of the

expressions are shown as thin lines in Fig. 4 as functions of

for fixed . The point where

is

and the point

where

is

the thin lines cross.

. In Fig. 4, these are points where where

By analyzing the dynamical system equation (1) for the (3,

6) code in detail, it can be shown that

and

are

stable fixed points of density evolution. Contrarily,

is an

unstable fixed point, which determines the boundary between and

the regions of attraction for the two stable fixed points. Since

and

are stable fixed points, the final error prob-

ability will take on one of these two values, depending on the

starting point of the recursion, . The thick line in Fig. 4 shows

the final error probability as a function of initial error proba- This value is recovered from noisy decoder results by noting

bility . One may note that

is the desirable small error that

for

, which are the ordinate

probability, whereas

is the undesirable large error prob- intercepts of the region in Fig. 5.

ability and that delimits these two regimes.

To provide a better sense of the performance of the noisy Gal-

The

points determine when it is beneficial to use the lager A algorithm, Table I lists some values of , , and (nu-

decoder, in the sense that

. By varying (as if in a merical evaluations are listed and an example of an analytical

sequence of plots like Fig. 4), an region where the decoder expression is given in Appendix C). As can be seen from these

is beneficial is demarcated; this is shown in Fig. 5. The function results, particularly from the curve in Fig. 5, the error prob-

is the -reliability decoding threshold for large ranges ability performance of the system degrades gracefully as noise

of .

is added to the decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VARSHNEY: PERFORMANCE OF LDPC CODES UNDER FAULTY ITERATIVE DECODING

4435

Fig. 6. -thresholds (gray lines) for decoding a C (3; 6) code with the noisy
Gallager A algorithm within the region to use decoder (delimited with red line).
Returning to threshold characterization, an analytical expression for the threshold within the region to use decoder is:

Fig. 7. Region to use decoder for Bazzi et al.’s optimized rate 1/2 LDPC code
with noisy Gallager A decoding (black) is contained within the region to use
decoder for a rate 1/2 LDPC code in Bazzi et al.’s optimal family of codes with
a = 1=10 (green) and contains the region to use decoder for the C (3; 6) code
(gray).

which is the solution to the polynomial equation in ,
The threshold is drawn for several values of in Fig. 6. A threshold line determines the equivalence of channel noise and decoder noise with respect to final probability of error. If for example, the binary symmetric channels in the system are a result of hard-detected AWGN channels, such a line may be used to derive the equivalent channel noise power for decoder noise power or vice versa. Threshold lines therefore provide guidelines for power allocation in communication systems.
C. Code Optimization
At this point, the bit error performance of a system has simply been measured; no attempt has been made to optimize a code for a particular decoder and set of parameters. For fault-free decoding, it has been demonstrated that irregular code ensembles can perform much better than regular code ensembles like the (3, 6) LDPC considered above [74], [77]. One might hope for similar improvements when LDPC code design takes decoder noise into account. The space of system parameters to be considered for noisy decoders is much larger than for noiseless decoders.
As a first step, consider the ensemble of rate 1/2 LDPC codes that were optimized by Bazzi et al. for the fault-free Gallager A decoding algorithm [74]. The left degree distribution is

where the optimal is specified analytically. Numerically,

. Measuring the performance of this code

with the noisy Gallager A decoder yields the region to use

decoder shown in Fig. 7; the region to use decoder for the (3, 6)

code is shown for comparison. By essentially any criterion of

performance, this optimized code is better than the (3, 6) code.

Are there other codes that can perform better on the faulty

decoder than the code optimized for the fault-free decoder? To

see whether this is possible, arbitrarily restrict to the family of

ensembles that were found to contain the optimal degree dis-

tribution for the fault-free decoder and take

. Also

let

be fixed. The numerical value of the threshold

, whereas the numerical value of

the threshold

. In this sense, the

code is better than the

code. In fact, as

seen in Fig. 7, the region to use decoder for this

code

contains the region to use decoder for the code.

On the other hand, the final error probability when operating

at threshold for the

code

, whereas the final error probability when operating at

threshold for the

code is

. So in this sense, the

code is better than

the

code. The fact that highly optimized ensembles

usually lead to more simultaneous critical points is the main

complication.

If both threshold and final bit error probability are perfor-

mance criteria, there is no total order on codes and therefore

there may be no notion of an optimal code.

VI. EXAMPLE: NOISY BELIEF PROPAGATION DECODER

and the right degree distribution is

It is also of interest to analyze a noisy version of the belief propagation decoder applied to the output of a continuous-al-

phabet channel. Density evolution for belief propagation is dif-

ficult to analyze even in the noiseless decoder case, and so a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4436

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

Gaussian approximation method [78] is used. The state variables are one-dimensional rather than infinite-dimensional as for full analysis of belief propagation. The specific node computations carried out by the decoder are as in belief propagation [13]; these can be approximated by the functions and defined below. The messages and noise model are specified in terms of the approximation.
Section V had considered decoding the output of a BSC with a decoder that was constructed with BSC components and Proposition 2 had shown that probability of bit error could never be driven to zero. Here, the probability of bit error does in fact go to zero.
Consider a binary input AWGN channel with variance . The output is decoded using a noisy belief propagation decoder. For simplicity, only regular LDPC codes are considered. The messages that are passed in this decoder are real-valued,
, and are in belief format. Thus one should think of the decoder as an analog device, although many digital implementations can also be described this way.
The variable-to-check messages in the zeroth iteration are the log-likelihood ratios computed from the channel output symbols, ,

vc

The check node takes the received versions of these messages, v c, as input. The node implements a mapping whose output, c v, satisfies:

c
cv

vc

where the product is taken over messages on all incoming edges except the one on which the message will be outgoing, and

The check node mapping is motivated by Gaussian likelihood computations. For the sequel, it is useful to define a slightly different function

which can be approximated as

with

,

,

[78].

For iterations

, the variable node takes the received

versions of the

messages, c v, as inputs. The mapping

yields output v c given by

As in Section V, local computation noise is combined into

message-passing noise (Proposition 1). To model quantization

[25] or random phenomena, consider each message passed in the

decoder to be corrupted by signal-independent additive noise

which is bounded as

. This class of noise

models includes uniform noise, and truncated Gaussian noise,

among others. If the noise is symmetric, then Theorem 1 applies.

Following the von Neumann error model, each noise realization

is assumed to be independent.

A. Density Evolution Equation
The definition of the computation rules and the noise model may be used to derive the approximate density evolution equation. The one-dimensional state variable chosen to be tracked is , the mean belief at a variable node. The symmetry condition relating mean belief to belief variance [13], [78] is enforced. Thus, if the all-one codeword was transmitted, then the value going to implies that the density of v c tends to a “mass point at infinity,” which in turn implies that goes to 0.
To bound decoding performance under any noise model in the class of additive bounded noise, consider (nonstochastic) worst-case noise. Assuming that the all-one codeword was sent, all messages should be as positive as possible to move towards the correct decoded codeword (mean beliefs of indicate perfect confidence in a bit being 1). Consequently, the worst bounded noise that may be imposed is to subtract from all messages that are passed; this requires knowledge of the transmitted codeword being all-one. If another codeword is transmitted, then certain messages would have added instead of subtracted.
Such a worst-case noise model does not meet the conditions of Theorem 1, but transmission of the all-one codeword is assumed nonetheless. If there were an adversary with knowledge of the transmitted codeword imposing worst-case noise on the decoder, then probability of bit error would be conditionally independent of the transmitted codeword, as given in Appendix A1.
Note that the adversary is restricted to selecting each noise realization independently. More complicated and devious error patterns in space or in time are not possible in the von Neumann error model. Moreover, the performance criterion is probability of bit error rather than probability of block error, so complicated error patterns would provide no great benefit to the adversary.
Since the noise is conditionally deterministic given the transmitted codeword, derivation of the density evolution equation is much simplified. An induction argument is used, and the base case is

vc

v
cv

where is the channel noise power. This follows from the log-

likelihood computation for an AWGN communication channel

with input alphabet

.

where the sum is taken over received messages from the neighboring check nodes except the one to which this message is outgoing. Again, the operation of the variable node is motivated by

The inductive assumption in the induction argument is . This message is communicated over message-passing noise to get

Gaussian likelihood computations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VARSHNEY: PERFORMANCE OF LDPC CODES UNDER FAULTY ITERATIVE DECODING

4437

Next the check node computation is made to yield
c

By the inductive assumption, all messages will be equivalent; that is why the product is a c -fold product of the same quantity. This value is communicated over message-passing noise to get
c

Finally the variable-node computation yields
c
v

Again, all messages will be equivalent so the sum is a v -fold sum of the same quantity. Thus the density evolution
equation is
v

Fig. 8. Thresholds for decoding the C (3; 6) code (triangle), the C (4; 8) code (quadrangle), and the C (5; 10) (pentangle), each with the noisy belief
propagation algorithm. Notice that the ordinate intercepts are " (3; 6) = 0:8747, " (4; 8) = 0:8323, and " (5; 10) = 0:7910, [78, Table I].

c
v

(4) VII. APPLICATION: RELIABLE MEMORIES CONSTRUCTED FROM UNRELIABLE COMPONENTS

B. Performance Evaluation

One might wonder whether there are sets of noise parameters

and

such that

. Indeed there are, and

there is a threshold phenomenon just like Chung et al. showed

for

[78].

Proposition 3: Final error probability

for LDPC en-

sembles decoded using the noisy belief propagation system de-

fined in Section VI, for binary-input AWGN channels with noise

level

.

Proof: Substituting

into (4) demonstrates that it is

a stable fixed point. It may further be verified that the dynamical

system proceeds toward that fixed point if

.

Unlike Section V where the

thresholds could be eval-

uated analytically, only numerical evaluations of these

thresholds are possible. These are shown in Fig. 8 for three reg-

ular LDPC ensembles with rate 1/2, namely the (3, 6) ensemble,

the (4, 8) ensemble, and the (5, 10) ensemble. As can be ob-

served, thresholds decrease smoothly as the decoder noise level

increases. Moreover, the ordering of the codes remains the same

for all levels of decoder noise depicted. Code optimization re-

mains to be done.

The basic reason for the disparity between Propositions 3 and

2 is that here, the noise is bounded whereas the messages are

unbounded. Thus once the messages grow large, the noise has

essentially no effect. To use a term from [67], once the decoder

reaches the breakout value, noise cannot stop the decoder from

achieving Shannon reliability.

Perhaps a peak amplitude constraint on messages would pro-

vide a more realistic computation model, but the equivalent of

Proposition 3 may not hold. Quantified data processing inequal-

ities may provide insight into what forms of noise and message

constraints are truly limiting [34], [35].

In Section I, complexity and reliability were cast as the primary limitations on practical decoding. By considering the design of fault masking techniques for memory systems, a communication problem beyond Fig. 1, both complexity and reliability may be explicitly constrained. Indeed, the problem of constructing reliable information storage devices from unreliable components is central to fault-tolerant computing, and determining the information storage capacity of such devices is a long-standing open problem [79]. This problem is related to problems in distributed information storage [80] and is intimately tied to the performance of codes under faulty decoding. The analysis techniques developed thus far may be used directly.
In particular, one may construct a memory architecture with noisy registers and a noisy LDPC correcting network. At each time step, the correcting network decodes the register contents and restores them. The correcting network prevents the codeword stored in the registers from wandering too far away. Taylor and others have shown that there exist non-zero levels of component noisiness such that the LDPC-based construction achieves non-zero storage capacity [54], [55], [63]. Results as in Section V may be used to precisely characterize storage capacity.
Before proceeding with an achievability result, requisite definitions and the problem statement are given [54].
Definition 6: An elementary operation is any Boolean function of two binary operands.
Definition 7: A system is considered to be constructed from components, which are devices that either perform one elementary operation or store one bit.
Definition 8: The complexity of a system is the number of components within the system.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4438

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

Definition 9: A memory system that stores information bits XORed with the stored value. Such a circuit can be implemented

is said to have an information storage capability of .
Definition 10: Consider a sequence of memories , ordered according to their information storage capability (bits).

with v

components, so v

v . The storage

is carried out in registers. The total complexity of the memory

,

v c , is

The sequence

is stable if it satisfies the following:

1) For any , must have allowed inputs denoted ,

vc

v

vc

vc

.

2) A class of states,

of . The classes

all

and all .

3) The complexity of

, is associated with each input

and

must be disjoint for

,

, must be bounded by ,

The information storage capability is times the rate of the

code, . The complexity of an irredundant memory with the

same storage capability is

. Hence, the redundancy

is

where redundancy is fixed for all .

4) At , let one of the inputs from

be stored in each

memory in the sequence of memories , with no

vc

vc

vc vc

further inputs in times

. Let denote the partic- which is a constant. By [65, Lem. 3.22], the inequality almost

ular input stored in memory . Let

denote the holds with equality with high probability for large . For the

probability that the state of does not belong to

regular LDPC code, the redundancy value is 34, so

at

and further let

. Then

, if the construction does in fact yield stable memories.

for any

and

, there must exist a such that The conditions under which the memory is stable depends

.

on the silver decoder. Since silver decoder complexity does not

The demarcation of classes of states is equivalent to demarcating enter, maximum likelihood should be used. The Gallager lower

decoding regions.

bound to the ML decoding threshold for the regular LDPC

Definition 11: The storage capacity, , of memory is a number such that there exist stable memory sequences for all memory redundancy values greater than .
Note that unlike channel capacity for the communication problem, there is no informational definition of storage capacity that is known to go with the operational definition.
The basic problem then is to determine storage capacity, which is a measure of the circuit complexity required to achieve arbitrarily reliable information storage. The circuit complexity must be linear in blocklength, a property satisfied by systems with message-passing correcting networks for LDPC codes.
Although Proposition 2 shows that Shannon reliability is not achievable for any noisy Gallager A decoder, the definition of stable information storage does not require this. By only requiring maintenance within a decoding region, the definition implies that either the contents of the memory may be read out in coded form or equivalently that there is a noiseless output device that yields decoded information; call this noiseless output device the silver decoder.

code is

[81, Table II]. Recall from Fig. 5

that the decoding threshold for Gallager A decoding is

.

If the probability of bit error for the correcting network in the

memory stays within the decoding threshold of the silver de-

coder, then stability follows. Thus the question reduces to deter-

mining the sets of component noisiness levels

for which

the decoding circuit achieves

-reliability.

Consider a memory system where bits are stored in regis-

ters with probability of flipping at each time step. An LDPC

codeword is stored in these registers; the probability of incorrect

storage at the first time step is . At each iteration, the variable

node value from the correcting network is placed in the register.

This stored value is used in the subsequent Gallager A variable

node computation rather than a received value from the input

pins. Suppose that the component noise values in the correcting

network may be parameterized as in Section V. Then a slight

modification of the analysis in Section V yields a density evo-

lution equation

Consider the construction of a memory with noisy registers

as storage elements. These registers are connected to a noisy

Gallager A LDPC decoder (as described in Section V), which takes the register values as inputs and stores its computational results back into the registers. To find the storage capacity of this construction, first compute the complexity (presupposing that the construction will yield a stable sequence of memories).
The Gallager A check node operation is a c -input XOR gate, which may be constructed from c two-input XOR gates. A variable node determines whether its v inputs are all the same and then compares to the original received value.

where

. There is a “region to use

decoder” for this system, just as in Section V. If

, this

region is shown in Fig. 9, and is slightly smaller than the region

in Fig. 5. Denote this region and its hypograph as . It follows

that

-reliability is achieved for . Since

-re-

liability is achievable, -reliability is achievable by mono-

tonicity. Thus the construction yields stable memories.

Proposition 4: Let be the set of memory component noise

Let v denote the complexity of this logic. The output of the parameters

within the region to use decoder or its hypo-

comparison to the original received value is the value of the graph corresponding to a system with a Gallager A correcting

consensus view. One construction to implement the consensus network for the (3, 6) LDPC code, depicted in Fig. 9. Then a

logic is to OR together the outputs of a v -input AND gate sequence of memories constructed from -components have a

and a v -input AND gate with inverted inputs. This is then storage capacity lower bounded as

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VARSHNEY: PERFORMANCE OF LDPC CODES UNDER FAULTY ITERATIVE DECODING

4439

Fig. 9. For a memory system constructed with noisy registers and a (3, 6) LDPC Gallager A correcting network, the region (delimited by black line) comprises the “region to use decoder” and its hypograph.

This may be directly generalized for any choice of code ensemble as follows.

Theorem 5: Let be the (computable) set of memory com-

ponent noise parameters

within the region to use decoder

or its hypograph corresponding to a system with a Gallager A

correcting network for the

LDPC code. Then a sequence

of memories constructed from -components have a storage ca-

pacity lower bounded as

No attempt was made to apply fault masking methods to develop decoding algorithms with improved performance in the presence of noise. One approach might be to use coding within the decoder so as to reduce the values of . Of course, the within-decoder code would need to be decoded. There are also more direct circuit-oriented techniques that may be applied [82], [83]. Following the concept of concatenated codes, concatenated decoders may also be promising. The basic idea of using a first (noiseless) decoder to correct many errors and then a second (noiseless) decoder to clean things up was already present in [61], but it may be extended to the faulty decoder setting.
Reducing power consumption in decoder circuits has been an active area of research [37], [84]–[90], however power reduction often has the effect of increasing noise in the decoder [91]. The tradeoff developed between the quality of the communication channel and the quality of the decoder may provide guidelines for allocating resources in communication system design.
Analysis of other decoding algorithms with other error models will presumably yield results similar to those obtained here. For greater generality, one might move beyond simple LDPC codes and consider arbitrary codes decoded with very general iterative decoding circuits [90] with suitable error models. An even more general model of computation such as a Turing machine or beyond [92] does not seem to have an obvious, appropriate error model.
Even just a bit of imagination provides numerous models of channel noise and circuit faults that may be investigated in the future to provide further insights into the fundamental limits of noisy communication and computing.

APPENDIX A

The bound reduces to

v c vc

for regular

codes.

This theorem gives a precise achievability result that bounds

storage capacity. It also implies a code ensemble optimization

problem similar to the one in Section V-C. The question of

an optimal architecture for memory systems however remains

open.

PROOF OF THEOREM 1

Let

be a codeword and let denote the corre-

sponding channel output

(where the notation means

pointwise multiplication on length vectors). Note that is

equal to the channel output observation when is all-one.

The goal is to show that messages sent during the decoding

process for cases when the received codeword is either or

correspond.

VIII. CONCLUSION
Loeliger et al. [7] had observed that decoders are robust to nonidealities and noise in physical implementations, however they had noted that “the quantitative analysis of these effects is a challenging theoretical problem.” This work has taken steps to address this challenge by characterizing robustness to decoder noise.
The extension of the density evolution method to the case of faulty decoders allows a simplified means of asymptotic per-

Let be an arbitrary variable node and let be one of its

neighboring check nodes. Let

and

denote the

variable-to-check message from to at the respective ter-

minals in iteration , assuming received value . Similarly, let

and

be the check-to-variable message from

to at the respective terminal in iteration assuming received

value .

By Definition 2, the channel is memoryless binary-input

output-symmetric and it may be modeled multiplicatively as

formance characterization. Results from this method show that

(5)

in certain cases Shannon reliability is not achievable (Proposi-

tion 2), whereas in other cases it is achievable (Proposition 3). where is a sequence of i.i.d. random variables and is the

In either case, however, the degradation of a suitably defined channel usage time. The validity of the multiplicative model is

decoding threshold is smooth with increasing decoder noise, shown in [13, p. 605] and [65, p. 184].

whether in circuit nodes or circuit wires. Due to this smooth- The proof proceeds by induction and so the base

ness, codes optimized for fault-free decoders do work well with case is established first. By the multiplicative model

faulty decoders, however optimization of codes for systems with (5),

. Recalling that

,

faulty decoders remains to be studied.

by the variable node symmetry condition (Definition 3)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4440

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

which includes computation noise , it follows that .
Now take the wire noise on the message from to into account. It is symmetric (Definition 5) and so
implies a similar property for . In particular
(6)

APPENDIX B PROOF OF THEOREM 2

Prior to giving the proof of Theorem 2, a review of some def-

initions from probability theory [93] and the Hoeffding-Azuma

inequality are provided.

Consider a measurable space

consisting of a sample

space and a -algebra of subsets of that contains the

whole space and is closed under complementation and count-

able unions. A random variable is an -measurable function

on . If there is a collection

of random variables

, then

where the last step follows because

and so it can be

taken outside of by Definition 5, when it is put back in for the

wire noise. Now since

and since the wire noise is

symmetric about 0 by Definition 5,

will

correspond to

, in the sense that error event probabil-

ities will be identical.

Assume that

corresponds to

for all

pairs and some

as the inductive assumption. Let be

the set of all variable nodes that are connected to check node

. Since is a codeword, it satisfies the parity checks, and so

. Then from the check node symmetry condition

(Definition 3),

corresponds to

. Further,

by the wire noise symmetry condition (Definition 5) and the

same argument as for the base case,

corresponds to

. By invoking the variable node symmetry condition

(Definition 4) again, it follows that

corresponds to

for all pairs. Thus by induction, all messages to and from variable node when is received correspond to the product of and the corresponding message when is received. Both decoders proceed in correspondence and commit exactly the same number of errors.
1) Worst-Case Noise: The same result with the same basic proof also holds when the wire noise operation is symmetric but is not symmetric stochastic, but is instead worst-case. The only essential modification is in (6) and the related part of the induction step. Since wire noise is dependent on , it can be written as . Thus

is defined to be the smallest -algebra on such that each

map

is -measurable.

Definition 12 (Filtration): Let be a sequence of -al-

gebras with respect to the same sample space . These are

said to form a filtration if

are ordered by refine-

ment in the sense that each subset of in is also in for

. Also

.

Usually, is the natural filtration

of some sequence of random variables

, and then

the knowledge about known at step consists of the values

.

For a probability triple

, a version of the conditional

expectation of a random variable given a -algebra is a

random variable denoted

. Two versions of conditional

expectation agree almost surely, but measure zero departures are

not considered subsequently; one version is fixed as canonical.

Conditional expectation given a measurable event is denoted

and conditional expectation given a random variable

is denoted

.

Definition 13 (Martingale): Let

be a fil-

tration on and let

be a sequence of random vari-

ables on such that is -measurable. Then

is

a martingale with respect to the filtration

if

.

A generic way to construct a martingale is Doob’s

construction.

Definition 14 (Doob Martingale): Let

be

a filtration on and let be a random variable on . Then

the sequence of random variables

such that

is a Doob martingale.

Lemma 1 (Hoeffding–Azuma Inequality [13], [94], [95]):

Let

be a martingale with respect to the filtration

such that for each , the following bounded

difference condition is satisfied

where step (a) follows because

and so it can be Then for all

taken outside of by the symmetry property of . Thus the two

and any

,

decoders will proceed in exact one-to-one correspondence, not

just in probabilistic correspondence.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VARSHNEY: PERFORMANCE OF LDPC CODES UNDER FAULTY ITERATIVE DECODING

4441

Now to the proof of Theorem 2; as noted before, it is an ex-

tension of [13, Th. 2] or [65, Th. 4.94]. The basic idea is to

construct a Doob martingale about the object of interest by re-

vealing various randomly determined aspects in a filtration-re-

fining manner. The first set of steps is used to reveal which code

was chosen from the ensemble of codes; the v edges in the bi-

partite graph are ordered in some arbitrary manner and exposed

one by one. Then the channel noise realizations are revealed.

At this point the exact graph and the exact channel noise realiza-

tions encountered have been revealed. Now the decoder noise

realizations must be revealed. There are variable nodes, so

the computation noise in each of them is revealed one by one.

There are v edges over which variable-to-check communi-

cation noise is manifested. Then there are v c check nodes

with computation noise, and finally there are v check-to-vari-

able communication noises for one iteration of the algorithm.

The decoder noise realizations are revealed for each iteration.

At the beginning of the revelation process, the average (over

choice of code, channel noise realization, and decoder noise re-

alization) is known; after the

v

v

vc

revelation steps, the exact system used is known.

Recall that denotes the number of incorrect values held

at the end of the th iteration for a particular

.

Since is a graph in the set of labeled bipartite factor graphs

with variable node degree v and check node degree c,

v c ; is a particular input to the decoder,

;

is a particular realization of the message-passing noise,

v ; and is a particular realization of the local

computation noise,

v c , the sample space is

vc

v

vc.

In order to define random variables, first define the following

exposure procedure. Suppose realizations of random quantities

are exposed sequentially. First expose the v edges of the

graph one at a time. At step v expose the particular check

node socket which is connected to the th variable node socket.

Next, in the following steps, expose the received values

one at a time. Finally in the remaining v

vc

steps, expose the decoder noise values and that were

encountered in all iterations up to iteration .

Let ,

, be a sequence of equivalence

relations on the sample space ordered by refinement.

Refinement means that

implies

. The equiv-

alence relations define equivalence classes such that

if and only if the real-

izations of random quantities revealed in the first steps for

both pairs is the same.

Now, define a sequence of random variables

.

Let the random variable be

, where the expec-

tation is over the code choice, channel noise, and decoder

noise. The remaining random variables are constructed as

conditional expectations given the measurable equivalence

events

,

Note that

and that by construction

is

a Doob martingale. The filtration is understood to be the natural

filtration of the random variables

.

To use the Hoeffding-Azuma inequality to give bounds on

v

v

bounded difference conditions

need to be proved for suitable constants that may depend on v, c, and . For the steps where bipartite graph edges are exposed, it was
shown in [13, p. 614] that

vc

v

It was further shown in [13, p. 615] that for the steps when the channel outputs are revealed that

vc v

v (7)

It remains to show that the inequality is also fulfilled for steps

when decoder noise realizations are revealed. The bounding procedure is nearly identical to that which yields (7). When

a node noise realization is revealed, clearly only something whose directed neighborhood includes the node at which the

noise causes perturbations can be affected. Similarly, when an edge noise realization is revealed, only something whose

directed neighborhood includes the edge on which the noise

causes perturbations can be affected. In [13, p. 603], it is shown that the size of the directed neighborhood of depth of the node

associated with noise is bounded as

vc

and similarly the size of the directed neighborhood of length

of the edge

associated with noise is bounded as

v c . Since the maximum depth that can be affected by a noise perturbation is , a weak uniform bound for the remaining exposure steps is

vc
vv
Since bounded difference constants have been provided for all , the theorem follows from application of the HoeffdingAzuma inequality to the martingale.
One may compute a particular value of to use as follows. The bounded difference sum is

v vc

vc

v

v c vc

v

v

v

vc

c

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4442

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

Setting constants in the theorem and in the Hoeffding-Azuma inequality equal yields

v

c

v

c

v

c

As given in Table I, the numerical value of is 0.0266099758.
Similarly complicated analytical expressions are available for the other entries of Table I and the values used to create Figs. 4–6.

v

c

v

c

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

v

c

Thus can be taken as

v

c.

APPENDIX C AN ANALYTICAL EXPRESSION
An analytical expression for

I would like to thank Rüdiger L. Urbanke, and I˙. Emre Telatar for several enlightening discussions, for encouragement, and for hosting my visit at EPFL. I also thank the anonymous reviewers, Sanjoy K. Mitter, G. David Forney, and Vivek K Goyal for assistance in improving the paper. Thanks also to Shashi Kiran Chilappagari for telling me about his work. is

REFERENCES

where is the second root of the polynomial in

and constants

are defined as follows.

[1] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, pp. 379–423, Jul./Oct. 1948.
[2] R. E. Blahut, Theory and Practice of Error Control Codes. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1983.
[3] A. R. Calderbank, “The art of signaling: Fifty years of coding theory,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 6, pp. 2561–2595, Oct. 1998.
[4] D. J. Costello Jr. and G. D. Forney Jr., “Channel coding: The road to channel capacity,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 95, no. 6, pp. 1150–1177, Jun. 2007.
[5] H. D. Pfister, I. Sason, and R. Urbanke, “Capacity-achieving ensembles for the binary erasure channel with bounded complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2352–2379, Jul. 2005.
[6] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[7] H.-A. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, and F. Tarköy, “Probability propagation and decoding in analog VLSI,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 837–843, Feb. 2001.
[8] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[9] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “An FPGA implementation of (3, 6)-regular low-density parity-check code decoder,” EURASIP J. Appl. Signal Process., vol. 2003, no. 6, pp. 530–542, 2003.
[10] L. M. J. Bazzi and S. K. Mitter, “Endcoding complexity versus minimum distance,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 2103–2112, Jun. 2005.
[11] R. W. Hamming, “Error detecting and error correcting codes,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 26, no. 2, pp. 147–160, Apr. 1950.
[12] W. H. Pierce, Failure-Tolerant Computer Design. New York: Academic, 1965.
[13] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[14] P. Larsson and C. Svensson, “Noise in digital dynamic CMOS circuits,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 655–662, Jun. 1994.
[15] R. Ho, K. W. Mai, and M. A. Horowitz, “The future of wires,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 89, no. 4, pp. 490–504, Apr. 2001.
[16] C. Zhao, X. Bai, and S. Dey, “Evaluating transient error effects in digital nanometer circuits,” IEEE Trans. Rel., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 381–391, Sep. 2007.
[17] T. Rejimon, K. Lingasubramanian, and S. Bhanja, “Probabilistic error modeling for nano-domain logic circuits,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 17, no. 1, pp. 55–65, Jan. 2009.
[18] K. K. Likharev, “Single-electron devices and their applications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 87, no. 4, pp. 606–632, Apr. 1999.
[19] A. Bachtold, P. Hadley, T. Nakanishi, and C. Dekker, “Logic circuits with carbon nanotube transistors,” Science, vol. 294, no. 5545, pp. 1317–1320, Nov. 2001.
[20] C. P. Collier, E. W. Wong, M. Belohradský, F. M. Raymo, J. F. Stoddart, P. J. Kuekes, R. S. Williams, and J. R. Heath, “Electronically configurable molecular-based logic gates,” Science, vol. 285, no. 5426, pp. 391–394, Jul. 1999.
[21] J. Han and P. Jonker, “A defect-and fault-tolerant architecture for nanocomputers,” Nanotechnology, vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 224–230, Feb. 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VARSHNEY: PERFORMANCE OF LDPC CODES UNDER FAULTY ITERATIVE DECODING

4443

[22] L. Anghel and M. Nicolaidis, “Defects tolerant logic gates for unreliable future nanotechnologies,” in Computational and Ambient Intelligence, ser. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, F. Sandoval, A. Prieto, J. Cabestany, and M. Graña, Eds. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 2007, vol. 4507, pp. 422–429.
[23] V. Bush, “The differential analyzer. A new machine for solving differential equations,” J. Franklin Inst., vol. 212, no. 4, pp. 447–488, Oct. 1931.
[24] R. Sarpeshkar, “Analog versus digital: Extrapolating from electronics to neurobiology,” Neural Comput., vol. 10, no. 7, pp. 1601–1638, Oct. 1998.
[25] B. Widrow and I. Kollár, Quantization Noise: Roundoff Error in Digital Computation, Signal Processing, Control, and Communications. Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[26] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[27] J. von Neumann, “Probabilistic logics and the synthesis of reliable organisms from unreliable components,” in Automata Studies, C. E. Shannon and J. McCarthy, Eds. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1956, pp. 43–98.
[28] S. Winograd and J. D. Cowan, Reliable Computation in the Presence of Noise. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[29] C. N. Hadjicostis, Coding Approaches to Fault Tolerance in Combinational and Dynamic Systems. Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic, 2002.
[30] P. Gács and A. Gál, “Lower bounds for the complexity of reliable Boolean circuits with noisy gates,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 2, pp. 579–583, Mar. 1994.
[31] P. Elias, “Computation in the presence of noise,” IBM J. Res. Develop., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 346–353, Oct. 1958.
[32] B. W. Johnson, Design and Analysis of Fault-Tolerant Digital Systems. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[33] D. K. Pradhan, Fault-Tolerant Computer System Design. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1996.
[34] N. Pippenger, “Reliable computation by formulas in the presence of noise,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 194–197, Mar. 1988.
[35] W. S. Evans and L. J. Schulman, “Signal propagation and noisy circuits,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 7, pp. 2367–2373, Nov. 1999.
[36] L. Benini and G. De Micheli, Networks on Chips: Technology and Tools. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 2006.
[37] R. Hegde and N. R. Shanbhag, “Toward achieving energy efficiency in presence of deep submicron noise,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 379–391, Aug. 2000.
[38] C. Crick and A. Pfeffer, “Loopy belief propagation as a basis for communication in sensor networks,” in Proc. 19th Annu. Conf. Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence (UAI’03), Aug. 2003, pp. 151–158.
[39] O. W. Yeung and K. M. Chugg, “On the error tolerance of iterative decoder circuitry,” in Proc. 2008 Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, Jan. 2008.
[40] L. Wei, “Robustness of LDPC codes and internal noisy systems,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., Oct. 2003, pp. 1665–1674.
[41] L. Ping and W. K. Leung, “Decoding low density parity check codes with finite quantization bits,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 62–64, Feb. 2000.
[42] R. Singhal, G. S. Choi, and R. N. Mahapatra, “Quantized LDPC decoder design for binary symmetric channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS 2005), May 2005, vol. 6, pp. 5782–5785.
[43] N. Miladinovic and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Improved bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1594–1606, Apr. 2005.
[44] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[45] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[46] T. Yu, R.-S. Lin, B. Super, and B. Tang, “Efficient message representations for belief propagation,” in Proc. 11th IEEE Int. Conf. Computer Vision, Oct. 2007, pp. 1–8.
[47] R. Motwani and P. Raghavan, Randomized Algorithms. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1995.
[48] S. T. Ribeiro, “Random-pulse machines,” IEEE Trans. Electron. Comput., vol. EC-16, no. 3, pp. 261–276, Jun. 1967.
[49] S. S. Tehrani, W. J. Gross, and S. Mannor, “Stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 716–718, Oct. 2006.

[50] A. Sahai and S. Mitter, “The necessity and sufficiency of anytime capacity for stabilization of a linear system over a noisy communication link—Part I: scalar systems,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3369–3395, Aug. 2006.
[51] A. T. Ihler, J. W. Fisher, III, and A. S. Willsky, “Loopy belief propagation: Convergence and effects of message errors,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 6, pp. 905–936, May 2005.
[52] A. Ganti, A. Lapidoth, and ˙I. E. Telatar, “Mismatched decoding revisited: General alphabets, channels with memory, and the wide-band limit,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 7, pp. 2315–2328, Nov. 2000.
[53] H. Saeedi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Performance of belief propagation for decoding LDPC codes in the presence of channel estimation error,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 83–89, Jan. 2007.
[54] M. G. Taylor, “Reliable information storage in memories designed from unreliable components,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 2299–2337, Dec. 1968.
[55] A. V. Kuznetsov, “Information storage in a memory assembled from unreliable components,” Probl. Inf. Transm., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 100–114, Jul.–Sep. 1973.
[56] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[57] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[58] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Expander graph arguments for message-passing algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 782–790, Feb. 2001.
[59] S. ten Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 806–808, May 1999.
[60] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “A more accurate one-dimensional analysis and design of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2106–2114, Dec. 2004.
[61] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[62] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Fixed points and stability of density evolution,” Commun. Inf. Syst., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 103–116, Sep. 2004.
[63] S. K. Chilappagari and B. Vasic, “Fault tolerant memories based on expander graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW’07), Sep. 2007, pp. 126–131.
[64] L. R. Varshney, “Performance of LDPC codes under noisy messagepassing decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop (ITW’07), Sep. 2007, pp. 178–183.
[65] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[66] T. R. Halford and K. M. Chugg, “The extraction and complexity limits of graphical models for linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 9, pp. 3884–3906, Sep. 2008.
[67] M. Lentmaier, D. V. Truhachev, K. S. Zigangirov, and D. J. Costello Jr., “An analysis of the block error probability performance of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 11, pp. 3834–3855, Nov. 2005.
[68] V. Rathi and R. Urbanke, “Density evolution, thresholds and the stability condition for non-binary LDPC codes,” IEE Proc. Commun., vol. 152, no. 6, pp. 1069–1074, Dec. 2005.
[69] Y. Weiss, “Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models with loops,” Neural Comput., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 1–41, Jan. 2000.
[70] P. M. Woodward, Probability and Information Theory, With Applications to Radar. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1953.
[71] D. Slepian, “The threshold effect in modulation systems that expand bandwidth,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 5, pp. 122–127, Sep. 1962.
[72] J. M. Wozencraft and I. M. Jacobs, Principles of Communication Engineering. New York: Wiley, 1965.
[73] V. Erokhin, “"-entropy of a discrete random variable,” Theory Probab. Appl., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 97–100, 1958.
[74] L. Bazzi, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Exact thresholds and optimal codes for the binary-symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algorithm A,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 2010–2021, Sep. 2004.
[75] D. P. Bertsekas and S. E. Shreve, Stochastic Optimal Control: The Discrete-Time Case. New York: Academic, 1978.
[76] L. Yang, “Recent advances on determining the number of real roots of parametric polynomials,” J. Symbol. Comput., vol. 28, no. 1–2, pp. 225–242, Jul. 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

[77] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[78] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[79] S. K. Chilappagari, B. Vasic, and M. Marcellin, “Can the storage capacity of memories built from unreliable components be determined?,” in Proc. 2008 Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, Jan.–Feb. 2008, pp. 41–43.
[80] A. G. Dimakis and K. Ramchandran, “Network coding for distributed storage in wireless networks,” in Networked Sensing Information and Control, V. Saligrama, Ed. New York: Springer, 2008, pp. 115–136.
[81] A. Montanari, “Tight bounds for LDPC and LDGM codes under MAP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 9, pp. 3221–3246, Sep. 2005.
[82] J. G. Tryon, “Quadded logic,” in Redundancy Techniques for Computing Systems, R. H. Wilcox and W. C. Mann, Eds. Washington, DC: Spartan Books, 1962, pp. 205–228.
[83] J. B. Gao, Y. Qi, and J. A. B. Fortes, “Bifurcations and fundamental error bounds for fault-tolerant computations,” IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 395–402, Jul. 2005.
[84] S. H. Nawab, A. V. Oppenheim, A. P. Chandrakasan, J. M. Winograd, and J. T. Ludwig, “Approximate signal processing,” J. VLSI Signal Process., vol. 15, no. 1–2, pp. 177–200, Jan. 1997.
[85] A. Sinha, A. Wang, and A. Chandrakasan, “Energy scalable system design,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 135–145, Apr. 2002.
[86] M. Bhardwaj, R. Min, and A. P. Chandrakasan, “Quantifying and enhancing power awareness of VLSI systems,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 757–772, Dec. 2001.
[87] L. Wang and N. R. Shanbhag, “Energy-efficiency bounds for deep submicron VLSI systems in the presence of noise,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 254–269, Apr. 2003.
[88] G. Masera, M. Mazza, G. Piccinini, F. Viglione, and M. Zamboni, “Architectural strategies for low-power VLSI turbo decoders,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 279–285, Jun. 2002.
[89] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[90] A. Sahai and P. Grover, Waterslide Curves and the Gap to Capacity EECS Department, University of California, Berkeley, Tech. Rep. UCB/EECS-2008-1, 2008.

[91] A. Maheshwari, W. Burleson, and R. Tessier, “Trading off transient fault tolerance and power consumption in deep submicron (DSM) VLSI circuits,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 299–311, Mar. 2004.
[92] B. J. Copeland, “Hypercomputation,” Minds Mach., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 461–502, Nov. 2002.
[93] D. Williams, Probability With Martingales. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
[94] K. Azuma, “Weighted sums of certain dependent random variables,” Tohoku Math. J., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 357–367, 1967.
[95] W. Hoeffding, “Probability inequalities for sums of bounded random variables,” J. Amer. Stat. Assoc., vol. 58, no. 301, pp. 13–30, Mar. 1963.
Lav R. Varshney (S’00–M’04) was born in Syracuse, New York on October 28, 1982. He received the B.S. degree with honors in electrical and computer engineering (magna cum laude) from Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, in 2004. He received the S.M., E.E., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and computer science from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, in 2006, 2008, and 2010, respectively.
He is a Research Staff Member at the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Hawthorne, NY. He has been a Postdoctoral Associate and Research Assistant in the Signal Transformation and Information Representation Group in the Research Laboratory of Electronics, has been a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellow, and has been a Research Assistant in the Laboratory for Information and Decision Systems, all at MIT. He was an Instructor in the MIT Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science in Spring 2009 and a Teaching Assistant in fall 2006. He was a Visitor at the Laboratoire de Théorie de l’Information and the Laboratoire de Théorie des Communications at the École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Switzerland, in 2006, and a Visiting Scientist at Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY, in 2005. His current research interests include information theory, coding, information in organizations, and neuroscience.
Dr. Varshney is a member of Tau Beta Pi, Eta Kappa Nu, and Sigma Xi. He received the Ernst A. Guillemin Thesis Award for Outstanding Electrical Engineering S. M. Thesis, the Capocelli Prize at the 2006 Data Compression Conference, the Best Student Paper Award at the 2003 IEEE Radar Conference, and was a winner of the IEEE 2004 Student History Paper Contest.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

