IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

4417

An Efficient Instanton Search Algorithm for LP Decoding of LDPC Codes Over the BSC
Shashi Kiran Chilappagari, Member, IEEE, Michael Chertkov, Member, IEEE, and Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We consider linear programming (LP) decoding of a fixed low-density parity-check (LDPC) code over the binary symmetric channel (BSC). The LP decoder fails when it outputs a pseudo-codeword which is not equal to the transmitted codeword. We design an efficient algorithm termed the Instanton Search Algorithm (ISA) which generates an error vector called the BSC-instanton. We prove that: (a) the LP decoder fails for any error pattern with support that is a superset of the support of an instanton; (b) for any input, the ISA outputs an instanton in the number of steps upper-bounded by twice the number of errors in the input error vector. We then find the number of unique instantons of different sizes for a given LDPC code by running the ISA sufficient number of times.
Index Terms—Binary symmetric channel (BSC), error-floor, linear programming decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, pseudo-codewords.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE significance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] is in their capacity-approaching performance when decoded using low complexity iterative algorithms, such as belief propagation (BP) [1], [2]. Iterative decoders operate by passing messages along the edges of a graphical representation of a code known as the Tanner graph [3], and are optimal when the underlying graph is a tree. However, the decoding becomes sub-optimal in the presence of cycles, and hence, the asymptotic analysis methods are of limited practical use for the analysis of a fixed code. The linear programming (LP) decoding introduced by Feldman et al. [4], is another
Manuscript received September 02, 2008; revised October 26, 2010; accepted December 01, 2010. Date of current version June 22, 2011. The work of S. K. Chilappagari was performed while he was a summer GRA at LANL. The work at LANL, by S. K. Chilappagari and M. Chertkov, was carried out under the auspices of the National Nuclear Security Administration of the U.S. Department of Energy at Los Alamos National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC52-06NA25396. B. Vasic was supported in part by the NSF and in part by Seagate Technology. Part of this work was presented at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Seoul, Korea, July, 2009. Part of this work appeared in the special issue of the Journal of Selected Areas in Communications on Capacity Approaching Codes, August 2009.
S. K. Chilappagari was with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA. He is now with Marvell Semiconductor, Inc., Santa Clara, CA 95054 USA (e-mail: shashickiran@gmail.com).
M. Chertkov is with the Theory Division and CNLS, Complex Systems Group, T-13, Los Alamos National Laboratory LANL, Los Alamos, NM 87545 USA (e-mail: chertkov@lanl.gov).
B. Vasic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2011.2146670

sub-optimal algorithm for decoding LDPC codes, which has higher complexity but is more amenable to analysis.
The typical performance measures of a decoder (either LP or BP) for a fixed code are the bit-error-rate (BER) or/and the frame-error-rate (FER) as functions of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). A typical BER/FER versus SNR curve consists of two distinct regions. At small SNR, the error probability decreases rapidly with the SNR, and the curve forms the so-called waterfall region. The decrease slows down at moderate values turning into the error-floor asymptotic at very large SNR [5]. This transient behavior and the error-floor asymptotic originate from the sub-optimality of the decoding, i.e., the ideal maximum-likelihood (ML) curve would not show such a dramatic change in the BER/FER with the SNR increase.
After the initial investigation of error floors of LDPC codes on channels other than the binary erasure channel (BEC) by Richardson [5], a significant effort has been devoted to the analysis of the error floor phenomenon. Given that the decoding sub-optimality is expressed in the domain where the error probability is small, the troublesome noise configurations leading to decoding failures and controlling the error-floor asymptotic are extremely rare, and analytical rather than simulation methods for their characterization are necessary. It is worth noting here that most of the analytical methods developed in the theory of iterative decoding have focused on ensembles of codes rather than a given fixed code.
The failures of iterative decoding over the BEC are well understood in terms of combinatorial objects known as stopping sets [6]. For iterative decoding on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and the BSC, the decoding failures have been characterized in terms of trapping sets [5], [7] and pseudo-codewords [8]–[10]. Richardson [5] introduced the notion of trapping sets and proposed a semi-analytical method to estimate the FER performance of a given code on the AWGN channel in the error floor region. The method was successfully applied to hard decision decoding over the BSC in [7]. The approach of [5] was further refined by Stepanov et al. [11], using instantons. Pseudo-codewords were first discussed in the context of iterative decoders using computation trees [8] and later using graph covers [9], [10]. Pseudo-codeword distributions were found for the special cases of codes from Euclidean and projective planes [12]. A detailed analysis of the pseudo-codewords was presented by Kelley and Sridhara [13], who discussed the bounds on pseudo-codeword size in terms of the girth and the minimum left-degree of the underlying Tanner graph. The bounds were further investigated by Xia and Fu [14]. Pseudo-codeword analysis has also been extended to the convolutional LDPC codes by Smarandache et al. [15]. (See

0018-9448/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

also [16] for an exhaustive list of references for this and related subjects.)
Pseudo-codewords can be also used to understand the failures of the LP decoder [4]. It was shown in [4] that the LP decoding on the BEC fails if the set of erased variable nodes contains a stopping set. Hence, in this sense, the pseudo-codewords for the LP decoder are equivalent to stopping sets for the case of the BEC. For binary-input memoryless channels, the pseudo-codewords of the LP decoder are related to the pseudo-codewords arising from graph covers [10]. In fact, in [10] Vontobel and Koetter have also pointed out relations between pseudo-codewords arising from graph covers and trapping sets.
Closely related to the pseudo-codewords and the trapping sets are the noise configurations that lead to decoding failures which are termed as instantons [11]. Finding the instantons is a difficult task which so far admitted only heuristic solutions [7], [17]. In this regard, the most successful (in efficiency) approach, coined the pseudo-codeword-search (PCS) algorithm, was suggested for the LP decoding performing over the continuous channel in [18] (with AWGN channel used as an enabling example). Given a sufficiently strong random input, the outcome of the PCS algorithm is an instanton. The resulting distribution of the instantons (or respective pseudo-codewords) thus provides a compact and algorithmically feasible characterization of the AWGN-LP performance of the given code.
In this paper, we consider pseudo-codewords and instantons of the LP decoder for the BSC. We define the BSC-instanton as a noise configuration which the LP decoder decodes into a pseudo-codeword distinct from the all-zero-codeword while any reduction of the (number of flips in) BSC-instanton leads to the all-zero-codeword. Being a close relative of the BP decoder (see [19], [20] for discussions of different aspects of this relation), the LP decoder appeals due to the following benefits: (a) it has ML certificate, i.e., if the output of the decoder is a codeword, then the ML decoder is also guaranteed to decode into the same codeword; (b) the output of the LP decoder is discrete even if the channel noise is continuous (meaning that problems with numerical accuracy do not arise); (c) its analysis is simpler due to the readily available set of powerful analytical tools from the optimization theory; and (d) it allows systematic sequential improvement, which results in decoder flexibility and feasibility of an LP-based ML for moderately large codes [21], [22]. While slower decoding speed is usually cited as a disadvantage of the LP decoder, this potential problem can be significantly reduced, thanks to the recent progress in smart sequential use of LP constraints [23] and/or appropriate graphical transformations [22], [24], [25] and other low complexity decoding approximations [26].
The two main contributions of this paper are: (1) characterization of all the failures of the LP decoder over the BSC in terms of the instantons, and (2) an efficient Instanton Search Algorithm (ISA). Following the idea by Chertkov and Stepanov [18], for a given a random binary -tuple, the ISA generates a BSC-instanton, that is guaranteed to be decoded by the LP decoder into a pseudo-codeword distinct from the all-zero-codeword. Our ISA constitutes a significantly stronger algorithm than the one of [18] due to its property that it outputs an instanton in the number of steps upper-bounded by twice the number of flips in the orig-

inal configuration the algorithm is initiated with. An overview

of instanton based techniques to analyze and reduce error floors

of LDPC codes is presented in [27]. While the ISA has also been

discussed in [27], the material in this paper presents a detailed

analysis of the ISA along with the required theorems and proofs

(that do not appear in [27]). Furthermore, this paper also eluci-

dates the method to estimate the FER performance of a given

LDPC code using the instanton statistics.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II,

we give a brief introduction to LDPC codes, LP decoding and

pseudo-codewords. In Section III, we introduce the BSC-spe-

cific notions of the pseudo-codeword weight, medians and in-

stantons (defined as special set of flips), their costs, and we also

prove some set of useful lemmata emphasizing the significance

of the instanton analysis. In Section IV, we describe the ISA

and prove our main result concerning bounds on the number

of iterations required to output an instanton. We comment on

the analytical estimation of the FER using instanton statistics

in Section V. We present an illustration of the ISA as applied

to the

Tanner code [28] and numerical results in

Section VI. We summarize our results and conclude by listing

some open problems in Section VII.

II. PRELIMINARIES: LDPC CODES, LP DECODER, AND PSEUDO-CODEWORDS

In this Section, we discuss the LP decoder and the notion of

pseudo-codewords. We adopt the formulation of the LP decoder

and the terminology from [4], and thus, the interested reader is

advised to refer to [4] for more details.

Let be a binary LDPC code defined by a Tanner

graph with two sets of nodes: the set of variable

nodes

and the set of check nodes

. The bi-adjacency matrix of is , a

parity-check matrix of , with rows corresponding to the

check nodes and columns corresponding to the variable

nodes. In other words,

if and only if there is an edge

between the check node and the variable node in the Tanner

graph . A binary vector

is a codeword

iff

. The support of a vector

,

denoted by

, is defined as the set of all positions such

that

.

We assume that a codeword is transmitted over a dis-

crete symmetric memoryless channel and is received as .

The channel is characterized by

which denotes the

probability that is received as . The Log-Likelihood Ratio

(LLR) corresponding to the variable node is given by

The ML decoding of the code allows a convenient LP formula-

tion in terms of the codeword polytope

whose vertices

correspond to the codewords in . The ML-LP decoder finds

minimizing the cost function

sub-

ject to the

constraint. The formulation is compact

but impractical because the number of constraints is exponential

in the code length.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: EFFICIENT INSTANTON SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LP DECODING

4419

Hence, a relaxed polytope is defined as the intersection of all

the polytopes associated with the local codes introduced for all

the checks of the original code. Associating

with

bits of the code we require

(1)

For every check node , let denote the set of variable nodes

which are neighbors of . Let

.

The polytope associated with the check node is defined as

the set of points

for which the following constraints hold:

(2) (3)
(4)

III. COST AND WEIGHT OF PSEUDO-CODEWORDS, MEDIANS, AND INSTANTONS
Since the focus of the paper is on the pseudo-codewords for the BSC, in this section we introduce some terms, e.g., instantons and medians, specific to the BSC. We will also prove here some preliminary lemmata which will enable subsequent discussion of the ISA in the next section.
When the channel and the decoder satisfy certain symmetry conditions (see [2] for details), we can assume, without loss of generality, that the all zero codeword is transmitted. The LP decoder satisfies these conditions as shown in [4]. Hence, we make the assumption of the all-zero-codeword throughout the paper. Hence, the received vector and subsequently the input to the LP decoder is the error vector. The process of changing a bit from 0 to 1 and vice-versa is known as flipping. The BSC flips every transmitted bit with a certain probability. We, therefore, call an error vector with support of size as having flips.
In the case of the BSC, the likelihoods are scaled as

Now, let

be the set of points

such that (1)–(4)

hold for all

. (Note that is a function of the Tanner graph

and consequently the parity-check matrix representing the

code .) The Linear Code Linear Program (LCLP) can be stated

as

if

if

.

Two important characteristics of a pseudo-codeword are its cost and weight. While the cost associated with decoding to a pseudo-codeword has already been defined in general, we formalize it for the case of the BSC as follows:

Definition 2: The cost associated with LP decoding of a binary vector to a pseudo-codeword is given by

For the sake of brevity, the decoder based on the LCLP is re-

(5)

ferred to in the following as the LP decoder. A solution

to

the LCLP such that all s and s are integers is known as an

integer solution. The integer solution represents a codeword [4]. If is the input, then the output of the LP decoder on is

It was also shown in [4] that the LP decoder has the ML certifi- the pseudo-codeword which has the least value of

.

cate, i.e., if the output of the decoder is a codeword, then the ML The cost of decoding to the all-zero-codeword is zero. Hence,

decoder would decode into the same codeword. The LCLP can the output of LP decoding of a binary vector is not equal to

fail, generating an output which is not equal to the transmitted the all-zero-codeword if there exists a pseudo-codeword with

codeword. For a more detailed description of the LCLP and the

.

interpretation of the different variables in the above equations, the reader is referred to [4].
The performance of the LP decoder can be analyzed in terms of the pseudo-codewords, originally defined as follows:

Definition 3: [13, Definition 2.10] Let

be a

pseudo-codeword distinct from the all-zero-codeword. Let be

the smallest number such that the sum of the largest s is at

least

. Then, the BSC pseudo-codeword weight of

Definition 1: [4] Integer pseudo-codeword is a vector

is

check

of non-negative integers such that, for every parity

, the neighborhood

is a sum of

if

local codewords.

if

Alternatively, one may choose to define a re-scaled pseudo-

codeword,

where

, as

simply equal to the output of the LCLP. In the following, we

adopt the re-scaled definition.

A given code can have different Tanner graph representa-

tions and consequently potentially different polytopes. Hence,

we refer to the pseudo-codewords as corresponding to a partic-

ular Tanner graph of .

It is also appropriate to mention here that the LCLP can be

where

is a set of largest components of .

The minimum pseudo-codeword weight of denoted by

is the minimum over all the nonzero pseudo-code-

words of . The parameter

can

be interpreted as the least number of bits to be flipped in the

all-zero-codeword such that the resulting vector decodes to the

pseudo-codeword . (See, e.g., [29] for a number of illustrative

examples.)

viewed as the zero temperature version of BP-decoder looking Remark: Feldman et al. in [4] defined weight of a pseudo-

for the global minimum of the so-called Bethe free energy func- codeword, the fractional distance and the max-fractional dis-

tional [19].

tance of a Tanner graph of a code in terms of the projected poly-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4420

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

tope (the interested reader is referred to [4] for explicit de-

scription of ). To differentiate the two definitions, we term the

“weight” defined by Feldman et al. as fractional weight and de-

note it by . For a point in , the fractional weight of is

defined as the L1-norm,

and the max-frac-

tional weight of is defined as the fractional weight normalized

by the maximum value, i.e.,

. Also, all medians of have

flips. The

proofs of the following two lemmata are now apparent.

Lemma 2: Let the transmitted codeword be the all-zero-code-

word and let be the output of the LP decoder on an error vector

with support of size . If

, then

.

Lemma 3: Let be a pseudo-codeword with median

whose support has cardinality . Then

.

Also, if denotes the set of nonzero vertices of the frac-

tional distance

of the code is defined as the minimum

weight over all vertices in . The max-fractional distance

of a Tanner graph of the code is given by

Lemma 4: Let

be a median of with support . Then

the result of LP decoding of any binary vector with support

and

is distinct from .

Proof: Let

. Then by Lemma 3,

. Now, if is any binary vector with support

, then

has at most flips and, therefore, by Lemma 2,

, which is a contradiction.

It was shown in [4], Theorem 9, that the LP decoder is suc-

cessful if at most

bits are flipped by the BSC,

thus making a potentially useful characteristic. Moreover,

an efficient LP-based algorithm to calculate was suggested

in [4]. However, LP decoding of the error pattern with the least

number of flips which the LP decoder fails to correct does not

necessarily output the pseudo-codeword with fractional weight

. Hence, we adopted the definition of the pseudo-codeword

weight from [13], however noticing that it was discussed there

in a different but related context of the computation tree and

graph covers. A slightly different definition also first appeared

in [29]. The advantage of our approach will become evident in

the subsequent sections.

The following Lemma gives a relation between

and .

Lemma 1:

.

Proof: The LP decoder is successful if at most

bits are flipped by the BSC. So, the minimum number of flips in

the all-zero-codeword which can cause the LP decoder to fail is

. If is the minimum number of flips associated with

the minimum weight pseudo-codeword, then

Since,

, we have

The above lemma can be generalized to any pseudo-codeword

as

. We would like to point out

that Kelley and Sridhara in [13] have derived a similar relation

between

and

and that Sridhara in [30]

observed that

.

The interpretation of BSC pseudo-codeword weight moti-

vates the following definition of the median noise vector cor-

responding to a pseudo-codeword:

Lemma 5: If the output of the LP decoder on

is a

pseudo-codeword

, then

.

Also,

.

Proof: According to the definition of the LP decoder,

.

If

, then

has flips and by Lemma 2,

.

If

, then

has flips and

. Hence,

by Lemma 2.

However, if

, then

, which

is a contradiction. Hence,

.

Definition 5: The BSC instanton is a binary vector with

the following properties: (1) There exists a pseudo-codeword

such that

; (2) For any binary vector

such that

, there exists no pseudo-codeword

with

. The size of an instanton is the cardinality of

its support.

In other words, the LP decoder decodes to a pseudo-code-

word other than the all-zero-codeword or one finds a pseudo-

codeword

such that

(interpreted as the LP

decoding failure), whereas any binary vector with flips from a

subset of the flips in is decoded to the all-zero-codeword. It can

be easily verified that if is the transmitted codeword and is

the received vector such that

, where the

addition is modulo two, then there exists a pseudo-codeword

such that

.

The following lemma follows from the definition of the cost

of decoding (the pseudo-codeword cost):

Lemma 6: Let be an instanton. Then for any binary vector

such that

, there exists a pseudo-codeword

satisfying

.

Proof: Since is an instanton, there exists a pseudo-code-

word such that

. From Definition 2 we have

Definition 4: The median noise vector (or simply the median)

of a pseudo-codeword distinct from the all-zero-code-

word is a binary vector with support

, such

that

are the

largest com- Since,

and

, we have

ponents of .

One observes that,

. From the definition of

, it follows that at least one median exists for every

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: EFFICIENT INSTANTON SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LP DECODING

4421

thus yielding

Instanton Search Algorithm

Initialization

step: Initialize to a binary input

The above lemma implies that if the all-zero-codeword is transmitted over the BSC and the support of the received vector is a superset of an instanton, then the LP decoder fails to decode the received vector to the all-zero-codeword. We now have the following corollary:

vector containing sufficient number of flips so that the

LP decoder decodes it into a pseudo-codeword different

from the all-zero-codeword. Apply the LP decoder to

and denote the pseudo-codeword output of LP by .

step: Take the pseudo-codeword (output of the

step) and calculate its median

. Apply the

Corollary 1: Let be a binary vector with support . Let

be a pseudo-codeword such that

. If LP decoding of

all binary vectors with support

such that

,

outputs , then is an instanton.

The above lemmata lead us to the following lemma which

characterizes all the failures of the LP decoder over the BSC:

Lemma 7: Let the transmitted codeword be the all-zero-codeword and let be a binary error vector such that the output of LP decoding on is a pseudo-codeword different from the all-zero-codeword. Then, the support of contains the support of an instanton as a subset.
The most general form of the above lemma can be stated as following: if is the transmitted codeword and is the received

LP decoder to

and denote the output by . By

Lemma 5, only two cases arise:

•

. Then

becomes

the th step output/

step input.

•

. Let the support of

be

. Let

for some

.

Let be a binary vector with support . Apply the

LP decoder to all and denote the -output by .

If

, then

is the desired instanton

and the algorithm halts. Else,

becomes the th

step output/

step input. (Notice, that Lemma 4

guarantees that any

, thus preventing the ISA

from entering into an infinite loop.)

vector, then result of LP decoding on is a pseudo-codeword

different from iff the

, where the addition is modulo

two, contains the support of an instanton as a subset.

From the above discussion, we see that the BSC instantons

are analogous to the minimal stopping sets for the case of iter-

ative/LP decoding over the BEC. In fact, Lemma 7 character-

izes all the decoding failures of the LP decoder over the BSC

in terms of the instantons and can be used to derive analytical

estimates of the code performance given the weight distribution

of the instantons. In this sense, the instantons are more funda-

mental than the minimal pseudo-codewords [12], [13] for the

BSC (note, that this statement does not hold in the case of the

AWGN channel). Two minimal pseudo-codewords of the same

weight can give rise to different number of instantons. This issue

was first pointed out by Forney et al. in [29]. (See Examples 1,

2, and 3 for the BSC case in [29].) It is also worth noting that the

result of LP decoding on an instanton is a minimal pseudo-code-

word.

It should be noted that finding pseudo-codewords with frac-

tional weight is not equivalent to finding minimum weight

pseudo-codewords. The pseudo-codewords with fractional

weight

can be used to derive some instantons, but not

necessarily the ones with the least number of flips. However,

as provides a lower bound on the minimum pseudo-code-

word weight, it can be used as a test if the ISA actually finds

an instanton with the least number of flips. In other words, if

Fig. 1 illustrates different scenarios arising in the execution of

the ISA. Here, the squares represent pseudo-codewords and the

circles represent binary vectors (noise configurations). Fig. 1(a)

shows the case where the result of LP decoding of a median,

, of a pseudo-codeword is a pseudo-codeword

of a smaller weight. In this case,

. Fig. 1(b) il-

lustrates the case where the LP decoding of a median,

,

of a pseudo-codeword outputs a pseudo-codeword of

the same weight. Fig. 1(c) illustrates the case where the LP

decoding of a median,

, of a pseudo-codeword out-

puts the pseudo-codeword itself. In the two latter cases, we

consider all the binary vectors whose support sets are subsets

of the support set of

and the vectors contain one flip

less. We run the LP decoder with the vectors as inputs and

find their corresponding pseudo-codewords. One of the nonzero

pseudo-codewords found is chosen at random as . This is

illustrated in Fig. 1(d). Fig. 1(e) shows the case when LP de-

coding of all the subsets of

(reduced by one flip) outputs

to the all-zero-codeword. LP decoding of

itself could

output or some other pseudo-codeword of the same weight.

In this case,

is an instanton constituting the output of the

algorithm.

We now prove that the ISA terminates (i.e., outputs an in-

stanton) in the number of steps of the order of the number of

flips in the initial noise configuration.

the number of flips in the lowest weight instanton found by the Theorem 1:

and

are monotoni-

ISA is equal to

, then the ISA has indeed found the cally decreasing. Also, the ISA terminates in at most steps,

smallest size instanton.

where is the number of flips in the input.

IV. INSTANTON SEARCH ALGORITHM AND ITS ANALYSIS

Proof: If Consequently,

, then

. .

In this section, we describe the Instanton Search Algorithm. If

, then

The algorithm starts with a random binary vector with some

. Consequently,

number of flips and outputs an instanton.

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

Fig. 1. Squares represent pseudo-codewords and circles represent medians or related noise configurations. (a) LP decodes median of a pseudo-codeword into another pseudo-codeword of smaller weight. (b) LP decodes median of a pseudo-codeword into another pseudo-codeword of the same weight. (c) LP decodes median of a pseudo-codeword into the same pseudo-codeword. (d) Reduced subset (three different circles) of a noise configuration (e.g., of a median from the previous step of the ISA) is decoded by the LP decoder into three different pseudo-codewords. (e) LP decodes the median (circle) of a pseudo-codeword (low square) into another pseudo-codeword of the same weight (upper square). Reduced subset of the median (three configurations depicted as circles are all decoded by LP into all-zero-codeword. Thus, the median is an instanton.

Since

is strictly decreasing, the weight of

sult, in most cases, the algorithm converges in less than

pseudo-codeword at step decreases by at least one compared

steps. (For illustration of this point see example dis-

to the weight of the pseudo-codeword at step . Since by

cussed in the next section.)

Lemma 2,

, the algorithm can run for at most (5) At any step, there can be more than one median, and

steps.

the ISA does not specify which one to pick. Our current

Remarks: (1) By “sufficient number of flips”, we mean that the ini-
tial binary vector should be noisy enough to for the LP decoder to output a pseudo-codeword other than the all-zero-codeword. While LP decoding of any binary vector with a large number of flips is almost guaranteed to output a pseudo-codeword different from the all-zero-codeword, such a choice might also lead to a longer running time of the ISA (from Theorem 1). On the other hand, choosing a binary vector with a few number of flips might lead to decoding to the all-zero-codeword very often, thereby necessitating the need to run the ISA for a large number of times. (2) Theorem 1 does not claim that the algorithm finds the

implementation suggests to pick a median at random. Also, the algorithm does not provide clarification on the choice of the pseudo-codeword for the case when more than one noise configurations from the subset decode to pseudo-codewords distinct from the all-zerocodeword. In this degenerate case, we again choose a pseudo-codeword for the next iteration at random. Note that one natural deterministic generalization of the randomized algorithm consists of exploring all the possibilities at once. In such a scenario, a tree of solutions can be built, where the root is associated with one set of initiation flips, any branch of the tree relates to a given set of randomized choices (of medians and pseudo-codewords), and any leaf corresponds to an instanton.

minimum weight pseudo-codeword or the instanton with the smallest number of flips. However, it is sometimes

V. ANALYTICAL PREDICTION OF THE FER

possible to verify if the algorithm has found the min- In [11], [31], it was shown that the slope of the (log-log) FER

imum weight pseudo-codeword. Let

denote the curve in the asymptotic limit of

is equal to the size

weight of the minimum weight pseudo-codeword found of the smallest weight instanton. In other words, most of the

by the ISA. If

, then

decoding failures in the error floor region are due to low-weight

.

instantons. Hence, the instanton statistics can be used to predict

(3) At some step , it is possible to have

the FER performance for small values of . For large values of

and incorporating such pseudo-code- (near the threshold), the FER performance can be estimated

words into the algorithm could lead to lower weight with very good accuracy by Monte-Carlo simulations. The FER

pseudo-codewords in the next few steps. However, this estimates in this region can be made with a fixed complexity (the

inessential modification was not included in the ISA to details of which will be explained subsequently). The region in

streamline the analysis of the algorithm.

which it is the most difficult to predict the performance is for

(4) While we have shown that

decreases by at intermediate values of . Analytical estimates cannot be made

least unity at every step, we have observed that in most as the instanton statistics for higher weight instantons are not

cases, it decreases by at least two. This is due to the complete. This is due to the fact that the number of instantons

fact that the pseudo-codewords with odd weights out- grows with the size and the ISA needs to run for a large number

number pseudo-codewords with even weights. As a re- of instantiations to gather reliable statistics about higher weight

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: EFFICIENT INSTANTON SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LP DECODING

4423

Fig. 2. Illustration for the example of ISA execution on the [155; 65; 20] Tanner code discussed in Section VI.

instantons. On the other hand Monte-Carlo estimates cannot be

made due to prohibitive complexity. Hence, we make use of an

approach that is a combination of Monte-Carlo simulations and

analytical approach.

Observe that a decoder failure for a pattern with errors can

occur due to the presence of an instanton (or instantons) of size

less than or equal to . Let

denote the probability that

an instanton of size is present in an error pattern of size . If

the number of instantons of size is denoted by then, it can

be seen that

(6)

of failures. Hence, the FER over a large range of can be estimated by the above approach.
Remark: It should be noted that while there are a large number of instantons of large size, the error floor performance is dominated by the instantons of smallest size which are very rare. Hence, estimates made using the above method may not be very reliable. This fact underlies the importance of the ISA which is successful in finding all the smallest weight instantons.
VI. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we present results illustrating different aspects and features of the ISA.

Now, let

denote the proba-

bility that the decoder fails when the channel makes errors.

Since, a decoder failure occurs if and only if an instanton is

present, we have

A. Illustration of the ISA

We use the

Tanner code [28] for illustration pur-

poses. We begin with an actual (and rather typical) example. The

reader is advised to follow this example with an eye on Fig. 2.

(7) Example 1: The algorithm is initiated with a binary vector whose support set has cardinality 12. In this case, LP decoding

where is the size of the smallest weight instanton. For a suffi-

ciently large value of , using Monte-Carlo simulations, the rel-

ative frequencies of different instantons can be found and con-

sequently

for different can be estimated. Using (6),

the values of can be estimated approximately. These statis-

tics can then be used to estimate

for intermediate values of using (7).

The FER at a given can then be estimated using

of outputs a pseudo-codeword of weight 17 (Lemma 2

guarantees that

). The Median

of the

pseudo-codeword has 9 flips. The output of LP decoding

on

is a pseudo-codeword of weight 11, marked as

, whose median

contains 6 flips.

decodes to

a pseudo-codeword of weight 11, and hence, we consider

all vectors whose support sets consist of one flip less than in the

support set of

. There are 6 such vectors and 5 of them de-

code to the all-zero-codeword (we do not show all the six vectors

in Fig. 2). The remaining vector decodes to a pseudo-codeword

of weight 9, marked as . The pseudo-codeword has only

one median

which is decoded to the same pseudo-code-

Since the channel under consideration is the BSC, we have

word . Hence, we consider all (five) vectors built from the

median

removing a single flip and observe that the LP

decoder decodes all these vectors into the all-zero-codeword.

We conclude that the median is actually an instanton of size 5.

Note that the FER for large values of is dominated by higher

. The values of

for large can B. Performance Prediction Results

be estimated with a fixed complexity by running a predeter- We first present the instanton statistics for the following two

mined number of pattern with errors and recording the number codes (1) The (3,5) regular Tanner code of length 155 [28] and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4424

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

TABLE I INSTANTON STATISTICS OBTAINED BY RUNNING THE ISA WITH 20 RANDOM FLIPS FOR 10000 INITIATIONS FOR THE TANNER CODE AND THE MACKAY CODE

TABLE II
Pr(decoder failurejk errors) OBTAINED BY MONTE-CARLO SIMULATIONS

(2) A (3,6) regular random code of length 204 from MacKay’s webpage [32]. Table I shows the number of instantons found when the ISA is initiated with 20 flips and run for 10000 dif-

TABLE III RELATIVE FREQUENCIES OF DIFFERENT SIZE INSTANTONS OBTAINED BY
ANALYZING ERROR PATTERNS WITH 8 ERRORS

ferent instantiations. The total number of instantons of each size

as well as the total number of unique instantons of each size are

recorded.1 It can be seen that the size of the smallest instanton

is 5 for the Tanner code and 4 for the random MacKay code.

Hence, the slope of the FER curve in the error floor region for

these codes is 5 and 4 respectively.

Note that the smallest weight instanton found by the ISA for

the Tanner code is 5 (We have observed that all the instantons

of size 5 are in fact the

trapping sets described in [7]. Fur-

ther investigation of the topological structure of instantons will

be dealt with in future work). The accuracy of this estimate can

be verified (indirectly) by finding the of the code. Using the

method outlined in [4], we observed that of the Tanner code

is 8.3498. This implies that

(by Lemma 1), which in

turn implies that the size of any instanton cannot be less than 5.

This proves that here 5 is, indeed, the smallest instanton size,

and respective minimum pseudo-codeword weight is 9. Note

also that the fractional weight of all the 155 pseudo-codewords

of BSC weight 9 is 9.95, while the weight of the pseudo-code-

word with the minimal fractional weight of 8.3498 is 19. The

remark illustrates that minimality of the fractional weight does

not imply minimality of the pseudo-codeword weight (and, thus,

minimality of the respective instanton size).

Table II shows the data corresponding to

for the Tanner and the

MacKay code from

to

. For

, we can

assume that

. Table III

shows the relative frequencies of various weight instantons for

the Tanner code and the MacKay code. The results are obtained

by simulating error patterns with 8 errors for the Tanner

code resulting in 331 decoder failures. The contributions of

various instantons is found by examining the subsets of the

8 error patterns and finding the instantons. Note that some

error patterns can consist multiple instantons, and hence, the

estimates made are only approximate. For the Tanner code, it

is found that there are approximately 2300 instantons of size 6,

6.4

instantons of size 7 and 3.8

instantons of size 8.

For the MacKay code, it is found that there are approximately

1120 instantons of size 5, 1.6

instantons of size 6,

9.2

instantons of size 7 and instantons of size 8.

Fig. 3(a) and (b) show the comparison between the FER

curves obtained using the semi-analytical approach described

above and the Monte-Carlo simulations. It is clear from the plots

that the proposed method predicts the performance accurately.

The plots also show the predicted performance at the values of

which are beyond the reach of the Monte-Carlo simulations.

The FER in this region is dominate by the smallest weight

instantons and the calculated slopes agree with the theoretical

prediction. It is worth noting that Tables I–III are sufficient to

obtain the FER estimate for the Tanner and MacKay codes.

A Note on Other Possible Algorithms: One can imagine

other simple algorithms that converge to an instanton in a finite

number of steps. One such algorithm can be formulated in the

following way.2

1) Start with a binary input vector

with

many bit flips, and let be the output of the LP decoder

1The standard way to find out whether our instanton search exhausted all the unique configurations is as follows. Assume that there are N unique instantons
of a given weight and in each trial ISA finds all of them with equal probability. To estimate the number of ISA runs required for finding all the N instantons, one
notice that if N 01 instantons are already found the number of trails required to
find to the last instanton is  N . If all but two instantons are already found the
number of ISA trials required is N=2. Therefore, the average number of ISA trials required to find all the instantons is estimated as N + N=2 + N=3 + 1 1 1 N=(N 0 1) + 1 = N(1 + 1=2 + 1=3 + 1 1 1 + 1=N) turning to N ln N at N ! 1, i.e., N ln N trials ISA reliably finds N instantons (this is also known
as the “coupon collector’s problem”). From this discussion, it is clear that the
statistics for smallest size instantons for both the codes are very reliable.

applied to . If

, then start again.

2) For any

, let

be

such that

and

for some , and

for

all

. Let be the result of application of the LP

decoder to .

3) If there is such that

, then set

and go to

step 2. Otherwise, is minimal and so it is an instanton.

2We would like to thank the anonymous reviewer for pointing out this simple alternative algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHILAPPAGARI et al.: EFFICIENT INSTANTON SEARCH ALGORITHM FOR LP DECODING

4425

Fig. 3. Comparison between the FER curves obtained using the semi-analytical approach and the Monte-Carlo simulations for (a) the Tanner code and (b) the MacKay code.

The above simple algorithm can also find an instanton in a

finite number of steps. However, such an algorithm finds only

instantons that are subsets of the support of the initial error

vector. This implies that the algorithm needs to be run for a large

number of instantiations to find a small weight instanton. As an

illustration, consider the Tanner code that contains 155 instan-

tons of weight five. The probability that an error pattern with

errors contains a weight-five instanton is approximately

. It follows that if

, the above simple al-

gorithm needs to be run about

times (in the order of

10’s of thousands) to find a weight-five instanton. In contrast,

the ISA finds weight-five instantons 3506 times in 10000 trials,

which implies that the ISA needs to be run only three times to

find the lowest weight instanton. This clearly illustrates the ad-

vantage of the ISA in finding low weight instantons. The advan-

tage of the ISA comes from the fact that given a pseudo-code-

word, the median step finds the lowest weight error vector that

could decode to the pseudo-codeword.

VII. SUMMARY AND OPEN PROBLEMS

instantons of the given size? Does the number of trials scales linearly with the size of the code? (3) We have noticed that difficulty of finding an instanton grows with its size. Once the ISA finds all the instantons of certain weight, can one optimize initiation strategy for the algorithm to find instantons of larger size more efficiently? (4) Can one utilize knowledge of the code structure (e.g., for highly structured codes) to streamline discovery of the Instanton-Bar-Graph, especially in the part related to the larger size instantons? (5) Some studies have explored connections between pseudo-codewords and stopping sets (see, e.g., [13]). Are there any (similar?) relationships between trapping sets of the BSC (for Gallager like algorithms) and BSC-LP instantons? (6) Are instantons of a code performing over the BSC related to instantons of the same code over the AWGN channel (or other soft channels)? Can we use one to deduce the other?

In this paper, we characterized failures of the LP decoder over

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

the BSC in terms of the instantons and respective pseudo-codewords. We then provided an efficient algorithm for finding the instantons. The ISA is guaranteed to terminate in the number of steps upper bounded by twice the number of flips in the original input (Theorem 1). Repeated sufficient number of times, the ISA outcomes the Instanton-Bar-Graph showing the number of

The authors would like to thank M. G. Stepanov for his help with the numerical simulation results. The authors would also like to thank P. Vontobel for his comments and suggestions and D. Sridhara for his clarifications regarding Lemma 1.
REFERENCES

unique instantons of different sizes. We also proved that the LP decoding of any configuration of the input noise which includes an instanton leads to a failure (Lemma 7). This Lemma arguably suggests to use the Instanton-Bar-Graph derived with the ISA algorithm as a metric for code optimization.
Finally, we conclude with an incomplete list of open problems and directions for future research following from this study:
(1) One would like to understand how to choose initiation of the ISA which guarantees convergence to the smallest size instanton.
(2) When can one be reasonably certain that all instantons of a given weight are found? Or stating it differently, how many trials of the ISA are required to find all the

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[4] J. Feldman, M. Wainwright, and D. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[5] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[6] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 57, NO. 7, JULY 2011

[7] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasic, “Error floors of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Communications, Jun. 11–15, 2006, vol. 3, pp. 1089–1094.
[8] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elec. Eng., Univ. Linköping, Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[9] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Conf. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Sep. 1–5, 2003, pp. 75–82.
[10] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, Graph-Cover Decoding and Finite Length Analysis of Message-Passing Iterative Decoding of LDPC Codes, 2005 [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0512078
[11] M. G. Stepanov, V. Chernyak, M. Chertkov, and B. Vasic, “Diagnosis of weaknesses in modern error correction codes: A physics approach,” Phys. Rev. Lett., vol. 95, p. 228701, Nov. 2005.
[12] R. Smarandache and P. Vontobel, “Pseudo-codeword analysis of Tanner graphs from projective and Euclidean planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2376–2393, Jul. 2007.
[13] C. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.
[14] S.-T. Xia and F.-W. Fu, “Minimum pseudoweight and minimum pseudocodewords of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 480–485, Jan. 2008.
[15] R. Smarandache, A. E. Pusane, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, Jr, Pseudo-Codeword Performance Analysis for LDPC Convolutional Codes, 2006 [Online]. Available: http://www.citebase.org/abstract?id=oai:arXiv.org:cs/0609148
[16] P. O. Vontobel, Papers on Pseudo-Codewords [Online]. Available: http://www.pseudocodewords.info
[17] M. Chertkov, “Reducing the error floor,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, Sep. 2007, pp. 230–235.
[18] M. Chertkov and M. Stepanov, “An efficient pseudocodeword search algorithm for linear programming decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1514–1520, Apr. 2008.
[19] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan, “Variational inference in graphical models: the view from the marginal polytope,” presented at the 40th Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, and Computing, Oct. 1–3, 2003.
[20] M. Chertkov and V. Chernyak, “Loop calculus helps to improve belief propagation and linear programming decodings of low-density-paritycheck codes,” presented at the 44th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, 2006.
[21] S. C. Draper, J. S. Yedidia, and Y. Wang, “ML decoding via mixed-integer adaptive linear programming,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Jun. 2007, pp. 1656–1660.
[22] K. Yang, X. Wang, and J. Feldman, “Fast ML decoding of SPC product code by linear programming decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf., Nov. 2007, pp. 1577–1581.
[23] M. H. Taghavi and P. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec. 2008.
[24] A. G. Dimakis and M. J. Wainwright, “Guessing facets: Polytope structure and improved LP decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Jul. 2006, pp. 1369–1373.
[25] M. Chertkov and M. Stepanov, “Pseudo-codeword landscape,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Jun. 2007, pp. 1546–1550.
[26] D. Burshtein, “Iterative approximate linear programming decoding of LDPC codes with linear complexity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Toronto, ON, Canada, Jul. 2008, pp. 1498–1502.
[27] S. K. Chilappagari, M. Chertkov, M. G. Stepanov, and B. Vasic, “Instanton-based techniques for analysis and reduction of error floors of LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 855–865, Aug. 2009.

[28] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” presented at the ISCTA, 2001.
[29] G. D. Forney, R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems and Graphical Models. New York: Springer, 2001, pp. 101–112.
[30] D. Sridhara, Personal Communication, Aug. 2008. [31] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Eliminating trapping
sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008. [32] D. J. C. Mackay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
Shashi Kiran Chilappagari (S’05–M’09) received the B.Tech. and M.Tech. degrees in electrical engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India, in 2004, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Arizona, Tucson, in 2008.
He was a Research Engineer in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, from January 2009 to December 2009. He is currently with Marvell Semiconductor, Inc., Santa Clara, CA. His research interests include error control coding and information theory with focus on the analysis of failures of various sub-optimal decoding algorithms for LDPC codes.
Michael Chertkov (M’05) received the Ph.D. degree in physics from the Weizmann Institute of Science in 1996 and the M.Sc. degree in physics from Novosibirsk State University in 1990.
After his Ph.D. degree, he spent three years at Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, as a R. H. Dicke Fellow in the Department of Physics. He joined Los Alamos National Lab in 1999, initially as a J. R. Oppenheimer Fellow in the Theoretical Division. He is now TSM-4 in the same division. His areas of interest include statistical and mathematical physics applied to information theory, computer science, hydrodynamics, optics, communication, and infrastructure networks. He has published 80 papers in these research areas.
Bane Vasic (S’92–M’93–SM’02) received the B.Sc., M. Sc., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Nis, Nis, Yugoslavia (now Serbia), in 1989, 1991, and 1994, respectively.
From 1996 to 1997, he was a Visiting Scientist at the Rochester Institute of Technology and Kodak Research, Rochester, NY, where he was involved in research in optical storage channels. From 1998 to 2000, he was with Lucent Technologies, Bell Laboratories (Bell-Labs). He was involved in research in iterative decoding and low-density parity-check codes, as well as development of codes and detectors implemented in Bell-Labs chips. Presently, he is a Professor in the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona, Tucson. His research interests include coding theory, information theory, communication theory, and digital communications, and recording.
Dr. Vasic is a Member of the Editorial Board for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS. He served as Technical Program Chair of the IEEE Communication Theory Workshop in 2003 and as Co-organizer of the Center for Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer Science (DIMACS) Workshops on Optical/Magnetic Recording and Optical Transmission, and Theoretical Advances in Information Recording in 2004. He was Co-organizer of the Los Alamos Workshop on Applications of Statistical Physics to Coding Theory in 2004, the Communication Theory Symposium within the IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC 2006), and IEEE Communication Theory Workshop (CTW 2007).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:52:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

