An Improved Construction method of QC-LDPC Codes
Based on the PEG Algorithm
Liqun Huang 1, Yuliang Wang 2 and Ping Gong 1
1 Department of Electronic Information, Northeastern University at Qinhuangdao, China 2 Department II of Service platform software development, ZTE Sanya R&D Center, Sanya, China
huangpchen@163.com

Abstract- Due to quasi-cyclic structure of parity-check matrices, Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check (QC-LDPC) codes reduce hardware requirements, and thus they have a higher practical value than random LDPC codes. This paper proposes an improved construction method of QC-LDPC based on PEG Algorithm, and the girth of the QC-LDPC codes has an increase of 2. Firstly, a base matrix is generated by the PEG algorithm, and then the base matrix is expanded using the unit circle permutation matrix, at the same time, the short loop of the base matrix is eliminated. This approach has the advantages of the PEG algorithm and the QC-LDPC codes, and simulation results show that bit error rate (BER) performance of the QC-LDPC codes presented in this paper is the same as or exceeds the one of randomly constructed LDPC codes.
Keywords- Low-density Parity-check Codes, PEG Algorithm, Quasi-cyclic matrix, permutation matrix, Girth
I. INTRODUCTION
The PEG (Progress Edge Growth) algorithm is currently accepted as a kind of effective algroithm for the random construction of the medium and short LDPC codes[1-5]. It resorts to the way of adding edges in turn of the Tanner graph for the codes, and in a given degree distribution situation, it makes the counts of the short cycles in the Tanner graph of the codes as little as possible, the girth as long as possible. However, some codes will be hard to encode such LDPC codes efficiently because of the unfixed structure, especially for the long codes, the amount of calculation for its construction and encoding is rising dramatically when completely using this algorithm to randomly construct.
QC-LDPC codes based on the PEG algorithm firstly need to construct a check matrix, called the base matrix, with small dimensions by the PEG algorithm, and then replace all the “1”and “0”elements by p × p circulant permutation matrixs and full-zeros matrix, respectively. The dimension of the base matrix is decided by the encoded codes length n, the dimension of circulant permutation matrix p and the codes rate. A method based on the FEG algorithm is presented to construct QC-LDPC codes[6], but the method eliminates only a part of 6-cycles without the expansion of the girth. Another method is given also based on the PEG algorithm[7], but due to the unfixed structure of the PEG algorithm, this algorithm only partly expand the length of the cycles, not sure whether enlarge the girth or not.
This paper proposes an improved construction method of QC-LDPC based on PEG Algorithm, and the girth of the QC-LDPC codes has an increase of 2, and partly expands the length of othe cycles. Our method includes the PEG algorthm, the cycles-searching algorthm and the cycle shift

value selection algorithm for identity matrix, whose effectiveness has been verified by the simulation results.
II. THE CONSTRUCTION PRINCIPLE OF QC-LDPC CODES BASED ON PEG ALGORITHM
Xiaoyu Hu etc proposed PEG algorithm[1], and MacKay deems PEG codes are currently the best Gallager codes (the length of codes is more than 500). The PEG algorithm can construct not only regular codes, but also irregular codes, their construction algorithms are basically similar, as long as the variable nodes are arranged in ascending order according to the node degree. The PEG algorithm can make the local shortest cycle length as large as possible.
The cycles-searching algorithm in this paper is based on Dijkstra’s idea, which was invented by the Dutch computer scientist Edsger Wybe Dijkstra in 1959, and can slove the shortest path problem in directed graph. All the cycles with L length can be found by this algorithm. But the calculation amount of the algorithms is very high, that has the linear relationship with the number of the columns of check matrix, and the storage capacity requirement for calculation process is also very high.
From equation (1), the condition of cycle formation in quasi circulant matrix[7], we know that if and only if each vertex shift value in a loop meet equation (1) established, a cycle of 2t length will come forth in the check matrix.

∑ ⎛
⎜⎝

2t k =1

(−1) k +1 Sα k ,β k

⎞ ⎠⎟

=

0

mod

p

(1)
Where Sα k ,β k is the shift value of the circulation
sub-matrix Psij corresponding to the kth vertex in a loop of

the base matrix. It is possible to eliminate 2t length cycles, if we properly

select a group of cycle shift values, which don’t meet above

equation. From the feature of equation, one certain variable

value can be found out, only when we have known other

variables. In this algorithm, we firstly determine the values
for 2t－1 vertexs, and then find out the unsuited cycle shift values for the 2tth vertex based on equation (1).

As we know from the cycle structure of the check matrix

of the QC-LDPC codes, if we firstly determine the shift

values of circulant sub-matrix one column by one column,

and just consider the cycles formed in the current column and

the column before it, then we can get an optional cycle shift

values set by removing the values which meet equation (1).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei9U7n8iv-.1D-4o5w7n7lo-a0d8e5d6o-n5/J1u1ne/$2246,2.00026©a2t 0071:151I:E27EUETC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Any value in this set can break the cycle which formed in current column and the column before.
The specific steps of this algorithm are given as follows: 1. If the dimension of circulant permutation matrixs is L, the set of optional shift values for each block element is (1， 2，3…L－1). 2. The shift values for circulant sub-matrixs in the first column are randomly selected from their sets of optional shift values. 3. Begin with the second column of the base matrix, the value for the first circulant sub-matrix in each column is generated randomly from the set (1，2，3…L－1), then search the cycles which exist in a certain column and the columns befor this column, if some cycles emerge, we can calculate the unsuitable shift value of other circulant sub-matrixs in this column based on equation (1), and update the sets of optional shift values for these circulant sub-matrixs by eliminating the unfit values. 4. Randomly select the shift value from the set of optional shift values for the circulant sub-matrix. 5. Go to step 3 according to column by column, and determine the shift values of all block elements. If one block element is contained in less than L－1 cycles, the above algorithm must eliminate all the 2t length cycles, which contain the block element. If one block element is contained in more than L－1 cycles, there is still a high possibility to eliminate the 2t length cycles. The procedure of construction of QC-LDPC codes based on PEG algorithm is as follows: 1. According to the code length, the code rate, the row weight and column weight of the check matrix of desired QC-LDPC codes, we can determine the code length, the code rate, the row weight, the column weight and the dimension of circulant permutation matrixs L for the base matrix. 2. Generate a base matrix by using PEG algorithm. 3. Use the cycles-searching program to find out the all the short cycles. 4. For each column, count the number of cycles by using the cycles-searching record matrix, and then reorganize all the columns of the base matrix according to the descending numbers of cycles. 5. Search the short cycles from the new base matrix again. 6. Determine the shift values for all the block elements by the shift value selected procedure. 7. Reorganize matrix according to the previous order of the column. 8. According to the shift values, expand and get the required QC - LDPC code, and use the full-zero matrix to expand the zero elements of the base matrix. The QC-LDPC codes with the girth increased of 2 can be obtained by using the above algorithm, and the short cycles of the check matrix will also reduce obviously. But this algorithm has the shortcoming of large amounts of calculation, and thus it is suitable for the situation that base matrix is small, and only short cycles need to be eliminated. This paper constructed two kinds of QC-LDPC codes by this

algorithm, One code has the code length 1008 or 504, the column weight 3, the girth 8, and the code rate 0.5, and another one has the code length 816 and the code rate 0.33.
III. SIMULATION RESULTS In this section, the QC-LDPC codes based on PEG and circulant permutation matrixs expanding are simulated, and compared with MacKay random codes, PEG random codes, and the simply expanding QC-LDPC codes based on PEG in performance. In the results of simulation, this new constructed QC-LDPC codes based on PEG algorithm and circulant permutation matrixs are expressed as PEG-E-LDPC, the codes presented in the original paper are expressed as PEG-O-LDPC, Mackay-LDPC denotes Mackay random codes, and PEG-PE-LDPC denotes the simply expanding QC-LDPC codes based on PEG. Mackay random codes and PEG random codes come
Figure.1 Performance of the PEG-E-LDPC (504, 252) code over the AWGN channel
from the webpage of Mackay, and the base matrix of PEG-PE-LDPC codes is the same with the base matrix of PEG-E-LDPC codes.
Figure 1 shows the performance of the new PEG-E-LDPC codes constructed in this paper, the PEG-LDPC codes constructed directly by the PEG algorithm, the original PEG-OE-LDPC codes, and PEG-PE-LDPC codes constructed by simple expansion, all LDPC codes have the code length 504 and the code rate 0.5 over the AWGN channel. In this figure,the FER of the y-coordinate is frame error rate, BER is bit error rate, and the x-coordinate is SNR. The code length of the base matrix of the PEG-E-LDPC codes and the PEG-OE-LDPC codes are both 126, and the dimension of the circulant permutation matrixs is 4. Obviously, the performances of PEG-E-LDPC codes and PEG-LDPC codes are close, and better than PEG-OE-LDPC codes and PEG-PE-LDPC codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The code length of the base matrix of the PEG-E-LDPC codes and the PEG-OE-LDPC codes are both 126, and the dimension of the circulant permutation matrixs is 8.
In this figure, when SNR is less than 2dB, the performance of PEG-E-LDPC codes and PEG-LDPC codes are close, and better than PEG-OE-LDPC codes and PEG-PE-LDPC codes. When SNR is greater than 2dB, the performance of PEG-E-LDPC codes is better than PEG-LDPC codes.

Figure.2 Performance of the PEG-E-LDPC (504, 252) code over the Rayleigh channel

Figure 2 demonstrates the performance of LDPC codes with the code length 504 and the code rate 0.5 over the Rayleigh channel, including the PEG-E-LDPC codes,the PEG-LDPC codes, the original PEG-OE-LDPC codes, and PEG-PE-LDPC codes. Where, the FER of the y-coordinate is still frame error rate, BER is bit error rate,and the x-coordinate is still SNR. The parameters of the check matrixs are identical with Figure1, the code length of the base matrix of the PEG-E-LDPC codes and the PEG-OE-LDPC codes are both 126, and the dimension of the circulant permutation matrixs is 4. As we have seen from the figure, the performances of PEG-E-LDPC codes and PEG-LDPC codes are close in 0~3dB, and better than PEG-OE-LDPC codes and PEG-PE-LDPC codes.

Figure.4 Performance of the PEG-E-LDPC (1008, 504)
code over the Rayleigh channel
Figure 4 displays the performance of LDPC codes with the code length 1008 and the code rate 0.5 over the Rayleigh channel, still including the PEG-E-LDPC codes, the PEG-LDPC codes, the original PEG-OE-LDPC codes, and PEG-PE-LDPC codes. All the parameters of the check matrixs of the codes are the same with Figure 3. In this figure, the performances of PEG-E-LDPC codes and PEG-LDPC codes are close, and also better than PEG-OE-LDPC codes and PEG-PE-LDPC codes.

Figure.3 Performance of the PEG-E-LDPC (1008, 504) code over the AWGN channel
Figure 3 shows the performance of LDPC codes with the code length 1008 and the code rate 0.5 over the AWGN channel, still including the PEG-E-LDPC codes,the PEG-LDPC codes, the original PEG-OE-LDPC codes, and PEG-PE-LDPC codes. In this figure, the y-coordinate represents FER and BER, and the x-coordinate denotes SNR.

Figure.5 Performance of the PEG-E-LDPC (816, 544) code over the AWGN channel
Figure.5 shows the performance of the same several kinds of LDPC codes as mentioned above over the AWGN channel. However, the code length of LDPC codes is 816, the code rate is 0.33, the code length of the base matrix of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEG-E-LDPC codes is 102, and the dimension of the circulant permutation matrixs are 8. As we have seen from the figure, over the AWGN channel, the performance of PEG-E-LDPC codes and Mackay-LDPC random codes are close, and better than PEG-OE-LDPC codes and PEG-PE-LDPC codes obviously.
IV. CONCLUSION This paper proposes an improved construction method of QC-LDPC based on PEG Algorithm, and the girth of the QC-LDPC codes has an increase of 2. With different code length and code rate over AWGN channel or Rayleigh channel, the simulation results show that the performance of the improved QC-LDPC codes constucted in this paper is similar with randomly constructed LDPC codes. Due to quasi-cyclic structure of parity-check matrices, QC-LDPC codes reduce hardware requirements, and thus they have a higher practical value than random LDPC codes.
V. ACKNOWLEDGMENT This work was supported by the Scientific Research Program from the Education Department of Hebei Province under Grant No. z2005323, and also supported by the Eleventh Five-Year Planning Project of Education Science Research from the Education Department of Hebei Province under Grant No. O8020027.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D. M. Arnold. Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs [J], IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, 2004, 51(1):386-398
[2] Myung Seho, Yang Kyeongcheol, et al. Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Fast Encoding [J], IEEE Trans. On Info. Theory, 2005, 51(8): 2894-2901.
[3] Z. Li, L. Chen, et al. Efficient Encoding of Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes [J], IEEE Trans. Communications, 2006, 54(1): 71-81.
[4] Z. W. Li, L. Chen, L. Q. Zeng, et al. Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density partity-check codes [J], IEEE Trans. Commum, 2006, 54(1):71-81
[5] Lingqi Zeng, Lan Lan, et al. Construction of Nonbinary Cyclic, Quasi-Cyclic and Regular LDPC Codes: A Finite Geometry Approach [J], IEEE Trans. Communications, 2008, 56: 378-387
[6] Lei Jing，Wang Jianhui, et al., Quasi-cyclic extension based on PEG algorithm for construction of LDPC codes [J], Journal on Communications, 2008, 29(9): 103-110
[7] Liu Xingcheng; Cheng Haohui, Study on the Construction Method of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Based on Progressive Edge-Growth (PEG) Algorithm [J], Journal of Circuits and Systems, 2009,14(4): 115-119
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 07:51:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

