IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 57, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2021

3101516

Efficient Parallel Decoding Architecture for Cluster Erasure
Correcting 2-D LDPC Codes for 2-D Data Storage
Arijit Mondal and Shayan Srinivasa Garani
Department of Electronic Systems Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 560012, India
Native 2-D low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes provide 2-D burst erasure correction capability and have promising applications in two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) technology. Though carefully constructed rastered 1-D LDPC codes can provide 2-D burst erasure correction, they are not as efficient as 2-D native codes constructed for handling the 2-D span of burst erasures. Our contributions are twofold. First, we propose a new 2-D LDPC code with girth greater than 4 by generating a parity-check tensor through stacking permutation tensors of size p × p × p along with the i, j, k-axes. The permutations are achieved through circular shifts on an identity tensor along different coordinate axes in such a way that it provides a burst erasure correction capability of at least p × p. Second, we propose a fast, efficient, and scalable hardware architecture for a parallel 2-D LDPC decoder based on the proposed code construction for data storage applications. Through efficient indexing of the received messages in an RAM, we propose novel routing mechanisms for messages between the check nodes and variable nodes through a set of two barrel shifters, producing shifts along two axes. Through simulations, we show that the performance of the proposed 2-D LDPC codes matches a 1-D QC-LDPC code, with a sharp waterfall drop of three to four orders of magnitude over ∼0.3 dB, for random errors over code sizes of ∼32 kbits or equivalently ∼180 × 180 2-D arrays. Furthermore, we prove that the proposed native 2-D LDPC codes outperform their 1-D counterparts in terms of 2-D cluster erasure correction ability. For p = 16 and code arrays of size 48 × 48, we implemented the proposed design architecture on a Kintex-7 KC-705 field-programmable gate array (FPGA) kit, achieving a significantly high worst case throughput of 12.52 Gb/s at a clock frequency of 163 MHz.
Index Terms— 2-D low-density parity-check (LDPC), burst erasure correction, error correcting codes (ECCs), field-programmable gate arrays (FPGAs), iterative ECCs, Kintex-7, magnetic disks, non-layered min-sum algorithm (MSA), two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR).

I. INTRODUCTION
E RROR correcting codes (ECCs) are used in virtually all communication and storage channels to protect the information against errors introduced by noise. Two main classes of ECCs exist, namely, algebraic and iterative coding schemes. Algebraic ECCs, such as Bose–Chaudhuri– Hocquenghem (BCH) and Reed–Solomon (RS) codes, provide guaranteed error correction capability and do not exhibit error floors, whereas iterative ECCs, such as the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, provide near Shannon capacity performance and improved performance in the waterfall region and can exhibit the flooring effect [1]. Carefully constructed LDPC codes can overcome the error floor issues for the desired level of code failure rate (CFR), but the design of such codes is challenging. Both iterative and algebraic ECCs are practically useful depending on the constraints of the storage channels.
There have been marked technological improvements in recent years, leading to the development of higher dimensional data storage technologies, such as shingled magnetic recording, two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) [2], and 3-D NAND flash memories [3]. Due to high data densities aimed beyond 4 Tb/in2 in practical TDMR channels and within bit-patterned media [4], reliable information storage and retrieval require the design of highly efficient ECCs
Manuscript received May 16, 2021; revised July 13, 2021, September 3, 2021, and September 30, 2021; accepted October 4, 2021. Date of publication October 13, 2021; date of current version November 18, 2021. Corresponding author: S. Srinivasa Garani (e-mail: shayangs@iisc.ac.in).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TMAG.2021.3119723.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2021.3119723

along with signal processing. In TDMR, random and burst errors/erasures introduced by the magnetic storage channel are inherently 2-D, requiring native 2-D signal processing and coding techniques to overcome these impairments [5], [6]. The channel engineering innovations from TDMR technology could also rekindle channels development efforts for 3-D archival storage, such as holographic memories [7].
The decoding algorithms for 1-D LDPC codes, such as the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [8] and min-sum algorithm (MSA) [9], allow parallelization and are, thus, useful for hardware implementations [10]. ECCs for magnetic recording channels must be designed to handle a mixture of burst and random errors arising from defects, thermal asperities, mechanical shocks, and so on [1]. Fossorier [11] showed that 1-D LDPC check matrices can be written in burst correction format (BCF), enabling the correction of 1-D burst erasures, achieving the Roger bound. Due to a large number of paritycheck equations in the BCF, a practical decoding method suitable for hardware implementation is difficult. Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes [12], on the other hand, provide a regular construction of the parity-check matrix, which enables good 1-D burst erasure correction performance.
In TDMR, where the data are 2-D, 2-D burst erasures may appear due to thermal asperities, mechanical shocks, 2-D timing artifacts [13], [14], and inherent defects in the magnetic material [15]. Matcha and Garani Srinivasa [15] proposed a model to study the 2-D defects applicable to a Voronoi-based TDMR channel model. They extended the 1-D defect model to TDMR by modeling the defects as a rectangular shape. Matcha and Garani Srinivasa [15] and Matcha et al. [16], [17] have also proposed joint detection and decoding architectures

0018-9464 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 57, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2021

applicable to TDMR using iterative coding and detection It should be noted that the proposed code construction and

techniques. Algebraic code constructions can be used for the the design architecture are scalable for different code parame-

correction of 2-D burst errors of small, predefined error shapes. ters. As a prototype example, we implemented a decoder on a

These were studied by Roy and Srinivasa [18] and Yoon and Kintex-7 KC-705 field-programmable gate array (FPGA) kit,

Moon [19]. Correction of arbitrary t × t bursts in a n × n 2-D for a 2-D LDPC code of size 48 × 48, having a parity-check

BCH code was studied by Madhusudhana and Siddiqi [20] tensor of dimensions 1024×48×48. It achieves a significantly

using improved Blahut’s algorithm (IBA-I). Recently, modified high worst case throughput of 12.52 Gb/s at 163 MHz.

IBA-I algorithms were proposed toward efficient hardware This article is organized as follows. In Section II, we discuss

architectures in [21]. Also, hardware architectures for BCH the proposed construction of the 2-D LDPC code with girth

product code decoders with small 2-D burst error correction greater than 4 and discuss its burst erasure correction capabil-

abilities were proposed in [22]. However, iterative error cor- ity. Next, we discuss the decoding algorithm and decoding

rection codes, such as the 2-D LDPC [16], provide the ability performance of the code through software simulations in

to correct large 2-D burst erasures. This motivates us to build Section III. In Section IV, we propose efficient indexing and

hardware for decoding native 2-D LDPC codes applicable to routing of the messages, followed by the design architecture.

TDMR channels.

Next, we discuss the FPGA implementation results and com-

Matcha et al. [16] proposed constructions of native 2-D parisons in Section V, followed by conclusions in Section VI.

LDPC codes that are capable of correcting large 2-D burst

erasures. Their construction involved stacking c × h × w permutation tensors of size p × p × p along the i, j,

II. 2-D LDPC CODE CONSTRUCTION

k-axes. The permutation tensors were constructed by applying a combination of shifts along j - and k-axes on an identity tensor. The shifts were chosen in such a way that the code had a burst erasure correction capability of at least p × p. Kamabe and Lu [23] proposed a variant of the code used in [16] with improved theoretical burst erasure correction capability.
In this article, we propose a 2-D LDPC code similar in

In this section, we will briefly discuss the construction of 1-D QC-LDPC codes, followed by the construction of 2-D LDPC codes proposed in [16] relevant to this article. Thereafter, we will introduce our construction of the 2-D LDPC codes with slight modifications to [16], with an intent to realize efficient hardware architectures.

construction to the one proposed in [16]. Unlike the con-

struction in [16] and [23], we modify the choice of the A. Construction of 1-D QC-LDPC Codes

shifts within the tensors and prove that our code is devoid of short cycles of length 4 for carefully chosen code parameters, thereby bringing significant coding gains. Similar to the code in [16], the proposed code construction has provably burst erasure correction capability of at least p × p. We design hardware architectures of a 2-D LDPC decoder for our proposed code construction based on the non-layered MSA (NL-MSA).
The primary challenge in the design of this decoder was to achieve the routing between the check nodes and variable nodes using barrel shifters. In 1-D QC-LDPC codes, the paritycheck matrix is constructed by stacking permutation matrices produced by applying shifts to only one of the axes, and thus, the required routing between the check nodes and the variable nodes can be achieved easily using barrel shifters.

Parity-check matrices for 1-D QC-LDPC codes are con-

structed by tiling permutation matrices. Let I be an identity

matrix of size p × p, and let P be a permutation matrix of

the same size. A permutation matrix is a right-circular shift

matrix, as shown in the following:

⎡

⎤

0 1 0 ··· 0

P

=

⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢

0 ...
0

0 ...
0

1 ...
0

··· ...
···

0 ...
1

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥.

(1)

1 0 0 ··· 0

We can construct a parity-check matrix corresponding to a standard 1-D QC-LDPC code, as shown in the following equation:

The situation in 2-D is more complicated. The permutation tensors in the parity-check tensor of the 2-D LDPC codes are

H = Pi, j ,

where P i, j = Pmod((i−1) j, p)

(2)

constructed by applying a combination of two shifts along with i and j belong to the range 1 ≤ i ≤ wc and 1 ≤ j ≤ wr ,

any two of the i, j, k-axes.

where wr and wc represent the row weight and the column

The contributions in this article are given as follows: 1) we weight of H , respectively. Different powers of P in the parity-

propose a new 2-D LDPC code construction and prove that it check matrix correspond to different shifts. Thus, we obtain a

has a girth greater than 4 for carefully chosen code parameters variety of 1-D QC-LDPC codes depending on the choice of

and 2) we propose a parallel decoding hardware architecture permutation matrix P and the shifts.

for the proposed code construction. In the hardware design, The burst erasure correction capability of 1-D QC-LDPC

we propose an efficient way to achieve the routing between codes depends on the span of zeros in the parity-check matrix.

the check nodes and variable nodes for the 2-D LDPC code For every position j in the codeword, if there exists an i th

using a set of two barrel shifters. Together, they produce row in H such that hi, j = 1 and hi, j+1 = hi, j+2 = · · · = the appropriate forward and reverse routing for the messages. hi, j+l−1 = 0, then the code is capable of correcting a burst Another contribution in our design is in the way that we index erasure of length l. The above condition essentially ensures

the variable node messages in an RAM such that the barrel that we can correct the j th bit erasure using the i th parity-

shifters produce the appropriate shifts.

check equation. The presence of identity matrices on the top

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONDAL AND SRINIVASA GARANI: EFFICIENT PARALLEL DECODING ARCHITECTURE

3101516

layer of the parity-check matrix in (2) ensures that the code thus constructed has a 1-D burst erasure correction capability of at least p.

B. Extending Ideas of 1-D QC-LDPC Codes to 2-D LDPC Codes
Matcha et al. [16] extended the ideas in 1-D QC-LDPC code construction to 2-D. They constructed native 2-D LDPC codes with 2-D burst erasure correction ability. Kamabe and Lu [23] proposed a similar construction with improved burst erasure correction ability. Since the construction in [23] requires very large parity-check tensors, it is not suitable for hardware implementations. We will briefly discuss the construction in [16], followed by the construction we used in this article.
Each codeword in a 2-D LDPC code is a 2-D array of bits. The parity-check tensor for a 2-D LDPC code is composed of 2-D arrays orthogonal to the code space, stacked on top of each other. Each horizontal layer in the parity-check tensor represents a single parity-check equation, analogous to the parity-check matrix for a 1-D LDPC code, where each row represents a parity-check equation. Parity-check tensors can be obtained by stacking 3-D permutation tensors in a 3-D fashion [16]. An indexing notation is used such that the position (i, j, k) represents the bit ( j, k) in the i th horizontal layer of the parity-check tensor. I3-D is chosen to be an identity tensor of size p × p × p, as shown in the following equation:

I3-D = [Ii, j,k ]ip, j,k=1,

Ii, j,k =

1, 0,

i = j=k otherwise.

The tensor I3-D can be permuted in three directions of the coordinate axes i , j , and k. Let P : {1, 2, . . . , p} → {1, 2, . . . , p}, Q : {1, 2, . . . , p} → {1, 2, . . . , p}, and R : {1, 2, . . . , p} → {1, 2, . . . , p} be the three permutation operations defined on a tensor T = [Ti, j,k]ip, j,k=1, as shown in the following equation:

P(T ) = [Ti,P( j),k]ip, j,k=1

Q(T ) = [TQ(i), j,k ]ip, j,k=1

R(T ) = [Ti, j,R(k)]ip, j,k=1.

(3)

Similar to the permutation in (1), we can choose P, Q, and R to be circular shifts given by

P(i ) = Q(i ) = R(i ) = p,

i =1

i − 1, otherwise.

We denote the circular shifts P, Q, and R as J -shift, I -shift, and K -shift, respectively. These shifts have been illustrated for an identity tensor I3-D of size 4 × 4 × 4 in Fig. 1.
We observe that there exists a relation between the permutations P, Q, and R given by

Qa ◦ Pa (I3-D) = R p−a (I3-D).

(4)

It has been proven in [16] that the order of permutations on a tensor can be interchanged. This implies that the operations

Fig. 1. (a) Identity tensor I3-D. (b) One J -shift P(I3-D). (c) Two J -shifts P2(I3-D). (d) One I -shift Q(I3-D). (e) Two I -shifts Q2(I3-D). (f) One K -shift R(I3-D). (g) Two K -shifts R2(I3-D).

Qa ◦ Pb(I3-D) and Pb ◦ Qa(I3-D) are equivalent. Using this in (4), we have

Qa ◦ Pb(I3-D) = Qa ◦ Pb−a ◦ Pa(I3-D)

= Qa ◦ Pa ◦ Pb−a (I3-D)

= R p−a ◦ Pb−a (I3-D ).

(5)

We conclude from (5) that defining two basic permutations along two axes of a tensor is enough. In this article, we consider these two permutations to be P(I3-D) and Q(I3-D), which are circular shifts along the axes j ( J -shift) and i (I -shift), respectively.
Similar to the 1-D QC-LDPC, we can construct the 2-D LDPC parity-check tensor H2-D using various shifts P and Q on I3-D. We can stack c × h × w cubes along the i, j, k-directions, obtained from a combination of I -shifts and J -shifts on I3-D. An example of such a stacking is shown in Fig. 2.

C. Our Construction

We constructed H2-D by stacking c × h × w cubes, each of size p × p × p along the i -, j -, and k-directions,

respectively. In our H2-D, the (i, j, k)th cube is given by Pa(i, j,k) ◦ Qb(i, j,k)(I3-D). The powers a(i, j, k) and b(i, j, k)
are chosen as follows:

a(i, j, k) = mod (i − 1) + i − 1 (( j − 1)w + k), p p

b(i, j, k) = mod i − 1 ( j − 1), p .

(6)

p

The construction defined above has the following properties.
1) The code has size hp ×wp and has a parity-check tensor H2-D of dimensions cp × hp × wp.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 57, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2021

Proof: We observe that the first horizontal layer of the cubes in H2-D is a stack of h × w permutation tensors of size p × p × p. Thus, the position of ones in the first parity-check
layer is given by

S1 = {(( j − 1) p + 1, (k − 1) p + 1)|1 ≤ j ≤ h, 1 ≤ k ≤ w}.

In the same way, the position of ones in the parity-check layers l = 1 to l = p is given by

Sl = {(( j − 1) p + l, (k − 1) p + l)|1 ≤ j ≤ h, 1 ≤ k ≤ w}.

Fig. 2. Stacking of c×h×w permutation tensors along the i, j, k-directions to form the parity-check tensor H2-D. Each small cube represents a permutation tensor obtained from cyclic shifts I -shift and J -shift on identity tensor I3-D.

2) If c is a multiple of p, the abovementioned choice of shifts in (6) produces a parity-check tensor with uniform column weight c/ p. This follows similarly from [16, Lemma 1].
3) Each permutation tensor in H2-D contributes to a row weight wr of exactly 1. Thus, the row weight of the constructed code is hw.
4) The rate of the code is (hwp − c)/ hwp. 5) If p is sufficiently large, the girth of the code is
greater than 4. We will prove in Section II-E that, for (h −1)(c/ p−1) < p and (w−1)(c/ p−1) < p, the girth of the code is greater than 4. For example, for p = 16, c = 64, h = 3, and w = 3, we obtain a girth greater than 4. Due to the absence of short cycles of length 4 in the constructed code, we observe good error correction performance. 6) It can correct 2-D burst erasures of size at least p × p. We shall discuss the burst erasure correction capability of the code in Section II-D.

D. 2-D Burst Erasure Correction Using Our Construction

Lemma 2 in [16] states that a 2-D ECC with parity-check

tensor H2-D = [hi, j,k ] can correct up to a 2-D burst of size

Bh × Bw if, for every position ( j, k), there exists an i th layer

in

H2-D

such ⎧

that

⎨⎪1, (a, b) = ( j, k)

hi,a,b := ⎩⎪0,

(a, b) ∈ {( j + x, k + y)| − Bh < x < Bh, | − Bw < y < Bw}\{( j, k)}.

(7)

The condition in (7) ensures that the i th parity-check equation has a single 1 at position ( j, k) in the erasure region and, thus, uses only the ( j, k)th bit in the erasure region. Next, we will prove that our 2-D LDPC code construction has a burst erasure correction capability of at least p × p.
Theorem 1: The 2-D LDPC code constructed using the shifts given in (6) has a burst erasure correction capability of at least p × p.

We observe that the relative position of ones in the first p layers of H2-D remains the same as that of the first layer. From (6), the next p layers p + 1 ≤ l ≤ 2 p of H2-D are obtained by applying a single J -shift to the top p layers. In the same way, we observe that the layers p + 1 ≤ l ≤ p2 are obtained by applying different J -shifts to the top p layers. This proves that the relative shifts in the layers 1 ≤ l ≤ p2 remain the same as that of layer l = 1.
We observe that, if a one is located at position ( j, k) in the first layer, the following positions contain all zeros:
Szeros = {( j + a, k + b)|− p < a < p,−p < b < p}\{( j, k)}.
(8)
This is the same as the condition imposed by (7) with Bh = p and Bw = p. Since we already showed that the relative position of ones remain the same in the top p2 layers, it follows that (7) is satisfied for every position containing a one in the top p2 layers. Since the column weight contributed by the top p2 layers is uniformly 1 at all positions, the condition in (7) is satisfied by every position ( j, k). Therefore, using [16, Lemma 2], we conclude that the 2-D LDPC code constructed using the shifts in (6) has a burst erasure correction capability of at least p × p.

E. Analysis of Our Code Construction for Short Cycles of Length 4
Let us consider any two rows i1 and i2 of parity-check matrix H . A short cycle of length 4 is formed if we have 1s at the following positions:

{(i1, j1), (i2, j1), (i2, j2), (i1, j2)}.

(9)

If the dot product1 of rows i1 and i2 is greater than or equal to 2, there is at least one short cycle of length 4. To guarantee the absence of short cycles of length 4 in rows i1 and i2, the dot product of rows i1 and i2 should be less than 2, i.e., 0 or 1. If the dot products of all possible combinations of rows of the parity-check matrix are less than 2, it ensures the absence of short cycles of length 4 in H .
For a parity-check tensor H2-D, this is equivalent to taking dot products of all combinations of horizontal layers l1 and l2 of H2-D. The I -shift and J -shift values in each tile determine the position of 1s in each horizontal layer of the parity-check tensor. I -shifts are represented by powers of Q, i.e., b(i, j, k) and J -shifts are represented by powers of P, i.e., a(i, j, k) represented in (6). We observe the following.

1The dot product in this context is not over modulo 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONDAL AND SRINIVASA GARANI: EFFICIENT PARALLEL DECODING ARCHITECTURE

3101516

1) a(i, j, k) represents the amount of J -shift on a tensor T . If the position of 1s in any layer of T is (l j , lk), the position of 1s after applying J -shift of a(i, j, k) in that layer is (mod((l j − 1) + a(i, j, k), p) + 1, lk ).
2) b(i, j, k) represents the amount of I -shift on a tensor T . If the position of 1s in any layer of T is (l j , lk), the position of 1s after applying I -shift of b(i, j, k) in that layer is (mod((l j − 1) − b(i, j, k), p) + 1, mod((lk − 1) − b(i, j, k), p) + 1).
Please note that, hereafter, i, j, and k denote the permutation
tile indices and l denotes the row (horizontal layer) indices (1 ≤ i ≤ c, 1 ≤ j ≤ h, 1 ≤ k ≤ w, and 1 ≤ l ≤ cp).
We will introduce the terms block row and block column,
which will be used for the rest of this article. Two rows l1 and l2 of H2-D belong to the same block row if ((l1 − 1)/ p2) −
((l2 − 1)/ p2) = 0. Two columns are said to belong to the same block column if ( j, k) indices for both the columns are
the same.
To prove that the girth of the code is greater than 4,
we follow the following steps. We find the position of 1s in
any two arbitrary layers l1 and l2 of H2-D. Using the position of 1s in layers l1 and l2, we can evaluate the dot products of layers l1 and l2. If the dot product is less than 2, it implies that there exists no short cycle of length 4 between layers l1 and l2. Proving that the dot product is less than 2 for all possible combinations of layers l1 and l2 guarantees the absence of short cycles of length 4 in H2-D.
Theorem 2: The code constructed by tiling c × h × w permutation tensors along i, j, k, with shifts given in (6), has no short cycles of length 4 if (h − 1)(c/ p − 1) < p and (w − 1)(c/ p − 1) < p.
Proof: In H2-D, for i = 1, both I -shifts and J -shifts are zeros for each permutation tensor. Thus, the position of ones
in the top layer are given by

S1 = {(( j − 1) p + 1, (k − 1) p + 1)|1 ≤ j ≤ h, 1 ≤ k ≤ w}. (10)

For any arbitrary layer l in the top permutation tile (i = 1), i.e., for l = 1 to l = p, such positions are given by

{(( j − 1) p + l, (k − 1) p + l)|1 ≤ j ≤ h, 1 ≤ k ≤ w}.

In general (for any tile i = 1 to i = c), we can find the position of 1s in any arbitrary horizontal layer l of H2-D for 1 ≤ l ≤ cp using the shifts in (6). Such positions are given by

Sl = {(( j −1) p + 1 + mod((l −1)−b(i, j, k) + a(i, j, k), p),

(k − 1) p + 1 + mod((l − 1) − b(i, j, k), p))|

1 ≤ j ≤ h, 1 ≤ k ≤ w}.

(11)

We know that i = ((l − 1)/ p) +1. Thus, after substituting the values of a(i, j, k) and b(i, j, k) from (6) in (11), we have

Sl =

( j − 1) p + 1 + mod (l − 1) −

l−1 p2

( j − 1)

l −1

l −1

+ p + p2 (( j − 1)w + k), p ,

l −1 (k − 1) p + 1 + mod (l − 1) − p2 ( j − 1), p)

1 ≤ j ≤ h, 1 ≤ k ≤ w . (12)

Putting l = l1 and l = l2 in (12), we get Sl1 and Sl2 , which
are the position of 1s in layers l1 and l2. Equating Sl1 and Sl2 gives the following set of equations:

( j − 1) p + 1 + mod (l1 − 1) −

l1 − 1 p2

( j − 1)

+ l1 − 1 + l1 − 1 (( j − 1)w + k), p

p

p2

= ( j − 1) p + 1 + mod (l2 − 1) −

l2 − 1 ( j − 1) p2

+

l2 − 1 p

+

l2 − 1 p2

(( j − 1)w + k), p

(13)

(k − 1) p + 1 + mod (l1 − 1) −

l1 − 1 p2

( j − 1), p

= (k − 1) p + 1 + mod (l2 − 1) −

l2 − 1 ( j − 1), p . p2

(14)

Simplifying the above equations, we have

mod (l1 − l2) +

l1 − 1 p

+(( j − 1)(w − 1) + k)

− l2 − 1 p

l1 − 1 p2

−

l2 − 1 p2

mod (l1 − l2) − ( j − 1)

l1 − 1 − l2 − 1

p2

p2

,p =0 (15)
, p = 0. (16)

If (15) and (16) are satisfied by more than one value of {( j, k)|1 ≤ j ≤ h, 1 ≤ k ≤ w}, it implies that the dot products of layers l1 and l2 are at least 2. To prove the absence of short cycles of length 4 between layers l1 and l2, we need to show that (15) and (16) have at most one solution in ( j, k). We consider the following substitutions:

t1 = l1 − l2

t2 =

l1 − 1 p

−

l2 − 1 p

t3 =

l1 − 1 p2

−

l2 − 1 . p2

(17)

Using the substitutions of (17) into (15) and (16), we have

mod(t1 + t2 + (( j − 1)(w − 1) + k)t3, p) = 0 (18)

mod(t1 − ( j − 1)t3, p) = 0.

(19)

We observe the following two cases.
Case 1 (l1 and l2 Are in the Same Block Row): In this case, t3 = 0. From (18) and (19), we obtain

mod(t1 + t2, p) = 0

(20)

mod(t1, p) = 0.

(21)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 57, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2021

The above equations have a solution only if t1 and t2 are both multiples of p. However, this is not possible if l1 and l2 are in the same block row. Thus, the above equations have no solutions in ( j, k), and thus, the dot product of layers l1 and l2 is 0.
Case 2 (l1 and l2 are in Different Block Rows): In this case, t3 = 0. Let (18) and (19) have a solution ( js, ks). If there are no other solutions {( j, k)|1 ≤ j ≤ h, 1 ≤ k ≤ w}, the dot
product of layers l1 and l2 would at most be 1. We have

mod(t1 + t2 + (( js − 1)(w − 1) + ks)t3, p) = 0 (22)

mod(t1 − ( js − 1)t3, p) = 0.

(23)

We observe the following in Case 2.
1) A necessary condition for a value of j = jp, such that jp = js to satisfy (19) is that ( jp − js)t3 = np, for some integer n. This can be shown as follows. From (23), we have

jst3 = t1 + t3 − n1 p

(24)

where n1 ∈ Z. Let us assume that ( jp − js)t3 is not an integer multiple of p, i.e.,

( jp − js)t3 = n2 p

(25)

where n2 ∈ Z. Substituting js from (24) into (25), we have

jpt3 − (t1 + t3 − n1 p) = n2 p ⇒ t1 − ( jp − 1)t3 = (n1 − n2) p ⇒ mod(t1 − ( jp − 1)t3, p) = 0. (26)

This implies that j = jp does not satisfy (19). This establishes that a necessary condition for j = jp to satisfy (19) is that ( jp − js)t3 = np for some integer n. We know that 0 < | jp − js| ≤ h − 1 and 0 < |t3| ≤ c/ p − 1. Thus, 0 < |( jp − js)t3| ≤ (h − 1)(c/ p − 1). Since (h − 1)(c/ p − 1) < p, we can easily see that ( jp − js)t3 = np. Thus, the necessary condition is not satisfied, and jp will not satisfy (19). 2) We already proved that only j = js will satisfy (19).
Thus, any other possible solution for (18) and (19) will be of the form ( js, k p), where k p = ks. We know that ( js, k p) satisfies (19). We need to verify if it also satisfies (18). A necessary condition for ( js, k p) to satisfy (18) is that (k p − ks)t3 = np for some integer
n. This can be shown as follows. From (22), we have

kst3 = n1 p − (t1 + t2 + ( js − 1)(w − 1)t3) (27)

where n1 ∈ Z. Let us assume that (k p − ks)t3 is not an integer multiple of p, i.e.,

(k p − ks)t3 = n2 p

(28)

where n2 ∈ Z. Substituting ks from (27) into (28), we have

k pt3 − n1 p + t1 + t2 + ( js − 1)(w − 1)t3 = n2 p ⇒ t1 + t2 + (( js −1)(w − 1) + k p)t3 = (n2 + n1) p ⇒ mod(t1 + t2 + (( js − 1)(w − 1) + k p)t3, p) = 0. (29)

This implies that ( js, k p) does not satisfy (18). This establishes that a necessary condition for ( js, k p) to satisfy (18) is that (k p − ks)t3 = np for some integer n.
We know that 0 < |k p − ks| ≤ w − 1 and 0 < |t3| ≤ c/ p − 1. Thus, 0 < |(k p − ks)t3| ≤ (w − 1)(c/ p − 1). Since (w −1)(c/ p −1) < p, we can easily see that (k p −ks)t3 = np. Thus, the necessary condition is not satisfied, and ( js, k p) will not satisfy (18).
This proves that only ( js, ks) satisfies both (18) and (19). Thus, the position of ones in the layers l1 and l2 is the same only for ( js, ks). This proves that the dot product of any two layers l1 and l2 in two different block rows is at most 1.
Since the dot product of layers l1 and l2 is at most 1 for both Case 1 and Case 2, we conclude that the dot product of any combination of layers l1 and l2 is at most 1 for the paritycheck tensor H2-D for the code we constructed. This proves that the code constructed in Section II-C by tiling c × h × w permutation tensors along i, j, k, with shifts given in (6), has no short cycles of length 4 if (h − 1)(c/ p − 1) < p and (w − 1)(c/ p − 1) < p.
For example, the code that we constructed with parameters h = 3, w = 3, c = 64, and p = 16 and shifts given in (6) is devoid of short cycles of length 4 since (h − 1)(c/ p − 1) < p and (w − 1)(c/ p − 1) < p.
F. Construction With Random I -Shifts
In the code constructed in Section II-C, the column weight contributed by any block row is uniformly 1. From (6), we observe that, for a particular ( j, k), the I -shifts remain the same for all p tiles in a particular block row. We observe that taking random values of I -shifts, such that, for a particular ( j, k), the I -shifts remain the same over all p tiles in a block row, does not affect the column weight of the entire code. This is because the I -shifts only change the relative positions of the horizontal slices in the permutation tensors, which does not change the column weight. Such a code constructed by using the same J -shifts as in (6) and random I -shifts gives better performance than the code constructed in Section II-C, given that the random I -shifts are sampled such that there are no short cycles of length 4. The p × p burst erasure correction capability of the code is ensured by the top block row, as proved in Theorem 1. Thus, guaranteed burst erasure correction capability of p × p for the code constructed with random shifts can be ensured by keeping the I -shifts in the top block row the same as in (6).
III. DECODING ALGORITHM AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we will describe the decoding algorithm that we used for the 2-D LDPC code that we designed, followed by its performance evaluation using simulations. Though the SPA [8] gives the best performance, it is computationally intensive due to complex logarithmic components at the check node unit (CNU), and thus, it is not suitable for hardware implementations. Parallel routing network and layered scheduling of SPA-based 1-D LDPC decoders using

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONDAL AND SRINIVASA GARANI: EFFICIENT PARALLEL DECODING ARCHITECTURE

3101516

lookup tables for check node processing were studied in [24] and [25], respectively. The MSA [9] is a simplified version of the SPA, which replaces the complex operations at the CNU with comparators, thus making it a good choice for hardware implementations.
The constructed code can be divided into block rows and block columns. The block rows have a uniform column weight of 1 each, while the block columns have a uniform row weight of 1 each. Parallel processing of both the block rows and block columns is area intensive, while processing both the block rows and block columns serially leads to lower throughput. The NL-MSA algorithm [10] is a good choice for applications that require high throughput since the block rows are processed in parallel, unlike layered MSA. It should be noted, however, that, though the layered min-sum provides lesser throughput, it provides slightly better performance than NL-MSA. We use the NL-MSA for designing hardware architectures for 2-D LDPC codes in this article.
The reader should note that one can design irregular LDPC codes with constraints on minimum column weight, through density evolution techniques. However, such irregular codes lack the block row/column structure possessed by regular codes. Decoders based on such irregular codes are not hardware-friendly and incur more area overhead due to difficulty in serial processing. Also, since the check node degrees are not fixed for irregular codes, the design is not efficient, with the latency being determined by the check node with maximum degree. For the above reasons, we have considered regular LDPC codes in this article.
A. Non-Layered Min-Sum Algorithm
Let us consider a Tanner graph obtained from a paritycheck matrix H . The parity-check matrix consists of m check nodes (C1, C2, C3, . . . , Cm) and n variable nodes (V1, V2, V3, . . . , Vn). Each row in H represents a check node, while each column represents a variable node. To form the Tanner graph, we connect a certain check node to a variable node if the respective entry in H is a 1. The MSA proceeds according to the following steps.
Step 1 (Initial Variable Node to Check Node Pass): The decoding process starts with the variable nodes receiving the input soft information, i.e., log-likelihood ratios (LLRs). The variable nodes direct these LLRs to the respective check nodes they are connected to.
Step 2 (Check Node to Variable Node Pass): For a particular variable node V j that it is connected to, the check node Ci finds the minimum of absolute values of all the messages it receives from the other variable nodes that it is connected to ({V1, V2, V3, . . . , Vn}\V j ) and directs this value to the variable node V j so that modulo-2 sum is satisfied.
Step 3 (Variable Node to Check Node Pass): For a particular check node Ci that it is connected to, the variable node V j finds the sum of all the messages that it receives from the other check nodes that it is connected to ({C1, C2, C3, . . . , Cn}\Ci ), along with the initial soft information available at Vj and directs the result to the check node Ci .

Step 4 (Computation of Hard Decision and Syndrome Check): Each variable node Vi sums the messages that it receives from the various check nodes that it is connected to along with the initial self-information. If the result is positive, the hard decision at the particular variable node is 0, and if the result is negative, the hard decision is 1. This results in a binary string c. The syndrome is calculated according to the equation s = H cT .
If the syndrome is satisfied, processing of new input LLRs for the next frame proceeds starting with Step 1; else, the next iteration starts with Step 2. The process continues till the code has been corrected or a stopping criterion is met in terms of a maximum allowable number of iterations.
B. Parity-Check Tensor for 2-D LDPC as an Equivalent Parity-Check Matrix
The parity-check tensor for the 2-D LDPC code is constructed in Section II-C by stacking c × h × w permutation tensors of size p× p× p along i, j, k-directions using the shifts in (6). The parity-check tensor H2-D has size cp × hp × wp. Each horizontal layer of H2-D is orthogonal to the code space and, thus, represents a single parity-check equation. Since the dimensions of the code are hp × wp, we have hp × wp variable nodes. Thus, H2-D can be represented using a Tanner graph with cp check nodes and hp × wp variable nodes. The equivalent parity-check matrix H1-D can be obtained by taking wp vertical slices of H2-D and stacking them side by side, as shown in Fig. 3(a). The size of the parity-check matrix H1-D is cp × hwp2.
The NL-MSA can proceed as described in Section III-A with the equivalent H1-D. It is important to note that the Tanner graph representations of both H2-D and H1-D are the same, and thus, they offer the same performance. The 2-D LDPC code can be rastered in 1-D by taking wp strips and arranging them adjacent to each other, as shown in Fig. 3(b).
C. Code Failure Analysis
It has been observed that, after data-dependent noise prediction (DDNP) and inter-symbol interference (ISI) detection, the overall read channel in magnetic storage is equivalent to the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [26]. Thus, the performance of a coded system can be evaluated by emulating it over an AWGN channel.
First, we compare the performance of the 2-D LDPC code with a 1-D LDPC code using Gaussian distributed random errors and also in the presence of 2-D burst erasures. The parameters of the codes that we used are given as follows.
1) 1-D LDPC Code: We used a 1-D array-type QC-LDPC code of length 32 768 with the following parameters: wc = 7, wr = 16, and code rate = 0.5625. The paritycheck matrix has dimensions 14 336 × 32 768, formed using permutation matrices with p = 2048. Another 1-D QC-LDPC code with the above parameters was designed using random shifts for the permutation matrices while ensuring that the girth is greater than 4.
2) 2-D LDPC Code: The 2-D LDPC code of size 180 × 180 was generated according to the proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 57, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2021

Fig. 3. (a) 2-D parity-check tensor represented as an equivalent 1-D paritycheck matrix. Each vertical layer is arranged side by side to convert the tensor to a matrix. (b) 2-D LDPC code rastered in 1-D form. Each strip is arranged adjacent to one another to obtain an equivalent 1-D code.
Fig. 4. CFR versus SNR in dB for 2-D LDPC code, 1-D array-type LDPC code, 2-D LDPC code with random I -shifts, and 1-D QC-LDPC code with random shifts. For the random error correction, random errors with a Gaussian distribution were introduced by the channel. To assess burst erasure correction performance, a burst erasure was introduced at a random position along with Gaussian distributed random errors.
code construction in Section II-C, with shifts given by (6). The parameters are p = 45, c = 315, h = 4, and w = 4. The parity-check tensor has dimensions 14 175 × 180 × 180 and has the following parameters: wc = 7, wr = 16, and code rate = 0.5625. The CFR performances of the above codes were evaluated through Monte Carlo simulations at various signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs), as shown in Fig. 4. The maximum iteration limit was set to 5. From the random error correction performance curves, we observe that the SNR performance of the 2-D LDPC code is ∼0.7 dB better than its counterpart 1-D arraytype LDPC code at a CFR of 10−3, and the drop per dB in the waterfall region for the 2-D LDPC code is also significantly steeper. However, a 1-D QC-LDPC code with random shifts

for permutation matrices performs ∼0.25 dB better than the proposed 2-D LDPC code. From Fig. 4, we also observe that a 2-D LDPC code constructed using random I -shifts, as discussed in Section II-F, has almost the same performance as the 1-D QC-LDPC code with random shifts. The random I -shifts were sampled in such a way that there were no short cycles of length 4.
For the burst erasure correction analysis of the 2-D LDPC code, we introduced a 45 × 45 burst erasure at a random position along with Gaussian distributed random errors. We observe a ∼1 dB SNR performance degradation at a CFR of 10−3 in the presence of the 45×45 burst erasure. For the 1-D array-type LDPC code, we rastered it into a 181 × 182 array and padded extra bits to match dimensions. We introduced a 45 × 45 burst erasure at a random position along with Gaussian distributed random errors. At the decoder, the 2-D array is unfolded into 1-D, and the extra padded bits are removed. We observed an SNR performance degradation of ∼2 dB at CFR of 10−3 compared to the performance without burst erasure. The drop per dB in the waterfall region is also significantly worse in the presence of the 45×45 burst erasure. This is because the 1-D LDPC code is not suitable for handling a 2-D burst erasure since the 2-D burst erasure on the rastered 1-D LDPC codes is equivalent to numerous noncontiguous smaller 1-D burst erasures, which the 1-D array-type LDPC code construction is not built to handle. In the presence of a 37 × 37 burst erasure, there was a ∼1 dB SNR performance degradation at a CFR of 10−3.
In Section IV, we will present the hardware architecture of a fully flexible decoder for the 2-D code construction that we proposed in Section II-C. However, for the implementation of the decoder on an FPGA kit, we used a smaller code due to the resource limitations of the FPGA that we used. The code that we used for implementation has the following parameters.
1) p = 16, c = 64, h = 3, and w = 3. 2) Code dimensions are hp × wp = 48 × 48, and parity-
check tensor dimensions are cp × hp × wp = 1024 × 48 × 48. The equivalent 1-D parity-check matrix has dimensions 1024 × 2304. 3) Row weight: wr = 9 and column weight: wc = 4. We used Monte Carlo simulations to evaluate the CFR performance at various SNRs. The maximum iteration limit was set to 5. The error correction performances in CFR versus SNR in dB for unquantized, 5-bit quantized, and 6-bit quantized LLRs have been shown in Fig. 5. For this particular simulation, Gaussian distributed random errors were introduced by the channel. It was observed that the 5- and 6-bit quantized decoders provided a reasonably small SNR performance degradation of ∼0.4 and ∼0.15 dB, respectively, over the unquantized decoder. It was also observed that using normalized MSA [27] with a normalization factor of 0.65 provided only a small improvement of ∼0.1 dB over the 5-bit quantized decoder. The burst erasure correction performance in CFR versus SNR in dB of the 2-D LDPC code is shown in Fig. 6. For this particular simulation, Gaussian distributed random errors were introduced by the channel along with a 16 × 16 burst at a random starting position. A performance loss of about 1.5 dB was observed due to the presence of the 16 × 16

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONDAL AND SRINIVASA GARANI: EFFICIENT PARALLEL DECODING ARCHITECTURE

3101516

Fig. 7. Indexing of variable nodes in a 2-D LDPC code with p = 4, c = 16, h = 3, and w = 3. There are hw = 9 block columns with p2 = 16
variable nodes in each block column. Each check node is connected to exactly
one variable node in each block column.

Fig. 5. CFR versus SNR in dB for unquantized, 6-bit quantized, and 5-bit quantized 2-D LDPC codes. Random errors with a Gaussian distribution were introduced by the channel.

new shifts. First, we shall discuss the indexing of the variable node messages and routing of the messages between the check nodes and variable nodes achieved using barrel shifters. Thereafter, we will present block-level schematics of the design architecture and the sub-units.

Fig. 6. CFR versus SNR in dB for unquantized, 6-bit quantized, and 5-bit quantized 2-D LDPC codes. Random errors with a Gaussian distribution were introduced by the channel along with a 16 × 16 burst at a random starting position.
burst, as can be clearly observed from Figs. 5 and 6. It was observed that the 5- and 6-bit quantized decoders provided a reasonably small SNR performance degradation of ∼0.35 and ∼0.15 dB, respectively, over the unquantized decoder.
IV. DESIGN ARCHITECTURE
In this section, we shall discuss the hardware architectural details of the 2-D LDPC decoder. In [24] and [25], the CNUs process the incoming LLRs in parallel using look-up tables. However, to reduce hardware complexity, we process the block columns in a serial fashion such that each check node receives one message in a particular clock cycle. This requires a set of barrel shifters for the routing of the messages between the check nodes and variable nodes. Such scheduling also allows flexibility of the design architecture such that a different code having different shifts for the permutation tensors can be achieved by a simple re-synthesis of the RTL with the

A. Routing of Messages Between Variable Nodes and Check
Nodes
Our aim was to design a 2-D NL-MSA LDPC decoder that processes the block rows in parallel and block columns serially. The constructed code has a row weight wr = hw and column weight wc = c/ p. We have a total of c/ p block rows, each contributing to a column weight of 1. We also have a total of hw block columns, each contributing to a row weight of 1. One of the primary challenges in the design of the decoder was formulating a procedure to store the variable node messages in RAMs and achieve appropriate forward and reverse routing between the check nodes and variable nodes through barrel shifters.
1) Example Illustration of Routing Between Check Nodes
and Variable Nodes: We will explain the routing using an example code for ease of understanding but the process remains the same for different code parameters p, c, w, and h. This example 2-D LDPC code is defined by parameters p = 4, c = 16, h = 3, and w = 3. This produces a 2-D LDPC code of size hp × wp = 12 × 12 with a parity-check tensor H2-D of dimensions cp × hp × wp = 64 × 12 × 12. The equivalent parity-check matrix H1-D has dimensions cp × hwp2 = 64 × 144. The I -shits and J -shifts are given by the powers of Q and P according to (6).
In Fig. 7, indexing of variable nodes for our example 2-D LDPC code is shown. There are hw = 9 block columns, with p2 = 16 variable nodes in each block column, as shown in Fig. 7. It is important to note that each check node is connected to exactly one variable node in each block column. Due to this, each variable node in a block column can be processed in parallel. This requires a total of p2 = 16 number of VNUs that are reused over hw = 9 clock cycles in serial to process hwp2 = 144 variable nodes. Each check node is connected to hw = 9 variable nodes. Since the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 57, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2021

Fig. 8. (a) Variable node message indices before applying any shift. There are nine block columns [( j, k) = (1, 1) to ( j, k) = (3, 3)]. (b) Variable node
message indices after applying J -shifts. J -shifts result in left circular shifts of individual rows in a particular block column, determined by the powers of P(T ) shown in left. (c) Variable node message indices after applying I -shifts. I -shifts result in up circular shifts of the individual columns in a particular block column, determined by the powers of Q(T ) shown at the bottom. (d) Indices of check nodes in the second block row.

block columns are processed serially, we need proper routing between the check nodes and variable nodes every clock cycle. This facilitates the connection of check nodes with the appropriate variable nodes for each block column, as given in H2-D. The routing from variable nodes to check nodes is called the forward routing, while the routing from the check nodes to variable nodes is known as the reverse routing. In Fig. 7, we observe the following.
1) A J -shift (P(T )) results in a left circular shift of the rows within a block column.
2) An I -shift (Q(T )) results in an up circular shift of the columns within a block column.
We illustrate this using our example 2-D LDPC code in Fig. 8, which shows the forward routing for the second block row. The indices of the variable node messages before applying any shift are shown in Fig. 8(a). Variable node message indices after applying J -shifts are shown in Fig. 8(b). J -shifts are left circular shifts on each row within a particular block column. The magnitudes of these shifts, given by (6), are shown in left in Fig. 8(b). Next, I -shifts are applied to produce the variable node message indices, as shown in Fig. 8(c). I -shifts are up circular shifts on each column within a particular block column. Since the magnitude of I -shifts in a block column remains the same due to our choice of shifts in (6), the up circular shift of individual columns translates to the complete block column being up circular shifted.

The check node indices for any block column of the second block row are shown in Fig. 8(d). Using Fig. 8(c) and (d), we can observe the connections between the check nodes and variable nodes in the second block row. This can be done by placing the check node indices in Fig. 8(d) on Fig. 8(c) for different block columns given by 1 ≤ j, k ≤ 3. For example, in the third block column ( j = 3, k = 1), the indices of check nodes connected to variable nodes are (17, 18, 19, 20, 21, . . .)→(34, 47, 12, 21, 35, . . .). We also observe the indices of variable nodes connected to a particular check node. For example, in the second block row, the 17th check node is connected to (2, 44, 34, 51, 89, 83, 100, 138, 132)th variable nodes.
2) Illustration of Routing Achieved Through P-Barrel and Q-Barrel Shifters: The way that the J -shifts and I -shifts affect the variable node indices in Fig. 8 gives us an idea of how to achieve the shifts using barrel shifters. Since each check node is connected to exactly one variable node in a particular block column, we can store the initial variable node messages in an RAM, as shown in Fig. 9(a). Comparing it with Fig. 8(a), we observe that the variable node messages in a particular block column are stored in parallel along the width of an RAM, while variable node messages for different block columns are stored serially along with the depth of the RAM. This requires an RAM of width p2 ×b = 16 ×b, where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONDAL AND SRINIVASA GARANI: EFFICIENT PARALLEL DECODING ARCHITECTURE

3101516

Fig. 9. (a) Indices of variable node messages stored in an RAM of width p2b = 16 × b and depth hw = 9. (b) J -shifts for c × h × w permutation tensors stacked to form the parity-check tensor. (c) Indices of variable node messages after applying J -shifts through P-barrel shifters. (d) I -shifts for c × h × w permutation tensors stacked to form the parity-check tensor. (e) Indices of variable node messages after applying I -shifts through Q-barrel shifters. (f) Indices
of variable nodes connected to check nodes in the second block row of the parity-check tensor.

b is the number of quantized bits used for each variable node message. The depth of the RAM is hw = 9.
We use two sets of barrel shifters to produce the forward routing from the variable nodes to check nodes. We show the forward routing for the example of 2-D LDPC code with parameters p = 4, c = 16, h = 3, and w = 3 and shifts given by (6) in Fig. 9. We illustrate the process for the second block row. J -shifts are produced by P-barrel shifters. The p2 parallel variable node messages are connected to p number of P-barrel shifters, with p inputs each. The P-barrel shifter produces an up circular shift equal to the amount of J -shift for the second block row, as given in Fig. 9(b). The indices of variable node messages after applying J -shifts through P-barrel shifters are shown in Fig. 9(c). I -shifts are produced by Q-barrel shifters. The p2 outputs of the p number of P-barrel shifters are connected to a Q-barrel shifter. An up circular shift of a block column in Fig. 8(c) translates to a down circular shift of amount s × p produced by a Q-barrel shifter if the corresponding entry for a certain block column in Fig. 9(d) is s. Thus, the Q-barrel shifter has p2 inputs and produces shifts in multiples of p. The indices of variable node messages after applying I -shifts through the Q-barrel shifter are shown in Fig. 9(e).

Fig. 9(f) shows the indices of the variable nodes connected to the p2 = 16 check nodes in the second block row of the parity-check tensor H2-D. Comparing Fig. 9(e) and (f), we observe that the check nodes in Fig. 9(e) have exactly the same connections to the variable nodes, as shown in Fig. 9(f). Thus, the arrangement of the barrel shifters produces the appropriate forward routing.
The reverse routing from the check nodes to the variable nodes in a particular block row can be obtained by using a Q-barrel shifter followed by p number of P-barrel shifters. The I -shifts and J -shifts for the reverse routing Q-barrel shifters and P-barrel shifters are the inverse of the shifts mentioned in Figs. 9(d) and (b).
B. Hardware Architecture
In Section IV-A, we explained how the variable node messages are indexed in an RAM to provide appropriate amounts of J -shifts and I -shifts for forward and reverse routing through a set of P-barrel and Q-barrel shifters. In this section, we will discuss the hardware architecture of the proposed NL-MSA decoder for the 2-D LDPC code that we constructed in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 57, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2021

Fig. 10. Overall architecture of the 2-D NL-MSA LDPC decoder. The block rows are processed in parallel, and block columns are processed serially. The MUX-es choose either the new frame stored in RAM or the VNU outputs for the next iteration. A set of P-barrel shifters and Q-barrel shifters produce the required forward and reverse shifts. The CNU and VNU emulate the operations at the check node and variable nodes in the Tanner graph, respectively. The S2C and C2S units provide the required conversions from signed magnitude to 2’s complement and vice versa. Control signals are produced based on the output of a counter.

Section II-C. Our architecture is scalable for various code specifications (parallelism, row weight, column weight, and so on) through a re-synthesis of the RTL.
The top-level architecture of the decoder is shown in Fig. 10. The architecture consists of basic blocks, such as the CNU, variable node unit (VNU), P-barrel shifters, Q-barrel shifters, signed to 2’s complement converter (S2C), 2’s complement to signed converter (C2S), syndrome check unit (SCU), MUX-es, and blocks RAMs to store the initial and intermediate variable node messages. We observe in Fig. 10 that the wc block rows are processed in parallel, and the wr block columns are processed serially. The incoming messages (LLRs) are stored in an RAM of depth wr × f , where f is the number of frames stored. The width of the RAM is p2 × b, where b is the bit precision. The indexing of the incoming messages in the RAM has already been discussed in Section IV-A. The output of the RAM is fed to wc parallel MUX-es. The signal “newfrm” is used for the initialization of the new frame. Depending upon the value of “newfrm,” the output of the MUX is either the new frame or the output of the VNUs for the next iteration. Next, we have a set of P-barrel shifters and Q-barrel shifters to provide the forward routing of messages to the CNUs. The output of the CNUs is passed through another set of barrel shifters to provide the reverse routing. The forward and reverse routings achieved using P-barrel shifters and Q-barrel shifters have been described in detail in Section IV-A.

Since the CNU consists of magnitude comparators, the incoming messages to the CNU are stored in signedmagnitude representation to reduce complexity. The VNUs consist of adders and subtractors. Since it is simpler to perform these operations in 2’s complement form, we use S2C units to convert the input to the VNUs to 2’s complement form before the VNU operation starts. It should be noted here that the initial incoming LLRs are stored in an RAM after conversion to 2’s complement since the VNU requires the initial LLRs in addition to the CNU messages. After the VNU operation is complete, the outputs of the VNUs are re-converted to signed-magnitude representation using C2S units. The VNUs produce the hard decision outputs over wr clock cycles that are used to evaluate the syndrome using the SCU. Meanwhile, the outputs of the VNUs for the next iteration are stored in wc RAMs, each of width p2 × b and depth wr . If the syndrome is satisfied or the stopping criterion is reached, the “newfrm” signal becomes “1,” and the new frame is processed; else, the next iteration starts with the output of the VNUs stored in RAM being fed to the P-barrel shifters. The process continues till all the frames are processed. Next, we shall discuss the sub-units in detail.
1) Check Node Unit: The architecture of the CNU shown in Fig. 11 has a similar structure to the architectures used in [10] and [28]. The CNU emulates the check node operation in the Tanner graph. It consists of a minimum value N1(p)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONDAL AND SRINIVASA GARANI: EFFICIENT PARALLEL DECODING ARCHITECTURE

3101516

Fig. 11. CNU consists of comparators to find the minimum and second minimum values, a partial state that stores them temporarily, a sign processing unit that stores the signs of incoming messages and the cumulative sign, and an R-selector that produces the check node messages depending upon the final state, the index of minimum value, and the sign processing unit [10], [28].

Fig. 12. VNU consists of an adder block that finds the partial sum of all incoming messages along with the initial information available at the variable node. A subtractor subtracts the message received from a particular check node to produce the variable node message to that check node.

and a second minimum value temporarily stores N1(p) and

NN22((pp))

finder, a partial state that and updates them every

clock cycle depending upon the incoming messages to the

check node. During the partial state processing, at any given

clock cycle, two comparators compare the incoming message btNNho1ia(tpnhw).iNNtIh2f1((pptN))h,1(eatphn)medaavnNgadn2l(upiNt)eu,2(dopwef).eoNIuff1(pptNhd) eiarteiemms aNaggi1r(nnepsia)ttuuewdnriectthhhoaafNnngNi eNiad1n(i,spda)lneNbdsu2s(tpeN)rl2(ewtpsh)siaetihnsr updated with Ni . If the magnitude of Ni is greater or equal to N2(p), N1(p) and N2(p) remain unchanged. At the end of wr clock cycles, the partial state stores the final magnitudes of

the minimum and second minimum values. Thus, we update the final state as N1( f ) = N1( p) and N2( f ) = N2( p).
Meanwhile, the sign processing unit stores the signs of

the incoming variable node messages during the partial state

processing, and also the cumulative sign by taking XORs of

the signs of the incoming messages. It also stores the index of the minimum value N1(index) among the incoming messages. After the final state has been updated, the CNU starts R-select

processing to produce check node messages. The R-selector

uses an N1(index).

MUX to choose either N1( f ) or N2( The sign of the output message

f)
is

depending upon also chosen by

the MUX depending on signs stored in a Qsign memory and

the cumulative signs of incoming messages. The R-selector

produces wr check node messages over wr clock cycles.

2) Variable Node Unit: The architecture of the VNU shown

in Fig. 12 has a similar structure to the architecture used

in [10]. The VNU emulates the computations at the variable

node of the Tanner graph. It has an adder block that adds

all the incoming check node messages along with the initial

information available at the particular variable node. The hard

decision is computed based on the sign of the result. The

variable node message to a particular check node is computed

by subtracting the message received from that check node

from the partial sum at the output of the adder block. Since

each variable node is connected to wc check nodes, each VNU produces wc variable node messages.

Fig. (20,

13. 21, 22

,

P-barrel . . . , 2s−1

has log2( p) stages that ) depending on the value

produce up of “shift.”

circular

shifts

of

3) P-Barrel Shifter: The architecture of the P-barrel shifter is shown in Fig. 13, which consists of s = log2( p) stages, capable of producing up circular shifts of (20, 21, 22, . . . , 2s−1), respectively. Each stage consists of p MUX-es in parallel. The value of up circular shift is stored in
a register “shift,” which is a s-bit signal. For a particular stage
i , if the value of “shift(i)” is 1, the stage produces a shift of 2i−1; else, it produces zero shift. Thus, the P-barrel shifter can produce any shift in the range (0, 1, 2, 3, . . . , p − 1).
4) Q-Barrel Shifter: The architecture of the Q-barrel shifter is shown in Fig. 14, which consists of s = log2( p) stages, capable of producing down circular shifts of (2s+0, 2s+1, 2s+2, . . . , 22s−1), respectively. Each stage consists of p2 MUX-es in parallel. The value of down circular shift
is stored in a register “shift,” which is a s-bit signal. For a
particular stage i , if the value of “shift(i)” is 1, the stage produces a shift of 2s+i−1; else, it produces zero shift.
Thus, the Q-barrel shifter can produce any shift in the range (0, p, 2 p, 3 p, . . . , p2 − p).
5) Block RAMs for Storing Intermediate Variable Node
Messages: We used the IP-core directory of Xilinx ISE to produce dual-port RAMs of width p2 × b and depth wr . We need wc such RAMs to store the intermediate variable node messages to be used for the next iteration. We also need

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 57, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2021

Fig. 14. Q-barrel (2s+0, 2s+1, 2s+2, . .

h. ,as22lso−g12)(

p) stages depending

that on

produce the value

down circular of “shift.”

shifts

of

an RAM of width p2 × b and depth wr to store the initial channel LLRs since they are required for the VNUs.
6) Syndrome Check Unit (SCU): The architecture of the SCU shown in Fig. 15 evaluates the syndrome to check whether the frame has been corrected. Evaluating the syndrome is equivalent to checking if the hard decision output of the VNUs satisfies all the c × p parity-check equations. This is achieved by passing the hard-decision variable node outputs to a set of 1-bit P-barrel shifters followed by 1-bit Q-barrel shifters to provide the forward routing. wc parallel instances of the above architecture need to be replicated for the wc block rows. Each output of the Q-barrel shifter is XOR-ed with itself every clock cycle, which translates to evaluating the parity-check equations. At the end of wr clock cycles, all the outputs are passed through a NOR-array. Thus, if all the inputs of the NOR array are zeros, i.e., if all the parity-check equations are satisfied, the output of the syndrome check unit is 1. This output is used as the select signal “newfrm” for the MUX-es in Fig. 10.
V. DESIGN IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
We implemented a 2-D LDPC decoder targeting a Kintex-7 KC-705 FPGA kit using Xilinx ISE software. The decoder was designed for a 2-D LDPC code having parameters p = 16, c = 64, h = 3, and w = 3 and the shifts given by (6). This produces a 2-D LDPC code with a parity-check tensor H2-D having dimensions 1024 × 48 × 48. The column weight of the code is wc = 4, and the row weight of the code is wr = 9. Thus, there are four block rows that are processed in parallel and nine block columns that are processed serially. Though we used this specific code to build the FPGA prototype, our design architecture is scalable for different values of p, c, h, and w, allowing different choices for code length, row weight, and column weight. We used a bit precision of 5 for the LLRs since there was only a small performance degradation of about 0.4 dB w.r.t. the unquantized decoder. Since the normalized MSA [27] provided only a small improvement of ∼0.1 dB over the 5-bit quantized decoder, we did not use a normalization factor in our implementation. However, the architecture is flexible, where a normalization/offset can be implemented as a simple lookup table at the output of each CNU.

The incoming message LLRs are quantized to 5 bits and stored in an RAM, which was implemented using the IP-core directory in Xilinx ISE. f numbers of frames are stored at a certain SNR. Thus, the RAM has a width p2 ×b = 1280 and a depth of f ×wr = 9 f . Each frame is stored in form of wr = 9 block columns according to the indexing shown in Fig. 9(a). When the “newfrm” signal is 1, each frame is loaded and fed to the decoder for a maximum of 5 iterations. If a frame is corrected within the five iterations, a register “framecount” is incremented by 1. When all the f frames have been processed, “framecount” indicates the total number of frames out of f , which were corrected using the implemented decoder, toward determining the CFR.
The control logic block produces 1-bit control signals, such as “loadps” (loads the partial state), “loadfs” (loads the final state), and “loadrs” (starts the R-select processing) based on the values of a counter. The read and write address registers of the various block RAMs also depend on the value of the counter. The CNU takes wr = 9 clock cycles for the partial state processing, 1 clock cycle for the final state, and wr = 9 clock cycles for the R-select processing. Most of the other units, namely, the MUXes, P-barrel shifters, Q-barrel shifters, VNUs, S2Cs, and C2Ss, have a latency of one clock cycle each. The SCU has a latency of four clock cycles since two clock cycles are required for the routing through the 1-bit P-barrel shifters and Q-barrel shifters and another two clock cycles are used to evaluate the syndrome using the XOR array and the NOR array. From Fig. 10, we can observe that each iteration takes 30 clock cycles to be processed. Since each frame takes five iterations in the worst case scenario, each frame will require 30 × 5 = 150 numbers of clock cycles in the worst case. According to the place and route report, the decoder runs without any timing error for a frequency not exceeding 163 MHz. Thus, the worst case symbol throughput can be calculated using the following formula:

Throughputsymbol

=

h × w × p2 × Nclock

fdec

= 3 × 3 × 256 × 163 × 106 150

= 2.503 Gsps.

(30)

Nclock in (30) represents the maximum number of clock cycles required for each frame. The worst case bit throughput can be calculated using the following formula:

Throughputbit = Throughputsymbol × b = 2.503 × 5 = 12.52 Gb/s. (31)

The architecture was synthesized, placed, and routed targeting a Kintex-7 KC-705 FPGA kit. The outputs were compared with software simulation outputs, and a one-to-one match was found, thereby validating the correctness of the outputs.
The resource utilization of the proposed decoder2 was compared with a 4096-code-length 1-D LDPC decoder based on NL-MSA [10], as shown in Table I. The proposed decoder requires a lesser number of LUTs and registers than [10],

2We are not aware of any hardware implementation of a decoder based on native 2-D LDPC codes in the literature.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MONDAL AND SRINIVASA GARANI: EFFICIENT PARALLEL DECODING ARCHITECTURE

3101516

Fig. 15. SCU has wc parallel sets of P-barrel shifters followed by Q-barrel shifters to evaluate all the c × p parity-check equations. If all the parity-check equations are satisfied, the output is 1, and we say that the syndrome is satisfied.

TABLE I KINTEX-7 KC-705 RESOURCE UTILIZATION SUMMARY

LDPC code in [10] has a different code length and rate than the proposed 2-D LDPC code, for a fair comparison, we consider the total number of information symbols produced by the two decoders.

but it requires 7.2 kB of BRAM message memory for storing intermediate variable node messages, unlike [10], where intermediate messages were stored in registers. The proposed architecture has a lower worst case latency of 150 clock cycles compared to 380 clock cycles in [10]. This is due to the fact that the number of block columns is lesser in the proposed design. The primary advantage of the proposed 2-D LDPC decoder is its inherent 2-D burst erasure correction capability, unlike the 1-D LDPC decoder in [10], which could be used for decoding rastered 1D codewords over a 2-D array. Since 1-D

A. Comparison Between 1-D LDPC Decoder and 2-D LDPC Decoder Producing Approximately Equal Number of Information Symbols
The proposed 2-D LDPC decoder has a rate of 5/9, producing 2304 × 5/9 = 1280 information symbols. The 1-D LDPC decoder in [10] produces 4096 × 29/32 = 3712 information symbols. Thus, to produce approximately the same number of information symbols, the 2-D LDPC decoder has to be replicated three times in parallel. The equivalent throughput of the 2-D LDPC decoder (consisting of three parallel 2-D LDPC decoders), which produces 1280 × 3 = 3840 information symbols, would be 12.52 × 3 = 37.56 Gb/s. However, that would require three times the area of a single 2-D LDPC decoder, which would be approximately 298 902 LUTs, 310 965 registers, and 21.6 kB of BRAM message memory.
VI. CONCLUSION
Native 2-D LDPC codes are useful for 2-D storage channels due to their inherent ability to correct burst erasures in 2-D. Thus, building efficient hardware architectures for 2-D LDPC codes is important for realizing these on actual storage channels. We proposed a new construction for 2-D LDPC code of size hp × wp, which is devoid of short cycles of length 4

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 57, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2021

for carefully chosen code parameters and has a burst erasure correction capability of at least p × p. We proposed hardware architectures for our 2-D LDPC code construction, and for a particular case of p = 16, c = 64, h = 3, and w = 3, we implemented the proposed architecture on a Kintex-7 KC-705 FPGA kit, achieving a significantly high worst case throughput of 12.52 Gb/s at a frequency of 163 MHz. The architecture is scalable for different code dimensions based on the parameters p, c, h, and w through re-synthesis of the RTL.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology, Government of India, under Grant MITO0101. The authors would like to thank Dr. Chaitanya Kumar Matcha for valuable discussions on the native 2-D low-density parity-check (LDPC) code construction.
REFERENCES
[1] B. Vasic and M. E. Kurtas, Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2004.
[2] R. Wood, R. Galbraith, and J. Coker, “2-D magnetic recording: Progress and evolution,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1–7, Apr. 2015.
[3] Y. Kim et al., “Three-dimensional NAND flash architecture design based on single-crystalline stacked array,” IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 35–45, Jan. 2012.
[4] H. J. Richter et al., “Recording on bit-patterned media at densities of 1 Tb/in2 and beyond,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2255–2260, Oct. 2006.
[5] S. S. Garani, L. Dolecek, J. Barry, F. Sala, and B. Vasic, “Signal processing and coding techniques for 2-D magnetic recording: An overview,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 106, no. 2, pp. 286–318, Feb. 2018.
[6] Y. Chen and S. G. Srinivasa, “Joint self-iterating equalization and detection for two-dimensional intersymbol-interference channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 3219–3230, Aug. 2013.
[7] S. G. Srinivasa, O. Momtahan, A. Karbaschi, S. W. McLaughlin, F. Fekri, and A. Adibi, “Volumetric storage limits and space-volume multiplexing trade-offs for holographic channels,” Opt. Eng., vol. 49, no. 1, Jan. 2010, Art. no. 015201.
[8] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D. M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2001, p. 1036.
[9] A. Anastasopoulos “A comparison between the sum-product and the min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2001, pp. 1021–1025.
[10] A. Mondal, S. Thatimattala, V. K. Yalamaddi, and S. S. Garani, “Efficient coding architectures for Reed–Solomon and low-density paritycheck decoders for magnetic and other data storage systems,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–15, Feb. 2018.

[11] M. Fossorier, “Universal burst error correction,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2006, pp. 1969–1973.
[12] M. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[13] B. P. Reddy, S. G. Srinivasa, and S. Dahandeh, “Timing recovery algorithms and architectures for 2-D magnetic recording systems,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 51, no. 4, pp. 1–7, Apr. 2015.
[14] C. K. Matcha and S. Garani Srinivasa, “Joint timing recovery and signal detection for two-dimensional magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 1–11, Feb. 2017.
[15] C. K. Matcha and S. Garani Srinivasa, “Defect detection and burst erasure correction for TDMR,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 1–11, Nov. 2016.
[16] C. K. Matcha, S. Roy, M. Bahrami, B. Vasic, and S. G. Srinivasa, “2-D LDPC codes and joint detection and decoding for two-dimensional magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 54, no. 2, pp. 1–11, Feb. 2018.
[17] C. K. Matcha, M. Bahrami, S. Roy, S. G. Srinivasa, and B. Vasic, “Generalized belief propagation based TDMR detector and decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Barcelona, Spain, Jul. 2016, pp. 210–214.
[18] S. Roy and S. G. Srinivasa, “Two dimensional error-correcting codes using finite field Fourier transform,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Jeju, South Korea, Oct. 2015, pp. 119–123.
[19] S. W. Yoon and J. Moon, “Two-dimensional error-pattern-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 8, pp. 2725–2740, Aug. 2015.
[20] H. S. Madhusudhana and M. Siddiqi, “On Blahut’s decoding algorithms for two-dimensional BCH codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 358–367, Jan. 1998.
[21] A. Mondal and S. S. Garani, “Efficient hardware architectures for 2-D BCH codes in the frequency domain for two-dimensional data storage applications,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1–14, May 2021.
[22] A. Mondal and S. S. Garani, “Efficient hardware design architectures for BCH product codes in the frequency domain,” in Proc. IEEE 63rd Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst. (MWSCAS), Springfield, MA, USA, Aug. 2020, pp. 703–706.
[23] H. Kamabe and S. Lu, “Burst erasure correction by 2D LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Waikoloa, HI, USA, Dec. 2019, pp. 1–7.
[24] Q. Lu, Z. Shen, C.-W. Sham, and F. C. M. Lau, “A parallel-routing network for reliability inferences of single-parity-check decoder,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Technol. Commun. (ATC), Oct. 2015, pp. 127–132.
[25] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, W. M. Tam, Y. Zhao, and F. C. M. Lau, “A layered QC-LDPC decoder architecture for high speed communication system,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circuits Syst., Dec. 2012, pp. 475–478.
[26] C. K. Matcha and S. G. Srinivasa, “Generalized partial response equalization and data-dependent noise predictive signal detection over media models for TDMR,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 1–15, Oct. 2015.
[27] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Min-sum decoder architectures with reduced word length for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 105–115, Jan. 2010.
[28] K. K. Gunnam and G. S. Choi, “Low density parity check decoder for regular LDPC codes,” U.S. Patent 8 359 522, Jan. 22, 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:48:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

