2942

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2009

On the Pairwise Error Probability of Linear Programming Decoding on Independent Rayleigh
Flat-Fading Channels
Eirik Rosnes, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we consider the pairwise error prob-

ability (PEP) of a linear programming (LP) decoder for a gen-

eral binary linear code as formulated by Feldman et al. (IEEE

Trans. Inf. Theory, Mar. 2005) on an independent (or memoryless)

H Rayleigh flat-fading channel with coherent detection and perfect
channel state information (CSI) at the receiver. Let be a parity-

H check matrix of a binary linear code and consider LP decoding
based on . The output of the LP decoder is always a pseudocode-

word. We will show that the PEP of decoding to a pseudocodeword

! when the all-zero codeword is transmitted on tioned channel, behaves asymptotically as K(!) 1

the
(Es

=aNb0o)v0ej-m(!e)nj-,

where (!) is the support set of !, i.e., the set of nonzero coordi-

nates, Es=N0 is the average signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and K(!)

is a constant independent of the SNR. Note that the support set
(!) of ! is a stopping set. Thus, the asymptotic decay rate of

the error probability with the average SNR is determined by the

Hsize of the smallest nonempty stopping set in the Tanner graph of
. As an example, we analyze the well-known (155; 64) Tanner

code and present performance curves on the independent Rayleigh

flat-fading channel.

Index Terms—Linear programming decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, pairwise error probability, pseudocodeword, Rayleigh flat-fading channel, stopping set, union bound.

I. INTRODUCTION

D URING the last decade major research efforts have been devoted to the construction and performance analysis of capacity-approaching low-complexity codes, in particular turbo and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1]–[3]. The existence of computationally efficient decoding algorithms for these capacity-approaching codes is the number one reason for their popularity. The performance of many of the most efficient graph-based algorithms, e.g., message-passing algorithms and decoding based on linear programming (LP) is crucially dependent on the existence of an efficient representation of the code in terms of a graphical model. For instance, it is
Manuscript received February 04, 2008; revised August 06, 2008. Current version published June 24, 2009. This work was carried out within NEWCOM and supported in part by Nera Networks AS and in part by the Norwegian Research Council (NFR) by Grants 156712/220, 164803/V30, and 174982. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 2007 IEEE Information Theory Workshop on Information Theory for Wireless Networks, Bergen, Norway, July 2007.
The author is with the Department of Informatics, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, Norway (e-mail: eirik@ii.uib.no).
Communicated by I. Sason, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2009.2021338

well-known that iterative belief-propagation (BP) decoding

of LDPC codes on the binary erasure channel (BEC) can be

characterized exactly in terms of stopping sets [4] in the chosen

Tanner graph representation of the code. Note that a binary

linear code has many different parity-check matrices and hence

many different Tanner graphs [5]. This reflects the property

of message-passing algorithms that both the complexity and

the performance are functions of the structure of the chosen

parity-check matrix for the code.

Feldman et al. [6] recently considered the use of LP to de-

code binary linear codes. The obvious polytope for LP decoding

is the convex hull of all codewords, in which case LP decoding

is equivalent to maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding. However,

the convex hull has a description complexity that is exponential

in the codeword length for a general binary linear code. Thus,

Feldman et al. [6] proposed a relaxed polytope which contains

all valid codewords as vertices, but also additional noncodeword

vertices. The vertices of the relaxed polytope are basically what

the authors called pseudocodewords in [6]. A more precise def-

inition will be given below in Section II-B. One desirable prop-

erty of the LP decoder is the ML certificate property, i.e., when

the LP decoder outputs a codeword, it is guaranteed to be the

ML codeword.

Recently, expressions for the pseudoweight on the BEC,

the binary symmetric channel (BSC), and the additive white

Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel have been derived [7], [8].

The pseudoweight is the equivalent of the Hamming weight on

the BEC and the BSC, and the equivalent of squared Euclidean

distance on the AWGN channel when LP decoding and not ML

decoding is performed. In this paper, we consider the indepen-

dent (or memoryless) Rayleigh flat-fading channel. Our goal is

to identify the equivalent of the pseudoweight for this channel.

The results in this paper apply to LP decoding of both general

concatenated codes, e.g., turbo codes as formulated in [9], and

LDPC codes. For simplicity of notation, we will consider only

LDPC codes.

This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we define

some basic notation, introduce LDPC codes and their finite

graph covers, and describe LP decoding based on a parity-check

matrix. In Section III, the pairwise error probability (PEP) of

LP decoding is analyzed. In particular, we will show that the

PEP of decoding to a pseudocodeword when the all-zero

codeword is transmitted on an independent Rayleigh flat-fading

channel with coherent detection and perfect channel state

information (CSI) at the receiver, behaves asymptotically as

, where

is the support set of

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES: PAIRWISE ERROR PROBABILITY OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

2943

, i.e., the set of nonzero coordinates,

is the average

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), and

is a constant indepen-

dent of the SNR. As an example, we analyze the well-known

Tanner code from [10] and present performance

curves on the independent Rayleigh flat-fading channel in

Section IV. Conclusions and a discussion of future work are

given in Section V.

II. PRELIMINARIES
In this section, we define the channel and establish some basic notation.

A. Independent Rayleigh Flat-Fading Channel
The independent Rayleigh flat-fading channel is a memoryless binary-input continuous-output channel described by
, where is the binary input taken from the set is the AWGN, is the fading coefficient with a Rayleigh distribution, and is the output. Furthermore, and are assumed to be statistically independent of each other, and also statistically independent of .

B. LDPC Codes and Finite Graph Covers

(graph-cover) pseudocodeword [7]. We remark that a different definition of pseudocodewords based on computation trees appeared in [8]. In this work, however, we will use the definition based on finite graph covers. The support set of a pseudocodeword, as defined above, is a stopping set, and for any stopping set there is a pseudocodeword (derived from a codeword in a suitable finite graph cover) with support set equal to the given stopping set [7], [12], [13].

C. LP Decoding Based on the Parity-Check Matrix

Let the indices of the neighboring bit vertices of the th check

vertex in

constitute the set and let

and is even

Define the polytope

and

A binary linear code of length and dimension is a -di- for all

mensional subspace of

. The code can be specified as onto the variables

the null space of a rank

binary parity-check ma-

. Next, define the following projection

trix where

. The Tanner graph

of

and

is a bipartite graph composed of left (bit or variable) and right (check) vertices (or nodes) corresponding to codeword bits and and the polytope

parity-check constraints, respectively. All edges in are incident on a left vertex and a right vertex, and there is an edge

(2)

between the th bit vertex and the th check vertex if and only if the th entry in the th row of is equal to one.
A stopping set is a subset of the codeword positions such that the subgraph of the Tanner graph induced by the corresponding bit vertices has no check nodes of degree one. It is well-known

LP decoding (on a binary-input memoryless channel with coherent detection and perfect CSI at the receiver) of binary linear codes as formulated by Feldman et al. [6], [14] can be described by the linear program

that on the BEC iterative BP decoding is successful if and only if

minimize

subject to

(3)

the set of erased positions does not contain a nonempty stopping

set [4]. Recently, it has been argued that stopping sets also influence the performance of iterative decoding on other binary-input where

memoryless channels [7], [11].

To construct a degree- cover of

, denoted by

, we first make identical copies of

. Any

permutation of the edges of the copies of the Tanner graph

such that any edge with left vertex

and right

vertex

before the permutation, is incident on the left

to one distinct vertex of the copies of , and on the right to

one distinct vertex of the copies of after the permutation,

will give a valid cover of

. The corresponding cover code

is denoted by

and is a function of both and the edge

permutations. Define

is the th component of the nuisance vector, which for a flatfading channel is the th component of the fading vector, is the th codeword bit, and is the th component of the received vector. If instead of we use the convex hull of , then solving the linear program in (3) is equivalent to ML decoding.
The notion of a proper and -symmetric polytope was introduced in [6], [14], where the authors proved that the probability of error of LP decoding is independent of the transmitted codeword on a binary-input output-symmetric memoryless channel

when the underlying code is linear1 and the polytope is proper

(1) and -symmetric. A polytope is proper if

,

and -symmetric if for any

and

it holds that

where a codeword from

. In this notation,

is

, where the notation with a vector argument means

corresponds the component-wise absolute value. The set of points from the

to the th copy of the th bit vertex in the Tanner graph.

Q 1We remark that the way the polytope _ is defined in (2) the code is assumed

Then,

is a to be linear in the setup.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2944

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2009

relaxed polytope , as defined in (2), where all entries are ra- The unconditional PEP

is

tional numbers is equal to the set of all pseudocodewords of all

finite graph covers of the Tanner graph. Furthermore, all vertices

of have rational entries [7].

III. PEP OF LP DECODING

The conditional PEP

of decoding to the pseu-

docodeword when is transmitted (assuming LP decoding

on a binary-input memoryless channel with coherent detection,

nuisance vector , and perfect CSI at the receiver) is

where the expectation is taken with respect to the independent

random variables

. The random variable

, is Rayleigh distributed with probability distribution

if otherwise

(4)

where

denotes the inner product operator. With bi-

nary antipodal signaling (

and

), we get

, where is the

standard deviation of the AWGN and is the th component

of the AWGN. Now, the conditional PEP in (4) evaluates to

where

for some

, where

is the average SNR,

which implies that the random variable

possesses a chi-

square distribution with 2 degrees of freedom. Let the nonzero

coordinates in be denoted by

, where

and

denotes the support set of its argument, i.e., is

nonzero for all

, and these are the only

coordinates with a nonzero component. To simplify notation,

we assume that

. This can be done

without loss of generality, since the channel is memoryless.

Furthermore, we assume, also without loss of generality, that

for all

,

where

, is the number of different values in the

nonzero coordinates in the pseudocodeword and

is a strictly increasing sequence of integers with

and

. Finally, we assume that

is a strictly in-

creasing sequence of positive rational numbers. Then, the un-

conditional PEP can be written as shown at the bottom of

the page, where

. The prob-

ability distribution

of the random variable is

if otherwise

is the Gaussian -function and

is the indicator function

with value if its argument is true and with value , otherwise.

When transmitting the all-zero codeword (which we can assume

without loss of generality, since the polytope in (2) is proper and

-symmetric, and the channel is output-symmetric for a given

nuisance vector ), the conditional PEP

be-

comes

where

is the Gamma-

function. When the argument is a positive integer,

. Now, we can write the unconditional

PEP as follows:

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES: PAIRWISE ERROR PROBABILITY OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

2945

Lemma 1: The unconditional PEP is independent of scaling, i.e., the unconditional PEP will not change if we multiply the pseudocodeword by a constant.
Proof: The result follows immediately from the expression in (5) for the unconditional PEP .

We will now consider an upper bound on the unconditional PEP .
Lemma 2: The unconditional PEP can be upper-bounded by

when

for all

, which is equivalent

to

, since

is a strictly increasing

sequence, where the second equality follows from the in-

tegral formula in (21) in Appendix C and the definition of

the Gamma-function, and the inequality follows from the

fact that

is

increasing in

. As

tends to infinity,

when

is fixed, and the asymptotic result in (6) follows by

using the integral formula in (23) in Appendix C.

where

is a positive real number that can be opti-

mized. Furthermore, as

, where

(6)

Proof: In general,

, where

is some arbitrary

real number, which is equal to the lower bound of Lemma 10

in [15] with

and

for all

. The

proof of this slightly more general result is similar to the proof

of Lemma 10 in [15] and is therefore omitted. Using this lower

bound, the unconditional PEP in (5) can be upper-bounded

by

Lemma 3: The asymptotic upper bound on the unconditional

PEP

from Lemma 2 is independent of scaling when the

constant is chosen in order to minimize the bound, i.e., the

value of the bound will not change if we multiply the pseu-

docodeword by a constant.

Proof: The minimum value of the asymptotic upper bound

on the unconditional PEP

in (6) can occur either at the

boundary, i.e., when

, or at a stationary point with

respect to . Since

tends to infinity when

,

we only need to consider the stationary points. The stationary

point equation for the asymptotic upper bound on the uncondi-

tional PEP

in (6) with respect to is

which evaluates to (7) shown at the bottom of the page. The stationary point equation in (7) can be further simplified to

(8)

This integral simplifies further to

Suppose

is an arbitrary stationary point of

with

respect to , i.e., the partial derivative of

with respect to

evaluates to zero at

. If we multiply the pseudocodeword

by some constant , then

is a stationary point of

. This follows directly from the stationary point equation

in (8), since

(7)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2946

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2009

is equal to zero, since

is a stationary point with the pseu-

docodeword . Thus, under the assumption that is chosen in

order to minimize the asymptotic upper bound on the uncondi-

tional PEP

in (6), the bound in (6) is indeed indepen-

dent of scaling, i.e., the value of the bound will not change if

we multiply the pseudocodeword by a constant, since

with

is equal to

with

.

We remark that the left-hand side of the stationary point equation in (8) is a polynomial of order in , and the minimizing value of is one of the roots of this polynomial. We will now consider a lower bound on the unconditional PEP .

Lemma 4: The unconditional PEP can be lower-bounded by

Furthermore, as (9)

where the second equality follows from the integral formula in

(21) in Appendix C and the definition of the Gamma-function.

As

tends to infinity,

, and

the asymptotic result in (9) follows by using the integral formula

in (23) in Appendix C. Obviously, the asymptotic result in (9)

is independent of scaling, since the right-hand side of (9) is in-

dependent of for all

.

Theorem 1: The unconditional PEP is asymptotically of

the form

, where

is a constant in-

dependent of

.

Proof: Both the asymptotic upper bound (in (6)) and

the asymptotic lower bound (in (9)) on the unconditional

PEP from Lemmas 2 and 4, respectively, are of the form

, where

is a constant independent

of

, from which it follows (using a Taylor series expan-

sion in terms of

) that the unconditional PEP

is indeed asymptotically of the form

,

where

is a constant independent of

.

which is independent of scaling. Proof: The unconditional PEP
bounded by

in (5) can be lower-

It is interesting to note that the constants in front of

in the asymptotic upper and lower bounds from

(6) and (9), respectively, are not equal. Below, we will give a

procedure to compute the exact value of this constant in the

general case of

. The special case of

is considered

in Section III-A. To deal with the general case of

, we

perform a change of variables as follows:

since

...

... ... ... ... ...

...

...

from which it follows that

which follows from the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality. In particular

(10)

where the inequality is the Cauchy-Schwartz inequality. Now, the integral above simplifies to

The motivation behind the change of variables is to make the

denominator of the fraction in the exponential in (5) only depen-

dent on a single variable , since this will simplify the inte-

gration. Using (5) and (10), we get the expression shown in (11)

at the bottom of the next page for the unconditional PEP, where

. For simplicity, explicit

integration limits for

have not been stated here.

Explicit integration limits are derived in Appendix B.

A. PEP of LP Decoding in the Special Case of
In this subsection, we will consider the special case of a pseudocodeword where all the values in the nonzero coordinates of are equal.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES: PAIRWISE ERROR PROBABILITY OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

Theorem 2: In the special case of , i.e., all the values in Theorem 3: In the special case of

the nonzero coordinates of are equal, the unconditional PEP to infinity (additive terms of order

is upper-bounded by

glected),

, where

2947

, as

tends

are ne-

Furthermore, as

, where

(12)

Proof: In the special case of

, the expression in (5)

for the unconditional PEP reduces to

where the first equality follows from the integral formula in

(21) in Appendix C and the definition of the Gamma-function,

and the inequality follows from the fact that

is increasing in

. As

tends to infinity,

, and the asymptotic

result in (12) follows by using the integral formula in (23) in

Appendix C.

Note that the unconditional PEP is indeed of the form

, where

is a constant independent

of

, which is consistent with Theorem 1.

Finally, we remark that the optimal value for (found by

solving the stationary point equation in (8) with

) is

, and it follows that the asymptotic upper bound in (6) is

equal to the expression in (12), i.e., the asymptotic upper bound

in (6) is tight.

In (13) and

(13)
if if
(14)

B. PEP of LP Decoding in the Special Case of
We now consider the special case of a pseudocodeword with two distinct nonzero values in the nonzero coordinates of
in more detail. Here we only state the asymptotic result. The complete derivation can be found in Appendix A.

Proof: See Appendix A.

Note that the unconditional PEP is indeed of the form

, where

is a constant independent

of

, which is consistent with Theorem 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(11)

2948

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2009

The asymptotic upper bound on the unconditional PEP

in (6) in the special case of

is

various values of and when

. The asymptotic

decoding loss quantifies the difference in PEP at high SNRs

of decoding to a pseudocodeword compared to decoding to a

codeword with the same support set size.

and the stationary point equation in (8) becomes

(15)

which can easily be solved.

Example 1: We consider the special case of

and

. Furthermore, let

. From the expression

in (13), we get

(16)

Setting

, we get the expression in (12) with .

Example 2: We consider the special case of

and

. From the expression in (13) we get the expression

shown in the forst equation at the bottom of the page for .

Setting

, for some positive rational number , we

get the expression in (12) with

.

In Fig. 1, we have plotted the fraction

as a function of

for various values of and when

, which we

can assume because of scaling-invariance (see Lemmas 1 and

3 for details). Also, the optimal value for (found by solving

the stationary point equation in (15)) is used when computing

. Note that

when

, but

for

, which shows that the upper bound

in (6) is not tight. However, the bound is sufficient to prove

the asymptotic result in Theorem 1. Finally, we observe from

Fig. 1 that the value of the fraction

, for a fixed

,

depends on the particular values of and .

Let us define the asymptotic decoding loss as

.

The asymptotic decoding loss versus is plotted in Fig. 2 for

C. PEP of LP Decoding in the General Case of

The general case of

is more difficult than when

.

In theory, an exact expression for the pre-constant

in the

asymptotic expression

for the uncondi-

tional PEP can be derived using a similar derivation as the one

outlined in Appendix A, for the case of

, and the decom-

position in (19) in Appendix B. However, this becomes very te-

dious, especially when

.

Example 3: An expression for the asymptotic unconditional

PEP in the special case of

, and

is shown in the second equation at the bottom of the page. This

result is derived using a general expression for the asymptotic

unconditional PEP in the special case of

, that can be de-

rived using a similar derivation as the one in Appendix A, for the

case of

, and the decomposition in (19) in Appendix B.

Note that when

and

, for some positive

rational number , the expression for reduces to the ex-

pression in (16).

IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS

In this section, we consider the well-known

-regular

Tanner code from [10] as an example code with LP de-

coding. In particular, we will look at the structure of all stopping

sets of size less than some threshold, and from this conclude that

all corresponding pseudocodewords have

. Then, we can

apply the derived formulas for the asymptotic PEP to this par-

ticular code.

An efficient algorithm to find all stopping sets of size less

than some threshold of a fixed LDPC matrix was recently pre-

sented in [16], [17]. We have used this algorithm to find all stop-

ping sets of size at most 21 for the well-known -regular

Tanner code from [10]. The minimum nonempty stop-

ping set size is and the corresponding multiplicity is . In

Fig. 3, the six different structures of subgraphs (of the Tanner

graph) induced by the variable nodes of stopping sets of size at

most 21 for the

Tanner code are shown. The white cir-

cles are variable nodes in the stopping set and the black squares

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES: PAIRWISE ERROR PROBABILITY OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

2949

(155 64) Fig. 3. The six different induced subgraph structures of stopping sets of size at
most 21 for the ; Tanner code. The white circles are variable nodes in
the stopping set and the black squares are check nodes in the induced subgraph. Each white rectangle (with rounded corners) contains a connected subgraph with only degree-2 check nodes which is identical to the induced subgraph structure in (f).

Fig. 1. The asymptotic unconditional PEP P divided by the asymptotic

= 2 + = 1 upper bound on the unconditional PEP P

in (6) versus  for various

values of d and g when 

and  

. The optimal value for 

(found by solving the stationary point equation in (15)) is used when computing

the upper bound in (6).

of the components of the stopping sets. However, these check nodes are not relevant for the following discussion and are thus omitted from the figure. A component of a stopping set is either

a single variable node that is not connected to a degree-2 check

node in the induced subgraph, or a set of variable nodes con-

nected by degree-2 check nodes in the induced subgraph, as in

Fig. 3(f). For example, the stopping sets depicted in Figs. 3(d)

and (e) have three and two components, respectively. Finally,

note that there are no other types of degree-3 check nodes con-

necting at least two different components of a stopping set other

than those depicted in Fig. 3.

To show how the abstract graphs from Fig. 3 relate to a real

stopping set, we show, in Fig. 4, for one stopping set of size

the complete subgraph induced by it. Each white rectangle

(with rounded corners) is a subgraph of the form depicted in

Fig. 3(f), i.e., a connected subgraph containing only degree-2

check nodes. Note that the degree-3 check nodes with dotted

edges connect the components of the stopping set, from which

it follows that the stopping set shown in Fig. 4 has the induced

subgraph structure in Fig. 3(b).

Finally, we remark that no proper subset of the stopping sets

of size at most is a nonzero codeword. However, a proper

subset could be a nonempty stopping set, e.g., the subset of a

stopping set of the type depicted in Fig. 3(e) without the single

variable node is a nonempty stopping set. In Table I, we have

= 2 + = 1 Fig. 2. Asymptotic decoding loss versus  for various values of d and g when
 and   .

tabulated the number of stopping sets of different sizes and with the different induced subgraph structures depicted in Fig. 3.

In the following, to simplify notation, when we explicitly

write pseudocodewords as vectors, only the nonzero coordinates

are check nodes in the induced subgraph. Each white rectangle are shown. We will now study in more detail the unnormalized

(with rounded corners) is a subgraph of the form depicted in pseudocodewords, i.e., the pseudocodewords we get without

Fig. 3(f). The induced subgraph in Fig. 3(f) is a connected sub- normalization by the degree in (1) of the underlying finite

graph containing only degree-2 check nodes. Note that there graph cover, with support set equal to a stopping set of the type

could be other check nodes of degree at least three connecting depicted in Fig. 3(a). Since there are degree-3 check nodes, the

variable nodes from the stopping sets depicted in Fig. 3. In par- stopping set is not the support set of a codeword. Furthermore,

ticular, there could be degree-4 check nodes connecting some it is easily seen that the values in all coordinates corresponding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2950

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2009

set of the pseudocodeword, is at most equal to the sum of the

other two coordinate values connected to the degree-3 check

node. From this observation, it follows that

and

.

In the following, all vectors in the conic hull of , defined

in (2), and denoted by

, are called pseudocodewords.

The conic hull

of is also commonly referred to as

the fundamental cone. Furthermore, two pseudocodewords

and from

are said to be equivalent if and only if

, where is a positive real number. Also, a minimal

pseudocodeword is a pseudocodeword that corresponds to an

edge of

[7], [15].

To summarize, there are two equivalence classes of minimal

pseudocodewords with support set equal to a stopping set of the

type depicted in Fig. 3(a). The two equivalence classes are

and

Fig. 4. An example stopping set of size 20 for the (155; 64) Tanner code. The subgraph of the Tanner graph induced by the stopping set is depicted in the figure. The white circles are variable nodes in the stopping set and the black squares are check nodes in the induced subgraph. Each rectangle (with rounded corners) contains a connected subgraph with only degree-2 check nodes. The depicted stopping set has three components and the degree-3 check nodes with dotted edges connect these components, from which it follows that it has the induced subgraph structure depicted Fig. 3(b).
TABLE I THE NUMBER OF STOPPING SETS OF DIFFERENT SIZES AND WITH THE
DIFFERENT INDUCED SUBGRAPH STRUCTURES DEPICTED IN FIG. 3

to variable nodes that belong to the same component of the stop-

ping set are equal. This is due to the fact that to satisfy all the

check nodes connected to variable nodes within a component

of the stopping set, all the variable nodes must have a value of

or . Thus, within a finite graph cover there will be an equal

amount of ones and zeros for each coordinate corresponding to

variable nodes within the same component of the stopping set.

From this observation, it follows that any unnormalized pseu-

docodeword is of the form

, where the

coordinates with value correspond to the leftmost component

of the stopping set and the coordinates with value correspond

to the rightmost component of the stopping set. Note that both

and are even, since the modulo-2 reduction of any unnor-

malized pseudocodeword is a codeword [12, Lemma 5.1] and no

proper subset of the stopping set is the support set of a nonzero

codeword.

The coordinate value in an unnormalized pseudocodeword

which is connected to any degree-3 check node in the subgraph

of the Tanner graph induced by the variable nodes of the support

where the pseudocodeword within a set of curly brackets

is a representative of the equivalence class. Note that

is also possible as an unnormalized

pseudocodeword; however, because it is a conic combina-

tion of the two pseudocodewords

and

, it cannot be a minimal pseudocodeword.

It follows that all minimal pseudocodewords with support set

equal to a stopping set of the type depicted Fig. 3(a) have

. Also, it is easily seen that the support set of the pseu-

docodewords is a minimal stopping set, i.e., a stopping set that

does not contain a nonempty stopping set as a proper subset.

Reasoning in more of less the same manner, we get the

equivalence classes of minimal pseudocodewords tabulated in

Table II for stopping sets with the induced subgraph structures

in Fig. 3. In the last column of the table, we have also indicated

if the corresponding stopping set is a minimal stopping set

or not. Note that for a stopping set of the type depicted in

Fig. 3(d), nonminimality can not be inferred directly from the

depicted induced subgraph structure, since there could exist

degree-4 or degree-5 check nodes with three or four edges,

respectively, connected to the third component of the stopping

set, which would make the stopping set a minimal stopping

set. However, such check nodes do not exist. From Tables I

and II, it follows that all pseudocodewords with support set

size at most 19 have

. Furthermore, all minimal pseu-

docodewords with support set size and have

.

Also, when

, where

and

when

, and

and

, otherwise. Note,

however, that most of these minimal pseudocodewords have

. Thus, the minimal pseudocodewords with small support

set size all have a small value of . This is also the case for

both the -regular

MacKay code and the almost

-regular

progressive edge-growth code from

[18]. A similar observation was made in [15].

In Fig. 5, we have compared the frame error rate (FER) of the

Tanner code with iterative min-sum (MS) and sum-

product (SP) decoding with a maximum of 100 iterations and

(adaptive) LP decoding [19] on an independent Rayleigh flat-

fading channel with coherent detection and perfect CSI at the

receiver. Adaptive LP decoding, as introduced by Taghavi and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES: PAIRWISE ERROR PROBABILITY OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

2951

TABLE II EQUIVALENCE CLASSES OF MINIMAL PSEUDOCODEWORDS CORRESPONDING TO THE DIFFERENT INDUCED SUBGRAPH STRUCTURES OF STOPPING SETS DEPICTED IN FIG. 3. IN THE LAST COLUMN OF THE TABLE, WE HAVE ALSO INDICATED IF THE SUPPORT SET OF THE PSEUDOCODEWORDS IS A MINIMAL STOPPING SET OR NOT

that for this SNR range not enough pseudocodewords have been taken into account when computing the TUB.

Fig. 5. Comparison of FER of the (155; 64) Tanner code on an independent Rayleigh flat-fading channel with different decoding methods. TUBs for LP decoding based on all equivalence classes of minimal pseudocodewords with support set size at most 21, have also been plotted.

V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

The focus of this work has been the analysis of the PEP of

the LP decoder for a general binary linear code as formulated

by Feldman et al. [6] on an independent Rayleigh flat-fading

channel with coherent detection and perfect CSI at the receiver.

We have shown that the PEP of decoding to a pseudocodeword

when the all-zero codeword is transmitted, behaves asymptot-

ically as

, where

is a constant inde-

pendent of

. Thus, the asymptotic decay rate of the error

probability with the average SNR is determined by the size of

the smallest nonempty stopping set in the Tanner graph used for

decoding. We have also given explicit expressions for the PEP

in the special case when there are at most two possible nonzero

values in the nonzero coordinates of . Finally, as an example,

the derived results have been applied to the well-known (155,64)

Tanner code from [10], whose performance on the independent

Rayleigh flat-fading channel has been analyzed.

One interesting topic for future work is to consider other

fading statistics, e.g., Nakagami or Rice fading. Also, one could

consider the case of no CSI at the receiver.

Siegel in [19], solves the LP decoding problem by adding con-

straints of the linear program in an adaptive manner. This is a

clever way to solve the LP decoding problem with reduced com-

plexity. Note that we do not consider adding redundant rows

here. For every value of

frame errors were simu-

APPENDIX A PROOF OF THEOREM 3

From (11) with

, we get the following expression after

completing a square in the exponential function:

lated, except for

dB, with LP decoding, where 100

frame errors were simulated. Truncated union bounds (TUBs)

for LP decoding based on all equivalence classes of minimal

pseudocodewords [15] with support set size at most 21, have

also been plotted. When computing the asymptotic TUB, we

used the expression for the asymptotic PEP in (13). The exact

TUB was computed by numerical integration. We use the term

exact, since the exact expression for the PEP and not the asymp-

totic expression, which is valid only for high SNRs, is used. As where goes to infinity, the gap between the asymptotic TUB

and the exact TUB goes to zero. Note that the exact TUB is

below the simulation curve for the LP decoder, which means

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2952

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2009

and where also explicit integration limits have been inserted.

For details on the integration limits, see Appendix B. Now, by

performing a change of variables

where

, and by using the binomial formula

, we get

where

The integration with respect to can now be carried out using the integral formula in (20) in Appendix C, and we get the expression at the bottom of the page, where is defined in (14), and

Performing the integration with respect to , using the integral formulas in (21) and (22) in Appendix C, we get

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES: PAIRWISE ERROR PROBABILITY OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

2953

Finally, we let

tend to infinity (additive terms of order

are neglected) and integrate with respect to

and using the integral formula in (23) in Appendix C. After

some manipulations we arrive at the expression in (13).

APPENDIX B DERIVATION OF EXPLICIT INTEGRATION LIMITS FOR THE
INTEGRAL IN (11)

In this appendix, we give explicit integration limits for the

integral in (11) for the general case of

. In particular, we

will explain how the unconditional PEP can be written as a sum

of

integrals of the type in (11), where the integration with

respect to has a lower limit of

and

an upper limit of

.

The integration limits for are always 0 (lower) and (upper).

In more detail, using the linear transformation in (10), the inte-

gration with respect to has lower and upper limits of, re-

spectively

(17)
which reduces to the expression shown at the bottom of the page, and where
(18)

If

, we are left with that constraint

and the additional constraints

, and the

constraint

. This last constraint follows from the fact that

the upper integration limit for must be at least as large as

the lower limit. These new constraints imply that the integration

with respect to has lower and upper limits of, respectively,

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2954

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 55, NO. 7, JULY 2009

(19)

which again implies the constraint

in addition to the constraints

, and the

constraint

. However, if

,

we are left with that constraint and the additional constraints

, and the constraint

. This last constraint follows from the fact that

the upper integration limit for must be at least as large as

the lower limit. These new constraints imply that the integration

with respect to has lower and upper limits of, respectively

if is odd (20)
if is even

where is a nonnegative integer,

, and

if if and

B. The Product of and

The integration limits for

are of the same type as those

for in (17) and (18), and we can apply the same reasoning

as above to derive the integration limits for . To summa-

rize, using the linear transformation in (10), we have the de-

composition for the integration with respect to the variables

as shown in (19) at the top of the page.

where is a nonnegative integer and

C. The Product of

and

(21) is a positive real number.

APPENDIX C SOME WELL-KNOWN INTEGRAL FORMULAS In this appendix, we state some integral formulas that we use frequently in the derivations throughout this paper.
A. The Product of and

where is a nonnegative integer and D. Integration of

if is even if is odd (22) is a positive real number.

if is even (23)
if is odd

for nonnegative integers .
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ROSNES: PAIRWISE ERROR PROBABILITY OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING DECODING

2955

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author wishes to thank Øyvind Ytrehus for valuable com-
ments on earlier versions of this work, and the anonymous re-
viewers whose comments greatly improved the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[5] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and the stopping redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 922–932, Mar. 2006.
[6] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[7] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/cs.IT/0512078/, accepted for publication.
[8] G. D. Forney, Jr., R. Koetter, F. R. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On the effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models, B. Marcus and J. Rosenthal, Eds. New York: Springer-Verlag, 2001, vol. 123, IMA Math. Appl., pp. 101–112.
[9] J. Feldman and D. R. Karger, “Decoding turbo-like codes via linear programming,” in Proc. 43rd Annu. IEEE Symp. Foundations Comp. Sci. (FOCS), Vancouver, BC, Canada, Nov. 2002, pp. 251–260.

[10] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Commun. Theory Appl. (ISCTA), Ambleside, U.K., Jul. 2001.
[11] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[12] C. A. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4013–4038, Nov. 2007.
[13] E. Rosnes, “On the connection between finite graph covers, pseudocodewords, and linear programming decoding of turbo codes,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006.
[14] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng. Comp. Sci., Mass. Inst. Technol. (MIT), Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[15] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Pseudo-codeword analysis of Tanner graphs from projective and Euclidean planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 7, pp. 2376–2393, Jul. 2007.
[16] E. Rosnes and Ø. Ytrehus, “An algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 2936–2940.
[17] E. Rosnes and Ø. Ytrehus, “An efficient algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, accepted for publication.
[18] D. J. C. MacKay, Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data. html
[19] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec. 2008.
Eirik Rosnes (S’01–M’04) was born in Stavanger, Norway, in 1975. He received the Cand. Scient. degree in physics and the Dr. Scient. degree in informatics, both from the University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway, in 1999 and 2003, respectively.
Currently, he is a Researcher with the Department of Informatics, University of Bergen. His research interests include convolutional codes, codes on graphs, and iterative decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:51:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

