ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

Edge-based Scheduled BP in LDPC Codes
Oren Golov and Ofer Amrani
School of Elec. Engineering Dept. of Elec. Engineering- Systems
Tel Aviv University

Abstract- This paper studies the potential performance gain, referred to as scheduling gain, when decoding LDPC codes using scheduled belief-propagation. Introducing genie-aided scheduling, it is shown that the scheduling-gain can be quite impressive for moderate and short-length codes. Adaptive schedule based on edge ordering is presented. This approach compares favorably with serial scheduling schemes based on random node ordering. Density evolution-based analysis appropriately tailored for decoding finite-length LDPC codes is provided. For serial decoding and genie-aided decoding, it is shown that the performance in the first iteration can be accurately predicted analytically using the proposed technique.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were originally introduced by Gallager [1] in 1962. In his seminal work, Gallager showed that LDPC codes can be decoded by using an efficient iterative decoding algorithm. Recently it has been demonstrated that iterative decoding can perform at rates extremely close to the Shannon limit with reasonable complexity. Thus, LDPC codes are considered among the most promising candidates for future applications. LDPC codes can be represented by means of a sparse bipartite graph. The two types of nodes in the graph are variable nodes and check nodes; a node of a certain type can be connected only to nodes of the other type. The traditional decoding algorithm associated with LDPC codes is based on the so-called flooding schedule whereby messages are passed from each bit node to all adjacent check nodes in the graph, followed by another round of message passing from each check node to all adjacent bit nodes. The term "adjacent nodes" refers to a node of one type connected by an edge to node of the other type. "An open question is whether different schedules could improve iterative decoding algorithms" Forney [5].
Alternative message passing schedules were considered in earlier research. Mao and Banihashemi [6] proposed a probabilistic variant of the flooding schedule which takes into account the loop structure of the code's graph. In a latter work Xiao and Banihashemi [7] studied a wider range of graph-based message-passing schedules, and designed schedule schemes based on the distribution of girths and closed walks in the code's graph.
The so-called serial decoding schedule [2],[3],[4] amounts to a scheduling rule according to which the variable nodes or the check nodes of an LDPC code are updated in a serial manner. This work explores the potential of using a nonarbitrary schedule. These non-arbitrary schedules have so far been overlooked, yet they show great promise. Furthermore, using a specifically tailored schedule results in improved BER and faster convergence, relative to the results presented in

previous works [2],[3],[4]. Indeed, the presented results answer Forney's question in affirmative.
The work is concluded by presenting density evolutionbased analysis appropriately tailored for decoding finite length LDPC codes. The distribution of the Log Likelihood ratio (LLR) messages exchanged between check nodes and variable nodes is carefully tracked by employing combinatorial arguments combined with the Gaussian approximation (GA). For serial decoding and genie-aided decoding, it is shown that the performance in the first iteration can be accurately predicted using the proposed analysis.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a general description of the proposed serial-scheduling approach. The potential gain this schedule can achieve is explored in section III. A practical scheduler is proposed in section IV. Analytical approach for analyzing finite-length LDPC codes under serial decoding is presented in Section V. Conclusions and further research topics are discussed in section VI.

II. SERIAL SCHEDULING
This section reviews the basic definitions related to LPDC codes, describes the standard decoding algorithm termed belief propagation and introduces the notations used throughout the
paper.
Let m(O be the message passed from variable node v to check node c at the Ith iteration of the algorithm. mTO) is similarly defined. At round 0, m(°) is the log-likelihood
ratio of the variable node v conditional on it's observed
value, denoted as mv. JVA(c) denotes the set of variables that
participate in check equation c, and M (v) denotes the set of checks in which variable v participates. JV(c)\v denotes the set JV(c) with variable v excluded, and M (v)\c denotes the set M(v) with check node c excluded. Finally, the edge heading from check node c to variable node v is denoted by ccv and the edge heading the opposite direction is denoted by
eC.
Each iteration uses the a-priori information mv obtained from the received values, and the extrinsic information
{fm,l 1)} delivered by the previous iteration. At the end of
an iteration, {m() } is updated as the extrinsic information for the next iteration. Decision on the values of the bits for the
current iteration can be determined from {T (1) }.
Belief-propagation (BP) update equations are described as follows:
mvc update law:

(1)

Tnv

if I = 0,

Tvm + ECEM(v)\c mjc1v if I > 0, (1)

1-4244-1429-6/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

2376

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

MCV update law:

=In1 (l) + Ht|cg(C)\v tanh (

(2)

1-Ht'cg(c) vtanh (m2n)

After every iteration the hard decision value for every variable node is determined by:

m(l) = mV + E

34

c/ E M4(v)

(1) f 0 if in71(,1'2) >00, iv,HD 1 ifTn 1) < 0,(4
Zhang and Fossorier [3] and Kfir and Kanter[2] developed a sequential version for the BP algorithm where messages are passed serially. Sharon and Litsyn [4], referred to it as Serial-V schedule and presented an alternative, the Serial-C schedule.
The Serial-V schedule is based on a serial update of the variable nodes; the Serial-C schedule is based on a serial update of the check nodes and thus it is considered dual to Serial-V. Note that both algorithms achieve similar results in terms of both complexity and performance.
The key difference between serial and flooding schedules is the inter-iteration information exchange, which exists only in the serial schedules. In the flooding schedule every message is calculated based only on messages from the previous iteration. In a single iteration the information from a certain variable node spreads only to it's closest neighbors. Hence, after I iterations, information from a variable node can only reach it's I distanced neighbors. Once a variable is updated in a serial schedule, the variables which share common check equations, will be exposed to it's updated information, which is the most recent available information. In this fashion information from a certain variable node can propagate to every other variable node in the course of a single iteration. The information flow depends on the order of the messages during the iteration. It was proven [4] that the serial schedule distributes the information in the underlying code's graph twice as fast as the flooding schedule.
A. Generalized scheduling scheme
In this paper, we take the serial approach one step further by defining a new serial schedule, Serial-E. Serial-V and Serial-C can be considered as particular cases of Serial-E. In every step of the algorithm we choose an edge c, and calculate mcv
This way, every edge in the graph represents a belieffiow from
every v' C JV(c)\v into v.
Using the edges as the "atomic units" rather than variable nodes or the check nodes, provides a new degree of freedom in scheduling the message passing.
The major innovation, however, is allowing the order of the edges to be changed as the algorithm progresses. By changing the order of accessing the edges, the algorithm can effectively respond to the latest information available and

optimally choose the next messages to be carried out. A general Serial-E scheduling is detailed below.
General Serial-E scheduling:

1) Initialize:

a) Set I 1 and determine the maximal number of iterations 1max
b) Set k = 0 and determine ksort. k is the edges

counter,
c) Calculate the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) m, for every variable node v in the graph,
d) For all edges calculate m(W)
e) Generate a sorted list of edges (the order of edges in the list is discussed later),

f) Mark all the edges in the list as fresh, i.e edges which were not used.

2) For everyfresh edge ecv in the sorted list do:

a) For every check node c' C M(v)\c calculate m(,,
b) For every check node c' C M (v)\c and for every

variable node v' C JV(c')\v calculate m(l),
c) Mark ecv as stale and set k := k + 1, d) If k( mod ksort) = 0 sort the list, i.e change the
fresh edges order.

3) Hard decision and stopping criterion:

a) Mark all the edges in the list asfresh and set k = 0,

m(Ov)D. b) For every variable node v calculate

The

codeword estimation after the Ith iteration is C

[Kvl,HD ..v. * ,HD]v
c) If c(l)HT = 0 or I = Imax stop the decoding and output C(l) as the decoded codeword; Else I := 1+1 and go to step 2.

Serial-E uses one edge at a time from the list of edges generated at the beginning of each iteration. After carrying out ksort messages, the remaining fresh edges in the list may be (re-)sorted. ksort controls the algorithm's performance-
complexity trade-off. Using ksort = 1 (i.e sorting the list
after processing every message) gives maximal flexibility in ordering the edges at the cost of more operations. At the other extreme, setting ksort to the number of edges in the graph causes no sorting during an iteration, resulting in lower complexity but lower flexibility. If sorting is omitted the SerialV, Serial-C and Serial-E are equivalent algorithms, resulting in identical performance and complexity
Various metrics can be considered for sorting; For example: message values, their position in the graph, the parity at the check nodes and more. The seemingly many sorting options raise two key issues:

1) Assessing the performance gain possible through the use of Serial-E.
2) Finding a good sorting rule.

Section III addresses the first issue, suggests a lower empirical bound on the performance improvement (scheduling-gain) and shows an astonishing improvement over regular serial decoding. Section IV addresses the second issue by analyzing the BP algorithm and suggesting a practical ordering algorithm

2377
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

which shows a performance boost when compared to the serial the performance of the optimal schedule. Thus, it accurately

algorithms.

estimates the ultimate scheduling-gain.

III. WHAT CAN ONE EXPECT OF A GOOD SCHEDULER?
For studying what good scheduling can achieve in terms of performance, we introduce the genie-aided scheduler. It is defined as a schedule that actually knows the transmitted codeword, yet the decoding algorithm can only employ this knowledge to assist the scheduling, namely for obtaining the edge ordering. This decoding algorithm still carries belief
propagation messages and every edge ec, is used only once
per iteration, no different than the standard BP serial decoder. For brevity of exposition, assume the all-zero codeword was transmitted, that is the all-one vector (binary phase shift keying is assumed).
Let us now consider the problem of optimal scheduling. We define an optimal schedule as the one that minimizes the number of iterations required to achieve successful decoding (providing that such schedule exist). The graph representation
associated with a regular (dV, d,) LDPC code consists of n
dv edges. An exhaustive search for the best ordering would therefore require (n. dv)! possible orderings. Also, trying to
determine the optimal ordering for the Serial-E algorithm is a difficult problem because during decoding (Step 2 of SerialE) every message potentially affects an exponential number of messages in the graph.
Therefore, we shall seek for a simple, greedy, schedule. The scheduler's goal will be to choose the next edge to be used by
the Serial-E algorithm such that the LLR m(l) is maximized.
The higher the LLRs at the end of the iterations the lower is the bit error rate.

B. Simulations Results The following simulations consider an ensemble of regular
(3,6) LDPC codes of length n=1008, and rate 0.5. Few parameters are studied.
1) Different number of iterations: Figures 1 and 2 depict the flooding, serial and genie schedules for a single iteration and for 100 iterations. The genie-aided schedule uses ksort = 100, namely it re-sorts the list of (fresh) edges following the processing of each group of 100 edges.
.2F
Fig. 1. BER after single iteration

A. Genie-aided schedule
For determining the scheduling rule, we start by examining
equations (3) and (4). Assume we choose ecclv as the next edge to be used. Denote the previous message on ecclv as T(1 1)
and the current message as m(V,, ) Also denote m(l) as the
variable node's LLR before using ecclv and m(l) as the variable node's final LLR after using eccll. Rewriting equation (3) we
get:

m(n ) T= v + EC/eAM(v)\c// Tncv )-m(/,/V ++~mnc//V
v Tm(l + AT(l-/V
(5)
Hence the motivation for sorting the list of edges using the
criterion Amj/,/V. In each step of the algorithm, the edge
with the largest value AmK, 1) will be selected as the next one to be used. Using the largest value is valid only if the all-zero codeword was transmitted. In practice, one can not employ this criterion unless the transmitted codeword is known. Alternatively, one may use

Am

(1
//

1i

sign(transmitted bit v),

and this is where the genie's assist is introduced. While examples for the sub-optimality of this schedule can be found, we conjecture that it can serve as a tight upper bound on

Fig. 2. BER- imax 100 iterations
Both figures demonstrate that the potential schedulinggain is impressive. Figure 1 shows more than 3dB gain for BER=10-3 for a single iteration. It also supports the common notion that scheduling mostly benefits the early iterations. Figure 2 shows more than 0.75dB performance gap between the genie and the serial schedules, for BER=10-3. It actually moves the water-fall region further to the left (towards channel capacity). Also note the small performance gap between serial and flooding when using sufficient number of iterations as previously suggested in other works. Comparing figures 1 and 2, it is quite startling that the performance of a single iteration of the genie-aided schedule is comparable to serial and flooding schedules when those are limited to 100 iterations.

2378
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

Fig. 3. BER - for different ksort values 2) Different sort parameters: Figure 3 depicts the performance of the genie-aided schedule for different values of
ksort with Imax = 100. For Imax = 100, it appears that the
scheduling-gain is insensitive to variations in ksort. Most gain
is achieved even when sorting only at the beginning of each iteration.
Notably, when limiting the number of iterations to just one, there is a huge performance gap when sorting just once before the iteration - and sorting twice - before and in the middle of the iteration . This result suggests that non-adaptive schedules, with predetermined fixed ordering, (such as SerialC and Serial-V) are too limiting.
3) Different code lengths: Figure 4 depicts the genie, serial and flooding schedules for two code lengths: n = 204 and n = 2640 with Imax = 100. We study the performance gain as a function of the code length. Gallager proved that BP is optimal for infinite length codes under the assumption that the codes graph is a tree. This assumption is not valid for finite short-length the codes used herein. We expect that under the infinite iterations regime, scheduling would be more effective in terms of BER for short length codes. Figures (2) and (4) confirms this assertion; the shorter the code, the larger the scheduling-gain.

at the receiver side, prior to decoding, is impossible, yet an exhaustive approach can be considered. The following algorithm is based on the fact that a good schedule (if one exists) converges extremely fast.
Decoding Algorithm
1) Initialization:
a) Determine maximal number of iterations Imax,
b) Set d = d(O, y); d(., ) is the Euclidean distance, c) Set the algorithm's decision to c= 0,
2) For every codeword c (out of 2k codewords):
a) Use a genie-aided decoder to decode the received word y (assuming c was transmitted), Let I be the decoders number of iterations and c' be the decoder's decision,
b) If I < Imax set imax = 1, c) If I imax and d(c',y) < d, set d = d(c',y)
and c= c'.
Since a binary (n, k) code has 2k codewords, this is obvi-
ously not a very practical algorithmic approach. Nevertheless, it is an interesting candidate for realizing the scheduling-gain advocated by the genie-aided schedule. In the next section we propose a practical approach that realizes some of this gain.

IV. PRACTICAL SCHEDULES
The potential scheduling gain motivates a search for a practical schedule. A failed probabilistic schedule is first suggested in order to demonstrate that finding a good practical schedule is not trivial. A successful differential schedule, which is a modification of the genie schedule is then presented and it's gain is simulated.

A. Probabilistic schedule

The probabilistic schedule uses the probability that an edge carries a correct message as the sorting rule. The following lemma can be derived as a property of the BP algorithm.
Lemma ] (Probability of incorrect message):

(1)

-pt-rD ti1nlrlaCOrIrTl-CrLt It b/(l-)c8J

e2 () - ()tJ

(r,

e2 + 2
When using this probabilistic metric as the soring rule, messages with high probability of correctness are used first. Such a sorting strategy appears to be a good choice.
Unfortunately, using the probabilistic metric causes the BP to become unstable and to perform worse than the flooding schedule.

Fig. 4. BER - for different code lengths
C. A Practical Question with a non-practical answer The potential scheduling-gain is quite impressive, but can it
somehow be realized? can the genie-aided approach be made into an algorithm? Clearly, having the transmitted codeword

B. Differential schedule

The genie schedule can be modified for the sake of practicality. Recall equation (5):

fiv) - Tnv + EC/EA(v)\c/ Tnc/v
= Tnv + ATm(//V
(l V1)
cv

MC(1/ 1) + inc(1/ 1)

The genie's objective is increasing AmVjO by selecting the highest Amj/,/V when the all-zeros code word is assumed.

2379
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

In a practical schedule, such an assumption is not valid.
Therefore, we propose using Arm(j,) as the sorting rule.
C. Simulation Results
The following simulation results consider an ensemble of n=1008, rate 0.5 regular (3,6) LDPC codes. Figure 5 depicts the flooding, serial and differential schedules for a single iteration with ksort = 100.
Figure 5 demonstrates an approximate scheduling gain of 1.85dB at BER=10-3 achieved by the probabilistic and differential schedules, when used in a single iteration. When using 100 iterations, there will be no scheduling gain, yet simulations show that the differential schedule requires less iterations than the serial schedule.

and the probability vector pk = k pk,,P.1Pd )], where

ik Pr t m,mnecssiasgeefsfefcotredthbeykj'thmcexdge JX

(9)

Lemma 2 explained. Mk,j F [mVj] relates to m1k mes-
sages influenced by j mcx messages assuming k edges have been employed. Inherently, during the different steps of a single iteration, variable nodes are influenced by a different amount of mcv messages. When using the mean notations,
MVkIj becomes:

Mk,= Mvk+j.E[n<j] Mv + jE[k] M +j r1k (10) Re-formulating equation (2), omitting the iteration index I and taking expectation on both sides yields:

I9

10L

V.SRA-B DEST EVLTO

LDPC~ a0 coes10o-

Flood
waeSenriail nroeucDiff

i
geerliato

of the GA properly

0.5

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

SNR [dB]

Fig. 5. BER after single iteration

V. SERIAL-E DENSITY EVOLUTION
In order to analyze the Serial-E for finite length (regular) LDPC codes, we introduce a generalization of the GA properly amended by combinatorial theory. Similar approximations along with order statistics arguments have also been derived for the Genie and the Differential schedules. (Employing a Semi GA [8] approach slightly improves the approximation.) The analysis is based on dividing a single iteration into n dv steps; one step per each m,v message on the code graph. Each step, indexed by k = I1, 2, ..., n dv, is composed of two phases:
Phase 1 (Generalized GA).
Lemma 2 (m,v expectation for the k'th edge):

Mv = -1(1 dl [1
j=o
where O(x) is defined as:

0 (Mv + d . Tlk) ]ITOk *(d -1))
(7)

fn (u) q(x)

1 {

v/-4--7Tx 2 tanh

du "-' ) 2
.

1

Phase 2 (Preparation for the next step).

Calculate

Ik { T=1 MkV k> 0,

0

k = O,

if x > 0,
if x = 0.
(8)

[tanh

=~v &l

tanh

(1 1)

J=o

Invoking equations (10) and (11) similar to [9] provides the updating rule (7). Explicit derivation of (9) is beyond the scope of this summary. Perfect match between the analytical results and simulations are demonstrated until graph cycles effect rises in short and moderate-length codes.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
This work introduces a general scheduling algorithm called Serial-E. Two key issues have been discussed: (a) Assessing Serial-E scheduling gain (b) Finding a good sorting rule. The genie theoretical schedule helped assessing the possible scheduling gain, and lay groundwork for finding good sorting rules. The practical schedule proposed in this work does not attain the performance gain suggested by the genie-aided schedule, yet it demonstrates an improvement over the serial and flooding schedules. Finding optimal scheduling remains an intriguing open problem.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, "Low-Density Parity-Check Codes," IRE Trans. Information Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, 1962.
[2] H. Kfir and I. Kanter, "Parallel versus sequential updating for belief propagation decoding," Physica A, vol 330, pp. 259-270, 2003.
[3] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, "Shuffled belief propagation decoding," The proceedings 36th Asilomar Conference on Signals, System and Computers, Pacific Grove, USA, November 2002.
[4] E. Sharon, S.Litsyn and J. Goldberger, "Efficient Serial Message-Passing Schedule For LDPC Decoding," Pre print
[5] G.D Forney Jr., "On iterative decoding and the two-way algorithm," Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, pp. 12-15, 1997.
[6] Y Mao and A.H. Banihashemi, "Decoding Low-Density Prity-Check Codes With Probabilistic Scheduling," IEEE Comm. Letters, vol 5 (10), pp. 414-416, 2001.
[7] H. Xiao and A.H. Banihashemi, "Graph-Based Message-Passing Schedules for Decoding LDPC Codes," IEEE Trans. Comm., vol 52 (12), pp. 2098-2105, 2004.
[8] M. Ardakani and F.R. Kschischang, "A more accurate one-dimensional analysis and design of irregular LDPC codes," IEEE Trans. Comm., vol 52 (12), pp. 2106-2114, 2004.
[9] T.J. Richardson S.Y. Chung and R.L. Urbanke. "analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a gaussian approximation". IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, 47, No. 2, 2001.

2380
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:00:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

