ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

EXIT and Density Evolution Analysis for
Homogeneous Expectation Propagation
John MacLaren Walsh
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering Drexel University
Philadelphia, PA 19104 jwalsh@ece.drexel.edu

Abstract- We extend Gaussian approximation density evolution (DE) techniques from the soft iterative decoding of turbo and low density parity check (LDPC) codes to the performance and convergence analysis of belief propagation (BP) and expectation propagation (EP) in randomly connected very large sparse homogeneous factor graphs. A strict form of the Gaussian approximation allows the use of extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts to study the performance and convergence of the algorithms. The result is a graphical tool that design engineers can use to quickly predict the performance and convergence speed of BP or EP applied to these inference problems. We demonstrate the utility of the new tool, and a motivation for the generalization of the results, by showing how it may surprisingly be applied to determine the performance of a scheme for distributed data fusion in a sensor network.
I. INTRODUCTION
Expectation propagation (EP) [1], [2], [3], [4] is a large family of algorithms for distributed iterative approximate Bayesian statistical inference which includes the turbo decoder, the soft low density parity check (LDPC) decoder, applications of belief propagation (BP) in sensor networks, the Kalman filter, and the forward backward algorithm as special cases. While the BP cases of EP correctly calculate the marginal a posteriori distributions in factor graphs without loops when the messages being passed correspond to BP, which includes the already well understood Kalman filter and forward backward algorithm cases, its performance when these requirements do not hold is less understood. To tackle this problem, Gaussian approximation based density evolution (DE) [5], [6], [7], [8] and extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts [9], [10] provided breakthrough tools to design engineers, allowing them to predict the performance of loopy expectation propagation in the iterative turbo and LDPC decoding cases for very large block sizes. Here, we discuss cases under which these techniques can be applied to EP for more general distributed estimation and detection problems, and in particular, when the random variables to infer are not a collection of binary random variables, but more generally a collection of any exponential family densities. Because exponential family probability distributions include most commonly modelled random variables, including any finite discrete, Poisson, beta, Gaussian, or exponential distribution, this extension greatly increases the applicability of EXIT chart theory. To highlight the utility of the new results, we use our extension of EXIT

theory on an application of EP to distributed estimation in a large sensor network.

II. HOMOGENEOUS EP

Rather than introducing the general definition of the expectation propagation family of algorithms and its relation to BP, in this section we shall introduce expectation propagation in a more specific homogenous factor graph context, where all of the parameters to infer and all of the factors take the same form. Readers interested in a more general development can refer to [1], [2] for an introduction to expectation propagation and [3], [4] for the relationship with exponential families, a message passing interpretation, and EP's relationship with BP.
Of central interest in this article is the statistical inference of information concerning a collection of S random vectors
j CQc RT, j C {1,.. .. S}, henceforth the parameters,
from a random vector r, henceforth the observations. The
space Q in which these parameters live may either be a finite or
countable set, in which case Vj is a discrete random variable, or a continuous subset of the reals, in which case Vj is
continuous random variable. We define a supporting measure
dOj on Q to be Lebesgue measure if Q is a continuous subset
of the reals, and a simple counting measure if Q is a finite or countable set. We collect all of the parameters into the vector
0 := [0j]. The ultimate goal of expectation propagation is
to approximate the a posteriori probability distribution for 0 given r = r. To do this, EP exploits a given multiplicative
factorization for the joint probability density for r and 0,

F
(r, ) :J=I fa(ra, a), ra C r, Oa C 0 (1)
a=l

which is the Radon Nikodym derivative of the joint probability

measure for r and 0 with respect to the supporting product

1s=1 measure dO =

dOj. Here, via an abuse of set notation,

ra C r indicates the (smaller dimensional) vector ra is created

by removing some of the elements of the vector r, and the

same relationship for Oa and 0 is also indicated. We will

also assume that the ras are disjoint, so that (again abusing

set notation) ra nr= 0 for any c :t a. On the other

hand, the subsets of the parameters Oa may overlap (i.e.

are not necessarily disjoint). In fact, each Oa is created by

1-4244-1429-6/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

876

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:42:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

concatenating several Ws, so that
Oa = [Oi lj C 2(a)]
The functions fa in (I) shall henceforth be called factors. It should also be pointed out that some of the factors may not depend on any observations (i.e. represent a priori information), and in that case we write ra = 0. We can depict the factorization ( 1) in a bipartite graph called a factor graph. On the left side of the graph are the parameter nodes, which are
labelled by the parameters Oj. On the right side of the graph
are the factor nodes, which are labelled by the functions fa.
An edge connects parameter node Oj with factor node fa if
j e 2(a). Similarly for all j e {1, ... , S}, we define the set T(j) to be the set of factors fa which share an edge with the
parameter node Oj.
By considering the homogenous factor graph case, we will be specifying that there are essentially only two types of factors, those which depend on only one Oj, and thus have degree one, and those that have degree df. We will index the factors such that the degree one factors have indices a C {1,...,S} and the degree df factors have indices a e {S + 1, ... , F}. Furthermore, we assume that the degree one factors have the same form as the approximating family, so that for all a e {1, . .., S},
fa(ra, Oa) = exp (Aa(ra) V(Oa) -4/v(Aa)), Vra, Oa,
Similarly, by specifying that all of the degree df factors have the same form, we mean that
fa(ra, Oa) = f(ra, Oa) Vra, Oa, Va e {S + 1... , F}
Additionally, the degree df factors must obey the symmetry
condition that for any permutation o on the ordering of {Oj }
in the vector Oa, we have
fa(ra, O(Oa)) = fa(ra, Oa)
Furthermore, fa must also yield marginal a posteriori densities
for Vj r that are standard exponential families of the form c(Qy) exp(v(Vj) -y) for some -y a function of r, the observed
value of r. We additionally require that all of the parameters
fj are connected to one degree one factor node and dp degree
df factor nodes. Finally, the edges in the bipartite sub-graph of the factor graph which is formed by removing all of the factor nodes of degree one and all of the edges connected to them must be chosen by randomly sampling uniformly from
the set 5(S, F, dp, df) of regular bipartite graphs whose S left nodes have degree dp and whose F right nodes have degree
df.
Expectation propagation exploits the multiplicative factorization (X) to approximate the a posteriori distribution pl, with a product of minimal standard exponential families
F
Pojr(0 r) - c(A(k)(r)) 17 ga(Oa A k) (ra)) (2) a=1
by iteratively refining A k) (r) over time k, where c is a function of A [a a C {1, .. ., F}] which ensures that the

aggregate density integrates over 0 C Qs to one. Here, the
gas are the Radon Nikodym derivative of a minimal standard
exponential family probability measure with respect to the supporting measure dOta, and thus take the form

ga(Oa Aa)= exp (Aa ta(Oa) -b(Aa))

(3)

where we have the concatenation ta(Oa) := [v(0j) j C 2(a)]
and denotes the ordinary inner product on the reals. In other
words, the probability density ga models the Oj, j e 2(a), as independent random vectors of a type which is specified
by selecting the function v at design time. Via appropriate selection of the supporting measure and v(.), one can model
the a posteriori distribution for Oj as a variety of distributions,
including exponential, multivariate normal, beta, gamma, Pois-
son, and any random variable drawn from a finite set [11], [12],
[13]. Furthermore, the dimension of tj9s can be chosen to be
greater than 1, and in this instance the exponential families can
also allow for the modelling of the correlations of the different
variables in Oj via appropriate choice of v. The minimality of
the chosen family ensures that the map defined by

Av(A)

fQfQv(e0x)pe(xvp(O('v)(0.)A)

A) dO
dO'

is bijective, and thus has a unique inverse.

Within the homogeneous parallel scheduling context we are

discussing in this paper, expectation propagation refines the

hyper-parameters Aa in (3) by iterating an algorithm which

may be described as message passing along edges in the factor

graph. To describe the involved dynamics, we will denote a

message passed at time k along an edge between the parameter

mj--a. node 0 and the factor node fa(ra, Oa') by m(k) Similarly.
we will denote a message passed along an edge between a

factor node and a parameter node by n(k) Given its incoming

messages m k)a j C 2(a), the factor node fa calculates its
outgoing messages na-k) j je 2(a) with the equation

(k) -M(k)

na ) j

- -jj) a

v(Wj)fa(ra, Oa) 17 exp (v(Oi) mm)ka) dOa

A-1 (Ia

iGP(a)

vV fa(ra Oa) rI exp .v(t9) mi ia) dOa
ai P(a)

This processing is done in parallel at each factor node. At
the next step, all of the parameter nodes {0j } calculate their outgoing messages mja from their incoming messages na-j
in parallel using the equation

mj(-k±a1)n k S

-k)j

cECY(j) \ {a}

The estimate in (2) is given by setting [Aa]j = na-j, where
[Aa]j is the part of Aa which multiplies v(0j).

III. A GAUSSIAN APPROXIMATION DE FOR EP

It has been shown [14] that under assumptions satisfied in our homogenous factor graph local to this paper, DE analysis

877
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:42:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

[5], [6], [7], [8] may be applied to expectation propagation. In particular, the random selection of the edges in the factor graph enables us to state that, with probability -> 1 as the number of parameters to estimate grows to infinity (S -*> oc),
given Vj = 00 for all j C {1,.. ., S}, the messages naj are
identically distributed according to the probability distribution
qa0,k given by the iteration
dp-1
q,oo,k+1 := a l°oo X ° q X 0 ,k
where ®dp 1 is the operator which convolves its input dp- 1 times with itself to produce its output, ya. denotes convolu-
tion with the probability density of the messages passed by the
factor nodes of degree one given oj00Vj C {1, ... . SI, so that, Aa(ra) -yo for all a e {1,... S} and a0o is the
operator which outputs the probability density for the random variable
H (a, Y) =

( df v(0j)f (ra,Oa)exp ( V(0i) i)) dOa

A-' JQ\iiP(a) \j/

aji f(ra,Oa)exp v((0i) dOa

dfQdf ~

~V~G~P~~(a)\j

(4)

given as its input the probability density q from which yi, i e

2(a) are i.i.d. samples, independent from ra given Vj

00, Vj C {1, ...S}.

Here we wish to discuss the approximation of the DE

iteration (4) by approximating qk with a Gaussian distribution.

The first part of the DE operator ®dp 1 maps Gaussian

distributions to Gaussian distributions. The second part of the

DE operator yao X will also yield a Gaussian density provided

both yao and its input density are Gaussian. On the other hand,

in general the nonlinear operator a0o is not guaranteed to do

the same. If it did, of course, given that the initial message

densities qo was Gaussian, one could totally determine the

density qk for a fixed k as S -> oc, by studying the properties

of the iterative map Goo which gives the mean vector and

covariance matrix of the message density

dp-1
®S) qo,,Oo := a0o a° V(Ip, El)

where AV is the jointly Gaussian PDF, so that

Goo (/-t, El) := (/-O,vo, °X9°o)
= J where Po"0 qoo(0,0

and
Eo vo = X(0 _- o,ao)(0 Aoao)Tq ,o (0)dO

Ultimately, if possible, it is desirable to study the dynamics of the iterated map

(u,+l Ek+l,) =G0o,(Uk Ek)

(5)

as opposed to the map in (4), whenever the message densities may be accurately approximated by Gaussians, because it reduces the dimensionality from having to consider the dynamics of an iterative nonlinear operator on a function space to the dynamics of a nonlinear map on Euclidean space. Of course, studying the deterministic dynamics of either (4) or (5) is far easier than directly studying via simulation the evolution of EP as a whole, since the latter would require many Monte Carlo simulations of the entire network, while the former may be executed by considering Monte Carlo simulations for the inputoutput behavior of a single factor node and a single parameter node. For this reason it is of interest to consider conditions
under which the message densities qk in (4) may be accurately approximated by Gaussian distributions. We presently discuss two situations in which such an approximation can be made.
In the first situation, we can regard the operation of the factor node to be well approximated as locally linear about the means of its inputs

As. 1 (Weak Gaussian Approximation via Local Lineariza-
tion): On the r and -y support of the probability density
Pr, (ra 0)pa1 (-y0), the operation H admits a first order
Taylor series approximation about the conditional means of raandy
a(r1,E[E 1[)-
+Vr, H (E [ral E [A]) (ra - E[ra])
+VxH(E [ra],E[A])(Y - E[ 1]) (6)
where E is the conditional expectation given Vj = 00 Vj C
{1, ., S}.

Assumption X, together with an initial message distribution q0 and degree one factor node message distribution yao that are Gaussian, is sufficient (but not necessary) to guarantee that studying the dynamics of the map
(1(k+1) (k+)) =Go (p(k) (k))

accurately determines the message distribution. A more strict assumption, which we will presently discuss,
reduces the dimensionality of the map Goo by making a
more stringent assumption on the probability densities for the
messages being passed.

As. 2 (Strong Gaussian Message Distribution Assumption):
The messages correspond a posteriori distributions for (imaginary non-physical) additive white Gaussian noise channels, i.e. it is assumed all of the messages Aa are of the form
u(Q,(:7=1A2)(J v(O) (Q0 )dO) (7)

for some e, where ? is the output of an imaginary channel

+ n (, J I)

(8)

Thus, the message probability density, conditioned on V = 00, and now taking e to be the random variable , will

878
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:42:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

be determined by only one variable, which is the standard deviation of the noise (72
This second assumption allows us to apply another well known technique from iterative decoder analysis, extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) analysis [9], [10], to the analysis of the performance and convergence of expectation propagation. In particular, consider the mutual information between the messages A in (8) and the parameters to infer V
I(o; Oo) f P\O,wo (Ao,0o) log (P'\ lxgo (A000)) dAodOo -f px0o(o) log (po(Ao)) dAo = J((J)
where the last inequality indicates that given a prior density
for 00, this mutual information is exclusively a function of or.
Furthermore, this function is bijective, so that again given the prior density for o0, the mutual information of the channel (8) determines the message density. Thus, under the assumption 2, we can study the dynamics of the iteration (4) by considering a map between mutual informations. In particular, given any
mutual information (A; ), andOj = OoVj one can determine a message density qvio,0, which then may be operated upon
by the the first part of the DE operator, which represents the action of the parameter node, to get q1
dp-1
the mutual information between A1 q 1 and V may then be calculated by determining the appropriate or in the imaginary channel (8) via Monte Carlo simulations or by direct calculation. In this manner, one may build a map between an input message mutual information with the parameter to be estimated and an output message mutual information with a parameter to be estimated describing the effect of a single calculation at a parameter node, which is called
an EXIT function, denoted by IOUT := To( IN) Similarly,
given any mutual information value 11, one may calculate
or = J-1(11) and thus the corresponding message distribution
q 1, and calculate the mutual information with the parameter to
be estimated of the output messages of a factor node a ql,
whose mutual information with the parameter to be estimated may be calculated (again either by hand or via Monte Carlo simulation of the factor message map). This then gives a map
IOUT := T1(lIIN) representing the effect of the factor node.
One may then study the evolution of the mutual information over iterations using
lk+1 = T, o To(lk)
where Ik is the mutual information between the messages passed at the kth iteration and the parameter to infer W.
Because of the one dimensional nature of the map To and
T1 one can draw a graph which can be used to predict the performance over iterations of expectation propagation in arbitrarily large homogeneous random regular factor graphs. This graph is called an EXIT chart [9], [10]. It consists of
two parametric lines (I, To (I)) and (T1 (1), 1). The location of
intersection of the two lines determines the performance of

expectation propagation in the large system limit. In particular,
one may draw contours of constant mean squared error for
V as the lines J-1(lo) + J-1(l1) = oJ2 where 10 and 11 are
the horizontal and vertical axes of the graph, respectively. This is because we add the messages m + n along an edge
connected to a parameter 0j to get the hyperparameter for
the current estimate of the a posteriori distribution for V. If the two lines (I, To (I)) and (T1 (1), 1) intersect at = I' with I' < He, then the ultimate mean squared error offered by expectation propagation in the large system limit will be
(72 J -(I/)+J-1(I/) (i.e., the intersecting contour). We shall
now illustrate both an example application and the utility of the theory with an example concerning distributed fusion in sensor networks.

IV. APPLICATION DISTRIBUTED FUSION IN SENSOR NETWORKS

Consider a sensor network of nodes {nj j e {1,...,S
with each sensor node nj trying to determine information concerning a parameter Oj. In order to ensure energy efficiency,
the sensor network employs a random sleep strategy, under

which at discrete time instant k a randomly selected collec-

tion of df nodes with indices denoted by A(k) are awake.

Only nodes that are awake may observe the environment

and communicate with each other. The random sleep strategy

is implemented using a pseudo-random number generator

which repeats after a certain number of time steps W, so that

A(k) = A(k mod W). In order to ensure constant average

power dissipation across the network, the pseudo-random

number generator is chosen such that over the time interval

W -1 > k > 0 each sensor node is awake the same number of

times. The observations made at time k by the awake nodes are

denoted by rk. Given the parameters Oj = OjVi C {1, ... . SI,
the observations between different time periods before the

repetition of the pseudo-random number generator controlling

the sleep cycle are statistically independent. On the other hand,

we assume that, given the same collection of awake sensors,

the actual observation process varies slowly, so that we have

the equality rk+S = rk. Thus, for any time k > S, it suffices to
consider the conditional probability density for r0...s-, := r given 0.

W-1

r|B(rO0) : = p,kI0K(rk Ok)

(9)

k=O

where A(k') = [0 j C A(k')]. We further assume a certain
IOk(r symmetry in the observation processes so that Pr.k t ) =
prk/ k/(r 0) for any k' :t k. Finally, a priori, the param-
eters {flqi C {o,...,W}} are independent and identically
distributed. The goal of the distributed data fusion is to provide
each node nj with enough of the information concerning what observations happened while it was asleep (i.e. ri with j not in A(i)), so as to give it knowledge of the a posteriori
distribution p*jj,(.lr), while still obeying the constraints of
the given sleep strategy. Expectation propagation is a natural solution for this problem. To see this, consider the factor graph

879
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:42:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

corresponding to the joint distribution

EXIT for EP with Gaussian R.V.s p=.999,r .25g=1, 1=)

W-1

s

Pr 0(r,O) 1p7 H k0,(rk Ok) 17Po (0)

k=O

j

One may perform expectation propagation on this factor graph, and the messages passed may literally be passed between
the different nodes. The right nodes in the bipartite graph correspond to different sensors, and in particular represent the parameters. The left nodes in the bipartite graph correspond to different time instants. At a given time a, the awake nodes
broadcast the messages {mj,a j C P(a)} to each other and then locally each compute {fna-j la e ¶(j)}. This factor
graph satisfies the homogeneity properties, with degree one
factor nodes pvo (0j), and other common degree factor nodes prk k(rk Ok). The subgraph of this graph which drops the
factor nodes of degree one and the edges connected to them is a regular bipartite graph, which was selected randomly. Thus we have all of the ingredients to allow for DE (4) to correctly model expectation propagation's behavior as a distributed data fusion algorithm. We now additionally hypothesize that the strong Gaussian approximation holds (2) and analyze the performance of expectation propagation based distributed data fusion using an EXIT chart.
To allow us to plot an example EXIT chart, let us addition-
ally assume that the P.k IOk (rktOk) is a Gaussian distribution
with mean ok and covariance matrix E whose diagonal elements are 'y2 and whose off diagonal elements are Ey2 for all k. We discuss specific cases of physical sensor networks where (9) and the other symmetry assumptions hold in a companion paper [15] since their purpose here is simply to demonstrate the utility of the application of EXIT chart theory to expectation propagation. Additionally, we choose the factor node degree to be df = 2, so that only two sensor nodes are on at any given time, and let the correlation coefficient e of the 2 x 2 covariance matrix be .999, so that the nodes in the sensor network stand to gain a lot from collaboration. Furthermore, again for the sake of demonstrating the theory,
let us assume that Vj is a priori a Gaussian random variable
with mean ,u and variance r1 (so that it is a scalar quantity)
for all j, and thus v(W) = [0, 02]. An EXIT chart for this
situation is depicted in 1. From this graph, we can see that if the size of the network is large enough S > 100000 in this case, DE correctly predicts both the convergence behavior and asymptotic performance of EP to be a MSE of about -35 dB.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we showed that the extrinsic information transfer theory developed for the performance and convergence analysis of large block length iterative decoding extends easily to general EP under some homogeneity assumptions. We then demonstrated that this extension of the theory allows for application of EXIT chart techniques to the analysis of EP based approaches to a wide variety of inference tasks, including the distributed estimation in sensor networks application presented here.

:^ -I
_
C: 3 CZ O

0\

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Mutual Information I, T0 (bits)

Fig. 1. An example EXIT chart. The solid and dashed lines are the average results of MC runs of actual EP for a network size S.

REFERENCES

[1] T. P. Minka, "A family of algorithms for approximate bayesian infer-

ence," Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2001.

[2] , "Expectation propagation for approximate Bayesian inference," in

Uncertainty in AIO1, 2001.

[3] J. M. Walsh and P. A. Regalia, "Iterative constrained maximum likeli-

hood estimation via expectation propagation," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf

on Acous., Speech, and Sig. Proc. (ICASSP), Toulouse, France, May

2006, pp. V-713 - V-716.

[4] J. M. Walsh, "Distributed Iterative Decoding and Estimation via Expec-

tation Propagation: Performance and Convergence," Ph.D. dissertation,

Cornell University, 2006.

[5] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, "Iterative turbo decoder analysis

based on density evolution." IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19,

pp. 891-907, May 2001.

[6] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, "Design of

capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes," IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, no. 2, pp. 619-639, Feb. 2001.

[7] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, "The capacity of low-density parity-

check codes under message-passing decoding," IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599-618, Feb. 2001.

[8] H. E. Gamal and A. R. Hammons, Jr., "Analyzing the turbo decoder

using the gaussian approximation," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47,

pp. 671-686, Feb. 2001.

[9] S. ten Brink, "Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel

concatenated codes." IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 1727-1737,

Oct. 2001.

[10] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, "Design of low-density

parity-check codes for modulation and detection," IEEE Trans. Com-

mun., pp. 670 - 678, Apr. 2004.

[11] L. D. Brown, Fundamentals of Statistical Exponential Families with

Applications in Statistical Decision Theory. Institute of Mathematical

Statistics, 1986.

[12] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan, "Graphical models, exponential

families, and variational inference," Department of Statistics, University

of California, Berkeley, Tech. Rep., 2003.

[13] S. Amari, Methods of Information Geometry. AMS Translations of

Mathematical Monographs, 2004, vol. 191.

[14] J. M. Walsh, "Density evolution for expectation propagation," in IEEE

Int. Conf on Acous., Speech, and Sig. Proc. (ICASSP), Honolulu,

Hawaii, 2007, accepted for Publication.

[15]

"Expectation propagation for distributed estimation in sensor

networks," in Proc. VIII IEEE Int. Conf. on Sig. Proc. Adv. in Wireless

Comm. (SPAWC), 2007, submitted.

880
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:42:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

