Cycle and Distance Properties of Structured LDPC Codes Based on Circulant Permutation Matrices

Jean-Baptiste Dore´, Marie-He´le`ne Hamon and Pierre Pe´nard
France Telecom, Research and Development Division, 4 rue du clos courtel, 35512 Cesson-Se´vigne´, France {jeanbaptiste.dore, mhelene.hamon, pierre.penard}@orange-ftgroup.com

Abstract— This paper investigates cycle and distance properties of structured Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes based on circulant permutation matrices. A very simple algorithm to detect and construct codes with good cycle properties is proposed. A geometrical approach to design codes with good girth properties is then presented and illustrated, through the definition of rules for the design of parity check matrices without short length cycles. An upper bound on the minimal distance of the proposed structured code is also derived. The information provided by this bound can help the construction of the parity check matrices, in order to achieve a target minimum distance.

I. INTRODUCTION

Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes were introduced by Gallager and have raised a particular interest in the past few years. LDPC codes are now increasingly considered as the introduction to communication systems and the evolution of these codes towards industrialization motivates the design of structured LDPC codes suitable for hardware implementation [1]. In particular Quasi Cyclic (QC) LDPC codes are interesting as they both simplify encoding and decoding process. Their hardware implementation only requires shift registers. QC LDPC codes from circulant permutation matrices have been studied by many people (see [2] for instance). Furthermore, for moderate lengths, this class of LDPC codes turns out to be not only practical, thanks to the cyclic structure, but also performs well. Recently, authors of [2] demonstrated that for a particular regular QC LDPC, the minimum distance of a (dv, dc)-regular QC LDPC is bounded by (dv + 1)! where dv and dc are the variable and check node degrees. Cycles properties of QC LDPC have been studied for particular classes of LDPC codes, and many authors have proposed code families based on regular QC LDPC with good girth properties [2] [3]. In this paper, we propose to discuss cycle properties of structured LDPC codes based on circulant permutation matrices which can be viewed as Irregular Repeat-Accumulate codes (IRA) [4]. We introduce a graphical model to look for cycles in the code graph derived from [2] and to construct codes maximizing locally the girth. In a second part we propose to determine a bound on the minimum distance of a particular class of structured QC LDPC codes which are well suited for implementation.

II. STRUCTURED LDPC CODES
We first propose to introduce a structured LDPC code construction. The parity check matrix of the code is based on shifted identity matrices and has the following form:

H = [Hs Hp]

(1)

where Hs is a sparse (N − K) × (K) matrix and Hp is a (N − K) × (N − K) triangular matrix. Using the following notation x = [c p], where c is the information word and p is the parity word, x is a codeword if, and only if:

HxT = [Hs Hp]

cT pT

= 0T

(2)

We denote by v the projection vector and parity bits are

computed using:

vT = HscT

(3)

pT = Hp−1vT

(4)

First, Hs is a low density matrix of size (mz) × (kz), where z is called the expand factor. This matrix consists of blocks

of circularly shifted identity matrices or zero matrices of size

z × z of the following form:

 Iδ(0,0)

Iδ(0,1)

···

Iδ(0,k−1) 

Hs = 

Iδ(1,0) ...

Iδ(1,1) ...

··· Iδ(i,j)

Iδ(1,k−1) ...



(5)

Iδ(m−1,0) Iδ(m−1,1)

Iδ(m−1,k−1)

If δ (i, j) is positive then Iδ(i,j) is defined as being a z × z circularly left shifted identity matrix by δ (i, j) mod z posi-

tions, where mod denotes the modulo function. If δ (i, j) is

negative, Iδ(i,j) is defined as being a z × z zero matrix. We denote S as the base matrix representative of Hs. This base

matrix contains the shift coefficients δ (i, j):

 δ (0, 0)

δ (0, 1)

···

δ (0, k − 1) 

S = 

δ (1, 0) ...

δ (1, 1) ...

··· δ (i, j)

δ (1, k − 1) ...



δ (m − 1, 0) δ (m − 1, 1)

δ (m − 1, k − 1)

(6)

Finally, we propose to define Hp by:

I

I1 

Hp =  I

I I

...

I



(7)

0

II

where I is a z × z identity matrix and I 1 is a z × z identity

matrix shifted left by one position:





0

··· 0

I1 = 

1
0 ...

0 1

... ...

... 

(8)

0

10

1-4244-0769-9/07/$20.00 © 2007 IEEE.

1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

y

12

43

0 2

A(x,y)

A0

A3

Fig. 1. Graph of the positive entries of the base matrix and corresponding permutation coefficients. In this example gmBin = 6
It is important to note that the shift is not done circularly to ensure the existence of the inverse of Hp, or in other words, to guarantee the existence of an encoder. It can be easily verified that the proposed construction can be viewed as a simple accumulator code. It should be mentioned that these codes are similar to the systematic version of IRA codes [4].

III. CYCLE PROPERTIES

In this section, we discuss a simple algorithm to detect short

length cycles based on the geometrical representation of the

parity check matrix.

The first step in designing of a structured LDPC code based

on circulant permutation matrices consists of determining the

positions of the positive shift coefficients. In order to avoid

short length cycles, since cycles in the Tanner graph cause the

sub-optimality of belief propagation algorithm, a very simple

method consists of optimizing the positions of the positive

entries of S in such way that the graph of positive coefficients

does not have short cycles. The graph of positive coefficients

is a reduction of the code graph where each permutation

coefficient is associated to an edge. For example, the graph

of the positive entries of the following base matrix is plotted

in Figure 1:





1 4 −1

S =  2 −1 2 

(9)

−1 3 0

We label the length of the smallest cycle in the graph of positive coefficients gmBin. It is very simple to derive a lower bound on the length of the smallest cycle gmin in the graph
defined by the expand parity check matrix, since in the worst

case, all positives coefficients are equals and then there are z cycles of length gmBin, so:

gmin ≥ gmBin

(10)

Therefore, a basic design method consists of optimizing the positions of positive coefficients in the base matrix in order to avoid short length cycles in the graph of positive entries (using Progressive Edges Growing (PEG) [5] for example) and then randomly or pseudo randomly choose values of positive coefficients. However, it is very difficult to design a code without short length cycles using this method. First, the base matrix is not, in most practical cases, a sparse matrix (the number of positive coefficients is not higher than number of negative coefficients: see [6] for example). In this case, it is very difficult for any algorithm to construct a graph without four-length or six-length cycles. Secondly, the proposed construction has a staircase structure, and it adds an additional constraint on the design: if there are two positive coefficients in position j and j + 1 in a column of S, then a

A1

A2

x

p

(a)

(b)

Fig. 2. Location of a non-null element in a circularly shifted identity matrix by p positions (a) and illustration of a four-length cycle (b)

four-length cycle exists in the graph of positive coefficients due to the proposed definition of Hp. Therefore it is impossible to design the graph of positive coefficients without four-length

cycles if:

dmv ax >

m 2

(11)

where dvmax is the maximum variable degree and with the constraint dmv ax ≤ m. Consequently we propose another design method in order to detect and avoid short length cycles.

First we characterize, through a geometrical representation,

the localization of non-null elements in the circularly shifted identity matrix by p positions. Using the axis illustrated in Figure 2, the coordinates of point A, characterizing non-null

elements of the circularly shifted identity matrix, are defined

by :

A :=

x (x + p) mod z

:=

(y − p) mod z y

(12)

A four-length cycle is introduced by a specific position

of two variable nodes and two check nodes. Therefore we

can consider the following configuration into a parity check

matrix:

IδA0 IδA1

IδA3 IδA2

(13)

We label A0, A1, A2 and A3, the points defining the non-null
elements in each matrix. A1 is defined to be the projection of A0 on the non-null elements of matrix IδA1 , A2 is the projection of A1 on the non-null elements of matrix IδA2 and A3 is the projection of A2 on the non-null elements of matrix IδA3 , as illustrated in Figure 2. The coordinates of the points A0, A1, A2 and A3 are defined by:

A0 :=

x x + δA0 mod z

A3 :=

yA3 − δA3 mod z yA3

A1 :=

yA0 − δA1 mod z yA0

A2 :=

xA1 xA1 + δA2 mod z
(14)

A four-length cycle exists if, and only if, the projection of the

point A3 on the non-null elements of matrix IδA is the point A0. Therefore, there is a four-length cycle if and only if:

xA0 = xA3

(15)

Using equation (15) and without loss of generality for x = 0, the graph contains four-length cycles if, and only if:

(δA0 − δA1 + δA2 − δA3 ) mod z = 0

(16)

2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This principle can be extended for length 2l cycles which are introduced by a specific configuration of l variable nodes and l check nodes. We denote Ai, i ∈ [0, 2l − 1], the point corresponding to a ”1” in matrix Iδi , in such a way that Ai+1 is the projection of Ai on the matrix Iδi+1 . Using equation (12), and without loss of generality with xA0 = 0, abscissa of point Ai (in their proper axis as defined in Figure 2), can be written as:
xA1 = (δ0 − δ1) mod z
xA2 = (δ0 − δ1) mod z
xA3 = (δ0 − δ1 + δ2 − δ3) mod z ... = ...
2l−1
xA2l−1 = ( (−1)iδi) mod z
i=0

Therefore, there is a 2l-length cycle if and only if, xA0 = xA2l−1 , and consequently:

2l−1

(−1)i δi mod z = 0

(17)

i=0

If there is a 2l-length cycle in the graph of the base matrix,

then a 2lk-length cycle (k ∈ [1, z]) may exist in the code

graph. Without loss of generality we consider xA0 = 0, and then:
2l−1

xA2l−1 = ( (−1)iδi) mod z

(18)

i=0

The projection of A2l−1 on non-null elements of matrix Iδ0 is the point A2l. Abscissa of point A2l is equal to xA2l = xA2l−1 = α. Therefore the point A2kl has an abscissa equal to xA2kl = (kα) mod z. If the constraint defined by:

2l−1
p (−1)i δi mod z = 0, ∀p ∈ [1, k − 1] (19)
i=0

is checked, then a 2kl-length cycle exists. This facts enables

the detection of all cycles in the code graph, knowing the

permutations coefficients.

In particular, it can be interesting to determine the coef-

ficient δj, knowing the 2l − 2 coefficients δi, i = j which

maximizes the cycle length. First we define the metric γj by:





γj = 2l−1 (−1)i δi mod z

(20)

i=0 i=j

The cycle length is maximized if:

k γj + (−1)j δj

mod z = 0, ∀k ∈ [1, z − 1]

(21)

In other words, the cycle is maximized if γj + (−1)j δj and z are relative prime numbers. This fact enables us to optimize the code gradually, incrementally determining the coefficients to avoid short length cycles. This method can be viewed as a simplified PEG like algorithm, working on

permutation coefficients. The proposed design algorithm can
be expressed:
Initialization: Initialize position of negative entries in S and the Target Cycle Length : TCL Incremental generation of S: for j = 0 to k − 1 do
for i = 0 to m − 1 do Perm List = 0 to z − 1 if δ(i, j) ≥ 0 then Forbidden List = Search Forbidden Perm(TCL) Perm List = Perm List - Forbidden List if card(Perm List ) > 0 then δ(i, j) = Perm List(rand()) else Exit - No Solution end if end if

While authors of [7] propose a design algorithm where permutation coefficients are randomly chosen and then checked in order to avoid particular four and six-length cycles, our algorithm gradually constructs the code to produce a code with a minimum target cycle. This algorithm becomes very interesting when the base matrix is dense (i.e for high coding rate) or when z is small.
To summarize, we have introduced rules to design parity check matrices without short length cycles and an associated design algorithm. In the next section we propose to investigate the distance properties of the proposed structure.

IV. DISTANCE PROPERTIES
In this section, we present some results and bounds about the minimum distance of the proposed structure. First we propose to introduce basic notations and concepts.
We consider a weight one vector c with a ”1” at index j:

c = [0 · · · 1 · · · 0]

(22)

We define y as the projection of c through a left shifted identity matrix by δ positions:

y = IδcT

(23)

y is also a weight one vector and the index of the ”1” is (δ+j) mod z. If the projection vector has a ”1” in index h then the

corresponding index in the accumulator input sequence is:

h

m (h mod z) + z

(24)

The output weight of an accumulator is straightforwardly

computed using the concept of Return To Zero Sequences

(RTZ) [8]. A RTZ sequence is defined by a list of symbols that

makes the encoder diverge from state 0 and then return to state

0. The RTZ sequence for an accumulator has the following

form:

...010...010...

The accumulator output weight is the difference between the positions of two successive indexes of non-null elements as illustrated in Figure 3. Using this property, the output accumulator weight is determined from indexes of non-null elements in the accumulator input sequence. We propose to discuss about a particular case of a weight two information

3

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Input . 0 0 1 0 0 1 0 . Output . 0 0 1 1 1 0 0 .
Fig. 3. Typical input and resulting output of an accumulator code

N = 672 − R = 1/2 − QPSK − STOP := 50 blocks errors 100

Best proposed

Worst proposed

10−1

Best random

Worst random

10−2

word with two consecutive ones at position j and j + 1, with

j ∈ [0, K − 1] and j mod z = 0, j + 1 mod z = 0, in order

to determine bounds on the minimum distance.

First, and without loss of generality, we consider Hs as a (qz)×(z) matrix which consists of q circularly shifted identity

matrices. A projection of a vector with two consecutive ones

through Hs results in a vector with q couples ”11” (see Figure 4). Moreover, from equation (24), the distance between

two ones of each couple is m in the accumulator input

sequence (see Figure 4). Therefore, the minimum distance can

be bounded by:

dmin ≤ 2 + mq

(25)

In the case of a LDPC code with the proposed structure, the minimum distance of the code is then bounded by:

dmin ≤ 2 + mqmin

(26)

where qmin is the smallest variable degree of Hs. This bound has consequences on the code design when flexibility is required. If a system needs a large range of block sizes, it should be preferable to increase linearly parameter m. However, when the block size flexibility is limited to few kilo bits (see for example [1]), it would be better from an implementation point of view, to fix parameter m for a sufficient minimum distance, and linearly increase parameter z [6]. In this case the class of code is asymptotically bad since the minimum distance does not grow linearly with the code size. This properties does not mean the code is bad in all cases. For small block sizes, a few kilo bits for example, an asymptotically good code may have a small minimum distance while an asymptotically bad code may have a good minimum distance.

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
To verify the validity of the design algorithm, we construct structured LDPC codes with rate 1/2 and N = 672. Code parameters are m = 12, z = 28 and the degree distributions, expressed in term of node perspective, are equal to λ(x) = 0.0015 + 0.4985x + 0.3333x2 + 0.1667x5 and ρ(x) = 0.003x4+0.997x5. Two sets of codes are designed and bit error rates (BERs) are compared for a transmission over additive white gaussian noise (AWGN). The first code set is randomly generated (there is no constraints on cycles), while the second code set is designed with the proposed algorithm. Simulations were carried out by an hardware decoder with a

0

j j+1

Input sequence z-1
Projection through Hs

Accumulator input sequence m
Output sequence
Fig. 4. Example of a weight two input sequence with a one at position j and j + 1 and resulting output sequence. In this exemple q = 3

BER

10−3

10−4

10−5

10−6

10−7

10−8

10−9

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

4.5

Eb/No

Fig. 5. BERs over the AWGN channel (R = 1/2,K = 336)

stopping criterion of 50 block errors for the last point. Figure 5 illustrates performance of the worst and the best of the two sets of codes. The worst randomly generated code suffers from poor performance because of four-length cycle. These cycles involve variable node of degree three resulting in a poor minimal distance. The best generated code have four-length cycle involving variable nodes of degree six and four. The smallest cycle length is eight for the two constructions from the proposed algorithm. We can see the codes constructed with the proposed algorithm outperform the randomly generated codes.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper we have proposed to discuss cycles and distance properties of a particular class of structured LDPC codes based on circulant permutation matrices. A geometrical approach to design codes with good girth properties has been presented and illustrated. We have also shown that the minimum distance of the proposed structure is bounded by the minimum degree of the systematic part of the parity check matrix. This bound influences the choice of the base matrix size for a target minimum distance. To conclude, this paper offers tools for the design of good structured QC LDPC codes which are increasingly considered as the introduction to communication systems (IEEE 802.16.e, IEEE 802.11n).
REFERENCES
[1] Draft Amendment to IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks - Part 16, IEEE Project P802.16e Std. 10, June 2005.
[2] M. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permuation matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, Aug 2004.
[3] R. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. Fuja, and D. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, Dec 2004.
[4] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” Second International Conference on Turbo Codes, Sept 2000.
[5] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, vol. 2, Nov 2001.
[6] D. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” IEEE International Conference on Communications, vol. 4, May 2004.
[7] Y. Zhang and W. Ryan, “Structured IRA codes: Performance analysis and construction,” to appear, IEEE Transactions on Communications, 2006.
[8] R. Podemski, W. Holubowicz, C. Berrou, and G. Battail, “Hamming distance spectra of turbo codes,” Ann. Telecomm., vol. 50, sept 1995.

4

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

