IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

2277

Iterative Decoding Using Attenuated Extrinsic Information from Sum-Product Decoder for PMR Channel With Patterned Medium
Yasuaki Nakamura1, Mitsuhiro Nishimura1, Yoshihiro Okamoto1, Hisashi Osawa1, Hajime Aoi2, Hiroaki Muraoka2, and Yoshihisa Nakamura2, Fellow, IEEE
The Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Ehime University, Matsuyama 790-8577, Japan The Research Institute of Electrical Communication (RIEC), Tohoku University, Sendai 980-8577, Japan An LDPC coding and iterative decoding system is studied in perpendicular magnetic recording (PMR) with a bit-patterned medium. We propose an iterative decoding scheme using attenuated extrinsic information from a sum-product decoder, and the bit error rate (BER) performance of the LDPC coding and iterative decoding system is evaluated by R/W computer simulations. It has been clarified that at an areal density of 1 Tbpsi the proposed system provides a jitter margin of the island edges of approximately 0.6% larger than the conventional system using (3, 18)-regular LDPC code.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, LDPC codes, patterned medium, perpendicular magnetic recording (PMR).

I. INTRODUCTION
I N recent years, storage densities have increased every year. To increase the storage densities, perpendicular magnetic recording (PMR) using a patterned medium draws attention as a next-generation magnetic recording system that can achieve the recording densities over 1 Tera-bit per square inch (1 Tbpsi) and higher [1]. Furthermore, the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes proposed by Gallager are attracting attention as good error correcting codes [2]. The LDPC code with iterative decoding has much higher decoding gain extremely close to the Shannon limit [3], [4]. Then, it is expected to apply the LDPC coding and iterative decoding system to a PMR channel using a patterned medium. In this paper, to prevent error propagation and bring an efficient iterative decoding, we study an iterative decoding system using attenuated extrinsic information from a sum-product decoder in a PMR channel with a patterned medium.

Fig. 1. Block diagram of LDPC coding and iterative decoding system.

II. R/W CHANNEL MODEL

Fig. 1 shows the block diagram of an LDPC coding and

iterative decoding system using a PMR channel with a pat-

terned medium. The user data sequence is encoded in units of

a sector by the 128/130(0,16/8) RLL encoder and an LDPC

encoder as shown in Fig. 1. The (0,G/I) RLL code is used to

remove catastrophic error events by I constraint. After that,

the sequence is transmitted to the precoder which has a char-

acteristics of

. Here, stands for the delay

of a recording channel bit interval . The precoded partial

response (PR) channel consists of the precoder, a R/W channel

and an equalizer. In this paper, a double layered bit-patterned

medium with a soft under layer (SUL) is used as a recording

medium. In Fig. 2, and are an island length and an

island interval represented by unit of length, respectively, and

stands for a duty ratio

of island. Fig. 3 shows

the reproducing waveforms [5]. The solid and the dashed lines

show the waveforms from an isolated island with the infinite

length and an isolated island with length. shows the

saturation level of an isolated waveform. The normalized linear

density is defined as

. Here, and stand for

the rising time of the isolated waveform from to

Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2007.893421

Fig. 2. Structure of double layered patterned medium.
Fig. 3. Isolated waveform.
and user bit interval, respectively. Fig. 3 shows the case of which corresponds to the areal density of 1 Tbpsi
[5]. We assume that the noise is composed of a medium noise and an electronic noise. The electronic noise is an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), while the medium noise is

0018-9464/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2278

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

generated by the fluctuation of the edges of island, and results

in a signal independent colored noise. Here, the fluctuation of

the edges of island is generated by the variation in island size

and position due to the limitation of the fabrication techniques

[6]. When the standard deviation of AWGN in bandwidth of

is expressed as where

is a user bit rate, the

SNR for the AWGN is defined as

[dB]. We also assume that the lithography jitter is followed by

Gaussian distribution with a standard deviation normalized

by . The equalizer in Fig. 1 is composed of a low-pass filter

with a normalized cut-off frequency by and a transversal

filter with taps. The equalizer output sequence is input to the

APP decoder. The APP decoder outputs the log-likelihood ratio

(LLR) sequence calculated by both the output sequence of the

precoded PR channel and the extrinsic information provided by

the sum-product decoder. However, the extrinsic information

is not used at the first decoding. The LLR sequence from the

APP decoder is input to the sum-product decoder, and the

sum-product decoder calculates the LLR as the reliability infor-

mation using the parity check matrix of the LDPC code. After

sum-product decoding, the extrinsic LLR sequence is returned

to the APP decoder. Here, and stand for the iteration

times in the sum-product decoder and in the iterative decoder,

respectively. In this paper, the extrinsic LLR sequence from

the sum-product decoder is attenuated by using an attenuator

with an extinction ratio . After given iterations, the data

sequence is determined by a hard decision, and RLL decoding

is performed.

Fig. 4. Relationship between the row weight and the BER.

III. LDPC CODES AND ITERATIVE DECODER

A. LDPC Codes

An LDPC code is defined by a very sparse parity-check ma-

trix. As it is allowed for the parity-check matrix of the LDPC

code to change the row and column weights, it is possible to

compose various codes with code length and rate. There is a re-

lation of the trade-off between the code rate and the ability of

error correction. Fig. 4 shows the relationship between the row

weight and the bit error rate (BER) when the column weight is

fixed to 3. The parameters are set at

dB

and

. Here,

is the optimum number of taps of the

transversal filter which gives the minimum BER at each row

weight. The PR channel is equalized to PR1 channel, i.e., class

I PR channel [7] with a DC-response which has a good perfor-

mance in PMR channel [8]. As can be seen in Fig. 4, we can

obtain the best BER performance when the row weight is ad-

justed to 18. Thus, we use (3, 18)-LDPC codes in this study.

B. Iterative Decoder
The iterative decoder consists of the APP decoder, the sumproduct decoder and the attenuator as shown in Fig. 1. It is well known that the LDPC code with iterative decoding based on the sum-product algorithm [9] exhibits good performance. Therefore, we employ a sum-product decoder for the error correction using the LDPC code. In the sum-product decoder, the calculation of reliability information using the message and check nodes is alternately repeated. After given iterations , the extrinsic LLR sequence is returned to the APP decoder. In the iterative process from the sum-product decoder to the APP decoder, the extrinsic LLR sequence is attenuated at each iteration. Fig. 5 shows the relationship between the extinction ratio
in the attenuator and the BER. The parameters are set to

Fig. 5. Relationship between the extinction ratio and the BER.

the same values as those of Fig. 4 except

dB

and

. From the figure, it can be seen that the iter-

ative decoding system shows the best BER performance at the

.

Fig. 6 shows the LLRs at the sum-product decoder output

of the conventional system

. The parameters are

set to the same values as those of Fig. 5, except and .

In Fig. 6, (a)–(c) show the LLRs at

0, 3, and 5, respec-

tively. The symbols and show the correct LLR and the erro-

neous LLR, respectively. As can be seen in the figures, LLR in

the conventional system becomes large at

, but deterio-

rates again as shown in (c). We show the LLRs for our proposed

system in Fig. 7 where the parameters are set to the same values

as those in Fig. 6(b). It can be seen that the proposed system re-

moves the erroneous LLRs at

.

IV. PERFORMANCE COMPARISON

Fig. 8 shows the BER performance for the jitter margin of

the island edges, where symbols circles and triangles show the

performance of the conventional system

and the

proposed system

, respectively. The white and the

black symbols show the cases of the PR1 channel and the gener-

alized PR1 (GPR1) channel [10]. The parameters are set to the

same values as those of Fig. 5, except and . As can be

seen in the figure, the system using the GPR1 channel show the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAKAMURA et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING USING ATTENUATED EXTRINSIC INFORMATION

2279

Fig. 6. LLRs at the sum-product decoder output of the conventional system.

Fig. 7. LLRs at the sum-product decoder output of the proposed system.

Fig. 9. SER performance.

sults show that the proposed system provides an island-edge jitter margin of approximately 0.6% larger than conventional system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT

This work was supported in part by the Scientific Research of Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (JSPS), in part by the Grant-in-Aid no. 17560310, and in part by the Storage Research Consortium (SRC), Japan.

Fig. 8. BER performance.
better performance than that of the PR1 channel. In addition, the proposed system provides a jitter margin of the island edges of 0.6% larger than that of the conventional system. It is equivalent to an SNR improvement of about 0.6 dB. Fig. 9 shows the sector error rate (SER) performance for the jitter margin of the island edges. Here, the symbols and the parameters are set to the same values as those of Fig. 8. As can be seen in the figure, the proposed system provides a better SER performance than that of the conventional system.

REFERENCES
[1] P. W. Nutter, IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 6, pp. 3551–3558, Nov. 2004.
[2] R. G. Gallager, IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962. [3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp.
1645–1646, Aug. 1996. [4] S. Y. Chung, IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001. [5] Y. Suzuki, J. Appl. Phys., vol. 97, p. 10P108, 2005. [6] G. F. Hughes, IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, no. 2, pp. 521–526, Mar.
2000. [7] E. R. Kretzmer, IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 14, no. COM-1, pp. 67–68,
Jan. 1966. [8] Y. Okamoto, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., vol. 235, pp. 259–264, 2001. [9] R. R. Kschischang, IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp.
498–519, Feb. 2001. [10] Y. Okamoto, Dig. Intermag, vol. CQ-03, 2006.

V. CONCLUSION

We have studied an iterative decoding system to prevent error Manuscript received January 20, 2002; revised November 18, 2002 (e-mail: propagation in PMR system with a patterned medium. The re- nakamura@rec.ee.ehime-u.ac.jp).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:02:39 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

