ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

Iterative LDPC decoding using neighborhood reliabilities
Valentin Savin CEA-LETI, MINATEC, 17 rue des Martyrs, 38054 Grenoble, France
valentin. savin @ cea.fr

Abstract- In this paper we study the impact of the processing order of nodes of a bipartite graph, on the performance of an iterative message-passing decoding. To this end, we introduce the concept of neighborhood reliabilities of graph's nodes. Nodes reliabilities are calculated at each iteration and then are used to obtain a processing order within a serial or serial/parallel scheduling. The basic idea is that by processing first the most reliable data, the decoder is reinforced before processing the less reliable one. Using neighborhood reliabilities, the Min-Sum decoder of LDPC codes approaches the performance of the SumProduct decoder.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check codes can be iteratively decoded using a parallel, serial or mixed (serial/parallel) scheduling. The parallel scheduling consists in processing all check nodes of the associated Tanner graph and then update all variable-tocheck messages. The serial scheduling may apply to variable or check nodes. Applied to check nodes, it consists in progressively processing each check node and updating outgoing variable-to-check messages from all variable nodes connected to the processed check node. Equivalently, each check node processing is preceded by the update of the incoming variableto-check messages. The mixed scheduling can be described as a serial scheduling applied to groups of check or variable nodes, which performs a parallel scheduling inside each group of nodes. Several serial or mixed schedules where proposed in the literature [1], [2], [3], [5]. The only advantage of the serial scheduling reported in the literature is that the decoding algorithm converges about twice faster as when the parallel scheduling is used [3], [5]. Due to this fact, the serial scheduling also performs better than the parallel scheduling when a very small number of iterations, e.g. 10 iterations, is used [1], [5].
In this paper, we focus on the impact of different scheduling schemes on the decoder performance, assuming a large number of iterations. By concern of brevity, the paper addresses only the case of binary LDPC codes, but the presented results also apply to non-binary codes. We fix the following notations:
* ( is a Tanner graph comprising N variable nodes and M check nodes,
* AV {n 1 < n < N} is the set of variable nodes,
* M {mn 1 <n < M} is the set of check nodes, * 'y and 'yn are the a priori, respectively a posteriori, information (log-likelihoods) available at the variable node n, * am,n is the variable-to-check message from n to m,

* /3m,n, is the check-to-variable message from m to n.
The analysis of iterative decoders is generally a challenging task. This is mainly due to cycles appearing in the Tanner graph, which depreciate the extrinsic nature of the exchanged information. One way to cope with graph's cycles is to use the computation trees associated with the decoding process [4]. Fix some variable node n and consider the a posteriori information Tn. By examining the updates that have occurred, one may recursively trace back through time the computation
of Tn,. This trace back will form a tree graph rooted at n and
consisting of interconnected variable and check nodes in the same way as in the original graph, but the same variable or check nodes may appear at several places in the tree. The fundamental observation is that the computation tree does not depend only on the Tanner graph or the scheduling type but also on the updating order. The success of decoding the variable node n depends on the reliability of the information conveyed through the computation tree.
Let us be more specific. Thereafter we assume that the all-zero codeword is transmitted through the channel (for symmetric channels this assumption does not induce any loss of generality). We also assume that the 0 bit corresponds to a positive information. Let IT denote the computation tree of Tn - the variable node n will remain fixed through this section. We also denote by P and Q the sets of variable and respectively check nodes of T. The set P has a distinguished element, namely the tree's root, which will be still denoted by
n. A T-codeword is a vector (xp)pEp satisfying all constraints
corresponding to check nodes q e Q. Its multiplicity vector is
an integer-valued vector ([X] k ) kAg, where [X] k is the number
of variable nodes p C X, corresponding to the variable node k CJV, such that xp = 1.
We recall (see [4]) that a T-codeword (xp)pEp such that
x = 1 is called a minimal deviation if it does not cover any other nonzero T-codeword. In [4], theorem 4.2, it is proved that when the Min-Sum decoding is used, a necessary condition for a decoding error (on bit n) to occur is that for some minimal deviation x we have:

S [XIk yk <0

(1)

kcEAf

Obviously, the probability that such an inequality holds increases when the computation tree contains several copies p of some unreliable variable nodes k; that is, when there exist

1-4244-1429-6/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

221

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

minimal deviations x having large [X]k for variable nodes k with -yk < 0.
For a serial or mixed scheduling, check nodes that are processed first and consequently, variable nodes connected to them, have a large number of copies appearing in the computation tree. From the above discussion, we conclude that the decoder should process first the most reliable check nodes. For this, we have to specify what a reliable check node should be. Intuitively, the reliability of a check node should be a measure of the reliabilities of variable nodes connected to it or, more involved, a measure of the reliabilities of variable nodes located in some neighborhood of a specified depth. This will be formalized in the following section where we introduce neighborhood reliabilities. However, it should be clear that in whatever way we will define the reliability of a check node, its estimation should be updated at each iteration, rather than be computed only once before starting decoding.
II. NEIGHBORHOOD RELIABILITIES
The depth-d neighborhood of a node 7 of X, denoted by
V is the set of nodes whose distance to 7 is lower or equal to d. We also denote by -(7() the set of nodes connected to 7, that is t(7w) =V() \ {7F}.
When a message passing iterative decoding exchanges messages along the edges of the Tanner graph, we consider that the following soft information is available at graph's nodes:
* the information available at variable nodes, which consists of the a priori information, the a posteriori information and the variable-to-check messages, * the information available at check nodes consisting of check-to-variable messages.
Moreover, at each iteration and for each variable node n, a hard bit sn is computed according to the a posteriori information Tn. For each check node m we also consider the parity check
value Cm =e Sn C {0, 1} (sum mod 2). This value
n C:(m)
constitutes the hard information available at the check node m. The check node m is said to be verified if m = 0.
Definition 1: We call neighborhood reliability of depth d, or simply reliability of depth d, a function associating to any node 7 a real value depending on the information available
at nodes T C V(d) and that is used to determine a processing
order during a message passing iterative decoding. When nodes 7 from the above definition are only either of
check or variable type, we speak about reliability functions for check, respectively variable, nodes.
We notice that the amplitude of a soft information represents a measure of its reliability. The hard information Cm can be used to detect whenever non accurate information is conveyed through the graph. Let us detail this point. Let m be an unverified check node; meaning that Cm = 1 after a certain number, say 1, of iterations of the Min-Sum decoding. Using the all-zero codeword assumption, it follows that there is a
variable node n e X(m) such that Yn < 0 (we assume that the
0 bit corresponds to a positive information). From the theorem 4.2 in [4], it follows that, at iteration 1, the computation tree

of Tn contains a minimal deviation satisfying (1). If, at the next iteration, unverified check nodes are processed first, many copies of such minimal deviations will appear as subtrees of different a posteriori information computation trees. Therefore, such a processing order would increase the probability of minimal deviations satisfying (1) to appear in computation trees at iteration I + 1. Here, we also use the fact that any minimal deviation of a subtree extends to a minimal deviation of the global tree (this can be easily derived using the recursive construction of minimal deviations described in section III).
A. Examples
We restrict ourself only to reliability functions for check nodes. In order to obtain better reliability functions, we have to consider deeper neighborhoods. Obviously, increasing the neighborhoods depth, results in an increased complexity of reliabilities computation and can create problems with handling the cycles of the Tanner graph. In practice, depth-2 reliability functions seem to be a good compromise. We define a realvalued, depth-2, check nodes reliability function, f(m), as follows. First, we define f'(m) to be the sum of reliabilities of the soft information available at the unverified check nodes m C \ {m}; so, assuming the graph is 4-cycle free, we have:

f'(n) = E
nCEH(m)

m/7(
Cm/=

/3m,n

As discussed above, the only circumstance when we can detect
an unreliable information conveyed through a check node is
when the check node is unverified. That explains why we
consider only unverified check nodes in the above definition. Thus, the function f'(m) gives an extrinsic measure of the unreliability, rather than the reliability, of a check node m.
This means that a check node ml is more reliable than a check
node M2 if f'(Ml) < f'(m2). To prevent that an unverified
check node ml be more reliable than a verified check node
M2, we define the function f (m) taking into account both Cm and f'(m), as follows:

f (m) = (um,f'(m))

Consequently, we say that a check node ml is more reliable
than a check node M2 if Ormi < (JT2 (thus, ml is verified
while M2 is not) or if om, = Om2 and f'(ml) < f'(M2). This corresponds to the lexicographical order between f(ml)
and f(m2). In this case, check nodes can be processed using
a serial (or mixed) scheduling, starting with the most reliable check node(s) and ending with the less reliable one(s).
As we will explain shortly, integer-valued functions con-
siderable reduce the use cost of neighborhood reliabilities.
Therefore, we propose an integer-valued reliability function f (m), as an alternative to the real-valued function defined above. First, for each check node m and variable node n C
'H(m) we define Om,n as a flag indicating whenever there are or not unverified check nodes m' e 'HX(n) \ {mt}. That is

222
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

Cm,n =0 if m'= 0 for all m' C XY(n) \ {m} and Cm, = 1
otherwise. Then, we define f(m) as follows:
f(m) = (7m(dcax + 1) + E 7m,n
neit (m)
where dmax is the maximum check degree. We note that the
sum E Om,n increments the value of f (m) by 1 for each
nC( (m)
variable node n e XH(m) that is connected to at least one unverified check node, other than m. The minimum of this sum is 0 and it is obtained if all check nodes (except m) located in the depth-2 neighborhood of m are verified. Its maximum is equal to dCLx and it is obtained if all variable
nodes n C X(m) are connected to at least one unverified check
node, other than m. Thus, we declare a check node mnl more
reliable than a check node m2 if f(Ml) < f(m2). The role
of the term orm(dmax + 1) is to make sure that a verified check node will always be declared more reliable than an unverified
one. Precisely, we have f (m) C {O, .. ., dc}ax if m is verified and f(m) e {dmax+ 1, ....,2dcax+ 1} if it is not.
B. Use of neighborhood reliabilities
As in the above section, we consider only reliability functions for check nodes. The description below also applies to reliability functions for variable nodes, by reversing the roles of variable and check nodes. We distinguish two cases, according to whether the reliability function is real or integervalued.
1) Real-valued reliability functions: The principle of a message passing decoding using a real-valued reliability function f, is represented in figure 1. As usually, it consists in an initialization step followed by several iteration steps, each one of which includes:
* A module that computes the reliability f (m) of each check
node m. The set of check nodes is sorted according to the computed reliabilities, starting with the most reliable check node and ending with the less reliable one. This may correspond to decreasing (as in figure 1) or increasing inequalities according to whether the reliability function mesures the reliability or the unreliability of a check node. * A processing loop of variable and check nodes. The ordered set of check nodes is processed using a serial scheduling. Therefore, each check node processing is preceded by the update of the incoming variable-to-check messages.
Obviously, appropriate changes can be brought to the above description, depending on the implementation of the decoding algorithm and the reliability function: * The computation of the a posteriori information can also be integrated into the processing loop. This is actually desirable when variable-to-check messages can be easily derived from the a posteriori information. * The ordered set of check nodes can be partitioned in groups of p check nodes and a mixed scheduling may be used, starting with the first group of p most reliable check nodes and ending with the group of p less reliable ones. In this case, we say that the decoding parallelism is equal to p.

REALIBILITIES COMPUTATION Vm E {1, ... M} compute f(m) sort check nodes according to their reliabilities
f(ml) > f(M2) > -- > f(m-1l)
set j = I
0:
:
:
CD
74--c1.:
m-q
0o)
Fig. 1: Iterative decoding using a real-valued reliability function
2) Integer-valued function: Let f be an integer-valued reliability function. Obviously, the principle described in the above section also applies in this situation. Nonetheless, using integer-valued functions, one can avoid sorting the set of check nodes and, thus, eliminate the additional complexity of this operation. Precisely, that is done by partitioning the set of
check nodes according to their reliabilities. We denote by fmi1
and fmax the minimum, respectively the maximum, of check
node reliabilities. For each f C {fmin, ... , fmax} we define Cf
to be the set of check nodes of reliability f. Then, we can run the iterative decoding using: * A serial scheduling. In this case, check nodes are ordered according to their reliabilities and the order of check nodes inside each subset Cf is random. * A mixed scheduling, with fixed decoding parallelism p, by partitioning the ordered set of check nodes in groups of p check nodes * A mixed scheduling, with variable decoding parallelism. In this case the subsets Cf are serially scheduled and inside each subset Cf the check nodes are processed in parallel.
More details can be found in section IV, where an integervalued reliability function is integrated to the Min-Sum decoding of LDPC codes.
III. CUTTING BACK THE COMPUTATION TREE
In section I we explained how the processing order of check nodes affects minimal deviations of computation trees and therefore impacts the decoding performance. That motivated the introduction of neighborhood reliabilities in section II. In this section we show that it is possible to force minimal deviations to pass through reliable nodes of the computation
tree.
Let IT be the computation tree of some a posteriori information, after L iterations of the decoding algorithm. Each edge of the tree corresponds to a message sent from the incident bottom node to the incident top node during one of the iterations 1, .... L. We denote by fT the subgraph comprising all edges (and incident nodes) corresponding to the
Ith iteration. Then TL is a subtree of IT while, for I < L, J1 is
a subgraph comprising several disjoint subtrees. Leaf nodes of
717, which will be also called iteration leaf nodes, correspond

223
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

Root node C )

Subtree EL Leaf nodes
0

Doubled variable nodes ar both in TL and L -1
0J Subgrah TL- 1

Subtree of TL-1

Fig. 2: Computation tree

necessarily to variable nodes. Root nodes of subtrees of il 1 correspond to variable nodes that are both in Ti and Ti-1, as
illustrated in figure 2.
Reconsidering notations from section I, let (xP)Gp' be a minimal deviation of T. The support of (xp)pEEp, denoted by
X, is by definition the subtree of IT constituted of variable
nodes p such that xp 1 and check nodes q connected to at least one such a variable node. In fact, due to the minimality
of the deviation (xp)pEp, it is quite simple to prove that each
check node q e X has a unique child variable node in X (and of course a unique variable parent node). Such a subtree will be called minimal subtree of 'T. Obviously, there is a one-toone correspondance between the set of minimal deviations and the set of minimal subtrees. Minimal subtrees, thus minimal deviations of T, can be recursively constructed as follows:
Step 0. Add the root variable node of 'T to X. Step i, (i > 0). For each variable node added to X at step i-1, add all its child check nodes to X. For each such a check node, choose a variable child node and add it to X.
Let q be a check node of X and assume that q e JT for
some iteration I e {0, ... ,L}. Let p be the unique child
variable node of q in X, thus p is also in E,. We denote by m,
respectively n, the corresponding check and variable nodes of the original graph. The set of child nodes of p, denoted by
1jp, is constituted of copies of check nodes in X(n) \ {m}. Check nodes in ITp can belong either to f17 or 17-71, therefore we can write 7tp = (1) U E 1) with self-evident notations.
If p is not a leaf node of JT, then T(0 #0 and all check
nodes q' C E(l) are also in X and they are copies of check nodes m' C X(n) that were processed at iteration I before the
check node m. Consequently, check node q has at least one more reliable descendent1 check node in X. Unfortunately,
this does not happen if p is a leaf node of 177, as in this case
'Trj) 0.
In order to force that minimal subtrees always contain more reliable descendent check nodes we modify the decoding
algorithm as follows: if p is a leaf node of the Ith iteration, it
retransmits to its parent check q the same message am,n as

'Here and through the end of this section we use descendent node with the
following restrictive meaning: if q and q' are nodes of a tree, we say that q' is descendent from q if the parent node of q' is a child node of q.

the one transmitted during the (I- 1)th iteration at the time when check node m has been processed. We call this operation cutting back. Now, we remark that p is an iteration leaf node if and only if m is the first processed check node (at iteration 1) between all the check nodes in 'H(n). Therefore, when the iteration starts, each variable node n may potentially have iteration leaf copies p in different computation trees in which it appears. During the iteration, each time a check node m has been processed, variable nodes in X(m) cannot anymore have iteration leaf copies in any computation tree. This can be easily implemented as explained in the next section.
Summarizing the above discussion, we can derive the following proposition. A check node of IT is called a final check node if all its child variable nodes are leaf nodes of IT (consequently, it has no descendent check nodes).
Proposition 2: Let IT be the computation tree of some a posteriori information computed using a reliability function and the cutting back operation. Let X be a minimal subtree of IT and q a check node of X. If q is not a final check node of IT, then it has at least one more reliable descendent check node in X.
IV. MIN-SUM DECODER IMPLEMENTATION USING
NEIGHBORHOOD RELIABILITIES
The reliability functions from section II-A were integrated to the Min-Sum decoder of LDPC codes. In practice, the MinSum decoder using any one of these functions performs very close to the SPA decoder. We also observed that the real-valued function f induces only a slight performance improvement with respect to the integer-valued function f. Therefore, in this section we focus on the implementation of the Min-Sum decoding using the integer-valued function f, which has a lower complexity. Nonetheless, we present simulation results for both integer and real-valued functions.
Initialization step. We initialize the a posteriori information
'Tn = ' and the check-to-variable messages /3m,n = 0
Iteration loop. Its implementation is represented in figure 3. We use a mixed scheduling with variable decoding parallelism, as explained in section II.
* On top of the iteration loop we placed the hard bits computation and check nodes verification modules. This is justified by the fact that the reliability function f makes use of parity check values Cm * They are followed by the reliabilities computation module. It computes check nodes reliabilities and, accordingly, places
check nodes in reliability sets Cf. Besides, it also set leaffiags of variable nodes (Leafn) to 1: at this moment any variable
node can potentially have iteration leaf copies in different computation trees in which it appears. * The processing loop is placed at the bottom of the of the iteration loop. Subsets Cf are serially scheduled and check nodes inside one such a subset are processed in parallel. Each time that a new check node m is processed we update the
a posteriori information of variable nodes n e XY(m). This
is done by subtracting the old check-to-variable message, then computing the new one and finally adding the new

224
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

HARD BITS: Vn C A ,S,n = bit corresponding to sgn(P)

E+00

CHECKS VERIFICATION: VTm M4, C

Sn

.nEi>H(ml)

Y

EXIT

RELIABILITIES COMPUTATION: Vm C compuStief,(m)
'df 'e ffmin,. ., fmax I define Cf = {m 1(m) = f I
set f = fmin and Vln E AX, Leafn,= 1l

VARIABLE NODES PROCESSING
Vn e Cf, Vn e al(m) if Leaf, = 0 then a,,,n n 3m n

CHECK NODES PROCESSING AND A POSTERIORI INFORMATION

Vm E Cf,Vn E H(m)

77T)= -re-l/ //withdraw old messages

L,rie // compute new messages

c

7ll=7t(l

tIsgn(a., /)

min

|°mn

n'E'H(-)\fnl) {n

an = an 3r0+ n //add computed new messages

Leafn 0

//not an iter leaf node anymore

N\y

1IE-06

\t

0 K 4032 E-07

0,5 0,75

1

1,25 1,5 1,75

2,25

Eb/NO (dB)

Fig. 4: Performance of Sum-Product, Min-Sum and Min-Sum with Neighborhood Reliabilities decodings with binary LDPC codes (AWGN, QPSK, rate
1/2, K is the number of information bits, 200 decoding iterations)

I E+00

- - - Min-Sum Min-Sum + int NR Sum-Product
"I

Fig. 3: Min-Sum decoding using an integer-valued reliability function
message to the a posteriori information, as it is shown in the check nodes processing and a posteriori information module. Furthermore, each time a check node m is processed we set
leaf flags of variable nodes n e 'X(m) to 0, as they cannot anymore have iteration leaf copies in any computation tree. On top of this module we placed the variable nodes processing
module. Thus, any variable-to-check message can be updated by subtracting the corresponding check-to-variable message from the a posteriori information of the variable node. We note that this module concerns only messages sent to check nodes that are processed by the next module and that these messages are updated only if they come from variable nodes that are not leaf nodes with respect to the current iteration.
Figure 4 presents simulation results for irregular, rate 1/2, binary LDPC codes. We observe that for high signal-to-noise ratios the Min-Sum decoding with neighborhood reliabilities reaches the performance of the Sum-Product decoding.
Neighborhood reliabilities can easily be generalized to the case of non-binary LDPC codes and the integer-valued reliability function f can be used without any modification. Figure 5 presents simulation results for irregular, rate 1/2, LDPC codes over GF(8). Using neighborhood reliabilities the Min-Sum decoding performs very close to the Sum-Product decoding at high signal-to-noise ratios.
Remark 3: We note that theorems 4.1 and 4.2 and corollary 3.1 of [4] also apply for the Min-Sum with neighborhood reliabilities decoding. By using neighborhood reliabilities we only modify computation trees of the a posteriori information.
Remark 4: In case of non-binary codes, minimal deviations of computation trees can be exploited in a completely different manner, leading to a self-contained decoding algorithm. This will be presented in a forthcoming paper.

1E-03
l E-04
l E-05 4 K= 2016 bits \ (672 GF(8)-symbols)
IE-06
0,5 0,7 0,9 11 1,3 15, 1,7 1,9 2,1 Eb/NO (dB)
Fig. 5: Performance of Sum-Product, Min-Sum and Min-Sum with Neighborhood Reliabilities decodings with LDPC codes over GF(8) (AWGN, QPSK,
rate 1/2, K is the number of information bits, 200 decoding iterations)
V. CONCLUSIONS
We showed that the processing order of nodes of a bipartite graph affects minimal deviations of different computation trees and therefore impacts the Min-Sum decoding performance. This motivated the introduction of neighborhood reliabilities and we developed a method that force minimal deviations to pass through reliable nodes of computation trees. We proposed an integer-valued reliability function that can be easily integrated to the Min-Sum decoding while preserving low complexity and independence on noise variance estimation errors. To the best of our knowledge this is the first exemple of self-correction method for the Min-Sum decoding, which applies to both binary and non-binary LDPC codes.
REFERENCES
[1] E. Boutillon, J. Tousch, and F. Guilloud. Ldpc decoder, corresponding method, system and computer program. US 2005/0138519 patent.
[2] Y Mao and A. H. banihashemi. A new schedule for decoding low-density parity-check codes. In Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM '01, volume 2, pages 1007-1010, 2001.
[3] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger. An efficient message-passing schedule for ldpc decoding. In IEEE Proc. Conv. of Eletrical and Electronics Engeneers, pages 223-226, 2004.
[4] N. Wiberg. Codes and decoding on general graphs. PhD thesis, Likoping University, 1996. Sweden.
[5] J. Zhang and M. P. Fossorier. Shuffled iterative decoding. IEEE Trans. on Comm., 53(2):209-213, 2005.

225
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:01:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

