542

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

Implementation of a Flexible LDPC Decoder
Guido Masera, Member, IEEE, Federico Quaglio, Member, IEEE, and Fabrizio Vacca, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Low-density parity-check codes (LDPC) are among the most powerful error correcting tools today available. For this reason they became very popular in several applications such as the digital satellite broadcasting system (DVB-S2), Wireless Local Area Network (IEEE 802.11n) and Metropolitan Area Network (802.16e). Whereas several code—specific decoders have been proposed in the literature, the implementation of a high performance yet flexible LDPC decoder still is a challenging topic. This work presents a novel formulation of the decoding algorithm that strongly simplifies internal communication requirements and enables the development of decoders supporting generally defined LDPC codes. The resulting architecture is tailored to decode both IEEE 802.11n and IEEE 802.16e LDPC codes, as well as any other code of comparable complexity. The implementation cost deriving from the full flexibility offered by the proposed approach is also evaluated.
Index Terms—Channel decoders, low-density parity-check code (LDPC), parallel architectures, reconfigurable architectures, VLSI implementation.
I. INTRODUCTION
THE remarkable error correcting capabilities of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] have led to their recent inclusion in several standards, such as IEEE 802.11n, IEEE 802.16e and DVB-S2. LDPC decoding can be carried out iteratively following a conceptually simple algorithm, well suited for parallel hardware implementations.
An LDPC code is a linear block code characterized by a very sparse parity check matrix . It is common to describe an LDPC code by a bipartite graph, called Tanner Graph [2], containing two sets of nodes: the first set of nodes represents the bits of a codeword [variable nodes (VNs)], the second set of
nodes implements the parity-check constraints [check nodes (CNs)]. The graph presents an edge between the th VN and the th CN if and only if the th bit is involved in the th parity-check equation.
The most typical decoding procedure is the message passing algorithm, also known as “sum-product” or “belief propagation” (BP) Algorithm [2], that implements the iterative exchange of node—generated messages along the edges of the graph. Even if nodes require computational capabilities, most of the implementation challenges come from the communication structure to support message exchange among VNs and CNs. In addition, modern applications need adaptation capabilities in a number of system parameters as block size and
Manuscript received July 27, 2006; revised November 29, 2006. This work was supported in part by the NEWCOM European Network of Excellence. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor G. M. Maggio.
The authors are with Dipartimento di Elettronica, Politecnico di Torino, Turin 10129, Italy (e-mail: fabrizio.vacca@polito.it).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2007.894409

code rate imposing tight flexibility requirements on hardware implementations.
Several realizations have been previously proposed to tackle the problem of efficient message delivery between the two types of processing units. Fully parallel architectures [3] usually result in excessive implementation cost, while serial architectures are too slow for most applications. Partially Parallel architectures, with multiple processing units serving VNs and CNs allow for proper cost-performance tradeoffs: a complete description of partially parallel decoders’ design space is available in [4].
Unfortunately, parallelism introduces the collision problem in memory access, a well—known problem already addressed in parallel turbo decoders implementations [5]. Two main approaches have been proposed to deal with collisions:
• to design collision free codes [6], [7]; • to design a decoder architecture able to avoid or at least
mitigate collision effects [5], [8]. Even if the first approach has proven to be effective, it significantly limits the supported code classes. The second approach, on the other hand, is well suited for flexible and general architectures.
Another challenging task is the design of LDPC decoders that are flexible in terms of supported block sizes and code rates. The need for decoders able to dynamically adapt to different transmission conditions is well known in practical communication systems. This problem has been faced in the past again introducing suitable constraints in the code design and exploiting regularities in the structure of the parity check matrix [9]. Such approach has proved to be very efficient when the required flexibility is limited to a set of pre-defined codes, but it tends to be inadequate when the support to generally defined codes is required.
In this brief, the problem of developing a flexible architecture capable of decoding generic LDPC codes with any structure block size and code rate is addressed. The proposed solution is partially parallel and scalable in terms of number of processors, in order to tradeoff throughput and complexity. The designed architecture is strongly based on a reorganized message-passing algorithm that was independently proposed in [10]–[13], [14] and [15]; for [14], [15] the method is exploited to reduce the complexity of a specific decoder, in this work we extend the idea applying it to the implementation of a flexible decoder.
The rest of the brief is organized as follows. After reviewing the main characteristics of LDPC algorithms, a novel reduced complexity decoding method is reviewed (see [12] for details); the resulting architecture is detailed in Section III. In Section IV, the implementation results are discussed, addressing an application-specific integrated circuit (ASIC) implementation on a 0.13- m CMOS technology. Finally, in Section V, conclusions are drawn.

1549-7747/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MASERA et al.: IMPLEMENTATION OF A FLEXIBLE LDPC DECODER

543

II. DECODING LDPC CODES

In message passing decoders, messages are exchanged along

the edges of a bipartite graph, and computations are performed

at the nodes. To avoid multiplications and divisions, the decoder

works in the logarithmic domain [2]. This algorithm is described

in the following equations, where represents the current iter-

ation, is the message generated by the

and directed

to the

is the message computed by and sent to

the . is the whole set of incoming messages for

and is the whole set of the incoming messages for .

VNs sum up all the messages coming from CNs, combining

them with the log-likelihood Ratio (LLR) associated to the

received bit, as shown

(1) On the other hand, CNs perform the following operation:

where

(2) is the product of the signs of the input messages

(3)

TABLE I
NUMBER OF EDGES  AND PROCESSING POWER REQUIRED BY EACH OF THE ANALYZED CODES (D = 10 MBPS, f = 100 MHZ, i = 20)

. This requires the MCNP to store, and then retrieve, local

copies of messages.

As a result of the simplified message passing, both MVNP

and MCNP repeat the same operations [(1) and (2)]; this also

implies that MCNP and MVNP can share the same processing

hardware leading to a considerable area save. We call this mod-

ified version of the BP algorithm low-traffic BP (LTBP) algo-

rithm since it achieve a remarkable reduction of exchanged data

between nodes. Additionally details of this decoding approach

are available in [10], [12], and [13].

In order to clarify the advantages offered by LTBP, it is useful

to introduce the concept of processing power , as firstly pro-

posed in [16]. According to this framework can be evaluated

on the basis of the rate of the code, the number of informa-

tion bits transmitted per codeword, the block size

,

the required information throughput , the operating clock fre-

quency , the maximum number of iterations and the

total number of edges to be processed per iteration . This rela-

tion is expressed as

(5)

and

is the cardinality (i.e., the number of edges) of the As two messages are associated with each edge (to be sent

CN. In (2),

is a nonlinear, nonlimited function defined as from the CN to the VN and vice versa),

gives the number

of messages that must be concurrently processed at each itera-

tion in order to achieve the target throughput. As an example,

(4) with Mbps,

(i.e.,

),

,

MHz and considering

,

In the original formulation of the decoding algorithm, each VN computes (1) generating multiple output messages, ; each message has to be delivered to a different CN. We define a modified VN processor (MVNP) that delivers a unique output message, in (1), evaluated as the sum of all incoming messages plus .
In the same way a modified CN processor (MCNP) is introduced. It generates a single output message to be delivered to all connected VNs, as expressed in (2). This means that the modified node processors have to exchange a reduced number of data, with a Multicast policy. In addition, the original messages
and need to be locally re-generated within the nodes. A MVNP receives inputs and implements the right part of (2) to retrieve the needed . In order to do so, the MVNP needs

we obtain

edges/cycle. This result can be read as

follows: the target throughput is reached using 14 processing el-

ements (PEs) implementing (1) and other 14 implementing (2).

Each PE is assumed to work concurrently with others and to

generate one message per clock cycle. This analysis, however,

does not take into account the message exchange overhead: yet

it assumes that all messages dispatched during a cycle are de-

livered simultaneously during the same cycle.

To verify the impact of communication scheme on the

throughput, we simulated the decoding algorithm on a set of

benchmark codes. Table I reports some details regarding the

selected codes. We considered a set of five codes gathered

from MacKay’s website [17] and three codes which have been

adopted in real applications (code 6 has been adopted for IEEE

802.16e Wireless Metropolitan Area Network, code 7 is the

the

values that were computed and locally stored at the candidate for IEEE 802.11n Wireless Local Area Network

previous iteration

. In a similar way, a MCNP receives while code 8 is one of the DVB-S2 codes). For each bench-

more inputs and implements the right part of (1) to obtain mark code the focus is posed on the total number of edges

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

544

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

TABLE II NUMBER OF CYCLES REQUIRED TO DECODE BENCHMARK CODES WITH DIFFERENT PROCESSING AND COMMUNICATION ARCHITECTURES

and on the required processing power (evaluated for a target

throughput of 10 Mbps with 20 iterations and assuming a clock

frequency of 100 MHz).

In Table II, the number of clock cycles needed to carry out

one half-iteration of the BP algorithm is estimated for a de-

coding architecture composed by multiple PEs, each one able

to receive/generate one input/output data per cycle. In column

two the theoretical number of cycles required to process all the

outbound messages for the case of 16 PEs is reported; the same

information is provided in column six for the case

.

Values in columns two and six do not consider the message

delivery overhead, while in column three, also related to the BP

case, the additional cycles introduced by collisions are taken

into account. In this case the communication structure is a Uni-

cast, nonblocking, 16—ports switching network. As it can be

seen, collisions cause a significant overhead in terms of addi-

tional cycles, ranging from 100% to more than 300% in the con-

sidered examples. Column four (labelled as Multicast) shows

the number of required cycles when the LTBP algorithm previ-

ously described is adopted with

and the same non-

blocking network as for column three: The percentage of saved

cycles is given in column five, while the two rightmost columns

report the numbers of cycles for the 32 PEs case. Results pro-

posed in Table II show that LTBP performs quite well, especially

when a medium-sized interconnection network is considered.

both the 16 and 32 processors cases. On the rightmost part of

Table II these numbers are reported.

A further improvement can be obtained if the mapping of

nodes to physical processors is optimized with the purpose of

minimizing the communication load among these processors.

Nodes to be mapped and their communication requirements

have been represented in the graph formalism and communica-

tion overhead was optimized by means of graph partitioning

(GP).

The graph partitioning tool available at [20] was used to op-

timize the node to processor mapping for some of the bench-

mark codes (i.e., the codes adopted for WLAN and WMAN ap-

plications). Experimental results show that graph partitioning

is worthy since it enables an additional computational saving

of 20% on average. As an example, code 6 requires 990 cycles

when the Multicast interconnection is exploited

; this

requirement is relaxed to 765 if graph partitioning is adopted.

This value is still significantly higher than the theoretical limit

(365 cycles, as reported in Table II) showing that a significant

number of collisions occurs in the network. However, the im-

provement with respect to the Unicast 1428 cycles is as high as

46.42 %. Graph partitioning approach become even more con-

venient in the 32 processors case, when this number is reduced

down to 411. We verified the potential of this approach also for

codes 4 and 7, obtaining 248 and 507 cycles, respectively, after

graph partitioning with 32 processors.

III. FLEXIBLE ARCHITECTURE A. Interconnection Network
The LTBP algorithm is of real help in the implementation of LDPC decoders only if a communication network supporting The interconnect network should be able to establish nonparallel Multicast is available. A straightforward structure to blocking connections among PEs [12]. In this work, the implement such a network consists of a crossbar switch and Crossbar, the Benes [18], and Clos [19] networks are compared a multiplexer bank. The crossbar switch supports all required in terms of complexity, number of control bits and number of message permutations at the destination processor side; the equivalent 2-to-1 multiplexers (MUX). multiplexer bank at the input supports possible replications The results are summarized in Table III for the case of 32 of source messages. Occasionally, a Multicast message can processors. The complexity is estimated as equivalent gates and be replicated into multiple Unicast messages, with the aim required number of MUX. In the last column the total number of to better pack the whole set of messages to be delivered in control bits needed to store a routing configuration is reported. a smaller number of cycles, thus reducing the half iteration This number is particularly useful for the Clos and the Benes latency. Of course, a proper schedule for deliveries is required cases: for both these structures, in fact, finding the routing conand the corresponding controls must be generated for the figuration for a given permutation is not a trivial task. To deal crossbar switch. A more efficient nonblocking network, such with this issue we use a dedicated memory to store pre-comas a Benes [18] or a Clos network [19], can also be used. The puted routing patterns (computed accordingly to [5], [12]) for number of cycles required in order to send all the messages each supported code. Benes network clearly appears to be the has been estimated for all the benchmark codes, considering best choice in terms of area occupation.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MASERA et al.: IMPLEMENTATION OF A FLEXIBLE LDPC DECODER

545

TABLE III COMPLEXITY OF DIFFERENT SWITCHING FABRICS (8 BIT MESSAGES)

Fig. 2. Decoding performances of the proposed approach.

Fig. 1. Block scheme of the modified variable/check node processor.

It is worth noting here that the nonblocking property of the

considered networks is not enough to avoid stall cycles for PEs:

when a collision on message destination occurs, it can not be

solved without the insertion of additional cycles and this is pre-

cisely the reason of the difference between columns 2 and 3 in

Table II.

To properly route messages in the Benes network, a control

memory should be adopted. In particular in order to address

code 4 in Table II with a 32 32 network, a memory with 497

words (of 144 bits, see Table III) is required. In the actual im-

plementation this control memory is mapped on an embedded Fig. 3. Block scheme of the designed flexible LDPC decoder.

512 144 SRAM (i.e., 737 kbits), leading to an area occupation

of 309, 186 m on a 0.13- m CMOS technology.

used to locally generate messages for current iteration, and

B. Modified Variable/Check Node Processor: MVN/CN

. The computation of the function is performed adopting the piecewise-linear (PWL) approach introduced in [13] rather

Each MVNP/MCNP is organized as in Fig. 1. The inbound

messages from the Multicast network [ and , in (1) and

(2)] are stored in the input message memory (

) (of

size

). The previously generated messages

(

and

) are stored in memories

and

and they are ac-

than adopting expensive look-up tables. In [13], it has been demonstrated that this approximation achieves very good decoding when data are represented over 8 bits, 4 bits for the integer part and 4 bits for the fractional one. The resulting bit-error rate (BER) performance of the proposed approach are depicted in Fig. 2 for the (1728,864) and (1944,972) codes.

cessed through a multiplexer controlled by the control unit CU. Sums required in (1) and (2) are obtained by means of the indi-

IV. RESULTS

cated subtracter and units (4) and stored in the

and A 32-processor version of the described decoder was syn-

memories (a

and

respectively), thesized and mapped on a 0.13- m CMOS standard cell

as absolute values and signs. This representation allows for the technology in order to explore the implementation complexity

independent processing of modulus and sign: the hardware ac- and throughput. Fig. 3 shows the structure of the whole de-

cumulator simply adds up absolute values of terms that compose coder, composed of 32 complete processors, 32 memory banks

either or , while the XOR gate combines the corresponding (ExcMsg) and a Multicast network made of 32 32-to-1 multi-

signs. When the processor is configured as a MVN, the received plexers and a 32 32 Benes network.

LLR must also be added to give the output . Obtained

After synthesis and mapping, a clock frequency of

or are converted back in two’s complement format and de-

MHz has been achieved with a logic complexity

livered as outputs. Finally, a subtractor and a second unit are of 170 kGates (0.98 mm ). Required memories introduce a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

546

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 54, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

TABLE IV COMPARISONS WITH DEDICATED IMPLEMENTATIONS

large contribution to the global area, and their size is strongly

correlated with the maximum code size to be supported. A

decoder version has been synthesized to support codes 6 and 7

(and all other codes with lower numbers of edges and nodes);

memories were mapped either on register file macros or on

SRAM macros depending on their size. The total memory foot-

print is 2.90 mm , leading to an overall area of 3.88 mm for

the whole decoder. The throughput per iteration

for the

proposed flexible LDPC decoder is equal to 515 Mbps for the

WLAN code and to 470 Mbps for the WMAN code resulting

in 64.4 Mbps and 58.7, respectively (after eight iterations),

which guarantees very good performance. In addition to the

two mentioned codes, different ones can be decoded by the

synthesized architecture: the number of nodes and edges must

be compatible with the size of allocated RAMs, but arbitrary

structures of the matrix can be accepted, simply requiring

a proper configuration to be loaded into the Benes control

memory.

Given these results it would be very interesting to try to com-

pare this solution with existing architectures. Unfortunately

such a comparison tends to be quite difficult to carry out. To the

best of our knowledge, in fact, the vast majority of published

architectures focuses on some very specific sub-class of codes.

Our solution, on the other hand, has been designed with the aim

of being able to support virtually any kind of LDPC code.

Even if this comparison turns out to be difficult, one could

argue about the cost of such flexibility. In Table IV the proposed

architecture is compared with two promising implementations:

B-H is a fully parallel decoder presented in [3], while K-P is a

decoder described in [15] and it is based on very similar algo-

rithm simplification. However in [15] only a particular class of

regular LDPC codes are dealt with. To enable fair comparisons,

we selected a code with a similar number of VNs and CNs (i.e.,

code 4 of Table I).

Besides the main implementation features Table IV presents

an additional merit figure, namely the throughput to area ratio

(TAR): TAR can be viewed as a metric to assess the flexibility

cost. It is possible to observe how a fully-parallel dedicated so-

lution such as B-H is able to reach an impressive value of TAR;

on the other hand K-P is outperformed by a factor of 1.3 by the

fully-dedicated solution. K-P however achieves a good cost per-

formance tradeoff for the specific addressed code. Our solution

is, again, outperformed by K-P by more than one order of mag-

nitude but, on the other side, it can be used to decode any kind

of LDPC code (within the indicated limits of complexity).

V. CONCLUSION
The decoding of large LDPC codes requires a remarkable
processing and communication effort; in addition, flexibility in
terms of supported codes is one of the cornerstones of modern
communications systems. As a consequence, the design of a
flexible LDPC decoder represents a challenging and significant
case of study. Starting from the definition of a modified version
of the decoding algorithm, which abates the communication re-
quirements, a novel parallel while flexible architecture has been
conceived for an LDPC general purpose decoder.
The 32 processors ASIC implementation is able to achieve
good decoding throughput ensuring the ability to decode an ar-
bitrarily designed LDPC code. Additionally, the proposed archi-
tecture accepts the LDPC code to be changed on the fly, opening
the possibility to adapt it to current channel conditions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate 1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[4] T. Brack, F. Kienle, and N. Wehn, “Disclosing the LDPC code decoder design space,” Proc. DATE 2006, vol. 1, pp. 200–205, Mar. 2007.
[5] A. Tarable, S. Benedetto, and G. Montorsi, “Mapping interleaver laws to parallel turbo and LDPC decoders architectures,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 2002–2009, Sep. 2004.
[6] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[7] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” in Proc. IEEE ICC 2003, May 2003, vol. 4, pp. 2708–2712.
[8] F. Kienle, M. J. Thul, and N. Wehn, “Implemntation issue of scalable LDPC-decoders,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes & Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 291–294.
[9] A. I. V. Casado, W.-Y. Weng, and R. D. Wesel, “Multiple rate lowdensity parity-check codes with constant blocklength,” in Proc. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals Syst. Comput., Monterey, CA, Nov. 2004, vol. 2, pp. 2010–2014.
[10] G. Masera, “Flexible hardware for wireless communications: A case of study,” in Proc. URSI XI Nat. Symp. of Radio Sci., Apr. 2005.
[11] F. Quaglio, F. Vacca, and G. Masera, “Low complexity, flexible LDPC decoders,” in Proc. 14th IST Mobile Summit 2005, Jun. 2005.
[12] F. Quaglio, F. Vacca, C. Castellano, A. Tarable, and G. Masera, “Interconnection framework for high-throughput, flexible LDPC decoders,” in Proc. DATE 2006, Mar. 2007, vol. 3, pp. 124–129.
[13] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Finite precision implementation of LDPC decoders,” in Proc. IEE Commun., Dec. 2005, vol. 152, no. 6, pp. 1098–1102.
[14] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Multi-Gbit/sec low density parity check decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2005, vol. 5, pp. 5194–5197.
[15] S.-H. Kang and I.-C. Park, “Loosely coupled memory-based decoding architecture for low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1045–1056, May 2006.
[16] F. Guilloud, E. Boutillon, J. Tousch, and J. Danger, “Generic description and synthesis of LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., to be published.
[17] D. J. C. MacKay, “Encyclopedia of sparse graph codes,” [Online]. Available: http://www.interference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/ data.html
[18] V. E. Benes, “Optimal rearrangeable multistage connecting networks,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 43, pp. 1641–1656, 1964.
[19] S. C. Liew, M. Ng, and C. W. Chan, “Blocking and nonblocking multirate Clos switching networks,” IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 307–318, Jun. 1998.
[20] J. Demmel. Graph Partitioning, [Online]. Available: http://www.cs. berkeley.edu/demmel/cs267/lecture18/lecture18.html

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:56:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

