IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

1099

Iterative Decoding of Multiple-Step Majority Logic Decodable Codes
Ravi Palanki, Marc P. C. Fossorier, Fellow, IEEE, and Jonathan S. Yedidia

Abstract—We investigate the performance of iterative decoding algorithms for multistep majority logic decodable (MSMLD) codes of intermediate length. We introduce a new bit-flipping algorithm that is able to decode these codes nearly as well as a maximumlikelihood decoder on the binary-symmetric channel. We show that MSMLD codes decoded using bit-flipping algorithms can outperform comparable Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes decoded using standard algebraic decoding algorithms, at least for high bit-flip rates (or low and moderate signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs)).
Index Terms—Bit flipping decoding, Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) codes, iterative decoding, linear block codes, majority logic decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
I T WAS shown in [1], that iterative decoding of one-step majority logic decodable (OSMLD) codes performed very well; the performance was often better than that of ordinary low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2], [3] of similar block length
and rate for values of up to a few thousand bits, despite the fact that the parity-check matrix of OSMLD codes has a higher density than that of ordinary LDPC codes. The reason for the improved performance was mainly because the
matrix used for decoding was highly redundant, i.e., .
In this paper, we investigate iterative decoding of multiplestep majority logic decodable (MSMLD) codes for transmission over a binary-symmetric channel (BSC). With the use of redundant matrices, these codes have already been shown to perform relatively well on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [4], [5]. However, unlike on the AWGN channel, where the performance of iterative decoding does not approach that of maximum-likelihood decoding (MLD), we find that fast and low-complexity bit flipping (BF) algorithms can achieve near MLD performance on the BSC.
II. THREE-STATE DECODING ALGORITHM
Two different BF algorithms designed for LDPC codes with a few low-weight checksums per bit were proposed by Gallager in [2]. In these algorithms, the “message” from a bit to its neighboring check does not directly depend on the message sent by
Paper approved by F. Fekri, Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received December 8, 2005; revised April 6, 2006. This work was presented at the International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, September 2003. This work was performed at Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs (MERL).
R. Palanki is with Qualcomm Inc, San Diego, CA 92121 USA (e-mail: ravi@systems.caltech.edu).
M. P. C. Fossorier is with the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu).
J. S. Yedidia is with Mitsubishi Electric Research Labs, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: yedidia@merl.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.898699

that check back to the bit and vice versa. This is done in order to

prevent the introduction of correlations in the iterative process.

In our case, because of the very large number of checksums

corresponding to each bit, we can neglect that refinement with

negligible performance degradation and we can obtain the fol-

lowing algorithm, which simplifies Gallager’s Algorithm-B:

• For each checksum and for each bit in checksum ,

compute the modulo- sum of the initial value of bit

and of the other bit values computed at iteration-

.

• For each bit , determine the number of unsatisfied

checksums intersecting on it. If is larger than some

predetermined threshold , invert the original received bit

, otherwise keep this value.

The use of a single threshold implies that bits with very dif-

ferent values are viewed with the same reliability at the next

iteration. For the codes considered in [2], can take only a few

different values. This is not the case for the codes considered in

this paper. It seems reasonable to try to reflect the differing re-

liablities of the bits in our algorithm. Consequently, we modify

the algorithm described above into the following “three-state”

algorithm, which also allows bits to be erased and checksums to

be deactivated.

• For each checksum and for each bit in checksum ,

compute the modulo- sum of the initial value of bit

and of the other bit values computed at iteration-

.

If any of these bits is erased, the checksum is deactivated.

• For each bit , determine the number of unsatisfied

activated checksums intersecting on it.

If

, invert the original received bit .

If

, erase bit .

Otherwise keep the original received bit .

Empirically, we find that the three-state algorithm performs

best when the thresholds and are functions of the iteration

number. Unfortunately, we could only do a rough optimization;

however, this appears to be sufficient since the performance is a

rather insensitive function of the thresholds. We typically chose

to begin at the first iteration with equal to the maximum pos-

sible number of unsatisfied checks , and with

,

and then to decrease and by the same small fixed integer

(say one to five) at each iteration, continuing to decrease their

values until they reach zero.

The proposed three-state approach can also be applied in

a straightforward way to Gallager’s original Algorithm-B. In

fact, for a theoretical analysis, only this version is meaningful

since the simplified algorithm introduces correlation and it is

not known how to handle correlated values in the analysis of

an iterative decoding algorithm in general. In that case, the

three-state algorithm becomes a generalized version of the

algorithm described in [7, Example 5], where

.

Consequently, if we assume the graph representation of the

code is a tree, the same approach as in [7] can be used to

analyze the three-state algorithm.

0090-6778/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

III. DECODING APPROACHES

A

-step majority logic decodable Euclidean geom-

etry (EG) code over EG

can be represented by an

incidence matrix [8, pp.309–319]. The matrix is also

a parity-check matrix of the EG code. Its rows represent

the

-flats of the EG EG

not going through the

origin and its

columns represent the points other than

the origin, with

if the th point belongs to the th

-flat. Note that for

, we obtain the subclass of

Reed–Muller (RM) codes.

A straightforward approach is to run the BF algorithm based

on . This matrix contains many four-cycles, but it is redundant

with

. Futhermore, it is possible to use an

sub-

matrix of for decoding. The rows of are chosen

in a manner that exploits the cyclic nature of the code. That is,

if contains a row , it also contains all cyclic shifts of .

No noticeable difference in performance has been observed for

different choices of these rows.

If a sufficient number of checksums is used, then the

BF algorithm converges rapidly to its final solution while if not

enough checksums are used, the BF algorithm generally never

converges to a codeword. In this latter case, a decoding failure

is detected. This observation suggests a “call by the need” al-

gorithm in which, for

, checksums

are initially used for iterations. If the algorithm converges to

a codeword, correct decoding is assumed; otherwise, the algo-

rithm is re-initialized (not continued) and performed based on

checksums during iterations. This process is repeated

until either a codeword is found, or all checksums have been

used without success, in which case the decoding fails.

Fig. 1. BF decoding do the (255; 127; 21) EG code; low-SNR regime.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

We assume a BSC obtained from binary phase-shift keying

(BPSK) signaling, so that for a code of rate , we have

, where

is the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR)

per information bit.

Fig. 2. BF decoding do the (255; 127; 21) EG code; high-SNR regime.

A.

EG Code

In Fig. 1, the simulated error performance of three-state (with unbiased recording of the ties). This bound is represented

BF decoding of the

EG code with the direct in Fig. 1. One can see that the performance of the three-state BF

approach of Section III is compared to -bounded distance algorithm must be very close (within a few tenths of a decibel)

decoding (BDD) with the Berlekamp–Massey algorithm of its of MLD performance. The error performance of the standard

Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) code sum-product or “belief propagation” (BP) algorithm, initialized

counterpart as well as bit flipping with Gallager Algorithm-B with the crossover probability of the BSC is also shown in

of its

Gallager LDPC code counterpart. This EG code Fig. 1. The reasons for the degraded performance of BP at low

corresponds to

and the EG EG with 255 points SNRs are elaborated on in Section V.

other than the origin and 5355 planes not going through the We also mention that the advantage of the three-state BF al-

origin. Hence, we can construct a parity-check matrix with gorithm over Gallager’s Algorithm-B is a reduction factor that

5355 rows and 255 columns. A maximum of 200 iterations was ranges between two and five in the number of errors. This gain

selected, while on average much less are needed, especially at is small, but remains nonnegligible in approaching MLD per-

high-SNR values. We observe that three-state BF decoding of formance, especially since the three-state algorithm is not much

the EG code not only outperforms its counterparts at the SNR harder to implement than Gallager’s Algorithm-B.

values represented, but also remains quite close to the sphere In Fig. 2, we plot the performance of the three-state BF de-

packing bound (SPB), also represented in Fig. 1. In fact, a lower coding algorithm for the

EG code into the very

bound on the MLD failure rate for this code was computed by high SNR, or low decoding failure, regime. To obtain these per-

checking whether the decoding errors were also MLD errors formance curves, we randomly generated random errors of fixed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

1101

Fig. 3. BF decoding of the (255; 127; 21) EG code for fixed number of errors. Fig. 4. BF decoding of the (511; 256; 31) EG (or RM) code.

weight ,

and for each weight , evaluated the cor-

;

; and

, and . For each

responding error performance

. The overall error perfor- size, at most 10 iterations were performed. The value was

mance was then obtained by the average

set to the maximum number of unsatisfied checksums at each

initial iteration and decreased by one (or a small number) at

(1) each subsequent iteration while we chose

. Again

these values were not thoroughly optimized so that additional

The results are reported in Fig. 3. Since for word-error rates

(WERs) smaller than , no reliable evaluation of

is

possible, we simulated weights

, where

is the

smallest weight for which

. Based on these re-

sults, we computed: a) an upper bound on (1) by assuming the

same

for weights ,

; b)

a lower bound on (1) by assuming

for weights ,

; and c) an approximation by extrapolating

for weights ,

. A pessimistic lower bound on

MLD was also obtained by recording only the MLD errors for

weight

and assuming

for weights ,

. From Fig. 2, we conclude that the three-state

BF for the

EG code outperforms -BDD of its

BCH counterpart down to a WER of about

. We must also

mention that this performance is nearly the same as that of a

more complicated approach based on generalized parity-check

(GPC) matrices [9]. At all WERs down to

, the difference

between the straightforward method and the GPC matrix based

method is less than 0.1 dB.

secondary gains should be achievable.

The application of the variable cost method is validated by the

fact that for

, no undetected error was recorded at

all simulated SNR values. For

, at the SNR value

of 4.5 dB, about 10% of the errors were undetected (all of them

occurring when all checksums were considered) and at this SNR

value, one out of the 100 errors recorded was recognized as an

MLD error. At lower SNR values, no undetected errors and no

MLD errors were recorded. While a reasonably good error per-

formance is achieved, we are clearly not able to obtain a tight

bound on MLD performance. Because the three-state BF algo-

rithm has a very low WER even for error patterns with a number

of bit flips far beyond the guaranteed error-correcting capability

of the code, we are also not able to meaningfully repeat the

analysis of the very-high-SNR regime. We also observe that de-

spite the fact that the minimum distance of this code is about half

of that of its BCH counterpart, iterative BF decoding of this EG

code can easily outperform -BDD of its BCH counterpart and

approaches relatively closely the SPB at the WERs presented in

Fig. 4. We must also mention that a more complicated approach

B.

EG (RM) Code

based on the decomposable structure of RM codes yielded no improvement [9].

Fig. 4 depicts the error performance of three-state BF de- At a given code rate, as increases, the weight of the rows

coding of the

EG (or RM) code with the vari- of the parity-check matrix also increases for the class of

able cost approach of Section III. For comparison, the SPB and MSMLD codes. This causes the number of redundant rows in

-BDD with the Berlekamp–Massey algorithm of the counter- to grow to a very large number if near-MLD peformance is

part

BCH code have also been presented.

required, as is already apparent for the results we present for the

Two different numbers of total parity checks,

code. Consequently, this approach does not seem

and

, have been considered (corresponding to 150 to scale up very well with despite the fact that iterative de-

and 1000 different cyclic shifts of weight- codewords of the coding is used. This is not totally surprising, as in general, the

dual code, respectively). In both cases, we chose five different decoding complexity of MLD increases exponentially with .

sizes of the set of checksums used, namely,

;

On the other hand, near MLD of EG codes of length

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

based on their parity-check matrix given in Section III is possible with this approach and was verified by simulation for many shorter codes.

V. EXTENSION TO ITERATIVE DECODING FOR THE AWGN CHANNEL

A very natural extension of these results is to replace the

BSC by an AWGN channel. Although as already stated in the

Introduction, relatively good results for iterative decoding of

MSMLD codes have been previously reported for the AWGN

channel, all these results fall short of near MLD. The main

reason we believe is the large dynamical range taken by the a

posteriori values evaluated after few iterations due to the large

correlation propagated by feedback (note that in the BF algo-

rithms, the values at the bit nodes are always the same at the be-

ginning of each iteration). As a result, there is no longer much

difference between soft information and hard information with

erasure. Indeed, the same conclusions also hold for BP decoding

over the BSC, although in that case, no significant degradation

can be expected at high enough SNR, as observed in Fig. 1.

Using a heuristic extension of the decomposition proposed

in [10], the a posteriori information

evaluated at itera-

tion-

can be represented as the sum of the a priori infor-

mation and a function of approximated extrinsic information

values derived (and observable) at iteration- . In graphs with

cycles, can be viewed as the sum of the true extrinsic infor-

mation and additional correlated values , so that

with

Consequently, the influence of correlation can be reduced by

modifying the function in several ways such as scaling

(

,

), offsetting

, damping

, or

clipping

. However, these modifi-

cations affect both and while hypothetically, it would be

desirable to reduce only. This is indeed a much difficult task

as we have direct access to only. For example, all best ap-

proaches used to iteratively decode the

EG code

over the AWGN channel fell short of MLD by about 0.8 dB [11].

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have shown that iterative BF algorithms can
achieve near MLD of intermediate length MSMLD codes de-
spite the presence of four-cycles in their graph representation.
This drawback is overcome by the very large number of redun-
dant low-weight checksums. The most straightforward parity-
check matrix representation of these codes in conjunction with
a “call by the need” decoding seems to provide the best com-
promise between error performance and decoding complexity.
In principle, the three-state BF decoding approach could
be applied to any other intermediate-length linear code. One
“merely” needs to find a sufficient number of redundant low-
weight codewords in the dual code to construct a useful parity-
check matrix . Unfortunately, this does not appear to be
an easy task for codes that are not as nicely structured as the
families of codes considered in this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of onestep majority logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 931–937, Jun. 2000.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] R. Lucas, M. Bossert, and M. Breitbach, “On iterative soft-decision decoding of linear binary block codes and product codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 276–298, Feb. 1998.
[5] H. Tang, J. Xu, Y. Kou, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “On algebraic construction of Gallager low density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 2002, p. 482.
[6] D. E. Muller, “Application of Boolean algebra to switching circuit design and to error detection,” IRE Trans. Electron. Comput., vol. EC-3, no. 1, pp. 6–12, Jan. 1954.
[7] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[8] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[9] M. Fossorier, R. Palanki, and J. S. Yedidia, “Iterative decoding of multistep majority logic decodable codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003.
[10] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1997.
[11] J. Yedidia, J. Chen, and M. Fossorier, “Generating code representations suitable for belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:48:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

