ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

On the Dynamics of Analog Min-Sum Iterative Decoders, an Analytical Approach

Saied Hemati and Abbas Yongacoglu
School of Information Technology and Engineering, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada
{hemati, yongacog}gsite.uottawa.ca

Abstract- In this paper, we show that an ideal analog min-sum decoder, in the log-likelihood ratio domain, can be considered as a piecewise linear system. Many theoretical aspects of these decoders, thus, can be studied analytically. It is also shown that the dynamic equations can become singular and degrade the decoding performance. When the decoder is nonsingular, the corresponding dynamic equations can be solved analytically to derive outputs of the decoder. The proposed approach paves the way for further analytical analysis on the dynamics of analog minsum decoders.
I. INTRODUCTION
For many communication channels, error-correcting performance of iterative decoding algorithms, applied to lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes and turbo codes, is close to optimum decoding [1], [2]. As the decoding complexity is affordable, these decoding algorithms are now used in many applications [3]. Iterative decoding algorithms are defined in discrete time domain and are associated by a synchronous message passing scheme and thus can be implemented by digital circuits [4]. However, improving power/speed ratio in these decoders, motivated several groups to design analog circuits for performing the necessary operations [5]-[1 ]. In the so-called analog iterative decoders, iteration disappears and is replaced by a transient response that would hopefully converge to the most likely transmitted codeword. Several proof-ofconcept analog decoders for short codes were implemented; however, measurement results show that in high signal to noise ratio region, decoding performance is degraded. Transistor mismatch, malfunction in comparators, and other implementation imperfections were hold responsible for the observed early error floor [5]-[1 1].
In [12] a simple model for ideal analog iterative decoding was introduced and its dynamic equations, which are nonlinear differential equations, were derived. By using numerical techniques, it was shown that the dynamics of analog iterative decoders is different from that of the conventional iterative decoders. While, the former is based on application of successive relaxation (SR) technique to the fixed point problem of decoding, the latter is based on the application of successive substitution (SS) method. It was also observed that due to higher chance of convergence for SR compared to SS, analog decoding can provide some coding gain for codes with cycles.
In this paper, an analytical approach is used for studying the dynamics of ideal analog min-sum decoders. This study sheds more light on theoretical aspects of decoding in continuous time domain and provides a better understanding about time response of ideal analog min-sum decoders. We show that an

ideal analog min-sum decoder in log-likelihood ratio (LLR) domain can be considered as a piecewise linear system; that is,
for any time interval [t1,t2] this system can be partitioned into finitely many sub-intervals, such that on each such sub-interval
I, it is equal to a linear system. We also show that outputs of the decoder can be derived analytically by having the parity-check matrix of the code and the received information from the channel.
We consider the model for analog decoding in [12], and
write the dynamic equation in a matrix form. We then study many important aspects of this system, such as bounds on eigenvalues and singularity of the dynamic equations. The singularity issue can be used together with implementation imperfections to justify the observed early error floor in analog iterative decoders.

II. MIN-SUM DECODING ALGORITHM, A DISCRETE-TIME
PIECEWISE LINEAR SYSTEM
In order to explain min-sum decoding algorithm in its conventional form, we consider a block code, the Tanner graph of which then depicts the structure of the min-sum iterative decoder. Tanner graph consists of two sets of nodes; the variable nodes and the check nodes. These nodes represent bits and parity equations, respectively and are connected through edges to each other based on the parity-check matrix of the code.
The decoder is initialized based on the received information at the channel output. Decoding is performed by passing messages through edges of the Tanner graph between the variable nodes and the check nodes, iteratively. In the /-th round of min-sum iterative decoding algorithm (I > 1), in the LLR domain, the messages that are passed between a variable node (V) and a check node (C) are given by:
m () C + Emg X1v(1)
C'eNv \fC1

mVc mC =(V fJlSign ))1 min (mjl_iC),

(2)

where Nc and NV are the sets of variable nodes and check nodes incident to the check node C and the variable node V,

respectively. mal)b is the message sent from node "a" to node

"b" in the /-th round of the algorithm. The algorithm is

initialized by m(?)b o. Moreover, mv is the initial weight of

the variable node V in the LLR domain that is computed based

on the received value from the channel. For the binary phaseshift keying (BPSK) modulation and an additive white

1-4244-1429-6/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

326

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:40:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, mv can be simply replaced

by the output of the matched filter corresponding to each bit at

the receiver [13]. For negative numbers, sign(.) function is

equal to -1 and for non-negative numbers it is equal to 1. The

output of each variable node in the /-th iteration is calculated by

the following equation:

MV = mV +Z mLv

(3)

C'eNv

MJ') represents the soft estimation of the transmitted bit

corresponding to the variable node V. The decoding process is stopped as soon as the estimated bit corresponding to each

variable node, which is defined as (I + sign(MV!) ))/2, satisfies

all the parity equations, otherwise decoding process continues until a given maximum number of iterations is reached.
Since operations in check nodes are not linear, a min-sum decoder is not a linear system, however, it is possible to rewrite (2) as:

(M )
C->V

( 1()
mv" -*c,

(4)

where Vmin is the index of the winner variable node corresponding to C-* V edge. In other words, it means that:

v.i. X>c = V,GNci\ftV! mV Xc )

(5)

and

(lsignV,C)c).

V'eNc \tVI Vmin }

(6)

As long as y and Vmin remain unchanged, all the operations in min-sum decoding algorithm in the LLR domain are linear. By any change in the index of the winner variable nodes corresponding to each check node's outgoing message, or by any change in the sign of the corresponding loser check node's incoming messages, Vmin or y switches to new values. However, in the time interval between two switching points, all the operations in min-sum decoding remain linear. As the number of switching points is always less than or equal to the number of iterations, thus we conclude min-sum decoding algorithm can be modeled as a piecewise linear system.
If we represent variable nodes' outgoing messages in the 1-
th iteration by X(l); a column vector of size e consisting of
all mv>C values and the incoming messages in the /-th iteration

by y(l); a column vector of size e consisting of all mc<V

values, then we can rewrite (1) in a matrix form as follows:

X(l) =EY("-) + R

(7)

where R is a column vector of size e that represents the received information from the channel that should be considered for updating variable nodes' outgoing messages
corresponding to mv values. E is a binary e x e matrix that is

constructed based on the parity-check matrix (H) of the code and shows check nodes that are adjacent to each variable node. In general, E matrix can be written as:
E 0 . 00

E= . Ei °

O 00

00

0 En

where Ei is a matrix corresponding to the i-th variable node. If the i-th variable node is of degree dVi then:

E i = Id, xd,, Id,, xd,j

where 1 and I are one and identity matrices, respectively. As an example, for a degree four variable node we have:

xi o 1 1 1 Y ,

Yi

X2 1 0 1 1Y
X3 1 1 0 Y33

2+M

_X4_ 1 1 1 0_ Y4

Y4

where xi and yi are outgoing and incoming messages corresponding to the i-th edge of the corresponding variable node, respectively. For degree one variable nodes,
corresponding Ei is zero.

Corollary 1: E is an invertible matrix if there is no degree one

variable node in the Tanner graph representation of the code.

Proof: It is simple to verify that the determinant of Ei is given by:

det(Ei)h=(_us f, 1(dvi-1),

thus

n

n

det(E) = n det(Ei) = (_ I)df 1 (dV, -i) 0

Furtheirmori=el, it can be shown that:

EilO

00

0

0

0

E-1

.

E1 0

0

0

0

00 . 0 En-1

Ei- 1 ( dd vi ;d -I)d,,xddv Id, xd,

40

Also, for the check nodes, we can use a matrix form to

represent operations shown in (4):

y(l) = FX(/),

(8)

where F is an e x e matrix and shows how each outgoing message of a check node is obtained based on X vector. While
E remains unchanged during the decoding process, F changes

327
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:40:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

when a switching point is reached. Corresponding to each check node, there are two non-zero columns in F. These columns belong to the first and the second incoming messages with the smallest magnitudes.

Corollary 2: For an (n,k) linear block code, rank of F is equal

to 2(n-k).

Proof: For each check node, the first and the second winners

are distinct and their non-zero elements are thus in different

rows. This makes two columns linearly independent. For a

special case when all incoming messages are equal, we can still

choose distinct first and second winners. Furthermore, columns

corresponding to different check nodes are also linearly

independent as each edge is only connected to one check node

and the non-zero elements are thus in different rows. Therefore,

rank of F is equal to 2(n-k).

A

If we represent soft estimation of the transmitted bits in the /-th

iteration by M(l) vector, based on (3), we can write:

M(l) = BY(') + R',

(9)

where B is a binary n x e matrix that shows to which edges each variable node is connected (n is the number of variable nodes) and can be simply derived from the parity-check matrix of the code. R'is a column vector of length n and its i-th element is my1. B matrix has the following general form:

B1 0

00

0. 0 .0

B

Bi 0

0. 0 .0

00

0 Bn

where Bi =lxd,

(a)

(b)

(c)

Fig. 1 Simple models for analog min-sum decoders.

In analog iterative decoder chips, resistive-capacitive loads associated with each interconnection act as LPF modules. Here, as a first order approximation, we consider a simple first order linear system to model a LPF module with the following transfer function:

HLPF (S) =+Ir+Irs
where r is the time constant for each edge. Thus, the dynamic equations for the model in Fig. 1 (a), is given by:

FTX=EY+R-X

{TY=FX -=, TXX( I+EF)X+R

(10)

where X is an e x e diagonal matrix that includes time constants of the corresponding edges. If all the edges have equal time

constants, then =rxI. Similarly, the dynamic equations for the model in Fig. l(b) is given by:

SX= EY +R

{ E + R > TY ( I+FE)Y+FR

(11)

If E is invertible, models in Fig. 1 (a) and Fig. 1 (b) become identical. This can be simply verified by writing Y in terms of X in (1 1). The dynamics of the model in Fig. 1 (c) is given by:

III. ANALOG MIN-SUM DECODING
While conventional iterative decoding is defined in the discrete-time domain, analog iterative decoding clearly works in the continuous-time domain. The requirement of continuity of messages in the time domain in analog iterative decoding makes it different from the conventional iterative decoding algorithms. To accommodate the continuity requirement in a simple model for analog decoding, we may use different approaches. It is possible to consider continuity for variable nodes' outgoing messages, for variable node's incoming messages, or for all incoming and outgoing messages. A lowpass filter (LPF) can ideally remove discontinuities in the required messages and thus we consider LPF modules for messages that are assumed continuous in the time domain, as shown in Fig. 1.

A0 TL =

+0 0 A=0

(12)

where T is a 2e x 2e diagonal matrix that includes time

constants of all the edges. We call A the characteristic matrix of the analog min-sum decoder.

Corollary 3: Singularity in one of the models in Fig. 1 makes the other models singular too.

Proof:
(det(A)y = dett I -EI0 -E

= det

0°

- FE j

However, it is clear that [ 14]:

det(I - EF) = det(I - FE)

Idet(I - EF) x det(I - FE)l

328
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:40:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

And thus
(det(A))2 = (det(I - EF))2 = (det(I - FE))2

nodes (dvmax) and the maximum degree of the check nodes (13) (dcmax).

This implies that all models in Fig. 1 become singular at the

same time.

4

Theorem 1: For a cycle free code, the characteristic matrix of the analog min-sum decoder is nonsingular. Proof: In order to prove this theorem, we show that for a cycle free graph, poles of the analog min-sum decoder are indeed poles of the LPF modules; therefore, the characteristic matrix has non-zero eigenvalues and thus is nonsingular. For linear systems, it is possible to use the principle of superposition to find each output, conveniently by adding up effects of each input at the output. In s-domain, we thus have:

Yi (s) Yi\R' (s) ZR'J (s) x 7l

(14)

j=1

jl\\

k l+k)

where Yi and R'j are the i-th and thej-th elements of Y and R'

vectors, respectively. Yi\ Ris part of Yi that comes from R'j.

k is the index of LPF modules that are located between j-th variable node and Yi. 9k is given by (6) and is equal to zero if

there is no path through edges between j-th variable node and

Yi. In (14) the transfer function of cascaded LPF modules is

simply substituted by the product of transfer function of each

LPF module, this is because in a cycle free code, there is

utmost one path (with no feedback) between each two nodes.

Thus, we conclude poles of the system are only poles of LPF

modules and thus A can not be singular.

4

Corollary 4: For cycle free graphs, analog min-sum decoders

are always stable.

Proof: As theorem 1 implies, all poles of A are negative real

numbers. Thus, this system is always stable [15]. Similarly, this

can be shown for models in Fig. 1 (a) and Fig. 1 (b).

A

One of the indirect consequences of theorem 1 and corollary 4 is validation of the application of the forward Euler (FE) method [15] to dynamic equations and choosing the time step a
fraction of the interconnections' time constants [12]. This
however, may not be accurate enough for codes with cycles as we have observed cases with positive or zero eigenvalues, which is translated to instability or singularity of the system. This observation can be justified by noting that cycles can act
as feedback when we derive Yi\fR, (s) / R'j (s) and may cause
instability. The following theorem and corollary provide some information about eigenvalues of A.

Theorem 2: Eigenvalues of the characteristic matrix (p(A))
are always smaller than the maximum degree of the variable

Proof: The maximum number of non-zero elements in rows of
A is dvmax. That is because maximum number of ones in rows of E is equal to dVmax- 1. Similarly, the maximum number of non-zero elements in columns of A and F is dcmax and dCmax-1,
respectively. Also, absolute value of the non-zero elements of
A is equal to one. Thus, based on the following inequality [16]:

2e

2e

p(A)<min maxZ aii ,maxZ ad jT1 w o u

Thus, we conclude:

p(A) <min{dv.max, dcmax},

4

Corollary 5: For an (n,k) code with e edges and z degree one variable nodes, the characteristic matrix (A) has at least z+e-2(n-k) eigenvalues of -1. If the code is cycle free all eigenvalues are equal to -1.

Proof. This is because of having z+e-2(n-k) all zero columns in A+I, due to corollary 2 and definition of E. Also, when the code is cycle free, corollary 4 implies that all eigenvalues of A are equal to -1 that are then scaled by -T to make poles of the analog min-sum decoder equal to poles of
LPF modules. Singularity of the characteristic matrix can be partly
responsible for the observed early error floor in analog min-sun decoder in [11]. It is important to note that while it was well known that cycles in graph can make messages statistically dependent; what is observed here for analog min-sum decoder is a linear dependency of the messages due to some kind of cycles. However, for practical analog min-sum decoders mismatch, which is a fabrication induced randomness of the parameters, may reduce the chance of singularity by randomly scaling the messages.
When A is nonsingular, it is possible to analytically solve the differential equation in (12).

-Ate LX(t) = =e

X()

R

R

I+ (TA)

ii-(fA)

(15)

_Y(t)_

Y (0)

Similarly, differential equations in (10) and (11) can be solved analytically. However, as soon as winners of any check node or sign of winners changes, F and A matrices should be updated. It is interesting to note that because of continuity of the messages, sign of a message changes only when it crosses over zero and therefore, it will have the minimum magnitude and will be a winner.
Fig.2 shows results of Monte Carlo simulations for finding word error rate (WER) performance of min-sum decoding for a (7,4) Hamming code. In this figure, we present WER curves for a conventional min-sum decoder, a decoder that solves (10) by

329
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:40:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISIT2007, Nice, France, June 24 - June 29, 2007

FE method, a decoder that solves (12) by FE method, a decoder based on the analytical approach in (15) with singular cases treated as a non-converged codeword, and a decoder based on the analytical approach in (15) without singularity (dithered analytical method). To derive the results when there is no singular case in the simulations, we intentionally added a small noise to non-zero elements of E and F, which remained unchanged during the simulations. This is very similar to mismatch effect in practical analog decoders and can help in reducing the chance of singularity in the ideal model. Fig. 2 shows that singularity can substantially degrade the decoding performance for an ideal analog min-sum decoder. It also shows that for this code by applying FE to (12), decoding performance will be very close to the analytical approach.
100
a)
02 10
uJ

10

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Eb/N0 [dB]

Fig. 2. WER of min-sum decoder for a (7,4) Hamming code.

IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a theoretical approach was adopted for studying analog min-sum decoder as a piecewise linear system. This approach sheds more light on the dynamics of these decoders. It was found that dynamic equations of the analog min-sum decoder can become singular for codes with cycles. The singularity issue degrades the decoding performance of the ideal analog min-sum decoder and may be partly responsible for early error floor that is observed in analog decoders. We also studied eigenvalues of the system and found upper bounds for it that corresponds to the maximum possible rate of change in analog min-sum decoders. Furthermore, we derived a closed form for the decoder's outputs.

REFERENCES
[1] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, "On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045dB of the Shannon limit," IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 5, no.2, pp. 58-60, Feb. 2001.

[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, "Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding; turbo codes," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf Communications, Geneva, May 1993, pp. 1064-1070.
[3] The IEEE 802 LAN/MAN Standards. Available at "http: lwww.ieee802.org".
[4] M. M. Mansour and N.R. Shanbhag, "A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip," IEEE J. Solid-States Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684-698, March 2006.
[5] M. Moerz, T. Gabara, R. Yan, and J. Hagenauer, "An analog 0.25ptm BiCMOS tailbiting M\AP decoder," in Proc. IEEE Solid-States Circuits Conf, pp.356-357, USA, Feb. 2000.
[6] H.-A. Loeliger, F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, and F. Tarkoy, "Probability propagation and decoding in analog VLSI," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 837-843, Feb. 2001.
[7] V.C. Gaudet and P.G. Gulak, "A 13.3-Mb/s 0.35ptm CMOS analog turbo decoder IC with a configurable
interleaver," IEEE J. Solid-States Circuits, vol. 38, no. 1, pp. 2010-2015, Nov. 2003.
[8] C. Winstead, J. Dai, S. Yu, C. Myers, R.R. Harrison, and C. Schlegel, "CMOS analog NIAP decoder for (8,4) Hamming code," IEEE J. Solid-States Circuits, vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 122-13 1, Jan. 2004.
[9] D. Vogrig , A. Gerosa, A. Neviani, A. Graell i Amat, G. Montorsi, and S. Benedetto, "A 0.35-ptm CMOS analog turbo decoder for the 40-bit rate 1/3 UMTS channel code," IEEE J. Solid-States Circuits, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 753-762, March 2005.
[10] C. Winstead, N. Nguyen, V. C. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, "Low-voltage CMOS circuits for analog iterative decoders," IEEE Trans. Circuits and Systems-I, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 829-841, April 2006.
[11] S. Hemati, A. H. Banihashemi, and C. Plett, "A 0.18-pim CMOS analog min-sum iterative decoder for a (32,8) lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) code," IEEE J. Solid-States Circuits, vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 253 1-2540, Nov. 2006.
[12] S. Hemati and A. H. Banihashemi, "Dynamics and performance analysis of analog iterative decoding for lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes," IEEE Trans. Comm. vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 61-70, Jan. 2006.
[13] N. Wiberg, Codes and Decoding on General Graphs. Ph.D. dissertation, Linkoping University, Linkoping, Sweden, 1996.
[14] T. Kailah, Linear Systems, Prentice-Hall, 1980, p.65 1.
[15] J. Vlach and K. Singhal, Computer Methods for Circuit Analysis and Design, 2nd edition, Springer, 2005.
[16] R. A. Horn and C. R. Johnson, Matrix Analysis, Cambridge University Press, 1985, p. 346.

330
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:40:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

