IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

3061

Self-Compensation Technique for Simplified Belief-Propagation Algorithm
Yen-Chin Liao, Chien-Ching Lin, Hsie-Chia Chang, and Chih-Wei Liu, Member, IEEE

Abstract—The min-sum algorithm is the most common method to simplify the belief-propagation algorithm for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. However, there exists a performance gap between the min-sum and belief-propagation algorithms due to nonlinear approximation. In this paper, a self-compensation technique using dynamic normalization is thus proposed to improve the approximation accuracy. The proposed scheme scales the min-sum algorithm by a dynamic factor that can be derived theoretically from order statistics. Moreover, applying the proposed technique to several LDPC codes for DVB-S2 system, the average signal-to-noise ratio degradation, which results from approximation inaccuracy and quantization error, is reduced to 0.2 dB. Not only does it enhance the error-correcting capability of the min-sum algorithm, but the proposed self-compensation technique also preserves a modest hardware cost. After realized with 0.13- m standard cell library, the dynamic normalization requires about 100 additional gates for each check node unit in the min-sum algorithm.
Index Terms—Belief-propagation, dynamic normalization, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, min-sum algorithm, self compensation.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, first introduced by Gallager [1] in 1963, had been almost forgotten until the rediscovery [2], [3] of these capacity-approaching codes [4]–[7] in the late 1990s. The simple arithmetic computations and implicit parallelism of the LDPC decoding algorithms facilitate low-complexity and high-speed hardware implementations. Due to these superior properties, many applications, such as DVB-S2 [8] and IEEE 802.16e [9], have adopted LDPC codes as the forward error correction (FEC) technique for high-speed and reliable data transmission.
An LDPC code, also a linear block code, can be characterized by a sparse parity check matrix which has only a small fraction of nonzero entries, and the sparseness of inherently reduces the computations in decoding. Moreover, has a graphical representation [10], [11] where the rows and columns are associated to check nodes and bit nodes, respectively. The number of nonzero entries of each row or column is related to the degree of the corresponding check node or bit node. An LDPC code has
Manuscript received October 16, 2005; revised September 3, 2006. This work was supported by the NSC and MOEA of Taiwan, R.O.C., under Grants NSC 94-2220-E-009-027 and 95-EC-17-A-01-S1-048, respectively. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. Javier Garcia-Frias.
The authors are with the Department of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 30039, Taiwan, R.O.C. (e-mail: julia@twins.ee.nctu.edu.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2007.893976

the same check node degree and bit node degree is called a regular LDPC code. Otherwise, it will be referred to an irregular LDPC code.
LDPC codes can be decoded by the message-passing algorithm, or called the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm [1], [11], that maximizes the a posteriori probability. The erroneous bits in a codeword can be corrected iteratively by exchanging the probabilistic messages among the check nodes and bit nodes. The messages passed around are often represented by log-likelihood ratios (LLR) where the multiplications can be replaced by additions. This approach leads to a much simpler LDPC decoder; however, some nonlinear operations are introduced.
In order to approximate the nonlinear operation and, hence, to further reduce the decoding complexity, some fast algorithms are proposed [11]–[22]. The min-sum algorithm [12], [11], one of the simplified versions, suggests that all the nonlinear operations in the BP algorithm can be averted. However, there would be approximation inaccuracy between the BP algorithm and the min-sum algorithm. To compensate this performance loss, the designers often apply the min-sum algorithm with a correction term which can be either an offset [14]–[16], [20], [21] or a scaling normalization [17]–[22]. The latter, referred to the normalized-BP algorithm, sometimes outperforms the former since scaling by a constant is equivalent to providing an offset adaptive to the results of the min-sum algorithm. Constant normalization factors are applied to normalized-BP algorithms in [17]–[21], which provide error performance close to the BP algorithm for regular LDPC codes. As for irregular LDPC codes, Zhang et al. [22] proposed the 2-D normalization that further compensates the gap between BP and normalized-BP algorithms. This 2-D scheme normalizes both check node and bit node outputs. Furthermore, a node of different degree will be applied with a different normalization factor.
However, it is still difficult to find an adequate constant factor for all nodes when their degrees are given. Hence, we proposed the dynamic normalization in [23]. From order statistics, we provide a theoretical derivation for the dynamic normalization factors in this paper. Additionally, considering the tradeoff between the approximation accuracy and the implementation cost, some realization approaches are presented. The annealing approach, one of our proposed schemes, scales the min-sum algorithm only at some specific decoding iterations to prevent overcompensation as well as to achieve a more power-efficient decoder design. As compared to constant normalization approach, the average degradation in SNR is reduced from 0.5 to 0.2 dB according to our simulation results.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm for decoding LDPC codes will be introduced, including several reduced-complexity BP

1053-587X/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3062

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

sages are represented by log-likelihood ratios (LLR), the belief-propagation (BP) decoding can be described as follows.
1) Initialization: Under the assumption of equal priori, , the decoder calculates
, the intrinsic information of , by

Fig. 1. Parity check matrix and the corresponding Tanner graph.

The message from

to

, denoted by , is ini-

tialized by

, while the message from

to

, denoted by , is set to zero.

2) Iterative Decoding:

a) Bit node updating:

updates the message to

by

algorithms. In Section III, the proposed dynamic normalization scheme will be addressed, and the derivation of the normalization factors will be given by theoretical analysis. Accordingly, the self-compensation technique using dynamic normalization will be presented in Section IV. In Section V, the proposed scheme is applied to several LDPC codes defined in DVB-S2 [8], [24] for performance comparisons, and a conclusion will be given in Section VI.

(1)

where the set

contains all elements in

excluding . Meanwhile decodes the th

bit by

if

II. DECODING LDPC CODES

An -bit LDPC code can be defined by an

parity

check matrix

, for

,

where denotes the entry on the th row and th column

of . For simplicity, only binary LDPC codes will be consid-

ered hereafter. The aim of decoding is to search for the most

likely codeword

subject to

.

An LDPC code can be represented by a Tanner graph [10].

Fig. 1 is an illustrative example of a 3 6 parity check matrix

and its corresponding graphical representation. There are six

bit nodes,

, representing the 6-bit code-

word

and three check nodes,

,

and , representing the three parity check equations of .

Moreover,

is the set that check nodes

connected to , and

denotes the

bit nodes connected to

. The number of edges connected

to a node is referred to the degree of the node. By definition, a

regular LDPC code has equal check node degree and bit node

degree, whereas the ones with different check node and bit node

degrees are referred to irregular LDPC codes.

The belief-propagation (BP) algorithm [1], [11] provides an

efficient and powerful approach to decode LDPC codes. Let

be the event that the parity check equation for

is satis-

fied. In each decoding iteration, the check node

updates

its outgoing message by the probability

, for

all

and

. After the bit node

re-

ceives all the messages from the check nodes in

, the bit

node updates its message according to the probability

, where

and is the value received

from the channel. Each bit node can accumulate more reliable

information from the others by iteratively exchanging informa-

tion between bit nodes and check nodes. The iterative decoding

process proceeds until a valid codeword is found or the decoding

iteration exceeds a predefined number. If the probabilistic mes-

otherwise

The decoding process stops when a valid codeword

is found, i.e.,

; other-

wise, the decoding moves toward the Check Node Up-

dating. If the iteration number exceeds a predefined

value, the decoder claims a decoding failure and ter-

minates the decoding procedure.

b) Check node updating:

updates , the mes-

sage sent to , according to the messages received

from

in which is excluded

(2)

where

(3)

As shown in (2), should be obtained from the nonlinear

function . Fig. 2 illustrates the magnitude part of (2), where

are the check node input magnitudes

for all

. The nonlinear function not only has high

computation complexity, but also suffers from quantization loss

while implementing in finite-precision computation. Thus,

some approximation schemes had been proposed to facilitate

circuit implementation.

The min-sum algorithm [12], [13] discards the

smaller terms in the summation of (2) to approximate the check

node updating by

(4)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIAO et al.: SELF-COMPENSATION TECHNIQUE FOR SIMPLIFIED BELIEF-PROPAGATION ALGORITHM

3063

III. DYNAMIC NORMALIZATION TECHNIQUE
The proposed technique performs normalization by a scaling factor that can be determined as a function of the check node inputs. Since the check node updating in normalized-BP algorithm comprises sorting all the check node inputs, order statistics can be used to derive the distribution of these sorted input messages. The derived factors can then be applied to a recursive procedure to trace the message distribution at different decoding iteration.

Fig. 2. Architecture of the magnitude part of BP algorithm in (2).
However, there exists a performance gap between the min-sum algorithm and the BP algorithm since the min-sum algorithm always over-estimates the check node output magnitude. Several low-complexity approximations using a correction factor have then been introduced to compensate the performance loss [14]–[23]. The compensation modifies the min-sum algorithm into the forms

A. Derivation of the Dynamic Normalization Factors

We suppose a check node of degree has independently

and identically distributed (i.i.d.) inputs that have probability

density function (pdf)

and cumulative distribution func-

tion (cdf)

. Let

be the sorted

check node input magnitudes, then any of these ranked random

variables will have the pdf [26]

(7)

(5) for all

.

According to (6), the output magnitude of check node up-

dating in normalized-BP algorithm can be rewritten as

if
otherwise (6)
The smallest two input magnitudes and

(8) will be scaled

where and are correction factors with

and

, by two distinct normalization factors and , respectively.

that can be determined either empirically or theoretically.

Comparing (2) and (8), we approximate the normalization fac-

For LDPC codes of long block length, density evolution [4], tors by

[5], [14], [19]–[22], [25] can be applied to determine the correc-

tion factor that is optimized for the channel parameter. However, density evolution is a technique to trace the message distribution

(9)

in message-passing decoding, where the input messages of bit

nodes and check nodes are assumed independent. For relatively

(10)

shorter LDPC codes, there are usually more short cycles that re-

sult in correlated message distributions [21]. Other approaches, averaging the difference between the min-sum approximation and the BP decoding for example, were proposed to provide alternatives in deriving the compensation amount. The normalization factor in [17] is determined by averaging the ratio of messages in min-sum and BP algorithms. In [18], the correction factor is chosen such that the mean square error of approximation is minimized.
In either (5) or (6), the constant correction factors are not always sufficient to provide performance improvement. For irregular LDPC codes, [22] suggests the 2-D normalizaton to reduce the performance gap between the constant normalized-BP and BP algorithms. Both the bit node and check node output messages are normalized, and distinct factors will be applied for

We can perceive that and are functions of the check

node inputs. Notice that the function

decays rapidly

as increases, and, therefore, smaller in the numera-

tors of (9) and (10) dominate the values of and . Thus,

parts of the summations in (9) and (10) can be further ap-

proximated by their expected values. Consequently, we can

define the -dimensional approximation for and by

(11) and (12), shown at the bottom of the next page, such that

and are -dimensional functions when the

smallest are given and have the values

.

The conditional means

and

can be calculated by the distributions derived in (7). That is

nodes of different degrees. Besides, we have shown in [23] that

the correction factor for normalized-BP algorithm is a function

of the check node inputs; adapting the correction factor with the

inputs can improve the performance. Thus, a self-compensation

scheme is proposed to improve the approximation accuracy of

(13)

the min-sum algorithm.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3064

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

(14)

Note that the integral in the above equations start from and

, and (13) and (14) become functions of and

.

As the check node inputs are sorted in ascending order, only the

values greater than or

need to be considered when

the smallest values are given. The parameter only affects

the complexity in determining and dynamically. However,

the check node updating is still based on (6) to avoid nonlinear

computation.

B. Message Distribution Under Iterative Decoding

In Section III-A, the normalization factors for a check node

can be derived when the degree and the input distributions are

known. However, the check node input distributions vary with the

decoding iteration under message-passing algorithm. A recursive

procedure to calculate the message distributions during iterative

decoding will be presented subsequently. Because the sign and

themagnitudeofachecknodecanbeupdatedseparately,it ismore

convenient to represent the pdfs of the messages and

in (1) and (2) by the sign-magnitude representation. That is, the

message pdfs

and

corresponding to a bit node and

a check node will be represented by 2-D quantities

and

, where the notation and stand for all

and . The terms and represent the probability of and

having positive signs, which are calculated by

and

The second term

and

are the pdfs of the magnitude

of and , which can be derived by

and

all-zero codeword

is transmitted to reduce the compu-

tation complexity in tracking the message distributions during

iterative decoding. In the following analysis, the zero vector is

assumed to be transmitted through an additive white Gaussian

noise (AWGN) channel and corrupted by a noise vector ,

a sequence of independent Gaussian random variables with

variance and zero mean. In binary phase-shift keying (BPSK)

signaling which maps the all-zero codeword to an all-one se-

quence, the received signal

is also a sequence of

independent Gaussian random variables with unity-mean and

variance . Thus, the initial message of bit node becomes

,

a Gaussian random variable with mean and variance equal to

and

. With these assumptions, the distribution

of messages and the normalization factors of the th decoding

iteration can be acquired recursively through the following

procedure.

• Step 1 [Output distribution of a bit node]: For a bit node of

degree that updates the message, denoted as , according

to (1), the output distribution can be calculated by its input

distribution

, which is also the overall output

distribution of the check nodes at the th iteration. Con-

sequently, the pdf and its sign-magnitude representation

that correspond to the bit node’s output message can be derived according to Appendix A. • Step 2 [Input distribution of the check nodes]: The pdf of the check node’s input, denoted by , is a mixture of the pdfs

derived from Step 1, and

where

denotes the probability that the check node’s inputs are sent

from a bit node of degree , and

. According to

Appendix B, the sign-magnitude representation of will

be

.

• Step 3 [Output distribution of a check node]: The output

distribution of a check node will be calculated after its input

distribution

is derived at Step 2. For a check node

of degree , the sign of the check node’s output is determined

according to the sign operation in (2), and all the inputs are

assumed to be i.i.d. random variables, the probability

that the output sign is positive will be

for

and

.

Furthermore, it has been proved that the performance of an

LDPC decoder is independent of the codeword as long as the

symmetry conditions are satisfied [4]. Hence, we assume an

(11)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(12)

LIAO et al.: SELF-COMPENSATION TECHNIQUE FOR SIMPLIFIED BELIEF-PROPAGATION ALGORITHM

3065

According to (8), the check node has only two output

magnitudes

and

. Then the pdfs of

and , denoted by

and

, will be

expressed by the pdfs

; and the cdfs

for

. That is

(15)

for all and

such that

(16)

for

all

such

that

. A detail deriva-

tion of

and

is presented in Appendix C.

Furthermore, we can see from (8) that only one of the

output messages will have magnitude , and the

others will have magnitude . The check node output

magnitude will have the distribution

Fig. 3. Normalization factors  (m ) and  (m ) of the rate (3=5), 64 800-bit LDPC code specified in DVB-S2. The value of K is 1. The normalization factor increases with the SNR and the decoding iteration. (a)  (m ); (b)  (m ).

(17) four-step procedure as mentioned above. Figs. 3 and 4 illustrate

• Step 4 [Input distribution of the bit nodes]: The input dis-

tribution of a bit node can be calculated by a mixture of the

pdfs for check nodes of different degrees. That is

where is the output distribution of a check

node of degree , denotes the probability of the messages

coming from a check node of degree ,and

. Based

on Appendix B, the input distribution of a bit node can be cal-

culated by

, and can

be used for the analysis of the

th iteration.

Hereafter, repeat from Steps 1 to 4 and the distribution of the mes-

the normalization factors of the 64 800-bit,

LDPC

code specified in DVB-S2 [8] BPSK signaling under AWGN

channel. Fig. 3 illustrates for

at different decoding

iteration and SNR while Fig. 4 plots for

at the first

iteration and

dB. Note that large or will

require larger normalization factors. Furthermore, it can also be

observed in Fig. 3 that increases with the iteration number and

the channel SNR.

IV. PROPOSED SELF-COMPENSATION SCHEME FOR MIN-SUM ALGORITHM USING DYNAMIC NORMALIZATION

sages and the normalization factors of each decoding iteration can Section III presents a means to estimate the normalization

be derived.

factors for each decoding iteration by a recursive analysis.

As the channel condition is given, the normalization factors However, applying different normalization factors at different

of a specific LDPC code can be analyzed by (11)–(14) and the decoding iteration will be costly in hardware implementation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3066

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

Fig. 4. Normalization factors  (m ; m ) and  (m ; m ) at the first decoding iteration for the rate (3=5), 64 800-bit LDPC code specified in DVB-S2. K = 2 and the SNR = 2:2 dB. (a)  (m ; m ); (b)  (m ; m ).

Therefore, the derived normalization factors for different iter-

ation will be averaged to provide the compensation amounts

for the proposed low-complexity self-compensation scheme.

Moreover, the approximation accuracy at the first few decoding

iterations dominates the overall decoder error performance.

Thus, the normalization factors can be chosen by averaging

the factors at the first few iterations. That is, when given the

channel SNR, the normalization factors become functions of the

smallest check input magnitudes

[see (18) and (19), shown at the bottom of the page], where

and

are

Fig. 5. Average of the normalization factors that are illustrated in
Fig. 3. (a) Average of  (m ). (b) Average of  (m ).

the normalization factors for the th decoding iteration;

and

are the

probabilities of the check node having its

smallest

input magnitudes equaling to

at the th

decoding iteration. Fig. 5 illustrates the averages of (18) and

(19) corresponding to Fig. 3. As shown in Fig. 6 which exhibits

(8), the proposed self-compensation scheme will compensate

min-sum algorithm by the dynamic normalization factors based

on (18) and (19). Additionally, three proposed normalization

approaches with different complexities will be presented.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(18) (19)

LIAO et al.: SELF-COMPENSATION TECHNIQUE FOR SIMPLIFIED BELIEF-PROPAGATION ALGORITHM

3067

Fig. 6. Magnitude of the check node updating by normalized-BP algorithm.
Fig. 7. Architectures of different realization of dynamic normalization. (a) Di-
rect-mapping approach. (b) Adaptive- approach. (c) Annealing approach for K = 1.

, respectively. For double- approach, the normalization factors and can be determined by

if otherwise

(21)

if otherwise

(22)

where and can be derived by uniformly partitioning

the input range and adjusting empirically after the normal-

ization factors are determined.

3) Annealing approach: Sometimes the min-sum algorithm

could be compensated incorrectly due to the finite preci-

sion and limited candidates of normalization factors. On

one hand, the normalization factors in (18) and (19) are

averaged to the iteration number. However, the normal-

ization factors tend to increase with iteration, the check

node outputs may be over-normalized and the messages are

equivalently scaled by a smaller factor. On the other hand,

min-sum algorithm always over-estimates the check node

updating; the check node output is equivalent to scaling by

a factor that is greater than 1. To prevent error accumulating

with decoding iteration, normalization may not be neces-

sarily required every iteration. That is, normalization can

be applied intermittently. For example, given an integer

and the iteration number , normalization is applied only

when

. It is equivalent to scaling the cor-

rect check node outputs by another factor

, when

. For a check node of degree

can

be estimated to be

1) Direct mapping approach: As shown in Fig. 7(a), the nor-

(23)

malization is implemented by two look-up tables (LUTs)

where

are directly mapped onto

and

. This approach provides a simple and

highly precise approximation of the nonlinear function.

However, there exists overhead of storage requirement for

the LUTs.

2) Adaptive- approach: This scheme confines the choice

of

and

to

candidates, which are de-

noted as

and

for

.

Moreover, let and denote the range of the

where is the number of available s. Besides, this an-

nealing approach equivalently provides more choices of

in finite precision representation; we can derive other nor-

malization factors by properly defining and when

and are given. That is, the effect of scaling by should

be balanced by the following

iterations. Therefore,

the normalization factors at the

iterations are equiv-

alent to and , where

check node input magnitudes, which are also par-

(24)

titioned into

parts where

and

. For all

, and

and

, the corresponding and

(25)

will be assigned as and that minimize the average scaling error

for all

. When

, then

and

. Accordingly, more choices of are avail-

able by varying when is restricted to finite number

(20)

of candidates. Thus, a finer resolution of can be real-

ized without increasing the message bit-widths. Moreover,

the annealing normalization reduces computation and fa-

where denotes the average of . By simulation,

cilitates a more power-efficient implementation. Fig. 7(c)

can provide a good approximation of (2). Thereafter,

illustrates this annealing approach where the controller de-

single- approach and double- approach will represent

cides if the dynamic normalization should be applied ac-

the approaches corresponding to

and

cording to the current iteration number .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3068

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

Except for the direct-mapping approach, the values and

are restricted to

such that the normalization circuit

can be implemented by few shifters and adders. The following

example will demonstrate and derivation for different

realization approaches.

Example: The -

, 64 800-bit LDPC code in DVB-S2

[8].

1) Parameters for analyzing the normalization factors: There

are 64 800

25 920 check nodes. Only one of

the check node has degree 10 and the rest 25 919 check

nodes have degree 11. Let denote the probability that

a messages coming from a check node of degree . Then

and

. Moreover, the probability of a bit

node connecting to check nodes is represented by

, where is the number of bit node of de-

gree , is the total number of bit nodes, and

.

Hence, the probability defined in Section III can be cal-

culated by

.

In this example,

64 800 and

. There-

fore,

, and

,

leading to the following results:

, and

.

Therefore, the normalization factors can be derived for dif-

ferent iterations based on the analysis in Section III, and

averaged to the decoding iteration according to (18) and

(19). Moreover, we only consider the case

in this

example.

2) Determine the normalization factors: The nor-

malization factors will be restricted in the set

for simple implementation.

Besides, we only consider finite precision message

representation that represents the maximum magnitude

by 4.0.

a) Single- approach:

and

.

b) Double- approach: The input is uniformly divided

into two regions. Thus, the threshold

and

. Then the normalization factors that mini-

mize (20) will be

.

c) Annealing, single- approach:

for

.

By (24) and (25), and can then be deter-

mined to be

and

, which will be mod-

ified into 0.5 and 0.75.

d) Annealing, double- approach:

for

.

Similarly,

, and will be 0.375, 0.625,

0.625, and 0.75, respectively.

For the Annealing approach with single- and

is

1.558 according to (23) where

and

. With (24) and (25), and can then

be determined to be

and

and modified into 0.5 and

0.75, the closest candidates in . Furthermore, the of the

Annealing double- approach is 1.621 according to (23),

and the normalization factors,

, and will

be 0.375, 0.625, 0.625, and 0.75, respectively.

Fig. 8 illustrates two implementation approach for this example,

the direct-mapping approach and the double- normalization.

Fig. 8. Architectures of the direct-mapping and the double- approach for rate (3=5), 64 800-bit LDPC code in DVB-S2. (a) 2-D LUT direct-mapping approach for K = 2. (b) Adaptive- approach for K = 1; N = 2.

Fig. 9. Implementation results of the 2-D LUT, double- approach, and min-sum algorithm for rate (3=5), 64 800-bit LDPC code. The gray portion
is the overhead introduced by the normalization circuit. (a) Gate count. (b) Timing.

The normalization scheme in Fig. 8(a) is realized by a 2-D LUT,

whereas the constant multiplications in Fig. 8(b),

and

, are performed by shifters.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIAO et al.: SELF-COMPENSATION TECHNIQUE FOR SIMPLIFIED BELIEF-PROPAGATION ALGORITHM TABLE I
MINIMUM WORKING SNR OF BP-FP AND MIN-SUM ALGORITHM
TABLE II
PARAMETERS OF FIXED- AND ADAPTIVE- APPROACHES

3069

In terms of area and timing, Fig. 9 compares the circuit over- bits. Considering low-complexity implementation, the normal-

heads in Fig. 8(a) and (b) to that of the min-sum algorithm. ization factors are restricted in the set

The check node unit that has degree 11 and 5-bit messages is such that only few shifters and adders will be required.

synthesized with the 0.13- m cell library in either area critical or timing critical conditions. The gray portions in Fig. 9 also present the additional gate count and timing contributed by the normalization circuit. Both figures show that the 2-D LUT direct-mapping normalization occupies about 50% of the gate count and 30% of the critical path delay due to the large LUT growing in quadratic with the bit-width of the messages. However, the double- approach requires only additional shifters and

A. Comparison of BP-FP and Min-Sum Algorithm

Table I compares the minimum working SNRs of BP-FP

and min-sum algorithms, defined by the minimum SNR for

bit error rate (BER) below . The finite precision formate

means that

bits represent one message;

where bits correspond to the integer part, bits correspond

to the fractional part and one extra bit is for the sign of the

adders, leading to 5% area (with 68 and 107 additional gates for each constraint) and 17% delay increases. It will be shown in next section that similar error performance can be achieved by these two schemes, however.

message. Different combinations for

for

has been simulated and the

format will contribute to

the lowest error rate for min-sum algorithm for all rates. The

term

is the SNR difference between the min-sum

and BP-FP algorithms. According to Table I,

is

kept within 0.3 dB for

since the codes work in

V. SIMULATION RESULTS
The 64 800-bit LDPC codes defined in DVB-S2[8] are simulated. For each coding rate, Rate, more than 3000 frames of LDPC codes, which equals to 3000 64 800 Rate = 19.44
Rate 10 bits, are simulated for each point, where Rate refers to the coding rate. The belief-propagation algorithm with floating-point messages, abbreviated to BP-FP, is simulated

better channel conditions such that min-sum algorithm yields

a good approximation. However, more accurate approximation

is necessary to improve the performance when

.

The proposed dynamic normalization will effectively reduce

the performance loss caused by min-sum algorithm for those

codes working at low SNR environments.

B. Comparison of Dynamic Normalization Approaches

as the baseline performance. Besides, several normalization As shown in Table I,

and

corre-

approaches presented in Section IV are compared. In the fol- spond to the largest SNR loss. Therefore, a discussion focused

lowing, the adaptive- approach with

will be on the

LDPC code will be presented for there is

referred to single- approach; the adaptive- approach with larger room of improvement. The results of BER versus SNR for

will be referred as double- approach; normal- different normalization approaches are compared in Fig. 10. All

ization by a constant will be referred to fixed- approach. The the corresponding parameters resulting in the best working SNR

simulation channel is modeled as AWGN, and the randomly for different approaches are listed in Tables II and III. Note that

generated binary data is modulated by QPSK signaling before the 2-D LUT direct-mapping approach outperforms all the other

transmission, where the LDPC decoder can be initialized by normalization schemes, but has a great storage overhead. The

the same method of BPSK. The maximum decoding iteration double- approach in Fig. 10 has a comparable performance

number is limited to 50. Note that the SNR in the simulation while requiring few additional logics for normalization.

is defined as the logarithm of the ratio of the modulated signal In Fig. 11, the limited maximum decoding iteration for dif-

power and the noise power. In addition to BP-FP, all the mes- ferent normalization approaches are compared. When the itera-

sages for different normalization approaches are represented by tion number exceeds this maximum value, the iterative decoding

finite-precision; the bit-width of all messages are quantized to 6 terminates whether the codeword is decoded correctly or not.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2007
TABLE III
PARAMETERS OF THE ANNEALING ADAPTIVE- APPROACHES

Fig. 10. Comparison of error performance of the rate (3=5), 64 800-bit LDPC
code applied with different normalizing techniques. The simulation parameters and finite-precision message formats are referred to in Tables II and III.

Fig. 11. Comparisons of maximum decoding iterations for the rate (3)=(5),
64 800-bit LDPC code applied with different normalizing techniques. The simulation parameters and finite-precision message formats is referred to in Table II.

The proposed double- normalization outperforms the fixed-

approach while the former requires maximum 20 decoding iter-

ations and the latter requires maximum 50 decoding iterations to

achieve BER

at similar SNR. Moreover, comparing the

double- normalization with the min-sum algorithm, the former

requires maximum 12 iterations and the later requires maximum

50 iterations to achieve BER

under the same SNR con-

SNR loss. The average degradation

and the average

improvement

are also given in Table IV. It shows that

the double- approach outperforms the others on average.

The average SNR loss,

, is reduced to 0.2 dB while

of the fixed- approach is 0.5 dB. The average

improvement of double- approach is 72.9%, which is more

than twice averaged IPR of the fixed- approach.

dition. Fig. 11 shows that when the decoding complexity and speed are both critical, the proposed dynamic normalization im-

VI. CONCLUSION

proves the decoding speed of fixed- and min-sum algorithm by

about 60% and 76%, respectively.

In Table IV, the performance of several normalization

schemes are compared for all codes with

. The

measurement of improvement is defined as

A self-compensation technique by dynamic normalization has been presented from the theoretical analysis to the implementation. With order statistics, the normalization factors can be obtained as a function of LDPC decoder inputs. The realization of dynamic normalization, which can be either

single or multiple factors, is considered as a tradeoff between

%

complexity and error performance. The simulation results

based on the 64 800-bit LDPC codes in DVB-S2 indicate that

where

is the difference of the minimum working at most two normalization factors can provide sufficient perfor-

SNR

between these normalized-BP algorithms and mance improvement. Furthermore, as compared to the constant

BP-FP, which results from the approximation inaccuracy and normalization scheme, more than twice SNR improvement can

the quantization noise. Similarly,

is that between be achieved. For a check node unit, about 100 additional gates

min-sum algorithm and BP-FP. For

code that are needed for the dynamic compensation circuit, which is

should work in low SNR condition, there is no suitable in about 5% overhead for a check node unit applied with min-sum

the set

for the fixed- approach, algorithm. In conclusion, dynamic normalization precisely

leading to

. On the contrary, all the other dynamic compensates the performance loss of min-sum algorithm and

normalizations in this case can still compensate about 40% preserves simple hardware implementation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIAO et al.: SELF-COMPENSATION TECHNIQUE FOR SIMPLIFIED BELIEF-PROPAGATION ALGORITHM
TABLE IV COMPARISONS OF DIFFERENT NORMALIZATION APPROACHES

3071

APPENDIX A

For independent random variables

with pdfs

, the function

can be derived recursively by the cor-

responding sign-magnitude representation of each ,

i.e.,

, where

, and

for

.

1) Let the function

denote the process of de-

riving the sign-magnitude representation of the pdf of

, where

and

. Besides, let denote the vector

. The pdf of , i.e.,

, for

is

APPENDIX B

Let

denote the sign-magnitude

representation of the pdf of a random variable , i.e.,

. Then, the corresponding sign-magnitude represen-

tation for the mixture of the pdfs

will be

, which can

be verified by definition.

APPENDIX C

are independent random variables and

is a -dimensional function of

. Let

the pdfs and cdfs of

, be denoted

as

and

. The pdf of the random variable

will be derived in the following.

Let

be one set

of the solutions to

. Thus, for

are fixed, is a function of only. Then,

for all and the given

, the pdf of can be

expressed by the pdf of as

and for

Then, the corresponding sign-magnitude representation Therefore, for all solutions to

,

of

can be derived by

and the pdf

will be

for

.

2) For

, the sign-magnitude representation for

the pdf of can be derived recursively by

where

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3072

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 55, NO. 6, JUNE 2007

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Prof. R.-J. Chen and
Prof. T.-H. Sang for many fruitful discussions and suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] S. Y. Chung, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[6] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[7] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE. Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[8] Digital Video Bracasting (DVB) Second Generation System for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications, ETSI Std. En 302 307, 2005.
[9] Local and Metropolitan Area Network Part16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems Draft, IEEE Std. P802. 16e.D9, 2005.
[10] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 399–431, Sep. 1981.
[11] J. L. Fan, Constrained Coding and Soft Iterative Decoding. Norwell, MA: Kluwer, 2001.
[12] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE. Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[13] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE. Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[14] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum-product and the min-sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1021–1025.
[15] X. Y. Hu, Eleftheriou, D. M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, “Efficient implementation of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2001, vol. 2, pp. 25–29.
[16] H. S. Song and P. Zhang, “Very-low-complexity decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE PIMRC, Sep. 2003, vol. 1, pp. 161–165.
[17] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[18] N. Kim and H. Park, “Modified UMP-BP decoding algorithm based on mean square error,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 40, pp. 816–817, Jun. 2004.
[19] H. Jun and K. M. Chugg, “Optimization of scaling soft information in iterative decoding via density evolution methods,” IEEE. Trans. Commun., vol. 6, no. 6, pp. 957–961, Jun. 2005.
[20] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[21] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X. Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE. Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[22] J. Zhang, M. Fossorier, D. Gu, and J. Zhang, “Improved min-sum decoding of LDPC codes using 2-dimensional normalization,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2005, vol. 3, pp. 1187–1192.
[23] Y. C. Liao, C. C. Lin, C. W. Liu, and H. C. Chang, “A dynamic normalization technique for decoding LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, Nov. 2005, pp. 768–772.

[24] M. Eroz, F. W. Sun, and L. Lee, “An innovative low-density paritycheck code design with near-Shannon-limit performance and simple implementation density evolution for low-density parity-check codes under max-log-map decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 13–17, Jan. 2006.
[25] X. Wei and A. N. Akansu, “Density evolution for low-density paritycheck codes under max-log-map decoding,” IEE Electron. Lett., vol. 37, pp. 1125–1126, Aug. 2001.
[26] R. V. Hogg and A. T. Craig, Introduction to Mathematical Statistics. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1994.
Yen-Chin Liao received the B.S. and M.S. degrees from the Department of Communication Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2000 and 2002, respectively. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree at the Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao Tung Univerisity.
From July 2002 to August 2003, she was with Integrated System Solution Corporation as an Engineer for performance evaluation and algorithm development in wireless communications. Her research interests include signal processing for communication systems, coding theory, digital communication, and VLSI signal processing.
Chien-Ching Lin received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2001, and the Ph.D. degree in electronics engineering from the National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, in 2006.
His research interests include coding theory, VLSI architectures, and integrated circuit design for communications and signal processing.
Hsie-Chia Chang received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electronics engineering from the National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1995, 1997, and 2002, respectively.
From 2002 to 2003, he was with OSP/DE1 in MediaTek Corporation, working in the area of decoding architectures for combo single chips. In February 2003, he joined the faculty of the Electronics Engineering Department, National Chiao Tung University. His research interests include algorithms and circuit architectures in signal processing, especially for error control codes and crypto-systems. Recently, he has also commited himself to joint source/channel coding schemes.
Chih-Wei Liu (M’03) was born in Taiwan, R.O.C. He received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1991 and 1999, respectively.
From 1999 to 2000, he was an integrated circuits design engineer at the Electronics Research and Service Organization (ERSO) of Industrial Technology Research Institute (ITRI), Hsinchu. Then, near the end of 2000 until October 2003, he was with the SoC Technology Center (STC) of ITRI as a Project Leader. He is currently with the Department of Electronics Engineering and the Institute of Electronics, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, as an Assistant Professor. His current research interests are SoC and VLSI system design, processor microarchitecture, digital signal processing, digital communications, and coding theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:47:15 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

