Optimizing Parametrized Information Bottleneck
Compression Mappings with Genetic Algorithms
Jan Lewandowsky∗, Sumedh J. Dongare∗, Marc Adrat∗, Matthias Schrammen†, Peter Jax† ∗Fraunhofer Institute for Communication, Information Processing and Ergonomics (FKIE), 53343 Wachtberg, Germany †RWTH Aachen University, Institute of Communication Systems, 52056 Aachen, Germany
Email: {jan.lewandowsky,sumedh.dongare,marc.adrat}@fkie.fraunhofer.de, {schrammen,jax}@iks.rwth-aachen.de

Abstract—Preserving relevant mutual information under compression is the fundamental challenge of the information bottleneck method and has numerous applications in machine learning and in communications. The literature describes very successful applications of this concept in quantized detection and channel decoding schemes. The resulting receiver algorithms only use simple lookup tables and process quantization indices, but can achieve performance close to that of conventional high-precision systems. In some applications, however, it is desirable to design a parametrized compression rule instead of a possibly huge lookup table. Genetic algorithms are very powerful generic optimization algorithms which are inspired from the natural evolution of the species. In this paper, we show that genetic algorithms can be used to optimize parametrized compression mappings that aim for maximum preservation of relevant information, especially in cases where standard optimization methods cannot be applied straightforwardly. We exemplarily investigate the receiver-sided channel output quantization as an important application in communications to illustrate the notable performance and the flexibility of the proposed concept.
I. INTRODUCTION
The information bottleneck method is a well-known framework from the machine learning field [1]. Its fundamental idea is to compress an observed random variable Y to some compressed representation T according to a compression rule. This rule is designed to preserve so called relevant mutual information I(X; T), where X is a properly chosen relevant random variable of interest. The method is very generic and has numerous applications, for example, in image and speech processing, astronomy and in neuroscience [2]–[4].
In the past few years, the method has also attracted considerable attention in the communications community, as it was revealed to be useful in the design of strongly quantized signal processing algorithms for detection and channel decoding with low complexity, but performance close to that of non-quantized conventional reference algorithms [5], [6]. The communications related applications of the method lead from the design of channel output quantizers over the decoding of low-density parity-check codes and polar codes to entire receiver chains that include channel estimation and detection [5]–[9].
Fundamentally, the idea of all aforementioned applications of the method in communications is to design deterministic compression mappings t = f (y) that replace the classical arithmetical operations in the signal processing algorithms.

These mappings are typically considered as lookup tables which store the respective t for each possible y. While the lookup table approach sketched above is well-suited for many of the problems already studied in communications, in some other applications it is favorable to actually have an arithmetical rule or a sequence of processing steps in an algorithm which maps an observed realization y onto the compressed t. This is the case, for example, when the cardinality of Y and, therefore, the resulting lookup table implementing t = f (y) becomes fairly large. As a result, it is meaningful to consider parametrized compression mappings t = fθ(y) with M parameters θ = [θ0, θ1, . . . , θM−1] that shall be optimized to preserve a desired large amount of mutual information I(X; T).
In this paper, we propose powerful classes of parametrized mappings that only need very few parameters to preserve significant amounts of relevant information. These mappings, however, cannot be optimized using standard gradient methods, as they involve non-differentiable functions and, even more importantly, also operations that have no closed form mathematical description at all, e.g., sorting or choosing between different paths in a graph. Such operations are easy to use in practice, but are very hard to describe analytically and, hence, to optimize.
Genetic algorithms are very generic and powerful optimization algorithms which are inspired by the natural evolution of the species [10], [11]. Their general idea is to create a population of candidate solutions to an optimization problem. Then a so called fitness of each individual in the population is evaluated with respect to the target function. The members of the population breed novel generations by combining their genetic information using simple crossover operators. In this process, the Darwinistic principle of promoting solutions with higher fitness is applied and also mutations happen. Fascinatingly, like this genetic algorithms can in fact find very good solutions to very complicated optimization tasks [10]–[13].
The above motivates us to apply genetic algorithms to optimize parametrized compression mappings that aim for maximum preservation of relevant information. Such mappings have numerous applications in learning and also in communications. As one example, we investigate the receiver-sided channel output quantization in communications. In summary,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 978-1-7281-9972-6/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

the contributions of this paper are as follows:
• We apply genetic algorithms to maximize mutual information in a parametrized information bottleneck setup.
• We design very powerful parametrized compression mappings that preserve large amounts of relevant information with very few parameters.
• We illustrate enormous flexibility and generality of the considered approach.
• We present results on channel output quantization to illustrate that the design approach for compression mappings can compete with state-of-the-art information bottleneck algorithms while requiring much fewer parameters for the description of the designed compression mappings.
The paper is structured as follows. The next section provides a brief overview of the information bottleneck method and genetic algorithms. In Section III, we propose different classes of parametrized mappings that can preserve significant amounts of relevant information with parameters optimized using genetic algorithms. Section IV then provides practical results on quantizing the channel output in a communication receiver with maximum preservation of relevant information. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES
This section introduces fundamentals on the information bottleneck method and genetic algorithms.
A. The Information Bottleneck Method
The information bottleneck method is an information theoretical framework introduced by N. Tishby et al. in [1]. It originates from machine learning and considers three discrete random variables X, Y and T which form a Markov chain X → Y → T. The idea is that Y is observed and shall be compressed to a more compact representation T. It is well known from the famous rate-distortion theory that in this context a compression corresponds to minimizing the so called compression information I(Y; T). However, it shall be guaranteed that also the mutual information I(X; T) is maximized. As a result one can conclude that X defines which features of Y are considered to be relevant and shall be preserved under compression. The compression rule that maps a realization y ∈ Y onto its compressed representation t ∈ T is typically considered as a conditional probability distribution p(t|y). This allows to cover probabilistic and also deterministic mappings of y onto t. In this paper, however, we will restrict ourselves to deterministic mappings p(t|y) ∈ {0, 1} ∀(y, t) that, of course, fulfil the law of total probability. In this situation, t is a determinstic function of y, i.e., t = f (y). There exist plenty of information bottleneck algorithms that can construct the desired compression mapping t = f (y) for a given cardinality of T . A popular information bottleneck algorithm is the KL-means algorithm from [7], [14]. Due to the fact that Y is discrete, it is possible to store the mapping t = f (y) in a lookup table with size |Y| by just storing each t for the respective y. The mapping t = f (y) then

clusters the event space of Y into several clusters Yt which, mathematically, are the preimages of t = f (y).

B. Genetic Algorithms

Genetic algorithms are very powerful and generic opti-
mization algorithms that have various applications in many
fields of engineering [10]–[13]. They aim to mimic the natural
evolution of the species to solve multi parameter optimization problems. Consider the problem of finding parameters θ = [θ0, θ1, . . . , θM−1] that maximize a function g : RM −→ R+0 .
In order to find optimum parameters θ, a genetic algorithm works on a population P = θ(0), θ(1), . . . , θ(npop−1) of
npop candidate solutions. Initially, this population is often drawn randomly. The real world parameter description θ(l)
is typically termed the phenotype of an individual in the population. Each member θ(l), l ∈ {0, 1, . . . , npop − 1} of the population implies a certain value of the target function g θ(l) which is readily termed the fitness of this individual.
In addition to the phenotype description of every individual,
a genotype description can be introduced. The idea is to encode the numerical values of the parameters θm(l) using so called alleles into a long genetic string. In the simplest form, the alleles
are just binary zeros or ones and the genotype of an individual
is a long sequence of these numbers, accordingly. For a given
phenotype, one can determine the genotype by considering uniform discretization of the search spaces [θmmin, θmmax] for the parameters θm into 2rm regions, respectively. Like this the values of the parameters θm(l) can be interpreted as bit sequences of length rm which encode the corresponding index of the region in binary form. A simple method to obtain the respective bit sequences is determining the region indices zm(l) for all the appearing θm(l) in θ(l) as

zm(l) =

θm(l) − θmmin θmmax − θmmin

(2rm

−

1)

.

(1)

The zm(l) are integers and can be converted into their binary representations easily. Then one just concatenates all the obtained
binary numbers to a long binary string to obtain the genotype. As an example, consider θ(l) = θ0(l), θ1(l) = [1.326, −0.839], θ0, θ1 ∈ [−2, 2], r0 = r1 = 8. One obtains z0(l) = 212, z1(l) = 74 and the corresponding genotype [11010100 01001010]. Of course, the reverse genotype to phenotype conversion can be
done similarly. An instance of the population P exists in a generation of
the genetic algorithm. In every generation, parent solutions are randomly selected from P and their genetic information is combined using simple genetic crossover operators on the
genotypes to create children which form the population of the following generation. Such a crossover operation with ncross = 2 crossover positions is illustrated in Figure 1.
It is key that in the described processing, the individuals
with higher fitness are more likely to become parents of
the next generation than the weaker individuals with lower
fitness. This is realized using simple inversion sampling to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

parents: [1101010001001010]

children: [1101001101001010]

relevant variable X, realizations x

I(X; Y)

observed variable Y, realizations y

[0110101101010111]

[0110110001010111]

random crossover positions

random crossover positions

Fig. 1: Illustration of a two point crossover in the processing of a genetic algorithm.

y∈Y

signal processing
fθ (y)

t∈T max I(X; T)
θ

parameters θ
Fig. 2: Optimizing parameters in a parametrized information
bottleneck like setup.

draw the parents. Moreover, the concept of elitism promotes the fittest individuals and guarantees them propagating their genetic material into the next generation. Finally, mutations of alleles in the genotypes of the children are performed with a certain mutation probability pmut to assure some diversity.
Fascinatingly, when the processing is executed for several generations, genetic algorithms can find very good solutions to enormously complicated optimization tasks [10]. A particular strength of genetic algorithms is their generality. They need no other assumptions on the target function than that it allows to measure the fitness of an individual in the population. This motivates us to investigate the possibility of maximizing the preserved relevant information I(X; T) under compression in information bottleneck settings with genetic algorithms.
III. PARAMETRIZED COMPRESSION MAPPINGS THAT MAXIMIZE RELEVANT INFORMATION
This section proposes two classes of powerful parametrized mappings that are very flexible and, therefore, can preserve significant amounts of relevant information, if their parameters are properly tuned. First, a class of mappings is considered which can be described in closed form, but still is hard to optimize using standard methods, as it involves non-differentiable functions. Second, a mapping which still involves parameters, but has no closed form description at all is proposed. This mapping is an instance of the so called approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm which works on a graph and requires several processing steps [15]. We show that due to their generality, in both cases genetic algorithms can be applied for the parameter optimization.
The general setup that we consider for both kinds of mappings is sketched in Figure 2. As shown there, we consider the observed random variable Y to be a random vector with realizations y = [y0, y1, . . . , yN−1]. The reason is that most signal processing components in communications, for example the ones to be studied in Section IV, process more than one input variable.
A. Clustering by Distance Minimization
The first class of parametrized mappings of y onto t ∈ T = {0, 1, . . . , |T | − 1} that we propose to optimize with genetic

algorithms determines the outgoing t for an incoming y as

t

=

fθ (y)

=

arg

min
t ∈T

{

d

(y,

θt

)}

,

(2)

where d (y, θt) is some properly defined, but at the same time arbitrary distance measure between an incoming vector y and an optimized parameter vector θt of the same dimension N as y. This mapping is characterized by |T | such parameter vectors θt = [θt,0, θt,1, . . . , θt,N−1] which we compactly gather in a long vector θ = [θ0, θ1, . . . , θ|T |−1]. As each vector θt has length N , there are N ·|T | parameters θm in θ. Additionally, it requires definition of the distance measure d (y, θt). Clearly, the approach is very much inspired from a vector quantizer
which we aim to design with a genetic algorithm such that it maximizes the mutual information I(X; T).
A well known distance measure that could be used in that class of mappings is the Euclidean distance between y and θt, i.e.,

N −1

dE(y, θt) =

(yn − θt,n)2.

(3)

n=0

The Euclidean distance is partially differentiable with respect to θt,n and, hence, one could get the impression that a gradient method can be applied to straightforwardly optimize the parameters by making use of the partial derivatives of I(X; T) with respect to all θt,n. We note, however, that the min operation from Equation (2) prevents a straightforward gradient approach. A typical way to overcome that issue would be to use a smooth approximation [16], e.g, the softmin operation instead of the min during optimization, but we note that like this, we would in fact not optimize the deterministic mapping rule that we aim for in Equation (2), but only some non-deterministic approximation. Genetic algorithms, however, can directly optimize the deterministic mapping rule, as it will be explained soon.
When it comes to implementation, the Euclidean distance has several disadvantages which cause high complexity. In particular, taking the square under the root in Equation (3) requires costly multiplications in digital hardware. In addition,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the square root is also costly. A much more favorable distance is the Manhattan distance [16] given by

N −1

dM(y, θt) =

|yn − θt,n|.

(4)

n=0

This distance measure only requires sign inversions and ad-
ditions which are fairly low cost operations. Of course, the absolute magnitude |.| in Equation (4) in addition to the already discussed min from Equation (2) makes a gradient approach for the optimization of the parameters θt,n very cumbersome and would require mathematical approximations
and workarounds [16].

query point nearest neighbor
entry node

B. Approximate Nearest Neighbor Clustering
If one aims to preserve very large amounts of mutual information I(X; T) ≤ I(X; Y), such that, I(X; T) ≈ I(X; Y) up to a very small gap, one will, in most relevant cases, require a quite huge cardinality of the output set T . While it is practical for small cardinalities of T , the distance minimization approach from the previous subsection then suffers from the disadvantage that a huge number of distances has to be calculated to determine their minimum, which can outweigh the advantage of a very compact parametrized description of the compression rule in comparison to a lookup table.
We note that the mapping rule from Equation (2) essentially describes the problem of finding the closest point θt to the query point y from a set of |T | candidate points. A reduced complexity, approximate algorithm for that problem exists which is termed approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm in the literature [15]. Approximate nearest neighbor search algorithms have very popular applications in machine learning. The idea of the approximate nearest neighbor search is to determine a neighborhood graph of nodes which correspond to the candidate points θt. For simplicity, we consider neighborhood graphs, where all nodes have nneighbor neighbors which correspond to the nneighbor closest points under the considered distance.
The approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm is depicted in Figure 3. When a new query point y shall be located, one enters the graph from any entry node and checks whether or not there are points in the neighborhood of the entry node which are closer to the query than the entry node itself. If this is the case, the closest found neighbor becomes the novel entry node and the processing starts over. In the shown example, the processing will stop after the neighbors of the entry node have been processed. Of course, this procedure can be executed for several initial entry nodes nentry to improve the accuracy. It is also very easy to add a complexity constraint on the maximum number of allowed distance calculations by only allowing a certain path length lpmaathx while jumping through the neighborhood graph. In order to achieve a desired minimum of distance calculations in the design, we define a set of nentry entry nodes and first choose to determine the closest entry node to the query from that set. Then we only run the approximate nearest neighbor search described above from the closest found entry node. In the considered design, the worst case number

Fig. 3: Visualization of the approximate nearest neighbor
search. The algorithm traverses through the neighborhood graph greedily. × markers correspond to the parameters θt to be optimized, blue arrows indicate neighborhood relations.

of distance calculations to determine t for a given y is given by

nmdisatx = nentry + nneighbor · lpmaathx.

(5)

Please note that this number is independent of |T |. Like this, one can allow for a very large number of candidate vectors θt without a proportional increase in the number of required distance calculations which helps us to overcome the main drawback of Equation (2) for large |T |.
The approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm then just outputs the index t of the approximate closest point θt to y, such that the min operation from Equation (2) gets replaced with an approximate min. Clearly, the possible performance of the algorithm in terms of the preservation of I(X; T) and its complexity depend on the parameters nentry, lpmaathx and especially on nneighbor which defines the sparsity of the neighborhood graph. Moreover the particular set of entry
nodes has an impact on the preserved relevant information. We
will see in the practical results in Section IV, that quite sparse
graphs with few entry nodes and small path length have the ability to preserve very significant amounts of I(X; T). Finally, please note that the approximate nearest neighbor approach considered here works with the Euclidean distance dE(y, θt) and also the Manhattan distance dM(y, θt).
The greedy processing to implement the mapping t = fθ(y) using approximate nearest neighbor search described here
is very hard to describe analytically. In fact, there is no
mathematical formula to adequately describe the algorithm.
Moreover, the involved neighborhood graph inherently depends on the parameters θt and, therefore, changes during optimization. As a result, the parameter optimization to maximize I(X; T) with standard gradient methods is not possible. Genetic algorithms, however, can be applied as discussed in
the following.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

C. Genetic Algorithm Optimization

We propose to perform the optimization of the parameters θ = [θ0, θ1, . . . , θ|T |−1] for both considered classes of mappings and irrespective of the actually used distance function d(y, θt) with a genetic algorithm. For that purpose, we initially draw a population of individuals P =
θ(0), θ(1), . . . , θ(npop−1) . As it is typically assumed in the
information bottleneck setup, we assume that the joint probability distribution p(x, y) is known.
For any population member θ(l) it is then very straightforward to calculate the joint probability distribution p(x, t) for
this particular individual as

p(l)(x, t) =

p(x, y),

(6)

y∈Y : t=fθ(l) (y)

and

p(l)(t) = p(l)(x, t).

(7)

x∈X

These distributions directly allow to calculate the respective preserved relevant information I(X; T) for this population member, that is,

I(l)(X; T) =

p(l)(x,

t)

log

p(l)(x, t) p(x)p(l)(t)

.

(8)

x∈X t∈T

Note that 0 ≤ I(l)(X; T) ≤ I(X; Y) by definition. This allows us to use the mutual information I(l)(X; T) directly as fitness
g θ(l) of the population members θ(l) in the generations

of the genetic algorithm. The rest of the processing then just follows the standard processing of genetic algorithms using selection, genetic crossovers and mutations over the generations as described, for example, in [10], [11].
It is very important to note that all the involved equations can be evaluated totally irrespective of the actual operations performed in the signal processing block fθ(y) from Figure 2. The presented equations in fact work for all possible deterministic mappings of y onto t ∈ T . The genetic algorithm just treats fθ(y) as a black box. Therefore, we can just use the distance minimization approach from Section III.A or the approximate nearest neighbor approach from Section III.B. We can also freely decide what distance measure d(y, θt) we want to use. As a result, the presented approach is very generic. In the next section, we analyze its performance for an important problem in communications.

IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
This section presents results on the application of the proposed parametrized compression mappings for quantizing the output of a communications channel. It shall be mentioned that this is one exemplary application that we use to illustrate the method and the performance of the designed mappings. This application allows us a very vivid illustration which reveals insights on the working of the proposed method. However, also numerous other applications of such mappings exist in communications, for example, in channel decoding

[5]–[9] and detection [17]. Moreover, they can also be used in machine learning. In the following, we first consider KLmeans quantization as proposed in [7] which shall serve as a benchmark for the designed parametrized compression mappings. The most important figure of merit that we consider is the preserved relevant information I(X; T) for a given output cardinality of the designed quantizers.

A. Information Bottleneck Quantizer Design with the KL-
Means Algorithm
An intuitive application of the information bottleneck
method in communications is the design of a channel output
quantizer which maximizes the relevant information on the transmitted modulation symbols X. In this context, Y corresponds to the received channel output. If Y is continuous, for example, for an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, it has to be very finely discretized to |Y| uniformly spaced samples on some interval of interest. T is the quantized output variable of the quantizer. A q bit quantizer designed with the Information Bottleneck method maps realizations y onto quantization indices t ∈ T = {0, 1, . . . , 2q − 1}, such that |T | = 2q and I(X; T) → max. I(X; T) is independent of the elements in T . We consider integer quantization indices that need q bits in the hardware.
As in [7], we consider complex AWGN channels and com-
plex modulation alphabets, such that the continuous received
sample at a certain time instance is

y = yre + jyim = (xre + nre) + j(xim + nim),

(9)

where nre+jnim is a realization of a complex valued, circularly symmetric Gaussian process with variance σn2 and mean 0 and x = xre + jxim is a complex modulation symbol. For a simple notation, we assume that y is already finely discretized using a large number of |Y| uniformly spaced samples in a grid on the complex plain with |Y| points for yre and yim, respectively. In addition, we define the vector representation y = [yre, yim]
of the received sample. In this situation, we want to quantize y to a number of
|T | << |Y| quantization regions. The considered quantizers
are particularly useful for phase shift keying (PSK) signals [7]. An example for 8-PSK under AWGN with noise variance σn2 = 0.5 is provided in Figure 4. This figure shows the quantization regions obtained with the KL-means algorithm in the complex plain. For this example, yre and yim were both finely discretized into |Y| = 256 uniformly spaced samples on the interval [−1.5, +1.5] with properly paying attention to
clipping effects. Like this, one obtains a grid with cardinality |Y| = 2562 = 65, 536 in the complex plain. This grid was quantized to |T | = 16 different quantization regions. This
implies strong compression.
A typical application of the designed quantizer could be
in a radio, where the analog-to-digital converter has a resolution of 8 bits for the real and the inphase component of
the received signal, but the signal shall be quantized to be processed further using just 4 bits per sample with minimum relevant information loss. In this example, I(X; Y) ≈ 1.49533

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

yim

≡ modulation symbols 1 0 −1 −1.5 −1 −0.5 0 0.5 1
yre

t
15 14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 1.5 0

Fig. 4: Quantization regions for the output of an AWGN
channel with 8-PSK modulation in the complex plain for σn2 = 0.5, |T | = 16 constructed with the KL-means algorithm. I(X; Y) ≈ 1.49533 bit, I(X; T) ≈ 1.38887 bit.

bit and I(X; T) ≈ 1.38887 bit which indicates that despite the very coarse quantization a significant amount of relevant information on the transmitted modulation symbols (that is, around 92.8%) is preserved, hence illustrating how the KLmeans algorithm preserves relevant information.
Note that due to the very complicated shape of the optimized quantization regions obtained using the KL-means algorithm from Figure 4, this quantizer cannot be characterized by simple thresholds for yre and yim. The KL-means algorithm instead delivers a table which holds the respective t ∈ T for all of the possible vectors y = [yre, yim], such that, effectively one ends up with a lookup table of size |Y| = 65, 536 that characterizes the quantizer.
We wonder if a much more compact description of a quantizer which preserves a comparable amount of mutual information I(X; T) is possible using the proposed parametrized compression mappings that are optimized with genetic algorithms for the same setup.

B. Genetic Algorithm Based Quantizer Design
1) Distance Minimization Approach: Figure 5 shows the obtained quantization regions from the method described in Section III.A which is based on the minimization of d(y, θt). Figure 5a uses the Euclidean distance and Figure 5b uses the Manhattan distance in Equation (2). For the genetic algorithm optimization we used a population size npop = 200, evolved ngen = 2, 000 generations, used ncross = 5 random crossover points and a mutation probability pmut = 10−4 for each bit in the genotype of the children. We used a resolution of rm = 10 bits on the interval [−2, +2] for all tunable parameters θm(l) and applied a concept of elitism by guaranteeing that the nelite = 20 best population members become parents in the

yim

≡ modulation symbols, × ≡ θt, t ∈ T

t

15

1

××

××

××

0

×

× ××

×

−1

×× ××

×

−1.5 −1 −0.5 0 0.5 1 yre

14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 1.5 0

(a) Euclidean distance, I(X; Y) ≈ 1.49533 bit, I(X; T) ≈ 1.38286 bit.

yim

≡ modulation symbols, × ≡ θt, t ∈ T

t

15

1 0 −1 −1.5

×

×

×

×

×××

×

×

× ×
×

× ×

× ×

−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1 yre

14 13 12 11 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 1.5 0

(b) Manhattan distance, I(X; Y) ≈ 1.49533 bit, I(X; T) ≈ 1.37313 bit.

Fig. 5: Quantization regions for the output of an AWGN
channel with 8-PSK modulation in the complex plain for σn2 = 0.5, |T | = 16 constructed with the genetic algorithm.

next generation. The phenotypes θ(l) in this scenario hold 2·|T | = 2·16 = 32 parameters. The parameters θt are denoted using × markers in Figure 5. As it can be seen, the genetic algorithm automatically learns favorable positions θt in terms of the maximum preservation of I(X; T) under the respective distance d(y, θt). The quantizers from Figure 5a and 5b both can be described with 32 << 65, 536 parameters, but
have quantization regions with very complicated shapes that
allow to preserve large amounts of relevant information. The preserved relevant mutual information is I(X; T) ≈ 1.38286 bit (i.e., 92.5% of I(X; Y)) for the Euclidean distance and I(X; T) ≈ 1.37313 bit (i.e., 91.8% of I(X; Y)) for the Man-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Mutual information in bit Mutual information in bit

3

σn2 = 0.5

3

see Figs. 4, 5

2.5

2.5

2

2

1.5
1 0

I(X; Y) I(X; T) KL-means I(X; T) gen. alg. dE(y, θt) I(X; T) gen. alg. dM(y, θt)

5

10

15

20

1/σn2 in dB

1.5
1 0

I(X; Y) I(X; T) KL-means I(X; T) gen. alg. dM(y, θt)

5

10

15

20

1/σn2 in dB

Fig. 6: Comparison of KL-means and genetic algorithm (gen.
alg.) optimized quantization using distance minimization from Section III.A for |T | = 16 in terms of preserved I(X; T). I(X; Y) serves as an ultimate upper bound.

Fig. 7: Comparison of KL-means and genetic algorithm (gen.
alg.) optimized quantization using approximate nearest neighbor search from Section III.B for |T | = 256 in terms of preserved I(X; T). I(X; Y) serves as an ultimate upper bound.

hattan distance. It is very impressive that the proposed genetic algorithm optimized compression mappings with 32 parameters can compete with the KL-means quantizer from Figure 4 with 65, 536 parameters which preserved I(X; T) ≈ 1.38887 bit (92.8% of I(X; Y)). For a more detailed and quantitative analysis, Figure 6 compares the preserved relevant information I(X; T) of the KL-means quantizer and the proposed genetic algorithm optimized quantizers with |T | = 16 as a function of the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) 1/σn2 of the AWGN channel. The results show that over the entire SNR range the proposed compression mappings perform very close to the ones from the KL-means algorithm. In the very important low SNR regime on the very left of the figure, the curves of all investigated quantizers almost superimpose. Interestingly, the loss of using the Manhattan distance in comparison to the Euclidean distance is very small and hardly visible in Figure 6. However, the much simpler distance calculation motivates considering the Manhattan distance for practical implementations.
2) Approximate Nearest Neighbor Approach: Figure 6 shows that there is still a mentionable gap between I(X; Y) and I(X; T) for all the considered quantizers. In order to close that gap, one has to increase the output cardinality |T | of the quantizer to further decrease the quantization loss. This, however, proportionally increases the number of distance calculations for the distance minimization method from Section III.A. The approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm from Section III.B overcomes that issue. Figure 7 compares the preserved relevant information I(X; T) of the KL-means algorithm and the proposed genetic algorithm optimized compression mappings based on the approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm from Section III.B for an output cardinality of |T | = 256. For practical reasons, we only consider the Manhattan distance dM(y, θt) here. For this investigation, we were forced to decrease the cardinality of the

grid that finely discretizes the complex plain to |Y| = 128 points for yre, yim ∈ [−1.5, 1.5], respectively. The reason is that the time complexity of the KL-means algorithm from [7] is proportional to the product |T | · |Y| and with |Y| = 65, 536 as used in the previous investigation and |T | = 256 used here, it was just not possible to create the KL-means quantizers
in reasonable time, even though we have used a highly
parallel implementation of that algorithm which parallelizes
the algorithm on a graphics card [18]. Please note that using a coarser grid slightly degrades I(X; Y). This indicates that using the KL-means algorithm for very large |T | is challenging. The method proposed here, however, easily allows using such a large |T |.
The approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm used the parameters nneighbor = 6 neighbors, nentry = 6 entry nodes and a maximum path length of lpmaathx = 5. These parameters were found to offer a good tradeoff between sparsity of the
neighborhood graph and performance. The worst case number of distance calculations to determine t for a given y in this setting is 6 + 6 · 5 = 36 according to Equation (5) which is significantly less than |T | = 256. During our experiments we found out that it is even possible to reduce the maxi-
mum number of distance calculations further by decreasing nentry, nneighbor or lpmaathx at the expense of very slight losses in I(X; T). Moreover, we have added the choice of the first entry node as a parameter to the genetic algorithm such that it is
included in the optimization process. The rest of the entry
nodes is chosen heuristically, such that all resulting entry nodes
have possibly large distances among each other. The shown
results indicate that the proposed compression mappings based
on the approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm from Section III.B with parameters θ optimized using genetic algorithms can deal with very huge cardinalities |T | which are required to minimize the remaining quantization loss, such

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

that I(X; T) ≈ I(X; Y), as it can clearly be seen in Figure 7. Moreover, the performance is virtually identical to the KLmeans quantizers while still requiring just 2 · |T | + 1 = 513 parameters for the description of the resulting quantizers in comparison to a size |Y| = 16, 384 lookup table from the KL-means algorithm.
V. CONCLUSION
Genetic algorithms were successfully applied for the optimization of parametrized compression mappings that shall preserve a maximum possible amount of relevant information in a parametrized information bottleneck setup. To the best of our knowledge, this paper describes the first application of genetic algorithms for the maximization of mutual information in this context. It was shown that genetic algorithms are particularly useful in situations where standard gradient approaches are not suitable for the parameter optimization and that they can handle arbitrary parametrized compression mappings, irrespective of their mathematical properties. Moreover, we have optimized two classes of parametrized compression mappings based on distance minimization and the approximate nearest neighbor search algorithm with the proposed method for maximum preservation of relevant information. The resulting mappings were compared with very large lookup table based mappings from the KL-means algorithm in the context of channel output quantization and shown to perform competitively while using much fewer parameters. The proposed method is very generic and can also be applied to other signal processing and machine learning problems. Especially the proposed optimization of approximate nearest neighbor search using genetic algorithms is very promising for many applications, as it has tunable complexity of the designed compression rule and can deal with very large output cardinalities. This motivates further research on genetic algorithms for maximizing the mutual information.

[8] J. Lewandowsky, M. Stark, and G. Bauch, “Information bottleneck graphs for receiver design,” in Proceedings of 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), Barcelona, Spain, Jul. 2016, pp. 2888–2892.
[9] S. A. A. Shah, M. Stark, and G. Bauch, “Design of quantized decoders for polar codes using the information bottleneck method,” in 12th International ITG Conference on Systems, Communications and Coding 2019 (SCC’2019), Rostock, Germany, Jan. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[10] D. A. Coley, An introduction to genetic algorithms for scientists and engineers. USA: World Scientific Publishing Co., Inc., 1998.
[11] X. Yu and M. Gen, Introduction to evolutionary algorithms. Springer London, 2010.
[12] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Decodertailored polar code design using the genetic algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 67, no. 7, pp. 4521–4534, Jul. 2019.
[13] W. Youping, L. Liang, and C. Lin, “An advanced genetic algorithm for traveling salesman problem,” in Proceedings of 2009 Third International Conference on Genetic and Evolutionary Computing, Guilin, China, Oct. 2009, pp. 101–104.
[14] B. M. Kurkoski, “On the relationship between the KL means algorithm and the information bottleneck method,” in Proceedings of 2017 11th International ITG Conference on Systems, Communications and Coding (SCC), Hamburg, Germany, Feb. 2017, pp. 1–6.
[15] Y. A. Malkov and D. A. Yashunin, “Efficient and robust approximate nearest neighbor search using hierarchical navigable small world graphs,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 824–836, Apr. 2020.
[16] M. Lange, D. Zu¨hlke, O. Holz, and T. Villmann, “Applications of lpnorms and their smooth approximations for gradient based learning vector quantization,” in Proceedings of 22nd European Symposium on Artificial Neural Networks, Bruges, Belgium, Apr. 2014, pp. 271–276.
[17] J. Lewandowsky, M. Stark, and G. Bauch, “A discrete information bottleneck receiver with iterative decision feedback channel estimation,” in Proceedings of 2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), Hong Kong, China, Dec. 2018, pp. 1–5.
[18] M. Stark, “Information bottleneck algorithms for relevant-informationpreserving signal processing in python,” visited on Aug. 19th 2020. [Online]. Available: https://collaborating.tuhh.de/cip3725/ib base

REFERENCES
[1] N. Tishby, F. C. Pereira, and W. Bialek, “The information bottleneck method,” in Proceedings of 37th Allerton Conference on Communication and Computation, Monticello, USA, Sep. 1999, pp. 368–377.
[2] N. Slonim, R. Somerville, N. Tishby, and O. Lahav, “Objective classification of galaxy spectra using the information bottleneck method,” Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, Oxford University Press, vol. 323, no. 2, pp. 270–284, May 2001.
[3] A. Bardera, J. Rigau, I. Boada, M. Feixas, and M. Sbert, “Image segmentation using information bottleneck method,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 18, no. 7, pp. 1601–1612, Jul. 2009.
[4] S. Buddha, K. So, J. Carmena, and M. Gastpar, “Function identification in neuron populations via information bottleneck,” Entropy 2013, vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 1587–1608, May 2013.
[5] F. J. C. Romero and B. M. Kurkoski, “LDPC decoding mappings that maximize mutual information,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 2391–2401, Sep. 2016.
[6] J. Lewandowsky, G. Bauch, M. Tschauner, and P. Oppermann, “Design and evaluation of information bottleneck LDPC decoders for digital signal processors,” IEICE Transactions on Communications, vol. E102B, no. 8, pp. 1363–1370, Jan. 2019.
[7] J. A. Zhang and B. M. Kurkoski, “Low-complexity quantization of discrete memoryless channels,” in Proceedings of 2016 International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications (ISITA), Monterey, USA, Oct. 2016, pp. 448–452.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

