5490

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ELECTRON DEVICES, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2020

Exploiting Error Characteristic to Optimize Read Voltage for 3-D NAND Flash Memory
Meng Zhang , Fei Wu , Member, IEEE, Qin Yu, Weihua Liu , Yifan Wang, and Changsheng Xie , Member, IEEE

Abstract — 3-D NAND flash memory has become increasingly popular nonvolatile storage devices due to large capacity and high performance. With the increase of program/erase (P/E) cycles and retention periods, the threshold voltage distribution of 3-D NAND flash memory is prone to shift such that it is difficult to accurately obtain the read reference voltage (RRV). When reading data, read retry operations perform multiple flash sensing to read bit information correctly, inducing extended read latency. To mitigate the read latency, a method of precisely acquiring the RRV is urgently needed. Using an field-programmable gate array (FPGA) hardware testing platform, this article first studies error characteristics of 3-D triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash memory with the floating gate (FG) structure, which includes the variations of raw bit error rates (RBERs) in different layers and pages, the variations of block reads under different read modes, and the threshold voltage shifting characteristic. Then, based on these characterizations, this article develops an error characteristic aware RRV acquisition scheme, called ECRRV, to gain optimal RRV by exploiting the least square method. Experimental results show that the proposed scheme can significantly diminish the RBER and block read count.
Index Terms— 3-D triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash, P/E cycles, raw bit error rate (RBER), read reference voltage (RRV), retention periods.
I. INTRODUCTION
N AND flash memory has been widely applied stemming from large storage capacity and high performance [1].
The storage capacity has been steadily improved as a result of
three advanced techniques: technology node scaling, multibit
storage per cell, and 3-D stacking [2], [3]. In particular,
Manuscript received July 10, 2020; revised September 14, 2020; accepted October 5, 2020. Date of publication October 27, 2020; date of current version November 24, 2020. This work was supported in part by NSFC under Grant 61872413 and Grant U1709220, in part by the Key-Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province under Grant 2019B010107001, in part by the 111 Project under Grant B07038, in part by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant 2019M66262, in part by the Postdoctoral Innovative Talents Support Program under Grant BX20190128, in part by the Excellent Projects for Postdoctoral Science and Technology Activities in Hubei Province, in part by the Key Project of Shandong Wisdom Joint Fund under Grant ZR2019LZH009, and in part by Key Laboratory of Data Storage System, Ministry of Education. The review of this article was arranged by Editor J. Kang. (Corresponding authors: Fei Wu; Changsheng Xie.)
The authors are with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, School of Computer Science and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China (e-mail: zgmeng@hust.edu.cn; wufei@hust.edu.cn; liuweihua@hust.edu.cn; cs_xie@hust.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this article are available online at https://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TED.2020.3030867

3-D stacking has become the widely deployed storage mode, in which several layers are stacked in the vertical direction, leading to much higher storage capacity. However, data reliability has been decreasing [4], which is mainly because the threshold voltage distribution (TVD) of adjacent storage states is more likely to overlap with the increase of program/erase (P/E) cycles and retention periods. Once this happens, it is difficult to accurately locate optimal read reference voltage (RRV) to read data, resulting in high raw bit error rates (RBERs). As a result, read retry operations need to be conducted many times, introducing a concern about read latency. To obtain optimal RRV, this article proposes an error characteristic aware RRV acquisition scheme, called ECRRV, to minimize the RBER and block read count via the optimization read operation. For facilitating this study, it is essential to understand the error characteristics of 3-D NAND flash memory.
There are several prior researches in studying flash error characteristics and optimizing the RRV. By exploiting a real field-programmable gate array (FPGA) hardware platform, retention and program interference errors were characterized [4], and a new error phenomenon was observed in 3-D multilevel cell (MLC) flash memories via experimental characterization [5]. The effects of self-recovery and temperature on device reliability were investigated [6]. The TVD characteristics of planar flash [7] and 3-D triple-level cell (TLC) flash [8], [9] were studied. By adaptively learning online, optimal RRV for each flash block can be applied [10] and inferred by exploiting retention and program interference errors [11]. The voltage distribution [12] and balanced coding [13] were utilized to adaptively gain the read voltage threshold. Compared with these previous works, this article exploits the TVD characteristic induced by P/E cycles and retention periods to optimize RRV by fitting the polynomial offline. Optimal RRV can be obtained via computing the minimum point of the TVD polynomial. This is because the RRV closest to the minimum point can minimize the RBER and effectively avoid the need for read retry.
More specifically, various error characteristics of 3-D floating gate (FG) TLC NAND flash memory are first studied on a real FPGA testbed, such as the TVD shifting characteristic, the variety of RBER in the different storage layers and pages, and the variation of block read count. Motivated by these studies, this article investigates how to obtain optimal RRV. First, acquire discrete points of cell numbers falling into two adjacent RRVs. Second, fit the discrete points using the

0018-9383 © 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: EXPLOITING ERROR CHARACTERISTIC TO OPTIMIZE READ VOLTAGE FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

5491

Fig. 1. 3-D and planar structures of 3-D NAND flash memory.

least square method to gain the adjacent TVD polynomial. Finally, find the RRV closest to the minimum point, which is considered as the optimal RRV that can minimize the number of bit errors. Experimental results show that the proposed scheme can minimize the RBER and block read count.
The remainder part of this article is organized as follows: Section II gives the basics of 3-D NAND flash memory and flash error characteristics. Section III studies error characteristics of 3-D FG TLC NAND flash memory. The proposed ECRRV scheme is presented in Section IV, and the related wok is introduced in Section V, followed by the conclusion in Section VI.
II. BACKGROUND
This section introduces the basic background of 3-D NAND flash memory, including the 3-D storage structure, the entire voltage distribution of eight states in TLC cells, and flash error characteristics.

Fig. 2. Threshold voltage shift to (a) right or (b) left caused by program interference and retention periods.
right [see Fig. 2(a)] due to program interference. With the increase of retention time, electrons stored in the cell leak gradually, causing the TVD to shift to the left [see Fig. 2(b)]. Moreover, P/E cycles can further aggravate the effects of retention time and program interference on the TVD. When applying the default RRV to read the data in the overlapping region, it is more prone to cause bit errors. More interestingly, for 3-D flash memories, bit errors have layer-dependence characteristics due to process variation. Besides, the RBER has a large gap between different logical pages. This is because different read voltages are needed to distinguish the storage state, inducing different numbers of bit errors.

A. Basics of 3-D NAND Flash Memory
A 3-D NAND flash memory chip contains many physical blocks, including word lines (WLs), bit lines (BLs), substrate, a top selection transistor (TSG), a bottom selection transistor (BSG), and silicon channel. Each WL contains hundreds of cells, as shown in Fig. 1. As illustrated in the plane array diagram, storage cells are connected in series through BLs.

III. ERROR CHARACTERISTICS OF 3-D FG TLC NAND FLASH MEMORY
In this section, we present error characteristics of 3-D FG TLC NAND flash memory. The experiment methodology is first introduced. Then the variations of TVD, RBER, and block read count are explored, subsequently.

The storage cells in the same layers are connected to form

multiple share pages (SPs) through WLs, which are controlled A. Experiment Methodology

by different selection transistors. Take 3-D TLC NAND flash as an example illustrated in
Fig. 2; an SP contains three different types of pages. Each TLC cell can store three bits of data, which are called the least significant bit (LSB), the central significant bit (CSB), and the most significant bit (MSB), respectively. Among them, LSB, CSB, and MSB represent the data stored in the storage cell for the lower, upper, and extra pages (EPs) of an SP, respectively. There are eight states per cell and an RRV is applied between two adjacent states to distinguish bit information. LSB is judged by applying Vlsb. CSB is sensed via Vcsb1 and Vcsb2 after completing the LSB read operation. MSB is determined by applying Vmsb1, Vmsb2, Vmsb3, and Vmsb4 after CSB is detected.

3-D FG TLC NAND flash chips are tested on an FPGA hardware platform. In the experiment process, program, read, and erase commands are sent to blocks with a specified physical address. When performing the program operation, data can be written to the specified page. When implementing the read operation, the raw data is readout. The media of flash memory can be directly accessed. The testing platform includes the main controller, the peripheral component interface express (PCIe) interface, and eight sockets that can mount eight flash chips. Firmware of the testing board mainly provides six basic operation interfaces for the upper host. These interfaces can be invoked by the host to perform the corresponding operations on the flash memory chip. Specific chip parameters are shown

B. Flash Error Characteristics

in Table I. In the retention experiment, we reduce the actual testing

The threshold voltage of flash cells is vulnerable to shift time by high-temperature baking. The raw data are obtained

under the influences of P/E cycles and retention time, leading in three steps: 1) select physical blocks that have aged to a

to the distribution overlapping between two adjacent states. certain number of P/E cycles; 2) after the data are written

In a short retention time, the TVD tends to shift to the into the physical blocks, put the chip into the oven for high

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5492

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ELECTRON DEVICES, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2020

TABLE I CHIP PARAMETERS
Fig. 3. Variation of the TVD for 5k P/E cycles under retention (RT) 0-month (0M), three-month (3M), six-month (6M), and nine-month (9M).
temperature (i.e., 85 ◦C) baking; and 3) record the data under a specified P/E cycle and retention time.

C. Variation of RBER
Besides, this article describes the variation of the RBER in different layers of 3-D FG NAND flash memory under different P/E cycles and retention periods, as shown in Fig. 4. It illustrates that the RBER rises as P/E cycles and retention time increase. For retention period of nine month (i.e., denoted as 9M), when P/E cycles are 1k and 3k, the RBER increases at the slowest speed; when P/E cycles are 5k, the RBER grows rapidly, reaching a much higher level. Besides, there are also some differences among storage layers due to the process variation.
By performing normal and correction read (i.e., different from read retry, which includes a more complex calibration algorithm) operations, we count the RBER of different pages, which is illustrated in Fig. 4. Experiment results demonstrate that the RBER has a large gap among the lower page (LP), upper page (UP), and EP. Specifically, the RBER of LP with normal read is significantly lower than that of UP and EP. For the same types of pages, the RBER in the top and bottom layers is much higher than that of other layers. As P/E cycles gradually increase, the normal read operation generates much higher RBER that goes beyond the correction capability. More interestingly, the correction read can reduce the RBER and thus improves successful error correction.

B. Variation of TVD
This article first characterizes the variation of the TVD in state 3 and state 4 induced by different P/E cycles and retention periods. Experimental results show that the TVD shifts to the left as retention time increases, as shown in Fig. 3. The horizontal axis represents the offset of the RRV. The longitudinal axis denotes the cell numbers falling into two adjacent RRV ranges. From Fig. 3, it can be seen that the longer retention time, the larger the shifting degree. Moreover, the shift speed of the state with more electrons is higher than the one with fewer electrons. For physical blocks with P/E cycles of 5k after retention nine month (i.e., 9M), the minimum voltage of state 4 shifts to −180 mV. The overlap window between such two states becomes larger and larger since the threshold voltage of state 4 shifts much faster than that of state 3. When applying the default RRV to execute the normal read operation, if the cell voltage is on the left side of the default RRV, the data are judged to be 1, otherwise 0. The TVD of state 4 shifts to the left, if the sensed voltage is less than the default RRV, the bit is misread as 1, leading to errors.
The offset of the TVD rises with the growth of P/E cycles and retention periods. When using the default RRV to read flash pages, more and more cells are judged to be in the incorrect storage state, causing much higher RBER. Therefore, the read retry operation has to be implemented, which can determine RRV for next read according to the threshold voltage shift characteristics. Specifically, for long retention periods, the threshold voltage shifts to left. When one read retry operation is failure to read data for successful decoding, next read operation can be implemented by applying RRV on the left of original read voltage. This method can compensate for voltage transfer.

D. Variation of Block Read Count
Furthermore, we count the number of block read under different P/E cycles with retention time being 9M. Fig. 5(a) shows the relationship between bit error numbers and the corresponding total number of frame (i.e., the size of each frame is 1 kB) errors when performing normal and correction read operations. In the case of normal read: 1) for retention period of 9M, when P/E cycles are 1k, the number of frame bit errors is less than or equal to 72 (i.e., 72 is selected as the upper limit of error correction codes (ECCs) in each frame), which still does not need correction read; 2) for physical blocks at 3k and 5k P/E cycles, due to the maximum number of frame errors being beyond 72, the correction read operation is activated. Particularly, the maximum frame error bits at P/E cycles of 3k and 5k are more than 150 and 350, respectively.
More importantly, as P/E cycles and retention periods increase, under the condition that all pages can be decoded successfully, that is the number of required read retry augments, aggravating overall read latency. For example, for retention period of 9M, there are 456 read retries in physical blocks at 3k P/E cycles, increasing the read count by 19.7%. The amount of read retry grows to a higher level with growing P/E cycles, as illustrated in Fig. 5(b). The maximum number of read retry operations on a single page is 2. This is because the RBER gradually increases with growing of P/E cycles and retention periods when using normal read. Once RBER exceeds the error correction capability of ECCs, the read retry operation has to be activated to guarantee successful decoding for all pages in a block and thus ensure data reliability. For some pages with much higher RBER, one read retry operation may not satisfy the successful decoding. Two read retry operations are launched to retry decoding operations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: EXPLOITING ERROR CHARACTERISTIC TO OPTIMIZE READ VOLTAGE FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

5493

Fig. 4. Variation of RBER of (a) LP, (b) UP, and (c) EP in different layers and pages using normal read and correction read for retention time 9M under different P/E cycles.

Fig. 5. (a) Error bit distribution of frame in physical blocks, (b) variation of block read counts, and (c) percentages of pages with the same number of read retry.

In this article, by conducting experiments, we observe that when the maximum number of read retry operation is 2, all pages can be decoded successfully at a higher level of P/E cycles and retention periods.
Fig. 5(c) shows the percentages of pages with the same number of retries in the physical blocks when P/E cycles are 5k and retention time is three month (i.e., 3M), six month (i.e., 6M), and nine month (i.e., 9M). For retention period of 3M, more than 99% of LP, 96% of UP, and 97% of EP do not require retries. For retention period of 9M, about 13% of LP needs to be retried once, 37% and 63% of EP need to be retried once and twice, while 52% and 48% of UP need to be retried once and twice, respectively. It demonstrates that most of the pages can satisfy the error correction condition using the same RRV for a certain number of P/E cycles and retention periods. However, with the increasing of P/E cycles and retention periods, the RBER will become much higher, leading to more and more pages whose errors cannot be corrected successfully. Therefore, high-efficiency solutions are urgently needed to decrease the RBER.
IV. PROPOSED ECRRV SCHEME
By utilizing the previously discussed error characteristics, this section proposes the ECRRV scheme, whose details are given as follows. The effectiveness of ECRRV is verified through experiments.
A. ECRRV Overview
The overview of the ECRRV scheme is shown in Fig. 6. The variation of the TVD can induce variations of the RBER and block read count. As explained before, when the TVD overlaps, the RBER is high using conventional normal read and thus requires read retry that induces large block read count. To reduce the RBER and block read count, we propose

Fig. 6. Overview of the ECRRV scheme.

ECRRV including three parts: gain the TVD polynomial, calculate the minimum point, and obtain the optimal RRV. The minimum point of the polynomial is the intersection of two adjacent states distributions. The corresponding offset voltage is considered as the optimal offset voltage. Fig. 7 gives the diagrammatic sketch of fitting polynomial y = f (v). The minimum point can be computed via the following equation:

d

f (v) dv

=

0.

(1)

The optimal RRV can be optimized as Vdef − Voffset, where Vdef and Voffset represent the default read and optimal offset voltages, respectively.

B. ECRRV Details
The ECRRV scheme is illustrated in Algorithm 1, which first gives the page address, the interval between discrete points, and power N of the fitting polynomial. Then, the discrete points are obtained via the following four steps.
Step 1: The RRV is resized as the minimum value in the adjustable range to read data of flash pages. The range of the offset voltage is from −420 to 420 mv (i.e., [−420, 420 mv]).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5494

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ELECTRON DEVICES, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2020
TABLE II PARAMETERS OF VOLTAGE INTERVALS AND POLYNOMIAL POWER

C. Experimental Result and Analysis

Fig. 7. Schematic of the fitted TVD polynomial.
Assume that the RRV is V f , the minimum value of the RRV in the adjustable range is 420 mv. The adjustable range of the RRV is from V f −420 to V f +420 mv (i.e., [V f −420, V f +420 mv]). The number of bit 1 at this time is recorded as N1.
Step 2: The RRV is increased by X millivolts. Similarly, the number of bit 1 is counted as N2. |N1 − N2| is calculated (i.e., the number of storage cells is within the threshold voltage range of X millivolt).
Step 3: Repeat Step 2 until the RRV reaches the maximum value in the adjustable range.
Step 4: Compute the change number of bit 1 for each adjustment of the RRV (i.e., discrete points with intervals of X millivolt).
These discrete points with an interval of X millivolt are fitted into a polynomial with N-power. Finally, the optimal RRV is obtained via computing the minimum point Vmp using (1) and select the closest RRV to Vmp as the optimal RRV.
Algorithm 1 Algorithm of ECRRV Input: The page address, the interval size of the RRV, and the
power of the fitting polynomial Output: The optimized RRV 1: Obtain the page address, the interval between discrete
points, and power N of the fitting polynomial 2: Invoke the set feature interface to set the RRV to the
minimum value in the adjustable range 3: Record the number of bit 1 when reading the page 4: Increase the RRV by X mV 5: if the RRV exceeds the adjustable maximum value then 6: Fit these discrete points into a polynomial with N-power
using the least square method 7: Get the minimum point Vmp of the polynomial 8: Denote the set of RRV as {Vmin, · · · , Vx , · · · , Vmax },
select the optimal RRV as Vopt via computing mi n|Vopt − Vmp|, where Vopt belongs to the set of RRV 9: else 10: Record the number of bit 1 when reading the page 11: Calculate the difference of the number of bit 1 compared with the last read 12: Skip to step 4 to continue the operations 13: end if

In this section, we evaluate the efficiency of ECRRV on RBER and block read count from two aspects. One is the power of the fitting polynomial and the other is the interval size of the RRV. To achieve better performance, it is necessary to choose the appropriate power and interval size through experiments. Table II gives the interval size of the VT Step and the powers. The RRV is set before each read operation. The RBER and time-consumption are recorded. By comparing differences between RBER and latency, the suitable power and interval size are selected. In the experiment process, this article uses randomly generated bit data (i.e., bit 0 and bit 1 randomly distribute in the flash pages) to validate the effectiveness of the proposed ECRRV scheme. This is because a scrambler [17] in flash memory is used to make bit data randomly distribute in the flash pages before data are programed. Bit data are randomized to resist channel noise interference and thus reduce bit errors.
This article compares the effects of fitting polynomials with different orders on the RBER and time to optimize the RRV. The obtained TVD may be more accurate by fitting the higher order polynomial. However, through experiments, this article finds that the RBER cannot be further reduced using the polynomial with higher orders (i.e., the order > 4) and the time is longer to calculate the RRV. More specifically, Fig. 8(a) shows that under different P/E cycles and retention periods, the RBER changes with the different fitting powers and voltage steps. Experimental results demonstrate that adopting the polynomial with power 3 to optimize the RRV leads to higher RBER. The main reason is that fitting the TVD into the polynomial with power 3 has low goodness. The correlation between the optimized RRV and TVD is low. For the same voltage interval size, it is fitted to 4, 5, and 6 power polynomials. The optimized RRV can lead to lower RBER and the difference among them is small. With the increase of the voltage interval size, the RRV obtained by fitting 4, 5, and 6 power polynomials leads to a gradual increase in the RBER, which rises obviously when the voltage step exceeds 10. This is because the increase in voltage steps decreases the accuracy of the fitting polynomial.
The time consumed for gaining the RRV is mainly related to the voltage step and the power of the fitting polynomial, as shown in Fig. 8(b). The higher the power, the more time it takes to calculate the coefficients of the fitting polynomial. The larger the voltage step, the less time it takes to obtain the TVD because the adjustable range of the RRV remains unchanged, the points of TVD that require to be obtained are less. More specifically, as explained above, the adjustable range of the RRV is [−420, 420 mv]. The size of the VT step is 7.5 mv. If the VT step is 4, the interval of two adjacent points is 30 mv. Thus, 28 (i.e., (420 + 420)/30) points of TVD are obtained. Assume that the time is T for obtaining 1 point, the total

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: EXPLOITING ERROR CHARACTERISTIC TO OPTIMIZE READ VOLTAGE FOR 3-D NAND FLASH MEMORY

5495

Fig. 8. (a) RBER distribution when using different powers of the fitting polynomials and (b) time consumed in optimizing the RRV.

Fig. 9. (a) and (b) Variations of RBER and (c) block read count after using normal read, correction read, and optimization read from ECRRV under different P/E cycles and retention periods.

time of obtaining 28 points is 28T . If the VT step is 16, the interval of two adjacent points is 120 mv. Thereby, 7 (i.e., (420 + 420)/120) points of TVD are obtained. The total time of obtaining 7 points is 7T .
Due to much higher RBER, fitting the TVD into the 3 power polynomial is excluded. The RBER has little difference by fitting the TVD with the same voltage step into polynomials with powers 4, 5, and 6. However, fitting the polynomials with powers 5 and 6 takes a long time. Thus, the polynomial with power 4 is most appropriate. Moreover, when the voltage step is more than 10, the optimized RRV induces a higher RBER. If the voltage step is less than 10, obtaining the TVD takes a longer time. Therefore, the voltage step 10 is most appropriate. After comprehensive consideration, the voltage step 10 and the 4 power polynomials are selected to optimize the RRV.
Fig. 9(a) shows that when using normal read and optimization read from ECRRV, the RBER varies with the P/E cycles and retention periods. More the P/E cycles and longer retention time, more obvious the effect of reducing RBER by using the optimization read. For example, for retention 3M, 6M, 9M, and 5k P/E cycles, when normal read operations are implemented, the RBER of physical blocks is 3.1 × 10−3, 8.5 × 10−3, and 9.6 × 10−3, respectively; when adopting the optimization read scheme, the RBER is reduced to 9.0 × 10−4, 1.1 × 10−3, and 1.2×10−3, respectively. Besides, it can be seen clearly that the RBER using optimization read is significantly lower than that of using correction read, as shown in Fig. 9(b). For instance, for retention 6M, 9M, and 3k P/E cycles, after using correction read, the RBER is 2.6 × 10−3 and 3.3 × 10−3, respectively. Conversely, through using the optimization read, the RBER is reduced to 8.0 × 10−4 and 1.0 × 10−3, respectively.

Comparing optimization read with correction read, the block read count is significantly diminished, as shown in Fig. 9(c). When P/E cycles are 3k and retention time is 3M and 6M, all pages do not need to be retried after using optimization read, which can significantly cut down the read count. Specifically, the number of the block read count is reduced by 207 and 378, respectively. The overall read count of blocks is reduced by 7% and 13%, respectively. More interestingly, as P/E cycles and retention periods climb up, it is more prominent for reducing the block read count using the optimization read.
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with strong error correction capability are widely used in 3-D NAND flash memory to improve data reliability [11], [16]. The decoding iterations affect the read latency. We compare the decoding iterations of using LDPC codes with normal read and optimization read with variable VT steps when the power of fitting polynomial is 4 under retention nine-month and P/E cycles are 1k, 3k, and 5k. In the simulation process, we construct the LDPC codes with a code rate of 8/9, and the maximum decoding iteration is set as 30. The decoding iterations are affected by the RBER. Simulation results in Fig. 10 shows that the decoding iterations with normal read increase with P/E cycles and get to the maximum value at 5k P/E cycles. As a result, data reliability cannot be guaranteed. Moreover, when using normal read, the RBER is much higher [see Fig. 9(a)], leading to more decoding iterations at P/E cycles of 5k. The optimized read with VT step = 16 is used at 5k P/E cycles, the decoding iterations are much higher than that of other VT steps due to much higher RBER [see Fig. 8(a)]. More importantly, the decoding iterations are significantly reduced

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5496

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON ELECTRON DEVICES, VOL. 67, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2020

storage layers and pages by utilizing different read modes. Inspired by these studies, the ECRRV scheme is proposed via fitting polynomial. The TVD polynomial is first gained, then the minimum point is calculated to optimize the RRV. Experimental results show that ECRRV can significantly reduce the RBER and block read count via the optimization read operation.

Fig. 10. Variation of LDPC decoding iterations with normal read and optimization read with different Vt steps when when the power of fitting polynomial is 4 under retention nine-month and P/E cycles are 1k, 3k, and 5k.
after using the optimization read. Data reliability is effectively improved due to the reduced RBER.
V. RELATED WORK
There are some previous works to study flash error characteristics and optimize the RRV. Xiong et al. [4] characterized performance and reliability of 3-D FG NAND flash on an FPGA platform. Luo et al. [5], [6] investigated retention errors and effects of temperature on 3-D NAND flash reliability. Cai et al. [7] and Liu et al. [8] studied the TVD characteristics of planar and 3-D NAND flash, respectively. However, they do not further study the effects of TVD characteristics on the RBER and block read count, without considering to exploit the TVD characteristics to optimize the RRV and thus reduce the RBER and block read count. Papandreou et al. [9] characterized and analyzed bit error characteristics of 3-D TLC NAND flash, and estimated the read voltage threshold for planar flash [10]. Sala et al. [11] exploited balanced coding to gain the read voltage threshold. Cai et al. [12] proposed retention optimized reading (ROR) for each block by adaptively learning online. However, learning online will increase the computation and storage overheads. Li et al. [13] inferred the optimal multisensing voltages by exploiting retention and program interference errors, without considering how to accurately locate and read the reference. Compared with these prior works, we can accurately locate the RRV by exploiting the TVD characteristic induced by P/E cycles and retention periods in 3-D NAND flash memory. The RRV is optimized, which can eliminate unnecessary read retry operations at much higher RBER. More specifically, the discrete points of TVD are fitted into polynomials with different orders. The optimal RRV can be found by calculating the minimum point of the TVD polynomial, which can significantly reduce the RBER and block read counts.
VI. CONCLUSION
This article first studies the TVD characteristic induced by P/E cycles and retention periods in 3-D FG TLC NAND flash memory, and then investigates the variations of the RBER and block read count caused by the TVD among different

REFERENCES
[1] B. Schroeder, A. Merchant, and R. Lagisetty, “Reliability of NANDbased SSDs: What field studies tell us,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1751–1769, Sep. 2017, doi: 10.1109/JPROC.2017.2735969.
[2] H. Kim, S.-J. Ahn, Y. G. Shin, K. Lee, and E. Jung, “Evolution of NAND flash memory: From 2D to 3D as a storage market leader,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), May 2017, pp. 1–4, doi: 10.1109/IMW.2017.7939081.
[3] A. Arreghini, G. Van Den Bosch, and J. Van Houdt, “Innovative schemes to improve reliability and density of horizontal and vertical channel 3D flash,” in Proc. 5th IEEE Int. Memory Workshop, May 2013, pp. 1–4, doi: 10.1109/IMW.2013.6582121.
[4] Q. Xiong et al., “Characterizing 3D floating gate NAND flash: Observations, analyses, and implications,” ACM Trans. Storage, vol. 14, no. 2, p. 16, Nov. 2017, doi: 10.1145/3162616.
[5] Y. Luo, “Improving 3D NAND flash memory lifetime by tolerating early retention loss and process variation,” ACM SIGMETRICS Perform. Eval. Rev., vol. 46, no. 1, p. 106, Jan. 2019, doi: 10.1145/ 3224432.
[6] Y. Luo, S. Ghose, Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, and O. Mutlu, “HeatWatch: Improving 3D NAND flash memory device reliability by exploiting self-recovery and temperature awareness,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit. (HPCA), Feb. 2018, pp. 504–517, doi: 10.1109/HPCA.2018.00050.
[7] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in Proc. Design, Automat. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), Mar. 2013, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.7873/DATE.2013.266.
[8] W. Liu et al., “Characterizing the reliability and threshold voltage shifting of 3D charge trap NAND flash,” in Proc. Design, Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE), Mar. 2019, pp. 312–315, doi: 10.23919/DATE.2019.8714941.
[9] N. Papandreou et al., “Characterization and analysis of bit errors in 3D TLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), Mar. 2019, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1109/IRPS.2019.8720454.
[10] N. Papandreou et al., “Enhancing the reliability of MLC NAND flash memory systems by read channel optimization,” ACM Trans. Design Autom. Electron. Syst., vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 1–24, Sep. 2015, doi: 10.1145/2699866.
[11] F. Sala, R. Gabrys, and L. Dolecek, “Dynamic threshold schemes for multi-level non-volatile memories,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 2624–2634, Jul. 2013, doi: 10.1109/TCOMM.2013.053013.120733.
[12] Y. Cai, Y. Luo, E. F. Haratsch, K. Mai, and O. Mutlu, “Data retention in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, optimization, and recovery,” in Proc. IEEE 21st Int. Symp. High Perform. Comput. Archit. (HPCA), Feb. 2015, pp. 551–563, doi: 10.1109/HPCA.2015.7056062.
[13] Q. Li, L. Shi, Y. Cui, and C. J. Xue, “Exploiting asymmetric errors for LDPC decoding optimization on 3D NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 475–488, Apr. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TC.2019.2959318.
[14] B. Peleato, R. Agarwal, J. M. Cioffi, M. Qin, and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive read thresholds for NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 3069–3081, Sep. 2015, doi: 10.1109/TCOMM.2015.2453413.
[15] F. Wu et al., “Using error modes aware LDPC to improve decoding performance of 3-D TLC NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Computer-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 909–921, Apr. 2020, doi: 10.1109/TCAD.2019.2897706.
[16] Y. Du, Y. Zhou, M. Zhang, W. Liu, and S. Xiong, “Adapting layer RBERs variations of 3D flash memories via multi-granularity progressive LDPC reading,” in Proc. 56th Annu. Design Autom. Conf., Jun. 2019, pp. 1–6, doi: 10.1145/3316781.3317759.
[17] E. Sharon and I. Alrod, “Randomizing for suppressing errors in a flash memory,” U.S. Patent 8 370 561, Feb. 5, 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:36:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

