IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

1105

Across-Array LDPC Codes Design for Resistive Random-Access Memories
Qike Pang and Zheng Ma , Member, IEEE

Abstract—Resistive random-access memory (ReRAM) has garnered significant attention due to its high storage density, rapid read/write speeds, and compatibility with CMOS devices. However, the simple crossbar structure of ReRAM introduces sneak path (SP) interference, which impairs the storage reliability of the ReRAM system. To address this, we propose a novel zoned namespace (ZNS)-based ReRAM storage scheme, which is well-suited for scenarios with hybrid storage protection of multitype data and employs low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes to mitigate the impact of SPs. Furthermore, considering the asymmetric nature of the ReRAM channel, we first develop a computer-calculable asymmetric discrete density evolution of belief propagation decoding (ADDE-BP). Due to the acrossarray storage structure, SP interference and noise vary across subarrays, resulting in codewords experiencing a nonuniform “sum channel.” To address this, we further propose criteria based on ADDE-BP for nonuniform error correction, specifically for the design of LDPC codewords. Simulation results show that the proposed codes achieve 1–2 orders of magnitude lower bit error rate (BER) than IEEE standard codes and Mackay codes under most channel conditions, thus demonstrating that our proposed LDPC code design for across-array applications enhances data storage reliability compared to conventional methods. Most importantly, the maximum check node degree and node type of the designed code were reduced, thus greatly simplifying the hardware implementation. This work establishes a co-design framework for ReRAM that simultaneously improves the reliability and efficiency of storage systems.
Index Terms—Across-array data storage, density evolution, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, nonuniform error correction, zoned namespace (ZNS)-based resistive random-access memory (ReRAM).
I. INTRODUCTION
I N THE era of big data, reliable data storage cannot be ignored. To date, the most widely used nonvolatile memory is flash memory [1], [2], which boasts faster read/write performance and higher storage density than mechanical hard disks. However, as the storage density of flash memory devices continues to increase, it is subject to certain limitations [3]. For instance, the programming voltage in the flash memory cannot be reduced below a certain level, leading to serious
Received 2 April 2025; revised 23 June 2025; accepted 2 August 2025. Date of publication 12 August 2025; date of current version 23 February 2026. This work was supported by NSFC Project under Grant U2268201. This article was recommended by Associate Editor X. Yin. (Corresponding author: Zheng Ma.)
The authors are with the Provincial Key Laboratory of Information Coding and Transmission and the School of Information Science and Technology, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu 610031, China (e-mail: pangqike@my.swjtu.edu.cn; zma@swjtu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCAD.2025.3597952

programming errors. In addition, the internal charge is more prone to leakage, compromising the reliability of user data. In recent years, resistive random-access memory (ReRAM) [4] has risen as a notable contender to flash memory, offering distinct advantages across multiple domains. The theoretical foundation for memristors, derived from the term “memory resistor,” was laid by Chua in 1971 [5]. Memristors distinguish different logical data through variations in resistance values; the high-resistance (HR) state represents a logical “0,” while the low-resistance (LR) state represents a logical “1.” Now, memristors have emerged as fundamental components for implementing in-memory computing (IMC) paradigms [6], effectively addressing the critical “memory wall” bottleneck. The distinctive plasticity characteristics of memristors provide a novel physical foundation for developing energy-efficient computing systems that integrate storage and computation [7]. This unique capability enables the design of memory-centric architectures where data processing occurs directly within memory units, significantly reducing energy consumption and latency associated with traditional von Neumann architectures.
The crossbar array structure [8] is commonly employed in ReRAM for its benefits, such as high-density storage and efficient and rapid data access. The memories are located at the intersection of the columns and rows of the array. During read operations, a specific voltage is applied to the target cell, and its resistance is inferred by measuring the current that flows through the memory. Eventually, the logical data is determined through the hard-decision process based on the resistance value. However, this straightforward array structure and reading mechanism also introduce a significant challenge known as sneak path (SP) interference [9], as depicted in Fig. 1. The SP is influenced by the data distribution and the array size. Typically, the retrieved current is not only from the target cell but represents the “sum current” in a parallel circuit configuration, suggesting that the combined resistance is lower than that of any single branch, as represented by Rsum < min{R1, R2, . . . , Rn}. This can lead to an underestimation of the target resistance, potentially causing erroneous data detection.
In the existing literature, numerous works have dedicated efforts to enhancing the reliability of ReRAM through various avenues, including material properties, channel modeling, noise detection, and the development of channel coding and error correction techniques. Cassuto et al. [10] proposed a method to address the SP effect using constrained codes. This approach restricts stored data to specific regions at the cost of reduced code rate. In terms of ReRAM fabrication, the incorporation of a selector device ensures unidirectional current

1937-4151 c 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:02:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Fig. 1. Illustration of 4 × 4 memory array of ReRAM with SP (left). The corresponding data array (right).

Fig. 2. (a) Corresponds to the “1D1R” structure, which employs the diode as the selector. (b) Shows the structure of “1T1R,” adopting the transistor-MOS as the selector.

Fig. 3. ZNS architecture, which organizes data based on application-specific and data-type criteria.

flow, thereby diminishing the likelihood of SP occurrences. As demonstrated in Fig. 1, the current directions in the target and SPs exhibit opposite polarity. To establish unidirectional current flow during read operations, the integration of a selector device during fabrication emerges as an essential strategy. The slight reduction in storage density is negligible compared to the significant improvement in mitigating interference in the SP.
In current memristor architectures, these selector configurations have been widely adopted: 1-diode-1-resistor (1D1R) and 1-transistor-1-resistor (1T1R), and their structures are shown in Fig. 2.
As illustrated in Fig. 1, SP interference is intrinsically pattern-dependent. Chen et al. [11] identified a significant correlation among interference events affecting elements in the same rows and columns. To leverage this correlation during data detection, they proposed a pilot-cell-based storage paradigm, wherein adaptive threshold detection schemes utilize side information from these pilot cells. While this approach enhanced data reliability in architectures without error correction coding (ECC), it inevitably compromised storage efficiency due to the overhead of pilot cell allocation. Concurrently, with the rapid advancement of deep learning, [12] introduced a detection architecture based on deep neural networks (DNNs). This approach accomplishes data detection with minimal channel modeling information; however, the generalization capability of such models requires further validation across diverse operational conditions and array configurations.
In light of the remarkable success achieved by low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in improving data reliability within flash memory [13], [14], the ReRAM also adopts LDPC codes [15] to mitigate SP interference. In [16], a two-step bits allocation strategy has been proposed. This strategy disperses multiple codeword bits across distinct storage arrays based on the node relationships within the Tanner graph. Although

this method diminishes the influence of channel correlation within a single codeword, it does not address the interference between different codewords. Song et al. [17] introduced an across-array storage scheme aimed at reducing channel correlation between bits by distributing codewords across multiple memory arrays, demonstrating that these bits are subject to independent channels. However, this approach focused solely on decoding optimization and differs significantly from our research.
Recently, solid-state drive (SSD) manufacturers have introduced a novel data placement mechanism known as zoned namespace (ZNS) [18], which organizes data based on application-specific and data-type criteria, as shown in Fig. 3. The ZNS architecture, contrasting with conventional blockinterface SSDs, effectively alleviates issues about flash throughput degradation, diminished lifespans, and the expansion of the over-provisioning (OP) space. Furthermore, ZNS demonstrates significant potential for hybrid storage systems managing diverse data types, a prevalent requirement in modern big data applications. The proven success of ZNS on SSDs motivates its adaptation to ReRAM, a promising candidate for next-generation nonvolatile memory. This study introduces a methodology for designing LDPC codes specifically optimized for a ZNS-based ReRAM architecture, where across-array data storage is completed depending on the data type. Song et al. [17] observed that across-array data storage in ReRAM reduces data correlation, potentially enhancing the effectiveness of traditional ECCs. However, when a single codeword spans multiple arrays, it may be susceptible to nonuniform interference patterns, which could compromise the ECC’s performance. The reasons are as follows: 1) Generally, data types, such as text, images, video, system data, and databases, exhibit different distributions for binary bits 0’s and 1’s [19]. 2) As mentioned earlier, the SP interference encountered by the data in ReRAM is intricately linked to the data distribution within the array and the random interference exhibiting variation between subarrays. Thus, the optimization

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:02:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PANG AND MA: ACROSS-ARRAY LDPC CODES DESIGN FOR RESISTIVE RANDOM-ACCESS MEMORIES

1107

of ECC for across-array storage is necessary. In this article, the LDPC code is considered. Conventional, regular LDPC codes exhibit limited resilience to nonuniform interference. While irregular LDPC codes offer improved resistance, a systematic design methodology specifically targeting the characteristics of nonuniform interference in this context remains an open research problem. To address these limitations, we propose an asymmetric discrete density evolution method for the nonuniform errors (ADDE-BP-NON) method, aimed at crafting LDPC codes that enhance performance and ensure the reliability of stored data. Computer-aided design tools developed by the above theoretical methods are effective in generating such good codewords. To this end, the contributions of our work are as follows.
1) For the hybrid storage scenarios of multitype data prevalent in the big data era, we propose a novel ZNS-based ReRAM storage architecture, where the architecture allocates the different types of data into multiple subarrays and employs a single hybrid LDPC code to protect them. Furthermore, recognizing the asymmetric and nonuniform interference characteristics inherent in this multitype data storage scenario, we introduce a tailored across-array LDPC code design methodology to enhance storage reliability.
2) For the asymmetric channel, we propose a computercalculable belief propagation (BP)-based asymmetric density evolution (ADE) algorithm. Although we only address the ReRAM channel in this article, the algorithm inherently applies to the progressivity analysis of the codeword in any asymmetric channel.
3) Furthermore, an asymmetric discrete density evolution method is proposed for nonuniform errors. Compared to conventional density evolution techniques, the resulting codeword design offers superior error correction performance and reduced hardware implementation complexity. Notably, this work represents the first instance of code design tailored explicitly for asymmetric channels exhibiting nonuniform error characteristics.
The article is organized as follows. Section II provides fundamentals for the ReRAM system. Section III gives the storage architecture of ZNS-based ReRAM and two types of LDPC code design methods, asymmetric discrete density evolution of BP decoding (ADDE-BP) and ADDE-BP-NON. Code design and results are presented in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes our contributions.
II. RESISTIVE MEMORY CHANNEL MODEL
We examine an m × n memory array of ReRAM, where the memristor at the intersection of the ith row and the jth column is denoted as a cell (i, j), with i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , m} and j ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}. Meanwhile, xi,j ∈ {0, 1} represents an element of the data matrix X, and yi,j corresponds to the output signal upon reading. In the data writing process, a specific voltage is applied to modulate the resistance of the target cell according to the hysteresis characteristic curve of the memristor [5]. Conversely, during the data erasure phase, all cells are uniformly transitioned to the HR state. Despite

Fig. 4. ReRAM channel model, where R1 indicates LR value, R0 and R0 denotes HR value with/without SP interference. We take the resistance values of R0 = 1000 , R1 = 100 and R0 = 250 [17].
the simplicity of ReRAM’s operational mechanism, its storage performance is significantly compromised by SP interference. SPs constitute unintended current pathways that run parallel to the expected current path, and these paths are considered interference. Fig. 1 illustrates SP interference, where cell (4,1) is the target cell under reading. The intended current path is indicated by the blue line, contrasted by two SPs: 1) the red path (4, 1) → (4, 3) → (2, 3) → (2, 1) → (4, 1) and 2) the green path (4, 1) → (4, 4) → (3, 4) → (3, 1) → (4, 1). The SP interference adversely impacts HR cells, thus rendering it difficult to clearly distinguish between HR cells and LR cells during the read phase. It is important to note that the current in the SP flows in the opposite direction to the intended current. So, a selector is integrated to ensure that the current can only flow in one direction, thus inhibiting the emergence of the SP. However, it is prone to failure due to manufacturing defects or material degradation, which can potentially reactivate the SP.
The formation of a SP can be attributed to these primary factors: 1) the specific storage patterns, the target cell xi,j = 0 and xi,s = xk,s = xk,j = 1, k ∈ {1, 2, . . . , m}, s ∈ {1, 2, . . . , n}; and 2) the failure of the selector device associated with the cell (k, s). Here, we focus predominantly on the SP of length-3 for facilitating analysis. The longer SP in series exhibits greater resistance compared to those of length-3 and consequently has a diminished effect on the measured resistance of the target cell. Meanwhile, the number of SPs under consideration is typically modest, given the low likelihood of concurrent selector failures across multiple cells.
The ReRAM channel is characterized by a unique Z-channel configuration in tandem with an additive Gaussian noise channel, as depicted in Fig. 4. We utilize additive Gaussian noise to represent the random noise [20] encountered by the resistances and the measurement noise introduced by the sensing circuit, consistent with the approach in [17]. However, our methodology can be expanded to include other composite noise models, as indicated in [16]. According to the channel model, the asymmetric nature of the ReRAM channel is defined by two parameters: ( ij, σ ). The term ij denotes the probability that a SP occurs within the cell (i, j), associated with the input data distribution and the specific cell. The standard deviation σ characterizes resistance variations in the array, where uniform deviation distribution across memory cells in a single array is conventionally assumed.
By the conditions that govern the emergence of SP interference, we can conduct a quantitative analysis of the average probability of the occurrence of SP interference within an array of size m × n. We presuppose the input distribution to be independent and identically distributed (i.i.d.) Bernoulli

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:02:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

process with parameter q, i.e., P(xi,j = 1) = q and P(xi,j = 0) = 1−q. Then, a binary random variable ei,j is introduced to characterize whether cell (i, j) is impacted by SP interference,
where ei,j = 1 indicates that cell (i, j) is contaminated (i.e., Pr(ei,j = 1|xi,j = 0) = ij) and ei,j = 0 indicates it is not (i.e., Pr(ei,j = 0|xi,j = 0) = 1 − ij). Therefore, the resistance of
the readout can be formulated as follows:

R1, xi,j = 1

ri,j =

1

1 R0

+

ei,j Rs

, xi,j

=

0

(1)

where Rs is paralleled resistance value caused by SPs interference with the target cell and R0 = ((1/R0)+(1/Rs))−1.
According to the principle of SP formation, the HR cell
will not encounter SP interference when the following two
points are satisfied simultaneously: 1) Certain positions in
the same row or column are HR cells, and then these paths
cannot form the SPs (contrary to condition 2 of the principle
of SP formation). 2) The remaining positions in the same row
or column are LR cells. Still, their intersection positions are
the LR cells whose selectors are not disabled or HR cells (characterized by probability 1 − pf q). These paths cannot form the SPs (contrary to condition 3 of the principle of SP formation). Therefore, for a specified distribution (q = q∗), the q∗ (mean value of ij) can be calculated by

q∗ = E

m i=1

n j=1

eij

mn(1 − q∗)

m−1 n−1
= 1−

m−1

i

i=0 j=0

n−1 × j

q∗(i+j) 1 − q∗ (m−1−i+n−1−j) 1 − pf q∗ ij. (2)

The pf is the failure probability of the selector, and it is set to 0.001 [16], [17]. For convenience in subsequent calculations, the factor f (q) = (1 − pf q)ij in (2) can be simplified by Taylor expansion with the Peano remainder term. To minimize the
simplification error, the Taylor expansion can be applied here.
In practice, the tolerable error E is considered in advance, and the order (n) of the expansion is determined

f (n)(q0) (q n!

−

q0)n

≤

E.

(3)

From (2), it shows that the larger the array size, the more likely the SPs will occur. Moreover, in the hybrid storage of multitype data, the data suffers from nonuniform errors

due to the different information distributions and the different specifications of the stored arrays. So, it is more challenging to protect the data in ReRAM to fulfill both high-capacity and high-density requirements for the hybrid storage of multitype data.

III. ACROSS-ARRAY LDPC CODING DESIGN
The probability of the SPs’ occurrence depends on the distribution of the stored data and the specifications of the storage array. To achieve high reliability and high-density storage, we implement the ZNS-based [18] storage architecture for ReRAM, where the across-array data storage [17] is based

Fig. 5. System model for hybrid LDPC coded for ZNS-based ReRAM storage.

on the data type. The schematic of the storage architecture

is presented in Fig. 5. In this scenario, we examine a typical

case where a single LDPC codeword is allocated to multiple

subarrays for storage.

In this study, we presume the existence of S distinct types of

data. Considering source bits marked by S sets of binary data

vector of length-ks: us = (u1, u2, . . . , uks ), s ∈ {1, 2, . . . , S},

these bits are allocated to T subarrays. The likelihood of

SP occurrences within each subarray is redenoted as st, t ∈

{1, 2, . . . , T}, s ∈ {1, 2, . . . , S} and is contingent upon the

distribution of stored data. Following [17], we substitute

t s

with its mean value

t s,q

,

which

is

calculated

using

(2).

In

this storage paradigm, based on (6) of [17], the ReRAM

storage channel can be equated to a block-varing channel.

And the channel parameters

t s,q

may

vary

among

subarrays.

Additionally, the noise (σt) is not uniform across different sub-

arrays. Consequently, the “sum channel” experienced by the

LDPC code constitutes a nonuniform channel within ReRAM.

Given the asymmetrical nature of the ReRAM channel, con-

ventional LDPC code design methodologies are inadequate to

address these issues in tandem. Drawing from [21], [22], we

have constructed an ADDE-BP-NON in this section.

A. Asymmetric Discrete Density Evolution for BP
Given that the ADE algorithm, as introduced by Wang et al. [22], lacks explicit expressions for iterative BP decoding, is practical intractable for its high complexity. To solve this problem, we develop a computer-calculable iterative formula for the ADDE-BP.
The uniform quantizer W(x) [23] is considered

⎧

⎪⎨

x

−

1 2

·

,x ≤ −2

W(x) = ⎪⎩ 0 x

+

1 2

·

,x ≥ 2 , others

(4)

where x and W(x) represent the message prior to and following quantization, respectively; The symbol denotes the quantization interval; The operations x and x correspond to the ceiling and floor functions, respectively. In practice, we first determine the quantization range by simulating the maximum value of the log-likelihood ratios (LLR), and then take the smallest possible quantization interval while considering the complexity, thus preventing channel loss.
In BP decoding, the LLR of the channel output serves as the decoding input. The output of the variable nodes (VNs) and the check nodes (CNs) are mapped according to (5) and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:02:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PANG AND MA: ACROSS-ARRAY LDPC CODES DESIGN FOR RESISTIVE RANDOM-ACCESS MEMORIES

1109

(6), respectively

dv−1

W v(il) = W v(i0) +

W uj(l)

(5)

j=1

W uj(l)

dc−1

W vi(l−1)

tanh

= tanh

(6)

2

2

i=1

where vi(l) represents the message transmitted from ith variable node (VNi) at the lth iteration and dv is the degree of this variable node. Similarly, uj(l) signifies the message sent from the jth check node (CNj) at the lth iteration, and dc is the degree of this check node.
To simplify the notation, discrete messages are redefined as follows: W(vi(l)) ⇒ vi(l); W(uj(l)) ⇒ uj(l). Under independence assumption [21], the individual messages vi(l) and uj(l) in the lth iteration are considered random variables of i.i.d. Consequently, the subscripts in vi(l) and uj(l) can be removed, denoting them as v(l) and u(l), respectively. For the ADE
approach, it is necessary to analyze the evolution of both
0-code and 1-code messages throughout the iterative process. Therefore, Pz(l)(v) is defined as the density function of the message emanating from VN at the lth iteration, with the subscript z ∈ {0, 1} representing the case of 0-code and 1-code. Additionally, Pz(0)(v) (l = 0) signifies the initial message density of the channel. Likewise, Q0(l)(u) and Q0(l)(u) denote the density function of the message of CN.
1) Message Density Update of Variable Node:

Pz(l)(v) = P(z0)(v) ⊗ Qz(l)(u)⊗(dv−1).

(7)

Here, the computation of message density of VN is consistent with the original density evolution [23]. In practical implementation, the discrete sequence convolution can be accelerated with the fast Fourier transform (FFT) and the inverse FFT (IFFT).
2) Message Density Update of Check Node:

R2(a, b) = 2tanh−1

a tanh

×

tanh

b

2

2

.

(8)

For the sake of simplicity, we first introduce the R2 operator (8) introduced in [23]. Then, (9) employs the R2 operator to rerepresent (6), where vector v = {v1, v2, . . . , vdc−1}. And, in order to make the expression of the density evolution formula
of the check nodes more convenient and concise, the function (c)(·) is used to express the update process of the check node

u=

(c) v

= 2 · tanh−1

dc−1 tanh vi 2

i=1

= R2 v1, R2(v2, . . . , .R2(vdc−2, vdc−1)) .

(9)

The derivation of the check node evolution formula plays a key role in ADDE-BP. The Tanner graph of a check node with its neighboring variable nodes during the iterative process is given in Fig. 6. Since each check node is i.i.d., the output message density of a certain node is denoted by Qz(l)(u), z ∈ {0, 1}. According to the concept of “perfect projection” [22], it suffices to provide the message densities Q0(l)(u) and Q(1l)(u)

Fig. 6. Partial exhibition of the Tanner graph.

that correspond to the nodes VNi receiving decision values

of 0 and 1, i.e., Q(0l)(u) → Vi = 0; Q1(l)(u) → Vi = 1.

Furthermore, we define a neighborhood set of CNj as NC1 Nj =

{VN0, nodes

VwNit1h,in. .N. ,C1VNNj mdc−us1t}.saGtiisvfeynmthoadt(theid=dc−0ec1iVsiio,n2)va=lue0s,

of the when

Vi = 0 is ascertained, it follows that

dc−1 k=1,k=i

Vk

=

n

must

be even and its probability is

P(n = even|Vi = 0) =

dc − 1 n

(P(Vk = 1))dc−2.

(10)

Similarly, when Vi = 1

P(n = odd|Vi = 1) =

dc − 1 n

((P(Vk = 1)))dc−2.

(11)

Finally, using (10) and (11), the updated formula for CN’s message density can be given

Q0(l)(u)

=

1 2dc−2

dc−1

dc − 1 · k

k=0,k=even

k

dc−1

P1(l−1)(vd) ·

P0(l−1)(vd) (12)

v: (c)(v)=u d=1

d=k+1

Q1(l)(u)

=

1 2dc−2

dc−1

dc − 1 · k

k=0,k=odd

k

dc−1

P1(l−1)(vd) ·

P0(l−1)(vd). (13)

v: (c)(v)=u d=1

d=k+1

In particular, when k = dc −

when k = 1 in (13),

0

iddnc=−(k11+21)P, 0(l−kd1=)(1vPd)1(l−=1)1(.vd)

=

1,

and

B. ADDE-BP for Nonuniform Errors
The ADDE-BP-NON method proposed in this section is motivated by the potential to enhance the performance of irregular LDPC codes through degree distribution optimization. From the perspective of nonuniform error immunity, due to the different number of CNs connected to different VNs of irregular LDPC codes, the information received by each VN during the decoding process is different, which leads to VNs possessing nonuniform immunity to interference. However, in the traditional design of irregular codes, nonuniform immunity is not considered as a priori metric. Inspired by this, designing LDPC codes with nonuniform immunity corresponding to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:02:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

known nonuniform interference is possible. Furthermore, the

“sum channel” in the ZNS-based storage architecture also

has asymmetric properties. Therefore, we propose the ADDE-

BP-NON method to approach the optimal matching between

LDPC codes and nonuniform asymmetric channels.

In contrast to ADDE-BP, the ADDE-BP-NON categorizes

VNs based on the interference intensity they experienced

(i.e., subchannels). Then, distinct “subdegree distributions” are

designed for each category, eventually forming the complete

degree distribution. Specifically, during the calculation of

the VN probability density, the probability density function

(PDF) for each subchannel is first derived independently.

Subsequently, the PDFs of the “sum channel” are combined

using a weighted average, where the weights correspond to

the proportion of edges in the Tanner graph associated with

each subchannel category relative to the total number of edges.

Due to the analytical complexity of nonuniform CNs degree

distribution matching over the channel, current optimization

efforts for CNs distribution are aligned with conventional

irregular code design principles. While ADDE-BP can be

conceptualized as a single optimization problem for code

design under a channel, ADDE-BP-NON can be considered

a joint optimization problem, seeking an optimal code design

for the effective channel formed by the aggregation of multiple

subchannels, each with distinct interference characteristics.

Critically, ADDE-BP-NON accounts for the heterogeneous

interference profiles across subchannels during density evolu-

tion. By tailoring the degree distribution irregularity to each

subchannel, the resulting composite code, when applied to the

overall aggregated channel, exhibits a highly effective degree

distribution, leading to enhanced error correction performance.

For the convenient presentation of the algorithm, it is

assumed that a length-n codeword is allocated to T subarrays

during data writing, and the subsequent notations are hereby

defined.

1) nt denotes the number of bits stored (transmitted) on the

tth subarray (subchannel). And

T t=1

nt

=

n.

2) ηt = {xt1 , xt2 , xt3 , . . . , }, where index t1, t2, t3, . . . , ∈

{1, 2 · · · n}, denotes the set of bits stored (transmitted)

on the tth subarray (subchannel). So |ηt| = nt, where | · | denotes the cardinality of the set. And let Gt = (nt/n).

3) E is the set of edges in the Tanner graph of the LDPC

codes. Et represents the set of edges connected with

a variable node of type t, and the corresponding bits

are stored (transmitted) in the tth subarray (subchannel). Furthermore, Eti represents the set of edges attached to the variable node with the degree i and the tth subarray. 4) λ(t)(x) = i λ(it) · xi−1 is defined as the degree distribution of the variable node under tth subchannel, where λi(t) = ([|Eit|]/|E|). The definition of check nodes is similar. To facilitate the design of codewords, the degree

distribution of the check nodes is maintained consistent

with the traditional definition [23].

5) (x) = {λ(1)(x), λ(2)(x), . . . , λ(T)(x)} and ρ(x) = i ρixi−1 represent the degree distribution of variable
nodes and check nodes of the LDPC code that can cor-

rect nonuniform errors within a codeword. The ensemble

C( , ρ) is the collection of LDPC codes.

Algorithm 1: ADDE-BP-NON

Input: Channel parameters: (

q1,

q2, ...

T q

)

and

(σ1,

σ2, ...σT ).

R2 operator pre-lookup table: RLUT . VNs degree distribution: (λ(1)(x), λ(2)(x), ...λ(T)(x)). CNs degree distribution: ρ(x).

Vector of bits ratio over sub-array: (G1, G2, ...GT ).

1 Initialization l = 0, lmax, W(x) and stop pe.

2 for t ∈ [1, T] do

3

(

t q

,

σk

)

⇒

Pz(0,t)(v);

4

(Gt, λ(t)(x), E) ⇒ Prt;

5 end

6 The initial density function of the “sum channel”:

Pz(0)(v) =

T t=1

Prt

∗

Pz(0,t)(v).

7 Iterative Process:

8 while l < lmax ∩ pe > stop pe do

9

CN update:

10

Qlz(u) = ψeven/odd P0(l−1)(v), P(1l−1)(v), ρ(x), RLUT .

11

VN update:

12

for t ∈ [1, T] do

13

Pz(l,)t(v) = Pz(0,t)(v) ⊗ λ(t)(Q(zl)(u));

14

end

15 The updated density function of the “sum channel”:

P(zl)(v) =

T t=1

Prt

∗

P(zl,)t (v).

16

Calculation of error probability: P(el).

17

Update l ← l + 1.

18 end

Output: Pe(l) and Convergence or not?

6) Prt = ([|Et|]/|E|) is the ratio of the number of edges

associated with the variable node in the tth subarray to

the number of all edges in the Tanner graph. Essentially,

Prt, t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T} determines the irregularity of the codewords in the ensemble C( , ρ), while this is

governed by the channel nonuniformity.

The proposed ADDE-BP-NON is described in Algorithm 1,

which can examine the convergence of an LDPC code set with

the VNs degree distribution {λ(1)(x), λ(2)(x), . . . , λ(T)(x)} and

the CNs degree distribution ρ(x) over a nonuniform and asym-

metric

channel

characterized

by

parameters

(

1 q

,

q2, . . . ,

T q

)

(omitting the subscript s) and (σ1, σ2, . . . , σT ). Additionally,

the prelookup table (RLUT ) of the R2 operator and the vector

of bits ratio over subarray (G1, G2, . . . , GT ) serve as inputs.

During the initialization of the algorithm, the maximum

number of iterations (lmax), the quantizer parameters (W(x)), and the stopping error rate (stop pe) are provided. In step 3, Pz(0,t), z ∈ {0, 1}, t ∈ {0, 1, . . . , T} denotes one of the T pairs of initial LLR message density functions. And Pz(0), z ∈ {0, 1} is

the initial density function of the “sum channel .”

The iterative process of Algorithm 1 includes the following

phases.

1) Message Density Update of Check Node: Qzl , z ∈ {0, 1} means the same as with ADDE-BP. For the sake of illustration,

two transformation operators for the check nodes, denoted

ψodd and ψeven, are utilized to represent (12) and (13), respectively. Specifically, Ql0 is obtained by mapping ψeven, and ψodd to Q1l .
2) Message Density Update of Variable Node: The variable

nodes are updated following the conventional DE approach.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:02:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PANG AND MA: ACROSS-ARRAY LDPC CODES DESIGN FOR RESISTIVE RANDOM-ACCESS MEMORIES

1111

However, the distinction is that the update of variable nodes must be differentiated by subchannel and calculated individually.
Algorithm 1 measures the threshold of the LDPC codes in an asymmetric and nonuniform channel, where the threshold level is representative of the performance of the codes to some extent. In particular, a pair of channel parameters ( , σ ) is employed to characterize the threshold of codes during density evolution. In the next section, we apply the ADDEBP-NON method and the differential evolution method to design the LDPC codes for the ReRAM channel. To simplify the comparison of thresholds during differential evolution, the smallest interference intensity ( min, σmin) among the nonuniform interferences is considered as the threshold for density evolution.

TABLE I DETAILED PARAMETERS OF LDPC CODES
TABLE II EXAMPLE: DEGREE DISTRIBUTION FOR T = 4 AND R = 0.8

IV. CODES DESIGN AND RESULTS

In this section, to verify the validity of the across-array

storage scheme for hybrid storage of multitype data, a bunch

of “good” LDPC codes are designed using a computer-aided

design tool developed by the ADDE-BP-NON methodology.

The thresholding of the ensemble of LDPC codes can be

determined by the density evolution, and it is necessary

to find the pair of degree distributions that produces the

maximum possible noise threshold for a given channel. The

problem is a nonlinear cost function minimization problem

with continuous space parameters. A commonly used solution

method is the differential evolution algorithm [24]. This

algorithm has been successfully applied to the design of LDPC

codes for erasure channels [25], AWGN channels [21], and

Rayleigh channels [26]. Differential evolution encompasses

four primary stages: initialization, mutation, crossover, and

selection. Following the crossover operation, which generates

candidate degree distributions, the ADDE-BP-NON method is

employed to evaluate the thresholds of each resulting degree

distribution. This threshold evaluation serves as the basis for

the subsequent selection stage. Generally, with the increase

of T, the parameter search space for code design becomes

excessively broad, increasing the complexity of the design.

The matrix (14) represents the parameters of the variable nodes

⎡ ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢

λ1,1 λ2,1
. λt,1
.

λ1,2 λ2,2
. λt,2
.

··· ··· ··· ··· ···

λ1,dv1 λ2,dv2
. λt,dvt
.

⎤ ⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥.

(14)

λT,1 λT,2 · · · λT,dvT

Considering the tradeoff between design complexity and code

performance, the “pseudo-regular codes” within the ensemble

C( , ρ) serve as an alternative, characterized by λ(i)(x) = xdvt −1, t ∈ {1, 2, . . . , T}, where the parameters matrix has

a single nonzero element per row. In essence, the degree

distribution of the variable nodes is focused on a single

degree within each subchannel, albeit with some inevitable

performance degradation. To substantiate the effectiveness of

our designed codewords, we compare their performance with

the IEEE standard code for flash memory [27] and the Mackay

LDPC code [28], as detailed in Table I.

Fig. 7. Asymptotic BERs of the example over the ReRAM channels (T = 4) predicted by the ADDE-BP-NON, where just the green line indicates the case of nonconvergence. Because the channel condition (σmin) exceeds the threshold for pseudo-regular code.
Table II are designed for a ZNS-based ReRAM architecture adopting the across-array storage scheme, where T = 4 and the channel parameters are { q = (0.5, 0.4, 0.4, 0.6), σ = (σmin + 10, σmin + 5, σmin + 5, σmin)}. The σmin is used as a measure of the codeword threshold. It can be seen that the threshold of “fully irregular code” is better than that of the “pseudo-regular code.” Furthermore, the maximum degree of “fully irregular code” is smaller than “pseudo-regular code,” IEEE standard code and Mackay code, which is more beneficial to hardware implementation.
Fig. 7 illustrates the asymptotic bit error rates (BERs) of the example over the ReRAM channels (T = 4). It is observed that fully irregular codes exhibit more rapid convergence. These codes require fewer iterations under identical channel conditions, as demonstrated by the comparison with pseudoregular codes and fully irregular codes at σmin = 45 in Fig. 7. Concurrently, once the channel noise exceeds the threshold for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:02:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

Fig. 8. Evolution of the density function of “fully irregular code” under σmin = 45, all-ones code (left) and all-zeros code (right). The log-likelihood ratio (LLR) quantization parameters: {−50:0.2:50}.

the codes, the BERs do not exhibit a sustainable decrease, as

exemplified by the pseudo-regular code at σmin = 46. In contrast to conventional density evolution methods, the

ReRAM channel exhibits inherent asymmetry, necessitating

the consideration of both the all-zeros and all-ones density

functions in the design and analysis of codes. Fig. 8 illustrates

the evolution of the density function for a fully irregular

code at σmin = 45. The right-hand side of Fig. 8 depicts the

LLR evolution of the all-zeros code, demonstrating that the

LLR distribution shifts toward positive values as the iteration

count escalates. Conversely, the LLR distribution of the all-

ones code veers toward the negative values. Moreover, the

probability of error can be progressively minimized, fulfilling the convergence criterion Pe(l) ≤ stop pe.
It can be seen in Fig. 9 that the performance of the designed

“pseudo-regular code” and “fully irregular code” with code

length n = 4096 outperforms the other two codes. Specifically,

for most of the channel noise (σmin), the BERs of fully irregular code are about 1-order of magnitude lower than that

of the pseudo-regular code. Compared to Mackay LDPC code,

the BERs of fully irregular code can be reduced by at least

2-order of magnitude. Meanwhile, the maximum node degree

of “fully irregular code” is lower than that of “pseudo-regular

code,” while the decoding performance is better.

Subsequently, we examine the performance degradation of

the LDPC codeword designed using

t s,q

under

actual

channel

conditions. As shown in Fig. 10, the codeword, designed

with the average value

t s,q

,

experiences

a

marginal

loss

in

performance in the real channel. Furthermore, as described

in [17], the adoption of the across-array scheme results in the

channel parameters

t s

becoming

increasingly

centered

around

its mean value with an increasing number of across-array T.

Consequently, this leads to a further reduction in performance

loss.

To demonstrate the merits of the across-array LDPC coding

design in a ZNS-based ReRAM storage architecture, we take

a set of source information with three types of data as the

storage pattern, where the corresponding parameters are: q1 = 0.55, n1 = 4096, q2 = 0.6, n2 = 1024 and q3 = 0.75, n3 =

1024, respectively. Fig. 11 compares the performance adopting

Fig. 9. Performance comparison between different codes under the same channel conditions:{ q = (0.5, 0.4, 0.4, 0.6), σ = (σmin +10, σmin +5, σmin + 5, σmin)}.

Fig. 10. Performance comparison of code for the ideal channel and real

channel. The

t s

of

real

channel

is

varying

around

t s,q

.

The

degree

distributions

of code 1 and code 2 are the same as the pseudo-regular code and the fully

irregular code listed in Table II.

different numbers of across-arrays (T = 1, 3, 4). To ensure

fair comparisons, we clarify the configurations for different

numbers of across-arrays: T = 1 indicates that three types

of data are stored individually and jointly protected using a

single hybrid code. Channel parameters are averaged across

subchannels. Thus, the code design does not account for

nonuniform interference. T = 3 represents each of the three

data types stored in a dedicated subarray. A single hybrid

code provides joint error protection. Crucially, the code design

explicitly considers the individual channel conditions of each

subarray. T = 4 denotes that the first type of data is stored in

two subarrays and also protected together with the remaining

two types of data using one single hybrid code (similar to the

T = 3 case). The code rate (R = 0.87) is fixed for all T. The

channel parameters of different across-array numbers are listed

here, where the parameters characterizing the SP interference

(

t s,q

)

are

computed

using

(2).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:02:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PANG AND MA: ACROSS-ARRAY LDPC CODES DESIGN FOR RESISTIVE RANDOM-ACCESS MEMORIES
TABLE III DETAILED PARAMETERS OF LDPC CODES UNDER DIFFERENT ACROSS-ARRAY SCHEMES

1113

1) Uniform channel T = 1, the joint channel parameters of

the three arrays:

q

=

(

1 1,q

+

2 2,q

+

33,q)/3,

σ = (σ1 + σ2 + σ3)/3.

2) Nonuniform channel T = 3, the joint channel parameters

of the three arrays:

1 1,q

=

0.48,

σ1 = σmin + 8.

2 2,q

=

0.1864, σ2

=

σmin

+

5.

3 3,q

=

0.3322, σ3

=

σmin.

3) Nonuniform channel T = 4, the joint channel parameters

of the four arrays:

1 1,q

=

0.2760, σ1

=

σmin

+

8.

2 1,q

=

0.2760, σ1

=

σmin

+

8.

3 2,q

=

0.1864, σ2

=

σmin

+

5.

4 3,q

=

0.3322, σ3

=

σmin.

For the above three storage scenarios (channel conditions),

we utilize the proposed algorithm for the corresponding LDPC

code design with the parameters listed in Table III, where the

core optimization procedure is consistent with the standard

differential evolution algorithm. The performance comparison

is shown in Fig. 11, and we have several remarks.

1) Compared to T = 1 (without the across-array scheme),

the storage reliability can be dramatically improved after

adopting the across-array scheme with the proposed

code design algorithms (ADDE-BP-NON algorithms).

The reason is that our method takes into account the

effect of nonuniform interference on the probability

density of VNs in the probability density tracking

so that the complete codeword can balance the anti-

noise performance of each type of VNs. Ultimately, the

nonuniform interference immunity of the codeword is

improved.

2) When choosing a higher across-arrays number, a larger

diversity gain can be obtained in terms of reliability,

which is consistent with the analysis of [17].

3) Using a limited variety of variable node types, we have

achieved an enhancement in storage performance, which

significantly reduces the complexity of hardware imple-

mentation, thereby further validating the practicality and

feasibility of our proposed scheme.

The above three points demonstrate that the proposed code

design methodology in the ZNS-based ReRAM storage

scheme can effectively resist data-related SP interference and

array-related random electronic interference. Furthermore, it

has a greater advantage regarding complexity than traditional

design methods.

Fig. 11. Performance comparison for the ReRAM channel with adopting different numbers of across-array. The channel condition is determined by the fixed source we choose and the corresponding size of the subarray.
V. CONCLUSION
This article introduces a novel ZNS-based ReRAM storage architecture for scenarios with hybrid storage protection of multitype data, which leverages data type segregation for across-array data placement. This architecture inherently mitigates the interference correlation between stored data, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of ECC schemes. Further, to efficiently resolve asymmetric and nonuniform errors arising from two primary sources: 1) SP interference and 2) inherent device variability. We propose a novel across-array LDPC code design methodology based on a computer-calcuable asymmetric discrete density evolution tailored for nonuniform error channels. This approach enables the construction of LDPC codes specifically optimized to resist the asymmetric and nonuniform interference characteristic of ReRAM. Consequently, LDPC codes designed using this method demonstrate superior performance in ensuring ReRAM storage reliability. Furthermore, compared to conventional LDPC design techniques, the resulting codes exhibit a significantly reduced maximum check node degree and fewer variable node types, highlighting their advantages in terms of design efficiency and simplified hardware implementation. Importantly, the proposed LDPC code design can be applied to other communication and storage channels exhibiting asymmetric and nonuniform error characteristics straightforwardly.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:02:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMPUTER-AIDED DESIGN OF INTEGRATED CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, VOL. 45, NO. 3, MARCH 2026

REFERENCES
[1] Q. Li, M. Ye, Y. Cui, T. Ren, T.-W. Kuo, and C. J. Xue, “Resolving the reliability issues of open blocks for 3-D NAND flash: Observations and strategies,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 4076–4087, Nov. 2022.
[2] Y. Cai, S. Ghose, E. F. Haratsch, Y. Luo, and O. Mutlu, “Error characterization, mitigation, and recovery in flash-memory-based solidstate drives,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 105, no. 9, pp. 1666–1704, Sep. 2017.
[3] A. Goda, “NAND flash innovations and future scaling,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), 2024, pp. 1–4.
[4] P. Thakkar, J. Gosai, H. J. Gogoi, and A. Solanki, “From fundamentals to frontiers: A review of memristor mechanisms, modeling and emerging applications,” J. Mater. Chem. C, vol. 12, no. 5, pp. 1583–1608, 2024.
[5] L. Chua, “Memristor-the missing circuit element,” IEEE Trans. Circuit Theory, vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 507–519, Sep. 1971.
[6] F. Seiler and N. TaheriNejad, “Efficient image processing via memristive-based approximate in-memory computing,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 43, no. 11, pp. 3312–3323, Nov. 2024.
[7] Y. Xi et al., “In-memory learning with analog resistive switching memory: A review and perspective,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 109, no. 1, pp. 14–42, Jan. 2021.
[8] G. Rajendran, W. Banerjee, A. Chattopadhyay, and M. M. S. Aly, “Application of resistive random access memory in hardware security: A review,” Adv. Electron. Mater., vol. 7, no. 12, 2021, Art. no. 2100536.
[9] Y. Lee, B. Jeon, Y. Cho, J. Kim, W. Shim, and S. Kim, “Recent progress in memrsitor array structures and solutions for sneak path current reduction,” Adv. Mater. Technol., vol. 10, no. 4, 2025, Art. no. 2400585.
[10] Y. Cassuto, S. Kvatinsky, and E. Yaakobi, “Information-theoretic sneakpath mitigation in memristor crossbar arrays,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 4801–4813, Sep. 2016.
[11] Z. Chen, C. Schoeny, and L. Dolecek, “Pilot assisted adaptive thresholding for sneak-path mitigation in resistive memories with failed selection devices,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 1, pp. 66–81, Jan. 2020.
[12] X. Zhong, K. Cai, G. Song, W. Wang, and Y. Zhu, “Constrained coding and deep learning aided threshold detection for resistive memories,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 4, pp. 803–807, Apr. 2022.
[13] Y. Wang, D. Wei, M. Liu, H. Feng, and L. Qiao, “EBDN: Entropybased double nonuniform sensing algorithm for LDPC decoding in TLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1914–1918, Jun. 2024.
[14] X. Yu et al., “Interleaved LDPC decoding scheme improves 3-D TLC NAND flash memory system performance,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 42, no. 11, pp. 4191–4204, Nov. 2023.
[15] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[16] P. Li, G. Song, K. Cai, and Q. Yu, “Across-array coding for resistive memories with sneak-path interference and lognormal distributed resistance variations,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 25, no. 11, pp. 3458–3462, Nov. 2021.
[17] G. Song, K. Cai, X. Zhong, Y. Jiang, and J. Cheng, “Performance limit and coding schemes for resistive random-access memory channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 2093–2106, Apr. 2021.
[18] H. Wang et al., “Efficient data placement for zoned Namespaces (ZNS) SSDs,” in Proc. 19th IFIP Int. Conf. Netw. Parallel Comput., 2022, pp. 302–314.
[19] P. Ranganathan and N. J. Gogtay, “An introduction to statistics— Data types, distributions and Summarizing data,” Indian J. Critical Care Med., Peer-Rev., Off. Publ. Indian Soc. Critical Care Med., vol. 23, pp. S169–S170, Jun. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://api. semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:201827571

[20] S. Pazos et al., “High-temporal-resolution characterization reveals outstanding random telegraph noise and the origin of dielectric breakdown in h-BN memristors,” Adv. Funct. Mater., vol. 34, no. 15, 2024, Art. no. 2213816.
[21] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[22] C.-C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Density evolution for asymmetric memoryless channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 4216–4236, Dec. 2005.
[23] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[24] R. Storn and K. Price, “Differential evolution—A simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Glob. Optim., vol. 11, pp. 341–359, Dec. 1997.
[25] S. Jeong and J. Ha, “On the design of multi-edge type low-density paritycheck codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 10, pp. 6652–6667, Oct. 2019.
[26] D. Niu, K. Peng, J. Song, and Z. Yang, “LDPC coded modulation with unequal protection,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun., Circuits Syst., 2008, pp. 114–118.
[27] IEEE Standard for Error Correction Coding of Flash Memory Using Low-Density Parity Check Codes, IEEE Standard 1890-2018, 2019.
[28] D. MacKay. “Gallager code resources.” Accessed: Feb. 12, 2025. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.org.uk/mackay/codes/data. html#l137
Qike Pang received the B.Sc. degree in information and communication engineering from Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China, in 2019, where he is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Institute of Information Science and Technology.
His research interests include channel coding, machine learning, NAND flash memory, and ReRAM systems.
Zheng Ma (Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in communications and information system from Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, China, in 2000 and 2006, respectively.
He was a Visiting Scholar with the University of Leeds, Leeds, U.K., in 2003. In 2003 and 2005, he was a Visiting Scholar with the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, Hong Kong. From 2008 to 2009, he was a Visiting Research Fellow with the Department of Communication Systems, Lancaster University, Lancaster, U.K. He is currently a Professor with Southwest Jiaotong University. He has authored over 120 research papers in high-quality journals and conferences. His research interests include information theory and coding, signal design and applications, FPGA/DSP implementation, and professional mobile radio. Prof. Ma received the Marie Curie Individual Fellowship in 2018. He is also the Vice-Chair of the Information Theory Chapter in the IEEE Chengdu Section. He was the Area Editor of the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:02:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

