HQ-07
The Design of Protograph LDPC Codes for Two-dimensional Magnetic Recording channels. P. CHEN1,2, L. KONG3, Y. FANG4, L. WANG5 1. Electronic and Information, Fuzhou university, Fuzhou; 2. Institute of Network Coding, Hongkong; 3. Nanjing University of Posts & Communications, Nanjing; 4. Guangdong University of Technology, Guandong; 5. Xiamen university, Xiamen

This paper investigates the performance of the protograph based low-density parity-check (LDPC)

codes for two dimensional (2D) inter symbol interference (ISI) channels with magnetic recording

density. The protograph LDPC codes have been shown to possess excellent error performance over

AWGN channel [1] and over partial response channel [2]. Moreover, the protograph structure that

realizes linear encoding and decoding allows high-speed encoding and decoding implementations.

We further proposes a protograph LDPC code for 2D ISI channel with the help of extrinsic infor-

mation transfer (EXIT) chart fitting and asymptotic ensemble weight enumerators. Analysis and

simulation results show that the proposed code has performance gain both in low- and high-SNR

regions over previously optimized irregular LDPC codes for 2D ISI channels [3].

I. System Model.

Let x(i,j)∈ {-1, 1} denote the binary data distributed in an array with M rows and N columns, i=

1,2,…, M, and j = 1,2,…, N. LM and LN denote the interference lengths in horizontal and vertical

directions, respectively. The 2-D channel response before equalization is represented by and LM×LN

channel variance

rσe2spiosnassesummaetdri.xMHo2r-eDo. vTehre, thadisdpitaivpeerwcohnitseidGerasutshseiaonpntiomisael

(AWGN) with zero symbol-based BCJR

mean and 2D-detec-

tor [3]. A protograph contains a relatively small number of nodes and can be represented by a base

matrix. A larger derived LDPC protograph code can be further obtained by performing a “copy-

and-permute” operation on the base matrix [1]. Based on some observations (not shown in this

abstract), from Monte Carlo simulation, without introducing degree-2 node in the protograph, we

propose a protograph suitable for 2-D ISI channel, and its corresponding base matrix, as shown in

Fig. 1 (a). The code rate R of the proposed code is (n+1)/(n+2).

II. Exit Analysis and Asymptotic Ensemble Weight Enumerators for Proposed Protograph.

We can evaluate thresholds of LDPC codes by finding the minimum channel Eb/N0 to ensure EXIT curves of the inner channel detector and the outer LDPC decoder as closely as possible, but do not cross over. With code rate 8/9 (n=8 in Fig. 1 (a)) and over a 4Tb/in2 2D ISI channel [2], Fig. 1 (b)

shows the EXIT curves of channel detector and LDPC decoder. The proposed code has decoding

tunnels larger than the irregular LDPC code, providing faster convergence speed and lower decod-

ing threshold value, for symbol-based BCJR detector. Specifically, the decoding threshold of the

proposed code are 3.93 dB, slightly lower than that of irregular code, 4.0 dB with BCJR detector.

Now we turn to computing the normalized logarithmic asymptotic weight distribution r(δ) for the

scalar normalized total codeword weight δ in the proposed protograph LDPC code [1]. Fig. 2 (a)

shows asymptotic weight distribution of the proposed code. Since the first zero crossing at δmin of value 0.031, the typical minimum distance ratio, is greater than zero, the minimum distance of the

proposed code increases linearly with block length with proportionality constant δmin. That is, the error floor of the proposed code lowers with the increase of block length.

III. Simulation Results.

Fig. 2(b) compares the decoding performance of the proposed protograph code and irregular LDPC

code that was optimized for 2-D ISI channel. The code rate is 8/9 and code lengths are 4608 and

13824, respectively. The number of outer iteration between channel detector and LDPC decoder is

10, and the number of iterations in LDPC decoder is 30. The 2D ISI channel with magnetic recording density of 4Tb/in2 is assumed [3]. We can see that the proposed code has lower decoding threshold and exhibit a lower error floor than the irregular LDPC code. At BER rate of 10-5, the

proposed code of length 13824 bits is less than 0.3 dB away from the symmetric information rate

of 2D ISI channels.

[1] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacity approaching protograph codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 876–888, Aug. 2009. [2] Y. Fang, P. Chen, L. Wang, and F. Lau, “Design of protograph LDPC codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2809–2819, Oct. 2012. [3] L. Kong, Y. L. Guan, J. Zheng, G. Han, K. Cai, and K. S. Chan, “EXIT chart-based LDPC code design for 2D ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 2823–2826, Jun. 2013. Pingping CHEN Fuzhou University, Fujian, E-mail: ppchen.xm@gmail.com The work of P. CHEN was supported by the China Natural Science Foundation for Young Scientists (Grant No. 61401099). The work of L.J. Kong was supported by the Natural Science Foundation for Young Scientists of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. BK20140879)Natural Science Foundation of the Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (Grant No. 14KJB510021 ) and Scientific Research Foundation for Scholars of Nanjing University of Posts & Communications(Grant No. NY214015 ).

Fig. 1. (a) A proposed protograph, and (b) EXIT curves of the irregular code and the proposed protograph code.
   

Fig. 2. (a) Asymptotic weight distributions for the proposed protograph. (b) Performance comparison of the proposed code and irregular code in 4Tb/in2 magnetic recording channel
   

INTERMAG 2015

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:58:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

