LDPC Soft Decoding with Reduced Power and Latency in 1X-2X NAND Flash-Based Solid State
Drives

Lorenzo Zuolo, Cristian Zambelli, Piero Olivo
Dipartimento di Ingegneria Universtià degli Studi di Ferrara
Ferrara, Italy lorenzo.zuolo@unife.it
Abstract—The reliability of the non-volatile NAND flash memories, measured in terms of Raw Bit Error Rate (RBER), is reaching critical levels for traditional error detection and correction. Therefore, to ensure data trustworthiness in nowadays NAND flash-based Solid State Drives, it becomes essential exploiting powerful correction algorithms such as the Low Density Parity Check (LDPC). However, the burdens of this approach materialize in an increased NAND flash power consumption due to the increased memory read latencies that translates in limited disk performance. In this work it is performed a comparison between a standard LDPC decoding approach based on hard and soft decisions and an optimized solution called LDPC NAND-Assisted Soft Decision. The simulation results on 2X, 1X and mid-1X MLC NAND flashbased Solid State Drives in terms of NAND flash I/O power consumption, disk read latencies and performance, favor the adoption of the presented solution.
Index Terms—Solid-State Drive, SSD, ECC, Low Density Parity Check, LDPC, Endurance, NAND Flash.
I.INTRODUCTION
Solid State Drives (SSDs) are now the most effective solution for fast mass storage systems in cloud services and high performance computing [1]. One main SSDs’ limitation is their reliability, which is dependent upon the non-volatile NAND flash memories used as the storage medium. These components, in facts, are subject to a progressive wear-out whose physical roots reside in the tunnel oxide degradation related to the mechanism exploited for their program/erase. The aggressive technology scaling and the need for increasing memory capacity by storing more bits in a single cell (Multi-Level Cells –MLC- architectures) amplify the memories’ wear-out impact on the SSD reliability [2, 3]. In fact, as long as the number of bits stored in a single cell increases, the width of the threshold voltage distribution associated to a logical stored content decreases and the control of the entire set of voltage distributions, which drift with the number of P/E cycles and retention time, is becoming more and more complex. A direct indication of this phenomenon is an increase in the RBER in a NAND flash memory. The RBER is the probability of bits in error after a single read operation [4]. Such an increase translates into the inability to read correct data after a number of

Rino Micheloni*, Alessia Marelli
PMC-Sierra Vimercate, Italy rino.micheloni@pmcs.com
Program/Erase operations (i.e., P/E cycles) or after long retention times.
Fig. 1 shows the measured average RBER as a function of endurance for three commercial MLC-NAND flash memories in 2X, 1X and mid-1X technology nodes described in Tab.1 As it can be seen, as the number of P/E cycles increases, the error rate quickly grows up. In addition, by scaling from a 2X to a mid-1X node, the RBER increases by an order of magnitude.

Figure 1: Measured average RBER in a commercial 2X, 1X and mid-1X node MLC-NAND flash as a function of program/erase (P/E) cycles.

Table 1. Main characteristics of measured NAND flash memories.

Vendor

Memory

Rated

Read

type

Endurance Time

Node

A-MLC Consumer 10 k P/E 68µs

2X

B-MLC Enterprise 12 k P/E 40µs

1X

C-MLC Enterprise** 4 k P/E 70µs Mid-1X

To broaden NAND Flash reliability figures and, consequently, SSDs’ data trustworthiness over the whole SSDs’ lifetime, the use of sophisticated Error Correction Codes (ECC) becomes essential. This requirement is tightly coupled with the percentage of uncorrectable pages produced by NAND flash memories. With this respect, an uncorrectable page is defined as a page which, if read, returns a number of errors greater than the ECC’s correction limit. This value represents a quality metric of the whole

*Work done at Università degli Studi di Ferrara, Italy

**Early samples

978-1-4673-6933-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:04:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SSD’s reliability because as soon as it is crossed, NAND flash memories and therefore the disk are considered as failed. Fig. 2 shows the percentage of uncorrectable pages for the three measured MLC-NAND memories and their actual fail point when a multi-threaded BCH decoder able to correct up to 100 errors in a 4320 Bytes codeword is used [5]. As it can be seen, as the number of P/E cycles increase, the BCH ECC becomes rapidly unable to ensure data reliability, and hence both NAND flash endurance and SSD’s lifetime are heavily impacted. Therefore, to overcome these limitations with the aim of moving the disk failure point as far as possible, a more powerful correction code must be adopted.
Figure 2: Measured percentage of uncorrectable pages as a function of P/E cycles. BCH fail points are marked for the three tested devices.
Due to their superior error correction capabilities, LDPC codes now represent a forced choice for SSDs [6, 7]. Conventional LDPC decoders, if properly designed, can sustain a NAND Flash RBER up to 10-2, providing a target Uncorrectable Bit Error Rate (UBER) of the storage medium in the range of 10-16. The LDPC correction engine usually leverages on two cascaded correction approaches: i) the hard decision (HD) which corrects errors by means of a single NAND Flash sensing operation of the cells threshold voltages; ii) the soft decision (SD) which performs, with considerably higher latency, a fine-grained multiple-read sensing operation. The series approach is used mainly because HD has the same limitations of BCH codes in terms of RBER [8], therefore as soon as this strategy fails to correct data, it is requested the intervention of the SD, with a higher correction range. However, in [8] Zhao et al. clearly shown that, as soon as the HD approach starts to fail, and dependently on the implemented precision of the SD operation, there is an overhead both in terms of increased SSD power consumption and overall SSD latencies (i.e., more read operations are requested on NAND Flash with respect to using HD approach only).
In this paper, we evaluate the impact on 2X, 1X and mid1X MLC NAND flash-based SSD architectures of an alternative LDPC correction approach that limits the drawbacks of the SD, namely a NAND-Assisted Soft Decision (NA-SD). The assumption of this methodology is that all the read sensing operations required for the correction can be performed inside the NAND flash memory and only a

smaller amount of information has to be transferred to the ECC decoder.
Using the SSDExplorer co-simulation framework [9], we quantitatively evaluated the effectiveness of exploiting NASD in a LDPC ECC. With respect to standard LDPC approaches, results show that NA-SD can achieve lower NAND flash power consumption, and better SSD’s latency/performance figures up to 91%, 23% and 19% respectively.
II.NAND-ASSISTED SOFT DECISION In LDPC decoding algorithms if the HD fails, the decoding process can be retried with the SD. To accomplish this second step, more information about the actual position of the NAND flash voltage threshold distributions must be collected. This process is performed in an iterative way by moving the internal read reference voltage of the memory and reading again the page in error. In particular, as shown in Fig. 3, for each iteration step called soft level, the target NAND Flash page is read and transferred twice from the memory to the ECC engine. Then, a new decoding process is performed, and if it fails the SD is re-attempted with a new iteration. Overall, when a N level SD is considered, N page read and N data transfer operations are performed.
Figure 3: Standard LDPC decoding (HD+SD). Each soft level requires two extra read and two data transfer.
Figure 4: LDPC decoding (HD+NA-SD). Data are internally read by the NAND flash memory. Each soft level requires one data transfer.
When a NA-SD approach is used, information for SD are produced directly by the NAND flash memory itself, which internally read the target page twice for each soft level. Then, read data are opportunely combined and only one transfer to the ECC is performed, as shown in Fig. 4. Like the SD approach, the NA-SD is an iterative algorithm and if the decoding process fails, a new iteration is performed.
Tab. 2 summarizes the number of operations performed by both algorithms. As it can be seen, NA-SD is able to halve the number of page transferred from the NAND flash

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:04:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

memory to the ECC. As a consequence, the overall soft decision process is shortened and hence, the SSD’s read latency is improved. Moreover, since the number of data transfers between the memory and the ECC are reduced, NAND flash memory I/O bus accesses are reduced as well and hence a considerable power reduction is provided.

Table 2. SD vs NA-SD approach. NA-SD is able to halve the

number of page transfer with respect to SD.

LDPC

One soft level

Two Soft levels

#n soft levels

2 page read 4 page read #n page read

SD

2 data move 4 data move #n page move

NA-SD

2 page read 1 data move

4 page read 2 data move

#n page read #n/2 page move

III.EXPERIMENTAL SETUP AND RESULTS
Results have been collected by means of: i) a dedicated NAND flash memory characterization system which collects RBERs and uncorrectable page statistics; ii) a hardware implementation of the LDPC code which computes real decoding latencies; iii) a co-simulation SSD framework able to produce bandwidth, latency and power figures of a target disk architecture starting from previously collected reliability data and ECC statistics [9].
Fig. 5 shows the test equipment exploited for memories characterization. It is composed by a programmable FPGA, a DRAM buffer for temporary data storage and a dedicated socket for NAND flash memory interfacing. Each tested device has been sequentially P/E with random data patterns to emulate real memory cycling. For testing purposes, each NAND flash memory has been stressed with a number of P/E cycles twice their rated endurance (Tab. 1).

Figure 5: NAND flash characterization board.
Fig. 6 shows the LDPC characterization setup. The ECC has been tested with random data patterns emulating different RBER values. Codewords are computed and decoded by the LDPC board, whereas an external PC gathers decoding latencies. During this step, the HD phase of the LDPC has been set with the same correction strength used by the BCH code described in the Introduction (i.e., up to 100 errors in a 4320 Bytes codeword). As a consequence, uncorrectable page percentages and ECC fail points shown in

Figure 6: LDPC characterization board for ECC’s decoding latencies evaluation.
Fig. 2 are valid also for the HD phase. Finally, the number of soft levels required by the SD step has been set to two. With this respect, it has been found that codewords processed after a two levels SD were always correctable.
SSD’s power, performance and latency figures of both standard SD and NA-SD have been collected by means of the SSDExplorer co-simulation framework [9]. This tool exploits all previously collected data of ECC latencies and NAND flash RBERs performing a fast yet accurate cosimulation of a complete SSD system. The simulated SSD architecture is a 512GB SSD composed by 8 populated channels with 4 NAND flash targets. All the simulations have been performed with the aim of stressing both the LDPC decoder and the NAND flash memories at the worstcase corner, represented by a 100% random 4kB read workload.
Figs. 7-8 show the advantages introduced by NA-SD normalized with respect to SD case. Fig. 7 shows the SSD read bandwidth gain achieved by NA-SD over memory endurance when the three tested devices are used as SSD’s storage medium. As it can be seen, using NA-SD on NAND flash memories for 2X and 1X nodes does not heavily impact the overall read performance of the SSD. This behavior is tightly coupled with the fact that measured 2X and 1X devices show a low percentage of uncorrectable pages and hence soft decoding are rarely required. As a consequence both SD and NA-SD are less used and thus the effectiveness of the latter, in terms of read bandwidth, is hidden. On the contrary, when mid-1X NAND flash memories are used, the percentage of uncorrectable pages and so the HD fail rate rapidly increases over memory endurance so that SD are constantly required. This is the ideal scenario for NA-SD because its capabilities can be fully exploited. In this case, the gain on SSD’s read bandwidth reaches up to 19% at 9k P/E cycles.
Fig. 8 shows the gain in terms of latency reduction achieved on the average read latency of the SSD when NASD is used. As it can be seen, as soon as the P/E cycles increase and the percentage of uncorrectable pages becomes higher than zero, NA-SD shows better average latencies than the SD approach up to 23% when a mid-1X NAND flashbased SSD is considered. Finally, the higher is the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:04:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 7: SSD’s read bandwidth gain when NA-SD is used. Maximum gain points are marked for the three measured devices.
Figure 8: SSD’s average read latency gain when NA-SD is used. Maximum gain points are marked for the three measured devices.
Figure 9: NAND flash IO-bus dynamic power consumption. Power reduction percentages achieved by the NA-SD approach are marked for the three measured devices. percentage of uncorrectable pages thus requiring SD, the higher is the effectiveness of NA-SD
Fig. 9 shows the increase of the power consumption required by NAND flash I/O-buses when either SD or NASD are used with respect to HD only, as a function of P/E cycles. As it can be seen, according to Tab. 2, NA-SD is able to reduce the power consumed during the data transfer phase up to 91% when a mid-1X NAND flash based SSD is considered at 9k P/E cycles. For the 2X and 1X nodes, even if NA-SD approach does not produces significant improvements in terms of read bandwidth and latency with respect to standard SD approach, the paved reduction of data transfers from NAND Flash memories to the ECC engine

allows considerable power savings (up to 8% and 32% for 1X and 2X node, respectively).
IV.CONCLUSIONS
In this paper it is evaluated the potential of a LDPC technique called NAND-assisted soft decision (NA-SD) by comparing its performance with standard LDPC approaches. The effectiveness of NA-SD with respect to traditional LDPC has been proven through simulations of a 2X, 1X and a mid-1X NAND flash-based SSD. The results shown that NA-SD allows achieving better SSD read performance, latency and power consumption reduction up to 19%, 23% and 91% respectively. Moreover, what ultimately stands out is that NA-SD becomes more effective when both RBER and uncorrectable pages percentage are high. As a consequence it becomes clear that this trend push toward a full NA-SD exploitation in future SSDs on which scaled NAND flash memories with high RBERs will be used as storage medium.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Wong, “SSD market overview,” in Inside Solid State Drives (SSDs), R. Micheloni, L. Crippa, and A. Marelli, Eds. Springer-Verlag, 2012 , pp. 1–18.
[2] C., Zambelli, M., Indaco, M., Fabiano, S., Di Carlo, P., Prinetto, P., Olivo, and D., Bertozzi, “A cross-layer approach for new reliability-performance trade-offs in MLC NAND flash memories”. In Design, Automation Test in Europe Conference Exhibition (DATE), 2012, pp.881-886.
[3] L., Zuolo, C., Zambelli, R., Micheloni, D., Bertozzi, and P., Olivo, “Analysis of reliability/performance trade-off in Solid State Drives,” in IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS), 2014, pp. 4B.3.1-4B.3.5.
[4] N. Mielke, T. Marquart, N. Wu, J. Kessenich, H. Belgal, E. Schares, F. Trivedi, E. Goodness, and L. Nevill, “Bit error rate in NAND Flash memories,” in IEEE International Reliability Physics Symposium (IRPS), 2008, pp. 9-19.
[5] Y. Lee, H. Yoo, I. Yoo, and I. Park, “6.4Gb/s multi-threaded BCH encoder and decoder for multi-channel SSD controllers”, in Proc. ISSCC, 2012, pp.426-428.
[6] E. Yeo, “An LDPC-enabled flash controller in 40nm CMOS,” in Proc. of Flash Memory Summit, Aug.2012
[7] X. Hu, “LDPC codes for flash channel,” in Proc.of Flash Memory Summit, Aug. 2012.
[8] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, T. Zhang, X. Zhang, and N. Zheng. “LDPC-in-SSD: making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives”. In Proc. of the 11th USENIX conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST'13).
[9] L., Zuolo, C., Zambelli, R., Micheloni, S., Galfano, M., Indaco, S., Di Carlo, P., Prinetto, P., Olivo, and D., Bertozzi, “SSDExplorer: A virtual platform for fine-grained design space exploration of Solid State Drives”. In Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conference and Exhibition (DATE), 2014, pp.1-6.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:04:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

