HQ-11
A soft decodable concatenated LDPC code. S. YANG1, Y. HAN1, X. WU1, R. WOOD2, R. GALBRAITH2 1. Avago Technologies, San Jose, CA; 2. HGST, Rochester, MN
I. INTRODUCTION Low density parity check (LDPC) codes with iterative soft decoding have been adopted as the primary error correction coding technology in data storage devices, e.g., hard disk drives (HDDs) and solid state drives (SSDs). Data storage normally has stringent requirements for low probability of decoding failure since there is no re-transmission mechanism as available for most other data communication applications. Typically the error floor of a LDPC decoder in a storage application should be below 10-12. Recently, the adoption of 4 kB sector formats has allowed LDPC code word size to increase from 4096 user bits to 32768 user bits. This increase in code word size has enabled significantly more error correction power and better noise tolerance margin. Further increases in LDPC code block size beyond 4KB are expected to deliver further SNR gain but would be very expensive in terms of silicon area and power consumption. In this work, a concatenated coding scheme that is suitable for iterative soft decoding is introduced. This construction produces a significant SNR gain benefit over 4KB LDPC, and it has complexity similar to a conventional 4KB LDPC decoder. The outer code in this concatenated construction spans many sectors, possibly an entire track. When individual sectors within the outer code are updated in place a read-modify-write procedure must be employed. While individual sectors can be read independently the full decoding power of the concatenated code can only be achieved by reading all the data sectors that are involved in the outer code. II. A SOFT DECODABLE CONCATENATED LDPC CODE As illustrated in Fig 1, the concatenated coding solution is designed by combining a LDPC base code C1 with another parity code C2. First, the user data are encoded by normal RLL encoding and then by LDPC C1 encoding to form the user data sectors. The user data sectors are further processed by a systematic encoder for the parity code C2. The parity bits produced by the encoder of parity code C2 are encoded again by LDPC code C1, which forms the parity sector(s). All user data sectors and parity sector(s) are written into the media. As a result, every sector in the media is a valid code word of the LDPC code C1, and all the sectors, including the user data sectors and parity sector(s), together satisfy the coding constraints of the parity code C2. During a read operation each sector is first decoded by LDPC code C1 using iterative soft decoding. If iterative decoding of LDPC code C1 fails for any sector, the parity code C2 is decoded and generates additional soft information for the bits in these failed sectors. This additional soft information is applied during a further round of iterative decoding in which code C1 is used to attempt recovery of sectors which did not decode during the first round of decoding. Decoding of the LDPC code C1 and the parity code C2 can proceed iteratively with decoders exchanging extrinsic information in the usual way. The choice of the LDPC code C1 and the parity check code C2 affects the overall decoding performance. Since low read latency performance is generally desirable for HDD and SSD products, a relatively strong LDPC code C1 is used and the full concatenated code is decoded relatively infrequently. On the other hand, the choice of C2 could affect the encoding and iterative decoding complexity. Thus, a simple parity check code could be a suitable choice for C2. In other words, the LDPC code C1 is the main error correction code, and the parity outer code C2 is an auxiliary code used to help the main LDPC code C1 and further boost the overall error correction power. III. Simulation Results Simulations use a channel user density of T50/T=1.0 with 80% media noise, and 20% stationary electronic noise. We use a highly optimized 4 kB LDPC code as the main error correction code C1, and use a simple single parity check code for C2. Consider a track of 400 sectors, where 399 of them are user data sectors, and 1 parity sector is inserted according to the above concatenated coding. The performance of the concatenated code solution is benchmarked against a normal 4 kB LDPC C1 alone. The concatenated code has an additional coding overhead of 0.0025% due to the

additional parity sector inserted at the end of the track. The penalty for this code rate is very small and the channel bit densities used in the simulation are adjusted according to the rate difference. Under the assumption that we have sufficient memory to buffer all failed sectors in each track, and also assuming that we have sufficient time and resources to process all the buffered failed sectors, the concatenated code achieves about 0.7 dB SNR gain over normal 4KB LDPC, as shown in Fig 2. In a practical product, the memory size and decoding latency will both be limited. In this example we consider the case where up to six failed sectors can be stored and processed reducing the gain on-the-fly to approximately 0.3 dB at a sector failure rate of 1e-5.
1) R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1962. 2) C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Communications, (Geneva, Switzerland), pp. 1064–1070, May 1993. 3) D. Mackay, and R. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low Density Parity Check Codes, ” in Electronics Letters (Volume:33, Issue: 6 ), pp. 457-458

Fig. 1 Concatenated Coding Scheme

    Fig. 2 Concatenated Coding Performance    

INTERMAG 2015

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:03:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

