TTCN: A New Approach for Low-Power Split-Row LDPC Decoders

Mohammad Shahrad Department of Electrical Engineering
Princeton University Princeton, NJ 08544 Email: mshahrad@princeton.edu

Mahdi Shabany Department of Electrical Engineering
Sharif University of Technology Tehran, Iran
Email: mahdi@sharif.edu

Abstract—Split-Row technique is proved to be one of the most effective methods to reduce the routing complexity of fully-parallel LDPC decoders. This technique is based on the idea of splitting each check node processor to multiple smaller processors. This paper introduces a new method, to increase the power-efficiency of Split-Row LDPC decoders. The proposed method is called trust to the truthful check node (TTCN), enabling the decoder to only depend on a portion of check node processors at specific decoding iterations. This leads to an average reduction of 30%-40% in the check node dynamic power consumption. This is achieved by means of trust to a minority of check node processors and gating the others. In fact, a great side effect of the proposed method is also a slight improvement in the error performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check codes, first introduced by Gallager [1], have received significant consideration in the last decade. LDPC codes have been adopted in many recent digital communication standards. This is due to their great error performance [2] as well as their intrinsic parallelism capability by iterative message-passing decoding [3], leading to ultrahigh throughputs.
Different methodologies can be used to implement an LDPC decoder from its corresponding Tanner graph. Fullyparallel decoders have a dedicated processing unit for each check node and variable node. On the other hand, partiallyparallel decoders use less processing units together with memory. Despite having excellent decoding throughput, fullyparallel decoders suffer from considerable routing complexity [4], whereas partially-parallel decoders reduce the interconnects through resource sharing while requiring multiple clock cycles to perform a decoding iteration [5].
Since fully-parallel architectures are preferred in many high-speed applications [6], few recent schemes have been proposed to reduce the routing congestion of fully-parallel decoders. Bit-serial decoders [7] ease the interconnects by word-length factor, resulting in a better area utilization and less power consumption [8]. Nevertheless, the serial nature of interconnects is the main challenge towards a high-speed parallel implementation [5]. Therefore, another technique, called Split-Row, has been proposed, which considerably reduces the routing congestion [9]. While providing a sub-optimal error performance, such decoders allow smaller circuits as well as higher throughputs. The performance of this technique was

CN

CN1

CNi

CNNs

Split Row

N

N

N

N

Ns

Ns

Ns

Fig. 1. Check node partitioning in Split-Row.

improved later by introducing the Split-Row Threshold concept [10].
In a different approach from the Split-Row Threshold and in order to realize a more power-efficient fully-parallel scheme, this paper introduces a novel method, called trust to the truthful check node (TTCN), which can be applied to SplitRow LDPC decoders. Using the proposed method, the majority of check node processing cores can trust to the minority at some decoding iterations, leading the decoder to consume less dynamic power. Moreover, since the TTCN solves the global unawareness issue of the Split-Row method for some iterations, the error performance is slightly improved.

II. SPLIT-ROW DECODING TECHNIQUE

The error correction in LDPC decoders is based on a sparse parity check matrix, which is represented by H. This matrix is well expressed by a bipartite graph, called the Tanner graph. Each Tanner graph comprises of two sets of nodes, i.e., the check nodes and the variable nodes, that are correspondent of rows and columns of the H matrix, respectively. For instance, if a row intersects with a column, or equivalently they share a “1” in the H matrix, their corresponding nodes are connected in the Tanner graph.

The main idea of the Split-Row technique is to split each

check node into multiple smaller instances. As Fig. 1 depicts,

after splitting the parity check matrix to Ns splits, each check

node would be broken to Ns nearly-independent instances

with

1 Ns

variable

nodes

connected

to

each.

Although

the

total

number of interconnects remains intact, this technique plays a

great role to noticeably improves the area utilization of fully-

parallel LDPC decoders.

The iterative nature of LDPC requires the calculation of messages in check node and variable node processors as well

978-1-4799-8391-9/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE

2001

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:04:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

as passing them based on the structure of the Tanner graph. The messages from connected check nodes to variable nodes and vice versa are called α messages and β messages, respectively. By applying the Split-Row method, the Min-Sum Normalized check node update equation of

αij = SMS ×

sign(βij ) × min (|βij |), (1)

j ∈V (i)\j

j ∈V (i)\j

which represents the message from i-th check node to j-th variable node, is changed to

αij:Spn = SSR ×

sign(βij ) × min (|βij |),

j ∈V (i)\j

j ∈VSpn(i)\j

(2)

where V (i) is the set of variable nodes connecting to the ith

check node, VSpn(i) is the set of those connecting to the Spn-

th instance of the i-th check node, SMS denotes the Min-

Sum normalization factor, and SSR is the optimized Min-Sum

normalization factor [11]. Finally, the min operation in (2)

represents a local minimum calculation, as opposed to the

global minimum calculation in (1), which leads to inaccurate

α message generation for Ns − 1 check node instances that

are not aware of the global minimum. This inaccuracy is the

cost of Split-Row that is partially compensated by optimizing

the normalization factor, SSR [11].

III. TTCN: TRUST TO THE TRUTHFUL CHECK NODE
Let’s start this section with an example. In order to provide the safety in a neighborhood, it is better to distribute multiple patrols in the area, rather than a single group, so that they can better maintain the security. If during a night, a cop repeatedly reports theft in his jurisdiction over the radio, it is meaningless for others to search their own territories for theft. Instead, they should use the provided information and act accordingly to help catch the thieve.
By means of splitting check node processors, the Split-Row technique provides parallelism that leads to higher throughputs as well as better area utilizations. But as mentioned in the last section, after applying the Split-Row technique, minimum calculation in each check node instance is limited to a smaller subset of β messages (see (2)). This leads to an inaccurate α message generation for Ns − 1 check node instances that are not aware of the global minimum. This paper suggests a new technique that exploits this fact to increase the power-efficiency as well as to overcome the global unawareness issue.
As its name implies, Trust to the Truthful Check Node technique does this by means of letting Ns − 1 check node instances to use the global minimum calculated by the truthful check node. Note that by definition, the truthful check node is one of Ns check node instances (of an H row) that contains the β message with the minimum magnitude (same as the alarming cop). The idea is to find the truthful check node and there is no need for the others to calculate the minimum. This reveals the main benefit of the TTCN, which is power saving. As shown later in the paper, the minimum calculation constitutes a big portion of each check node processor. Therefore, its elimination, even for few decoding iterations, has noticeable effect on the power consumption.
Before providing the detailed explanation on how the TTCN is realized, let’s see how the incoming β messages

30

25

20

|β|

15

10

5

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Iterations

Fig. 2. Absolute value of 32 incoming messages to a check node (|β|) over the decoding iterations at SN R = 2.8dB for IEEE 802.3an.

change during the LDPC decoding iterations and build some intuition. As the case study, consider the application of the Split-Row to the standard H matrix of IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T Ethernet) [12], which implies a regular 384 × 2048 H matrix, where each row has 32 ones (Wr = 32), or similarly, each check node is connected to 32 variable nodes in the corresponding Tanner graph.
Fig. 2 shows the absolute value of incoming messages to a check node (|β|) over various decoding iterations at SN R = 2.8dB. As differentiated with a bold dashed line, one of the variable nodes generates the min(|β|) for all decoding iterations. Similarly, extensive simulations prove that in most of the cases, the line underlying such plots for all or the last decoding iterations is generated by only one of the variable nodes.
With this property, we can assume that if a variable node has made the min(|β|) frequently, it is going to generate the following min(|β|) values as well. Subsequently, this property suggests that if a check node has had the access to the min(|β|) frequently, it is very likely that it will also have access to that for the following decoding iterations too. This is the main concept based on which the TTCN theory is founded.
IV. TTCN IMPLEMENTATION
In this section, the implementation aspects of a TTCN LDPC decoder are discussed. The implementation challenges toward the TTCN technique are finding the truthful check nodes (TCNs), deciding when to trust a TCN, and eventually distributing the truthful check node data to other cores.
The iterations in which the check node processors trust to their TCNs are called the trust iterations. Trust iterations can be hard-coded, fed as input, or even calculated by a learning algorithm embedded in the decoder. In order to impose as minimum hardware as possible to the basic Split-Row decoder, the hard-coded trust iterations is used in this paper. Various simulations were performed to find out the best set of trust iterations, whose results are provided in the next section.
In check node update equations in (1) and (2), there is an exclusion while calculating the minimum of β messages. To perform this exclusion, both first and second minimums should

2002
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:04:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. TTCN check node processor schematic.

be calculated. In such a case,

min (|βij |) =
j ∈V (i)\j

M in1i, M in2i,

if j = argmin(M in1i) if j = argmin(M in1i)

(3)

where

M in1i = min (|βij|).

(4)

j∈V (i)

M in2i =

min

(|βij |).

(5)

j ∈V (i)\argmin(M in1i)

Now, in order to find each row’s TCN, the check node instance having the minimum M in1 should be identified. To do so, a TCN determination block is required for each Ns check node instances.

In the last section, it was mentioned that in most of the cases, the check node having access to the global minimum after few initial decoding iterations, would conserve this property for the next iterations. This fact eases the hardware implementation. Particularly, the TCN node can be determined once and assumed to remain truthful for the later iterations as well. As a result, the TCN determination block can be gated, consuming no dynamic power for all other iterations. Moreover, we can start finding the TCN one clock cycle earlier than the required time. Consequently, the critical path is not affected directly.

Fig. 3 shows the schematic of the TTCN check node processor. Compared to the Split-Row counterpart [9], there is subtle excess hardware (painted in gray) allowing each check node instance to use the TCN’s M in1 in the trust iterations. Moreover, the inputs of the minimum calculation tree are gated in the TTCN mode, as a result of which, there is no dynamic power consumption for the whole tree as well as proceeding comparators during the trust iterations. Since the remaining logic elements constitute a much lower portion of a check node processor, this dynamic power conservation is desirable.

The final implementation difference between the TTCN and basic Split-Row decoder is that, in order to share the TCN’s M in1, Ns check node instances of a row are connected with a bus. This bus is used only in the trust iterations and it is TCN determination block’s duty to set the one-hot pattern used to configure a single transmitter and Ns − 1 receivers.

Bit Error Rate

10-1

10-2

10-3

10-4

10-5

10-6

10-7

10-8

2.6

2.8

MS Split-Row, Ns=4 MS TTCN, Ns=4 MS Split-Row, Ns=2 MS TTCN, Ns=2 MS Normalized

3

3.2

3.4

3.6

3.8

SNR (dB)

Fig. 4. Error performance comparison between Split-Row and TTCN decoders for IEEE 802.3an (2048,1723).

TABLE I. HARD-CODED SCHEDULE AND EFFECTIVE RESOURCE UTILIZATION FOR THE TARGET TTCN DECODERS.

Decoding Iteration(s) Trust TCN Determination Inter-CN Buses Active Active TCN Deter. Blocks Active Min. Calc. Trees (Ns = 2) Active Min. Calc. Trees (Ns = 4)

1,2 0 768 1536

3 -
384 768 1536

4,5,6,7
-
0 384 384

8,9,10 0
768 1536

V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
Although it might initially seem counter-intuitive, the TTCN, using fewer check node instances, does not degrade the error performance. On the other hand, the wise set of trust iterations even slightly improves the bit error rates. Fig. 4 compares the error performance of 2-split and 4-split TTCN decoders with their Split-Row counterparts. The LDPC decoders are formed from the standard parity check matrix of IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T Ethernet) and have maximum of 10 decoding iterations. Based on the simulations, the best set of trust iterations for the mentioned parity check matrix is (4, 5, 6, 7). As seen in Fig. 4, the 4-split decoder benefits relatively more from the TTCN method. It is because of the fact that the 4-split, Split-Row decoder initially suffers more from the global unawareness issue than the 2-split decoder.
Table I depicts the hard-coded schedule and effective resource utilization of these TTCN decoders based on the selected trust iterations. Note that similar to other common LDPC decoders, TTCN decoders also have the syndrome check block that can terminate the decoding iterations earlier if the hard decision of variable node LLR values satisfy the parity check equations.
Fig. 5 compares the active minimum calculation trees of the Split-Row and the TTCN decoder (4-split) at SN R = 3.2dB, which shows an average reduction of 32%. This would result in nearly 30% reduction in the check node dynamic power consumption, respectively. The worst case scenario for the TTCN decoder is at low-SNR values that the decoding is not terminated earlier. In fact, the reduction in the minimum calculation tree utilization for an M × N parity check matrix can be formulated as in (6), which implies that at least 37.5% dynamic power reduction for a 16-split decoder can

2003
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:04:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Active Min. Calc. Trees Bit Error Rate

4
x 10 1.6
1.4

Split−Row, Ns=4 TTCN, Ns=4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

160

Decoding Runs

Fig. 5. Sorted active minimum calculation trees of Split-Row and TTCN decoders for IEEE 802.3an (2048,1723) at SN R = 3.2dB.

be achieved.

r = 1 − 4 × M + 6 × Ns × M = 1 − 4 + 6 × Ns . (6)

10 × Ns × M

10 × Ns

It is worth mentioning that as Ns increases, TTCN can help

improving the power efficiency and error performance more

significantly.

In

terms

of

the

power

efficiency,

since

only

1 Ns

of minimum calculation trees are actively working during the

trust iterations, the decoder having more splits gains more. And

when it comes to the error performance, TTCN can do more

for the decoders suffering more from the global unawareness

issue. Needless to say that a better error performance implies

a reduced power consumption because of the early termination

concept [8].

Nonetheless, the hardware overhead of TTCN is increased for greater Ns values. In the 2-split decoder, each TCN determination block selects the TTCN by a comparison of two M in1s, while the TCN determination comparison in the 4-split decoder is amongst 4 candidates. Furthermore, 4 inter-CN bus directions should be set in the latter. According to these two, the TCN determination block is bigger for decoders with more splits. Moreover, the inter-CN buses become more and more global as the Ns grows, increasing the routing complexity as a result.

Analytical determination of the trust iterations seems hard enough to motivate any designer to find the best set of them via simulations. But there exist a rule of thumb, which can be helpful to prevent blind-eye trial and error, that is “Not too early, not too late!”. If the decoder goes to the trust mode in the initial iterations, since the β messages have not stabilized yet, the selected TCN might be wrong. Such a condition may even deteriorate the error performance compared to the basic Split-Row. The late trust, on the other hand, is ineffective, since in many SNR values the decoding process finishes earlier than the maximum iteration. Fig. 6 depicts the bit error rate of the 2split TTCN decoders, all having 4 consecutive trust iterations, but different starting cycles. As seen, the (4,5,6,7) set works slightly better.

VI. CONCLUSION
With the help of fully-parallel LDPC decoder implementations very high throughputs are achievable. But their routing

−1
10

SNR=2.8dB

SNR=3.0dB

SNR=3.2dB

SNR=3.4dB

−2
10

−3
10

−4
10 (2,3,4,5)

(3,4,5,6)

(4,5,6,7) Trust Iteratins

(5,6,7,8)

(6,7,8,9)

Fig. 6. Effect of trust iteration on the error performance of 2-split TTCN decoders for IEEE 802.3an (2048,1723).

complexity and as a result their low area utilization is a major issue, preventing them to be used them in many applications. By now, different methods had been proposed to improve the routing complexity of the fully-parallel LDPC decoders. The split-Row method does this very effectively and has proved its capabilities. This paper introduces a novel method, called TTCN, that both reduces the active resource utilization and improves the error performance of Split-Row LDPC decoders. This is done by means of trust to a minority of check node processors and gating the others.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Info. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, Mar. 1999, pp. 399431.
[3] C. J. Howland and A. J. Blanksby, “Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2001, vol. 4, pp. 742-745.
[4] T. Mohsenin and B. Baas, “Trends and challenges in LDPC hardware decoders,” in Proc. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Nov. 2009, pp. 1273-1277.
[5] A. Cevrero, Y. Leblebici, P. Ienne, and A. Burg, “A 5.35mm2 10GBASET Ethernet LDPC Decoder Chip in 90nm CMOS,” in Proc. IEEE Asian Solid State Circuits Conf. (A-SSCC), Nov. 2010, pp. 1-4.
[6] A. B. Stimming and A. Dollas, “FPGA-based design and implementation of a multi-Gbps LDPC decoder,” in Int. Conference on Field Programmable Logic and Applications (FPL), Aug. 2012, pp. 262-269.
[7] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A bit-serial approximate min-sum LDPC decoder and FPGA implementation,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2006, pp. 149-152.
[8] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835-1845, Aug. 2008.
[9] T. Mohsenin and B. M. Baas, “Split-Row: A reduced complexity, high throughput LDPC decoder architecture,” in Proc. ICCD, Oct. 2006, pp. 320-325.
[10] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “Multi-split-row threshold decoding implementations for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2009, pp. 2449-2452.
[11] T. Mohsenin, D. Truong, and B. Baas, “A low-complexity messagepassing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1048-1061, May 2010.
[12] “IEEE Standard 802.3 - 2012 Clause 55A Matrices,” http://standards.ieee.org/downloads/802.3/.

2004
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:04:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

