HQ-06
Protograph based Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Coding for Ultra-High Density Magnetic Recording Channels. L. KONG1, L. HE1, P. CHEN2, G. HAN3, Y. FANG4 1. School of Computer Science & Technology, Nanjing University of Posts & Communications, Nanjing; 2. Fuzhou university, Fuzhou; 3. School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou; 4. School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou
Bit-patterned media recording (BPMR), heat (or microwave) assisted magnetic recording (HAMR) and shingled writing (SW)/two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) have been primed to further increase the areal density of magnetic recording beyond 1Tb/in2[1-3]. However, with the reduction of the track pitch, inter-track interference (ITI) becomes a major impairment for these magnetic recording systems. ITI combined with the conventional (down-track) inter-symbol interference (ISI) forms a two-dimensional (2D) interference that severely degrades the performance of data detection in these systems. Although the symbol-based 2D Bahl-Cocke-Jelinek-Raviv (BCJR) channel detector [2]-hereinafter called full 2D channel detector-can provide optimal detection over such 2D-ISI channels, it has prohibitive complexity for the typical 2D data size. Suboptimal 2D channel detectors with lower complexity have been proposed, but their computational burden remains a bottleneck of the receiver. In [3], the well known suboptimal 2D channel detector, iterative row-column soft decision feedback algorithm (IRCSDFA), has been further simplified using Gaussian approximation (GA), the resultant simplified 2D detector is referred as “GA-IRCSDFA”. It suffers performance loss compared to the original IRCSDFA, but the loss is minimized by careful decoding- detection scheduling design. Besides 2D channel detection, coding also provides a means to combat 2D-ISI [2][4]. In [2], new low-densityparity-check (LDPC) codes optimized for 2D-ISI channels detected using the 2D BCJR detector have been designed, and are shown to achieve better performance than LDPC optimized for additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. However, the LDPC codes in [2] were designed for use with the full 2D channel detector, which is highly complex. Random-like LDPC codes optimized for 2D-ISI channels detected using 2D GA-IRCSDFA detector in [4], exhibit excellent error-correction capabilities, especially for high codeword lengths. However, Random-like codes cause complex hardware implementations due to the high-complexity descriptions, and the quadratic encoding complexity growing with the block length. In this paper, we design protograph based quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes for ultra-high density magnetic recording channels, using reduced-complexity 2D GA-IRCSDFA detector. The base matrix is constructed according to the degree sequences for 4Tb/in2 2D-ISI channels with slight modification. The proposed protograph based QC codes have a low-complexity quasi-cyclic encoder structure with a readily parallelizable protograph decoder structure. The block diagram of a QC-LDPC coded 2D-ISI channel with joint detection and decoding is depicted in Fig.1, where the dashed box corresponds to the joint 2D GA-IRCSDFA detector and LDPC decoding scheme. In the simulations, we set the maximum number of iterations between the 2D GA-IRCSDFA detector and the LDPC belief-propagation (BP) decoder to 10, and the maximum number of BP iterations in LDPC decoder to 30, all codes have rate of 8/9. The number of iterations between two component detectors in 2D GA-IRCSDFA detector is set to 3. In Fig.2, we compare the BER performance of our proposed protograph based QC-LDPC codes withthe 2D-ISI-optimized(Scheme 2) and AWGN-optimized(Scheme 3) for three different code lengths in a 2D-ISI channel with recording density of 4Tb/in2, where the degree sequences of the Scheme 2 and Scheme 3 LDPC codes are given in Table II of [4]. Fig.2 shows that the proposed protograph based QC-LDPC codes of Scheme 1 (red lines) has a performance gain of about 0.55 dB over the codes of Scheme 3 (black dashed lines) at BER of 10−5 for all three different code lengths (Nc = 4608, 9216, 13824) in a 2D-ISI channel with recording density of 4Tb/in2. Furthermore, there is only 0.05 dB loss in the performance of the protograph based QC-LDPC codes when compared to the significantly more

complex, unstructured 2D-ISI-optimized codesat BER of 10−5 for all three different code lengths, and nearlynot any compromiseat high SNR region. Based on the modified degree sequences for 4Tb/in2 2D-ISI channels, new protograph-based QC-LDPC codes have been designed for 2D-ISI channels. Monte Carlo simulations demonstrated that the new LDPC codes can achieve a larger performance gain over 2D-ISI channels than codes optimized for AWGN channels, and the achievable performance is comparable to that exhibited by random-like optimized codes of [4]. This work was supported by the Natural Science Foundation for Young Scientists of Jiangsu Province (Grant No. BK20140879)Natural Science Foundation of the Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions (Grant No. 14KJB510021) and Scientific Research Foundation for Scholars of Nanjing University of Posts & Communications(Grant No. NY214015).
[1] R. Wood, M. Williams, A. Kavcic, and J. Miles, “The feasibility of magnetic recording at 10 Tb/in2 on conventional media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 917-923, Feb. 2009. [2] L. J. Kong, Y. L. Guan, J. P. Zheng, G. J. Han, K. Cai, and K. S. Chan, “EXIT-chart-based LDPC code design for 2D ISI channels”, IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 2823-2826, Jun. 2013. [3] J. Zheng, X. Ma, Y. L. Guan, K. Cai, and K. S. Chan, “Low-complexity iterative row-column soft decision feedback algorithm for 2D inter-symbol interference channel detection with Gaussian approximation”, IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 4768-4773, Jun. 2013. [4] Y. L. Guan, G. J. Han, L. J. Kong, K. S. Chan, K. Cai and J. Zheng, “Coding and signal processing for ultra-high density magnetic recording channels”, 2014 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications (ICNC), page(s): 194 – 199.

Fig.1 Block diagram of QC-LDPC coded 2D-ISI magnetic recording system with joint GA-IRCSDFA detector and decoder.
   

Fig. 2 BER performance comparison with three schemes employed by GA-IRCSDFA detector in 4Tb/in2 magnetic recording channel
   

INTERMAG 2015

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:00:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

