IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

1421

High-Throughput LDPC-Decoder Architecture Using Efficient Comparison Techniques & Dynamic
Multi-Frame Processing Schedule
Sachin Kumawat, Rahul Shrestha, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Nikunj Daga, and Roy Paily, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents architecture of block-level-par-

allel layered decoder for irregular LDPC code. It can be recon-

figured to support various block lengths and code rates of IEEE

802.11n (WiFi) wireless-communication standard. We have pro-

posed efficient comparison techniques for both column and row

layered schedule and rejection-based high-speed circuits to com-

pute the two minimum values from multiple inputs required for

row layered processing of hardware-friendly min-sum decoding

algorithm. The results show good speed with lower area as com-

pared to state-of-the-art circuits. Additionally, this work proposes

dynamic multi-frame processing schedule which efficiently utilizes

the layered-LDPC decoding with minimum pipeline stages. The

suggested LDPC-decoder architecture has been synthesized and

post-layout simulated in 90 nm-CMOS process. This decoder oc-

cupies 5.19

area and supports multiple code rates like 1/2,

2/3, 3/4 & 5/6 as well as block-lengths of 648, 1296 & 1944. At

a clock frequency of 336 MHz, the proposed LDPC-decoder has

achieved better throughput of 5.13 Gbps and energy efficiency of

0.01 nJ/bits/iterations, as compared to the similar state-of-the-art

works.

Index Terms—Data-rate/throughput, IEEE 802.11n (WiFi) wireless-communication standard and very-large scale-integra-
tion (VLSI) design, LDPC codes, LDPC-layered decoding.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes are widely regarded for their excellent error-correction capabilities with near optimal bit-error rate (BER) performance and high flexibility in hardware realization [1]. These powerful features have made this code a popular choice for several wireless-communication standards like IEEE 802.11n (WiFi), IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX), IEEE 802.15c (WPAN), IEEE 802.3 (10 GBASE-T), DVB-S2 and ITU G.hn [2], [3]. Such widespread applications have led into the design of efficient LDPC decoding algorithms and their hardware implementations.
Min-sum algorithms (MSA) with offset are preferred over more robust sum-product algorithms because of their reduced
Manuscript received September 27, 2014; revised January 12, 2015; accepted January 27, 2015. Date of publication April 03, 2015; date of current version April 28, 2015. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor X. Zhang.
S. Kumawat, N. Daga and R. Paily are with the Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, India (e-mail: s.kumawat@iitg.ernet.in; n.daga@iitg.ernet.in; roypaily@iitg.ernet.in).
R. Shrestha is with the Center for VLSI and Embedded System Technology (CVEST), International Institute of Information Technology-Hyderabad (IIIT-H), Hyderabad-500032, Telangana, India (e-mail: rahul.shrestha@iiit.ac. in).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2015.2403032

hardware complexity though at the expense of degraded BER performance. Two main scheduling schemes are used for decoding irregular-LDPC code in hardware: flooding and layered decoding schemes. Flooding schedule is utilized in [4]–[6] for its low-memory intensive implementations and data independency for easy division of the data path. Whereas, layered scheduling converges in almost half the number of iterations when compared to the flooding schedule [7]. Reported works like [8]–[12] efficiently use this property resulting in multi-gigabit decoders. However, layered schedule suffers from severe data dependencies which prevent very high-speed implementations. On the other side, inter-standard reconfigurability has attracted attention of researchers leading to works like [13]. They use shuffled decoding to reduce hardware complexity and support modern standards like IEEE 802.11n, IEEE 802.16e and ITU G.hn. Multi-mode reconfigurable architectures in [14] and [15] have the flexibility to switch between LDPC and turbo decoding-process. Condo et al. [14] uses different processing cores for LDPC and turbo decoding with shared memory to store messages for both the processes. While Sun and Cavallardo [15] have designed single architecture to process both LDPC and turbo codes by proposing a unified algorithm. Weiner et al. [6] and Flatresse et al. [16] studied the use of fully-depleted silicon-on-insulator (FD-SOI) technology resulting in low power solutions which opened up a new dimension at the technology level.
These contributions have elevated the performance of LDPC decoder in terms of power consumption, design area and throughput. However, there still exists a need to boost the achievable throughput from the state-of-the-art value to conceive an architecture that is compatible for next-generation wireless-communication systems. With rapidly growing demands of higher data-rates, wireless industries have predicted the benchmark throughput beyond 3 Gbps for next-generation standards [17]. Thereby, this work focuses on the design of high-throughput reconfigurable LDPC-decoder which supports multi-gigabit data-rate and the contributions are as follows:
1) A block-parallel layered-decoding scheme [10] utilizing the offset min-sum algorithm (O-MSA) has been used for the design of LDPC decoder. A major challenge for block parallel-architecture of LDPC decoder is to find the required two-minimum values for O-MSA from multiple inputs in single cycle. Thereby, we have proposed an efficient-comparison technique to be used in the construction of high-speed circuits for extracting the minimum values with smaller number of pipeline stages. This resulted in lower latency and good frequency scaling.
2) This work proposes dynamic multiple-frame processing for LDPC-decoding algorithm to remove the pipeline bubbles and minimize the memory overheads.

1549-8328 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:57:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

3) Using these proposed techniques, architecture of LDPC decoder is conceived for IEEE 802.11n (WiFi) wireless-com-
munication standard [2]. The BER performance analysis of this decoder for various code-rates has been performed in additive-white Gaussian-noise (AWGN) channel environ-
ment. Synthesis and post-layout simulation of the suggested LDPC-decoder is carried out using 90 nm-CMOS process and it can be reconfigured for various code-rates and wide
range of block lengths those are compliant to WiFi wireless-communication standard. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, brief discussions on the formulation of LDPC-layered decoding and challenges faced in this work are carried out. Section III presents the proposed techniques on efficient-comparator designs and rejection based circuits for more number of inputs. In Section IV, reconfigurable architecture of LDPC decoder is presented and Section V includes BER performance evaluation of the suggested LDPC decoder, VLSI-design details and comparison with the reported works. Finally, this paper is concluded in Section VI.

II. LDPC LAYERED DECODING: FORMULATION & CHALLENGES

Several variants of the layered MSA exist but its basic structure

can be summarized as follows. Most of the wireless communica-

tion standards specify their parity-check matrix (PCM) in quasi-

cycle low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) form, as shown in

Fig. 1. Such PCM is constructed using a

identity sub-matrix

called block, which is rotated or shifted by an amount specified

by a shift matrix . Let

specifies the shift coefficient for

block column and block layer in the PCM. Similarly, let

be the exclusive information sent from variable nodes to the

corresponding check nodes; be the extrinsic information sent

from check nodes to the variable nodes in block layer and

block column in vector form. Consider to be the vector of pos-

terior information or log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) for the variable

nodes in block column. Now if is the number of sub-itera-

tions and is the maximum number of iterations, the message

updates can be expressed as:

(1)

(2)

(3)

Fig. 1. An IEEE 802.11n rate 2/3, 648 frame length QC-LDPC parity check matrix. The boxes represent rotated sub-matrices or blocks.

where is a set over which inputs (i.e., ) to the function are de-

fined and is the offset which is a correction measure to improve

the performance of MSA.

One of the major challenges of this formulation is to produce

messages for the next layer in the subsequent clock cycle. For

block parallel implementation considered here, this includes

finding the minimum from multiple inputs, which are 24 in the

case of IEEE 802.11n, removal of offset and generation of the

messages for all the neighboring variable nodes in single clock

cycle. This increases critical-path delay and pipelining becomes

necessary to cut it down. But the data dependencies from (1)–(3)

result in a feedback which introduces multiple pipeline bubbles

equal to

where is the number of stages. Thereby, block

interlacing [18] and multi-layer processing [19] utilize these

pipeline bubbles. As a result, block interlacing method processes

two frames together in interlaced pattern while the multiple layer

processing modifies the layered decoding scheme to process two

layers with the same set of messages, simultaneously, thus

increases the number of iterations required for convergence.

Gunnam et al. [8] propose some measures based on memory

bypassing and pre-fetching along with reordering of the PCM to

reduce the data dependencies.

We therefore propose a technique to process multiple frames

simultaneously to fill up the pipeline bubbles. Additionally, we

have suggested data pre-fetching method to remove memory

read-write latencies, as majority of the memory accesses are

sequential rather than random. On the other side, the number of

pipeline stages and the number of frames should be minimized

because messages for each frame have to be stored separately

which increases the memory overheads. In this work, the number

of frames to be processed is decided on the basis of frame length

which makes it dynamic multi-frame processing, elaborated in

latter sections.

where

and

. Here de-

notes the iteration number and is the set of variable nodes con-

nected to check nodes in layer. Vectors with superscript

are circularly rotated by that amount and the vectors are ini-

tialized to the received channel values and are initialized to

zero. In the case of layered decoding approach, the QC-LDPC

PCM is divided into block of layers which can be considered as

sub-codes. For each sub-iteration or layer processing, the parity

check constraints for only that layer are processed. The messages

are immediately updated after processing each layer and are

used for the next layer, as illustrated by (1). The function in

(2) denotes the check node processing and, for O-MSA, it can be

expressed as:

(4)

where

III. FAST MINIMUM COMPUTATIONS

The check node processing in layered O-MSA schedule in-

cludes computations of two most minimums out of the incoming

messages (denoted by

and ), index of , sign bits

for each check-node output, and the offset processing. Thereby,

high-speed check-node units (CNUs) with low-area occupation

are needed as they are the major contributor of logic resources in

the decoder architecture. Most taxing sub module in CNU is the

computations of

and

index. Therefore, this

paper proposes low-complexity techniques for comparing mag-

nitudes of two numbers in two's complement (2C) and sign mag-

nitude (SM) formats for column and row layered processing re-

spectively. Then, we suggest efficient rejection-based schemes to

compute

out of more than 2 inputs.

A. Proposed Techniques for Efficient-Comparator Design

Conventional comparator takes two SM values and uses most(5) significant bits (MSBs) to compare. Further, lower-order bits are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:57:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAWAT et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC-DECODER ARCHITECTURE

1423

Fig. 3. Modified technique for magnitude comparison of two sign magnitude numbers.

Fig. 2. Suggested technique for comparison of two 2C numbers.

is the

data width and

stands for CLA with and as inputs and as the

initial carry.

TABLE I FPGA IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS: 2'S COMPLEMENT AND SIGN MAGNITUDE
COMPARATORS

compared if the higher-order bits are equal and this results in

logic-path delay for -bit inputs. We have suggested a carry

look-ahead adder (CLA) based comparison scheme that results

in

path delay. The effectiveness of using CLA for

Fig. 4. (a) Rejection based four-input two-output comparator circuit. (b) Rejection based three-input comparator circuit. (c) Hierarchical architecture of six-input comparator based on rejection scheme.

comparison has been reported in previous works like [20]. Fig. 2

presents the suggested technique for comparing two 2C numbers. The conventional comparator here is just a single

com-

The basic idea of this method is to add two numbers with dif- parator. It can be seen that the scheme again results in a lower

ferent signs and check the sign bit of the result. If both the inputs number of logic units with lower delay. Therefore, we use the

have the same sign, which is denoted by

in Fig. 2, one SM comparator units to develop fast multi-input circuits with low

of the inputs (i.e., here) is inverted by taking one's complement area utilization.

(1C) by XORing with

, otherwise it is passed unaltered.

Then, this value is added with other input using CLA where initial

B. Rejection Based Multi-Input Circuits

carry input to CLA serves as the increment of one required for 1C To find the minimum out of multiple inputs which require prop-

to 2C conversion. Note that computation of the complete sum is not agation of data; generally, tree structure (TS) based circuits are

required, rather only MSB of the result is needed which can be ef- considered the fastest with degraded area. Such circuits find

ficiently carried out using a CLA in

. Finally, the flag is and

at each stage and combine them until only one pair of

generated as 0 if both the inputs are positive and

is 0 or the least two minimums are left [21], [22]. This results in

if both are negative and

is 1. Flag will also be 0 if they stages for inputs and low delay (

units in the critical path).

have different signs with being positive and

is 1 or Sorting based approaches (XS) are another popular choice which

is negative and

is 0. Otherwise the flag becomes 1 and consist of

levels when

is computed. However, to find

this is ensured by taking XOR of

with sign of the other both

and

, another

units are needed for

input . The proposed algorithm is particularly efficient in column computation [8], [21], [23].

layered or block serial processing of LDPC codes. There the mes- To achieve a decoder frequency of 110 MHz (see Sec-

sages are processed serially inside the CNU and can be directly tion IV-A) in FPGA for higher number of inputs as 24 in our

compared in 2's complement form.

case, pipelining becomes necessary. XS circuits suffer from a

We implemented a conventional 2C comparator which con- feedback which cannot be efficiently pipelined to improve upon

sists of two 2C to SM converters and a conventional

com- speed. On the other hand, though TS schemes can be pipelines,

parator. Table I shows post place-&-route results for the imple- they suffer from large area due to more logic resources. There-

mentation of conventional and suggested 2C magnitude compara- fore, we have suggested a rejection based scheme (RS) for tree

tors on field-programmable gate-array (FPGA) board (Virtex-IV, structures in which non-useful inputs are rejected and the rest

xc4vlx160 device). The data width is 5 bits and both the units (least two) are propagated forward. We save on

and

generate a flag rather than propagating the minimum input to the computations at each stage resulting in area occupations similar

output. It can be readily observed that the number of logic units to XS and delay performance approaching TS circuits.

is significantly reduced with marginal increase in combinatorial For inputs, parallel comparisons are carried out and flags

delay.

are generated for controlling a multiplexer (mux) layer. The mux

For the row layered block parallel scheduling as in our case, network rejects all but two inputs which are the least two min-

multiple inputs are processed in parallel. Therefore it makes sense imums in unknown order. Fig. 4(a) shows an architecture for

to convert the 2C inputs to SM once and propagate the inputs in 4-input comparator along with logic for mux-control and

hierarchical computations. We can therefore optimize the above index bits generation. Each “ ” block is based on Fig. 3

technique for SM inputs using the fact that both the inputs would which outputs a flag denoted by

. The mux control logic

be of positive sign. Fig. 3 presents the simplified technique. This is a function of the six flags. Six-variable K-map reduction can

results in a classical circuit that subtracts the two unsigned inputs be used to obtain the logic as given in Fig. 4(a). Furthermore, the

and checks the sign of the output computed by cla. Table I also

index bits, (LSB) and (MSB), can also be found as a

presents the implementation results for SM comparison units. function of the 1-bit flags as shown in Fig. 4(a). For

, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:57:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1424

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 6. Comparison of FPGA post place-&-route results for eight-input comparators.

Fig. 5. Suggested general-architecture of -input comparator based on rejection scheme.
TABLE II COMPARATOR CIRCUITS FOR DIFFERENT NUMBER OF INPUTS

and 2:1 multiplexers respectively. CP stands for critical path in

terms of logic units “A” and “M.”

It can be noted that the proposed circuits are efficient in terms

of critical path delay and have no feedback when compared to XS

approach. For example, for four input circuits, suggested scheme

results in one comparator/CLA and two multiplexers in the crit-

ical path as compared to three and four, respectively, for [8].

However, the number of flags

increase quickly with an in-

crease in by a power of two which makes the mux-control logic

more complex. For example, for six-input module with

flags, the mux-control logic is a function of 15 variables and the

resulting data path will become very complex. Therefore, our ap-

proach does not scale properly with the number of inputs. Hence,

we use multiple three-input and a four-input unit to realize a hier-

archical six-input

architecture. Fig. 4(c) show the archi-

tecture. Table II also presents the estimated attributes for . The

index calculation remains the same for the first

unit but we need to modify it for the second one by simply giving

the 4th input to as its last input as shown in Fig. 4(c) and

changing the index equations as:

For the

unit, the msb calculation is modified as:

use the radix-4 unit to construct a TS comparator, rejecting half

of the inputs at each stage as shown in Fig. 5. At any stage , the index is calculated as:

and propagated according to (7). To compare the proposed approach with XS, we implemented

(6) the survival based scheme in [8] on FPGA for 8 inputs. For the suggested approach, we used three four-input modules which are

stacked together along with a two-input sorter. Fig. 6 presents (7) the results suggesting significant reduction in delay with marginal

where the subscript denotes attributes for that stage and

and

are indices from previous stage radix-4 units. Finally

a simple two-input sorter, which comprises of one comparator

and two multiplexers can be used to find

out of the

least two. For many practical applications, the number of inputs

may not be a power of two. For such cases, we can use mixed

radix circuits. Fig. 4(b) presents the rejection based scheme for 3

inputs. The mux control logic for radix-3 is a function of the flags

, , , and can be easily obtained as:

increase in area. Table IV suggests area and delay results for a comparator and
2-input mux implemented using 90 nm CMOS process. Since we use the optimized comparator module based on Fig. 3, area occupied by the comparator was found to be similar to a 2-input mux for 5-bit data width. Therefore reduction in number of muxs also have a significant effect on the area which is a key feature of the rejection-based scheme. Additionally, given the longer critical path for a comparator, minimum number of comparators are ensured in the suggested rejection based scheme.

We also implemented the proposed circuits on 90 nm CMOS

process with 0.9 V supply voltage in worst case delay conditions

Table II presents a comparison between modules with different to compare with other existing schemes. The comparison is sum-

number of inputs based on the survival based scheme for selection marized in Table III. Reference [23] presents improvements over

sorting presented by Gunnam et al. [8] and the proposed rejec- XS approach in [21], so we compare with XS in [23] and TS in

tion based approach. They use comparison flags and

index [21]. It can be seen that the proposed scheme achieved better gate

to extract survivors from the previous levels after

compu- count than the improved XS in [23]. Due to lack of information,

tation. Out of the extracted survivors,

is computed. In the proper delay scaling is not carried out but theoretically RS per-

Table II, “A” and “M” stands for number of comparators/CLAs formed at similar speeds as [23]. It also performs significantly

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:57:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAWAT et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC-DECODER ARCHITECTURE

1425

TABLE III COMPARISON OF RS WITH EXISTING XS AND TS SCHEMES: DW (DATA WIDTH), T (CMOS-TECHNOLOGY NODE), A (DESIGN AREA), D (DELAY), GC
(GATE COUNT), P (AREA-DELAY PRODUCT)

TABLE IV COMPARATOR VS. MULTIPLEXER PERFORMANCE

for the pipelined 24 input RS architecture. The delay mentioned is combinational delay considering combinatorial data path.

IV. MULTI-RATE BLOCK-PARALLEL LDPC DECODER
WiFi standard specifies up to four MIMO transmitters capable of transmitting at 150 Mbps each. This results in a data throughput of 600 Mbps or user throughput of at least 300 Mbps for rate-1/2 codes. Therefore to fully support WiFi standard, the target throughput is 600 Mbps. Block-serial or column layered approach is usually more energy efficient and reconfigurability is less complex; however, it requires 24 cycles for a single iteration for WiFi standard. While block-parallel or row-layered approach processes 24 inputs together in less number of clock cycles (12 clock cycles) in a single iteration. This makes it suitable for the design of high-throughput decoders. To reduce the reconfiguration complexity, we have used a look-up table based technique for the suggested block-parallel architecture.

A. Decoder Architecture

Fig. 7. 24-input minimum ( chitecture.

and

index) computation ar-

For a block-parallel CNU that is compliant to WiFi standard,

24 inputs are read per cycle and then

,

,

index,

and sign computations are performed. Since there are maximum

better in terms of area when compared to designs in [21]. Fur-

thermore, RS achieves the best area-delay product results among

the reported works.

For the cases where is not a power of 2, such as IEEE 801.11n

(WiFi) standard which defines PCMs with 24 block columns, we

can use mixed radix circuits with hierarchical stacking. Fig. 7

presents the architecture for

where we have used multiple

modules of the proposed radix-4 circuits and a six-input module

in hierarchical fashion along with the two-input sorter. To use the

module in hierarchical structure, the index in

units are modified to propagate previous stage indices as:

12 layers which have to be processed for rate-1/2 codes, with the

maximum number of ten iterations

, the minimum required

clock frequency for the decoder is calculated as 108 MHz for

FPGA implementation. We have designed three pipeline stages in

CNU to achieve a target frequency of 110 MHz. Fig. 8(a) presents

the suggested CNU architecture.

The CNU processing flow starts by reading 24 messages

through the first multiplexer network, MUX-NTW-1. It imple-

ments 2-input muxs for each of the CNU inputs to replace them

with a maximum value if, according to the PCM, the CNU is

not connected to the variable-node unit (VNU) corresponding

to that input. This method allows filtering of varying number

of non-neighboring VNU messages based on corresponding

While for the internal

unit, the index calculations

are customized depending on . For

, we modify it as:

24 flags from PCM-FLAG ROMs [Fig. 8(b)] dynamically for different row degrees. The filtering is followed by conversion of 2C values to SM by ABS block. The conversion is required

for utilizing the low complexity comparison scheme of Fig. 3 in

the MIN COMPARATOR BLOCK, which assumes all inputs to

be positive. Simultaneously, a XOR tree, SIGN CALCULATION

UNIT, computes the signs for CNU outputs. The next step is

where

and

are indices from the internal

offset correction for the two minimums as required by O-MSA

units at the same stage . Moreover, dividing the data path just be- (5), carried out by subtracters as shown in Fig. 8(a). After offset

fore the six-input module makes it efficiently pipelined as the data removal, if the results are negative (value underflow), they are

path is effectively divided in half resulting in even higher oper- replaced by an all zero value, as governed by (5). Sign bit of the

ating clock frequency. Table III also gives implementation results results act as control signals for the multiplexers used for the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:57:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 9. Circular shifting of longer frames using barrel shifter and proper memory addressing. “R” are the RAMs and “Addr” are their corresponding read addresses. “Out” is a group of three messages out of nine-length vector in the shifted form.

and three cycles respectively. For the layered schedule, we can

use only one set of shifters to achieve the required cyclic shifts

by modifying the shift coefficients

as follows. If is an

entry in the shift matrix and represents an entry for the layer

below it, then the required shift is calculated as:

At the start of a new frame, is initialized to . The barrel shifters

can process 648 messages per cycle but circular shifting of the

longer frames is not straightforward. For example, a vector of

length 10 cannot be rotated using two five-input shifters. Neither

can it be accomplished in two cycles using one five-input shifter

directly. Thus, we have proposed a memory addressing based

technique which utilizes two and three cycle latencies for longer

frames to address this issue.

Consider a three-input shifter and three random-access mem-

ories (RAMs), as shown in Fig. 9. To perform two right-shifts of

nine-length vector, we rotate its first three elements rightwards

by two units using the shifter and store them in the RAMs, as

shown in Fig. 9. It is repeated for the next three elements in the

next cycle and so on until the complete vector is stored in that

manner. Now during the memory-read cycles, data is read by set-

ting proper addresses for each RAM. Fig. 9 shows the address

sequences required for the task and the corresponding output se-

quence. The output sequence has been rotated by two and can be

read in groups of three for parallel processing. In general for a

vector of

elements, a shift of can be achieved using an

input barrel shifter by rotating subset of elements by

. The read addresses needs to be calculated before the first ac-

Fig. 8. (a) Proposed block-parallel CNU architecture. (b) Proposed reconfig- cess, after which the access is circularly sequential in nature.

urable multi-rate layered-LDPC decoder-architecture.

ACC-RAMs are true-dual port RAMs used to accumulate the

rotated messages after each sub-iteration, as shown in Fig.

purpose. Since signs for all the outputs are already computed 8(b). Proper addressing of the RAMs is done to read the messages

along with the

index, only

,

and

with in correct shifted order. Similarly, E-RAMs store output of the

the computed sign are stored to reduce memory requirements. CNUs

in the compressed form as

,

and

Finally, a second multiplexer network, MUX-NTW-2, expands

after each sub-iteration. These messages are required to

the incoming 3 values into 24 CNU outputs. For each output, one generate messages for the next layer as given by (1). The

mux selects between

and

based on the sign bit 12 PCMs are stored in PCM-SHIFT ROMs while PCM-FLAG

calculated by the XOR tree and a second mux selects between ROMs store the flag information used by CNUs for each PCM.

the propagated

and

based on the

index. The 3 The address generators form the controller that ensure data pre-

pipeline stages, dividing the CNU data flow, are carefully set so fetching, bypassing and correct order of message flow. FIFOs act

as to uniformly partition the data path inside the decoder.

as latency synchronizers between the CNU inputs and outputs.

Fig. 8(b) shows the proposed top-level architecture of reconfig- The controller works in four major states. Processing of an

urable block-parallel layered LDPC-decoder. The Dashed lines incoming frame begins by populating ACC-RAMs with channel

represent pipeline stages. A parallelization factor of

is LLR values constituting the initialization state. The second state

chosen by using CNUs in parallel, each processing one parity comprises of first rotation of CNU input messages according to

constraint for a particular row layer. A set of subtracters and

coefficients. The messages are bypassed to barrel shifter

adders perform the operations of (1) and (3), respectively, and via VNUs by adding and subtracting zeros and stored back to

together constitutes the VNUs which work in serial fashion. For ACC-RAMs in shifted manner. The third state starts the decoding

the decoder, we chose

CNUs that correspondingly re- process by reading CNU messages from ACC-RAMs.

quire 648 VNUs to support parallel processing. For each cycle,

messages are read by the CNUs and pipelined processing

messages are exchanged between CNU and VNU of the data begins. The emerging CNU to VNU messages out of

groups. The longer frames of 1296 and 1944 are handled in two CNUs are simultaneously stored in the E-RAMs and read by 648

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:57:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAWAT et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC-DECODER ARCHITECTURE

1427

VNUs in parallel. CNU inputs for the next layer are computed

in VNUs by adding to previous CNU inputs and subtracting pre-

vious layer CNU outputs from it as denoted by (3) and (1) respec-

tively. The messages are then shifted according to PCM coeffi-

cients for the next layer and stored in ACC-RAMs again which

marks the completion of one sub-iteration. A decoding iteration

is completed when all the layers are processed. Each layer is pro-

cessed for a pre-set number of iterations

before decoding

stops. The last controller state takes decoding decisions based on

signs and flushes out the output for current frame.

B. Reconfiguration and Multi-Frame Processing

Status of the currently-decoded code is stored in the form of

addresses of look-up tables containing information of the number

of layers and the number of frames to process. We have stored all

the PCMs in a single ROM to save memory and the base address

(i.e., starting address) for each PCM is also stored in a look-up

table. Therefore to reconfigure the decoder to process a frame

with different code rate, simply the address for number of layers

and base-address table need to be updated which is carried out

by the controller. This results in processing the required number of sub-iterations/layers and correct PCM-shift coefficients from the ROM. Similarly to switch to a code with different frame length, the address to number of frames and base-address table

Fig. 10. Proposed multi-frame processing for efficient utilization of pipeline.

Here

denotes frame's part under layer processing. For 648

length frames, each frame is processed in a single cycle and has no parts. Refer

to the legend at the bottom for meaning of different stages in the processing.

are updated.

As discussed before, the pipeline stages introduce idle latency

cycles. Therefore, we store and process multiple frames together

to fill up the pipeline bubbles and efficiently utilize the layered

schedule. Memory write takes two clock cycles introducing two

memory latency cycles in addition to the two-cycle logic-pipeline

latency. Memory-read cycles are avoided using data pre-fetching

as the read addresses can be pre-computed. Hence, there is a 4

stage bubble while processing a 648 length frame or part of longer

frames. Since for QC-LDPC codes, only parity checks within a

layer have independent computations that can be done in par-

allel, multiple frames can be processed to utilize the idle stages.

The number of frames are decided dynamically based on the

frame size. Fig. 10 shows the dynamic multi-frame processing.

The symbol represent frame number , frame part or the

clock cycle number for longer frames and the PCM layer/row

number . For 648 length frame, we bypass the accumulation

RAMs as the shifter can rotate it in one cycle itself, avoiding the

two-memory write cycles. Hence, we process three frames for

648 length codes as shown in Fig. 10. For 1296-length frames, it takes two cycles to process one frame and circular shifting also require multiple cycles. Therefore, it requires three frames, each

Fig. 11. BER performance of the suggested LDPC-decoding algorithm for various code-rates and a block length of 1944 compliant to WiFi standard.

occupying 2 stages so that the bubbles are not introduced. It is to be noted that in this case, multiple message vectors have to be stored in the memory. Similarly for 1944-length frames, it takes
three cycles to process a single frame and thus two frames are enough to occupy all the 5 stages in the processing flow, as shown in Fig. 10.

values. Thereafter, the BER performance of such LDPC decoder for ten decoding iterations and a maximum block-length of 1944 bits, which is compliant to WiFi standard, has been plotted in Fig. 11. Additionally, the suggested decoder can decode code with multiple code-rates that ranges from low-effective code-rate of 1/2 to high-effective code-rate of 5/6. It is to

V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS, VLSI DESIGN, AND COMPARISON OF RESULTS

be noted that for modern wireless-communication systems, the full range of code-rates between these corners must be supported by the decoder architecture [24]. Thereby, high-level simulation

High-level behavioral simulation of the suggested LDPC has been performed for WiFi-compliant code-rates like 1/2, 3/4,

decoder has been carried out using binary-phase shift-keying 2/3, and 5/6. It can be observed that the suggested LDPC decoder

(BPSK) modulation in AWGN-channel environment for WiFi achieves a BER of at

values of 3.56 dB and 4.66 dB

wireless-communication standard. This simulation includes for low-effective code-rate of 1/2 and high-effective code-rate of

BPSK-modulated transmission of bits via AWGN channel; 5/6, respectively, as shown in Fig. 11. Similarly, the suggested

subsequently, the noisy channel outputs are demodulated and decoder attains a BER of

at 3.98 dB and 4.25 dB for the

then decoded using proposed LDPC decoder for each of the code-rates of 2/3 and 3/4 respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:57:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

Fig. 12. Test setup for the hardware testing of suggested LDPC decoder using host computer, FPGA, and logic analyzer.

TABLE V RESULTS AND COMPARISON FOR FPGA IMPLEMENTATIONS

Fig. 13. Chip layout of proposed LDPC decoder with core dimension of .
TABLE VI ACHIEVABLE THROUGHPUTS (MBPS) OF PROPOSED-LDPC DECODER FROM FPGA IMPLEMENTATION AND ASIC DESIGN FOR ALL THE BLOCK LENGTHS
AND CODE RATES OF WIFI STANDARD

this value resulted in adequate BER performance as well as ap-

We have hardware-implemented the proposed LDPC decoder on FPGA board (Virtex-IV, xc4vlx160 device) with (5,2) and (6,2) fixed-point quantization where 2 represents the number of bits for fractional precision. Channel LLR values with fixed-point representation are derived from the high-level behavioral model used in BER simulation and are stored in on-board random-access memory (RAM) of FPGA. These LLRs are stored in FPGA

preciable hardware efficiency and the suggested decoder operates

at maximum clock frequency of 121 MHz. We have compared

the FPGA-implementation results with the decoder reported in

[10], as shown in Table V. It can be observed that with competi-

tive resource utilization and lower clock speed, we have achieved

a higher user-throughput and support multiple codes. The data

throughput

of LDPC decoder can be computed as

memory by host computer where the BER simulations were car-

ried out, as shown in Fig. 12. Thereafter, configuration file (in.bit

format) of the suggested decoder-architecture is loaded on FPGA board by host computer via universal-serial bus (USB) cable. One
of the on-board keys has been used as enable signal to on-board memory and implemented decoder. The output of this on-board decoder is interfaced with logic analyzer using 160 pins high-

where is the number of frames processed simultaneously, is the frame length, is the number of layers present in the code and
is the running clock frequency of the decoder. The number of latency cycles can be calculated as

speed mezzanine card (HSMC) which has data transfer speed of

3.125 Gbps, as shown in Fig. 12. Subsequently, 16-pin GPIO

cable has been used to connect HSMC and the logic analyzer. where 1 are the pipeline latency cycles,

are the

Thereby, for each

value, entire channel LLR values are initial cyclic-shift rotation cycles and the last two cycles are for

stored using on-board memory and these values are fed to im- first-time memory-write wait. Thus, the user throughput can be

plemented LDPC decoder on triggering high the enable signal calculated as

where denotes code-rate. For

using on-board key. The decoded LLR values are displayed on a 648 length and rate-1/2 code, we process three frames at 120

the screen of logic analyzer and the decoded bits are stored in host MHz in FPGA resulting in a data throughput of 617.1 Mbps.

computer as a file (in.txt format) which is used for computing the The proposed LDPC decoder has been synthesized and post-

BER value. Thus, BER values are computed for different

layout simulated in 90 nm 1P9M-Low-K CMOS process with

values for the code-rates 1/2 as well as 5/6 and are plotted in 0.9 V supply. Gate-level netlist of our design has been gener-

Fig. 11. These BER plots are derived from fixed-point architec- ated using SYNOPSYS-Design-Compiler tool and it possesses

ture of suggested LDPC decoder with quantization (5,2) and it has 18 logic-levels consuming 509 k and 4.36 k hierarchical and leaf

shown minor degradation of 0.1 dB for both the code-rates of cells respectively. Post-synthesis simulations and static-timing

1/2 and 5/6 at a BER of . Table V shows the results obtained analysis of this netlist have been carried out using SYNOPSYS-

for this FPGA implementation with (5,2) and (6,2) fixed-point Verilog-Compiler-Simulator and SYNOPSYS-Prime-Time tools

quantization. It can be observed that the decrement in slice and respectively. Thereby, this decoder has a critical path delay of

LUT utilizations of 19.82% and 21.78%, respectively, have oc- 2.98 nS. This verified netlist is imported in Cadence-SOC-En-

curred with the reduction of one bit. In case of registers and sav- counter tool for backend-design process with six-metal layers.

ings in memory, gains of 14.49% and 7.36%, respectively, can be Standard cells are placed on the core area with a cell-utilization

observed. Therefore, we have used five-bit quantization because of 79.2% and power grids as well as stripes are inserted on the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:57:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KUMAWAT et al.: HIGH-THROUGHPUT LDPC-DECODER ARCHITECTURE
TABLE VII COMPARISON OF PROPOSED LDPC DECODERS WITH REPORTED WORKS

1429

: Post-Layout Simulation Results; : Synthesis Results.

core. Then, clock-tree synthesis and timing optimizations are per-

VI. CONCLUSION

formed. Power routing, signal routing and insertion of leaf cells

are carried out. Finally, post-route static-timing analysis as well

as optimization is accomplished. Decoder layout has a core area

of 5.19

with 509 k gates. Using the standard delay files

(.sdf) and the netlist generated from the layout, post-layout sim-

ulation is carried out and the design operates at 335.57 MHz.

It has consumed a maximum power of 451.28 mW while de-

coding QC-LDPC code of 1944 block length and at 3/4 code-rate.

Chip layout of the implemented LDPC decoder at 90 nm-CMOS

process is shown in Fig. 13. Based on the results obtained from

such application-specific integrated-circuit (ASIC) synthesis and

post-layout simulation, we have obtained the achievable through-

puts of the suggested LDPC-decoder for various code-rates and

block lengths those are compliant to WiFi standard, as shown

in Table VI. It shows that the maximum achievable throughputs

of the decoder when implemented on FPGA and ASIC are 1.84

Efficient circuits for two, three, four and six inputs compar-

isons to address the issue of fast

computations in

a block parallel-layered LDPC-decoder architecture have been

presented. The proposed architecture for 24 inputs was found

to be faster and with small area overhead. The LDPC-decoder

architecture proposed can fully support the WiFi wireless-com-

munication standard in FPGA with a clock speed of 120 MHz.

Post-layout simulation outcomes of the suggested LDPC de-

coder in 90 nm-CMOS process has shown very-high achievable

throughput of 5.13 Gbps. Additionally, better energy-efficiency

of 0.01 nJ/bits/iterations was achieved with minor degrada-

tion in design area and power consumption. The techniques

suggested in this work can be applied to any LDPC decoder

design to achieve multi-gigabit architecture for next-generation

wireless-communication systems.

Gbps and 5.13 Gbps respectively. We have compared the post-layout simulated results of the
proposed LDPC-decoder with reported works, as shown in Table VII. Among the reported works, multi-standard LDPC decoder based on shuffled decoding proposed by Ueng et al. [13] has reported the highest throughput of 1.96 Gbps. The Suggested LDPC-decoder has achieved a throughput of 5.13 Gbps which is 62% better than the highest reported value of [13]. However, [13] supports multiple wireless-communication standards albeit single standard is supported by the proposed decoder-architecture. The proposed work also compares slightly better in area with [13]. The higher gate count figure for the proposed decoder is due to utilization of registers as memory cells during synthesis. Similarly, our work has achieved 87% better throughput than

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] IEEE Std 802.11n-2009 (Amendment to IEEE Std 802.11-2007 as Amended by IEEE Std 802.11k-2008, IEEE Std 802.11r-2008, IEEE Std 802.11y-2008, and IEEE Std 802.11w-2009), 2009, Tech. Rep..
[3] IEEE Std 802.16e-2005 and IEEE Std 802.16-2004/Cor 1-2005 (Amendment and Corrigendum to IEEE Std 802.16-2004), 2006, Tech. Rep..
[4] F. Verdier and D. Declercq, “A low-cost parallel scalable FPGA architecture for regular and irregular LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1215–1223, 2006.
[5] M. Weiner, B. Nikolic, and Z. Zhang, “LDPC decoder architecture for high-data rate personal-area networks,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2011, pp. 1784–1787.
[6] M. Weiner, M. Blagojevic, S. Skotnikov, A. Burg, P. Flatresse, and B.

that of the state-of-the-art work [25], which is compliant to WiFi wireless-communication standard, and has a power reduction of 62%. Comparison has also been carried out with the reported works of lower (65 nm) and higher (130 and 180 nm) CMOS processes [29]–[32] in Table VII. It shows that the suggested decoder-architecture has achieved better throughput among all the reported works with nominal degradation in design area and power consumption. On the other side, we have achieved better energy efficiency of 0.01 nJ/bits/iterations which is 50% better than the best reported value from [13].

Nikolic, “27.7 A scalable 1.5-to-6 Gb/s 6.2-to-38.1 mW LDPC decoder for 60 GHz wireless networks in 28 nm UTBB FDSOI,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers (ISSCC), 2014, pp. 464–465. [7] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Convergence analysis of serial message-passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. 6th Int. ITG-Conf. Source Channel Coding (TURBOCODING) and 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes & Related Topics, 2006, pp. 1–6. [8] K. K. Gunnam, G. S. Choi, and M. B. Yeary, “A parallel VLSI architecture for layered decoding for array LDPC codes,” in Proc. 20th Int. Conf. VLSI Design and 6th Int. Conf. Embedded Syst., 2007, pp. 738–743.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:57:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 5, MAY 2015

[9] Z. Cui, Z. Wang, and X. Zhang, “Reduced-complexity column-layered decoding and implementation for LDPC codes,” IET Commun., vol. 5, no. 15, pp. 2177–2186, 2011.
[10] S. Kim, G. E. Sobelman, and H. Lee, “A reduced-complexity architecture for LDPC layered decoding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 1099–1103, 2011.
[11] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, W. M. Tam, Y. Zhao, and F. C. M. Lau, “A layered QC-LDPC decoder architecture for high speed communication system,” in Proc. IEEE Asia Pacific Conf. Circuits Syst. (APCCAS), 2012, pp. 475–478.
[12] C. Yu, H.-S. Chuang, B.-S. Lin, P.-H. Cheng, and S.-J. Chen, “Improvement on a block-serial fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.11n,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consum. Electron. (ICCE), 2014, pp. 446–447, IEEE.
[13] Y.-L. Ueng, B.-J. Yang, C.-J. Yang, H.-C. Lee, and J.-D. Yang, “An efficient multi-standard LDPC decoder design using hardware-friendly shuffled decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 743–756, Mar. 2013.
[14] C. Condo, M. Martina, and G. Masera, “VLSI implementation of a multi-mode turbo/LDPC decoder architecture,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1441–1454, 2013.
[15] Y. Sun and J. R. Cavallaro, “A flexible LDPC/turbo decoder architecture,” J. Signal Process. Syst., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 2011.
[16] P. Flatresse, B. Giraud, J. Noel, B. Pelloux-Prayer, F. Giner, D. Arora, F. Arnaud, N. Planes, J. Le Coz, O. Thomas, S. Engels, G. Cesana, R. Wilson, and P. Urard, “Ultra-wide body-bias range LDPC decoder in 28 nm UTBB FDSOI technology,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers (ISSCC), 2013, pp. 424–425.
[17] D. Talbot, “A banner year for mobile devices,” MIT Technol. Rev., Commun. News, Dec. 2012.
[18] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Block-interlaced LDPC decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 74–78, 2008.
[19] Y. Sun, G. Wang, and J. R. Cavallaro, “Multi-layer parallel decoding algorithm and VLSI architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), 2011, pp. 1776–1779.
[20] S. Veeramachaneni, M. K. Krishna, L. Avinash, P. S. Reddy, and M. Srinivas, “Efficient design of 32-bit comparator using carry look-ahead logic,” in Proc. IEEE Northeast Workshop Circuits Syst. (NEWCAS), 2007, pp. 867–870.
[21] C.-L. Wey, M.-D. Shieh, and S.-Y. Lin, “Algorithms of finding the first two minimum values and their hardware implementation,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3430–3437, 2008.
[22] L. G. Amarù, M. Martina, and G. Masera, “High speed architectures for finding the first two maximum/minimum values,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2342–2346, 2012.
[23] Q. Xie, Z. Chen, X. Peng, and S. Goto, “A sorting-based architecture of finding the first two minimum values for ldpc decoding,” in Proc. IEEE 7th Int. Colloq. Signal Process. Its Appl. (CSPA), 2011, pp. 95–98.
[24] Y. Sun and J. R. Cavallaro, “Efficient hardware implementation of a highly-parallel 3GPPLTE/LTE-advance turbo decoder,” Integr., the VLSI J., vol. 44, p. 30517315, 2011.
[25] C. Yu, H.-S. Chuang, B.-S. Lin, P.-H. Cheng, and S.-J. Chen, “Improvement on a block-seria fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder for IEEE 802.11n,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consum. Electron. (ICCE-2014), pp. 446–447.
[26] Y. Sun and J. R. Cavallaro, “A low power 1-Gbps reconfigurable LDPC decoder design for multiple 4G wireless standards,” in Proc. IEEE Int. SOC Conf., 2008, pp. 367–370.
[27] Y. L. Wang, Y. L. Ueng, C. L. Peng, and C. J. Yang, “Processing-task arrangement for a low-complexity full-mode WiMAX LDPC codec,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 415–428, Feb. 2011.
[28] C.-H. Liu, C.-C. Lin, S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Hsu, and S.-J. Jou, “Design of a multimode QC-LDPC decoder based on shift-routing network,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 734–738, 2009.
[29] T. Brack, M. Alles, T. Lehnigk-Emden, F. Kienle, N. Wehn, N.-E. L'Insalata, F. Rossi, M. Rovini, and L. Fanucci, “Low complexity LDPC code decoders for next generation standards,” in Proc. Design, Autom., Test Eur. Conf. Exhib. (DATE '07), Apr. 2007, pp. 1–6.

[30] G. Gentile, M. Rovini, and L. Fanucci, “Low-complexity architectures of a decoder for IEEE 802.16e LDPC codes,” in Proc. Euromicro Conf. Digit. Syst. Design Archit., Methods, Tools (DSD), Aug. 2007, pp. 369–375.
[31] K. Gunnam, G. Choi, W. Wang, and M. Yeary, “Multi-rate layered decoder architecture for block LDPC codes of the IEEE 802.11n wireless standard,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS 2007), pp. 1645–1648.
[32] D. Bao, B. Xiang, R. Shen, A. Pan, Y. Chen, and X. Y. Zeng, “Programmable architecture for flexi-mode QC-LDPC decoder supporting wireless LAN/MAN applications and beyond,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 1, pp. 125–138, 2010.
Sachin Kumawat received the B.Tech. degree in electronics and communication engineering along with a minor in computer science and engineering from the Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, India in 2014.
He is currently working as a research and development software engineer in Chennai area, India. His research interest lies in the areas of embedded systems and VLSI-architecture design for various fields including digital communication, networks and computer vision.
Rahul Shrestha received the B.Eng. degree in telecommunication engineering from B.M.S College of Engineering, Bangalore, India, in 2008. He received the Ph.D degree in electronics and electrical engineering from Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, India in 2014.
He is currently an Assistant Professor at the International Institute of Information Technology Hyderabad, Center for VLSI and Embedded Systems Technologies, Telangana, India. His research interests include VLSI design and implementation of high-speed digital architectures for wireless communication applications in ASIC/FPGA platform and the study of channel codes from algorithmic and implementation perspectives for high-throughput applications.
Nikunj Daga recieved the B.Tech. degree in electronics and communication engineering from Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, India in 2014.
He is currently working as a technical associate in Bangalore, India. He has experience in embedded system design and authored a landscape analysis whitepaper for intellectual property of 2G-3G wireless communications. His research interest lies in VLSI design, digital communications, and computer networks.
Roy Paily received the B.Tech. degree in electronics and communication engineering from College of Engineering, Trivandrum, India in 1990. He obtained the M. Tech. and Ph.D. from Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur and Indian Institute of Technology, Madras in 1996 and 2004 respectively, in the area of semiconductor devices.
He is currently a Professor at the Department of Electronics and Electrical Engineering, and Head of the Centre of Nanotechnology, Indian Institute of Technology Guwahati, Guwahati, India. His research interests are VLSI circuits, MEMS, and devices.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:57:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

