1988

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2018

An Effective Low-Complexity Error-Floor Lowering Technique for High-Rate QC-LDPC Codes
Huang-Chang Lee, Po-Chiao Chou, and Yeong-Luh Ueng

Abstract— This letter presents a low-complexity redecoding-based error-floor lowering technique for quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes, where a predetermined set of variable nodes are attenuated before the redecoding. Using a two-stage off-line search, the attenuation set is determined based on the error patterns collected from the standard decoding simulation. It is shown that the error floor can be effectively lowered, and only a negligible amount of complexity is introduced.
Index Terms— Low-complexity decoder, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, error floor.
I. INTRODUCTION
H IGH-RATE low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are popular for both wireline communications and storage systems. However, LDPC codes usually suffer from a high error floor due to trapping sets [2], [3]. Many studies have shown that the error floor can be mitigated using modified decoding schemes which can be classified into two categories. In the first category, the error floor is lowered with the assistance of the trapping set information. If the standard decoding process fails and the syndrome pattern matches one of the patterns derived from the stored trapping sets, in the redecoding stage, the a posteriori LLR (log-likelihood ratio) values of the suspicious error bits are flipped using the failure avoidance technique [4], or are scaled using the postprocessing technique [5]. Errors caused by the trapping set can then be corrected via by executing a few additional redecoding iterations. Applying elegant quantization to the related decoding messages, the errors triggered by the dominant trapping sets can be corrected [11]. A more sophisticated quantization leads to a novel class of FAID (Finite Alphabet Iterative Decoders) [12], [13], where redecoding is not required.
The identification of the trapping sets is not an easy task. In order to avoid the use of trapping set information, the methods in the second category are used to lower the error floor based
Manuscript received July 12, 2018; accepted August 5, 2018. Date of publication August 13, 2018; date of current version October 8, 2018. This work is supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of the R.O.C. under grants MOST 107-2221-E-007-017-MY3. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was H. Pishro-Nik. (Corresponding author: Yeong-Luh Ueng.)
H.-C. Lee is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Chang Gung University, Taoyuan 333, Taiwan, and also with the Department of Neurological Surgery, Taoyuan Chang Gung Memorial Hospital, Taoyuan 333, Taiwan (e-mail: akula.lee@gmail.com).
P.-C. Chou was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan. He is now with MediaTek Inc., Hsinchu 30078, Taiwan.
Y.-L. Ueng is with Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: ylueng@ee.nthu.edu.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2018.2864982

on the unsatisfied check nodes. When the bi-mode decoding technique [7] is employed, all the a posteriori LLR values for the variable nodes neighboring the unsatisfied check nodes are erased in the redecoding attempt. If the number of unsatisfied check nodes is also evaluated, the two stage decoding technique [10] can alter the LLR values for different types of variable nodes. The backtracking algorithm [6] introduces a trial-and-error strategy. The LLR signs for the suspicious error bits are individually flipped corresponding to a sequence of redecoding attempts. However, decoding latency will be prolonged since a large number of redecoding attempts may be required in order to achieve a satisfactory improvement.
In this letter, a new class of error floor lowering technique is proposed for QC-LDPC codes. Neither the storage of trapping set information, nor the detection of unsatisfied check nodes is required. Instead of using the trapping set information, a set of variable nodes is selected offline using the collected error patterns. If the standard decoding process fails, the LLR magnitudes corresponding to these pre-determined variable nodes are attenuated, and the redecoding process is performed. Since QC-LDPC codes are structured codes, the variable nodes corresponding to the same block columns of the parity-check matrix can be simultaneously attenuated. The proposed error floor lowering technique is applied to the (18396, 16644) and (35442, 33294) QC-LDPC codes. FPGA evaluation shows that the error floor for these two codes can be reduced by about two orders. Since only a single trial redecoding attempt is required, together with the indices for the selected block columns, a negligible amount of additional complexity is introduced to the online decoding process. When the proposed method is applied to the WiMax and Margulis codes, an error-floor lowering capability that is comparable to that of the backtracking method [6] can be observed. In addition, as long as the error patterns can be collected, the proposed method can be flexibly combined with other LDPC decoders.
II. REVIEWS OF QC-LDPC CODES
A QC-LDPC code can be constructed based on an Mp-byNp base matrix B, where the element in the i-th row and the j-th column is denoted as non-negative integer bi,j, which can be expanded to a weight-bi,j z-by-z circulant matrix hi,j in the parity-check matrix H. After the expansion operation, each of the rows and each of the columns in the Mp-by-Np base matrix B can be respectively mapped to a z-by-N “block row” and an M -by-z “block column” of the M -by-N paritycheck matrix H, where N = Np · z, and M = Mp · z. The B matrix given in (1) is expanded to the H matrix in (2),

1558-2558 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:29:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: EFFECTIVE LOW-COMPLEXITY ERROR-FLOOR LOWERING TECHNIQUE FOR HIGH-RATE QC-LDPC CODES

1989

where Mp = 2, Np = 3, and z = 4 are considered.

B=

2 0

1 2

1 1

(1)

⎡

1010

H = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢000010

1 0 1
0 0 0

0 1 0
0 0 0

1 0 1
0 0 0

0000

0100 0010 0001 1000
0011 1001 1100 0110

⎤

0010

0 1 0
0 0 0

0 0 1
1 0 0

0 0 0
0 1 0

000101⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥ .

1000

(2)

The majority of the decoding failures for LDPC codes in the high SNR region are primarily due to trapping sets [2]. A (v, w) trapping set can be triggered when its v variable nodes are simultaneously in error and the w check nodes connecting to these variable nodes are not satisfied. If a trapping set is identified in a QC-LDPC code, and z is prime, additional z −1 isomorphic trapping sets [7] exist that can be constructed using the variable nodes of the same block columns together with the check nodes of the same block rows in the parity-check matrix.

III. PROPOSED ERROR-FLOOR LOWERING TECHNIQUE
A. Redecoding Process
If the standard decoding process fails, the initial channel LLR values are reloaded. After the values corresponding to the selected variable nodes are scaled by a factor of μ, a single re-decoding attempt is executed. An attenuation is preferred for the scaling, i.e., μ < 1, for the reason outlined below. For the check-node operation in the sum-product algorithm (SPA) and min-sum algorithm (MSA), the output check-to-variable message is dominated by the minimum magnitude of the input variable-to-check message. Therefore, a different decoding result will be more likely to be obtained in the redecoding attempt if an attenuation is used rather than an augmentation operation is used, and, hence, it is likely that the result of the redecoding attempt is correct. In line with this observation, a fixed collection of variable nodes that are to be attenuated in the redecoding attempt is determined offline based on the error patterns collected from the standard decoding simulation.
For QC-LDPC codes, most of the error patterns are resultant from a certain kind of isomorphic trapping set in the high SNR region. It can be expected that any errors due to the same kind of isomorphic trapping set can be solved by attenuating the LLR values for the variable nodes corresponding to the same block columns, then a block-wise attenuation can efficiently be applied to the majority of the possible patterns. In order to correct as many errors as possible in a single trial redecoding attempt, a total of NA block columns are selected and are simultaneously attenuated. The block-wise attenuation method simplifies the proposed error-floor lowering scheme, since only the indices for the selected block columns are stored rather than the indices for the individual variable nodes.

TABLE I RESULTS OBTAINED IN THE FIRST STAGE

B. Two-Stage Offline Search

The selection criterion is based on the error patterns col-

lected from the standard decoding simulation in the high SNR

region. A total of NA block columns that are able to correct

the highest number of error patterns are selected. In addition,

the value of NA should be restricted to the smallest possible in order to minimize the effect of the convergence speed

in the redecoding attempt. The minimum NA value can be determined by gradually increasing its value during the search

process until NA + 1 attenuation block columns can no longer correct further error patterns than the NA-sized combination. An exhaustive search is not practical here, especially for a

large Np value or when a large number of error patterns are collected. For example, there are Np = 99 block columns in the (35442, 33294) code considered in this work. If an

exhaustive search is applied, assuming that NA = 4 is suitable,

and the attenuation factor μ is represented using Q = 4 bits,

then a total of 2Q ×

NA +1 i=1

Np i

≈ 2.35 · 1010 combinations

must be evaluated. Therefore, a two-stage strategy is proposed

so as to simplify the search process. The first stage is used to

test whether each error pattern can be corrected via single

block-column attenuation. For each error pattern, all block

columns are sequentially attenuated, and the result of the rede-

coding attempt obtained from these single-block attenuations

are listed in a table. Based on this table, the second stage of

the search process is used to determine the combinations of

multiple attenuation blocks that are able to correct the most

error patterns, which are then selected.

An example is shown in Table I, where 10 error pat-

terns are collected for a QC-LDPC code that has 8 block

columns. The first error pattern can be corrected if any one

of the 1st, 3rd, 4th, 7th or 8th block columns is attenuated.

Based on this table, the number of attenuation blocks grad-

ually increases in the second stage of the search process,

and the combinations that correct the most error patterns

are selected. For the example shown in Table I, the 4th

block column will be the first selected, since attenuating

this block column is able to correct the highest number of

error patterns (5 out of 10 error patterns). When two block columns are selected, i.e., NA = 2, either the 6th or the 8th column is a suitable candidate, since both combinations of either the {4th and 6th} or the {4th and 8th}

columns can be used to correct more error patterns than

other combinations (7 out of 10 error patterns). Suppose that NA = 3, and a combination of either the {4th, 6th, and 1st},

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:29:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1990

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2018

{4th, 6th, and 2nd} or {4th, 6th, and 7th} block columns is
able to increase the number of correctable patterns by one if the previous selection is the set of the {4th and 6th} block columns. In contrast, if the set {4th and 8th} is previously selected, then the combination of the {4th, 8th, and 2nd} block columns or the {4th, 8th, and 3rd} block columns will be
evaluated next. After each NA-sized combination of attenuation block
columns is indicated, it will be re-evaluated based on all
collected error patterns since Table I only shows the results for
the attenuation of a single block column. The search process is
terminated if no further error patterns are correctable through
the additional attenuation of any block columns. Although the
two-stage search process is not able to provide the optimum
selection, it is more practical when compared to an exhaus-
tive search. When the two stage process is applied to the (35442, 33294) code, where Q = 4 bits are used to quantize the attenuation factor μ, then only 24 × 99 = 1584 evaluations are required for each error pattern in order to determine the
results of the single block attenuation in the first stage. Here the magnitude of μ can be found through a brute-force search since there are only 16 possible values. After the results are
recorded in the table, there will only be a few candidate combinations where NA = 2, NA = 3, NA = 4, and NA = 5 attenuation block columns are waiting to be evaluated in the second stage. It is worth noting that, for each value of NA, only the combinations that potentially correct the highest number of error patterns listed in the table need to
be evaluated.

TABLE II ASIC IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
TABLE III FPGA IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS, WHERE NA = 4

Algorithm 1 Two-stage offline search algorithm 1: Execute standard decoding simulation offline. 2: Collect a total of Es error patterns. 3: Set the attenuation factor μ = 2−Q. 4: for e = 1 · · · Es 5: for j = 1 · · · Np 6: LLR((j − 1)z : jz − 1) = μ ∗ LLR((j − 1)z : jz − 1) 7: Execute redecoding procedure offline. 8: end for 9:end for 10: Record the resultant table (e.g., Table I). 11: Select and evaluate the combination of NA attenuations. 12: if The correctable rate is satisfied: position = 15 13: else μ = μ + 2−Q, position = 4 14: if μ > 1 − 2−Q: position = 15 15: Terminate.
C. Performance Evaluation and Comparison
Two QC-LDPC codes, (35442, 33294) and (18396, 16644) together with their corresponding layered decoders are implemented in this work. Table II shows the implementation results, where the degree distributions for the variable nodes and check nodes respectively denoted as ρ(X) and λ(X), are also included. The architecture for the layered decoders is based on that presented in [9], where the channel LLR values are not retained during the standard decoding phase.

Fig. 1. FER performance for both the standard decoding and the proposed redecoding method based on the AWGN channel.
Then the memory buffer for the channel LLR values can then be eliminated, and the redecoding process is performed using the a posteriori LLR values that have been updated during the standard decoding process. For both QC-LDPC codes, the redecoding capability is measured in terms of both its correction rate and its associated complexity, and are listed in Table II, which shows that the redecoding process using the a posteriori LLR values can achieve a similar error performance as that when using the channel LLR values, but with a lower storage complexity. Therefore, the redecoding method based on the a posteriori LLR values is considered in the following discussion. A hardware simulator is realized using a Xilinx FPGA XC7VX690T, and the results are presented in Table III. The improvements in frame error rate (FER) performance for both the AWGN and the BSC channels are shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 respectively, where the number of iterations used is set to 50, and μ = 0.4375. It can be observed that the error floor can be lowered by about two orders of magnitude.
In Table IV, we compare the proposed error-floor lowering technique with those presented in the previous literature. Compared to the redecoding based techniques [4]–[7], [10], the proposed method has the simplest online processing complexity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:29:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: EFFECTIVE LOW-COMPLEXITY ERROR-FLOOR LOWERING TECHNIQUE FOR HIGH-RATE QC-LDPC CODES

1991

Since the rate-1/2, length-2640 Margulis code is popular for error-floor evaluation, this code is also considered. The decoding used is the standard SPA. For both codes, the proposed method can provide a comparable error-floor performance compared to those of the backtracking method [6]. The proposed method requires only a single on-line re-decoding attempt. For the backtracking method, the total number of redecoding attempts and iterations depend on the check node degree and the number of unsatisfied check nodes. As such, it can be expected that this method requires a much greater complexity than the proposed method.

Fig. 2. FER performance for both the standard decoding and the proposed redecoding method based on the BSC channel.
TABLE IV COMPARISON BETWEEN ERROR-FLOOR LOWERING TECHNIQUES

IV. CONCLUSION
In this letter, a low-complexity error-floor lowering technique is proposed for QC-LDPC codes. The only additional hardware required is the storage for the indices of the attenuation block columns and a number of associated control circuits. The selection of the attenuation block columns is determined using the offline systematic two-stage process. As long as a substantial number of error patterns can be collected from the target decoder, the proposed technique can be flexibly combined with the target decoder such that the error-rate performance can be improved via a single trial redecoding attempt. For the cases considered in this work, the error floor performance can be improved by one to two orders of magnitude.

Fig. 3. Comparison in error floor between the proposed and backtracking methods in the AWGN channel. For the WiMax code, NA = 3 and µ = 0.125, and for the Margulis code, NA = 5 and µ = 0.1875.
because it is the only one that does not need the identification of unsatisfied check nodes. The schemes presented in [11]–[13] may have an even lower complexity since a redecoding attempt is not needed. However, the assistance of trapping set information is required, and the trapping sets depend on the code structure, the decoding algorithm, and the implementation effects. If any change is made in the implementations, the trapping sets information must be re-determined again. The proposed technique needs neither syndrome checks nor trapping set information. As long as the error patterns can be collected, it can be combined with other LDPC decoders, e.g., all the other decoders listed in Table IV, and the error floor can be further lowered.
Fig. 3 shows the FER when applying the proposed method to the standard rate-5/6, length-2304 WiMax LDPC code.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1963.
[2] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, Oct. 2003.
[4] E. Cavus and B. Daneshrad, “A performance improvement and error floor avoidance technique for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Pers., Indoor Mobile Radio Commun., Sep. 2005, pp. 2386–2390.
[5] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “Lowering LDPC error floors by postprocessing,” in Proc. IEEE Global Commun. Conf., New Orleans, LO, USA, Nov. 2008, pp. 1–6.
[6] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Hardware implementation of a backtracking-based reconfigurable decoder for lowering the error floor of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 2931–2943, Dec. 2011.
[7] Y. Han and W. E. Ryan, “Low-floor decoders for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1663–1673, Jun. 2009.
[8] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” JPL, La Cañada Flintridge, CA, USA, Tech. Rep. 42-154, 2003.
[9] H.-C. Lee, M.-R. Li, J.-K. Hu, P.-C. Chou, and Y.-L. Ueng, “Optimization techniques for the efficient implementation of high-rate layered QC-LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 64, no. 2, pp. 457–470, Feb. 2017.
[10] X. Zhang and S. Chen, “A two-stage decoding algorithm to lower the error-floors for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 517–520, Apr. 2015.
[11] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Quantized min-sum decoders with low error floor for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2012, pp. 2871–2875.
[12] S. Planjery, D. Declercq, L. Danjean, and B. Vasic, “Finite alphabet iterative decoders—Part I: Decoding beyond belief propagation on the binary symmetric channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4033–4045, Oct. 2013.
[13] S. Planjery, D. Declercq, M. Diouf, and B. Vasic, “On the guaranteed error-correction of decimation-enhanced iterative decoders,” in Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Bremen, Germany, Aug. 2014, pp. V57–V61.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:29:02 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

