 Low-Complexity LDPC Decoder        
for 5G URLLC 
 
Jian-Cheng Liu, Huan-Chun Wang, Chung-An Shen, and Jih-Wei Lee 
Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering 
National Taiwan University of Science and Technology, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC 106 
{ M10602217, hcwang, cashen, D10202202 }@mail.ntust.edu.tw 
 
Abstract—This paper proposes a low-complexity low-density 
parity-check (LDPC) decoder architecture for 5G ultra-reliable 
low latency communication (URLLC). In order to reduce the 
hardware utilization and the influence of data dependency 
problem. Proposed low-complexity decoder reduces the number of 
multi-size shift modules of the conventional single-layer decoder 
from two to one by improve the method in [15]. Due to the 
reduction of multi-size shift modules, we also construct new 
matrices that generate the shift value in proposed low-complexity 
decoder. Using the FPGA platform of Xilinx Virtex 7, 
experimental results show our proposed low-complexity decoder 
improves the resources utilization and throughput of conventional 
architectures. The improvement in percentage is about 20.1% for 
LUTs and 6.8% for throughput. The experimental result show 
that our method is more efficient than [15]. 
Keywords—low-density parity-check (LDPC), 5G, ultra-reliable 
low latency communication (URLLC), field-programmable gate 
array (FPGA), decoder architecture, low-complexity, shift modules.  
I. 
INTRODUCTION  
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) proposed by R.G. Gallager 
in 1963[1] is a kind of linear block code with sparse parity-check 
matrices. However, integrated circuit implementation of 
proposed decoding algorithm is too complex. Not until 1997 did 
D MacKay, M Neal restudy the algorithm, they found that its 
performance could approaching to the Shannon limit [2]. Due to 
low-complexity encoding, quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) 
codes is the most promising class of structured LDPC codes [3]. 
Therefore, it is widely used in many standards and applications, 
such as IEEE 802.11n (WLAN), IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) [4], 
fiber optical communications, storage systems, deep-space 
communication systems, quantum key distribution [5] and 
ATSC3.0 [9].  
The 5th-Generation Wireless Systems (5G) is an extension of 
the 4G system. It provides the ultra-reliable low latency 
communication (URLLC) to satisfy many applications, 
including 
wireless 
control 
of 
industrial 
automation 
manufacturing production processes, telemedicine surgery, 
intelligent grid, and intelligent vehicle system. URLLC require 
reliability of   99.999% and latency less than one millisecond 
[16]. In 3GPP standard meeting [6], QC-LDPC has been 
considered as a promising candidate for 5G error coding. To 
support different applications and tough environment conditions 
in 5G, two base graphs are studied for constructing various 
sparse parity-check (PC) matrices with various coding rates and 
information block sizes. Base graph 1 (BG1) incudes 8/9~2/3 
coding rate and small to larger block sizes, and base graph 2 
(BG2) covers 2/3~1/5 coding rate and very small to medium 
block sizes. In this paper, we focus on the PC matrix based on 
BG2 with 42 layers and 52 columns, as shown in Fig. 1.  
The LDPC decoding based on BP algorithm is known as sum-
product algorithm (SPA). Although BER of sum-product 
algorithm is approaching to the Shannon limit [2]. However, it 
cost too many hardware resources for implementation. Min-sum 
algorithm (MSA) is another simple kind of sum-product 
algorithm. It sacrifices BER performance to obtain smaller area 
and lower memory resources for implementation.  
Most of the QC-LDPC decoding can be divided into circuit 
blocks, which includes variable node unit (VNU), check node 
unit (CNU), shift modules, memory, and control unit [4] [5] [7] 
[8] [11][12][13] [14]. The sub-matrix size Z affects the size of 
the CNUs and VNUs and the shift module. To transfer and 
reverse transfer, shift modules responsible for routing the 
message between variable nodes and check nodes always exists 
in pairs. Use multi-size shift modules in pair cost many lookup 
table (LUT) resources. In this paper, we improve the method in 
[15], which propose a method for reducing one shift module 
rather than the two shift modules which are used in conventional 
design.   After reducing one shift module, our proposed 
architecture not only reduces the hardware resources of the 
conventional architecture, which uses shift modules in pair, but 
also decreases the decoding cycles for each iteration without the 
frame error rate (FER) degradation.  
 
Fig. 1. PC matrix based on BG 2 with 42 layers and 52 columns. 
43
2018 IEEE Asia Pacific Conference on Postgraduate Research in Microelectronics and Electronics
978-1-5386-9591-3/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
II. 
LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM 
The LDPC code is graphically represented as a Tanner graph 
which contains two set of nodes: Check nodes (CNs) and 
variable nodes (VNs). In each iteration, SPA uses the a priori 
information of other nodes to compute extrinsic information of 
each node as follows. Initially, for QPSK modulation in AWGN 
channels, LLR of the n-th node can be computed by 
 𝐿𝑛=
2
𝜎2 𝑦𝑛                                     (1) 
where 𝑦𝑛 is the received signal of the n-th node and 𝜎2  is 
average noise power. After (1) is computed for all nodes, the soft 
information of CNs is computed by:  
CNU(𝑦1, 𝑦2, … , 𝑦𝑛) ≈α ∙∏
𝑠𝑖𝑔𝑛(𝑦𝑗) ∙min(|𝑦1|, … , |𝑦𝑛|)
𝑛
𝑗=1
(2) 
where α is selected 0.625 for BER performance and hardware 
complexity. After (2) is computed for all CNs, (2) become the 
new soft information of VNs and then the soft information of 
VNs is computed by  
VNU(𝑦1, 𝑦2, … , 𝑦𝑛) = 𝑦1 + 𝑦2 + 𝑦3 + ⋯+ 𝑦𝑛       (3) 
After (3) is computed for all VNs, VNU in (3) become the new 
soft information of CNs in next iteration, i.e.,  𝑦𝑛 in (2) is 
replaced by 𝑦𝑛=VNU in next iteration. Above procedures repeat 
for some iterations. After some iterations, we use the soft 
information (3) to find information bits by hard decision. If 
decoding algorithm computes the soft information of CNs in (2)-
(3) by one layer in Fig. 1 at a time in each iteration, this decoding 
algorithm is the single-layer decoding algorithm. Following [4], 
we next describe the conventional single-layer architecture  
 
III. 
DECODER ARCHITECTURE 
A. Conventional decoder architecture  
Fig.3 
shows 
the 
conventional 
single-layer 
decoder 
architecture. We briefly describe circuit blocks of Fig. 2 as 
follows. 
Memory Block: Three memory block are for this architecture. 
One is LLR-BRAM for storing LLR messages using dual-port 
RAMs another for CN-BRAM which can write and read check 
node messages for normalized min-sum unit(NMSU) using 
dual-port RAMs the other for PC matrix BRAM which store 
and provide the information of the parity-check matrix for shift 
module using a single-port ROM. 
Control Unit: This block generates the address signal to LLR 
BRAM and Matrix BRAM, and it update the new LLR 
messages to the LLR BRAM. 
Shift module (Cyclic Shift): React to the multi-application 
demand in 5G communication. The shift module must be 
flexible enough for processing various block sizes. Fig. 3 shows 
the shift module for processing various block sizes. In Fig. 3, 
the left shift moves data a (Z-shift) value to the left and the right 
shift moves data a (shift) value to the right. Then, merger circuit 
combines two shifted data by exclusive-OR(XOR) gates to 
obtain the output shifted LLR.  
Normalized Min-Sum Units(NMSUs): This block contains Z 
NMSUs in order to process Z check node messages in parallel 
in one sub-matrix. Each NMSU,which include CNU and VNU, 
operate the normalized min-sum algorithm and compute the 
LLR variation and output it to the next stage. After describing 
the conventional single-layer deocder, next, we show the new 
proposed decoder architecture.  
B. Proposed  decoder architecture  
Fig.4 shows our proposed new architecture. Compared with 
Fig. 2, Fig. 4 removes shift module 2 and hence reduces the size 
of the FIFO in Fig. 2. In Fig. 4, removed shift module and FIFO 
with reduced size are denoted with red dashed lines. Removing 
the shift module 2 can reduce the size of FIFO. Therefore, Fig. 
4 improves the hardware utilization and throughput of Fig. 2. 
Next, we describe how Fig. 4 improves Fig. 2. First, LLR 
messages in Fig. 4 replace shifted LLR messages and become 
Fig. 2. Conventional decoder architecture [4]  
Fig. 3. Shift module for processing various block sizes. 
44
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
the input of FIFO. Therefore, in Fig. 4, adding shifted LLR 
messages and shifted delta messages can replace adding LRR 
messages and delta messages Fig. 2. In Fig. 2, shift module 2 
performs the inverse operation of shift  module 1. Without shift 
module 2, Fig. 4 needs new shift matrices to generate the new 
shift value, which can compensate the difference between 
storage locations of LLRs in Fig. 2 and storage locations of 
LLRs in Fig 4.  Next, we construct new shift matrices.  
C. New shift matrices  for proposed architecture  
Three shift matrices in Fig. 4 for generating the shift value for 
each iteration and the final hard decision. One is for the first 
iteration, another is for all remaining iterations, and the other is 
for final decision. This method is different from update stage in 
[15]. Compare with [15] we only need to store additional one 
matrix, which content is number with blue color in Fig.7. By this 
method, we have more output flexible in processing stage. Next, 
we construct these three shift matrices in Fig. 4 by PC matrix.  
1. Shift matrix for the first iteration  
Shift matrix for the first iteration is the matrix where each 
non-zero element is the shift value used in the first iteration. 
The size of this shift matrix equals that of the PC matrix. Let 
,n m
s
be the shift value of the n -th non-zero element in the m -
th column of the PC matrix. In the example of the 4 6
 PC 
matrix in Fig. 5,  
1,1
s  is 2 and 
2,1
s
 is 4. Using the notation of 
,n m
s
, the n -th shift value on the m -th column of this matrix 
equals  
,
1,
,
,
(
) mod ,
2
mod
,
1
n m
n
m
n m
n m
s
s
Z
n
f
s
Z
n








  
      
(5) 
Using (5) and the 4 6
 PC matrix in Fig. 5, Fig. 6 gives an 
example of constructing a 4 6
 shift matrix in the first iteration. 
After constructing the shift matrix for the first iteration, we next 
construct the shift matrix for all remaining iterations.  
2. Sift matrix for all remaining iterations 
Shift matrix for all remain iterations is the matrix where each 
non-zero element is the shift value used for all remaining 
iterations. The size of this shift matrix equals that of the PC 
matrix. Let 
,n m
r
be the the n -th shift value in the m -th column 
of this matrix. Then, 
,n m
r
 equals  
,
1,
,
,
(
) mod ,
2
(
)mod
,
1
n m
n
m
n m
n m
m
s
s
Z
n
r
s
g
Z
n









       
(6) 
where 
m
g  is the last shift value in the m -th column of  PC 
matrix. For the example of the 4 6
 PC matrix in Fig. 5, 
5
g  is  
2 and 
6
g  is  4. Using (6) and the 4 6
 PC matrix in Fig. 5, Fig. 
7 gives an example of constructing a 4 6
 shift matrix for all 
remaining iterations. After constructing the shift matrix for all 
Fig. 4.  Proposed decoder architecture   
Fig. 5. 
 PC matrix with Z=8. 
(4-2) mod8=2 
Fig. 6. 
 shift matrix with Z=8 for the first iteration  
Fig. 7. 
 shift matrix with Z=8 for remaining iterations  
(3-4) mod8=7 
Fig. 8. 
 shift matrix with Z=8 for hard decision  
(-4) mod8=4 
45
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
remaining iterations, we next construct the shift matrix for the 
final hard decision.  
 
3. Shift matrix for the final hard decision  
After (2) and (3) are computed for some iterations, the shift 
matrix for the hard decision is used to generate the shift value 
for hard decision. The size of this shift matrix equals 1 k

, 
where k  is the number of column of the PC matrix. Let ℎ𝑚be 
the shift value of the m -th column of this matrix. Then, ℎ𝑚 
equals  
(
)mod
m
m
h
g
Z

 
      
 
(7) 
Using (7) and the 4 6
 PC matrix in Fig. 5, Fig. 8 gives an 
example of constructing a 1 6
 shift matrix for the final hard 
decision.  
IV. 
 EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND COMPARISION  
We implement the proposed architecture by the FPGA 
platform of Xilinx Virtex 7 VC707 (XC7VX485TFFG1761-2). 
Compared with the PC matrix in Fig. 2, constructed new shift 
matrices in Fig. 4 need more memories. The increase of 
memory resources is 
          
 
 (2r)𝑁𝑐𝑙𝑜𝑔𝑍 
                       (8) 
where r is the code rate, Z is the block size, and 𝑁𝑐 is the number 
of column of the PC matrix. Table I compares the LUTs and 
decoding cycles of the conventional architecture in Fig. 2 and 
our proposed architecture in Fig.4. It shows that the reduction of 
look up tables and decoding cycles. The throughput is negative 
correlation with decoding cycles. It can be expressed as  
throughput ≈ 
𝑁 × 𝑓𝑐𝑙𝑘×𝑟
𝐷𝑒𝑐𝑜𝑑𝑖𝑛𝑔 𝑐𝑦𝑐𝑙𝑒𝑠                    (9) 
where N is the number of codeword bits, r is the code rate, 𝑓𝑐𝑙𝑘 
is the operation clock frequency.  
TABLE I 
Resource comparison of the proposed architecture and the architecture in [4]  
Resource 
Architecture in 
[4] 
Proposed 
architecture  
Improvement 
in percentage 
LUTs 
38296 
30605 
≈20.1% 
Block RAMs 
22 
22 
- 
Decoding 
cycles  
5766 
5440 
≈ 6.8% 
 
V. 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we improve the method in [15] to reduce the 
multi-size shift module and get more efficient in hardware 
resource. After that, we obtain lower decoding cycle than before. 
Because it reduces one processing stage in every block size. It 
can also reduce the influence of data dependency problem. 
Using the FPGA platform of Xilinx Virtex 7, experimental 
results show our proposed architecture outperforms the 
conventional ones. The improvement in percentage is about 
20.1% for LUTs and 6.8% for throughput. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] R. G. Gallager,“ Low density parity check codes” Cambridge , MA:MIT 
Press, 1963. 
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low 
density parity check codes” Electronics Letters, vol.33 (6), pp. 457-458, 
1997.  
[3] Li Zhang ; Qin Huang ; Shu Lin ; Khaled Abdel-Ghaffar ; lan F . Blake 
“Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes: An Algebraic Construction, Rank Analysis, 
and Codes on Latin Squares” IEEE Transactions on Communications, 
Year :2010. 
[4] Yang Sun, Guohui Wang, and Joseph R. Cavallaro “Multi-Layer Parallel 
Decoding Algorithm and VLSI Architecture for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Code” 
2011 IEEE International Symposium of Circuits and Systems (ISCAS) 
Year:2011,Pages :1776-1779 . 
[5] Cong Hui, Yonggang Wang and Xiaoming Lu “Implementation of a High 
Throughput LDPC Codec in FPGA for QKD System” 2016 13th  IEEE 
International Conference on Solid-State and Integrated Circuit Technology , 
Year : 2016,Pages:1494-1496. 
[6] R1-167659, “Double QC-LDPC codes with degree-3 for NR”, National 
Taiwan University, 3GPP TSG RAN WG1 #86, Gothenburg, Seeden, 22nd 
-26th August 2016. 
[7] Xinmiao Zhang; Alexander Bazarsky “Perfect Column-Layered Two-Bit 
Message-Passing LDPC Decoder and Architectures” 2018 IEEE 
International 
Symposium 
on 
Circuits 
and 
Systems 
(ISCAS) 
Year :2018,Pages: 1-5. 
[8] Alexandru 
Amaricai 
; 
Oana 
Boncalo, 
“Cost 
Effective 
FPGA 
Implementation 
fot 
Hard 
Decision 
LDPC 
Decoders” 
24th 
Telecommunications forum TELFOR 2016. 
[9] Seho Myung ; Sung-Ik Park ; Kyung-Joong Kim ; Jae-Young Lee ; 
Sunhyoung Kwon ; Jeongchang Kim “Offset and Normalized Min-Sum 
Algorithms for ATSC 3.0 LDPC Decoder” IEEE Transactions on 
Broadcasting, Vol.63, No.4, 2017. 
[10] Joachim Sachs ; Gustav Wikstrom ; Torsten Dudda ; Robert Baldemair; 
Kittipong Kittichokechai “5G Radio Design for Ultra-Reliable Low-
Latency Communication” IEEE Network ,Year : 2018, Pages: 24-31. 
[11] Thien T. Nguyen-Ly ; Tushar Gupta ; Manuel Pezzin ; Valention Savin ; 
David Declercq and Sorin Cotofana “Flexible, Cost-Efficient, High-
Throughput Architecture for Layered LDPC Decoders with Fully-Parallel 
Processing Units” Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design 2016. 
[12] Dharmesh J. patel ; Pinalkumar Engineer “Design and implementation of 
quasi cyclic low density parity check (QC-LDPC) code on FPGA” 
International Conference on Wireless Communications, Signal Processing 
and Networking (WiSPNET), 2017. 
[13] Oana Boncalo;University Politehnica Timisoara; Timisoara , Romania 
“QC-LDPC Gear-Like Decoder Architecture with Multi-Domain 
Quantization” Euromicro Conference on Digital System Design.2016.  
[14] Truong Nguyen-Ly ; Khoa Le ; F.Ghaffari ; A. Amaricai ; O. Boncalo ; 
V.Savin and D. Declercq “FPGA Design of High Throughput LDPC 
Decoder based on Imprecise Offset Min-sum Decoding”.2015 IEEE 13th 
international New Circuits and Systems Conference (NEWCAS). 
[15] Sangmin Kim ; Gerald E. Sobelman ; Hanho Lee “A Reduced-Complexity 
Architecture for LDPC Layered Decoding Schemes” IEEE Transactions on 
Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems. 
[16] Chih-Ping Li ; Jing Jiang ; Wanshi Chen ; Tingfang Ji ; Jogn Smee “5G 
ultra-reliable and low-latency systems design” 2017 European Conference 
on Networks and Communications (EuCNC).   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
46
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
