2018 International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications
2018 International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications (ATC)
Optimized Layer Architecture for Layered LDPC Code Decoder
Longyu Ma, Chiu Wing Sham
Optimized Layer AThrecUhniitveecrstiutyroef AfuocrklaLnda, yNeewreZdealLanDd PC Code Decoder
Email: lma792@aucklanduni.ac.nz, b.sham@auckland.ac.nz

Abstract — Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes have
been widely used as error correction codes for many application
on communication discipline. It has been proved that they
can approach Shannon’s capacity limit and implementable. On
the other hand, the architecture of LDPC decoders should be
designed carefully in order to obtain a convincing trade-off
between logic complexity and error correction performance.
In this paper, we proposed an optimized Block Processing
Unit (BPU) to perform all the operations of check nodes and
variable nodes of a QC-LDPC/LDPC decoder. The optimized
BPU can reduce the logic complexity significantly compared to
the original one. While the same quantization bit-width and
calculation are employed, it can maintain a similar throughput
and error correction performance. The experimental results
show that it can provide a better trade-off between the logic
complexity and the error correction performance than the
original one.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes [1] is a class of linear block codes with a sparse parity-check matrix. It is proven that it can give an excellent error correction performance such as low error floors and high coding gains. Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes are one subclass of the derived LDPC codes with consisting of circulant permutation sub-matrices only. Because of the regular structure of QC-LDPC code, both the encoders [2], [3] and the decoders [4], [5], [6] can be implemented in low complexity while keeping the error correction performance. Assisted by the blossoming development of Integrated Circuit (IC), QC-LDPC codes are adopted widely in different fields, like optical transmission [7], WLAN and forthcoming 3GPP 5G. High throughput and low complexity are two major concerns on the implementation of LDPC encoders and decoders in order to apply LDPC codes in current modern communications. It is known that a layered LDPC decoding algorithm has a much high convergence speed and has been studied extensively. Hence, a relatively lower complexity of a LDPC decoder, representing a lower fabrication cost, a higher yield rate and lower power consumption, meanwhile keeping a reasonably high throughput and low error floor, are always desirable. Min-Sum (MS) and Normalized/Offset MS algorithms [6], [8], [9] are broadly used as an series of algorithms in many LDPC decoders. However, both algorithms lose more calculation accuracy compared with the quantized Sum Product Algorithm (SPA) when check node degrees and code rate increase. Layered approximately regular (LAR) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were first introduced in 2008 [10]. The proposed layered modified MS decoding algorithm was used to trade off among complexity, speed, and performance. Later, a memory-bypassing scheme was proposed for the layered decoding architecture to

reduce the energy consumption of the LDPC decoder [11]. However, the loss of error correction performance due to MS algorithm has not been resolved. In order to satisfy the strict error correction performance for some applications, the MS algorithm is sometimes not preferable. A SPA-based layered architecture was proposed then [12], [13]. Based on their experimental results, SPA-based architecture can achieve a better BER performance with reasonable logic complexity compared to MS-based architecture. In a SPAbased decoder with dedicated processing units, Check Node Processors (CNPs) and Variable Node Processors (VNPs) usually occupy more logic resources than other modules in the whole circuit in order to obtain a much better error correction performance and lower error floors. Although the former proposed dedicated layered architectures can reduce the decoder complexity without a large switching network, the complexity of the CNPs and VNPs are still huge.
In this paper, we propose a modified Block Processing Unit (BPU) that takes less logic resources and keeps the same performance as the original SPA-based decoder. The proposed BPU can be applied in typical QC-LDPC decoder or QC-LDPC Convolutional Code decoder. First, our BPUs architecture applies a new architecture to eliminate the VNPs. Compared to previous SPA-based decoder, it results in less input signals and logic registers. It can keep the timing sequence of BPUs in a designed order. Such downsizing BPU would not affect on the throughput and accuracy. Second, a Look-up-table (LUT) based CNP is proposed in order to eliminate the “2’s-Complement to Signed-and-Magnitude” (C2S) and “Signed-and-Magnitude to 2’s-Complement” (S2C) modules. This can be done by integrating a LUT, optimized by Karnaugh-map approach, into CNPs. Consequently, all BPU operations can be run in a standardized data type, 2’s-Complement. The experimental results show that an accuracy-lossless proposal successfully reduces the logic complexity significantly .
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, it reviews the original BPUs architecture derived from previous contribution of other researchers [12] and presents the proposed one by two steps, namely First Version (V1)and Second Version (V2) architecture of BPU. In Section III, it shows the usage of hardware resource after synthesis and implementation among three different length and groups of QC-LDPC decoders BPUs and a BER result of proposed BPUs instantiated in these QC-LDPC decoders, followed by concluding remarks in Section IV.

978-1-5386-6542-8/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE

287

978-1A-u5th3o8ri6ze-d65lic4e2n-s8ed/1u8s/e$l3im1it.e0d0to©: Y2o0n1se8i UIEnEivE. Downloaded on 2Ju8ne724,2026 at 12:35:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 In2t0e1r8naInttioenrnaal tCioonnafleCreonncfeereonncAedovnaAncdevdanTceecdhTneoclhongoielosgfoiersCfoormCmomunmicuantiiocantsio(nAsTC)

II. PROPOSED BPU’S ARCHITECTURE To facilitate the discussion, a short review of how an original Block Processing Unit (original BPU) look like and run in a LDPC decoder is provided according to [13] [12]. Based on this original one, a V1 and V2 BPU will be presented afterwards. A. The Original BPU Architecture
Fig. 1. Block diagram of the core processor of a QC-LDPC decoder

One of reasons why choosing [12] as a baseline is that its CNP’s core algorithm is realized by Quantized Sum Product Algorithm (QSPA) based on LUTs and is better to be implemented on a Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) or an Integrated Circuit than the CNPs which are approximate SPA (ASPA). To be specific, ASPA based on mappers and adders can achieve better performance than QSPA, but the benefits brought by adopting ASPA is not worthy enough to compensate for the complexity of the architecture. With regard to Min-Sum, it over-simplifies the computation in a CNP and is notably seen as much worse than the other decoders with SPA in the BER performance test. In some cases, increasing iteration times of Min-Sum Algorithm may, to some extent, overcomes the weakness of BER performance, while a longer latency is introduced and such side-effect is also vital. In general, QSPA is currently a well-balanced approach for implementing a CNP. For the other reason, the original architecture applying QSPA is not optimized perfectly, in other words, the following research trying to downsize the Original BPU, if resulting in lossless performance, could make QSPA-based LDPC decoders more competitive.
B. Proposed Architecture

Fig. 3. The V1 architecture of a BPU

Fig. 2. The Original architecture of a BPU
BPU is an important module in a LDPC decoder. Fig. 1 shows a Layered QC-LDPC decoder’s core component with BPU arrays which are in charge of Belief Propagation[14] in separate layers. For each layer, every BPU’s architecture is shown in Fig. 2. The initial data is processed in the following steps. Firstly, the Variable-node-To-Check-node (V2C) messages in the Sign-Magnitude (SM) format are captured by CNPs which use these captured data to calculate the new the Check-node-To-Variable-node (C2V) messages. Secondly, new C2V messages will be converted into ones in the type of 2-complement before being delivered to the next sub-module, VNP. These C2V messages enter together with the channel messages and other layers C2V messages into VNPs and all of them are used to compute the new V2C messages. Finally, the updated V2C and C2V messages calculated previously are shifted out to memories for the next step that depends on the whole decoder’s architecture. The whole algorithm is well explained in the literature[15].

The proposed first version (V1) architecture is shown in Fig. 3. It gives up latching V2C Messages. Instead, it utilizes a posterior probability log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of each variable node to indirectly obtain V2C messages by subtracting C2V messages from itself. Together with the original CNP, new modules constitute a less complex BPU, while keeping the same input width of every quantized data and the same accuracy of computation in every step in a BPU. More specifically, In denotes the Channel Message of Variable Node n, αmn denotes C2V messages (from Check Node M to Variable Node N), βmn denotes V2C messages (from Variable Node N to Check Node M). New βmn messages are formed by subtracting the old C2V messages from the old LLR message L(Qm(kn) j), which denotes the a posterior LLR message of variable node n after the jth layer’s operation in the kth iteration.
Step 1) Initialization: when j = 1 and k = 1, L(Qn(0)) = In Step 2) Calculating V2C Messages:

βmk n j = L(Q(nkj−1)) − αm(kn−j1)

(1)

Step 3) This step is the same as the original version that is feeding CNPs with updated V2C messages to calculate

228888
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:35:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications (ATC)
2018 International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications

new C2V messages, αmn, using the Quantized Sum Product Algorithm.

sign(αmn) = ∏ sign(βmn )

(2)

n ∈N(m)\n

∑ |αmn| = φ −1[

φ (|βmn |) − φ (|βmn|)]

(3)

n ∈N(m)

where

φ (x)

=

φ

(x)

=

−log(tanh

x 2

)

In the Formula above, N(m) denotes a set of variable nodes n connected to check node m. N(m) denotes a set of variable nodes connected to check node m; N(m) \ n as defined by the set N(m) excluding variable node n.
Step 4) Once new C2V messages are obtained, the new LLR messages L(Qn(kj)) are updated as:

L(Qn(kj)) = αmk n j + βmkn j

(4)

As can be seen in Fig. 3, the Subtraction Array is the hardware instantiation of (1). The CNP computes (2) and (3). (4) is achieved by module ”LLR Sum”.
Compared with the original architecture in Fig. 2, less input data are used by the updated BPU (V1) even though the extension of LLR from 4-bit to 5-bit to prevent overflow is considered. Since less input data are transfered into the V1’ BPU , the registers as the fundamental units of a implemented BPU, which are used to latch every computing stage of temporary data, can be optimized and trimmed in a significant number. Assuming that all input data were registered in every stage of a BPU, it could be estimated that the register usage in one V1’s BPU can be cut down to

V 1InputDataWidth = QSM + (QSM + 1) x100%

Original I n put Dat aW idt h

QSM ∗ 5

.

Where QSM represents the size of quantized messages.

Assuming that the quantized width is 4 bits (same as our

following implementation), the saved registers would be

around 55%. It shows that the modified architecture V1

simplifies the complexity of BPUs.

The number of stages in a BPU (V1) is the same as the

original one, because the new architecture does not change

the registers’ location, add or remove a new stage of registers

between different sub-modules. Such decision preserves the

previous throughput and timing sequence achieved by the

original architecture of a BPU.

C. A integrated Look-up Table based Check Node
The second version (V2) of our proposed architecture of a BPU, based on V1, removes the “2’s-Complement to Signedand-Magnitude” (C2S) and “Signed-and-Magnitude to 2’sComplement” (S2C) modules through adding a look-up table to take over a C2S and an S2C.
Building a look-up table (LUT) for a complex mathematical function can simplify the work that should have be done by following an algorithm and calculating the value. Previous

Fig. 4. The V2 architecture of a BPU
work [13] has adopted the look-up table approach to solve the impractical calculation of Sum-Product Algorithm. Their CNPs require Sign-and-Magnitude (SM) as the input data type but 2’s-complement (2C) as output data type. S2Cs and C2Ss are instantiated as the converters of data types. In order to eliminate all S2Cs and C2Ss for a united data presentation, we change the original output values of the LUT to take over what a S2C should do previously. It another word, we change the SM result of a CNP directly to 2C result that can be accepted by the subsequent module as input data. Although a look-up table method has a critical issue that it grows exponentially, if high resolution is necessary for a function input. However, the disadvantage doesn’t exist in our implemented design, which can be easily verified by the quantized SPA equation (2)(3). As we can see,
• These two equations separate messages information into a sign bit and value bits and the two results are which we want to append a LUT to translate the signed bit and value bits into a complete 2-complement values.
• Each new LUT has two 4-bit inputs and one 4-bit output that has 28 = 256 possible results.
Empirically, a LUT storing 256 possibilities are feasible, which can be tested by early estimation[16] or Electronic Design Automation (EDA) tools. Besides that, a general approach, namely Karnaugh-map simplification, is also used to reduce the LUT’s redundancy and optimize the timing sequence. As a result, our second version optimization ensures that the CNP complexity remains lower than the original and V1’s CNP. The layout of a BPU with the look-up-table-based CNP is shown in Fig 4.
III. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
In that the aim of this article is to simplify the complexity of QSPA-based BPU in a LDPC decoder without any performance degradation compared to what the literature [12] present, increasing clock frequency or throughput, BER performance or optimizing memory usage (No blocked RAM or ROM in a BPU) is not included. Hence, a comparison in terms of hardware resource and a comparison with regard to BER performance between the original BPU and the proposed BPUs are demonstrated with the help of other modules in QC-LDPC decoders from [12].

289
289
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:35:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications (ATC)
2018 International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications

TABLE I FPGA RESOURCE CONSUMPTION 1

CLB LUTs CLB Reg
Clock

Code A Original
16472 11520 80MHz

Code A V1
15022 7200 80MHz

Code A V2
14377 6336 80MHz

TABLE II FPGA RESOURCE CONSUMPTION 2

CLB LUTs CLB Reg
Clock

Code B Original
22034 15360 80MHz

Code B V1
19372 9600 80MHz

Code B V2
19169 8448 80MHz

TABLE III FPGA RESOURCE CONSUMPTION 3

CLB LUTs CLB Reg
Clock

Code C Original
13850 9680 80MHz

Code C V1
12464 6000 80MHz

Code C V2
11981 5280 80MHz

A. Complexity Comparison
We implement our design on the FPGA development kit (Xilinx Virtex UltraScale+ FPGA VCU118 Evaluation Kit). The complexity comparison are shown in Table I, II and III. The results are extracted from the synthesis and implementation reports of the Xilinx’s Integrated Development Environment (IDE), Vivado and simplified by omitting some irrelevant factors and keeping the BPU only. We compare our BPUs (V1 and V2) with the original one and all BPUs are tested using three QC-LDPC codes. The original one [13] is denoted by the Original”. V1 gets its improvement including the updated algorithm while V2’s advantage contains the updated algorithm and LUT-based CNP (No S2Cs and C2Ss). By introducing three different code lengths of LDPC codes, we want to eliminate the possibility that the optimization of BPUs may be subject to the length of LDPC codes. Three QC-LDPC codes are as follows: Code A is a (18432, 4, 24) regular QC-LDPC code, Code B is a (24576, 4, 24) regular QC-LDPC code and Code C is a (30720, 4, 24) regular QCLDPC code. The code rate of all those codes are 5/6.
We observe that with the BPU adopting V1 architecture, its register usage decreased significantly by approximately 45% regardless of length of LDPC codes. Less complexity also simplifies control logics that release about 12% of all CLB LUTs, in comparison with the Original. In terms of V2, the improvement is still meaningful as Table I, II and III show that the logic usage of V2 is at most 5% less than that of V1.
V1 and V2’s architecture both meet the timing sequence and have no timing violation when the main clock is set up by 80MHz similar to the original one, which means the optimization not only make BPUs better than before, but also make them possible when BPUs run with similar clock frequency in a real hardware system.
B. Error Correcting Performance
The test of BER performance is conducted on the same evaluation kit under additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [17]. 4-bit quantization is used with 10 decoding iterations. The three different BPUs (Original, V1 and V2)

Fig. 5. Error performance of three different QC-LDPC codes in three different architectures
are embedded into a QC-LDPC decoder for which three QCLDPC codes are designed with a same 4 x 24 base matrix and different sub-matrix sizes. The Figure 5 shows BER curves of the three different architecture coincide regardless of code lengths and implicates that our decoder with proposed BPU can obtain the same error correction performance as [12]. The error floor may only be appeared at Bit Error Rate (BER) 10−11.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have presented a modified LUT-based BPU that derives from an existing architecture but takes less logic resources. In the experiments concerning usage of logic resources and error correction performance, the proposed architecture has been successfully implemented onto an Xilinx FPGA and this novel BPU architecture, especially V2, has a simpler logical complexity, saving around 45% registers and 13% LUTs in comparison with the original one. In addition, the error correction performance achieved by the SPA-based QC-LDPC decoder with the proposed BPU has been proved to be as good as the original one. We believe that this BPU architecture will be more desirable to be applied in different types of LDPC decoders for some applications with strict restrictions on error correction performance as well as design complexity.

290
290
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:35:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2018 International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications (ATC)
2018 International Conference on Advanced Technologies for Communications

REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The Capacity of Low-Density ParityCheck Codes under Message-Passing Decoding,” IEEE Transaction on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599 – 618, February 2001.
[2] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient Encoding of Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Transaction on Communication, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71 – 81, January 2006.
[3] W. M. Tam, F. C. Lau, and C. Tse, “A Class of QC-LDPC Codes with Low Encoding Complexity and Good Error Performance,” IEEE Communication Letters, vol. 14, pp. 169 – 171, Feburary 2010.
[4] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-Limit Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” IEEE Transaction on Communication, vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038 – 1042, July 2004.
[5] I. Djordjevic and B. Vasic, “High Code Rate Low-Density ParityCheck Codes for Optical Communication Systems,” IEEE Photonics Technology Letters, vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 1600 – 1602, June 2004.
[6] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “Low-Complexity High-Speed Decoder Design for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transaction on VLSI Systems, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104 – 114, January 2007.
[7] I. B. Djordjevic, M. Arabaci, and L. L. Minkov, “Next Generation FEC for High-Capacity Communication in Optical Transport Networks,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 27, no. 16, pp. 3518 – 3530, August 2009.
[8] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transaction on Communication, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288 – 1299, August 2005.
[9] Y. Dai, N. Chen, and Z. Yan, “Memory Efficient Decoder Architectures for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes,” IEEE Transaction on Circuits and Systems I, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 2898 – 2911, October 2008.
[10] H. Zhang, J. Zhu, H. Shi, and D. Wang, “Layered Approx-Regular LDPC: Code Construction and Encoder/Decoder Design,” IEEE Transaction on Circuits and Systems I, vol. 50, pp. 572 – 585, March 2008.
[11] J. Jin and C.-Y. Tsui, “An Energy Efficient Layered Decoding Architecture for LDPC Decoder,” IEEE Transaction on VLSI Systems, vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1185 – 1195, August 2010.

[12] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, W. M. Tam, Y. Zhao, and F. C. Lau, “A Layered QC-LDPC Decoder Architecture for High Speed Communication System,” in Asia Pacific Conference on Circuits and Systems, December 2012, pp. 475 – 478.
[13] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, F. C. M. Lau, Y. Zhao, and W. M. Tam, “A 2.0 Gb/s Throughput Decoder for QC-LDPC Convolutional Codes,” IEEE Transaction on Circuits and Systems I, vol. 60, no. 7, pp. 1857 – 1869, July 2013.
[14] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on information theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[15] D. Oh and K. K. Parhi, “Low complexity implementations of sumproduct algorithm for decoding low-density parity-check codes,” in Signal Processing Systems Design and Implementation, 2006. SIPS’06. IEEE Workshop on. IEEE, 2006, pp. 262–267.
[16] A. Nayak, M. Haldar, A. Choudhary, and P. Banerjee, “Accurate area and delay estimators for fpgas,” in Proceedings of the conference on Design, automation and test in Europe. IEEE Computer Society, 2002, p. 862.
[17] Q. Lu, J. Fan, C.-W. Sham, and F. C.M.Lau, “A High Throughput Gaussian Noise Generator,” in Asia Pacific Conference on Circuits and Systems, December 2014, pp. 117 – 120.

291
291
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:35:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

