IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

1317

A Neural Network-Based Compressive LDPC Decoder Design Over Correlated Noise Channel
Ying Li, Baoye Zhang, Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Bin Tan , Jun Wu , Senior Member, IEEE, and Die Hu , Member, IEEE

Abstract—To combat the correlated noise and utilize the non-equiprobability of the source, we propose a novel Lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) decoder design based on a priori information and neural network, which includes two neural networks, namely Correlated-Denoising Convolutional Neural Network (Correlated-DnCNN) and Belief Propagation-Deep Neural Network (BP-DNN), respectively. Correlated-DnCNN is used to remove the correlation of channel noise and reduce the noise power. BP-DNN is used to eliminate the harmful effect of short cycles of the Tanner graph and explore the priori information of the source. With the priori information to assist in initializing the input nodes of the BP-DNN network, we introduce compression capability to the LDPC, thus the proposed scheme can improve efficiency significantly when there is a large amount of compressible data in the physical layer. To train the Correlated-DnCNN and BP-DNN jointly, we design a new threeobjective joint denoising-decoding loss function, which can not only guarantee the decoding performance, but also constrain the noise to conform to the normal distribution as much as possible, and improve the network convergence performance. Experiments show that the proposed decoding framework can remove the noise correlation, reduce the noise power, and improve the decoding performance effectively.
Index Terms—LDPC, BP decoding, neural networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
A LARGE amount of text files are directly sent to the physical layer (PHY) without being compressed, resulting in lots of compressible data in the PHY. However, the current PHY has no compression capability. Transmission of uncompressed data wastes resources like bandwidth and power while also reducing communication efficiency.
Manuscript received 16 July 2023; revised 26 December 2023; accepted 3 February 2024. Date of publication 9 February 2024; date of current version 8 August 2024. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) under Grants U21A20452 and 62261030, Shanghai Science and Technology Innovation Action Plan Project No. 21220713100, the Jiangxi Double Thousand Plan under Grant jxsq2019201125. The associate editor coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was Z. Xiao. (Corresponding author: Jun Wu.)
Ying Li and Baoye Zhang are with the College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China (e-mail: liying8040@outlook.com; baoye.zhang@tongji.edu.cn).
Bin Tan is with the College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Jinggangshan University, Ji’an 343009, China (e-mail: tanbin@jgsu.edu.cn).
Jun Wu is with the School of Computer Science, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China (e-mail: wujun@fudan.edu.cn).
Die Hu is with the Key Laboratory of EMW Information, Fudan University, Shanghai 200433, China (e-mail: hudie@fudan.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCCN.2024.3364234

A feasible method to improve the communication efficiency of compressible sources is based on the adaptive modulation and coding (AMC) mechanism [1] and a priori informationassisted decoder. It is known that AMC is a link adaptation technique most commonly used in wireless communication systems, the principle of which is to match channel conditions by adjusting the code rate and modulation mode. Therefore, if we can use a priori information-assisted decoder to lower the bit error rate (BER) performance, then the non-equiprobable sources can match a higher-order modulation mode than the equiprobable sources under the AMC mechanism, which improves the spectral efficiency of the non-equiprobable sources. However, how to design an effective decoding scheme assisted by the priori information is still an open problem.
Nowadays, Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2], Polar codes [3], and Turbo codes [4] are the most used mainstream channel codes. Among them, LDPC codes have been shown theoretically to approach the Shannon limit over the AWGN (Additive White Gaussian Noise) channel when the code length is unlimited and the belief propagation (BP) [5] decoding method is used [6]. However, LDPC codes cannot reach theoretical performance in actual systems, even for equiprobable sources, for two reasons: First, the BP decoding method is intended for independently identically distributed (i.i.d.) noise, but the noise in the practical channel is correlated (due to filtering, oversampling, and equipment noise) [7], preventing the BP decoding algorithm from convergent. Second, in practice, the length of LDPC codes is restricted, resulting in the occurrence of Tanner graph cycles. The presence of a significant number of short cycles, particularly in the Tanner graph of short codes, may make the BP method difficult to converge.
With the rapid development of deep learning algorithms in wireless communication, researchers are provided with a way of using neural networks to solve the above problems. Liang et al. [8] proposed an iterative Belief PropagationConvolutional Neural Network (BP-CNN) structure, which was inspired by the successful application of the CNN in the field of image denoising. They use CNN to remove the correlated noise, thereby improving the BP decoding performance of LDPC codes under correlated noise channels. But they did not consider the impact of the cycles in the Tanner graph. Nachmani et al. [9] proposed a feedforward neural network to replace the BP decoding algorithm. To remove the influence of the cycles in the Tanner graph and improve the BP

2332-7731 c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1318

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

decoding performance of BCH codes, they trained the weights of the connecting edges in the Tanner graph to be real numbers instead of 1. But they did not consider the influence of related noise. At the same time, neither of them considered how to deal with the compressible data in PHY.
Inspired by above researches, we propose a novel LDPC decoder design based on a priori information and neural network, which includes two neural networks, namely Correlated-DnCNN and BP-DNN, respectively. The Correlated-DnCNN network is used to remove the correlation of noise and reduce the noise power. The BP-DNN network is utilized to implement the priori information-assisted BP algorithm and eliminate the harmful effect of short cycles by adding training weights to edges of the Tanner graph. It is noted that the structure of BP-DNN is the same as the feedforward neural network proposed by Nachmani et al. [9]. To enable the BP-DNN network to decode with a priori information, we introduce a priori information item in the traditional demodulation process. That is, what we input into the BP-DNN network is the modified Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR). To train the Correlated-DnCNN and BP-DNN jointly, we devise a novel denoising-decoding joint loss function composed of three sub-loss functions. It not only ensures decoding performance but also constrains noise to conform to the normal distribution as much as possible, improving network convergence performance. Meanwhile, we introduce two balance factors to balance the three sub-loss functions. Our study shows that the choice of the balance factor is influenced by the strength of the noise correlation and the source probability distribution. Experiments further show that our proposed LDPC decoder can effectively remove the noise correlation in wireless transmission systems, reduce noise power, minimize BP method computational cost, and improve decoding performance.
There are three major contributions in this paper: • We propose a novel LDPC decoding structure, including
Correlated-DnCNN network and BP-DNN network with strong learning ability, which are utilized to remove the correlation of channel noise and eliminate the harmful effect of short cycles in the Tanner graph, respectively. • We introduce compression capability to the LDPC by utilizing the priori information of the non-equiprobable sources to enhance the confidence of the LLR in LDPC decoder. • We design a three-objective joint denoising-decoding loss function to train and optimize the Correlated-DnCNN network and the BP-DNN decoding network jointly. The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II discusses related work. Section III introduces the system design. Section IV presents the simulation results. Section V gives the conclusion.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we discuss the related work on the decoding algorithm of LDPC codes, correlated noise, and image denoising, respectively.

A. Decoding Algorithm of LDPC Codes
LDPC codes were first invented by Gallager in 1962 [2], but due to the constraints of computing power and hardware, LDPC codes did not attract the attention of scholars at that time. Until 1996, Mackay and Neal [10] rediscovered LDPC codes and found that it could approach the Shannon limit. Since then, LDPC codes have become a research hotspot, and have been widely used in wireless communications [11], satellite communications [12], and adopted by 3GPP 5G NR, IEEE802.16 (WiMAX), CCSDS [13], and other standards.
The decoding algorithm of LDPC codes is mainly divided into hard decision decoding algorithms and soft decision decoding algorithms. One of the methods closest to the Shannon limit is the BP algorithm of soft decision decoding algorithms, commonly known as sum-product algorithm (SPA) [14]. However, its nonlinear operation and high complexity limit its application in practice. Therefore, the minimum sum (MS) [15] decoding algorithm was proposed to replace the previous complex multiplication and logarithmic operations with the minimum value. Although the complexity is reduced, the performance is sacrificed. Then, to improve the performance of the MS method, the normalized minimum sum (NMS) algorithm [16] and the offset minimum sum (OMS) algorithm [17] were devised, and they are now extensively utilized in practical systems.
With the rapid development and wide application of deep learning, more researchers are looking at ways to employ neural networks to lower the complexity of the BP algorithm. Nachmani et al. [9] first proposed a feedforward neural network to increase the performance of BP algorithm of BCH codes, utilizing the Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) method to train the weights of the connecting edges in the Tanner graph to be real numbers instead of 1. However, its computational complexity remains high, and hardware implementation is difficult. To compensate for this shortcoming, Lugosch and Gross [18] suggested a neural network decoding methodology based on the OMS, where the check nodes learn the additive offset parameter of each edge instead of the multiplicative weight. It minimizes computational complexity without sacrificing performance. Nachmani et al. [19] proposed optimizing BP algorithm with a recurrent neural network (RNN), which can provide a gain of 1.5dB in the high Signalto-Noise Ratio (SNR) area and further minimize decoding complexity.
B. Correlated Noise and Image Denoising
Sharma et al. [7] pointed out that filtering and oversampling are the two main reasons for noise correlation in the received symbols. Specifically, the received signal is typically filtered by a narrowband filter at the receiver. The noise inherent in the received signal will also be filtered at this time. The noise carried by the signal will be correlated after filtering. When the filter’s bandwidth is W Hz (typically the same as the signal’s bandwidth) and we sample at a rate greater than the Nyquist rate, which is 2W Hz, the noise on the sampled output will be correlated as well [7].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: NEURAL NETWORK-BASED COMPRESSIVE LDPC DECODER DESIGN

1319

Fig. 1. System Model.

Whitening is the conventional method of removing noise correlation at the receiver, however it needs matrix multiplication, which increases computing complexity. To enhance the BP algorithm performance of LDPC codes in correlated noise channels, Liang et al. [8] designed an iterative BP-CNN structure. The CNN network is used to separate the correlated noise from the correlated noise with errors, where the errors are caused by the BP decoding process. Liang et al. [8] regard this process as an image denoising process, where treat the correlated noise with errors as a noisy image, and treat the extracted correlated noise as a clean image. The CNN employed by Liang et al. [8] is relatively simple and has a 4-layer structure, with filter sizes of {9, 3, 3, 15} and feature map numbers of {64, 32, 16, 1} in each layer. Experiment results demonstrate that it can outperform whitening.
Image denoising algorithms are generally divided into traditional image denoising algorithms and deep learningbased denoising algorithms. The most used traditional image denoising technique is the Block-matching and 3D filtering (BM3D) [20] approach, which was developed in 2007. The most well-known deep learning-based method is DnCNN [21]. The network is generally 17 or 20 layers, whose input is the images with noise and output is the clean image, and its performance is better than BM3D.

III. SYSTEM DESIGN
A. System Model
Fig. 1 depicts the system model. Consider a binary sparse source m ∈ {0, 1}k with a sparsity of psrc. At the transmitter, m is encoded to u ∈ {0, 1}n by an LDPC (n, k) code, i.e.,

u = mG,

(1)

where G ∈ {0, 1}k×n is the generator matrix generated by the parity check matrix (PCM) H ∈ {0, 1}(n−k)×n of the LDPC
(n, k). After BPSK modulation, u is mapped to the symbol

s = 2u − 1.

(2)

Then, s passes through the AWGN channel, and is added with correlated noise. In this paper, we illustrate correlated noise using a one-sided noise correlation model [22], thus the channel noise samples are generated by

n = Θ1/2na ,

(3)

where na is a Gaussian noise vector, and each element in na has mean 0 and variance σ2. The correlation matrix Θ is fulfilled by

η(j −i),

i ≤j

θi,j =

η(i−j )

∗
,

i > j,

(4)

where θi,j represents the (i, j)th element of Θ, (·)∗ represents the complex conjugate, and η represents the correlated
coefficient.
The received symbol

y = s+n

(5)

is first input into the Correlated-DnCNN, and then it outputs nˆ, which is the estimate of correlated noise n. After subtracting the estimated correlated noise from y, we have

ˆs = y − nˆ.

(6)

By substituting (5) into (6), we have

ˆs = s + n − nˆ

= s + r,

(7)

where r = n−nˆ represents the residual noise. The noise power for each element in r is defined as σˆ2.
Then, ˆs is demodulated by a priori information-assisted demodulation method to obtain the LLR uˆ ∈ Rn , and the
detailed process will be introduced in Section III-D. Finally, uˆ is sent to the BP-DNN, and output the decoded
bits mˆ .

B. Proposed Correlated-DnCNN
DnCNN [21] was proposed by Zhang et al. in 2017, which can separate the noise from the noisy images. Given a DnCNN with depth D, it contains D convolutional layers, (D − 1) nonlinear rectified linear unit (ReLU) layers, and (D − 2) batch normalization (BN) [23] layers. The input size and kernel size determines the depth D. K. Zhang et al. set the patch size to be 35 × 35. They also set the kernel size to be 3 × 3, where the receptive field with depth D is (2D + 1) × (2D + 1). To maximize the receptive field, they set the depth of DnCNN to be D = 17, which can obtain the information of the whole patch.
Based on the DnCNN, we propose a Correlated-DnCNN structure to separate the correlated noise from the received

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1320

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 2. Correlated-DnCNN structure.

noisy symbols in a wireless communication system. As mentioned in Section III-A, the received symbols are y = s + n. Hence, the Correlated-DnCNN aims to learn a mapping F (y) = nˆ, where nˆ is as close to n as possible. To train the parameters in the Correlated-DnCNN, we utilize mean squared error (MSE) to measure the difference between the real correlated noise n and the estimated noise nˆ, which is also defined as the loss function LossA, i.e.,

LossA =

n − nˆ n

2

=

r n

2

.

(8)

As shown in Fig. 2, we divide the Correlated-DnCNN into
D layers, and the processing of each layer is as follows:
• Layer 1: The input is the noisy symbol y with dimension n × 1. C1 filters with size K1×1 are used for convolution with step size of 1 to obtain C1 feature maps. To maintain the dimension of each feature map like the input dimension, that is, n × 1, (K1 −1)/2 padding are applied at the beginning and end of the input data, respectively. Then, C1 feature maps pass through the nonlinear ReLU function to obtain the output data with dimension n × 1 × C1.
• Layer d(1 < d < D): Take the output data of the previous layer as the input of this layer, and add (Kd − 1)/2 padding at the beginning and end of the input data. Cd filters with size Kd × 1 × Cd−1 are used for convolution with step size of 1 to obtain Cd feature maps with size n × 1 × Cd . The output data with dimension n × 1 × Cd is then obtained by passing Cd feature maps through a BN layer and a ReLU layer.
• Layer D: Take the output data of the (D − 1)th layer as the input, and add (KD − 1)/2 padding at the beginning and end of the input data. One filter with size KD × 1 × CD−1 is used for convolution with step size of 1 to obtain the output data with dimension n × 1.
There are two main differences between Correlated-
DnCNN and DnCNN. First, the input of DnCNN is a
two-dimensional image, while the input of Correlated-DnCNN
is a one-dimensional vector. One-dimensional convolution has
lower complexity than two-dimensional convolution. Second,
the input of the DnCNN is not an entire image, but a patch
(before training, an entire image is first divided into multiple
non-overlapping small blocks, each of which is called a patch).
Since the size of the received symbol y is small and the data
is highly correlated, it is not suitable for patching. Thus, we
take the entire data as input to Correlated-DnCNN.

C. Normal Detection

As illustrated in (8), LossA constrains the power of the residual noise r = n − nˆ to be as small as possible, thus

reducing the noise power. Besides, we also make the residual

noise r obey the Gaussian distribution as much as possible to

increase BP decoding performance. To achieve this goal, an

obvious way is to add a normal detection constraint to the loss

function.

In statistics, there are a large number of normality test meth-

ods, including Jarque-Bera (JB) test [24], Shapiro-Wilk (SW)

test [25], Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS) test [26], Anderson-

Darling (AD) test [27] and so on. Among them, JB test is one

of the most prevailing goodness-of-fit tests algorithms, and it

has had a lot of success in economics. The test statistic of JB

test is a function of skewness S and kurtosis K, which are both

calculated from the sample. The closer the test statistic is to

zero, the closer the sample is to a normal distribution. Since

this function is derivable and simple enough, we use the test

statistic without coefficients of JB test as LossC, i.e.,

LossC

=

S2

+

1 4

(K

−

3)2,

(9)

where the skewness S and the kurtosis K are defined as

follows:

S=

1 n 1 n

n i =1

(ri

−

¯r)3

n i =1

(ri

−

¯r)2

3/2

,

K=

1 n 1 n

n i =1

(ri

−

¯r)4

n i =1

(ri

−

¯r)2

2,

(10)

where n is the length of residual noise r, ri is the ith element in r, and ¯r is the mean of r.

D. BP-DNN Utilizing Non-Equiprobable Source
To utilize the non-equiprobable sources in the PHY, we improve the traditional demodulation method, using the priori information to assist the demodulating process. Specifically, ˆs is demodulated to obtain the Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) uˆ ∈ Rn by

uˆ = l ch + l src ,

(11)

where l ch = 2ˆs/σˆ2 is the channel LLR demodulated from the received symbols, and l src = [l1, l2, . . . , lk , 0] ∈ Rn , where li = log(psrc/(1 − psrc)), i ∈ [1, k ] is the priori information
and only acts on the system bits.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: NEURAL NETWORK-BASED COMPRESSIVE LDPC DECODER DESIGN

1321

It is worth mentioning that to calculate uˆ, we need to obtain σˆ2 first, which is the noise power of the residual noise. Coincidentally, the value of σˆ2 is exactly the same as LossA in (8). Therefore, we only need to save the value of LossA without additional calculations.
Then, BP-DNN takes uˆ as input, and outputs the decoded bits mˆ . It can not only realize BP decoding algorithm, but also
eliminate the harmful effect of short cycles in Tanner graph
and improve decoding performance. The structure of BP-DNN
is the same as the feedforward neural network proposed by
Nachmani et al. [9], but we differ from them in that we use
a priori information to initialize the first hidden layer nodes.
Before introducing BP-DNN, we first introduce BP algorithm,
which is an iterative decoding algorithm. The core idea is to
pass messages between variable and check nodes based on a
Tanner graph. When the BP-DNN in Fig. 1 is replaced with the
traditional BP algorithm, the decoding process is as follows: Let vi (1 ≤ i ≤ n) denote the ith variable node, cj (1 ≤
j ≤ (n − k )) denote the jth check node, and rvi →cj (rcj →vi ) denote the massages passed from the vi (cj ) to cj (vi ). At first, we initialize rvi →cj with uˆi , which is the ith element in uˆ obtained by (11), i.e.,

rvi →cj = uˆi .

(12)

Then, the massages rcj →vi can be described as

⎛

⎞

rcj →vi = 2 tanh−1⎝

tanh rvi →cj ⎠, (13) 2

vi ∈N (cj )\vi

where N (cj )\vi denotes the set of neighboring variable nodes of cj and except vi . The massages rvi →cj is

rvi →cj =

rcj →vi ,

cj ∈N (vi )\cj

(14)

where N (vi ) \ cj denotes the set of neighboring check nodes of vi and except cj . After L iterations, the output LLR can be
obtained by

rvi =

rcj →vi .

cj ∈N (vi )

(15)

After making a hard decision on rvi and taking the k-bit corresponding to the system bit, mˆ can be obtained.
The BP-DNN has one input layer, one output layer, and 2L
hidden layers, where L represents the number of BP iterations.
In other words, a complete iterative process includes the
calculation of an odd layer and an even layer. Let ei,j be the Tanner graph edge connecting vi and cj , which corresponds to the node in the hidden layer of the BP-DNN structure. Let
l (1 ≤ l ≤ 2L) denote the index of the hidden layer.
When l = 1, the node ei,j of this hidden layer is only connected to the variable node vi of the input layer, and we use uˆi to initialize all nodes, which is the ith element in uˆ obtained by (11), i.e.,

x1,ei,j = uˆi .

(16)

When l > 1 and l is odd, the node ei,j of this hidden layer is not only connected to the node e = ei,j = (vi , cj ), j = j

of the (l − 1)th hidden layer, but also connected to the input

node vi , the output of each node ei,j is

⎛⎛

⎞⎞

xl ,ei,j

=

tanh⎝

1 2

⎝wl ,i

uˆi

+

wl,e,e xl−1,e ⎠⎠,

e =ei,j ,j =j

(17)

where w denotes the weight trained by BP-DNN network.

When l > 1 and l is even, the node ei,j of this hidden

layer is linked to the node e = ei ,j = (vi , cj ), i = i of the

(l − 1)th hidden layer, the output of each node ei,j is

⎛

⎞

xl,ei,j = 2 tanh−1⎝

xl−1,e ⎠.

(18)

e =ei ,j ,i =i

Finally, the output of each node in the output layer is

⎛

⎞

xvi = σ⎝w2L+1,i uˆi +

w2L+1,i,e x2L,e ⎠, (19)

e =ei,j

where σ(x ) = (1 + e−x )−1 denotes the sigmoid function. After taking the k-bit corresponding to the system bit from xvi , mˆ can be obtained. It is noted that when the weight w is fixed at 1, the neural network degenerates to the traditional BP decoding algorithm.
To learn the trainable parameters of BP-DNN, we apply cross entropy as the loss function, which can be defined as LossB, i.e.,
1n LossB = − n ui log(xvi ) + (1 − ui ) log(1 − xvi ), (20)
i =1

where ui is the ith element in u calculated by (1). It is worth noting that the time complexity of BP-DNN
networks with 2L hidden layers is the same as that of traditional BP decoding algorithms with L iterations, this is because both of them have the same number of layers and the same number of non-zero weights in the Tanner graph.

E. Joint Training
Combined with LossA, LossB and LossC, we can obtain a overall loss function

Loss = LossA + bLossB + cLossC,

(21)

where b and c are factors used to balance the three sub-loss functions. We will show in simulation experiments that these factors are affected by source distribution information and noise correlation.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
At first, we simulate the performance of Correlated-DnCNN combined with traditional BP decoding under different correlation noise, so as to verify the denoising ability of Correlated-DnCNN. Meanwhile, we find the optimal balance factor through simulation and analyze the relationship between the optimal balance factor and the correlation of channel noise. Then, we use different source probability distributions

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1322

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 3. The performance of the Correlated-DnCNN with BP decoding for psrc = 0.5.

to train and validate the Correlated-DnCNN, respectively, and study the influence of the source probability distribution on the Correlated-DnCNN network. Finally, we show the performance of the combination of Correlated-DnCNN and BP-DNN for different sparse sources and give the selection of the optimal balance factor.
The Pytorch framework is utilized to build CorrelatedDnCNN and BP-DNN, and the GPU applied is the NVIDIA TITAN X.

TABLE I TRAINING PARAMETERS

A. Performance of Correlated-DnCNN With BP Decoding
In this subsection, we will show the performance of the Correlated-DnCNN with BP decoding. In this scenario, the BP-DNN network in Fig. 1 is replaced with the traditional BP decoding algorithm. Without BP-DNN, LossB cannot be calculated, so we use LossA +cLossC as the loss function. We use LDPC(576, 432) [28] under WiMAX Standard as channel code.
We simulate the performance of equiprobable sources (psrc = 0.5) and non-equiprobable sources (taking psrc = 0.1 as an example) under correlated noise, respectively. The training process and verification process of our proposed scheme are as follows.
Training phase: At the transmitter, the source is first encoded by LDPC(576, 432) and modulated by BPSK, after which we utilize (5) to add the correlated noise under a given SNR and a given correlated coefficient η. Multiple SNRs ({0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3}dB) are used to create the training data. At the receiver, the noisy symbols are sent to the Correlated-DnCNN directly. The network is trained using the conventional mini-batch gradient descent approach. Each minibatch contains 140 codewords, where each SNR corresponds to 20 codewords. To compute the gradient, 140 codewords are delivered to the network per iteration. We adopt the Adaptive moment estimation (Adam) [29] to update and optimize the weights of the Correlated-DnCNN. Table I summarizes the training parameters.
Validation phase: The steps of the transmitter are the same as those in the training phase, so we omit them here. At the receiver, the noisy symbols are directly sent to the CorrelatedDnCNN to output the estimation of the correlated noise. Then, after subtracting the output value of Correlated-DnCNN from

TABLE II NETWORK PARAMETERS OF CORRELATED-DNCNN
the noisy symbol, we use the noise power saved in the training phase, i.e., LossA, and the priori information of the source to perform demodulating. Finally, we use the BP decoding with 50 iterations to get the decoded bits.
The parameters of Correlated-DnCNN we used are shown in Table II.
We use the “iterative BP-CNN” scheme proposed by Liang [8] as the comparison scheme. The steps of the transmitter are the same as ours, so we omit them here. The received noisy symbol y is first demodulated by BPSK, then perform 25 rounds of BP decoding, BPSK modulation and hard decision to obtain estimated transmit symbols. Next, calculate y minus the value of estimated transmit symbols and input the calculated result into the CNN network to obtain the estimated noise. After subtracting the estimated noise from y, BPSK demodulation and BP decoding with another 25 iterations are performed. To sum up, a total of 50 iterations of decoding have been performed.
Fig. 3 shows the simulation performance when psrc = 0.5 and the correlated coefficient η is set to be 0.8, 0.5, and 0, respectively. The larger the correlation coefficient, the stronger the noise correlation. In order to demonstrate the denoising ability of neural networks and eliminate the influence of other factors (such as iteration times) on the overall scheme,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: NEURAL NETWORK-BASED COMPRESSIVE LDPC DECODER DESIGN

1323

all schemes in Fig. 3 use the same BP decoding iteration times. “BP(50)” means the performance under traditional BP decoding with 50 iterations. “BP(25)+CNN+BP(25)” represents the performance of the iterative BP-CNN [8]. “CorDnCNN+BP(50)” means our proposed scheme, which uses the Correlated-DnCNN with BP decoding algorithm.
Fig. 3(a) gives the performance with the correlated coefficient η = 0.8. It is clear that our proposed scheme and the “iterative BP-CNN” method outperform the traditional BP algorithm. In our proposed scheme, we also show the performance with balance factor c = 1, 0.1 and 0.01, respectively. When c = 1, our proposed scheme is better than the “iterative BP-CNN” scheme only when SNR is greater than −2.7dB; When c = 0.1 and c = 0.01, our approach outperforms the “iterative BP-CNN” technique throughout the whole SNR interval, with c = 0.1 being the best. When BER = 10−5, our proposed scheme improves by approximately 1.4dB compared to “iterative BP-CNN” scheme. Fig. 3(b) gives the performance with η = 0.5. We also show the performance with balance coefficient c = 1.5, 1 and 0.5, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3(b), our scheme performs much better than “iterative BP-CNN” and traditional BP decoding algorithms. When SNR is less than or equal to 1dB, the performance with c = 1.5, c = 1, and c = 0.5 is similar. When SNR is greater than 1dB, the performance with c = 1 is better than that of c = 1.5 and c = 0.5. When BER = 10−5, our proposed scheme has a gain of approximately 2.1dB compared to “iterative BPCNN” scheme. Fig. 3(c) gives the performance with η =0. We also show the performance with balance factor c = 1.5, 1 and 0.5, respectively. As shown in Fig. 3(c), when the SNR is less than or equal to 2.5dB, the performance of the five schemes is similar, and when the SNR is larger than 2.5dB, the performance with c = 1 is optimum.
Fig. 4 shows the simulation performance when psrc = 0.1 and the correlated coefficient η is set to be 0.8 and 0.5, respectively. “BP(50)-priori” means that the statistical information of the source is used for demodulation (see (11)), and then the traditional BP decoding scheme with 50 iterations is used. As considered in Fig. 3, all schemes in Fig. 4 use the same BP decoding iteration times.
Fig. 4(a) gives the performance with η = 0.8. In our proposed scheme, we also show the performance with balance factor c = 0.5, 0.05 and 0.01, respectively. As can be seen from Fig. 4(a), our scheme is far superior to the “BP(50)” and “BP(50)-priori” schemes. In our scheme, the optimal balance factor is c = 0.05. Fig. 4(b) shows that when psrc = 0.1 and η = 0.8, the optimal balance factor is c = 0.2.
The above experimental results show that when η = 0.8, the optimal balance factor is smaller than those with η = 0.5 and η = 0. This demonstrates that when the noise correlation is strong, we should focus on minimizing the average power of noise; when the noise correlation is weak, we should focus on the constraint of the normal distribution of residual noise. At the same time, we also notice that under the condition of η = 0.8, the optimal balance factor (c = 0.1) corresponding to psrc = 0.5 is larger than the optimal balance factor (c = 0.05) corresponding to psrc = 0.1. Under the condition of η = 0.5, the optimal balance factor (c = 1) corresponding

Fig. 4. The performance of the Correlated-DnCNN with BP decoding for psrc = 0.1.
to psrc = 0.5 is larger than the optimal balance factor (c= 0.2) corresponding to psrc = 0.1. This is because the MSE part in the loss function gradually becomes more and more important when the source tends to be sparse.
B. Performance Under Different Probability Distributions
In this subsection, we use different source probability distributions to train and validate the Correlated-DnCNN, respectively, and study the influence of the source probability distribution on the Correlated-DnCNN network. In this scenario, the setting of our scheme is the same as that of Section IV-A. We use LDPC(576, 432) as channel code and LossA + cLossC as the loss function. The noise correlation coefficient is set to 0.8.
The simulation results of training networks with source probability distributions of 0.1, 0.15, 0.25, and 0.5 are shown in Fig. 5. As considered in Fig. 3, all schemes in Fig. 5 use the same BP decoding iteration times. “BP(50)” means the traditional BP decoding scheme with 50 iterations; “BP(50)priori” means that the probability distribution information of the source is first used for demodulation (see (11)), and then the traditional BP decoding algorithm with 50 iterations is adopted; “train0.1, test0.1” refers to this scheme that uses the source with probability distribution of 0.1 for training and the source with probability distribution of 0.1 for testing.
Fig. 5(a) shows the performance of a network trained with source probability distribution of 0.1. In the validation phase,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1324

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024
TABLE III TRAINING PARAMETERS

When the probability distribution is 0.25, the method has a big error floor and performs worse than “BP(50)-priori” when the SNR exceeds 2.5dB; when the probability distribution is 0.5, the scheme also has a large error floor and performs worse than “BP(50)” when the SNR exceeds 2.6dB.
Fig. 5(b) shows the performance of a network trained with source probability distribution of 0.15. In the validation phase, the best performance is that the probability distribution of the test source is also 0.15. When the probability distribution is 0.25, the scheme has an error floor; When the probability distribution is 0.5, the scheme has a high error floor, and its performance is worse than “BP(50)-priori” when the SNR exceeds 1.3dB, and worse than “BP(50)” when SNR is greater than 2.5dB.
Fig. 5(c) shows the performance of a network trained with a source probability distribution of 0.25. In the validation phase, the best performance is that the probability distribution of the test source is also 0.25. When the probability distribution is 0.5, the scheme has a great error floor, and its performance is worse than “BP(50)-priori” when the SNR exceeds 2.6dB.
Fig. 5(d) shows the performance of a network trained with a source probability distribution of 0.5. In the validation phase, the best performance is that the probability distribution of the test source is also 0.5. When the probability distribution is 0.1 and 0.15, the performance is better than “BP(50)”; When the probability distribution is 0.5, there is a large error floor, and the performance is worse than “BP(50)” when the SNR is greater than 2.9dB.
From the above simulation and analysis, it can be seen that the probability distribution of the source has a significant influence on network training. As a result, we need to train different networks according to different source probability distributions.

Fig. 5. The performance under different probability distributions with η = 0.8.
the best performance is that the probability distribution of the test source is also 0.1. As the probability distribution of the test source becomes larger, the performance becomes worse.

C. Joint Performance of Correlated-DnCNN and BP-DNN
In this subsection, we show the performance of the combination of Correlated-DnCNN and BP-DNN for different sparse sources and give the selection of the optimal balance factor. The system model employed is depicted in Fig. 1, and the loss function is depicted in (21). We use LDPC(128, 64) under CCSDS standard as channel code, set the noise correlation coefficient to 0.8, and simulate on equal probability source (psrc = 0.5) and compressible source(psrc = 0.1), respectively. The parameters of this scheme are shown in Table III, where the number of hidden layers in the BP-DNN network is set to 20, corresponding to 10 iterations. Except

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LI et al.: NEURAL NETWORK-BASED COMPRESSIVE LDPC DECODER DESIGN

1325

Fig. 6. The performance of the Correlated-DnCNN and BP-DNN for psrc = 0.5.

Fig. 7. The performance of the Correlated-DnCNN and BP-DNN for psrc = 0.1.
for those parameters, the training and verification process of this scheme is basically the same as that in Section IV-A.
Fig. 6 shows the joint performance of Correlated-DnCNN and BP-DNN when the source probability distribution psrc = 0.5. In the legend, “BP(50)” means the traditional BP decoding scheme with 50 iterations; “Cor-DnCNN+BP(50), c=0.1” represents the optimal scheme of the Correlated-DnCNN with BP decoding, where c = 0.1. According to Fig. 6(a), when b = 1, c = 0.1 and b = 1, c = 1, the performance is improved, but not as excellent as “Cor-DnCNN+BP(50), c=0.1”. As seen in Fig. 6(b), when b = 10, the performance of c = 0.1, c = 1, and c = 10 is close to that of “Cor-DnCNN+BP(50), c=0.1”. Fig. 6(c) shows that when b = 100, the performance of c = 1 and c = 10 is better than “Cor-DnCNN+BP(50), c=0.1”. To sum up, when the noise correlation is 0.8, the performance is the best when the balance factors are set to be b = 100, c = 10, indicating that item LossB is the most important, followed by LossC, LossA.
Fig. 7 shows the joint performance of Correlated-DnCNN and BP-DNN when the source probability distribution psrc = 0.1. It can be seen that the performance is the best when the balance factors are set to be b = 100, c = 1, also indicating that item LossB is the most important, followed by LossC, LossA. It is clear that when BER = 3 × 10−4, our proposed scheme improves by 5.5dB compared to traditional scheme “BP(50)”.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a novel LDPC decoding framework based on neural networks and priori information, which incorporates Correlated-DnCNN and BP-DNN to reduce channel noise correlation and the harmful effect of short cycles in Tanner graph. To enable the BP-DNN network to use priori information to assist decoding, we introduce a priori information item in the traditional demodulation process and use the modified Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) as the input of the BP-DNN network. To train the two networks jointly, we design a new three-objective joint denoising-decoding loss function. Experiments demonstrate that the proposed decoding framework successfully removes noise correlation, reduces noise power, and improves decoding performance in wireless communication systems. In the future, we will study more general methods of using neural networks to assist channel decoding, which can not only decode linear codes but also non-linear codes.
REFERENCES
[1] G. Chen, R. Ma, M. Lei, and X. Cao, “Channel list selection based on quality prediction in wirelesshart networks,” J. Commun. Inf. Netw., vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 49–56, Sep. 2018.
[2] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[3] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213–2226, May 2015.
[4] H. Chen, R. G. Maunder, and L. Hanzo, “A survey and tutorial on lowcomplexity turbo coding techniques and a holistic hybrid ARQ design example,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 1546–1566, 4th Quart., 2013.
[5] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[6] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[7] S. K. Sharma, S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, “SNR estimation for multi-dimensional cognitive receiver under correlated channel/noise,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 6392–6405, Dec. 2013.
[8] F. Liang, C. Shen, and F. Wu, “An iterative BP-CNN architecture for channel decoding,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 144–159, Feb. 2018.
[9] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in Proc. 54th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), 2016, pp. 341–346.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1326

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COGNITIVE COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 10, NO. 4, AUGUST 2024

[10] D. J. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[11] J. Hu and T. M. Duman, “Low density parity check codes over wireless relay channels,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 3384–3394, Sep. 2007.
[12] M. Eroz, F.-W. Sun, and L.-N. Lee, “DVB-S2 low density parity check codes with near Shannon limit performance,” Int. J. Satel. Commun. Netw., vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 269–279, 2004.
[13] S. Abu-Surra, D. DeClercq, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Trapping set enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), 2010, pp. 1–5.
[14] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[15] M. P. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[16] J. Chen and M. P. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[17] J. Chen and M. P. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BPbased decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[18] L. Lugosch and W. J. Gross, “Neural offset min-sum decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2017, pp. 1361–1365.
[19] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Feb. 2018.
[20] K. Dabov, A. Foi, V. Katkovnik, and K. Egiazarian, “Image denoising by sparse 3-D transform-domain collaborative filtering,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 2080–2095, Aug. 2007.
[21] K. Zhang, W. Zuo, Y. Chen, D. Meng, and L. Zhang, “Beyond a Gaussian denoiser: Residual learning of deep CNN for image denoising,” IEEE Trans. Image Process., vol. 26, pp. 3142–3155, 2017.
[22] S. K. Sharma, S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, “Eigenvalue-based sensing and SNR estimation for cognitive radio in presence of noise correlation,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 3671–3684, Oct. 2013.
[23] S. Ioffe and C. Szegedy, “Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by reducing internal covariate shift,” in Proc. 32nd Int. Conf. Mach. Learn., 2015, pp. 448–456.
[24] C. M. Jarque and A. K. Bera, “Efficient tests for normality, homoscedasticity and serial independence of regression residuals,” Econ. Lett., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 255–259, 1980.
[25] S. S. Shapiro and M. B. Wilk, “An analysis of variance test for normality (complete samples),” Biometrika, vol. 52, nos. 3–4, pp. 591–611, 1965.
[26] F. J. Massey Jr., “The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for goodness of fit,” J. Am. statist. Assoc., vol. 46, no. 253, pp. 68–78, 1951.
[27] F. W. Scholz and M. A. Stephens, “K-sample Anderson–Darling tests,” J. Am. Statist. Assoc., vol. 82, no. 399, pp. 918–924, 1987.
[28] M. Helmling et al., “Database of channel codes and ML simulation results,” 2019. [Online]. Available: www.uni-kl.de/channel-codes
[29] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” 2014, arXiv:1412.6980.

Baoye Zhang (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in computer science and technology from the China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, China, in 2017. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology with Tongji University, Shanghai, China. His research interests include multimedia communication, wireless networking, and 3-D vision.
Bin Tan received the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology from Tongji University, Shanghai, China, in 2017. She is currently a Professor with the College of Electronics and Information Engineering, Jinggangshan University. Her current research interests include multimedia communication, source and channel coding, and wireless networking.
Jun Wu (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in information engineering and the M.S. degree in communication and electronic systems from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in 1993 and 1996, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in signal and information processing from the Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing, China, in 1999. He was a Professor with the Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tongji University. He was also a Principal Scientist with Broadcom Inc., before he joined Tongji University. He is currently a Full Professor with the School of Computer Science, Fudan University. His research interests include wireless networks, machine learning, and signal processing.

Ying Li received the B.S. degree in computer science and technology from Shanghai Normal University, Shanghai, China, in 2016. She is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in computer science and technology with Tongji University, Shanghai. Her research interests include multimedia communication and wireless networking.

Die Hu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2001 and 2006, respectively. She is currently an Associate Professor with the Department of Communication Science and Engineering, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Her research interests include wireless communications and signal processing.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:49:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

