1740

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

An Optimization Model for Offline Scheduling Policy of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Dongxu Chang , Guanghui Wang , Guiying Yan, and Dawei Yin

Abstract— In this study, an optimization model for offline scheduling policy of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is proposed to improve the decoding efficiency of the belief propagation (BP). The optimization model uses the number of messages passed (NMP) as a metric to evaluate complexity, and two metrics, average entropy (AE), and gap to maximum a posteriori (GAP), to evaluate BP decoding performance. Based on this model, an algorithm is proposed to optimize the scheduling sequence for reduced decoding complexity and superior performance compared to layered BP (LBP). We validated the proposed algorithm on LDPC codes constructed following 5G New Radio, which resulted in a reduction of decoding complexity of more than 20% compared to LBP.
Index Terms— Low-density parity-check code, scheduling policy, decoding efficiency.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) code [1] has been widely used in communication fields, such as 5G New Radio (NR) [2], IEEE 802.11 (WiFi) [3]. It was demonstrated by MacKay and Neal in 1996 [4] that LDPC codes can approach the Shannon limit. The belief propagation (BP) decoding algorithm [5] of LDPC code is most commonly used due to its low complexity and good performance in practice.
The conventional BP algorithm employs a flooding scheduling strategy to conduct message-passing between variable nodes and check nodes. This strategy updates all variable-tocheck (V2C) messages or check-to-variable (C2V) messages simultaneously in one iteration, achieving a high degree of parallelism. However, the flooding BP algorithm is known for its slow convergence speed. This is because the latest information available in the current iteration can only be utilized in the subsequent iteration. The delayed information may hinder the benefits of information transmission, thus affecting the algorithm’s convergence rate [6].
In 2004, Hocevar introduced the concept of layered belief propagation (LBP) decoding [6], which updates
Manuscript received 8 May 2024; accepted 28 May 2024. Date of publication 6 June 2024; date of current version 14 August 2024. This work is partially supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2023YFA1009600). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M.-R. Sadeghi. (Corresponding author: Dawei Yin.)
Dongxu Chang is with the Data Science Institute, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, China (e-mail: dongxuchang@mail.sdu.edu.cn).
Guanghui Wang is with the School of Mathematics and the Data Science Institute, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, China (e-mail: ghwang@sdu.edu.cn).
Guiying Yan is with the Academy of Mathematics and Systems Science, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101408, China (e-mail: yangy@amss.ac.cn).
Dawei Yin is with the School of Mathematics, Shandong University, Jinan 250100, China (e-mail: daweiyin@mail.sdu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2024.3407591

information sequentially. This decoding strategy can accelerate the decoding process as it ensures that the most recent information is disseminated. In comparison to the flooding scheduling strategy, LBP can reduce decoding complexity by nearly 50% while achieving the same performance.
Despite its benefits, LBP does not have a specific design for the decoding sequence order. To further reduce decoding complexity, scheduling the order of decoding sequences is a key direction for improving LBP. In the following, we define the order of transmitting information among nodes or edges in decoding as a scheduling sequence. In [7], [8] [9], several online (dynamic) scheduling policies have been proposed. These policies determine the scheduling sequences based on the latest information from the previous updates, meaning the decoding order is established during the decoding process. However, additional calculations are required to determine the choice of the next part of the scheduling sequences. In some cases, these calculations can be even more complex than the decoding process itself, which may contradict the original intention of scheduling optimization and result in high latency.
In contrast to online scheduling policies, offline scheduling policies are fixed for a given decoder and achieve high efficiency in statistical significance without adding extra complexity of determining the scheduling sequence to the decoding process. Consequently, offline scheduling policies can better align with practical application scenarios than online scheduling policies. Several relevant studies have been conducted on this topic, including [10], [11] [12], [13]. In [10], the Least-punctured and highest-degree (LPHD) algorithm is proposed, in which check nodes with higher degrees and fewer punctured variable nodes are updated first. In [11], Lowdegree (LD) schedule gives priority to updating check nodes with a lower degree. In [12], a scheduling policy is proposed that considers the characteristics of the parity-check matrix of LDPC to ensure that updated messages are propagated to other nodes as much as possible. These algorithms design scheduling sequences by analyzing different aspects of the parameters of the decoding factor graph but leave little room for further improvement. In [13], a greedy approach to designing nested scheduling sequences by utilizing the raptor-like structure of 5G LDPC codes was proposed. Nevertheless, an offline scheduling policy that captures the scheduling operation more analytically through a better optimization algorithm is required.
In this study, we model the efficiency of scheduling policies using a complexity-performance paradigm. The complexity is measured by the number of messages passed (NMP) [14], which counts the message passing on directed

1558-2558 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION MODEL FOR OFFLINE SCHEDULING POLICY

1741

edges to measure complexity. For the performance evaluation of scheduling policies under the sum-product decoder, we consider two different metrics. The first one is average entropy (AE), which measures the uncertainty of variable nodes after each message passed. It calculates the LLR distribution of the messages sent by the variable nodes using density evolution [15] and then averages the entropy of the variable node information. The second metric is gap to maximum a posteriori (GAP) [14]. Based on the Bethe free energy, GAP measures the statistical distance between the distribution obtained by message passing and the true posterior distribution. By optimizing the value of AE or GAP of the scheduling sequences, we can design an algorithm to optimize the scheduling sequences. A simple greedy scheduling policy based on GAP has already been proposed in [16]. It can achieve a 10% speed increase compared to LBP when the number of iterations is small. However, the performance of this greedy scheduling policy can significantly degrade when the number of iterations increases, as it only considers the influence of the scheduling sequence on the current decoding process, neglecting the longer-term effects on the decoding.
In this study, we present a novel algorithm, called the Successive-Searching BP (SSBP), which is based on the local search algorithm [17] and the complexity-performance paradigm. Local search algorithms have a long history of success in combinatorial optimization problems, and the SSBP algorithm can effectively search for scheduling sequences that lead to fast declines in AE or GAP throughout the decoding process. Simulation results demonstrate that the scheduling sequences generated by SSBP exhibit significantly lower decoding complexity and better error-rate performance than those generated by other scheduling policies.
The rest of the letter is organized as follows: Section II provides an overview of relevant LDPC decoding algorithms and introduces the metrics used in the complexity-performance paradigm. The proposed SSBP algorithm is described in Section III. The simulation results of our algorithm are presented in Section IV. We conclude the letter in Section V. The more comprehensive version of the letter can be found in [18].
II. SCHEDULING STRATEGIES
In this letter, we aim to find scheduling sequences that enable decoding with low complexity and good performance, where the scheduling sequence is defined as follows:
Definition 1 (scheduling sequence): A scheduling sequence is a sequence formed by the edges on the factor graph. The scheduling sequence e1, e2, . . . , eT , where e1, e2, . . . , eT are edges on the factor graph and T denotes the maximum number of NMP used in decoding, implies that the message passing during decoding will proceed following the order of e1, e2, . . . , eT . Specifically, the (protograph) CN-centric scheduling sequence is composed of (protograph) check nodes. Each (protograph) check node in the sequence represents all the edges connected to it.
The complexity of the decoding process is measured by the NMP during decoding, which is the number of edges used to perform variable-to-check (V2C) and check-to-variable

message updates. After decoding on the check nodes, the

increase in NMP is equal to the degree of that check node.

The performance throughout the decoding process can be

evaluated using AE or GAP. It is worth noting that, as it

characterizes the average entropy of all bits, AE to some

extent represents the magnitude of bit error rate (BER),

whereas GAP is more focused on characterizing block

error rate (BLER) [14]. Specifically, we use AEβ (c, t) (or GAPβ (c, t)) to denote the value of AE (or GAP) of the channel messages with the L-density c = (c1, · · · , cN ) and NMP t under scheduling sequence β.

A scheduling sequence with a rapid decline of the corre-

sponding AEβ(c, t) (or GAPβ(c, t)) throughout the decoding process is desirable. However, the influence of the decline

in the AE function (or the GAP function) on the decod-

ing complexity varies depending on the decoding period.

In practice, achieving high throughput requires a decoder that

can decode successfully with few iterations. Therefore, the

decrease of the AE function (or the GAP function) at the

beginning of the decoding process is more important than at

the end, since the rapid decrease of the uncertainty of the value

of variable nodes at the beginning of the decoding might lead

to a quick early stop of the decoding process. Thus, scheduling

designs at the later stage of decoding may not be used at all.

As a result, it is not practical to simply use the average decline

rate of AEβ(c, t) (or GAPβ(c, t)) in decoding to measure the performance of the corresponding scheduling sequence.

Due to the aforementioned reasons, we define a func-

tion τAE(c, β) as a deformed overall decline speed of the function AEβ(c, t) with channel messages with L-density c = (c1, · · · , cN ) under a given scheduling sequence β. It is defined as follows:

T

τAE(c, β) = AEβ(c, t).

(1)

t=1

It is evident that the decrease in AEβ(c, t) at the beginning of decoding will significantly affect τAE(c, β), aligning with actual requirements. Under this definition, we consider that a smaller value of τAE(c, β) corresponds to higher decoding efficiency under the corresponding scheduling sequence β.
We can similarly define a deformed overall decline speed τGAP (c, β) of the function GAPβ(c, t) with channel messages with L-density c = (c1, · · · , cN ) under a given scheduling sequence β:

T

τGAP (c, β) = GAPβ(c, t).

(2)

t=1

Therefore, our objective is to find the scheduling sequence

β that minimizes τAE(c, β) (or τGAP (c, β)) for a given L-density c.

In order to find an optimal scheduling sequence, we pro-

pose an optimization algorithm called Successive-Searching

BP (SSBP), which is based on the local search algorithm.

SSBP starts with an initial sequence and iteratively searches

for a scheduling sequence that has a lower value of τAE(c, β) (or τGAP (c, β)) than the current sequence by randomly modifying a part of the current sequence. This process continues

until no better scheduling sequence can be found.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1742

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

Fig. 1. SSBP algorithm.
To reduce the search space and facilitate scheduling, we adopt a (protograph) CN-centric scheduling policy, which selects a check node (in protograph) in each decoding step and updates all information connected to this node simultaneously, resulting in a (protograph) check node sequence as the corresponding scheduling sequence. This way, instead of updating AEβ(c, t) (or GAPβ(c, t)) every time a message is passed while computing τAE(c, β) (or τGAP (c, β)), we update it only after all messages connected to the chosen check node passed. Moreover, we limit the maximum number of decoding iterations to T , and the same scheduling sequence is used in each iteration.
We have investigated the impact of different initial scheduling sequences on the SSBP algorithm. We tested the cases where the initial scheduling sequence was selected by layered scheduling, nested scheduling, and LD scheduling, and the results showed significant improvements in all these cases.
After initialize the scheduling sequence β using the initial scheduling sequence β0 and obtaining the L-density c = (c1, · · · , cN ) of the channel messages, we compute the corresponding τAE(c, β) (or τGAP (c, β)) value of β. We then select h pairs of check nodes uniformly at random and change the order of these pairs sequentially in β. This process is repeated b times to generate b new sequences from β. The scheduling sequence with the minimum τAE (or τGAP ) among the β and b new sequences will replace β to become the new starting sequence in the next round of SSBP. We continue this process from the new starting sequence to find better scheduling sequences. We give the flow diagram of this process in Fig. 1. If none of the new sequences obtained are better than the original scheduling sequence, we consider the sequence update to have failed. The algorithm terminates when the sequence update fails S consecutive times.
III. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we apply the SSBP algorithm to LDPC codes constructed following 5G NR [2]. Both CN-centric and protograph CN-centric scheduling policies, denoted as QC-SSBP,

are considered. We test the coding scheme (440, 200) and (3000, 1000) for base graph 1 (BG1). By calculating the average NMP under different scheduling policies, we compare the SSBP algorithm for the AE case and SSBP for the GAP case with layered BP (LBP) [6], node-wise residual BP (NW-RBP), least-punctured and highest-degree (LPHD) scheduling policy [10], lowest-degree (LD) scheduling policy [11], nested scheduling policy [13] and greedy scheduling policy [16]. The scheduling policy of LBP follows the order of rows in the parity-check matrix.
To accommodate high throughput application scenarios, we limit the maximum number of decoding iterations to 5 in all our experiments. For the hyperparameters in SSBP, we set b, the number of searches at one time, to be 100, and S, the stop criterion, is set to 50. The selection of parameters b and S will have an impact on the algorithm’s runtime and effectiveness. Increasing the values of b and S to some extent allows the algorithm to find better scheduling sequences but also prolongs the runtime. Experiments show that the chosen values of b and S strike a good balance between the algorithm’s runtime and effectiveness. Regarding the number of check node pairs for change h, experiments show that continuous optimization of the scheduling sequence in the algorithm is only possible when h is relatively small, such as ⌊0.5% × M ⌋ in our simulation experiments. The possible reason for this is that most sequences in the entire sequence space are bad for decoding. Therefore, a new scheduling sequence obtained from the original sequence by changing a large part of the original sequence is likely to be a “bad” scheduling sequence. The average NMP and the average iterations of these scheduling policies on several 5G NR graphs is shown in TABLE I, where N is the length of the codeword, and R is the code rate.
As shown in TABLE I, the SSBP scheduling policy can significantly reduce the average NMP required for the decoding process, both for the AE case and for the GAP case. In the (440, 200) BG1, the SSBP for the AE case can reduce NMP by almost 30% compared to the LBP algorithm. Additionally, as previously mentioned, SSBP is an offline BP strategy, which means that we can determine the decoding order through Algorithm 1 before the formal decoding process. Therefore, almost no additional scheduling complexity added to the formal decoding process, as compared to LBP.
In Fig. 2, we present the average NMP required for decoding under various scheduling strategies at different Es/N0, along with the achievable BLER. It can be observed that SSBP can significantly reduce the average NMP required for decoding at different Es/N0.
To gain a clearer understanding of the effect of different scheduling policies on decoding, we present in Fig. 3 the changes in AE, GAP, BER, and BLER with NMP changing when decoding under different scheduling policies for the (440, 200) BG1, where the number of iterations is fixed at 5. We can observe that throughout the decoding process, especially in the intermediate stages of decoding, the SSBP algorithm exhibits the lowest levels of BER and BLER. This characteristic ensures that SSBP can complete decoding quickly and perform early termination, thereby achieving higher decoding efficiency.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHANG et al.: OPTIMIZATION MODEL FOR OFFLINE SCHEDULING POLICY
TABLE I AVERAGE NMP FOR SEVERAL SCHEDULING POLICIES IN BG1

1743

Fig. 2. Average NMP (a) and BLER (b) vs. Es/N0 for different scheduling policies in (440, 200) BG1 graph, where the maximum number of iterations is 5. SSBP can significantly reduce the average NMP required for decoding.

Fig. 3. Average entropy (AE), GAP, BER, and BLER vs. NMP for different scheduling policies in (440, 200) BG1 graph, where the number of iterations is fixed to be 5. SSBP has the fastest descent speed and better error-rate performance.

The scheduling sequences obtained from the SSBP algorithm exhibit certain regularity. For instance, the scheduling sequences found by QC-SSBP(AE) and QC-SSBP(GAP) on (440,220) BG1 are [28,26,24,19,5,23,27,29,18,20,14,25, 21,17,22,13,16,8,6,12,15,11,10,7,9,4,1,2,3] and [28,22,24,19,

26,17,11,5,14,20,8,18,25,21,23,6,12,13,15,10,16, 7, 9, 4, 1, 3, 2, 29,27], respectively. It can be observed that the scheduling sequences above tend to update the check nodes with lower degrees first, consistent with the conclusion in [11]. However, a good scheduling sequence does not strictly follow the order

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1744

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 8, AUGUST 2024

of degrees of check nodes. Further analysis regarding good scheduling sequences is left for future work.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this study, we presented an efficient scheduling policy for LDPC codes. Firstly, we proposed a model to evaluate the complexity and performance of the decoding process using three metrics, namely NMP, AE, and GAP. Based on this model, we designed the SSBP offline scheduling algorithm and analyzed the upper bound of the average-case computational complexity required by SSBP. Our simulation results demonstrate that SSBP can significantly improve the convergence speed and achieve better error-rate performance without introducing extra scheduling complexity in the decoding process. It should be noted that other optimization methods, such as machine learning and ant colony optimization, can also be applied to our proposed model to further improve the efficiency of offline scheduling policies. Moreover, better optimization algorithms for finding well-performing scheduling sequences and the theoretically optimal value of scheduling sequences remain to be further studied.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
Dawei Yin would like to express his gratitude to Longlong Li for his valuable discussion on this study.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] 5G NR; Multiplexing and Channel Coding (Release 15), Standard TS 38.212, V15.2.0, 3GPP, 2018.
[3] IEEE Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems-Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Specific Requirements Part 11: Wireless Lan Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Standard 802.11, 2007.

[4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, 1997.
[5] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[6] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SIPS), Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[7] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. D. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Jun. 2007, pp. 932–937.
[8] Y. Gong, X. Liu, W. Ye, and G. Han, “Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683–2691, Oct. 2011.
[9] X. Liu, Y. Zhang, and R. Cui, “Variable-node-based dynamic scheduling strategy for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 147–150, Feb. 2015.
[10] B. Wang, Y. Zhu, and J. Kang, “Two effective scheduling schemes for layered belief propagation of 5G LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1683–1686, Aug. 2020.
[11] J. Frenzel, S. Mueller-Weinfurtner, J. B. Huber, and R. R. Mueller, “Static layered schedules and core-only parity check for the 5G new radio LDPC codes,” in Proc. 12th Int. ITG Conf. Syst., Commun. Coding, Feb. 2019, pp. 1–5.
[12] M. Kim, D. Kim, and Y. H. Lee, “Serial scheduling algorithm of LDPC decoding for multimedia transmission,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Broadband Multimedia Syst. Broadcast., Jun. 2012, pp. 1–4.
[13] M. Jang, K. Kim, S. Myung, H. Jeong, K.-J. Kim, and S.-H. Kim, “A design of layered decoding for QC-LDPC codes based on reciprocal channel approximation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2022, pp. 554–559.
[14] D. Yin et al., “On the message passing efficiency of polar and lowdensity parity-check decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Globecom Workshops, Dec. 2022, pp. 528–534.
[15] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[16] D. Yin et al., “On the message passing efficiency of polar and lowdensity parity-check decoders,” 2022, arXiv:2206.06897.
[17] E. Aarts, E. H. Aarts, and J. K. Lenstra, Local Search in Combinatorial Optimization. Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton Univ. Press, 2003.
[18] D. Chang, G. Wang, G. Yan, and D. Yin, “An optimization model for offline scheduling policy of low-density parity-check codes,” 2023, arXiv:2206.06897.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:50:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

