2024 2nd International Conference on Networking, Embedded and Wireless Systems (ICNEWS) | 979-8-3503-6746-1/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ICNEWS60873.2024.10730918

Design and Implementation of LDPC Decoder using VHDL for Space application

B P Swathi Department of Electronics and
Communication BMS College of Engineering
Bengaluru, India swathi.ec20@bmsce.ac.in

Amulya K Department of Electronics and
Communication BMS College of Engineering
Bengaluru, India amulya.ec20@bmsce.ac.in

Divya Shree K V Department of Electronics and
Communication BMS College of Engineering
Bengaluru, India divya.ec20@bmsce.ac.in

Suma M N Department of Electronics and
Communication BMS College of Engineering
Bengaluru, India suma.ece@bmsce.ac.in

Keerthi K Payload Data Management Group U R Rao Satellite Centre, ISRO
Bengaluru, India keerthik@ursc.gov.in

Abstract—With increase in demand for higher data rates and more complex satellite missions, the need for advanced channel coding techniques has become essential to establish robust and efficient communication links. Given the significant challenges posed by long distances and low signal power levels in deep space communication, the Consultative Committee for Space Data Systems (CCSDS) standard recommends Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes for robust error-correcting capabilities and efficiency. The design and Implementation details of Normalized min-sum based LDPC Decoder using VHSIC Hardware Description Language (VHDL) for Space application are provided in the paper. The future work is also identified in the paper.
Keywords— LDPC, Channel Decoder, RTL design, CCSDS, Spacecraft.
I. INTRODUCTION
Over the years, digital communication has made rapid progress, particularly in cellular, computer and satellite communication. Communication systems must handle various factors, such as electromagnetic interference, attenuation, and distortion, which can degrade signal quality. Channel encoding and decoding techniques are incorporated in digital communication to mitigate the effects of channel noise on data and enhance the robustness and reliability of communication links.
It is essential to incorporate coding for deep space satellite communications as long distances and low signal power levels often cause message corruption. LDPC codes are preferred for communication between ground stations and satellites for space applications. LDPC codes exhibit strong error correction capabilities that make LDPC suitable for communication channels with varying levels of noise and interference.
Register-Transfer Level (RTL) design and implantation details of LDPC Decoder using VHDL for Space application are provided in this paper. The LDPC decoder validation process and results are also presented in this paper.
II. LITERATURE SURVEY
Literature survey is carried out prior to the RTL design of LDPC decoder. The literature survey details are provided below in brief.

Evolution of LDPC codes, recent research breakthroughs, LDPC applications, and analysis using Tanner graphs are reported. Various construction methods for LDPC codes and details about algorithms are also provided [1].
Various decoding techniques including both hard decision decoding using the bit flipping algorithm and soft decision decoding approaches such as the belief propagation algorithm, sum product algorithm, and minimum sum algorithm are reported [2].
The principles and performance of Reed-Solomon (RS), LDPC, and Turbo error correction control codes are summarized, compared and analysed in the context of wireless optical communication and aviation under different weather conditions. As per literature, LDPC codes are suitable for high-speed communication systems [3, 4].
Upon comparing and analysing performance of QuasiCyclic (QC) - LDPC codes against the currently used turbo codes with respect to a set of parameters for deep space and high data rate applications, it is concluded in the literature that QC-LDPC codes outperform turbo codes [5].
Numerous LDPC codes are compared using a set of metrics to select a family of LDPC codes that is good for inclusion in a new CCSDS telemetry channel coding standard for deep-space applications. It is concluded that AccumulateRepeat-Accumulate (ARA) codes expanded with circulants have better performance and can generate a family of codes with a variety of code rates and block lengths [6].
Two simplified versions of the belief propagation algorithm for fast iterative decoding of LDPC codes on the additive white Gaussian noise channel are proposed which reduce decoder complexity [7].
Two improved min-sum algorithms, the normalized and offset min-sum algorithms, are used for decoding of regular and irregular LDPC codes and their behaviour is analysed [8].
Efficient algorithms and cost-effective hardware are needed for identifying the first two minimum values in the min-sum algorithm based LDPC decoder design. Sortingbased (XS) and Tree Structure (TS) approach are compared in the literature. The XS approach reduces number of comparisons, while the TS approach attains higher speed at lower hardware cost [9].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Area and time-efficient tree architecture for identifying the first two minima and the index of the first minimum in LDPC decoder design is reported in the literature. This architecture reduces number of comparators by reusing intermediate comparison results from the first minimum to collect values for the second minimum [10].
A technical document is available that includes Recommended Standard for developing channel coding schemes that can be used in Telecommand (TC) Space Data Link Protocol for ground-to-space or space-to-space communication links for a space missions. This Recommended Standard specifies two error-control coding methods: modified Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) code and LDPC codes. It describes the codeword format, encoding and decoding procedures for BCH coding. Additionally, the document provides an overview, specifications, parity-check matrix, encoding and decoding procedures for LDPC coding [11].
As spacecraft and its communication protocols become increasingly complex, there is a corresponding demand for more sophisticated uplink coding capabilities. The technical document on CCSDS Experimental Specification for a set of short block length LDPC codes intended for telecommand applications is available for reference. LDPC codes can provide greater coding gain compared to the BCH code specified in the TC Synchronization and Channel Coding for telecommand systems. The document recommends three short block length LDPC systematic codes for Emergency and command/ Automatic Repeat reQuest (ARQ) modes of uplink operation, with code block lengths of (n=128, k=64), (n=256, k=128), and (n=512, k=256). Each of these codes has a code rate of r=k/n=1/2[12].
A novel approach for designing a CCSDS-recommended LDPC encoder with a code rate of ⅞ and decoder using BitFlipping algorithm is provided in the literature. Verification of both CCSDS-compliant encoder and decoder is conducted through simulation on the Xilinx Integrated Software Environment (XILINX-ISE) platform and implementation on a Virtex-7 Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) [13].
Implementation details of a high-throughput Euclidian geometry-based QC-LDPC code decoder architecture for code rate ½ on a Xilinx Kintex7 (XC7K325T-2) board using the Normalized Min-Sum algorithm and the turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm are reported [14].
Algorithmic transformations and architectural optimizations aimed at enhancing the throughput of conventional LDPC decoders, particularly for QC-LDPC codes, achieving both low complexity and high speed are introduced. The proposed architecture's efficacy is validated through implementation on a Xilinx FPGA Virtex-II 6000 board [15].
III. APPROACH
It is reported in the literature that the Normalised min-sum based LDPC decoding technique is preferred coding scheme for space application after comparing the performance and results with other coding schemes. CCSDS standard document also recommends Normalised min-sum based LDPC decoding scheme for space application. Hence, this decoding technique is selected for the design of LDPC decoder. The approach for implementing the RTL design of

LDPC decoder is depicted with typical activity flow-chart in Fig. 1.
The activity begins with a literature survey on LDPC codes, specifically focusing on LDPC decoders. Subsequently, the specifications for the decoder, as recommended by the CCSDS standard in references [11] and [12], are listed.
Initially, the decoder is developed and simulated in MATLAB. The normalizing factor is then tuned based on simulation run with different set of iteration limit and the decoder’s error correction capability in percentage. Subsequently the RTL design for a (128,64) block length code is done as per CCSDS standard using VHDL.
The functional verification is conducted to test the decoder with encoded data with noise and without noise to check errorhandling capacity. The RTL design results are compared with the MATLAB simulation results prior to proceed with synthesis and timing verification.
After synthesis and timing verification, the LDPC decoder design is implemented on a FPGA board as part of hardware demonstration.
Fig. 1. LDPC decoder design implementation flow-chart
IV. LDPC DECODER FUNCTIONALITY Various types of LDPC decoding techniques such as Bit flipping, Sum-product algorithm, Belief propagation, Minsum algorithm, Normalized Min-Sum algorithm, Layered Min-Sum algorithm, Offset Min-Sum algorithm, are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

available. The normalized Min-Sum decoding algorithm is implemented as per CCSDS standard whose functionality is presented below in brief.
LDPC decoders are soft-in-soft out decoders which receives soft messages as input from the channel and gives soft messages as outputs. Soft messages are real values distributed around +1 and -1. In hardware, these real symbol values are the amplitudes of analog voltage or current signal which are converted to digital domain using an Analog to Digital Converter (ADC) with suitable quantization levels at the receiver end of digital communication link. The LDPC decoder assumes the output of ADC as soft messages i.e., the Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) values of the codeword symbols. These soft messages are real values representing belief about the bit, which are represented mathematically using loglikelihood ratio as presented by (1) for bit “b”.
LLR quantifies the confidence or belief that a particular bit is 0 or 1, considering the received signal's characteristics. A positive LLR indicates a higher likelihood of the bit being 0, while a negative LLR indicates a higher likelihood of the bit being 1.
LDPC coding scheme gets its name due to sparse and lowdensity nature of the parity-check matrix used in the coding scheme. This matrix has few non-zero elements compared to its total size, leading to efficient computation. A Parity check Matrix H (4x7) is considered as given in Fig. 2 to explain the functionality.

In LDPC decoding, the rows of parity check matrix represent the check equations and columns represent bit position. The position of 1’s in a row represents which codeword bit participate in a check equation and same gets connected in the tanner graph.
The Normalized Min-Sum algorithm based LDPC decoder refines decoding accuracy through iterative message-passing between bit and check nodes.
Matrix H considered has 4 Check nodes and 7 Bit nodes hence the received codeword should be 7 bit long. Consider the codewords received from the receiver as in Fig. 4, which has a single bit error at the first position.
Fig. 4. Received codewords considered for discussion.
Each bit node maintains a soft LLR which consists of extrinsic and intrinsic LLR messages exchanged between nodes during the decoding process. Intrinsic LLR refers to the belief of the bit solely based on the observation of the received signal from channel corresponding to that bit. Extrinsic LLR, on the other hand, is the refined LLR value of a bit-node calculated based on the information from neighbouring channels or bit-nodes.
Decoder begins by initializing the Bit Nodes with received values which will be the initial beliefs of the Bits. The initialization part involves matrix multiplication of Paritycheck-matrix with the received codewords as shown in (2).

Fig. 2. Parity-check-matrix of size 4x7.
LDPC codes decoding can be visualized using the tanner graph, which consists of k check nodes corresponding to each row and n bit nodes corresponding to each column of H matrix (k×n). The Tanner graph for the above Parity Check Matrix is shown in Fig. 3.

Instead of directly updating probabilities, it normalizes the messages exchanged to prevent LLR values from growing too large or too small. This normalization step ensures stability in the decoding process, even with large variable node or high signal-to-noise ratios, and prevents LLR saturation for better convergence. Additionally, the min-sum algorithm simplifies belief propagation process, reducing computational complexity while maintaining competitive decoding accuracy.
Decoder normalizes all the Beliefs before message passing by multiplying with a normalizing factor. These normalized LLR values are sent as messages from Bit-Nodes to only those Check-Nodes connected in the Tanner graph.
Codewords obtained at Check Node are related through the check equation which is nothing but XOR of all non-zero elements in the row equated to zero. It represents Single parity check (SPC) code. SPC code is a linear block code that has a single parity bit (XOR of all other bits) in every block code. The belief of a bit b1 consists of belief about that bit from its received value (Intrinsic) and belief about that bit from other received values (Extrinsic). The first row of H matrix represents a (4,3) SPC code, the intrinsic belief LLR is given by (3).

Fig. 3. Tanner graph of LDPC Codes

Further, the Extrinsic LLR (magnitude and sign separately) is given by (4) and (5).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Where f(x)=| log(tanh(x/2)) | and l1, l2, l3 and l4 are extrinsic messages from bit-node.
Using Min-Sum approximation, the extrinsic LLR value for (n, n-1) SPC decoder (magnitude and sign separately) is represented in (6) and (7).

should begin its operations. Along with these signals, data valid signals are also input to the decoder. The data valid signals indicate that data are available at the port.

At each Check-Node after SPC decoding with Min-Sum approximation, the extrinsic LLR values computed for each Bit-Node connected are then sent back to their respective BitNodes as messages.
Multiple extrinsic beliefs arriving from the check nodes are consolidated at the bit node to update its belief. Since, at each Bit-Node belief about the same bit is received from multiple Check-Nodes, it represents a repetition code. Repetition code is a linear block code that consist of messages that are repeated multiple times and transmitted through a noisy channel. Hence Repetition decoding is done at each BitNode. Column one of the parity-check-matrix represents a (3,1) Repetition code with received values [r1 r2 r3], The intrinsic LLR value of bit b1 will be similar to (3) while extrinsic LLR is given by (8).
Where m3and m4 are extrinsic messages from checknodes.
Scalar Factor (2/σ^2) is ignored. New extrinsic beliefs calculated at bit-node are again normalized and passed to connected check-nodes and the process continues till iteration limit predetermined is met. Thus, the extrinsic beliefs are passed back and forth between check nodes and bit nodes to iteratively improve each bit’s belief using information from other bits. Finally, the total belief which will be sum of intrinsic and extrinsic beliefs will be calculated at Bit-Node and will be the corrected beliefs produced as output.
V. RTL DESIGN OF LDPC DECODER
A. Specifications
The specifications of the LDPC decoder design are derived from CCSDS recommendations for telecommand deep space applications. A block code length of (128, 64) and a code rate of ½ is selected for the design. As a soft-decision decoder, the input and output codewords are real values represented in 16bit format, with 1-bit for the sign, 2-bits for the integer part, and 13-bits for the fractional part. Normalized Min-Sum algorithm is adopted for LDPC decoder as per CCSDS standard. The Normalizing factor and Maximum iteration limit needed for the decoder will be tunned based on the MATLAB simulation results.
B. Functional block diagram of RTL design
The RTL design of the Normalized Min-Sum algorithm based LDPC decoder is implemented in VHDL. The functional block diagram of the design is illustrated in Fig. 5.
The LDPC decoder receives 128 codewords as input along with the parity-check-matrix (64x128). The START signal is also an input to the decoder which indicates when the decoder

Fig. 5. Functional block diagram of LDPC Decoder
The first step is initialization, where the matrix multiplication of the parity-check matrix and the received codewords occurs. Subsequently, all initial beliefs are normalized by multiplying them with the normalization factor.
After normalization, the Check-Node operation (Row operation) is performed for all 64 rows, followed by the BitNode operation (Column operation) for all 128 columns. After these operations, the iteration limit is checked. The process returns to normalization followed by the Row operation when the iteration has not reached the limit. The Row and Column operations for normalized beliefs continue iteratively until the limit is reached. When maximum iteration limit is reached, the sum of the intrinsic and extrinsic beliefs performed during the Column operation for all 128 bits will be recorded and sent as final output result synchronized with the clock.
To efficiently manage this complex functionality, the control path and data path of the LDPC decoder are separated enabling a modular design. The control path, implemented using a Finite State Machine (FSM), manages the sequence of operations, ensuring that each step (initialization, normalization, Row operation, Column operation and iteration check) is executed in the correct order. The data path includes the actual data processing elements such as multipliers, adders and memory units used for storing intermediate results after performing the matrix multiplications and message passing operations. The design details of both the control and data paths are explained in the following section.
C. FSM of LDPC decoder
The control path, implemented using FSM, is written as a separate Controller module, where the controller governs all operations in the LDPC Data Flow module using control signals. The FSM designed for the decoder is depicted in Fig. 6. In Fig. 6, the red text represents input control signals to the FSM, while the blue text represents the output control signals from the FSM.
The FSM has six states, with the RESET state being the default state. Upon entering RESET, all signals are initialized to zero and the FSM remains in this state until it receives a START signal. The START signal, given as input to the decoder, initiates the decoder operation and change the FSM to the INITIALISE state. In this state, all inputs namely the parity-check matrix H (64x128) and the received codewords (128 codewords, each 16 bits wide) are stored in the decoder. Loading of all inputs and matrix multiplication completion are indicated to controller by LOAD_DONE signal. The controller transition to ROW_STATE occurs upon receiving LOAD_DONE signal.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 6. FSM of LDPC decoder
In the ROW_STATE, normalization and row operations (Check-Node operations) are performed. The FSM remains in this state until all row operations are completed and indicated by ROW_DONE signal. Upon receiving the ROW_DONE signal, the FSM transitions to the COLUMN_STATE occurs, where column operations (Bit-Node operations) are conducted for all columns. The FSM stays in the COLUMN_STATE until the COLUMN_DONE signal confirms that all column operations are complete.
Upon receiving the COLUMN_DONE signal, the FSM moves to the ITERATION_STATE, where it checks current iteration count against the limit. If the current iteration has not reached the limit, the FSM returns to the ROW_STATE, and the process continues iteratively. Once iteration limit is reached and indicated by the ITE_DONE signal, the FSM transitions to the OUTPUT_STATE occurs. In this state, the corrected codeword from the decoder is sent out as final output synchronized with the clock. After all the 128 codewords have been sent as output from the decoder and indicated by DONE signal, the FSM moves back to the RESET state and waits until the START signal is given again to restart the process.
D. LDPC decoder data-path
The LDPC Decoder Data path module performs all the operations in the decoder based on the control signals received from the Controller module. This module instantiates two additional sub-modules: the Check-Node operation module and the Bit-Node operation module, which handle Row and Column operations, respectively. Upon a RESET (active low reset), all storage elements and signals are initialized to zero. All operations within the module occur on the positive edge of the clock signal. The data flow within the module is depicted in Fig. 7.

Fig. 7. LDPC Decoder Data flow module
The module stores the values of the parity-check matrix (64x128) and the received codewords (128 codewords, each 16-bit wide) as input arrays synchronized with the clock. Initialization involves performing matrix multiplication of the parity-check matrix and the codewords, with the results stored in an intermediate matrix L (64x128, with each value being 16 bits wide).
At the beginning of each iteration, normalization of the beliefs is performed by multiplying with a scalar factor of 0.5. This value is selected based on the results obtained by carrying out various number of iterations, percentage of errors corrected in the data of selected block, etc. The module sequentially sends all rows to the Check-Node operation module, storing the updated rows back in the L matrix. Subsequently, all columns are processed by the Bit-Node operation module and store the updated columns stored in the L matrix. Also, the Bit-Node operation module produces total beliefs for all bits (128 codewords) at each iteration which is stored at a Register array of 128 values with each 16 bits wide.
Additionally, the decoder includes logic to check the iteration limit and provide control signals to the FSM. If the current iteration has not reached the limit, the module proceeds with the next iteration, starting from normalization. If the limit has reached, the total belief is sent as the output from the decoder, synchronized with the clock, based on the FSM's output control signals.
The individual functional submodules are integrated to form a cohesive and operational decoding system.
VI. DETAILS OF RTL DESIGN DEMONSTRATION USING XILINIX FPGA BOARD
After functional verification and successful synthesis of the RTL design, it is demonstrated on a FPGA board. The demonstration details are provided below in brief.
The ZYNQ XC7Z020 FPGA-based PYNQ-Z2 is a development board from XILINX, designed to support PYNQ , an open-source framework for embedded programmers to explore the features of Xilinx ZYNQ System On Chips (SOCs). The PYNQ-Z2 harnesses the power of the Xilinx Zynq-7000 SoC, which integrates a dual-core ARM CortexA9 processor with programmable logic. The PYNQ board environment allows Python programming and is compatible

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

with the Xilinx Vivado Design Suite for direct hardware design implementation on the board. One of the modules performance verification on FPGA board is provided below in brief.
Synthesis is carried out for a 4x7 parity-check matrix LDPC decoder on PYNQ FPGA board in Vivado v2018.2 tool. The synthesis is successful and the device utilization summary is as shown in Fig. 8.
Fig. 8. Hardware utilization summary of LDPC decoder after synthesis
The Check-node operation module for 4x7 parity-checkmatrix LDPC decoder mentioned in section 4 is tested by implementing on PYNQ FPGA board. The board's clock, set at 125MHz, is used as the reference for the module. All four rows that needs to be sent as input to the module are initialized in Read-Only-Memory (ROM) block memory IP of the development board. Address (2-bit) is made as an input port, which enables the reading of row values from ROM and subsequently feeding them as input to the Check-node operation module. The updated row values obtained as output from the module are read through seven 16-bit wide ports. All input and output ports are connected to the processor via an AXI-GPIO interface block within the custom block design. The hardware setup for testing the design is shown in Fig. 9.
Fig. 9. Hardware setup for testing the design using FPGA board
Upon generating the bitstream, the board was connected to a PC using an Ethernet cable and powered through the USB port. A Python code within Jupyter notebook is utilized to flash the design onto the FPGA board to test its functionality.

VII. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
A. Functional simulation results Functional verification of the LDPC decoder design is
performed using a testbench on Vivado. A clock frequency of 10 MHz is used for the simulation. The results are then analyzed to verify the correctness of the RTL design. The LDPC decoder design of required block length (128,64) is simulated by providing 64x128 parity-check-matrix as input to the design, transmitted in synchronous with the clock through 16-bit wide port H_BIT. Additionally, the received codeword (128 values 16-bit each), obtained from the encoder, is sent to the design as input R_BIT in synchronization with the clock. Also, the data valid signals H_DATAVALID and R_DATAVALID are sent as input to the decoder. The updated codeword outputs (128 values of 16 bits each) are obtained through port RNEW_BIT in synchronous with clock. The input and output waveform for the LDPC decoder design module for one iteration as observed from testbench along with the FSM state changes is as shown in Fig. 10.
Fig. 10. Waveform of Design Block for first iteration
The total latency of the LDPC design is 715 clock cycles (71500ns) representing the time delay when inputs are applied to the design until corresponding outputs become available. Latency for total data processing in the LDPC decoder design is recorded to ensure that it is well within the time available between data frames for the application.
B. RTL design verification with MATLAB MATLAB code is developed and simulated to compare
the performance of RTL LDPC decoder design using the Normalized Min-Sum algorithm to ensure consistency. The RTL LDPC Decoder design for a (128,64) block length is tested with encoded data having no induced noise and is processed for multiple iteration. The output obtained from the decoder is compared with the MATLAB simulation results. It is observed that the RTL design results exactly match the MATLAB simulation results, confirming the correctness of the designed decoder. Additionally, the hard values of the input data to the decoder (encoder data) and the RTL/MATLAB output data match, indicating that under no noise condition, the data is transmitted accurately without any errors. It is repeated for noisy data. The results are matching and satisfactory. The details are provided below.
C. Verification of decoder by introducing noise to data The performance of the RTL decoder for handling noisy
data is evaluated by corrupting nine percent of the input data (128 codewords) and checking the number of errors corrected by LDPC decoder. Uniform random noise is added to the data using MATLAB scripts and decoder's correction efficiency is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

analyzed. Correction efficiency is defined as the percentage of errors corrected by the decoder relative to the total number of errors introduced and mathematically represented by (9).

The RTL decoder design, with this corrupted input and normalizing factor of 0.5, is tested over multiple iterations and the results are as summarized in Table I. It can be seen from the table that in the first iteration, out of 12 values with noise, noise is retained in only 4 places, resulting in a correction efficiency of 66.667%, which is moderately good for the first iteration. Further, it is evident that correction efficiencies increase with the number of iterations. In the fifth iteration, the number of values retaining errors decreased from 4 to 3. By the tenth iteration, the correction efficiency increased to 97.667%, with only one error retained. By the fifteenth iteration, all errors were corrected, achieving 100% efficiency. These results highlight the iterative nature of the decoder's error correction process.

TABLE I.
DESIGNED

CORRECTION-EFFICIENCY OF THE LDPC DECODER

Sl. Number of Number of No iterations Noisy data

1

1

12

2

5

12

3

10

12

4

15

12

Number of Errors retained 4 3 1
0

Correction efficiency (%)
66.667 75
91.667 100

Initially, the correction efficiency is moderate due to the limited number of corrections possible in a single iteration. However, as iterations progress, the decoder's ability to identify and correct errors improves, leading to fewer retained errors and higher overall efficiency.
Further testing of the decoder involves increasing the percentage of noise induced in the data. A normalizing factor of 0.5 is implemented, but it can be fine-tuned to achieve better performance with higher levels of noise. Additional testing is needed with different normalizing factor, to enhance the decoder's efficiency in handling noise.
D. Hardware implementation results
Hardware results are obtained through interaction with PYNQ FPGA board by python coding on Jupyter notebook platform. Initially, python overlay for the bitstream generated in Vivado is created. Outputs are subsequently extracted from the FPGA board by the platform by providing inputs through available API functions. In order to obtain the check-node operation outputs for all four rows, distinct addresses are sent as input and the updated row output obtained are read in python. The inputs of check-node operation module (initialized in ROM) along with outputs obtained in hardware are displayed together on notebook as shown in Fig. 11.
The hardware performance results of the check-node operation module for 4x7 parity check matrix matches with the MATLAB results obtained.

Fig. 11. Results on Jupyter notebook for check-node operation of all four rows.
VIII. CONCLUSION
The paper provides details on RTL Design and verification of LDPC channel decoder design using normalized Min-sum algorithm for space application. The decoder is designed for block length (128,64) in accordance with the CCSDS standard recommendation for deep space applications.
Functional verification of the design is conducted using testbench. Further, the decoder design is verified by MATLAB simulation. The decoders error-correcting capability is verified by introducing noise into data and the results confirm that the decoder operates accurately, even under noisy conditions. The decoder’s module is also implemented on Xilinx FPGA PYNQ board and the hardware results are satisfactory.
Activities have been identified which needs to pursued in future. First, memory optimization is necessary to reduce hardware resource requirements, making the decoder more efficient and cost-effective. Second, design optimization is essential to further enhance the performance of the LDPC decoder. This involves implementation of layered decoding architecture to improve performance and error correction capabilities, support various code lengths and rates, and increase versatility and applicability to different communication scenarios. Additionally, the optimized LDPC decoder design needs to be validated as part of the development of IP modules. These enhancements will ensure that the LDPC decoder will be efficient and adaptable for a wide range of satellite communication systems.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors acknowledge the valuable inputs and suggestions provided by faculty of ECE department of BMS college of engineering and PDMG team of U R Rao Satellite centre, ISRO, Bengaluru.
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Tu and S. Zhang, "Overview of LDPC Codes," 7th IEEE International Conference on Computer and Information Technology (CIT 2007), pp. 469-474, 2007, doi: 10.1109/CIT.2007.7.
[2] Abdel Halim A. Zikry, Ashraf Y. Hassan, Wageeda I. Shaban, Sahar F. Abdel-Momen, “Performance Analysis of LDPC Decoding Techniques”, International Journal of Recent Technology and Engineering (IJRTE), Vol. 9, January 2021, doi:10.35940/ijrte.E5067.019521.
[3] Xinyu Lei, “The Comparison of RS Codes, LDPC Codes, And Turbo Codes”, Highlights in Science, Engineering and Technology, Vol. 81, pp. 496-504, January 2024, doi:10.54097/8tn0ya36.
[4] Kenneth Andrews, Dariush Divsalar, Sam Dolinar, Jon Hamkins, and Fabrizio Pollara, “Design and Standardization of Low-Density ParityCheck Codes for Space Applications”, SpaceOps 2008 Conference (Hosted and organized by ESA and EUMETSAT in association with AIAA), May 2008, doi:10.2514/6.2008-3211.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

[5] Nikoleta Andreadou, Fotini-Niovi Pavlidou, Stylianos Papaharalabos, and P. Takis Mathiopoulos, "Quasi-Cyclic Low-Density Parity-Check (QC-LDPC) codes for deep space and high data rate applications", 2009 International Workshop on Satellite and Space Communications, pp. 225-229, 2009, doi:10.1109/IWSSC.2009.5286377.
[6] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, D. Divsalar, and J. Thorpe, “Design of LowDensity Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes for Deep-Space Applications”, The Interplanetary Network Progress Report, Vol. 42-159, pp. 1-14, 15 November 2004.
[7] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic and H. Imai, "Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation”, IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 47, pp. 673-680, May 1999, doi: 10.1109/26.768759.
[8] Jinghu Chen, R. M. Tanner, C. Jones and Yan Li, "Improved min-sum decoding algorithms for irregular LDPC codes”, International Symposium on Information Theory, 2005. ISIT 2005, pp. 449-453, 2005, doi: 10.1109/ISIT.2005.1523374.
[9] Chin-Long Wey, Ming-Der Shieh, and Shin-Yo Lin, "Algorithms of Finding the First Two Minimum Values and Their Hardware Implementation ", IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, Vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3430-3437, December 2008, doi: 10.1109/TCSI.2008.924892.

[10] Youngjoo Lee, Bongjin Kim, Jaehwan Jung, and In-Cheol Park, "LowComplexity Tree Architecture for Finding the First Two Minima," IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems II: Express Briefs, Vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 61-64, January 2015, doi: 10.1109/TCSII.2014.2362663.
[11] “TC Synchronization and channel coding”, Recommendation for Space Data System Standards, CCSDS Document, Recommended standard, CSDS 231.0-B-3, Blue book, September 2017.
[12] “Short block length LDPC codes for TC synchronization and channel coding”, Research and Development for Space Data System Standards, CCSDS Historical Document, Experimental specification, CCSDS 231.1-O-1, Orange book, April 2015.
[13] Vaibhavi. B Panchal, Bela Vaidya and Bhavesh Soni, “Implementation of CCSDS Compliant LDPC Code”, International Journal of Trend in Research and Development, Vol. 3(3), May-June 2016.
[14] Ruochen Liao, Yuzhuo Fu, and Ting Liu, “FPGA-Based High Throughput TDMP LDPC Decoder”,Springer Nature Singapore Pte Ltd. 2016, NCCET 2016, Vol. 666, pp. 94-101, August 2016, doi: 10.1007/978-981-10-3159-5_9.
[15] Zhongfeng Wang, and Zhiqiang Cui, “Low-Complexity High-Speed Decoder Design for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes”, IEEE Transactions on Very Large-Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, Vol. 15, pp. 104114, January 2007, doi: 10.1109/TVLSI.2007.891098.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:53:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

