FPGA Implementation of LDPC Decoders Based on Joint Row-column Decoding Algorithm

Zhiyong He, Sébastien Roy, and Paul Fortier
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada, G1K 7P4

Abstract— This paper presents a joint row-column decoding algorithm for the decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Simulation indicates that the proposed algorithm improves the performance in both the waterfall region and the error floor region. By combining row processing with column processing, the joint row-column decoding algorithm reduces the storage requirements of extrinsic messages and avoids memory conflicts and routing congestion during the exchanges of extrinsic messages. Implementation results into field programmable gate array (FPGA) devices indicate that the proposed algorithm reduces the hardware costs by 30% and increases the decoding speed by a factor of four. A 40-parallel decoder attains a throughput of 2 Gbits/sec by using up to 20% of the generic logic resources in a Xilinx XC4LX160 device.
I. INTRODUCTION
Because of their capacity-achieving performance, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes introduced by Gallager [1] have recently received a lot of interest for reliable high speed communication applications such as long-haul optical channels and magnetic storage. Several industrial standards have been recently proposed which suggested the incorporation of LDPC codes, including Gigabit Ethernet, broadband wireless access networks, high-throughput wireless local area networks, and Digital Video Broadcast (DVB) satellite communications. For these practical applications, the high throughput of LDPC codes is a critical issue. Since the decoders for LDPC codes inherently have a large latency and low throughput due to the iterative decoding process, highly parallel decoding architectures are required to achieve multiplicative speed-up of throughput by employing multiple component decoders.
To implement such a highly parallel decoder, the first challenge is memory conflict and routing congestion during the exchange of extrinsic messages, because the column processors (alias bit node processors) read (write) the extrinsic messages from (into) the memory modules in a sequential order, while the row processors (alias check node processors) get access to these memory modules in an interleaved order. Several row processors may simultaneously attempt to get access to the same memory. To reduce routing congestion, it was suggested to permute memory addresses or reorder the parity check matrix [2]. To avoid conflicts in memory accesses, many more redundant

memory modules have to be added to assist memory accesses. Since a parallel decoder consists of many sets of row processors and column processors, a second challenge is posed by decoder area and power consumption. To address this, some low-complexity decoder architectures have been proposed to decrease hardware cost (e.g. [3]-[6]).
In this paper, we present a joint row-column decoding algorithm to increase the decoder throughput of LDPC codes. Without any column processor, the proposed algorithm offers the following advantages: 1. avoidance of memory conflict and routing congestion; 2. reduction of storage requirement for extrinsic messages; 3. reduction of the total hardware cost; 4. dramatic increase of decoder throughput. Finally, the proposed algorithm improves the performance in the waterfall region and slows down the onset of the error floor.

II. LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM
LDPC codes can be effectively decoded using the belief propagation algorithm, which is also variously designated as the message-passing (MP) algorithm and the sum-product algorithm.

A. Traditional message-passing algorithm

The traditional MP decoding algorithm performs two

distinct operations in each iteration. In the first phase (row

processing), the extrinsic messages in m check nodes are

calculated as follows:

∏ ∑ vij =

sign(uik )iφ[

φ (| uik |)] , (1)

k∈N (i)\ j

k∈N (i)\ j

with φ (x) = log((ex +1) /(ex −1)) , where N( i ) is the set

of bit nodes neighboring a check node i, and the notation

N(i)\j is the set N(i) excluding the bit node j. In the second

phase (column processing), log-likelihood ratios of n bit

nodes are calculated via:

∑ U j = llr( j) +

vkj ,

(2)

k∈M ( j )

where llr( j) = log( p0j / p1j ) is the prior log-likelihood
ratio of the j-th bit node. Similarly, M( j ) is the set of check nodes neighboring a bit node j and the notation M(j)\i is the

1-4244-0921-7/07 $25.00 © 2007 IEEE.

1653

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

set M(j) excluding the check node i. Then, the extrinsic

messages of n bit nodes are updated as follows:

uij = U j − vij .

(3)

B. Turbo decoding message-passing algorithm
As a variation of the traditional MP algorithm, the turbo decoding message-passing (TDMP) algorithm (alias layered decoding algorithm) divides horizontally the parity-check matrix into several sub-matrices [7], where each sub-matrix has column degrees of 0 or 1. Each sub-matrix is designated as a horizontal layer or a component code. Just like the turbo principle in a turbo decoder, the decoder based on MP algorithm is used to decode each horizontal layer (each component code) from the first layer to the last layer, while the updated log-likelihood ratios are passing between layers. Since each horizontal layer (component code) has a maximum column degree of 1, the TDMP algorithm is applicable only to specific structured LDPC codes, such as the LDPC codes constructed from shifted identity matrices.

C. Joint row-column decoding algorithm
We propose a joint row-column decoding algorithm which can be viewed as a generalization of the TDMP algorithm. Instead of the separate row-column processing in the traditional MP algorithm, the proposed algorithm includes column processing in the processing of each row, i.e. a joint row-column processor is used to process m rows from the uppermost row to the lowermost row in each iteration. Thus, no distinct column processing is required in the proposed algorithm. For the irregular LDPC codes having non-constant degrees, it is suggested to rearrange the rows of the parity-check matrix in a degree-decreasing manner from the top to the bottom. Thus, the check nodes of high degrees are processed first, providing better information for the check nodes of low degrees. Many algorithms, including the message-passing algorithm, can be modified to implement a joint row-column processor.

C.1 Joint processor based on message-passing algorithm
During decoding, the joint row-column processor based on message-passing algorithm reads both the log-likelihood
ratio U j and the extrinsic messages vij , and then calculates

new log-likelihood ratio U ' j and new extrinsic messages

v 'ij as follows:

uij = U j − vij ,

(4)

∏ ∑ v 'ij =

sign(uik )iφ[

φ (| uik |)] ,

(5)

k∈N (i)\ j

k∈N (i )\ j

U ' j = uij + v 'ij ,

(6)

where φ (x) = log((ex + 1) /(ex −1)) . The computation of

the extrinsic messages v 'ij in (5) in the joint decoding
algorithm is exactly the same as that in (1) in the traditional

message-passing algorithm. After the m rows are processed, a hard decision is made in each iteration according to the

sign of U ' . At the first iteration, the log-likelihood ratio j

U j

and the extrinsic messages

vij

are initialized to

Uj

=

log(

p

0 j

/

p1j ) ,

(7)

vij = 0 .

(8)

C.2 Joint processor based on minimization algorithm

To simplify the computation of the extrinsic messages

v 'ij in (5), the joint row-column processor can be

implemented based on a minimization algorithm which performs the minimization of the extrinsic messages in the ith row with 1 ≤ i ≤ m .

uij = U j − vij ,

(9)

∏ v 'ij =

sign

(uik

)i min k∈N (i)\

j

|

uik

|,

(10)

k∈N (i)\ j

v"ij = α × v 'ij − β ,

(11)

U ' j = uij + v "ij ,

(12)

where α and β are two corrective factors with 0 < α < 1 .

Since it imposes no constraint on the form of the paritycheck matrix, the proposed algorithm is applicable to various LDPC codes, including randomly-constructed LDPC codes, LDPC codes constructed from finite geometries, and LDPC codes constructed from shifted identity matrices.

III. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
To evaluate the proposed algorithm, simulations were performed for the LDPC codes specified in the IEEE 802.16e standard [8], assuming an AWGN channel and BPSK modulation. Throughout the paper, the tested LDPC code has a code length of 1920 and a code rate of 2/3.
The bit error rate (BER) and frame error rate (FER) at the 50-th iteration versus the signal-noise-ratio per bit Eb /N0 are compared in Fig. 1 for the traditional message-passing decoder, the joint decoder based on the message-passing algorithm, and the joint decoder based on the min algorithm.
Two corrective factors in (11) are set to α = 0.75 and β = 0 . An error floor occurs in the vicinity of 10−7 for the
traditional decoder, while no error floor exists down to 10−8 for two joint decoders. The joint decoders improve the performance in the waterfall region and the error floor region.
The BER versus the number of iterations at Eb /N0 = 2.75 dB for the three decoders is compared in Fig. 2. The BER first decreases rapidly and eventually converges towards a certain value. It is clear that the joint decoders exhibit a

1654

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

much faster convergence behavior than the traditional decoder, because the latter updates the log-likelihood ratio (llr) value only once, while the former performs updates of llr for several times at each iteration. To attain a BER below 10−5 at Eb /N0 = 2.75 dB, the traditional decoder needs 14 iterations, while the joint decoders need only 7 iterations. Since more iterations result in a large decoding latency and low throughput, the maximum number of iterations in the hardware implementation described in the next section are set to be 8 and 16 for the joint decoder and the traditional decoder, respectively.

were implemented into a Xilinx Virtex-4 XC4VLX160 Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) device, which contains 67584 slices, 135168 Flip-flop slices, 135168 LUTs, and 288 block RAMs. Due to the paper length constraint, FPGA implementation of the joint decoder with the min algorithm is not included in the following text.
A traditional serial decoder includes a row processor and a column processor. Some elegant implementations for these two processors have been reported in the recent literature (e.g. [3]-[6]). Without any column processor, a serial decoder based on the joint row-column decoding algorithm includes only a single joint row-column processor. Shown in Fig. 3 is an example of the joint rowcolumn processor with 3 inputs and 3 outputs. The row processor block shown in the figure performs exactly the same computation as the row processor in the traditional
decoder. The function φ in the row processor was
implemented as a 7-bit Look-Up-Table (LUT) in which 4 bits are used for the fractional part. Thus, a precision of 4 bits was chosen, i.e., 4 bits were used to represent the fractional part of each quantity within the algorithm. Since the most-significant-bit (MSB) is used for the sign, the extrinsic information was represented by a vector of 8 bits.

Fig. 1. Bit-error-rate and frame-error-rate at the 50th iteration versus Eb /N0 for the LDPC code with a code length of 1920 and a code rate of 2/3.

Fig. 3 A joint row-column processor with degree of 3.

Fig. 2 BER versus the number of iterations at Eb /N0 = 2.75 dB.
IV. FPGA IMPLEMENTATION OF SERIAL DECODERS To compare the decoding speed between the traditional decoding algorithm and the joint decoding algorithm, serial decoders for LDPC codes specified in the IEEE 802.16e standard with a frame length of 1920 and a code rate of 2/3

To reduce the propagation time from input signal to output signal in a row processor, a tree architecture is employed to implement the addition of extrinsic messages in (1), (2) and (5). Synthesis reports indicate that 5205, 1849, and 6825 gates were required for implementing a row processor, a column processor, and a joint row-column processor, respectively. The joint row-column algorithm reduces the hardware cost of a serial decoder by 3%.
By exploiting pipelining techniques, a maximum clock frequency of 365 MHz was achieved for the two decoders. When using a decoding clock frequency of 300 MHz, a decoding speed of 14 Mbps can be achieved for the traditional decoder with 16 iterations, while the speed of the joint decoder with 8 iterations reaches 112 Mbps. Thus the proposed joint row-column decoding algorithm increases decoding speed of a serial decoder by a factor of 8!

1655

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

V. FPGA IMPLEMENTATION OF PARALLEL DECODERS
A series of parallel decoders using both the traditional MP algorithm and the proposed algorithm have been implemented into the XC4VLX160 device with a maximum clock frequency of 172 MHz.
A. Decoders with low degree of parallelism
To compare hardware costs and throughputs of parallel decoder between the two algorithms, we implemented two 4-parallel decoders. The 4-parallel decoder using the traditional MP algorithm is comprised of 4 row processors and 12 column processors. To avoid memory conflicts during the exchange of extrinsic messages, several Block RAMs were added to assist memory accesses. Since 320 clock cycles were required for each iteration, the traditional 4-parallel decoder achieved a decoding speed of 56 Mbps, when using a decoding clock frequency of 150 MHz.
The 4-parallel decoder using the joint row-column decoding algorithm is composed of 4 joint row-column processors. Since no column processor is required, the proposed algorithm reduces hardware consumption by 30%. When using a decoding clock frequency of 150 MHz, the 4parallel joint decoder reaches a decoding speed of 225 Mbps which is 4 times faster than the traditional parallel decoder.
B. Highly parallel decoders
We only implemented highly parallel decoder based on the joint decoding algorithm, because of serious memory conflicts and routing congestion when implementing highly parallel decoder using the traditional decoding algorithm. Without any column processor, the joint row-column decoding algorithm avoids routing congestion and conflicts in memory access. To further reduce wires from processors to memory modules, each Block-RAM is configured as a dual-port 512 × 36-bit RAM so that each block RAM can store 512 sets of 36-bits words. Then, four extrinsic messages from the joint processor are stored as a word into the block RAM. Three block RAM are assigned to one joint processor having a row degree of 12.
When using the joint row-column decoding algorithm, the maximum degree of parallelism is mainly determined by the size of each sub-matrix in the parity-check matrix. Since the size of the sub-matrix for the tested LDPC code is 80, we implemented a 40-parallel decoder into the XC4VLX160 device, thereby consuming the following resources: Slices20%, Flip-flop 10%, and LUT-15%. When using a decoding clock frequency of 150 MHz and a maximum number of iterations of 8, the 40-parallel joint decoder attains a decoding speed of 2 Gigabits/sec!
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper has discussed the FPGA implementation of LDPC decoders based on a joint row-column decoding

algorithm in which the column processing is combined in the processing of each row. Since the pseudo-posterior probabilities of bit nodes are updated many times during each iteration, the joint decoding algorithm dramatically reduces the number of iterations and increases the convergence rate of the decoding process. Simulations indicate that the proposed algorithm improves the performance in the waterfall region and the error floor region. Without any column processor, the joint rowcolumn decoding algorithm reduces the storage requirements of extrinsic messages and avoids the memory conflict and the routing congestion during the exchanges of extrinsic messages. FPGA implementation results indicate that the proposed algorithm reduces hardware costs by 30% and increases the decoding speed by a factor of four. A 40parallel decoder attains a throughput of 2 Gbits/sec by using up to 20% of the generic logic resources in a Xilinx XC4LX160 device.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and Le Fonds québécois de la recherche sur la nature et les technologies (FQRNT). The support of the Canadian Microelectronics Corporation (CMC), under its System-OnChip Research Network (SOCRN) program, is also gratefully acknowledged.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT. Press, 1963.
[2] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone and F. R. Kschischang, “Multi-Gbit/sec Low Density Parity Check Decoders with Reduced Interconnect Complexity”, IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 5194-5197, May 2005.
[3] Z. Wang and Q. Jia, "Low complexity, high speed decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes", IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 5786-5789, May 2005.
[4] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone and F. R. Kschischang, " A Bit-Serial Approximate Min-Sum LDPC Decoder and FPGA Implementation", IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 149152, May 2006.
[5] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, " A 170 Mbps (8176, 7156) quasi-cyclic LDPC decoder implementation with FPGA", IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 5095-5098, May 2006.
[6] K. Shimizut, T. Ishikawat, N. Togawatt, T. Ikenagat, S. Gotot, " A parallel LSI architecture for LDPC decoder improving messagepassing schedule", IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, pp. 5099-5102, May 2006.
[7] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanhhag, " High-throughput LDPC decoders ", IEEE Trans. on VLSI Systems, vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976-996, December 2003.
[8] IEEE Std 802.16e-2005, “IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems”, Feb. 28th, 2006.
[9] T. J. Richardson, “Error Floors of LDPC Codes”, 41st Annual Allerton Conf. on Communications, Control and Computing, pp. 1426-1435, Monticello, Illinois, USA, Oct. 2003.

1656

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:54:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

