1644

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2007

Iterative Decoding With Replicas
Juntan Zhang, Yige Wang, Marc P. C. Fossorier, Fellow, IEEE, and Jonathan S. Yedidia, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Replica shuffled versions of iterative decoders for lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes and turbo codes are presented. The proposed schemes can converge faster than standard and plain shuffled approaches. Two methods, density evolution and extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts, are used to analyze the performance of the proposed algorithms. Both theoretical analysis and simulations show that the new schedules offer good tradeoffs with respect to performance, complexity, latency, and connectivity.
Index Terms—Belief propagation decoding, density evolution, extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, turbo codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
I TERATIVE decoding has received significant attention recently, mostly due to its near-Shannon limit error performance for the decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] and turbo codes [3]. It uses a symbol-by-symbol soft-in/soft-out decoding algorithm like maximum a posteriori probability (MAP) decoding [4] and processes the received symbols recursively to improve the reliability of each symbol based on constraints that specify the code. In the first iteration, the decoder only uses the channel output as input, and generates a soft output for each symbol. Subsequently, the output reliability measures of the decoded symbols at the end of each decoding iteration are used as inputs for the next iteration. The decoding iteration process continues until a certain stopping condition is satisfied. Then hard decisions are made based on the output reliability measures of decoded symbols from the last decoding iteration. Standard iterative decoders of LDPC codes and turbo codes often require several tens of iterations for the iterative decoding process to converge. Hence, methods to accelerate the decoding convergence without sacrificing performance are needed.
A “shuffled” turbo decoding method was previously proposed [5] that takes account of the different reliabilities of extrinsic messages that are available during an iteration of a turbo decoder. The shuffled turbo decoding algorithm converges faster
Manuscript received June 23, 2005; revised November 10, 2006. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-0430576.
J. Zhang was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawai’i at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA. He is now with Availink, Germantown, MD 20874 USA (e-mail: jzhang@availink.com).
Y. Wang and M. P. C. Fossorier are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawai’i at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: yige@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu; marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu).
J. S. Yedidia is with Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: yedidia@merl.com).
Communicated by Ø. Ytrehus, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of Figures 1, 3–6, 8, and 11 in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2007.894683

and only needs approximately the same computational complexity as standard parallel turbo decoding. Scheduling schemes using the “shuffled” idea have also been proposed for decoding LDPC codes and have been shown to converge faster than the corresponding standard decoding [6]–[8].
The aim of this work is to develop “replica shuffled” versions of the standard iterative decoding algorithms for LDPC codes and turbo codes. By using replicated subdecoders, this method provides a faster convergence than plain shuffled decoding at the expense of higher complexity. In [9], parallelism within one iteration is achieved by proper interleaver design for the turbo decoder architecture. In this work, iterations themselves are parallelized and consequently, the two approaches can be combined.
Our new approach is analyzed by density evolution [10] and extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts [11]–[13]. Both methods show that shuffled belief propagation (BP) converges about twice as fast as standard BP and replica shuffled BP converges faster than plain shuffled BP. The convergence speed of replica shuffled BP is determined by the number of subdecoders and the information updating schemes. For turbo decoding, replica shuffled turbo decoding converges faster than both plain shuffled turbo decoding and standard parallel turbo decoding. It is worth mentioning that the proposed schemes are sequential in nature. Therefore, they are mainly interesting when the structure of a code makes it difficult to implement the decoding in hardware in a fully parallel way (e.g., long LDPC codes, LDPC codes with relatively dense connectivity such as finite-geometry LDPC codes or turbo codes).

II. ITERATIVE DECODING OF LDPC CODES

LDPC codes can be represented by a bipartite graph with

variable nodes on the left and check nodes on the

right. This bipartite graph can be specified by the sequences

and

, where

repre-

sents the fraction of edges with left (right) degree , and

and are the maximum variable degree and check degree,

respectively. For a regular

LDPC code,

.

A. Algorithms
Following the definitions in [14], deterministic schedulings can be implemented either based on horizontal [15], [16] or vertical partitioning [6], [7] of the parity-check matrix. In [15], [16] a horizontal partitioning was proposed to serialize the decoding of LDPC codes and in the process, speed-up of the convergence was achieved. The algorithms of [6], [7] directly intend to speed up BP or simplified versions of BP by combining the bit node and check node processings in their scheduling. In this work, we consider replica approaches based on a vertical partitioning to speed up the decoding. The replica principle can also be applied to a horizontal partitioning in a straightforward way and similar gains have been observed for both partitioning schedules.

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING WITH REPLICAS

1645

1) Standard BP Decoding of LDPC Codes: Suppose a

regular binary

LDPC code of length

and dimension is used for error control over an additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with zero mean and

power spectral density

. Assume binary phase-shift

keying (BPSK) signaling with unit energy, which maps a

codeword

into a transmitted sequence

, according to

, for

. If

is a codeword in and

is the corresponding transmitted sequence, then the received

sequence is

, with

, where for

, the ’s are statistically independent Gaussian

random variables with zero mean and variance

. Let

be the parity-check matrix which defines the

LDPC code. We denote the set of bits that participate in check

by

and the set of checks in which

bit participates as

. We also de-

note using

the set

with bit excluded, and

the set

with check excluded. We define the

following notations associated with the th iteration.

•

The log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of bit which is

derived from the channel output . In BP decoding, we

initially set

.

more independent information that is used to update the mes-

sages, the more reliable they become. Iteration of the standard

two-step implementation of the BP algorithm uses all values

computed at the previous iteration in (1). However, cer-

tain values

could already be computed based on a partial

computation of the values obtained from (2), and then be

used instead of

in (1) to compute the remaining values

. This suggests a shuffling of the horizontal and vertical

steps of standard BP decoding. This decoding is referred to as

shuffled BP decoding.

In the shuffled BP algorithm [5], the initialization, stopping

criterion test and output steps remain the same as in the standard

BP algorithm. The only difference between the two algorithms

lies in the updating procedure. Step 1 of the shuffled BP algo-

rithm is modified as: for

and each

,

process the horizontal step and vertical step jointly, with (1)

modified as

•

The LLR of bit which is sent from the check node

to bit node .

•

The LLR of bit which is sent from the bit node

to check node .

•

The a posteriori LLR of bit .

The standard BP algorithm is carried out as follows [2]:

Initialization:

Set , and the maximum number of iteration to .

For each , set

.

Step 1:

(i) Horizontal Step, for

and each

,

process

(1)

(ii) Vertical Step, for process

and each

,

(2)

Step 2: Hard decision and stopping criterion test:

(i) Create

such that

if

and

if

.

(ii) If

or is reached, stop the decoding itera-

tion and go to Step 3. Otherwise, set

and go to

Step 1.

Step 3: Output as the decoded codeword.

2) Plain Shuffled BP Decoding of LDPC Codes: In general, for both check-to-bit messages and bit-to-check messages, the

(3)
3) Replica Shuffled BP Decoding of LDPC Codes: Shuffled BP decoding is a bit-based sequential approach and the method described in Section II-A2 is based on a natural increasing order, i.e., the messages at bit nodes are updated according to the order
. The larger the value of , the more independent pieces of information are used to update the messages at bit and the more reliable these messages become. Therefore, as the index increases, the reliability of the bit decisions increases and the corresponding error rate decreases. Indeed, the same reasoning applies if shuffled BP decoding is performed in reverse order; hence, if shuffled BP decoding is employed using a bit order starting with bit and ending with bit , the error rate increases with the index . As an illustration, Fig. 1 depicts the number of bit errors using standard and shuffled BP decodings (with increasing and decreasing order) for the PG-LDPC code [17] at the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 3.0 dB and after the second iteration. A total of 10000 random blocks were decoded. From Fig. 1, we observe that in plain shuffled BP decoding, the later a bit is processed, the more reliable it is. If more decoders are used, they can exchange their most reliable messages (bit-to-check messages associated with bits corresponding to the lower part of shuffled decoding curve) with one another and achieve faster convergence. Based on this observation, replica shuffled BP decoding is developed next.
In replica shuffled BP decoding, several shuffled subdecoders based on different updating orders operate simultaneously and cooperatively. After each iteration, each subdecoder receives more reliable messages from and sends more reliable messages to other subdecoders. Based on these more reliable messages, all replica subdecoders begin the next iteration. Hence, replica decoding can be viewed as a way to parallelize iterations. For

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1646

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2007

Fig. 1. Number of bit errors versus bit position in the (273; 191) PG-LDPC code at SNR of 3.0 dB.

two replicas, let and denote the subdecoders with natural increasing and decreasing updating orders, respectively. Let

and

be the variables associated with at iteration

. The variables associated with are defined in a similar way. The replica shuffled BP decoding with two replica subdecoders is carried out as follows:

Initialization: Set , and the maximum number of iteration to .

For each , set

.

Step 1: Each replica subdecoder processes the following two

steps simultaneously. For

and each

,

process

(i) Horizontal Step

Step 2: Set

for

and

for

.

Step 3: Hard decision and stopping criterion test:

(i) Create

such that for

if

and

otherwise; for

if

and

otherwise.

(ii) If

or is reached, stop the decoding itera-

tion and go to Step 4. Otherwise, set

and go to

Step 1.

Step 4: Output as the decoded codeword.

With respect to Fig. 1, note that Step 2 is equivalent to keeping

the lower parts of the two shuffled BP curves.

Another possible implementation is that these two sub-

decoders exchange more reliable messages synchronously

with each other during the decoding process. Define

and

, for

. In synchronous scheme, the

updating and exchanging procedures operate simultaneously as

follows:

Step 1: For

and each

, for

and each

, two replica subdecoders process

the following two steps simultaneously:

(i) Horizontal Step

(ii) Vertical Step

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING WITH REPLICAS

(ii) Vertical Step: for , process:

1647
and each

Synchronous group replica shuffled decoding is defined in a similar way.

(ii) Vertical Step

Notice that in this case the two replica subdecoders use the same

set of bit-to-check LLR values. It is also straightforward to ex-

tend the replica shuffled BP decoding to the cases in which more

than two replica subdecoders are used.

4) Group Replica Shuffled BP Decoding of LDPC Codes: To

take advantage of as many newly delivered messages as pos-

sible and therefore to achieve the best performance, a fully se-

rial replica shuffled BP is necessary. However, this scheme is

not attractive for hardware implementation due to its serial na-

ture. A totally parallel implementation is not realistic either for

large code lengths, or codes with highly connected graph.

In [5], a method called “group shuffled” BP was presented.

In group shuffled BP, the bits of a codeword are processed in

groups in a semi-parallel manner. The groups are processed se-

rially while the bits within a group are processed in parallel. This

approach can be extended in a straightforward way to the design

of group replica shuffled BP decoders. Assume the bits of a

codeword are divided into groups and each group contains

bits (assuming

for simplicity). Step 1

of the nonsynchronous group replica shuffled BP algorithm is

carried out as follows:

Step 1: For

, each replica subdecoder processes

jointly the following two steps

(i) Horizontal step: for

and each

, process:

Replica shuffled BP can also update messages in groups based

on unnatural increasing or decreasing orders. Suppose the up-

dating order of one replica is

, where

. Assume the updating orders of and

are and , respectively. Then replica shuffled BP with un-

natural updating ordering can be described with the above up-

dating rules by replacing

and

with

and

, respectively.

Replica shuffled BP can be further generalized to various

forms. One example is that in the unnatural updating scheme,

some groups of bit nodes may be updated more than once at one

iteration while other groups of bit nodes are updated only once.

The updating of LLR values at the th iteration is now based on

the LLR values delivered at the

th or

th iteration

(as in the example of Section II–A5).

5) Relationship Between Group Plain and Group Replica

Shuffled BP: Group plain shuffled BP can be viewed as a special

case of synchronous group replica shuffled BP. Assume in group

plain shuffled BP decoding, the bits in a codeword are divided

into

groups and each group contains bits. Consider

a group replica shuffled BP decoder with two subdecoders

and . For both and , the bits in a codeword are di-

vided into

groups and each group contains

bits. For

, let bits in group-

in and

bits in group- in compose group- in group shuffled BP

decoding. In synchronous group replica shuffled BP decoding,

if subdecoder updates group-

and subdecoder

updates group- simultaneously, group replica shuffled BP de-

coding with two subdecoders becomes group plain shuffled BP

decoding.

Since each subdecoder in group replica shuffled BP decoder

can take any updating order, group replica shuffled BP decoding

provides more flexibility than group plain shuffled BP decoding.

Hence, we can find some scheduling for group replica shuffled

BP decoder that has better performance than group plain shuf-

fled BP using the same decoding time and the same hardware

resources, i.e., the same number of subdecoders. For example,

consider a

irregular LDPC code which was con-

structed in a semi-random manner [25]. The variable node and

check node degree distributions are

and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1648

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2007
TABLE I PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF GROUP PLAIN AND GROUP REPLICA SHUFFLED BP DECODING

Fig. 2. Illustration of the scheduling of group plain shuffled BP decoding with two groups and group replica shuffled BP decoding with two subdecoders and four groups.

In shuffled and replica shuffled BP decoding, the pdfs of out-

going and incoming messages of bit nodes depend on the bit

index number. Let

and

be the pdfs of the in-

coming and outgoing messages of bit nodes in the th group at

iteration , respectively. We assume the bits of an LDPC code-

word are divided into groups and for simplicity we assume

given any check, the number of adjacent bits from any group is

at most one.

For the bit node processor of shuffled BP, the density

evolution is the same as that of standard BP, so that for

respectively. We compare group plain shuffled BP decoding

with two groups and group replica shuffled BP decoding with

two subdecoders and four groups. Fig. 2(a) illustrates the sched-

uling of group plain shuffled BP decoding. The variable nodes

are divided into two parts, 1 and 2. The processing follows

the order:

. Fig. 2(b) illustrates

the scheduling of group replica shuffled BP decoding. With re-

spect to the first subdecoder, the variable nodes are divided into

four parts,

and . The processing follows the order:

(4)

where denotes the Fourier transform operator. As observed from (3), depends on both for

and

for

. To avoid a brute-force calculation of all

possible combinatorial formats of and

, we let the

average pdf of the newly delivered outgoing messages from bit

nodes in group

at iteration be

(5)

. With respect to the second subdecoder,

the variable nodes are divided into

and . The pro-

cessing follows the order:

. Since the decoding time

for one iteration in group replica shuffled BP triples that in group

plain shuffled BP decoding, we compare their performance after

6 and 18 iterations, respectively, in Table I. We observe that with

this particular scheduling and the same number of subdecoders,

group replica shuffled BP outperforms group plain shuffled BP.

Similarly, we let the average pdf of the outgoing messages from

bit nodes in group

be

(6)

The check node processing can be implemented in a recursive way [18]. Define a core operation as

B. Analysis by Density Evolution

(7)

1) Density Evolution of Shuffled BP: Density evolution [10] is an effective numerical method to analyze the performance of message-passing iterative decoding algorithms based on graph. It has been shown that for a given message-passing decoder, if the channel and the decoder satisfy the symmetry conditions [10], then the decoding bit error rate (BER) is independent of the transmitted sequence. The process of density evolution therefore can be greatly simplified by assuming the all-zero sequence is transmitted. It is straightforward to verify that shuffled and replica shuffled BP decoder satisfy the symmetry condition, so that the all-zero transmitted codeword assumption is valid. In density evolution of shuffled and replica shuffled BP, a cyclefree structure of the LDPC code graph is assumed as in [10]. In this case, the incoming messages to any bit or check node are independent, which also simplifies the derivation of the probability density functions (pdfs) of the outgoing messages.

Then (1) can be calculated by applying (7) recursively as

(8)

If the incoming messages are independent and identically dis-

tributed (i.i.d.) random variables with pdf

, the pdf of the

outgoing message can be efficiently computed as [18]

(9)

where denotes the operation of pdfs of bit-to-check messages based on check node processing (7). Let us consider group shuffled BP with natural increasing ordering. The incoming messages to the check nodes adjacent to bit nodes in the th group have in total

(10)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING WITH REPLICAS

1649

possible formats. For each

, there are (11)

possible formats which contain newly delivered bit-to-check

messages at the current iteration and

bit-to-check

messages delivered at the previous iteration. The average pdf of

message incoming to bit nodes in the th group at iteration

becomes

The extension of density evolution of shuffled and replica

shuffled BP for decoding irregular LDPC codes is also straight-

forward. Consider an irregular LDPC code with degree distribu-

tions

and

. Consider

plain shuffled BP decoding in natural increasing order. From

(12), at iteration , the pdf of incoming messages to bit nodes in

the th group from a check node with degree is

(16) Since the pdfs of the outgoing messages of check nodes with different degree are distinct, the expectation of these pdfs is the overall pdf of the messages incoming to bit nodes int the th (12) group

Theorem 3.2.2 in [8] provides a recursion for density evolu-

tion of a serial schedule. In [8], the variable nodes are divided

into sets of equal size. Based on the assumption that no

two variable nodes in a set are connected to the same check

node, density evolution is simplified and only recursions are needed. For the bit nodes associated with group , the updating Similarly, the pdf of outgoing messages from bit nodes in the rule in our paper is the same as that in [8]. However, the up- th group at iteration becomes

dating rules for check nodes differ. In [8], the updating of pdfs

for check nodes is based on a single pdf, which is the average of

(17)

all pdfs of the bit nodes. In our approach, the pdf of a check node

is updated from all different pdfs of bit nodes from different groups, based on a combinatorial analysis with a consideration of the degree of the check node and all possible combinations of the pdfs of the bit nodes.
2) Density Evolution of Replica Shuffled BP: It is straightforward to extend these updating rules of pdfs for shuffled BP to replica shuffled BP. For instance, in nonsynchronous replica shuffled BP with two subdecoders, the updating rule of the pdfs of the outgoing belief messages from bit nodes is the same as that in plain shuffled BP, while the pdfs of incoming belief messages to bit nodes are modified as

3) Simulation Results: Fig. 3 depicts the BER as a function

of the numbers of decoding iterations predicted by density evo-

lution with standard BP, shuffled BP, replica shuffled BP with

two and four subdecoders (synchronous exchanging) methods,

for decoding rate-

regular LDPC codes with

1.111 dB. In the simulation, we assume the bits in an LDPC

codeword are divided into

groups. We observe that

shuffled BP converges about twice as fast as the standard BP

decoding while replica shuffled BP converges faster than plain

shuffled BP. As expected, we observe that the larger the number

of subdecoders in replica shuffled BP, the faster the convergence

(13) of decoding.

Fig. 4 depicts the BER versus the number of iterations pre-

for

. If an unnatural updating ordering is em- dicted by density evolution with replica shuffled BP decoder of

ployed, the indices

and in (13) are replaced with two subdecoders using nonsynchronous and synchronous ex-

and , respectively. Density evolution of synchronous replica shuffled BP operates in the same way while updating pdfs of incoming belief messages to bit nodes synchronously, i.e.,

changing schemes, for a

regular LDPC code. We observe

that replica shuffled BP under the synchronous exchanging

scheme converges faster than under the nonsynchronous

exchanging schedule. It is also worth mentioning that the

synchronous scheme requires less memory than the nonsyn-

(14) chronous scheme, but more frequent memory access.

Fig. 5 depicts the BER as a function of the numbers of de-

for

, and

coding iterations predicted by density evolution with standard

BP, shuffled BP, replica shuffled BP with two and four sub-

(15) decoders (synchronous exchanging) methods, for decoding a

rate- irregular LDPC code over an AWGN channel with

for

. The density evolution of replica shuffled BP

0.409 dB. The check and bit nodes distributions of

with more than two subdecoders can be obtained in a similar this code are

and

way.

, respectively

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1650

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2007

Fig. 3. BER versus number of iterations predicted by density evolution with the standard BP, plain shuffled BP, replica shuffled BP with two and four subdecoders (synchronous scheme), for decoding a (3; 6) regular LDPC code at the SNR of 1.111 dB.

Fig. 4. BER versus number of iterations predicted by density evolution with replica shuffled BP with two subdecoders under nonsynchronous and synchronous updating schemes, for decoding a (3; 6) regular LDPC code.

[19]. We observe a similar behavior as in the case of regular with four subdecoders, for decoding the above irregular LDPC

LDPC codes.

code at the SNR of 0.409 dB. We observe that at a given prob-

Fig. 6 depicts the BER versus the decrease in BER predicted ability of error, the decrease of the probability of error with

by density evolution with standard BP and replica shuffled BP replica shuffled BP is always larger than that of standard BP,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING WITH REPLICAS

1651

Fig. 7. An example for illustrating the ideal parity-check matrix of a (2; 3) regular LDPC code with length 9.
graph and the extrinsic (a priori) LLRs of the variable (check) nodes. Then the EXIT functions of a degree variable node and a degree check node are respectively

Fig. 5. BER versus number of iterations predicted by density evolution with the standard BP, plain shuffled BP, replica shuffled BP with two and four subdecoders (synchronous scheme), for decoding an irregular LDPC code at the SNR of 0.409 dB.

where

(18)
(19) and is defined as

(20)

is the inverse function of . The approximation

functions of and

are given in [20, the Appendix].

1) EXIT Charts of Plain Shuffled BP: In order to find a

closed form for the shuffled BP decoding, the following ideal

model is constructed for a regular LDPC code. Suppose the

variable nodes can be divided into sets and those in the

th set only connect to the th edge of the check nodes. For

example, quasi-cyclic regular LDPC codes have this feature.

This ideal model is also suitable for codes constructed using the

progressive edge-growth (PEG) method [21]. The parity-check

matrix corresponding to this ideal model is referred to as the

“ideal” parity-check matrix. Fig. 7 illustrates an example of the

ideal parity-check matrix of a

regular LDPC code with

Fig. 6. BER versus decrease in BER predicted by density evolution with the standard BP and replica shuffled BP with four subdecoders and synchronous updating, for decoding an irregular LDPC code at the SNR of 0.409 dB.

length . Based on the above ideal model, since all the edges of the
variable nodes in the same set connect to different check nodes,

they cannot benefit from one another. However, they can equally

which illustrates the faster convergence property of replica shuffled BP from another perspective. We also observe that density evolution of replica shuffled BP with four subdecoders has three fixed points, which is the same as that of standard BP. We observe a similar behavior for plain shuffled BP and replica shuffled BP with two subdecoders.

make use of the updated information of the previous edges. The processing of each check node also becomes identical.
Let the mutual information between the bits on any edge connected to a check node and their corresponding a priori LLRs be equal to the average input mutual information . Let be the updated mutual information between the bit on the th edge of the same check node and its a priori LLRs. Denote by the

C. Analysis by EXIT Charts
EXIT charts [11]–[13] are another effective technique to study the convergence behavior of iterative decoding. They are easy to visualize and to program and are a good complement to

mutual information between the bit on the th edge of this check

node and its extrinsic LLRs. Then the EXIT function for a check

node of a

regular LDPC code decoded with shuffled BP

decoding is

density evolution. Both the variable node and check node EXIT

curves can be computed in closed form [20] for the standard BP

(21)

decoding. Let be the average mutual information between

the bits on the edges of the graph and the a priori (extrinsic) It is worth stating that for standard BP, ’s are the same for all

LLRs of the variable (check) nodes. Similarly, let be the edges of a check node since all of them are processed simulta-

average mutual information between the bits on the edges of the neously. However, that is not the case for plain shuffled BP. In

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1652

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2007

second edges of the check nodes as their input a priori information. To calculate , we follow (19) and take the average of
and as the input a priori information, i.e.,

Then based on (18), the output extrinsic information of the

variable nodes in Set 2 equals

. Finally,

we process the variable nodes in Set 3. They take the output ex-

trinsic information from the third edges of the check nodes

as their input a priori information. Similarly, is obtained

from (19) with the average of and as the input a priori

information, i.e.,

Then the variable nodes in the third set output extrinsic infor-

mation , which equals

as shown in

Fig. 8(g), and one iteration is completed.

The above updating process can be generalized to any

regular LDPC code with the ideal parity-check matrix,

i.e.,

(22)

(23)

Fig. 8. The mutual information updating process for the LDPC code with the ideal parity-check matrix in Fig. 7.

for

.

The average input mutual information of all the variable

nodes is

and the average output mutual

information is

plain shuffled BP, variable nodes are processed in a fully serial manner and in our ideal model described before this means the The EXIT function for a variable node in the shuffled BP deedges of a check node are processed serially, so is improved coding is given by

as the increase of . For example, consider the ideal parity check

matrix in Fig. 7. Fig. 8 illustrates its updating process using

(24)

plain shuffled BP. Since the processing of each check node is identical, Fig. 8 depicts only one check node. The dark dots in Fig. 8 represent the variable nodes that are being processed. Based on the ideal model assumption, we know that the th edge

Next, we compare

and

. Let

and

. Since

is approximately linear with

when is within a small range, we obtain in that case

of all the check nodes only connects to the variable nodes in the

th set. Supposing variable nodes are processed from Set 1 to

Set 3, then all the th edges of the check nodes are processed

before any th edge of any check node for

. When the

variable nodes in Set 1 are processed, they take the output ex- Therefore, it follows

trinsic information from the first edges of the check nodes

as their input a priori information as shown in Fig. 8(b). Since

the a priori information of a check node is initially, fol-

lowing (19), we have

. Based on (18),

the output extrinsic information from the variable nodes in Set

1

as shown in Fig. 8(c). Then

the updating of Set 1 is completed. Next we process the vari-

able nodes in Set 2 as shown in Fig. 8(d) and (e). The variable

nodes in Set 2 take the output extrinsic information from the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING WITH REPLICAS

1653

algorithm only. So the threshold value remains the same for all methods.

From simulations, we observe that the variances of the a priori inputs to different variable nodes at one iteration vary within a small range. Hence the EXIT function for a variable node in shuffled BP decoding is almost the same as that in standard BP decoding.
2) EXIT Charts of Replica Shuffled BP: It is straightforward to extend this method to replica shuffled BP. Using a similar approach, we can show that the EXIT function for a variable node in replica shuffled BP decoding is also almost the same as that in standard BP decoding. Since in the nonsynchronous scheme, subdecoders only exchange information at the end of each iteration, the EXIT function for a check node in replica shuffled BP with two subdecoders and the nonsynchronous updating can be written as

even

(25)

odd

(26)

The EXIT function for a check node in replica shuffled BP with more than two subdecoders can be obtained in a similar way.
In the synchronous scheme, subdecoders exchange information immediately. Suppose subdecoders are used. Then we can divide each of the sets of the ideal model into subsets. Each subdecoder processes the variable nodes in a distinct subset of the same set at the same time. After all the variable nodes have been processed once, the subdecoders go back to the first set and process a subset different from those they have already processed. Thus, the replica shuffled BP can be regarded as applying the shuffled BP times. Therefore, the EXIT function for a check node in the synchronous scheme with subdecoders is given by
(27)

Theorem 1: Based on EXIT chart analysis, the threshold of a

code decoded by plain shuffled BP or replica shuffled BP is the

same as BP.

Proof: Let be the threshold in standard BP de-

coding. When

, the EXIT curves of variable

and check nodes cross each other at some point, say . If

, then

. In

plain shuffled BP decoding, if we use as the input a priori in-

formation to check nodes, then the extrinsic information of the

first edge in a check node is because

.

Variable nodes take as input and send back to check

nodes because

. From this we

can see the input mutual information to check nodes is not

improved during the process of updating variable nodes serially,

i.e.,

and

. So

and

, which means the EXIT curves

of variable and check nodes in plain shuffled BP also cross each

other at the point . The same result can be proved for replica

shuffled BP.

In general, the actual Tanner graph does not satisfy all the constraints of our ideal model, but the convergence behavior of the corresponding code can still be well approximated by the ideal model as shown next. Fig. 9 compares the EXIT functions obtained from the simulation method of [13] and the proposed closed forms. Both methods assume the input LLRs have a Gaussian distribution. We observe that the EXIT functions of these two methods are almost the same, which validates the EXIT functions derived in this paper.
We also verified by EXIT charts that the nonsynchronous scheduling converges slower than the synchronous one, as shown in Fig. 4. Fig. 10 depicts the EXIT charts of five decoding methods. We observe that replica shuffled BP with four subdecoders using the synchronous scheme converges much faster than the other methods. Fig. 11 depicts EXIT curves superimposed to constant-BER curves [28, Ch. 9]. For the same BER, the iteration number of standard BP is twice that of shuffled BP and eight times that of replica shuffled BP with four subdecoders and synchronous updating.
Fig. 12 depicts the EXIT curves of different decoding methods at the SNR of 1.11 dB, which is the threshold of the
regular LDPC code. We observe that the EXIT curves of variable and check nodes cross each other at the same point for all the methods. Hence, they have the same threshold as expected from Theorem 1.
These results can be readily extended to irregular LDPC codes.
3) EXIT Charts of Group Plain Shuffled BP: Based on the analysis of plain shuffled BP, we deduce the following theorem.

(28)

with

.

While these derivations allow us to model the convergence

of each method, it is well known that the threshold derived on

a tree cannot be changed by modifying the scheduling of the

Theorem 2: When decoding a regular LDPC code, group plain shuffled BP should have at least groups in order to have at any given iteration the same performance as plain shuffled BP based on the ideal model.
It is very easy to observe this result using the ideal parity-check matrix because the variable nodes in each set do not

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1654

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2007

Fig. 9. Comparison between the EXIT curves obtained from the simulation method of [13] and the proposed closed forms for a (3; 6) regular LDPC code at the SNR of 1.5 dB.

Fig. 10. EXIT curves (in closed form) for shuffled BP and four types of replica shuffled BP decodings at the SNR of 1.5 dB (variable nodes (VND) and check nodes (CND)).

benefit from each other and they can be processed in parallel degree is divisible by the group number, but it becomes cum-

without changing the performance. Simulation results presented bersome otherwise. Let be the number of groups. Suppose

in the next section confirm that this value is a good estimate of the check node degree is divisible by with

.

the least number of groups necessary to achieve the same per- Then the EXIT function of group plain shuffled BP can be de-

formance as plain shuffled BP on real Tanner graphs. Conse- scribed as

quently, Theorem 2 indicates that the speedup obtained by shuf-

fled BP over standard BP can still be achieved with a high level

(29)

of parallelism since, in general, is quite small. For complete-

ness, we develop the remaining case next.

If

, then

When the group number is less than , the EXIT function

(30)

of group plain shuffled BP is easily obtained if the check node

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING WITH REPLICAS

1655

Fig. 11. EXIT curves (in closed form) for standard BP, shuffled BP, and replica shuffled BP with four subdecoders with synchronous updating at the SNR of 1.5 dB, superimposed to constant-BER curves.

Fig. 12. EXIT curves (in closed form) for standard BP, shuffled BP, and four types of replica shuffled BP at the SNR of 1.11 dB.

Otherwise

(31) The preceding analysis is for vertical shuffled BP, similar results can be obtained for horizontal shuffled BP in [15], [16].
Theorem 3: When decoding a regular LDPC code, horizontal group plain shuffled BP should have at least groups in order (32) to have at any given iteration the same performance as plain (33) shuffled BP based on the ideal model.

where

In horizontal shuffled BP, instead of dividing variable nodes

.

into sets, we divide check nodes into sets. The check nodes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1656

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2007

Fig. 13. Comparison between the EXIT curves obtained from the simulation method of [13] and the proposed closed forms for group shuffled BP and group replica shuffled BP with four subdecoders and synchronous updating, for decoding a (3; 6) regular LDPC code at the SNR of 1.5 dB.

in each set do not benefit from each other and they can be pro-

cessed in parallel without changing the performance.

4) EXIT Chart of Group Replica Shuffled BP: The EXIT

function of group replica shuffled BP with nonsynchronous up-

dating is almost the same as that of replica shuffled BP (i.e.,

) except that ’s in (25) and (26) are obtained from

(30) and (32).

For the synchronous scheme, when

, group replica

shuffled BP can be regarded as applying standard BP times.

Therefore, the corresponding EXIT function is

(34)

(35)

where

.

When

, if is divisible by and

is divisible by , group replica shuffled BP is equivalent to

applying group shuffled BP with groups times. Let

.

Then the EXIT function becomes

to have at any given iteration the same performance as replica shuffled BP based on the ideal model.

Fig. 13 depicts the EXIT curves obtained from the simulation

method of [13] and the proposed closed forms for group shuffled

BP and group replica shuffled BP with synchronous updating.

We observe that the curves obtained with these two methods

match each other well, which again validates our derived EXIT

functions.

Fig. 14 depicts the error performance of shuffled BP, group

shuffled BP with six groups, replica and group replica shuffled

BP with 24 groups with four subdecoders, and synchronous up-

dating for decoding a

regular LDPC code,

whose Tanner graph was constructed by the PEG method [21].

Since the number of the bit nodes, 8000, cannot be divided by 6

or 24, the remaining bit nodes are assigned to the corresponding

last group. From this figure, we observe that the group methods

with the smallest group number derived theoretically in The-

orems 2 and 4 have almost the same performance as their cor-

responding non-group counterparts.

D. Simulation Results

(36) Fig. 15 depicts the word error rate (WER) of iterative de-

coding of a

LDPC code, with the standard

BP, plain shuffled and group replica shuffled BP algorithms, for

and , with four replica subdecoders and (37) synchronous updating. The maximum number of iterations

where

.

When

, the EXIT function of group replica shuf-

fled BP with synchronous updating is the same as for

.

Hence, we have the following theorem.

for plain and group replica shuffled BP was set to 10. We observe

that the WER performances of replica shuffled BP decoding

with four subdecoders and

, and a group number

larger or equal to four, are approximately the same as that of

standard BP with

.

Theorem 4: When decoding a regular LDPC code, group Fig. 16 depicts the WER of standard and replica shuffled BP

replica shuffled BP should have at least

groups in order decoding of a

irregular LDPC code which was

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING WITH REPLICAS

1657

Fig. 14. Word error rate (WER) of shuffled BP, group shuffled BP with six groups, replica shuffled BP with four subdecoders, and synchronous updating and its group version with 24 groups, for decoding a (8000; 4000) (3; 6) regular LDPC code.

Fig. 15. WER of a (8000; 4000) (3; 6) LDPC code with group shuffled BP algorithm, for G = 2; 4; 8; 16; 8000 and at most 10 iterations.

constructed in a semirandom manner [25]. The variable node chronous replica shuffled BP. However, for some LDPC codes

and check node degree distributions are

with relatively higher density parity-check matrices (such

and

as LDPC codes based on Euclidean and projective geometry

, respec- (PG)), nonsynchronous replica shuffled BP may provide a better

tively. The number of replica subdecoders was four and up- ultimate performance than the synchronous one. In Table II,

dating was synchronous. We observe that replica shuffled BP synchronous and nonsynchronous replica shuffled BP with two

with

and

provides a similar performance as subdecoders and 200 iterations for both decoding algorithms

that of standard BP with

.

are compared (the large iteration number was chosen to ensure

For most Gallager type LDPC codes, synchronous replica convergence in both cases). For this code, the nonsynchronous

shuffled BP offers similar ultimate performance as nonsyn- schedule provides a better performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1658

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2007

Fig. 16. Error performance for iterative decoding of a (16200; 7200) irregular LDPC code.

TABLE II PERFORMANCE COMPARISON OF NONSYNCHRONOUS AND SYNCHRONOUS REPLICA SHUFFLED BP DECODING FOR THE (273; 191) PG-LDPC CODE

denote the extrinsic value of the estimated information bit delivered by component decoder at the th iteration [23].

A. Algorithms

1) Standard Serial and Parallel Turbo Decoding: The de-

coding approach proposed in [3] operates in serial mode, i.e., the

component decoders take turns in generating the extrinsic values

of the estimated information symbols, and each component de-

III. ITERATIVE DECODING OF TURBO CODES

coder uses the most recent extrinsic messages delivered by the

A turbo code [3] encoder is formed by the concatenation of

two (or more) convolutional encoders, and its decoder consists

of two (or more) soft-in/soft-out convolutional decoders which

feed reliability information back and forth to each other. At each

iteration, the decoding of each component decoder is based on

not only the received channel values, but also the extrinsic mes-

sages delivered by other component decoders. For simplicity,

we consider a turbo code that consists of two rate- sys-

tematic convolutional codes with encoders in feedback form.

Let

be an information block of length

and

be the corresponding coded se-

quence, where

, for

,

is the output code block at time . Assume binary phase-shift

keying (BPSK) transmission over an AWGN channel, with

and all taking values in

for

and

. Let

be the received se-

quence, where

is the received block

at time . Let

denote the estimate of .

Let denote the encoder state at time . Following [4], define

other component decoder as a priori values of the information

symbols. The disadvantage of this scheme is its decoding delay.

In the parallel turbo decoding algorithm [24], both component

decoders operate in parallel at any given time. After each itera-

tion, each component decoder delivers its extrinsic messages to

the other decoder, which uses these messages as a priori values

at the next iteration.

2) Plain Shuffled Turbo Decoding: Although the parallel

turbo decoding reduces the decoding delay of serial decoding

by half, the extrinsic messages are not taken advantage of as

soon as they become available, because the extrinsic messages

are delivered to component decoders only after each iteration

is completed. The aim of the shuffled turbo decoding is to

use the more reliable extrinsic messages at each time. Let

be the sequence permuted by the in-

terleaver corresponding to the original information sequence

, according to the mapping

,

for

. We assume that

. There

is a unique corresponding reverse mapping

, for

and

. In shuffled turbo de-

, where

coding, first ’s of the two component decoders are computed , and in parallel and then ’s and ’s are calculated partially based

let

represent the corresponding on the most recent updates at the current iteration. Although the

values computed by component decoder , with

. Let two component decoders operate simultaneously as in parallel

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING WITH REPLICAS

1659

Fig. 17. Examples for illustrating the processing of plain and replica shuffled turbo decodings. (a) Example of plain shuffled turbo decoding with k = 8. (b) Example of replica shuffled turbo decoding with k = 8.

turbo decoding scheme, the messages are updated during each

iteration based on

and

[5]. Correspondingly, it

provides a faster decoding convergence.

3) Replica Shuffled Turbo Decoding: In the plain shuffled

turbo decoding summarized in Section III-A2, we assume all

the component decoders compute ’s followed by ’s. Let us

refer to the two component decoders as and . Another possible scheme is to operate in the reverse order, i.e., all the component decoders compute ’s followed by ’s and we refer

to them as and . In terms of error performance, there is no difference between these two approaches. However, the reliabilities of the extrinsic messages associated with a certain information bit delivered by these two shuffled turbo decoders differ. In general, the more independent information is used, the more reliable the delivered messages become. For the ex-

trinsic messages delivered by component decoder , which

are denoted as

, the larger is, the more reliable this

message is. Similarly, for the extrinsic message

de-

livered by , the smaller is, the more reliable this message is. It is natural to expect a faster decoding convergence if these two shuffled turbo decoders operate cooperatively instead of independently. Because in this approach two sets of shuffled component decoders are used to decode the same sequence of information bits, we refer to it as replica shuffled turbo decoding. In replica shuffled turbo decoding, two plain shuffled turbo decoders (processing recursions in opposite directions)

and

operate simultaneously and exchange

more reliable extrinsic messages during each iteration. We as-

sume that the component decoders deliver extrinsic messages

are two possible cases. The first case is

, which

means the extrinsic value

of the information bit

has already been delivered by decoder . As in plain shuffled

turbo decoding, this newly available

is used to com-

pute the values

and

. The second

case is

, which implies the extrinsic value

of the information bit has not been delivered yet by . Then

in plain shuffled turbo decoding, the values

and

are updated based on the extrinsic messages delivered at last iter-

ation. In replica shuffled turbo decoding, however, there are two

further subcases. The first subcase is

, which

implies the extrinsic value

of the information bit

has already been delivered by decoder . Then this newly

available

, instead of

is used to compute

the values case is

,

, and

. The second sub-

, which implies both extrinsic mes-

sages of the information bit , i.e.,

and

,

are not available yet. In this subcase, the values of

and

at the
, After puts

are updated based on the extrinsic messages delivered th iteration. The recursions of component decoders
, and are realized based on the same principle. iterations, the shuffled turbo decoding algorithm out, where

synchronously, i.e.,

, where the

and

denote the times at which

and

deliver the extrinsic values of the th (

th)

estimated symbol of the original information sequence and of

the interleaved sequence , respectively. As a result, each value

is available as soon as computed or four new values become

available at same time instant.

Let us first consider the processing of component decoder

at the th iteration. After time

, the values of

which is different from the estimate in standard turbo decoding

[3] and plain shuffled turbo decoding.

Fig. 17(a) and (b) illustrate the decoding processes of plain

and replica shuffled turbo decoding, respectively, with

.

In Fig. 17(a), when bit-1 of decoder is processed, the new

extrinsic information from decoder is not available yet, and

the extrinsic information from the previous iteration is used as

a priori information; when bit-3 of decoder is processed, the

should be updated and the values of

are needed. There new extrinsic information from the current iteration is used as it

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1660

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2007

Fig. 18. Monte Carlo model for computing the transfer function of a given turbo code with conventional turbo decoding.

Fig. 20. Monte Carlo model for computing the transfer function of replica shuffled turbo decoding.

a priori and extrinsic messages, respectively. Since we assume

an AWGN channel, each received signal

with

. Then

. It follows

(38)

Fig. 19. Monte Carlo model for computing the transfer function of plain shuffled turbo decoding.

where

and

. Hence, the consistency

condition [27] is satisfied.

Consider the a priori input

, with

and

. Using a similar analysis, we obtain

(39)

is already available. In Fig. 17(b), when bit-1 of decoder is processed, no new extrinsic information from decoders and
is available, so the information from the previous iteration is used; when bit-3 is processed, only the new extrinsic information from is available, and this new value is used; when bit-7 is processed, information from decoder is not avail-

and the consistency condition is also satisfied. Denote as the

mutual information exchanged between and and as

that exchanged between and . Since is conditionally

Gaussian and the consistency condition is satisfied, is inde-

pendent of the value of . Therefore, can be written as a func-

tion of , say

and has been defined in (20).

Since we do not impose a Gaussian assumption on

is

able yet, but that from decoder is; when bit-8 is processed, approximated based on the observation of samples of , so new extrinsic information from both and is available, that [13], [28]

and the most recently updated value is used. These two last cases

illustrate the advantage of using replica decoders.

(40)

It is straightforward to generalize replica shuffled turbo de-

coding to multiple turbo codes which consist of more than two component codes. Also group of bits can be updated periodically only to reduce information exchanges between replicas. Based on the above descriptions with two replicas, the total computational complexity of the replica shuffled turbo decoding for multiple turbo codes at each decoding iteration is about twice that of the parallel turbo decoding.
The proposed approach can be generalized to more than two replicas of each decoder but in that case, termination issues have to be considered, unless the convolutional code is in tail-biting form.

The transfer function is defined as

and for a

fixed value

, it is just

. The transfer functions

of both decoders are plotted on a single chart. Since in turbo

decoding the extrinsic messages of the first decoder serve as the

a priori messages of the second decoder, the axes are swapped

for the transfer function of decoder-2.

1) Analysis of Plain Shuffled Turbo Decoding: In [28, Ch. 9],

a Monte Carlo model is used to derive the EXIT chart for a given

turbo code. Its structure is shown in Fig. 18, with two Gaussian

random noise generator outputs and whose distributions

satisfy (38) and (39), respectively. Then and are sent to

B. Analysis by EXIT Charts

the single-input single-output (SISO) decoder, which outputs . Based on (20) and (40), and can be calculated. The

In this section, we first review the results obtained in [11], transfer functions are obtained accordingly.

[13], [28]. Both channel observations and a priori knowledge In plain shuffled turbo decoding, each decoder sends the

can be modeled as conditional Gaussian random variables [11]. newly updated extrinsic messages to the other decoder imme-

Denote by

and the LLRs of channel observations, diately after updating. Hence, we adopt three Gaussian random

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING WITH REPLICAS

1661

Fig. 21. EXIT charts of a two-component turbo code with interleaver size 16384, for standard parallel, plain shuffled, and replica shuffled turbo decoding, E =N = 0.15 dB.

Fig. 22. Bit error performance of a two-component turbo code with interleaver size 16384, for standard parallel, plain shuffled and replica shuffled decodings.

noise generators in the model to compute the transfer function, tion is depicted in Fig. 20. Since the four decoders,

as shown in Fig. 19. The first two generators are identical to those in Fig. 18, while the third one takes the interleaved sequence as input. The outputs of all these generators, and , are sent to the plain shuffled turbo decoders, where and are used as the a priori messages of decoder-1 and de-

and , exchange information synchronously, the newly updated a priori messages of and are the same after each iteration and so are those of and . Therefore, we still use three Gaussian random noise generators, but send

coder-2, respectively. Then and are obtained and both to and , and to and , respectively. Since

of them are used to calculate in (40).

each decoder takes the extrinsic messages from two other de-

2) Analysis of Replica Shuffled Turbo Decoding: For replica coders as its a priori messages, only the most recently updated

shuffled turbo decoding, the model to compute the transfer func- extrinsic messages serve as the a priori messages in the next it-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1662

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 5, MAY 2007

eration. Hence, it is more convenient to use the a priori LLRs for The replica approach is particularly useful for turbo codes

the next iteration, say and , to calculate . Therefore, in since their decoding is serial. EXIT charts have been used to

Fig. 20, we have the replica shuffled turbo decoder output

estimate the convergence of replica shuffled, plain shuffled, and

and instead of

and . The values

and are then calculated using the same formulas as before and

the transfer functions follow.

parallel turbo decoding. From both EXIT chart analysis and simulation results, it is observed that replica shuffled turbo decoding can save about half iterations compared with parallel turbo decoding, which is a significant improvement.

C. Simulation Results

In general, the proposed replica approach can be viewed as

Fig. 21 depicts the EXIT charts of a rate- turbo code with

two component codes and interleaver size

, for standard

parallel, plain shuffled, and replica shuffled turbo decoding at

the SNR of 0.15 dB. We observe that the replica shuffled turbo

decoding converges faster than both the parallel and plain shuf-

fled turbo decoding.

several processing elements updating the same memory unit, each element corresponding to one iteration of the underlying algorithm. The global scheduling of the memory accesses can be determined from the convergence analysis by density evolution or EXIT charts. This analysis is also useful to design codes suitable for replica decoding.

Fig. 22 depicts the BER of the same turbo code, with standard

parallel, plain shuffled, and replica shuffled decoding. After five iterations, the replica shuffled turbo decoder outperforms its parallel and plain counterparts by several tenths of a decibel. Furthermore, at the SNR value of 0.15 dB, the BER of replica shuffled turbo decoding after five iterations is slightly worse than that of standard parallel turbo decoding after ten iterations, as predicted from the EXIT charts in Fig. 21.
IV. CONCLUSION
Replica shuffled iterative methods have been proposed to decode LDPC codes and turbo codes with reduced latency. The faster convergence property of the presented algorithms has been verified by density evolution and EXIT charts. Both theoretical analysis and simulation results show that replica shuffled decoding provides good tradeoffs with respect to performance, complexity, and latency. Although not explored in this work, connectivity in the decoder realization can also benefit from the replica approach.
Based on EXIT charts analysis, we derived an estimate for the least number of groups needed for group plain and replica shuffled BP to achieve the same performance as plain and replica shuffled BP, respectively. This result is useful because the fully serial updating of plain and replica shuffled BP is often not attractive in practice, and group shuffled BP is needed. This result indicates that we can achieve the same performance as the fully serial version with only a few carefully chosen groups.
Since group plain shuffled BP can be viewed as a special case of synchronous group replica shuffled BP, group replica shuffled BP decoding provides more flexibility than group plain shuffled BP decoding and we can find schedulings for which group replica shuffled BP decoder has better performance than group plain shuffled BP using the same decoding time and the same hardware resources. However, we observed that in general, the scheduling of group plain shuffled BP is very good.
For most Gallager type LDPC codes, both synchronous and nonsynchronous replica shuffled BP achieve similar error performance after convergence. In that case, the synchronous scheduling requires less iterations than the nonsynchronous one. However, for some LDPC codes with relatively high density parity-check matrices (such as LDPC codes based on Euclidean and projective geometry), nonsynchronous replica shuffled BP may provide a better performance than the synchronous one.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near-optimum error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[4] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[5] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[6] H. Kfir and I. Kanter, “Parallel versus sequential updating for belief propagation decoding,” Physica A, vol. 330, pp. 259–270, 2003.
[7] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Systems and Computers, Pacific Grove, CA, Nov. 2002, pp. 8–15.
[8] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “An efficient message-passing schedule for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. 2004 Conf. Electrical and Electronics Engineers in Israel, Tel-Aviv, Israel, Sep. 2004, pp. 223–226.
[9] C. Berrou, Y. Saouter, C. Douillard, S. Kerouédan, and M. Jézéquel, “Designing good permutations for turbo codes: Toward a single model,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Paris, France, Jun. 2004, pp. 341–345.
[10] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[11] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[12] M. Tüchler, S. ten Brink, and J. Hagenauer, “Measures for tracing convergence of iterative decoding algorithms,” in Proc. 4th IEEE/ITG Conf. Source and Channel Coding, Berlin, Germany, Jan. 2002, pp. 53–60.
[13] M. Tüchler and J. Hagenauer, “EXIT charts of irregular codes,” in Proc. 2002 Conf. Information Sciences and Systems, Princeton, NJ, Mar. 2002, pp. 748–753.
[14] F. Guilloud, “Generic Architecture for LDPC Codes Decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, ENST, Paris, France, 2004.
[15] E. Yeo, P. Pakzad, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “High throughput low-density parity-check decoder architectures,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 3019–3024.
[16] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Turbo decoder architecture for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., Nov. 2002, pp. 1383–1388.
[17] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[18] S. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: ITERATIVE DECODING WITH REPLICAS

1663

[19] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[20] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[21] X. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 995–1001.
[22] S. Tong and X. Wang, “Convergence analysis of Gallager codes under different message-passing schedules,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 249–251, Mar. 2005.
[23] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.

[24] D. Divsalar and F. Pollara, “Multiple turbo codes for deep-space communications,” JPL TDA Progress Rep., pp. 66–77, May 1995.
[25] Draft DVB-S2 Standard, [Online]. Available: http://www.dvb.org [26] A. Viterbi, “An intuitive justification and a simplified implementation
of the MAP decoder for convolutional codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 12, no. 2, pp. 260–264, Feb. 1998. [27] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of provably good low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, Jun. 2000, p. 199. [28] E. Biglieri, Coding of Wireless Channels. New York: SpringerVerlag, preprint.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:55:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

