324

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 21, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

Exploiting Resistance Drift Characteristics to Improve Reliability of LDPC-Assisted Phase-Change Memory
Meng Zhang , Fei Wu , Qin Yu, Weihua Liu , Ruixiang Ma, and Changsheng Xie

Abstract—Phase-change memory (PCM) as emerging non-volatile memory has attracted more attention and considered as the promising replacement of the main memory. PCM has shown good scalability and high storage density, but data storage reliability has become a challenge and concern. When data are written into PCM cells by a phase transition between amorphous and crystalline, the resistance of each state drifts as the increase of storage time due to structural relaxation. As a result, raw bit error rates (RBER) become higher and higher, severely degrading the data storage reliability (i.e., an important problem in PCM). In this paper, we first find that high error percentage exists between the full amorphous and amorphous states in multilevel cell (MLC) PCM via a preliminary experiment, which is the main factor leading to high RBER. Then, we analyze why this phenomenon exists in PCM from the view of the resistance drift. Finally, by exploiting the resistance drift characteristics, we propose drift compensation and drift-aware LDPC decoding schemes to improve reliability of PCM. Simulation results show that the proposed schemes can significantly reduce the RBER and LDPC decoding iterations.
Index Terms—Phase change memory, resistance drift characteristics, raw bit error rates, LDPC codes, decoding iterations.
E MERGING non-volatile memory (NVM) with low access latencies has become promising candidates for main memory in the future storage systems [1], [2]. In particular, phase-change memory (PCM) shows excellent advantages
Manuscript received February 17, 2021; accepted June 2, 2021. Date of publication June 9, 2021; date of current version September 3, 2021. This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2018YFB1003305; in part by the Key-Area Research and Development Program of Guangdong Province under Grant 2019B010107001; in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61821003, Grant 61872413, Grant U1709220, and Grant 61902137; in part by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant 2019M66262; in part by the Postdoctoral Innovative Talents Support Program under Grant BX20190128; in part by the Excellent Projects for Postdoctoral Science and Technology Activities in Hubei Province; in part by the Key Project of Shandong Wisdom Joint Fund under Grant ZR2019LZH009; in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, HUST under Grant 2021JYCXJJ033; and in part by the 111 Project under Grant B07038. (Corresponding author: Fei Wu.)
The authors are with the Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Key Laboratory of Information Storage System, Ministry of Education of China, and the Engineering Research Center of Data Storage Systems and Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China, and also with the Shenzhen Research Institute, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Shenzhen 518000, China (e-mail: zgmeng@hust.edu.cn; wufei@hust.edu.cn; liuweihua@hust.edu.cn; cs_xie@hust.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more figures in this article are available at https://doi.org/10.1109/TDMR.2021.3087807.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDMR.2021.3087807

such as large capacity, good scalability, high storage density, and endurance, which has attracted more attention and is considered to replace DRAM as persistent memory or storage class memory [3]. However, data storage reliability has become a challenge and concern [8], [9], which is an important issue to be solved. Specifically, resistance happens to drift over storage time due to structural relaxation [10] when bit data are stored in PCM cells, resulting in two adjacent resistance distributions to overlap. When reading bit information, it is difficult to distinguish which storage states the sensed resistance belongs to. Consequently, raw bit error rates (RBER) become increasingly much higher, severely reducing data storage reliability.
In this paper, we improve reliability of multilevel cell (MLC) PCM from two aspects: extend the resistance distribution margin and enhance the error correction capability of LDPC codes. First, we find that larger error percentages exist between the full amorphous and amorphous states in MLC PCM by conducting a preliminary experiment. This is the main factor leading to high RBER (i.e., beyond 10−2) with the increase of storage time. Moreover, we find that the iterations of LDPC decoding grow with the increase of storage time. Unfortunately, the decoding iterations get to the maximum value, failing to correct bit errors. Then, we give an analysis of why high RBER exists in PCM from the view of resistance drift. Finally, by utilizing the resistance drift characteristics, we propose drift compensation and drift-aware LDPC decoding schemes to reduce RBER and decoding iterations, while the reliability can be well ensured. Specifically, the drift compensation scheme can decrease error percentages induced by state shifting as mentioned above by enlarging the resistance distribution margin, thus greatly lower the RBER. The drift-aware LDPC decoding scheme can improve the error correction capability of LDPC codes by optimizing soft information (i.e., log-likelihood rate (LLR) information per bit), thus cutting down the iteration times. More interestingly. data reliability can be significantly improved by together with the proposed two schemes. Simulation results show the RBER and decoding iterations are reduced and the storage time is also extended.
The main contributions of this paper are as follows. • Experimentally find that high error percentages are
induced by shifting from the amorphous state to the full amorphous state in MLC PCM, leading to high RBER and LDPC decoding iterations and thus reducing data storage

1530-4388 c 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: EXPLOITING RESISTANCE DRIFT CHARACTERISTICS TO IMPROVE RELIABILITY OF LDPC-ASSISTED PCM

325

Fig. 1. (a) PCM cell storage architecture and (b) write-read temperature pulse [5], [8].
reliability. And, analyze the factors of causing high RBER and decoding iterations from the point of resistance drift. • Propose resistance drift compensation (RDC) and resistance drift-aware LDPC decoding (RDAL) schemes to enhance reliability of PCM. RDC scan minimize the RBER via enlarging the resistance distribution margin between the amorphous state and the full amorphous state. RDAL can enhance the error correction capability of LDPC codes by optimizing LLR information, thus lessening the decoding iterations. • Validate the effectiveness of RDC and RDAL by simulations, and significantly reduce the RBER and LDPC decoding iterations as well as extending data storage time. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II introduces backgrounds about PCM and motivation of this paper, and Section III presents RDC and RDAL in detail. Simulation results are described and analyzed in Section IV, followed by the related work in Section V. Section VI gives a conclusion.
I. BACKGROUND AND MOTIVATION
In this section, we first introduce related backgrounds of PCM, such as basic architecture and write-read principles, then describe the resistance drift characteristics. Finally, we give the motivation of this paper by preliminary experiments and analysis.
A. Basic Architecture of PCM
A PCM storage cell consists of fours basic elements, two electrodes (i.e., top and bottom electrodes), a heating resistor (Hr), and a chalcogenide storage layer called Ge2Sb2Te5 (GST) [1], [2], as shown in Fig. 1 (a). By heating with using different current pulse durations and amplitudes, the GST material state can be changed between the crystalline and amorphous states. The crystalline (low resistance) and amorphous (high resistance) states have a large resistance difference. Consequently, a PCM cell can store different bits of information by configuring the resistance range [5]. Fig. 1 (b) shows the variations of program and read temperature pulses. When switching the state from crystalline to amorphous, the reset operation is activated by using a short but high current pulse, which can quickly increase the GST temperature beyond the melting point temperature Tmelting [9]. Conversely, when

Fig. 2. Cell resistance distributions and write-read principle of MLC PCM.
switching the state from amorphous to crystalline, the set operation is launched by using a long but low current pulse, which can raise the GST temperature beyond the crystalline temperature Tcrystalline but lower than Tmelting. When reading the bit information, a low current pulse is applied to distinguish the resistance difference between two adjacent states [10].
B. Write-Read Operations
Each MLC PCM cell can store two bits (i.e., 00, 01, 11, and 10) information by configuring the GST material into four different states (i.e., crystalline, semi-crystalline, amorphous, full amorphous), which corresponds to four resistance distributions, as shown in Fig. 2. In this paper, we call the left bit of the two bits as the most significant bit (MSB) and the right bit of the two bits as the least significant bit (LSB). There are basic operations on PCM cells such as write and read, which take the word as the basic unit.
MLC PCM program: Fig. 2 shows two program approaches for MLC PCM. In PCM, two bits per cell are programmed simultaneously by using the set/reset pulse and partial reset (i.e., called Preset)/partial set pulse (i.e., called Pset) [5]. Specifically, there are four possible values in each cell during programming. For the first program method, when programming ‘00’, the set pule is used and when programming ‘10’, the reset pulse is applied. When programming the intermediate state ‘01’, state ‘10’ is first programmed by applying the reset pulse followed by programming ‘11’ with Pset pulse and then continue to use the Pset operation until programming ‘01’ is finished. This process can be described as 10 → 11 → 01. For the second method, programming ‘00’ and ‘10’ still uses set and reset operations, respectively. When programming the intermediate state ‘11’, state ‘00’ is first programmed by applying the set pulse followed by programming ‘01’ with the Preset pulse and then continue to apply the Preset operation until programming ‘11’ is completed. This process can be described as 00 → 01 → 11. In the program process, the verify operation needs to be leveraged to check whether the storage cell falls into the target resistance range.
MLC PCM read: The MLC PCM cell has four possible state distributions. Therefore, three reference resistances are required to distinguish these four states. When reading MSB, reference resistance Rref 2 is applied between state 01 and state 11. If the sensed resistance Rs > Rref 2, the bit is read as ‘1’, otherwise, the bit ‘0’. When reading LSB, reference resistances Rref 1 and Rref 3 are applied between state 00 and state 01, between state 11 and state 10, respectively. If the sensed resistance Rref 3 > Rs > Rref 1, the bit is read as ‘1’. If the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

326

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 21, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

Fig. 3. The resistance distributions before and after drift.
sensed resistance Rs > Rref 3 or Rs < Rref 1, the bit is read as ‘0’.

C. Resistance Drift Characteristics
For the MLC PCM cell, the resistance distribution per state drifts over time due to the structural relaxation effect. More interestingly, the resistance of different phase states exhibits different drift speeds. The crystalline state is stable and the amorphous state is metastable over time. The resistance drift is related to the initial resistance value. The higher the initial resistance is, the higher the drift speed is. Specifically, the resistance drift model can be described as follows [9].

Rdri = Rini(t/tini)ν

(1)

log Rdri = log Rini + ν(log t − log tini)

(2)

Here, Rdri and Rini denote the drift resistance and initial resistance, respectively. t and tini represent data storage time and initial time, respectively. ν denotes the drift exponent. The resistance of state 10 has a higher drift speed and range, as shown in Fig. 3. The mean and variance of the resistance distribution gradually increase with data storage time. As a result, the resistance distributions of state 10 and state 11 overlap, leading to increased RBER and thus seriously affecting data reliability. Moreover, log Rini and ν follow normal distribution [10]. From formula (2), it can be inferred that the log Rdri also follows the normal distribution, whose mean and variance can be denoted as the following formulas (3) and (4) [10], respectively.

μsloi g Rdri = μlsoi g Rini + μνsi · logt

(3)

σlsoig Rdri

2
=

σlsoig Rini

2
+

σνsi · logt 2.

(4)

sHtaetree,sμi. lso(i gσRlsoiingiRainni )d2

μνsii represent the means of log Rini and ν in and (σνsi )2 denote the variations of log Rini

and ν in state si. Through formulas (3) and (4), the state shift

percentages, RBER, and decoding iterations can be counted.

also extended by using LDPC codes with low decoding iterations. By conducting preliminary experiments, the motivation is given in detail as follows.
By simulations, we find that different state shift percentages exist in PCM cells when suffering from resistance drift, as shown in Fig. 4 (a). Simulation results show the percentages from state 11 to state 10 (denoted as 11->10) increase with storage time and get to a higher value (i.e., larger than 90%) at 105s. Consequently, the gap becomes much larger over time, resulting in much higher LSB RBER. This is because that resistance distributions of state 11 and state 10 intersect seriously over time.
We count MSB and LSB RBER over storage time, as shown in Fig. 4 (b). Simulation results show that LSB RBER increases rapidly with the storage time and gets to 10−2 at 103s. MSB RBER increases slowly over time and less then 10−2 at 108s. The larger RBER difference exists between MSB and LSB due to unbalanced state shift percentages. In addition, the number of decoding iterations increases sharply over time when adopting LDPC codes to correct LSB errors. This is because increasing RBER requires more iterations to improve soft information precision of LDPC decoding and thus enhance error correction capability. When storage time is 103s, higher RBER is beyond the error correction capability of LDPC hard-decoding, making the decoding iterations get to the maximum value 30. For MSB, the number of decoding iterations increases slowly over time, which is less than 10 at 107s due to relatively low RBER.
Furthermore, we count the variation of mean and deviation of each state resistance distribution (i.e., equation (2)) over storage time, as shown in Fig. 4 (c). The mean and deviation of state 01, 11, and 10 increase with the storage time. Especially, the deviation of state 10 increases rapidly, which leads to a wide range of cross-distribution, causing higher shift percentages from state 11 to state 10.
Summarily, resistance drift over time induces unbalanced state shift percentages in PCM cells, introducing high RBER and thereby reducing data reliability. LDPC codes are leveraged to improve reliability, but consuming more decoding iterations. We propose RDC and RDAL schemes to decrease RBER and improve the error correction capability of LDPC codes. By extending the margin of resistance distribution between the full amorphous and amorphous states, RDC can significantly lessen RBER into the error correction range of LDPC decoding. By optimizing LLR information with RDAL, the error correction capability of LDPC decoding is enhanced, leading to decreased decoding iterations.

D. Motivation
As mentioned above, The resistance drift phenomenon exists in PCM cells over storage time, inducing high RBER and thus reducing data reliability. LDPC codes are adopted to improve data reliability, but high RBER leads to more decoding iterations, increasing decoding latency. In this paper, we focus on exploiting the resistance drift characteristics to minimize RBER and decrease LDPC decoding iterations. More importantly, data reliability is well improved and storage time is

II. THE PROPOSED RDC AND RDAL SCHEMES In this section, we first give the RDC scheme in detail, then introduce the RDAL scheme.
A. RDC We give a diagrammatic sketch of the proposed RDC
scheme, as shown in Fig. 5 (a) and (b). There is the same margin between each storage state for the conventional scheme [6]. It means that there is the same capability for tolerance-noise.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: EXPLOITING RESISTANCE DRIFT CHARACTERISTICS TO IMPROVE RELIABILITY OF LDPC-ASSISTED PCM

327

Fig. 4. Variations of state shift percentages (a), RBER, decoding iterations (b), mean and deviation of resistance distributions (c) with storage time.

Fig. 5. (a) Conventional and (b) the proposed RDC scheme with extended margin between full amorphous (i.e., 10 state) and amorphous (i.e., 11 state) states;
(c) conventional LDPC decoding and RDAL scheme with higher LLR precision as initial decoding input. In this figure, R1, R2, and R(μ11+μ10+1)/2 denote read reference resistance, which are fixed sensing (FS) for MSB and LSB. TaS represents time-aware sensing for MSB. Lmsb and Llsb denote LLR information of MSB and LSB with conventional decoding. LLRmsb and LLRlsb denote LLR information of MSB and LSB with RDAL. In the process of decoding, normalized min-sum algorithm [7] is used, including check node (CN) information and variable node information updates (VN), and decoding decision.

However, each state in PCM (e.g., MLC PCM) is affected by different degrees of noise, inducing different RBERs in LSB and MSB. This is because different storage states have a larger difference for resistance drift rate. Moreover, the full amorphous state (i.e., the 10 state) with larger resistance is more prone to drift right over time and has a larger drift range. It is more likely to induce the overlap of resistance distribution between state 11 and state 10, as shown in Fig. 5 (a). When data storage time is 108s, there is a serious cross between state 11 and state 10, easily leading to high bit error. Therefore, we propose the RDC scheme to reduce the overlap probability of resistance distribution between state 11 and state 10 by extending the margin and improving tolerance-noise, as demonstrated in Fig. 5 (b). With the increase of storage time, state 11 and state 10 do not overlap after exploiting RDC. Therefore, when reading LSB, the fixed reference resistance R(μ11+μ10+1)/2 is applied, which can easily distinguish the state

11 and state 10. Here, μ11 and μ10 are the means of state 11 and state 10, respectively. When reading MSB, we adopt the time-aware sensing scheme [12]. However, the time-aware sensing for LSB cannot further reduce the error rates and still induce higher RBER in long storage time. Thereby, we can apply RDC for LSB read. Even in long storage time, the RBER can be greatly reduced.
B. RDAL
The error correction capability of LDPC decoding also has an important impact on data reliability. It is very necessary to enhance the LDPC error correction capability and thus improve data reliability. The precision of LLR information is the main effect factor on the LDPC error correction capability, which can be greatly boosted by improving LLR precision. Therefore, we develop the RDAL scheme presented

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

328

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 21, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

in Algorithm 1 to improve LLR accuracy by exploiting

the resistance drift characteristic. RDAL mainly includes

read MSB with TaS resistance and read LSB with R1 and
R(μ11+μ10+1)/2, optimize MSB and LSB LLR, and iteration decoding. Specifically, LLR information can be optimized

by only applying hard-read resistance regardless of reading

LSB and MSB. MSB and LSB LLR can be obtained by the following formulas. If sensed resistance is larger than Rtmsb,

LLRmsb =

Rmax Rtmsb

P11(r)dr

+

Rmax Rmt sb

P00(r)dr

+

Rmax Rmt sb

P10(r)dr

Rmax Rtmsb

P01(r)dr

(5)

otherwise,

LLRmsb =

Rtmsb Rmin

P11(r)dr

+

Rmt sb Rmin

P00(r)dr

+

Rtmsb Rmin
Rtmsb Rmin

P10(r)dr P01(r)dr

.

(6)

Here, Rmt sb denotes the applied reference resistance over time for MSB, which can be computed by the following formula.

Rtmsb =

μRi1n1i + μα11 · lgt +

σR2i1n1i +σα211 ·(lgt)2 σR2i0n1i +σα201 ·(lgt)2

+1

μR0in1i + μα01 · lgt . (7)

σR2i0n1i +σα201 ·(lgt)2 σR2i1n1i +σα211 ·(lgt)2

+1

Rmax and Rmin represent the minimum and maximum resistance values. For LSB, if sensed resistance is larger than

R(μ11+μ10+1)/2,

LLRlsb =

Rmax Rf
Rmax Rf

P11(r)dr P10(r)dr

.

(8)

If sensed resistance is less than R(μ11+μ10+1)/2 and larger than R(μ00+μ01)/2,

LLRlsb =

Rf Rp

P11(r)dr

+

Rf Rp

P00(r)dr

+

Rf Rp
Rf Rp

P01(r)dr .
P10(r)dr

(9)

Here, Rf = R(μ11+μ10+1)/2 and Rp = R(μ11+μ10)/2. If sensed resistance is less than R(μ11+μ10)/2 and larger than R1,

LLRlsb =

Rp R1 Rp R1

P01(r)dr P00(r)dr

.

(10)

If sensed resistance is less than R1,

LLRlsb =

R1 Rmin
R1 Rmin

P01(r)dr P00(r)dr

.

(11)

The purpose of RDC and RDAL is to minimize the RBER

and the number of decoding iterations. After exploiting RDC,

the overlap probability of the full amorphous and amor-

phous resistance distribution is greatly reduced. After utilizing

RDAL, the error correction capability of LDPC decoding

is improved. The effectiveness of RDC and RDAL can be

evaluated by computer simulations.

III. SIMULATION AND RESULT ANALYSIS
In this section, we describe the simulation setup and give an analysis for results.

Algorithm 1 Algorithm of RDAL

Input: MSB or LSB read command

Output: MSB or LSB codeword

1: if Read MSB then

2: Apply TaS resistance Rmt sb between state 01 and 11

3: if Sensed resistance Rs > Rtmsb then

4:

Obtain initial MSB LLR by computing formula (5)

5: else

6:

Use formula (6) to gain MSB LLR

7: end if

8: end if

9: Decoding with normalized min-sum algorithm

10: if Read LSB then

11: Apply DS resistance R1 and Rf between state 00 and state, state 11 and state 10

12: if Rs > Rf then

13:

Obtain initial LSB LLR by computing formula (8)

14: else

15:

if Rs > RP then

16:

Use formula (9) to gain LSB LLR

17:

else

18:

if Rs > R1 then

19:

Utilize formula (10) to achieve LSB LLR

20:

else

21:

Exploit formula (11) to calculate LSB LLR

22:

end if

23:

end if

24: end if

25: end if

26: Skip step 9 to perform the decoding operation

A. Simulation Setup
These proposed RDC and RDAL schemes are evaluated by computer simulations. The detailed simulation process is described as follows. First, we construct quasi-cyclic LDPC codes without four rings whose column weight and row weight are 4 and 36, respectively. The size of the circulant submatrix is 512 × 512. 2KB information bits are encoded to generate a complete codeword. Second, Gaussian noise is added to LDPC codewords. In PCM cells, the resistance obeys Gaussian distribution. In the simulation process, parameters of the resistance distribution are from the reference [10], including means and deviations of each initial state and resistance drift factor. By increasing storage time, the resistance drift of each state can be simulated. Third, the reference resistance is applied to count RBER and state shift percentages, as shown in Fig. 4 (a) and (b). Fourth, when applying different reference resistance values, LLR information is obtained to activate LDPC decoding, and decoding iterations can be counted under different schemes.
B. Result Analysis
To intuitively understand the resistance drift characteristics, we first simulate the resistance distribution per MLC PCM cell under different storage time when using conventional and RDC schemes, as shown in Fig. 6 (a) and (b). Simulation results show that 10 state resistance is much easier to drift and has a wider shift range over time. The cross-range of the state 01 and 11 resistance distribution becomes larger gradually with the increase of storage time. More interestingly, 00 state resistance distribution has almost no drift with time. The crossing of 00 state and 01 state distributions is not very serious. This is because the full amorphous state with higher resistance can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: EXPLOITING RESISTANCE DRIFT CHARACTERISTICS TO IMPROVE RELIABILITY OF LDPC-ASSISTED PCM

329

Fig. 6. The resistance distribution drift of different storage states over time with conventional [9], [10] and RDC schemes.

Fig. 7. Variations of RBER and decoding iterations under different storage time when using different optimization schemes.

happen to drift at a higher speed due to the structural relaxation effect. Therefore, the resistance drift of state 11 and state 10 is the main factor in causing higher LSB RBER. When using the RDC scheme, the resistance distributions of state 11 and state 10 do not overlap although resistance drift happens over time. In a longer storage time (e.g., 108s), 11 state and 10 state distributions can be distinguished by using a fixed reference resistance, thus minimizing LSB errors.
Besides, we count decoding iterations under different storage time when exploiting different optimization schemes for correcting LSB and MSB errors, as shown in Fig. 7 (a). When using default sensing for MSB and LSB, LDPC decoding iterations gradually increase with storage time. When the storage time is 103s, LSB decoding iterations get to the maximum value 30 due to high RBER. Bit errors cannot be completely corrected, thus reliability fails to guarantee. However, MSB decoding iterations are less than 5 due to low RBER. There is a larger gap between MSB and LSB decoding iterations. When using time-aware sensing [9], [10], LSB decoding iterations increase rapidly, getting to a higher value at 108s. MSB decoding iterations are much lower and become more gentle. Unfortunately, the gap is still large. When utilizing RDC with fixed reference resistances R(μ11+μ10)/2 and R(μ11+μ10+1)/2 for LSB, decoding iterations are extremely low. Especially, the number of MSB iterations is very close to that of LSB when adopting RDC with fixed reference resistance R(μ11+μ10+1)/2. After adopting RDC, LSB decoding iterations are significantly

reduced. Moreover, we count the variation of RBER with the growth of storage time, as shown in Fig. 7 (b). Simulation results show that LSB RBER increases rapidly with storage time after applying default sensing, which is close to 1.2 × 10−1 at 108s. More interestingly, the RBER is very close between LSB using RDC with fixed reference resistance R(μ11+μ10+1)/2 and MSB with time-aware sensing. The difference between them has been greatly shortened. Although at higher storage time 108s, the RBER is less than 10−3.
Furthermore, we study the effect of RDAL on decoding iterations with RDC and time-aware sensing schemes, as shown in Fig. 7 (c). Simulation results show that when using timeaware sensing for LSB with approach [7], decoding iterations gradually increase with storage time. After exploiting RDAL, decoding iterations are much lower. The proposed RDAL can be well combined with the time-aware sensing scheme to correct bit errors. Importantly, RDAL is also integrated into RDC and the decoding iterations can further be reduced. The decoding iterations gap between LSB and MSB is greatly shortened. The error correction capability of LDPC decoding is significantly improved and thus the storage time can be extended.
In PCM, the RBER and error correction capability of LDPC decoding are the important factors affecting data reliability. RDC and RDAL can significantly minimize the RBER and improve the LDPC error correction capability, thereby data reliability is well be improved.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

330

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 21, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

IV. RELATED WORK
In PCM, resistance drift induced by write disturbance, storage time, and the temperature has become the main issue for reducing data reliability. Many prior works were proposed to improve reliability of PCM. Jalili et al. [8] addressed the resistance drift problem by evaluating the resistance threshold to sensing data. Xu and Zhang [9], [10] proposed a time-aware sensing scheme to reduce the RBER induced by the resistance drift. Stanisavljevic et al. [11] developed a drift-invariant detection method for estimating read threshold based on resistance drift. Adjusting the read threshold can only reduce the RBER caused by resistance drift a certain storage time, but the RBER can not be further decreased with the increase of storage time. This is because the resistance distributions of full amorphous and amorphous states are seriously crossed for long time. The adjusted read threshold cannot distinguish the resistance distribution accurately. Tavana and Kaeli [12] proposed two cost-effective schemes to mitigate write disturbance. Huang and Thakkar [13] exploited low-temperature partialRESET operations to reduce write disturbance. Yang et al. [14] investigated the reliability improvement scheme from circuit and architecture levels. Pozidis et al. [15] adopted signal processing and coding techniques to process the resistance drift problem and thus improve data reliability. Sebastian et al. [16] studied the effects of time and temperature on the resistance variation. Wang et al. [17] developed a called ReadDuo scheme for resistance drift. Chien et al. [18] characterized a study of reliability from the views of cycling endurance and thermal stability. Kwon et al. [19] proposed a new PCM architecture to reduce the RBER and therefore improve data reliability. Compared with these previous works, we find that the high RBER is mainly caused by the resistance drift of full amorphous and amorphous states in MLC PCM, leading to more LDPC decoding iterations. Therefore, we propose RDC and RDAL schemes to further lessen the RBER and improve LDPC error correction capability. By extending the noisetolerance domain, RDC can mitigate the resistance distribution overlap of full amorphous and amorphous states rather than adjusting the read threshold. Moreover, RDAL can improve the LLR information precision by only applying one reference resistance between two adjacent resistance distributions, leading to decreased decoding iterations.
V. CONCLUSION
The resistance drift exists in the PCM cells over storage time, inducing high RBER and LDPC decoding iterations. In this paper, we first analyze resistance drift characteristics with the increasing storage time. The full amorphous state with higher resistance shows faster drift speed and wider range. It is more prone to cause resistance distribution to intersect between the amorphous state and the full amorphous state, leading to higher LSB RBER and decoding iterations. Then, we propose RDC and RDAL schemes by exploiting the resistance drift characteristics to reduce LSB RBER and decoding iterations. RDC can tolerate more bit errors via extending the margin between state 11 and state 10. RDAL can improve error correction capability by improving LLR information precision.

Simulation results show that RDC can greatly reduce LSB RBER and RDAL can significantly lower down decoding iterations. More importantly, the gap between MSB RBER and LSB RBER is shorten and decoding iterations are very close.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Song, A. Das, O. Mutlu, and N. Kandasamy, “Improving phase change memory performance with data content aware access,” in Proc. ACM SIGPLAN Int. Symp. Memory (ISMM), Jun. 2020, pp. 30–47.
[2] G. Wang, “Threat models and security of phase-change memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Consum. Electron. (ICCE), Jan. 2019, pp. 1–6.
[3] M. Zhao et al., “State asymmetry driven state remapping in phase change memory,” IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 27–40, Jan. 2017.
[4] S. Rashidi, M. Jalili, and H. Sarbazi-Azad, “Improving MLC PCM performance through relaxed write and read for intermediate resistance levels,” ACM Trans. Archit. Code Optim., vol. 15, no. 1, p. 40, Mar. 2018.
[5] C. Lee, Y. Song, and Y. Shin, “Endurance enhancement of multi-level cell phase change memory,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Comput.Aided Design (ICCAD), Nov. 2019, pp. 1–8.
[6] Q. Wu, F. Sun, W. Xu, and T. Zhang, “Using multilevel phase change memory to build data storage: A time-aware system design perspective,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 2083–2095, Oct. 2013.
[7] M. Zhang et al., “BeLDPC: Bit errors aware adaptive rate LDPC codes for 3D TLC NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Design Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), Mar. 2020, pp. 302–305.
[8] M. Jalili, M. Arjomand, and H. S. Azad, “A reliable 3D MLC PCM architecture with resistance drift predictor,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Depend. Syst. Netw. (DSN), Jun. 2014, pp. 204–215.
[9] W. Xu and T. Zhang, “Using time-aware memory sensing to address resistance drift issue in multi-level phase change memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Qual. Electron. Design (ISQED), Mar. 2010, pp. 356–361.
[10] W. Xu and T. Zhang, “A time-aware fault tolerance scheme to improve reliability of multilevel phase-change memory in the presence of significant resistance drift,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1357–1367, Aug. 2011.
[11] M. Stanisavljevic, T. Mittelholzer, N. Papandreou, T. Parnell, and H. Pozidis, “Drift-invariant detection for multilevel phase-change memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2018, pp. 1–5.
[12] M. K. Tavana and D. R. Kaeli, “Cost-effective write disturbance mitigation techniques for advancing PCM density,” in Proc. IEEE/ACM Int. Conf. Comput.-Aided Design (ICCAD), Nov. 2017, pp. 253–260.
[13] C. H. Huang and I. G. Thakkar, “Work-in-process: Mitigating write disturbance in phase change memory architectures,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Compliers Architect. Synth. Embedded Syst. (CASES), Oct. 2019, pp. 1–2.
[14] C. Yang, M. Mao, Y. Cao, and C. Chakrabarti, “Cost-effective design solutions for enhancing PRAM reliability and performance,” IEEE Trans. Multi-Scale Comput. Syst., vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 1–11, Jan.–Mar. 2017.
[15] H. Pozidis, T. Mittelholzer, N. Papandreou, T. Parnell, and M. Stanisavljevic, “Phase change memory reliability: A signal processing and coding perspective,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 51, no. 4, Apr. 2015, Art. no. 3500107.
[16] A. Sebastian, D. Krebs, M. L. Gallo, H. Pozidis, and E. Eleftheriou, “A collective relaxation model for resistance drift in phase change memory cells,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), 2015, p. 5.
[17] R. Wang, Y. Zhang, and J. Yang, “ReadDuo: Constructing reliable MLC phase change memory through fast and robust readout,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP Int. Conf. Depend. Syst. Netw. (DSN), Jun. 2016, pp. 203–214.
[18] W. C. Chien et al., “Reliability study of a 128Mb phase change memory chip implemented with doped Ga-Sb-Ge with extraordinary thermal stability,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), Dec. 2016, pp. 552–554.
[19] T. Kwon, M. Imran, J. M. You, and J. S. Yang, “Heterogeneous PCM array architecture for reliability, performance and lifetime enhancement,” in Proc. IEEE Design Autom. Test Europe Conf. Exhibit. (DATE), Mar. 2018, pp. 1610–1615.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

