2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding
Coding Schemes for Crossbar Resistive Memory with High Line Resistance in SCM Applications
Zehui Chen and Lara Dolecek Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering - University of California, Los Angeles
chen1046@ucla.edu, dolecek@ee.ucla.edu

2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding (ISTC) | 978-1-6654-0943-8/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISTC49272.2021.9594163

Abstract—Crossbar resistive memory with 1 Selector 1 Resistor (1S1R) structure is attractive for low-cost, power efficient, and high-density storage class memory (SCM) applications. As technology scales down to the single-nm regime, the increasing resistivity of wordline/bitline becomes a limiting factor to device reliability. Due to the line resistance, reliability of memory cells in an array is spatially non-uniform. In this paper, by mitigating and leveraging this spatial non-uniformity, we propose two simple yet effective coding schemes, one that utilizes interleaving and one that utilizes multiple codes based on a proposed location dependent code allocation (LDCA) framework, to reduce the undetected biterror rate (UBER) or to allow for lower write voltage for power efficiency in the studied crossbar resistive memories.

I. INTRODUCTION The crossbar resistive memory, whereby bistable memristors are placed at the intersection of wordlines and bitlines, is one promising candidate for the next generation nonvolatile memory due to its inherent 4F 2 device density and its simple crossbar structure [1]. With its ultra low leakage current, resistive memory is also appealing for low-power applications [2]. One of its most attractive applications on the system level is storage-class memory (SCM), a term that refers to memory technology that fills the latency and density gaps between DRAM and NAND flash memories [3]. Error correction codes (ECCs) are widely employed in memory systems that are built upon crossbar resistive memory because ECCs offer a trade-off between the device reliability and the switching power of memory devices [4], [5]. As effective usage of ECCs can greatly reduce the power consumption of these systems [4], [5], ECC schemes that are tailored toward unique properties of crossbar resistive memory are desired. As technology scales down to single-digit-nm, simultaneously scaled wordline/bitline resistances increasingly become a limiting factor to device reliability [6]. Channel models that relate the line resistance to the row bit-error rate (RBER) are established in our prior work [7] and as can be seem from Fig. 1 (c.f.[7]), RBERs of cells in a memory array are highly non-uniform, making conservative worst-case design/selection of ECCs not rate efficient. In an array with largely non-uniform device reliability, efficient ECC solutions must take this non-uniformity into consideration. Channels with non-uniformity can be considered as channels with SNR variation [8] or non-stationary channels [9], [10]. These channels have been studied in the ECC literature in the context of e.g., LDPC codes and Polar codes for storage applications [8], [9], [10]. However, these complex codes with long block length and high decoding latency (on the order µs
978-1-6654-0943-8/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE

Fig. 1: Heatmap of BERs for a 1024x1024 array [7].
[11]) are not compatible with the small decoding granularity and fast decoding requirements of the SCM applications [3]. Therefore, in targeting the SCM applications, we study efficient coding schemes for spatially non-uniform channels, based on simple yet effective BCH codes with short block lengths, and evaluate our proposed schemes on the channel models proposed in [7]. BCH codes are widely adopted in crossbar resistive memory [4], [5] and have decoding latency on the order of ns.
In Section II, based on a single BCH code, we propose an interleaved coding scheme to mitigate the non-uniformity by allowing cells that store different codewords to have similar averaged RBER. In Section III, we propose an alternative method that uses different BCH codes in different wordlines to leverage the non-uniformity, and to do so without interleaving. A systematic framework to optimize the allocations of codes to wordlines is also proposed in Section III. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed schemes by simulations in Section IV. We show that our proposed schemes are able to reduce the UBER by 45% and reduce the power consumption by 12% compared to the baseline case. The comparison between the two proposed schemes and trade-offs are also discussed in Section IV. A variant of the scheme proposed in Section III is discussed in Section V. We conclude and discuss future research in Section VI. Note that we include materials from our journal submission [12] for completeness.
II. SINGLE ECC WITH INTERLEAVING One approach to mitigate the non-uniformity of cell reliabilities is interleaving [8], [13]. Because memory cells are located an the intersection of wordlines (rows) and bitlines (columns), under the adverse effect of high line resistance,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:33:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding

channel parameters of cells depend on the row and column indices [7]. Specifically, a cell that is closer to the source and ground (with small column and row indices) has a lower RBER than a cell that is further away from the source and ground (with large column and row indices), as can be seen from Fig. 1. Suppose codewords are stored in the wordlines and the same ECC is employed to all wordlines. If the ECC is designed/selected for an averaged case, e.g., the channel conditions in the middle wordlines, it can be an overkill for the lower wordlines while being inadequate for the upper wordlines. We therefore propose a sub-diagonal interleaved coding scheme aiming to improve code performance by mitigating the non-uniformity across wordlines. This sub-diagonal interleaved coding scheme is illustrated in Fig. 2.
Fig. 2: Illustration of the sub-diagonal interleaved coding scheme on an 8 × 8 array.
Under this sub-diagonal interleaved coding scheme, a codeword is stored in cells that are located on the same diagonal or sub-diagonal of the memory array, instead of being stored across the cells that are located on the same wordline, as conventionally done. This scheme can be readily generalized to a non-square array by storing a codeword in cells that are located on the main diagonal or a circularly shifted main diagonal.

interleaved coding scheme. The results for an 128 × 128 array in Fig. 3 show that the non-uniformity among codewords is largely mitigated.
III. MULTIPLE ECCS WITH OPTIMIZED CODE ALLOCATION
Interleaving and de-interleaving are in general costly operations, even though the interleaved coding scheme in Section II is conceptually simple and requires only one ECC. If interleaving is deemed prohibitively expensive, one intuitive idea to improve coding efficiency is to use a strong ECC for relatively unreliable wordlines and use a weak ECC for relatively reliable wordlines. The complexity of this approach is reasonable compared to using a single ECC because encoders and decoders for structured codes, e.g., BCH codes, with different error correction capabilities can share similar encoding and decoding circuitry.
Given a set of ECCs with varying error correction capabilities and a set of wordlines with varying channel parameters, we refer to the problem of designating an ECC to a wordline for all wordlines as the code allocation problem. Similar problems, i.e., using different ECCs for different channel conditions, have been studied in digital communication systems under the context of adaptive coding [14] where the channel condition is often time dependent (instead of being location dependent as in our set-up). In this section, we present a systematic framework, referred to as the location dependent code allocation (LDCA) framework, for solving an optimal code allocation problem. We first present the formulation of the optimal location dependent code allocation (LDCA) problem as a standard optimization problem (see also [12]) and then propose an efficient algorithm that leads to a sub-optimal solution, which is shown to reduce the UBER effectively.
For the LDCA problem in an m×n array, suppose we have a set C of L error correction codes C1, C2, · · · , CL with the same block length n and different error correction capabilities. In our specific case, we consider BCH codes with a corresponding set of error correction capabilities T = {t1, t2, · · · , tL}, i.e., ti being the error correction capability of BCH code Ci. For each wordline i, we choose a code from C and store the encoded bits in it. Let C ∈ Rm×L be an array whose element cil is the UBER (cost) when code Cl is applied to wordline i and cTi be a row of C. Let A ∈ RL×m be an array whose column ai ∈ RL is an one-hot vector denoting the code selection for wordline i, i.e., for a given i, ali = 1 if Cl is used for wordline i and ali = 0 otherwise. Let r ∈ RL represent the rate of the codes in C and let Rgoal be the desired storage rate for the memory array. Under the constraint of rate Rgoal, we seek to find a code allocation matrix A such that the overall UBER is minimized. The optimal LDCA problem can therefore be formulated as the following integer programming problem:

Fig. 3: The averaged RBER for cells storing codewords in an 128 × 128 array with line resistance 50Ω.
Under the RBER non-uniformity pattern similar to Fig. 1, this proposed scheme attempts to improve code performance by letting each codeword to have a similar averaged RBER, so we first compare the averaged RBER in cells that store a codeword where the codeword is stored in a wordline with the averaged RBER in cells that store a codeword when using the

m

min
A

cTi ai = T r(AC)

i=1

s.t. aTi 1 = 1, i = 1, · · · , m

(1)

ali ∈ {0, 1}

1 m

m

rT ai≥Rgoal.

i=1

In the above optimization problem, 1 is the all-ones vector. To solve the above optimization problem, we first need to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:33:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding

estimate the cost matrix C from the channel parameters. In [7], channel of cell (i.j) is modeled as a binary asymmetric channel (BAC) with crossover probabilities p5(ij) and p(6ij). We approximate the n BAC channels of cells on a wordline by an averaged binary symmetric channel (BSC) with parameter and calculate C based on this approximation:

tl
cil ≈ 1 −

n e

(p¯i)e(1 − p¯i)n−e,

(2)

e=0

where p¯i

=

1 n

n j=1

qp5(ij) + (1 − q)p(6ij) ,

and

q

is

the

probability of a 0 being stored. Note that although our current

set-up is based on BCH codes and the channel models in [7], the

LDCA framework is a general one and it is applicable to other

systems with location dependent non-uniformity even when

bearing a different channel model and/or utilizing different

ECCs. The LDCA framework can be readily generalized to

other channels models and ECCs by changing how the cost

matrix C is approximated in Equation (2).

With the approximated cost matrix C, we propose Algorithm

1 to solve the integer programming problem (1) by solving its

relaxed linear programming problem (3) iteratively:

of non-uniformity, we present rows of the solved code allocation matrix A∗ for an 128 × 128 array and varying line resistance in Fig. 4. Three codes BCH(128,100,3), BCH(128,93,4) and BCH(128,86,5) are included in C and Rgoal is set to be the rate of BCH(128,93,4). Based on the definition of A, rows of A can be interpreted as the relative “weight” of the codes. With 10Ω line resistance, the non-uniformity is mild and the solution from Algorithm 1 suggests that using a single code BCH(128,93,4) is sufficient. With higher line resistance, the solution from Algorithm 1 suggests the usage of a strong code BCH (128,86,5) for the worse wordlines and a weak code BCH(128,100,3) for the better wordlines.

m

min
A

ciT ai = T r(AC)

i=1

s.t. aiT 1 = 1, i = 1, · · · , m

(3)

0 ≤ ali ≤ 1

1 m

m

rT ai ≥ RLP .

i=1

Algorithm 1: LDCA solver algorithm

1. Solve the linear programming problem (3) with

RLP = Rgoal to get A∗. 2. Estimate the code allocation matrix Aˆ based on the

maximum in each column of A∗. Namely, in aˆi, only

the argmax(a∗i )-th element is set to 1 and all other elements are 0.

3. Calculate the true rate based on Aˆ, i.e.,

Rˆ

=

1 m

m i=1

rT

ai.

4. Terminate the algorithm

if

Rˆ

is

within

a

certain

tolerance of Rgoal. Otherwise, update RLP . Namely, if RAglogaolr−ithRmtotler≤miRˆna≤tesR; goal + Rtol then elseUifpdRˆat>e RRLgPoalw+ithRRtolLPth−enRupdate; else Update RLP with RLP + Rupdate; end

5. Repeat step 1-4 until termination or certain number

of iterations is reached.

In Algorithm 1, Rtol and Rupdate are user defined parameters where Rtol specifies the tolerance between the true rate Rˆ and the target rate Rgoal, and Rupdate specifies the step for updating the rate used in problem (3). Note that in our experiment with L = 3, Algorithm 1 terminates in a single iteration.
To illustrate how our proposed framework is able to efficiently adjust the code selection/allocation based on the severity

Fig. 4: Solutions of algorithm 1 for arrays with various line resistance.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS Simulations on code performances are performed to study the effectiveness of our schemes proposed in Section II and Section III. We simulate BCH codes with block length n = 128 and n = 256 in arrays with size 128 × 128 and 256 × 256, respectively. Standard BCH codes with error correction capability t = 2, 3, and 4 where codewords are stored in wordlines are simulated as the baseline. BCH codes with t = 2, 3, and 4 under the sub-diagonal interleaved coding scheme in Section II are simulated. Under the LDCA framework from Section III, the decoding performance of four different sets of codes, whose allocations are optimized by the LDCA framework, are simulated for each array. These sets of codes are the standard BCH codes with T = {1, 2, 3}, T = {2, 3, 4}, T = {3, 4, 5}, and T = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. Their target rates are set to equal the rate of the BCH codes with t = 2, t = 3, t = 4, and t = 3, respectively. We vary the line resistance in a reasonable regime according to [6], while keeping the write voltage constant in Fig.5 and we vary the write voltage while keeping the line resistance constant in Fig. 6. Based on models from [7], either increasing the line resistance or reducing the write voltage deteriorates the reliability of a memory cell. Increasing the line resistance also exaggerates the non-uniformity of cell reliabilities. All other simulation parameters are from [7]. From Fig. 5 and Fig. 6, we observe that both of our proposed schemes show consistent improvement compared to the scheme utilizing a single code and storing codewords in wordline,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:33:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding

(a) 128 × 128 Array, 5V Write Voltage

(a) 128 × 128 Array, 40Ω Line Resistance

(b) 256 × 256 Array, 5V Write Voltage Fig. 5: UBER v.s. Line Resistance

(b) 256 × 256 Array, 40Ω Line Resistance Fig. 6: UBER v.s. Write Voltage

with a maximum UBER reduction of 45%. As shown in Fig. 6, by using improved coding schemes, we allow for lower write voltage while maintaining the same UBER. A maximum of about 6.25% write voltage can be reduced which results in a power saving of 12%. We observe that the decoding performance of the optimized sets of L = 3 codes are very similar to the decoding performance of the interleaved coding scheme in most of the tested operating regime. In the regime of short block lengths, i.e., n = 128, and low line resistance, the interleaved coding scheme outperforms the scheme based on multiple ECCs. We conjecture that this is because interleaving is able to mitigate the non-uniformity despite its severity, whereas the scheme based on multiple ECCs requires notable RBER differences among the wordlines to perform well as the error correction capabilities of ECCs are only expressed in discrete integer values. For arrays with largely non-uniform cell reliabilities, e.g., the high resistance regime in Fig.5b and the low write voltage regime in Fig.6b, the scheme based on the set of L = 5 codes shows notable improvement compared to the interleaved coding scheme. This shows that when allowing for more ECCs to be used in the LDCA framework, a scheme based on the optimized code allocation of a larger collection of codes is more promising than the interleaved coding scheme when the non-uniformity across the memory array is severe.
Because similar performance between the two proposed schemes are observed, we remark here some trade-offs be-

tween these two schemes. The two proposed approaches are suitable for different scenarios. The interleaved coding scheme is conceptually simpler and requires only one ECC encoder and decoder pair. In contrast, the interleaved coding scheme requires an interleaver and de-interleaver, which add additional hardware and latency overhead. The proposed scheme in Section III does not use an interleaving operation per se but requires an optimization process in the design stage and also requires additional ECC encoders/decoders due to the use of multiple ECCs. We present both schemes for completeness; the usefulness of each in a specific application depends on its performance and the trade-off between hardware/latency overhead of the interleaver/de-interleaver and that of the additional encoders/decoders.

V. REGULARIZED LDCA

Lastly, we present a variant of the LDCA framework, the

regularized LDCA framework, in order to take the cost of

decoders with different error correction capabilities into con-

sideration. These costs can be measured in terms of power

consumption, latency, or area overhead and can also be the

number of decoders. In the regularized LDCA framework, we

add the

oaprteimguizlaartiizoantiopnrotbelremmscTd(e1c)Aa1ndin(3th) ewohbejreectcivdeecfu∈ncRtioLnsisoaf

vector that contains appropriate weights for the decoders.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:33:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding

We demonstrate the usefulness of this variant by showing two case studies of the regularized LDCA framework where we generate plots similar to Fig. 4 with and without this regularization term in Fig. 7. The array is of size 256 × 256 with 30Ω line resistance and we use a set of L = 5 codes whose error correction capabilities are T = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}. In Case 1, suppose we wish to avoid using BCH(256,248,1) and BCH(256,216,5) in the moderate line resistance regime and we wish to do so without manually restricting L. With a regularization term that penalizes BCH(256,248,1) and BCH(256,216,5), we get a solution in Fig.7b that achieves this goal while still allowing more ECCs to be used when the non-uniformity is severe. In Case 2, suppose we wish to take into account the area overhead of different decoders and we use the weights in Fig. 7c which are extrapolated from [5]. The regularized LDCA framework produces a solution that only uses BCH codes with t = 1, 3 and 5 and this suggests that BCH codes with t = 2 and t = 4 are not efficient when taking area overhead into consideration.

(a) un-regularized solution

VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK In this paper, we proposed two coding schemes to improve UBER performance in crossbar resistive memory with high line resistance targeting SCM applications. Our improved coding schemes are able to reduce the UBER by 45% and reduce the power consumption by 12%. Future research includes the study of adaptive LDCA framework to provide on-the-fly code allocation when memory parameters change in time.

REFERENCES

[1] D. Ielmini and R. Waser, Resistive switching: from fundamentals of nanoionic redox processes to memristive device applications. John Wiley and Sons, 2015.
[2] E. Vianello, O. Thomas, G. Molas, O. Turkyilmaz, N. Jovanovic´, D. Garbin, G. Palma, M. Alayan, C. Nguyen, J. Coignus et al., “Resistive memories for ultra-low-power embedded computing design,” in 2014 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting. IEEE, 2014, pp. 6–3.
[3] G. W. Burr, B. N. Kurdi, J. C. Scott, C. H. Lam, K. Gopalakrishnan, and R. S. Shenoy, “Overview of candidate device technologies for storageclass memory,” IBM Journal of Research and Development, vol. 52, no. 4.5, pp. 449–464, 2008.
[4] D. Niu, Y. Xiao, and Y. Xie, “Low power memristor-based ReRAM design with error correcting code,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Asia and South Pacific Design Automation Conference, Sydney, Australia, March 2012, pp. 79– 84.
[5] M. Mao, Y. Cao, S. Yu, and C. Chakrabarti, “Optimizing latency, energy, and reliability of 1t1r reram through cross-layer techniques,” IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 352–363, 2016.
[6] J. Liang, S. Yeh, S. S. Wong, and H.-S. P. Wong, “Effect of wordline/bitline scaling on the performance, energy consumption, and reliability of cross-point memory array,” ACM Journal on Emerging Technologies in Computing Systems (JETC), vol. 9, no. 1, p. 9, 2013.
[7] Z. Chen and L. Dolecek, “Write and Read Channel Models for 1S1R Crossbar Resistive Memory with High Line Resistance,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conference (GlobCom), Taipei, China, Dec. 2020.
[8] H. Esfahanizadeh, A. Hareedy, R. Wu, R. Galbraith, and L. Dolecek, “Spatially-coupled codes for channels with SNR variation,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 1–5, 2018.
[9] M. Zorgui, M. E. Fouda, Z. Wang, A. M. Eltawil, and F. Kurdahi, “NonStationary Polar Codes for Resistive Memories,” in Proc. IEEE Global Communications Conference (GlobCom), Big Island, HI, Dec. 2019.
[10] H. Mahdavifar, “Polar coding for non-stationary channels,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 66, no. 11, pp. 6920–6938, 2020.
[11] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, X. Zhang, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in 11th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies (FAST 13), 2013, pp. 243–256.

(b) regularized solution (Case 1)
(c) regularized solution (Case 2) Fig. 7: Case studies of the regularized LDCA framework. [12] Z. Chen and L. Dolecek, “Channel Models and Coding Solutions
for 1S1R Crossbar Resistive Memory with High Line Resistance,” manuscript submitted to IEEE Transactions on Communications. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2104.14011 [13] W.-c. Chou and M. A. Neifeld, “Interleaving and error correction in volume holographic memory systems,” Applied optics, vol. 37, no. 29, pp. 6951–6968, 1998. [14] B. Vucetic, “An adaptive coding scheme for time-varying channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 653–663, 1991.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:33:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

