IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

1051

Protograph LDPC-Coded BICM-ID With Irregular Mapping: An Emerging Transmission Technique
for Massive Internet of Things
Zhaojie Yang , Student Member, IEEE, Yi Fang , Member, IEEE, Yu Cheng , Member, IEEE, Pingping Chen , Member, IEEE, and Dhafer J. Almakhles , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding (BICM-ID) is a key technology enabling the communication systems to realize reliable and efficient data transmission. In this work, we present a study on the adaptive irregularmapping (AIM)-aided BICM-ID systems with the use of protograph low-density parity-check (PLDPC) codes. To be specific, we first propose a three-step design strategy to generate a type of adaptive constellations, which can be combined with their corresponding initial constellations to formulate an AIM scheme for improving the BICM-ID performance. Then, we put forward a theoretical-analysis tool, called AIM-based protograph extrinsic information transfer (PEXIT) algorithm, to estimate the convergence performance of PLDPC codes in the AIM-aided BICM-ID systems. By making use of such an algorithm, we further develop a code-design method to construct a new type of PLDPC codes, called enhanced PLDPC codes, tailored for the AIM-aided BICMID systems. Both convergence analysis and simulations indicate that the proposed AIM-aided BICM-ID systems perform better than the existing counterparts, and their performance can be significantly improved by using the enhanced PLDPC codes. Consequently, the proposed designs have great potential to meet the high-reliability, high-throughput, and strong link-adaptation requirements of future wireless-communication scenarios, such as green Internet of Things (IoT).
Manuscript received November 14, 2020; revised January 9, 2021; accepted February 20, 2021. Date of publication March 3, 2021; date of current version August 19, 2021. This work was supported in part by the NSF of China under Grant 62071131, Grant 61771149, and Grant 61871132; in part by the Open Research Fund of the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks under Grant ISN22-23; in part by the NSF of Guangdong Province under Grant 2019A1515011465; in part by the Science and Technology Program of Guangzhou under Grant 201904010124; in part by the Guangdong Province Universities and Colleges Pearl River Scholar Funded Scheme under Grant 2017-ZJ022; in part by the Research Project of the Education Department of Guangdong Province under Grant 2017KTSCX060 and Grant 2017KZDXM028; in part by the Graduate Education and Innovation Project of Guangdong Province under Grant 2020SQXX12; and in part by the Guangdong Innovative Research Team Program under Grant 2014ZT05G157. (Corresponding author: Yu Cheng.)
Zhaojie Yang, Yi Fang, and Yu Cheng are with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China, and also with the State Key Laboratory of Integrated Services Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an 710126, China (e-mail: zjyang0131@163.com; fangyi@gdut.edu.cn; chengyu@gdut.edu.cn).
Pingping Chen is with the Department of Electronic Information, Fuzhou University, Fuzhou 350116, China (e-mail: ppchen.xm@gmail.com).
Dhafer J. Almakhles is with the Renewable Energy Laboratory, Department of Communications and Networks Engineering, College of Engineering, Prince Sultan University, Riyadh 11586, Saudi Arabia (e-mail: dalmakhles@psu.edu.sa).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TGCN.2021.3063224

Index Terms—Protograph low-density parity-check (PLDPC), irregular mapping (IM), bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding (BICM-ID), Internet of Things (IoT).
I. INTRODUCTION
W ITH an aim to realize low-power, high-throughput, and high-reliability data transmission, many researchers have endeavored to spur the theoretical investigation and practical application of modern communication technologies, such as the narrowband Internet of Things (NB-IoT) [1], millimeterwave (mmWave) [2], and channel-selection-based resource allocation [3]. In addition to the above-mentioned techniques, a joint coding-and-modulation scheme, called bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM), has become one of the most popular communication architectures in recent years because it is capable of achieving the high-throughput and high-reliability transmission. BICM can be regard as a serial concatenated framework, which consists of three different components, i.e., the encoder, interleaver, and constellation [4]. By incorporating this framework, the communication systems can realize spectral-efficient transmission in various channel environments, such as the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels [4] and Rayleigh fading channels [4]. Nevertheless, the BICM systems are treated as sub-optimal transmission schemes, whose performance can be significantly enhanced by including an iterative decoding (ID) procedure in the receiving side. For this reason, a BICM in conjunction with ID, namely BICM-ID, has received intensive attention [5]. The BICM-ID systems not only inherit the spectral-efficiency advantage, but also possess more desirable error performance, and thus are very promising to support high-reliability and high-throughput transmission in various communication scenarios, such as relay systems [6], cooperative communication systems [7], integrated coding systems [8], and massively data-intensive IoT [9].
Owing to the appealing characteristics of BICM-ID systems, abundant research works related to the design, optimization, and analysis of constellations have been conducted in the past few years [10]–[12]. For instance, a systematic method, which is used to guide the design of M-ary phase-shift keying (PSK) constellations and M-ary quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) constellations, has been proposed in [10]. Moreover,

2473-2400 c 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1052

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

a novel kind of amplitude PSK (APSK) constellations, which possesses better performance than their QAM counterparts, has been introduced in [11]. Furthermore, another type of highorder modulated constellations, which exploits the structural feature of BICM-ID framework to improve the system capacity and iterative gain, has been proposed in [12]. In addition to the above regular mapping (RM) schemes, some irregular mapping (IM) schemes have been developed to further enhance the BICM-ID performance, i.e., each codeword is modulated by two different constellations simultaneously in the bit-to-symbol mapping process. To be specific, an IM scheme formulated by combining a Gray constellation and a maximum squared Euclidean weight (MSEW) constellation has been designed and analyzed in [13]. Meanwhile, the IM scheme consisting of a Gray constellation and an anti-Gray constellation has been investigated in [14]. As a further advancement, by making use of the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart [15], [16], a modified adaptive binary switch algorithm (MABSA) has been proposed to search excellent constellations, which are mixed with the pre-fixed constellations to formulate the IM schemes [17]. In general, the IM technique not only can offer a flexible way for the performance optimization of BICM-ID systems, but also can possess strong link-adaptation capability [17]. This is because the intrinsic layered feature of IM can provide unequal error protection (UEP) for different components of a given transmitted data stream based on the channel characteristics or practical communication requirements.
In addition to the constellation shaping, the application of capacity-approaching error-correction codes (ECCs) is an effective scheme for enhancing the BICM-ID performance. Among the existing ECCs, a type of structured lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, called protograph LDPC (PLDPC) codes, has received much attention in the wireless community because of their outstanding performance and simple implementation [18]. In the past decade, plenty of research works focusing on the joint design of PLDPC codes and high-order modulations have been widely investigated. For example, an interleaving scheme, called variable degree matched mapping (VDMM) scheme, has been presented for improving the error performance of PLDPC codes in BICM systems over AWGN channels [19]. Moreover, with the help of a protograph EXIT (PEXIT) algorithm [20], the VDMM scheme has been further optimized so as to find out the best bit-to-symbol mapping pattern for PLDPC-coded BICM systems [21]–[23]. On the other hand, the design and performance analysis of PLDPC codes for BICM-ID systems has been intensely investigated in various transmission scenarios, such as the Poisson pulse-position modulation (PPM) channels [24], multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash-memory channels [25], and block-fading channels [26].
Inspired by the appealing benefits of PLDPC codes, the combination of such codes and IM schemes has great potential to be a competitive coded modulation technique, which is capable of providing superior performance, high throughput, and strong link-adaptation capability for future wireless applications, especially 6G-enabled green IoT. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is a lack of works having been

reported to explore the design and analysis of IM schemes for PLDPC-coded BICM-ID systems. With this motivation, this work carries out an insightful study on the adaptive IM (AIM)-aided BICM-ID systems employing PLDPC codes. To be specific, a three-step design strategy is first conceived to construct a type of adaptive constellations based on the prefixed initial constellations. Then, the adaptive constellations and their initial counterparts can be combined to constitute a new type of IM schemes, namely AIM schemes, for improving the BICM-ID performance. Moreover, a theoreticalanalysis tool, called AIM-based PEXIT algorithm, is conceived so as to evaluate the convergence performance of PLDPC codes in the AIM-aided BICM-ID systems. Additionally, by means of such an AIM-based PEXIT algorithm, a code-design method is developed to construct a new type of PLDPC codes, called enhanced PLDPC codes, which are applicable to the AIM-aided BICM-ID systems. Simulated results illustrate that the AIM-aided BICM-ID systems not only exhibit better performance than the existing counterparts, but also achieve additional performance gains by employing the enhanced PLDPC codes.
The organization of the rest of this paper is as follows. In Section II, we present the AIM-aided PLDPC-coded BICMID system model and review the harmonic-mean analysis. In Section III, we introduce a three-step design strategy to construct a type of adaptive constellations and verify their advantages in terms of different harmonic mean of the minimum squared Euclidean distance (HMMSED) values. In Section IV, we propose an AIM-based PEXIT algorithm as well as a new code-design method, and predict the convergence performance for AIM-aided BICM-ID systems. Section V shows some simulated results along with several discussions, and Section VI concludes this work.

II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PRELIMINARIES
A. AIM-Aided PLDPC-Coded BICM-ID Systems
The structure of an AIM-aided PLDPC-coded BICM-ID system over AWGN channels is shown in Fig. 1, whose transmission mechanism is illustrated as follows. Specifically, a length-k information-bit sequence s = {s1, s2, . . . , sk } is first passed to the PLDPC encoder, and transformed into a lengthn coded-bit sequence c = {c1, c2, . . . , cn }. Subsequently, the coded-bit sequence c is passed to an interleaver and processed by a designated permutating operation. Further, every m consecutive coded bits are converted into an M-ary symbol based on an AIM modulator, and thus a length-(n/m) symbol sequence x = {x1, x2, . . . , xn/m } can be obtained, where m = log2 M .1 After that, the modulated symbol xj (j = 1, 2, . . . , n/m) is transmitted in an AWGN channel, and the corresponding channel output yj is given as

yj = xj + nj ,

(1)

1Note that in the bit-to-symbol mapping procedure, each length-n coded-bit sequence must be divided into two length-(n/2) coded-bit sub-sequences in a sequential order, and these two parts are mapped to two different M-ary constellations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED BICM-ID WITH IRREGULAR MAPPING

1053

Fig. 1. Structure of an AIM-aided PLDPC-coded BICM-ID system.

Fig. 2. Illustration of a set-partitioning rule for a 16-QAM Gray constellation.

where xj is chosen from an M-ary constellation set χ; nj denotes the complex Gaussian noise with mean zero and variance σ2 = N0/2, i.e., nj ∼ N (0, σ2), for per dimension, and N0 is the noise-power-spectral (NPS) density. In addition, the normalized energy for per transmitted symbol is assumed to be one, i.e., Es = E[|xj |2] = 1, where E[ · ] stands for an expectation function.
In the receiving side, the channel output is processed iter-
atively by taking advantage of an AIM demodulator and a
PLDPC decoder. Specifically, based on the channel output yj and the a-priori log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) LA,Dem, the AIM demodulator can implement a demodulated procedure and output the extrinsic LLRs LE,Dem (i.e., LE,Dem = LP,Dem − LA,Dem), which will be sent to the deinterleaver and permuted by a designated deinterleaving operation. Subsequently,
the extrinsic LLRs LE,Dem are served as the a-priori LLRs LA,Dec for the PLDPC decoder. Through a decoding procedure, the PLDPC decoder can output the extrinsic LLRs LE,Dec (i.e., LE,Dec = LP,Dec − LA,Dec), which will be passed to the interleaver and processed by a designated per-
mutation. Finally, the extrinsic LLRs LE,Dec are used as the updated a-priori LLRs for the AIM demodulator and play a
significant role in the next outer iteration (i.e., the iteration
between the demodulator and the decoder). To summarize,
the above serial concatenated framework is aimed at updat-
ing the LLRs iteratively, and thus is benefit to enhance the
overall performance of AIM-aided PLDPC-coded BICM-ID
systems. Unless otherwise stated, the AIM demodulator and
PLDPC decoder are realized by means of the max-sum approx-
imation of the log-domain maximum a-posteriori probability
(Max-log-Map) algorithm [27] and belief-propagation (BP)
algorithm [28], respectively, in this work.

B. Harmonic Mean Analysis

As is well known, constellation is a crucial element for the high-order modulated systems, and thus should be reasonably designed so as to realize reliable and efficient transmission in various communication environments. One notable example is the Gray constellation, which is assumed to be the best-performing mapping scheme for the BICM scenarios. However, the Gray constellation is not suitable for the BICMID scenarios due to its trivial performance gain in the ID procedure [29]–[31]. To facilitate the performance analysis of constellations, many researchers have focused their attention on a popular theoretical-analysis tool, called harmonic mean analysis, which is helpful to determine the optimal constellation in a given decoding scenario, such as the non-ID and ID scenarios [32]. Then, we briefly introduce the harmonic mean analysis as below.
1) Non-ID Scenario: Assuming that an M-ary constellation is given, there are M different labels, and each of them consists otchofemmκpl-letahmbeellnainbtagerlyibnisgtes.tbHoitfebrχeeκb,in,wgwehbdeer(efibnκe∈=χ{bκ01,,a12s}, t.)h,.e.a,nlmadb.eχlTκbhseeatns,wttihhthee non-feedback HMMSED, which is used to evaluate the BICM performance, is computed as [32]

⎛

Dh2(χ)

=

⎝1 m 2m

m1 i =1 b=0 x ∈χbκ

⎞−1

1⎠ x −z 2

,

(2)

where z is taken from χκ, and used to represent the label

closest to x;

x −z

b
indicates the Euclidean distance between

the label x and label z. To make Eq. (2) more clear, a set-

partitioning rule for a 16-QAM Gray constellation is illustrated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1054

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

in Fig. 2. while the

As observed, the shaded parts denote blank parts correspond to the set χκ0 ,

the set χκ1 , where κ =

1, 2, 3, 4.

2) ID Scenario: Suppose that an ideal iterative condition,

which is also known as error-free feedback [5], [32], [33], is realized. Then, for each 2m -ary modulated symbol including

m coded bits, one can assume that its (m − 1) component

coded bits are correctly determined by the decoder, and their

perfect soft information is fed back from the decoder to the demodulator. As such, a 2m -ary modulated scheme is trans-

formed into m independent binary modulated schemes for m

component coded bits [5]. The iterative-feedback HMMSED,

which is used for evaluating the BICM-ID performance, can

be computed by [32]

⎛

Dh2(χ)

=

⎝1 m 2m

m1 i =1 b=0 x ∈χbκ

⎞−1

1⎠ x −z 2

,

(3)

where z is taken from χκ, and used to represent the label whose component labelingb bits are the same as those of x

except the κ-th labeling bit; x − z indicates the Euclidean

distance between the label x and label z . Similarly, a specific

example related to Eq. (3) is presented in Fig. 2. As can be

seen, based on a designated labeling bit, all the 8 possible

label pairs, i.e., {x , z }, can be easily found in a 16-QAM

Gray constellation.

3) Offset Gain: Aiming to develop a more efficient method

to manifest the asymptotic iterative gain for a given constella-

tion, the difference and the Dh2(χ) of a

between the Dh2(χ) of a Gray constellation given constellation is defined as offset gain,

which is computed as [32]

Gh = −10 × log10 Dh2(χ)/Dh2(χ) (dB).

(4)

Note that the Gray constellation possesses the largest Dh2(χ) among all the existing counterparts, but its Dh2(χ) is relatively small, which leads to a small Gh . Thereby, the Gray
constellation is not suitable for BICM-ID systems. Remark 1: It should be noted that Dh2(χ), which is tai-
lored for the non-ID context, can be exploited to measure the

constellation performance irrespective of the decoding algo-

rithm. The larger Dh2(χ) is, the better the obtained. Moreover, a constellation with

performance can be a large Dh2(χ) can

help the decoder outputting reliable initial soft information,

which is effective to make the system obtaining desirable performance gain in the iterative process. Thus, Dh2(χ) can perfectly measure the BICM performance, and play a signif-

icant role on the BICM-ID performance. Distinguished from Dh2(χ), Dh2(χ) is derived under an ideal iterative condition [32], and thus is closely related to the decoding algorithm.

However, the BP decoding algorithm is unable to achieve

optimal performance [34], and cannot realize the error-free

feedback for practical communication systems. As a consequence, Dh2(χ) is considered as a secondary criterion for evaluating the iterative gain of constellations in BICM-ID sce-

narios. From the above discussion, it is advisable to design a constellation possessing a maximum Dh2(χ) and a relatively

Fig. 3. Principle of the pre-numbered procedure for an M-ary constellation: (a) a 8-PSK constellation and (b) a 16-QAM constellation.
large Dh2(χ) for high-order modulated systems, especially BICM-ID systems.
III. DESIGN METHODOLOGY AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR THE PROPOSED ADAPTIVE CONSTELLATIONS
A. Three-Step Design Strategy
With an aim to help the high-order modulated systems obtaining desirable performance in ID context, a variety of constellations, which can achieve noticeable iterative gains, have been proposed, e.g., the MSEW constellations [13] and anti-Gray constellations [13]. In addition to the conventional RM schemes, i.e., the bit-to-symbol mapping process is implemented with a single constellation, a novel type of mapping schemes, referred to as IM schemes, has been developed so as to refine the modulator-design advancements. Specifically, the IM schemes can simultaneously adopt two different constellations to modulate a given codeword, and thus offer a more flexible and efficient way for the system design and optimization. For instance, the combination of a Gray constellation and a designated counterpart, such as the MSEW [13], anti-Gray [14], and MABSA-based [17] constellations, have been already investigated for BICM-ID systems. Nonetheless, there is possibility for further enhancement in the performance of IM-aided BICM-ID systems since some IM schemes are formulated by combining two existing constellations, which are designed separately. For this reason, we put forward a three-step design strategy, which can be used for constructing a type of adaptive constellations based on given initial counterparts. The resultant adaptive constellations and their initial constellations perfectly match with each other, and thus are able to constitute a more excellent type of IM schemes. In particular, the detailed design method for the adaptive constellations is shown as follows.
1) Preliminary for the Initial Constellation: Suppose that an M-ary initial constellation is given, there are M different labels, and each of them will be assigned with a designated label number (i.e., x1, x2, . . . , xM ) by a pre-numbered procedure. Specifically, the pre-numbered procedure contains two different cases, which correspond to two different types of constellations, i.e., the M-ary PSK constellations and M-ary QAM constellations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED BICM-ID WITH IRREGULAR MAPPING

1055

Fig. 4. Structures of the 8-PSK initial constellations and their corresponding adaptive constellations: (a) MSEW and adp-MSEW constellations, where xk,3 is the selected target labeling bit; (b) anti-Gray and adp-anti-Gray constellations, where xk,2 is the selected target labeling bit; (c) Gray and adp-Gray constellations, where xk,1 and xk,2 are the selected target labeling bits.

• For an M-ary PSK constellation, its M labels formulate a
circle structure. Then, we define any one of these M labels
as xi , while the label farthest from the xi is defined as x(M +1−i), where i = 1, 2, . . . , M /2. As a consequence, we can easily find that the Euclidean distance between
the xi and x(M +1−i) is maximized, and both of them constitute a label pair {xi , x(M +1−i)}. • Different from PSK constellations, all the labels within
an M-ary QAM constellation formulate a square structure. We can first divide these M labels into 2(m/2)
column vectors in a left-to-right order, and each of which contains 2(m/2) labels, where m = log2 M . Subsequently, all the 2(m/2) labels within the j-th col-
umn vector will be numbered in a top-to-bottom order, where j = 1, 2, . . . , 2(m/2). Similarly, we assume that
two designed labels, i.e., the xi and x(M +1−i), constitute a label pair {xi , x(M +1−i)}, where i = 1, 2, . . . , M /2. In order to make the above pre-numbered procedure more
clear, two specific examples are presented in Fig. 3, in
which a 8-PSK constellation and a 16-QAM constellation are
considered.
2) Selecting the Target Labeling Bits: After the above pre-
numbered procedure, some labeling bits within the labels of
an initial M-ary constellation should be chosen, and used as
the component labeling bits for the labels of a corresponding
M-ary adaptive constellation. More specifically, by analyzing
the labeling-bit distribution of the initial constellation, its

labeling bits, which are set to be b and b in xi and x(M +1−i), respectively, can be found and called as target labeling bits, where xi and x(M +1−i) belong to the label pair {xi , x(M +1−i)}; i = 1, 2, . . . , M /2; and b ∈ {0, 1}. Suppose that the number of these target labeling bits selected for use is m , where 0 < m < m. The m target labeling bits will be maintained and used as the component labeling bits for all
labels of the adaptive constellation.
3) Designing the Remaining Labeling Bits: With an aim to determine the other m − m labeling bits of all labels within an adaptive constellation, we can adopt an optimization rule to process these M/2 label pairs {xi , x(M +1−i)} in a sequential order, where i = 1, 2, . . . , M /2. To be specific, the resultant adaptive constellation satisfies the following two characteris-
tics: 1) the Hamming distance between two labels belonging
to the same label pair is maximized, i.e., the Hamming dis-
tance between the label xi and the label x(M +1−i) is equal to m; and 2) the Hamming distance between two adjacent labels
must be as small as possible.
Following the aforementioned method, one can design a
type of M-ary adaptive constellations, which not only can
ensure maximum non-feedback HMMSEDs, but also can
possess relatively large iterative-feedback HMMSEDs. As
a further illustration, the adaptive constellations for the 8-
and 16-ary modulations with different initial constellations
are designed, whose structures are shown in Fig. 4 and
Fig. 5, respectively. As observed from these two figures,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1056

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

Fig. 5. Structures of the 16-QAM initial constellations and their corresponding adaptive constellations: (a) MSEW and adp-MSEW constellations, where xk,1 and xk,4 are the selected target labeling bits; (b) anti-Gray and adp-anti-Gray constellations, where xk,1 and xk,3 are the selected target labeling bits; (c) Gray and adp-Gray constellations, where xk,1 and xk,2 are the selected target labeling bits.
TABLE I HMMSEDS AND OFFSET GAINS, I.E., Dh2(χ), Dh2(χ) AND Gh , FOR DIFFERENT CONSTELLATIONS,
WHILE THE 8- AND 16-ARY MODULATIONS ARE INVOLVED

the MSEW, anti-Gray, and Gray constellations are utilized as the initial constellations, while their corresponding adaptive counterparts are denoted as the adaptive MSEW (adpMSEW), adaptive anti-Gray (adp-anti-Gray), and adaptive Gray (adp-Gray) constellations. Based on the HMMSED analysis illustrated in the next subsection, i.e., Section III-B, one can observed that the non-feedback HMMSED and iterativefeedback HMMSED, i.e., Dh2(χ) and Dh2(χ), for a given constellation can be used to reflect the constellation performance in the non-ID context and ID context, respectively.
B. HMMSED Analysis
Referring to Table I, under the 8- and 16-ary modulations, the numerical results in terms of Dh2(χ), Dh2(χ), and Gh for three different adaptive constellations, i.e., the adp-MSEW, adp-anti-Gray, and adp-Gray constellations, are

presented, while their corresponding conventional counter-
parts, i.e., the MSEW, anti-Gray, and Gray constellations,
are used as benchmarks. As can be observed, for a 8-PSK
modulation, the proposed adp-MSEW and adp-anti-Gray constellations exhibit relatively large Dh2(χ) compared with the MSEW and anti-Gray constellations, while the proposed adpGray constellation exhibits the same Dh2(χ) as the Gray constellation. Actually, the proposed three adaptive constellations exhibit the same Dh2(χ) as the Gray constellation (i.e., the best case for BICM systems), which implies that the for-
mer can achieve the same BICM performance as the latter
in the non-ID context. Furthermore, these adaptive constellations possess larger Dh2(χ) and Gh than the Gray constellation, and thus they can obtain desirable performance in the iterative
procedure. Additionally, one can easily find that the relative
performance between the three adaptive constellations and
their corresponding conventional constellations in the case

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED BICM-ID WITH IRREGULAR MAPPING

1057

Fig. 6. Block diagram of the AIM-based PEXIT algorithm for an AIM-aided PLDPC-coded BICM-ID system.
of 16-ary modulation is similar to that in the case of 8-ary modulation. Based on the above discussion, the three different types of adaptive constellations are more suitable to combine with their corresponding initial counterparts to form the AIM schemes for PLDPC-coded BICM-ID systems. With an aim to demonstrate the superiority of the AIM schemes, we will resort to a modified PEXIT algorithm to verify the asymptotic-performance in the next section.
IV. AIM-BASED PEXIT ALGORITHM AND CONVERGENCE-PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS FOR AIM-AIDED PLDPC-CODED BICM-ID SYSTEMS
A. PLDPC Codes
A protograph G = (V, C, E), which is equivalent to a small Tanner graph [18], consists of three different sets, i.e., a check node (CN) set C = {c1, c2, . . . , cnc }, a variable node (VN) set V = {v1, v2, . . . , vnv }, and an edge set E = {ei,j }, where i = 1, 2, . . . , nc and j = 1, 2, . . . , nv . Note that each edge ei,j connects a CN ci to a VN vj , and parallel edges are permitted for using. As such, the code rate of a protograph is calculated as R = (nv − nc)/nv . The adjacency matrix corresponding to a protograph with nc CNs and nv VNs is referred to as a base matrix B = (bi,j ) of size nc × nv , where bi,j indicates the number of edges connecting ci with vj . By implementing a “plifting” operation on a designated base matrix B, an expanded matrix H of size (ncp)×(nv p), called parity-check matrix, can be formulated. It should be noted that the lifting operation is implemented by means of a modified progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm [35].
B. AIM-Based PEXIT Algorithm
Aiming to facilitate the asymptotic-performance analysis for the AIM-aided PLDPC-coded BICM-ID systems, a modified PEXIT algorithm, called as AIM-based PEXIT algorithm, is conceived in this subsection. Specifically, the AIM-based PEXIT algorithm is employed to investigate the mutual information (MI) evolution between the AIM demodulator and the PLDPC decoder, and thus can be used to calculate the decoding thresholds of PLDPC codes in an AIM-aided BICMID system. In particular, the threshold value is assumed to be the minimum signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) per information bit (i.e., Eb /N0) that allows a PLDPC code to achieve errorfree transmission. Fig. 6 depicts a block diagram for such an algorithm. For the sake of introducing the AIM-based PEXIT algorithm in detail, several relevant MIs are defined in the following.

As pointed out in a variety of research works [12], when

the channel LLRs of PLDPC coded bits follow a Gaussian

dNis(tσric2bhu/t2io,nσc2wh)i,ththme ecaonrreσspc2ho/n2dinagndMvIacriaanncbee

σc2h, i.e., measured

l∼ by a

J (·) function [36], as

J (σch) = 1 −

+∞ exp
−∞

−

(μ−σc2h/2)2
2σc2h

2πσc2h

× log2[1 + exp(−μ)] dμ,

(5)

where the corresponding inverse function of J (·) (i.e., J −1(·))
and closed-form approximation can be obtained from [36].
Then, seven different kinds of MIs used in such an AIM-based
PEXIT algorithm are defined as
• IA,Dem and IE,Dem indicate the a-priori and extrinsic MIs of the AIM demodulator, respectively;
• IAV(i , j ) and IAC(i , j ) indicate the a-priori MIs sent from ci to vj and vj to ci , respectively;
• IEV(i , j ) and IEC(i , j ) indicate the extrinsic MIs sent from vj to ci and ci to vj , respectively;
• IAPP(j ) indicates the a-posteriori MI of vj ; In the AIM-based PEXIT algorithm, the predetermined
number for the outer iterations between the AIM demodu-
lator and the PLDPC decoder is defined as Tout, while that for the inner iterations of the PLDPC decoder is defined as
Tin. Furthermore, in each inner iteration, there exists an MI exchange from VN to CN and vice versa, i.e., IEV(i , j ) = IAC(i , j ) and IEC(i , j ) = IAV(i , j ). Based on the aforementioned definitions, the MI updated process for the AIM-aided
PLDPC-coded BICM-ID systems over an AWGN channel is
illustrated as below. 1) Initialization: Given a specific Eb /N0, and initialize the a-priori MI of AIM demodulator as IA,Dem = 0, i.e., initialize the corresponding a-priori LLRs of AIM
demodulator as 0. Then, an AIM-based Monte-Carlo
simulation is performed to generate a channel output sequence y = {y1, y2, . . . , y(n/m)}, which will be passed to the AIM demodulator.
2) Calculating the extrinsic MI of AIM Demodulator:
Given the channel output and the a-priori LLRs of AIM
demodulator, a demodulated procedure is implemented
with the Max-log-Map algorithm, and a sequence of extrinsic LLRs l = {l1, l2, . . . , ln } output from the AIM demodulator can be obtained. Accordingly, the extrinsic MI of the j-th VN (j = 1, 2, . . . , nv ) IE,Dem(j ) is calculated as

IE,Dem(j ) = 1 − E log2 1 + e−uk lk ,

(6)

where uk = (−1)ck ∈ {+1, −1} and lk are the k-th converted binary symbol and the corresponding extrinsic LLR, respectively; ck ∈ {0, 1} is the k-th coded bit; k = (j − 1)p + 1, (j − 1)p + 2, . . . , (j − 1)p + p, and p represents the lifting factor.
3) Setting the Initial Decoding MI of VN Decoder: The
extrinsic MIs of AIM demodulator are sent to the VN
decoder, and used for its initial decoding MIs, i.e.,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1058

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

IE,Dem(j ) = Iinit(j ) (j = 1, 2, . . . , nv ). Note that Iinit(j ) = 0 when vj is a punctured VN in a protograph. 4) Updating the extrinsic MI of VN Decoder: In the VN

decoder, by exploiting the initial decoding MI Iinit(j ) and the a-priori MI IAV(i , j ), the relevant extrinsic MI IEV(i , j ) should be computed as (if bi,j = 0 in the base

matrix)
⎛⎛

IEV(i , j ) =J ⎝⎜⎝ bs,j J −1(IAV(s, j )) 2

s =i

⎞1/2⎞

+

bi ,j −1

J −1(IAV(i , j ))

2
+

J

−1

(Iinit(j

))

2⎠

⎠⎟,

(7)
where i = 1, 2, . . . , nc and j = 1, 2, . . . , nv . If bi,j = 0, IEV(i , j ) = 0. 5) Updating the extrinsic MI of CN Decoder: In the CN decoder, by exploiting the a-priori MI IAC(i , j ), the relevant extrinsic MI IEC(i , j ) should be computed as (if bi,j = 0 in the base matrix)
⎛⎛
IEC(i , j ) = 1−J ⎜⎝⎝ bi,s J −1(1 − IAC(i , s)) 2
s =j
⎞1/2⎞ + bi,j −1 × J −1(1−IAC(i , j )) 2⎠ ⎠⎟,

(8)

where i = 1, 2, . . . , nc and j = 1, 2, . . . , nv . If bi,j = 0, IEC(i , j ) = 0.
6) Calculating the a-priori MI of AIM Demodulator: By

exploiting the a-priori MI of VN decoder IAV(i , j ), the

a-priori MI of AIM demodulator IA,Dem(j ) should be

computed as

⎛

⎞

IA,Dem(j ) = J ⎝

nc bi,j J −1(IAV(i , j )) 2

1/2
⎠,

i =1

(9)

where j = 1, 2, . . . , nv . It is noteworthy that IA,Dem serves as an updated MI, and the corresponding updated

LLRs can be calculated and used for the AIM demod-

ulator in the next demodulated procedure (i.e., outer

iteration).

7) Calculating the a-posteriori MI of VN Decoder: Based

on the initial decoding MI Iinit(j ) and the a-priori MI IAV(i , j ), the a-posteriori MI of j-th VN IAPP(j ) for j = 1, 2, . . . , nv , can be measured as
⎛ IAPP(j ) = J ⎝ nc bi,j J −1(IAV(i , j )) 2

i =1

⎞

1/2

+ J −1(Iinit) 2

⎠. (10)

Fig. 7. Protographs of the rate-1/2 (a) (3, 6) regular code and (b) RJA irregular code.
8) Finalization: If IAPP(j ) = 1 for j = 1, 2, . . . , nv , or the predetermined value of Tout is reached, this algorithm is terminated. Otherwise, go to Step 2) and continue the iterative procedure.
By using the AIM-based PEXIT algorithm, one can obtain the minimum Eb /N0, which can make the a-posteriori MIs of all VNs converging to one, for the AIM-aided PLDPC-coded BICM-ID systems.
Note also that: • Different from the standard EXIT algorithm tailored for
the conventional RM scenarios, an AIM-based MonteCarlo simulation as well as an AIM-based demodulated procedure are exploited for the MI update in the AIMbased PEXIT algorithm. This implies that Step 1) of the AIM-based PEXIT algorithm is not the same as that of the standard EXIT algorithm. • For the conventional RM scenarios, only one extrinsic MI IE,Dem and one a-priori MI IA,Dem can be obtained in each outer iteration of the standard EXIT algorithm. Nonetheless, in the AIM scenarios, a codeword is divided into 2 blocks and modulated by two different constellations. With an aim to guarantee the accuracy of the theoretical-analysis results, the proposed AIM-based PEXIT algorithm simultaneously updates nv different extrinsic MIs IE,Dem(j ) and nv different a-priori MIs IA,Dem(j ) for j = 1, 2, . . . , nv . As a consequence, both Step 2) and Step 6) of the AIM-based PEXIT algorithm are quite different from those of the standard EXIT algorithm. • Importantly, the AIM-based PEXIT algorithm is also suitable for the conventional BICM-ID scenarios when two identical constellations are adopted in the modulated precess, and for the BICM scenarios when an initial condition of Tout = 0 is given.
C. Proposed Code-Design Method
As is well known, PLDPC codes are viewed as structured LDPC codes, which contains few nodes. From the VNdegree and CN-degree perspective (resp. degree-distribution pair), these PLDPC codes are classified into two different categories, i.e., the regular codes and irregular codes. For instance, the protographs corresponding to two typical rate-1/2 PLDPC codes, called as (3, 6) regular code [37] and RJA irregular code [38], [39], are presented in Fig. 7. Particularly, the dark circles represent the VNs, while the circles with a plus sign represent the CNs. In the past

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED BICM-ID WITH IRREGULAR MAPPING

1059

TABLE II DECODING THRESHOLDS (Eb/N0)th (DB) OF THE (3, 6) AND RJA PLDPC CODES IN BICM-ID SYSTEMS WITH DIFFERENT MAPPING SCHEMES
OVER AN AWGN CHANNEL. TWO DIFFERENT MODULATION ORDERS, I.E., 8- AND 16-ARY MODULATIONS, ARE INVOLVED. THE MAXIMUM NUMBERS OF Tout AND Tin ARE SET TO BE 8 AND 25, RESPECTIVELY

few years, a great deal of attention has been paid to explore the design and optimization of PLDPC codes in various transmission scenarios, such as the AWGN channels [34], fading channels [22], and magnetic recording channels [40], [41]. Nonetheless, the performance analysis of PLDPC codes for high-order modulated systems, especially AIM-aided BICM-ID systems, is relatively unexplored. Therefore, by taking advantage of the AIM-based PEXIT algorithm, we propose a system-search-based method, which makes full use of the features of PLDPC codes and AIM-aided systems, to construct a type of enhanced PLDPC codes. The preliminaries of such a system-search-based method are shown as follows.
• A lot of research works have demonstrated that the protograph structure of a PLDPC code, which can exhibit outstanding performance, should consist of a proper proportion of degree-2 VNs and high-degree VNs [34].
• By making use of the three-step design strategy illustrated in Section III-A, one can generate a type of adaptive constellations, which possess both desirable nonfeedback HMMSED and iterative-feedback HMMSED. Moreover, the initial constellation and its corresponding adaptive counterpart, which have different convergence performance, are used to construct an AIM scheme.2
Exploiting the above two characteristics, we can construct a type of enhanced PLDPC codes tailored for the AIM-aided BICM-ID systems, which have the same encoding and decoding complexities as the original PLDPC codes. To be specific, for a given original protograph and its corresponding base matrix Borig of size nc × nv , we can first create an initial base matrix Binit, which possesses the same size as Borig. Subsequently, the elements within the first (nv /2) column vectors of Binit will be initialized to ensure that the weight of these column vectors is set to be 2. In order words, the first (nv /2) VNs are set to be degree-2 VNs. Then, all the elements within the remaining (nv − (nv /2) ) column vectors of Binit will be processed by a systematic enumeration. In particular, the possible values for all the elements are set to be bi,j ∈ {0, 1, 2, 3} aimed at reducing the search space. Moreover, the overall number of edges within Binit must be the same as that within Borig so as to ensure the same complexity. Finally, with the help of the AIM-based PEXIT
2In this work, the AIM scheme, which is formulated by combining the initial constellation and its corresponding adaptive constellation, is represented as AIM (χinit), where χinit denotes the initial constellation.

algorithm, the Binit, which can exhibit the lowest decoding threshold, will be obtained and used as the enhanced base matrix Ben. It should be noted that in the modulated process, these coded bits corresponding to the first (nv /2) degree-2 VNs of Ben are mapped by the initial constellation, while the coded bits corresponding to the remaining (nv − (nv /2) ) VNs of Ben are mapped by the adaptive constellation.
Example: With an aim to illustrate the effectiveness of
the above code-design method, we construct two types of
enhanced PLDPC codes, i.e., the enhanced (3, 6) PLDPC code
and enhanced RJA PLDPC code, based on the rate-1/2 (3, 6)
PLDPC code and RJA PLDPC code in Fig. 7. After a simple search, the base matrices (i.e., Be(3n,6) and BRenJA) of the two enhanced PLDPC codes are yielded as

B(e3n,6) = 2

4,

BeRnJA =

1 1

1 1

1 2

3 2

,

(11)

where the sizes of Be(3n,6) and BeRnJA are (1 × 2) and (2 × 4), respectively. One can easily observe that the overall numbers of edges within B(e3n,6) and BRenJA are the same as those within their corresponding original base matrices Bo(3r,i6g) and BoRrJigA. For the sake of verifying the superiorities of the AIM schemes and enhanced PLDPC codes, a
detailed asymptotic-performance analysis is presented in the
next subsection.

D. Decoding-Threshold Analysis
By utilizing the AIM-based PEXIT algorithm, we estimate the convergence behavior of four different PLDPC codes, i.e., the (3, 6), RJA, enhanced (3, 6), and enhanced RJA PLDPC codes, in the AIM-aided BICM-ID systems over an AWGN channel. Note that we consider two different modulations, i.e., the 8- and 16-ary modulations. Furthermore, we adopt six different mapping schemes, including three conventional RM schemes, i.e., the MSEW, anti-Gray, and Gray mappings, and their corresponding AIM schemes, i.e., the AIM (MSEW), AIM (anti-Gray), and AIM (Gray) mappings.
Referring to Table II, when a 8-PSK modulation is involved, one can obviously see that the (3, 6) and RJA PLDPC codes with the proposed AIM schemes can achieve smaller decoding thresholds than those with the conventional RM schemes. Similar phenomenon can be also found if a 16-QAM modulation is involved. This implies that the (3, 6) and RJA PLDPC codes can exhibit better error performance when the proposed AIM schemes can be employed in the BICM-ID systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1060

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

TABLE III DECODING THRESHOLDS (Eb/N0)th (DB) OF THE (3, 6), RJA, AND THEIR CORRESPONDING ENHANCED PLDPC CODES IN AIM (GRAY)-AIDED BICM-ID SYSTEMS OVER AN AWGN CHANNEL. TWO DIFFERENT MODULATION ORDERS, I.E., 8- AND 16-ARY MODULATIONS, ARE INVOLVED. THE
MAXIMUM NUMBERS OF Tout AND Tin ARE SET TO BE 8 AND 25, RESPECTIVELY

As seen from Table III, in the AIM (Gray)-aided BICMID systems, one can observe that the enhanced (3, 6) and enhanced RJA PLDPC codes possess smaller decoding thresholds compared with the original (3, 6) and original RJA PLDPC codes in the cases of both 8- and 16-ary modulations. Therefore, the AIM (Gray)-aided BICM-ID systems with the proposed enhanced (3, 6) and enhanced RJA PLDPC codes are capable of outperforming those implemented with the original (3, 6) and original RJA PLDPC codes.
Remark 2: Although the enhanced (3, 6) and enhanced RJA PLDPC codes are only used for the AIM (Gray) scheme in this work, they are also applicable for the other two AIM schemes, i.e., the AIM (MSEW) and AIM (anti-Gray) schemes.

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
To further verify the merits of the proposed AIM schemes and enhanced PLDPC codes, we present some bit-error-rate (BER) simulations on the AIM-aided PLDPC-coded BICM-ID systems over an AWGN channel in this section. In particular, the (3, 6), RJA, enhanced (3, 6), and enhanced RJA PLDPC codes are used as the transmitted data streams, and their code rate and codeword length equal to 1/2 and 4800, respectively. Also, three conventional RM schemes and their corresponding AIM schemes, i.e., the MSEW, anti-Gray, Gray, AIM (MSEW), AIM (anti-Gray), and AIM (Gray) schemes, are considered. Additionally, three existing IM schemes, which are implemented by combining the Gray constellation with the MSEW constellation [13], anti-Gray constellation [14], and MABSA-based constellation [17], are presented as benchmarks.3 Besides, the maximum number of the outer iterations Tout equals to 8, while that of the inner iterations Tin equals to 25.

Fig. 8. Simulated curves of the (3, 6) PLDPC code and RJA PLDPC code in the 8-PSK AIM-aided BICM-ID systems with six different mapping schemes, i.e., the MSEW, AIM (MSEW), anti-Gray, AIM (anti-Gray), Gray, and AIM (Gray) schemes: (a) (3, 6) PLDPC code and (b) RJA PLDPC code.

A. Error Performance for 8-PSK Modulation
For a 8-PSK modulation, Fig. 8 plots the simulated curves of the (3, 6) PLDPC code and RJA PLDPC code in the AIMaided BICM-ID systems with six different mapping schemes, i.e., the MSEW, AIM (MSEW), anti-Gray, AIM (anti-Gray), Gray, and AIM (Gray) schemes. As observed from Fig. 8(a), it is obvious that the (3, 6) PLDPC code with the AIM schemes is capable of exhibiting better error performance compared with that with the corresponding conventional RM schemes. To be specific, at a BER of 1 × 10−5, the AIM (Gray) scheme has a gain of about 0.1 dB over the conventional Gray scheme, while both the AIM (anti-Gray) and AIM (MSEW) schemes
3For simplicity, the three IM schemes are referred to as IM (Gray, MSEW), IM (Gray, anti-Gray), and IM (Gray, MABSA), respectively.

achieve a gain of about 1.4 dB over their corresponding antiGray and MSEW schemes. Furthermore, referring to Fig. 8(b), one can observe that the relative performance of RJA PLDPC code with the above mentioned six different mapping schemes is similar to that of (3, 6) PLDPC code. In addition, the simulated results are well consistent with their corresponding decoding-threshold analysis illustrated in Section IV-D.
B. Error Performance for 16-QAM Modulation
On the other hand, Fig. 9 depicts the simulated curves of the (3, 6) PLDPC code and RJA PLDPC code in the 16-QAM AIM-aided BICM-ID systems with six different mapping schemes. It can be observed from Fig. 9(a) that the proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED BICM-ID WITH IRREGULAR MAPPING

1061

Fig. 10. Simulated curves of the RJA PLDPC code in the 16-QAM AIMaided BICM-ID systems with three different IM schemes, i.e., the IM (Gray, MSEW), IM (Gray, anti-Gray), and AIM (Gray) schemes.

Fig. 9. Simulated curves of the (3, 6) PLDPC code and RJA PLDPC code in the 16-QAM AIM-aided BICM-ID systems with six different mapping schemes, i.e., the MSEW, AIM (MSEW), anti-Gray, AIM (anti-Gray), Gray, and AIM (Gray) schemes: (a) (3, 6) PLDPC code and (b) RJA PLDPC code.

Fig. 11. Simulated curves of the RJA PLDPC code in the 64-QAM AIMaided BICM-ID systems with two different IM schemes, i.e., the IM (Gray, MABSA) and AIM (Gray) schemes.

AIM schemes allow the (3, 6) PLDPC code to exhibit better performance than the corresponding RM schemes. Specifically, at a BER of 1 × 10−5, the AIM (Gray), AIM (anti-Gray), and AIM (MSEW) schemes achieve desirable gains of about 0.2 dB, 0.6 dB, and 1 dB over the Gray, anti-Gray, and MSEW schemes, respectively. Furthermore, similar phenomenon can be found for the RJA PLDPC code in Fig. 9(b), and these simulated results also agree well with their corresponding decoding-threshold analysis presented in Section IV-D.
To further illustrate the superiorities of the AIM schemes, the performance comparison among the IM (Gray, MSEW), IM (Gray, anti-Gray), and AIM (Gray) schemes is presented in Fig. 10. Referring to this figure, the AIM (Gray) scheme is the better-performing mapping scheme with respect to the IM (Gray, MSEW) scheme and IM (Gray, anti-Gray) scheme. For instance, at a BER of 4 × 10−6, the proposed AIM (Gray) scheme obtains significant performance gains of about 0.5 dB and 1.1 dB over the IM (Gray, anti-Gray) scheme and IM (Gray, MSEW) scheme, respectively. This phenomenon illustrates that the AIM (Gray) scheme is preferable for BICM-ID systems compared with the other two existing IM schemes.

C. Error Performance for 64-QAM Modulation
To validate the feasibility and superiority of the three-step design strategy in even high-order modulations, we further study the error performance of RJA PLDPC code in the 64-QAM AIM-aided BICM-ID systems. In particular, the 64-QAM-based AIM (Gray) and IM (Gray, MABSA) schemes are considered. As observed from Fig. 11, the AIM (Gray) scheme turns out to be a better alternative than the IM (Gray, MABSA) scheme. Specifically, the RJA PLDPC code with the AIM (Gray) scheme needs about an SNR of 6.4 dB to achieve a BER of 1 × 10−5, while that with the IM (Gray, MABSA) scheme needs about an SNR of 6.6 dB to achieve such a BER value. In other words, the AIM (Gray) scheme outperforms the IM (Gray, MABSA) scheme by about 0.2 dB at a BER of 1 × 10−5. Based on the above discussion, one can conclude that the proposed three-step design strategy is effective and the AIM schemes appear to be better alternatives for BICMID systems compared with the conventional RM schemes as well as the existing IM schemes regardless of the modulation order.
Remark 3: Compared with the RM schemes [13], [14], the proposed AIM schemes can achieve better error performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1062

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

Fig. 12. Simulated curves of the (3, 6) PLDPC code, RJA PLDPC code, and their corresponding enhanced PLDPC codes in the AIM (Gray)-aided BICMID systems. Two different modulation orders, i.e., 8- and 16-ary modulations, are involved.

Fig. 13. Simulated curves of the enhanced (3, 6) PLDPC code, enhanced RJA PLDPC code, and their corresponding inverted PLDPC codes in the AIM (Gray)-aided BICM-ID systems. Two different modulation orders, i.e., 8- and 16-ary modulations, are involved.

at the cost of more storage space. But the implementation complexity of the AIM schemes in terms of modulation, demodulation, and decoding is the same as that of the RM schemes [14]. Importantly, the proposed AIM schemes possess relatively lower complexity than some existing IM schemes [17], because the constellations of the former are formulated by a simple three-step design strategy instead of a computer-search-based method.
D. Error Performance for the Conventional PLDPC Codes and Their Enhanced Counterparts
In the following, we perform simulations on the (3, 6) PLDPC code, RJA PLDPC code, and their corresponding enhanced PLDPC codes in the AIM (Gray)-aided BICM-ID systems, while two different modulations, i.e., 8- and 16ary modulations, are involved. Referring to Fig. 12(a), the enhanced (3, 6) PLDPC code is capable of exhibiting better performance than its original (3, 6) PLDPC code in the cases of both 8- and 16-ary modulations. To be specific, at a BER of 2 × 10−6, the enhanced (3, 6) PLDPC code can achieve a gain of about 0.3 dB over its original (3, 6) PLDPC code for both 8- and 16-ary modulations. Additionally, similar

observations are found from Fig. 12(b), in which the enhanced RJA PLDPC code and its original RJA PLDPC code are compared. Therefore, simulated results are consistent well with the asymptotic-performance analyses in Section IV-D, which indicate that a significant improvement in the performance of AIM-aided BICM-ID systems can be obtained by using the enhanced PLDPC codes.
To verify the rationality of the code-design method proposed in Section IV-C, we have performed simulations on the enhanced (3, 6) PLDPC code, enhanced RJA PLDPC code, and their inverted counterparts (i.e., the degree-2 VNs and the remaining VNs of the enhanced PLDPC codes are modulated by the adaptive constellation and the initial constellation, respectively) in the AIM (Gray)-aided BICM-ID systems. Particularly, two different modulation orders, i.e., 8- and 16-ary modulations, are considered. As seen from Fig. 13(a), the enhanced (3, 6) PLDPC code can significantly outperform its inverted counterpart. Specifically, at a BER of 5 × 10−6, the enhanced (3, 6) PLDPC code attains gains of about 0.1 dB and 0.2 dB over its inverted counterpart for the 8and 16-ary modulations, respectively. Moreover, similar phenomenon can be observed from Fig. 13(b), which shows the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED BICM-ID WITH IRREGULAR MAPPING

1063

a gain of about 1.2 dB over their corresponding MSEW and anti-Gray schemes. Furthermore, the AIM (Gray) scheme with the enhanced (3, 6) PLDPC code can achieve a gain of about 0.4 dB over that with the (3, 6) PLDPC code. Additionally, similar phenomenon can be found in Fig. 14(b), in which the RJA PLDPC code and its corresponding enhanced counterpart are considered. Although we have only performed simulations on the 8-PSK BICM-ID systems over Rayleigh fading channels, the proposed AIM schemes and enhanced PLDPC codes can also exhibit superior performance in other high-order modulated scenarios, such as the 16-QAM modulation.

Fig. 14. Simulated curves of the (3, 6) PLDPC code, RJA PLDPC code, and their corresponding enhanced PLDPC codes in the 8-PSK BICM-ID systems over Rayleigh fading channels. Five different mapping schemes (i.e., MSEW, AIM (MSEW), anti-Gray, AIM (anti-Gray), and AIM (Gray)) are involved.
performance comparison for the enhanced RJA PLDPC code and its inverted counterpart.
Remark 4: Although the simulations of the enhanced PLDPC codes are only presented in the case of AIM (Gray) scheme, such codes are also better alternatives than the corresponding original counterparts and inverted counterparts in the cases of both AIM (MSEW) and AIM (anti-Gray) schemes.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this article, we have conducted an investigation for the AIM-aided BICM-ID systems with the employment of PLDPC codes. To be specific, we have first conceived a three-step design strategy to construct a type of adaptive constellations, which can be combined with their corresponding initial counterparts to formulate AIM schemes for the BICM-ID systems. Subsequently, we have developed a convergence-performance analytical tool, namely AIM-based PEXIT algorithm, for predicting the decoding thresholds of PLDPC codes in the AIM-aided BICM-ID systems. By taking advantage of the AIM-based PEXIT algorithm, we have also presented a code-design method to generate a type of enhanced PLDPC codes for the AIM-aided BICM-ID systems. Both convergence-performance analyses and BER simulations have demonstrated that the AIM-aided PLDPC-coded BICM-ID systems exhibit desirable error performance and outperform the existing counterparts, such as the conventional RM-aided PLDPC-coded BICM-ID systems and existing IMaided PLDPC-coded BICM-ID systems. Besides, the enhanced PLDPC codes are able to perform better than the existing PLDPC codes in the AIM-aided PLDPC-coded BICM-ID systems. More importantly, the AIM scheme that comprises two constellations with different convergence performance can also be used as a hierarchical scheme to provide UEP in the multi-data transmission scenarios (i.e., different constellations are used to process different data streams). Hence, our proposed designs appear to be a prospective technique for the bandwidth-limited systems having diverse quality-of-service (QoS) requirements, especially emerging IoT applications.

E. Error Performance for the 8-PSK BICM-ID Systems Over Rayleigh Fading Channels
With an aim to demonstrate that our proposed AIM schemes and enhanced PLDPC codes are also applicable for fading scenarios, we have performed simulations on the (3, 6) PLDPC code, RJA PLDPC code, and their enhanced counterparts in the 8-PSK BICM-ID systems over Rayleigh fading channels [34], [42], [43], while five different mapping schemes (i.e., MSEW, AIM (MSEW), anti-Gray, AIM (anti-Gray), and AIM (Gray)) are considered. Referring to Fig. 14(a), the proposed AIM schemes can achieve significant performance gains over their corresponding RM schemes. To be specific, at a BER of 3 × 10−6, both the AIM (MSEW) and AIM (anti-Gray) schemes allow the (3, 6) PLDPC code to achieve

REFERENCES
[1] C. B. Mwakwata, H. Malik, M. M. Alam, Y. Le Moullec, S. Parand, and S. Mumtaz, “Narrowband Internet of Things (NB-IoT): From physical (PHY) and media access control (MAC) layers perspectives,” Sensors, vol. 19, no. 11, p. 2613, 2019.
[2] Y. Liu, X. Fang, M. Xiao, and S. Mumtaz, “Decentralized beam pair selection in multi-beam millimeter-wave networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 6, pp. 2722–2737, Jun. 2018.
[3] H. Liao et al., “Learning-based context-aware resource allocation for edge-computing-empowered industrial IoT,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 7, no. 5, pp. 4260–4277, May 2020.
[4] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 927–946, May 1998.
[5] X. Li, A. Chindapol, and J. A. Ritcey, “Bit-interleaved coded modulation with iterative decoding and 8 PSK signaling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1250–1257, Aug. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1064

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON GREEN COMMUNICATIONS AND NETWORKING, VOL. 5, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2021

[6] Y. Fang, P. Chen, G. Cai, F. C. M. Lau, S. C. Liew, and G. Han, “Outagelimit-approaching channel coding for future wireless communications: Root-protograph low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Veh. Technol. Mag., vol. 14, no. 2, pp. 85–93, Jun. 2019.
[7] M.-K. Chang and S.-Y. Lee, “Performance analysis of cooperative communication system with hierarchical modulation over Rayleigh fading channel,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 8, no. 6, pp. 2848–2852, Jun. 2009.
[8] Q. Chen, L. Wang, P. Chen, and G. Chen, “Optimization of component elements in integrated coding systems for green communications: A survey,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 21, no. 3, pp. 2977–2999, 3rd Quart., 2019.
[9] S. Mumtaz, A. Bo, A. Al-Dulaimi, and K.-F. Tsang, “Guest editorial 5G and beyond mobile technologies and applications for industrial IoT (IIoT),” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat., vol. 14, no. 6, pp. 2588–2591, Jun. 2018.
[10] H. M. Navazi and M. J. Hossain, “A novel symbol mapping method for BICM-ID systems for higher order signal constellations,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1323–1326, Aug. 2014.
[11] Z. Liu, Q. Xie, K. Peng, and Z. Yang, “APSK constellation with gray mapping,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 15, no. 12, pp. 1271–1273, Dec. 2011.
[12] Z. Yang, Y. Fang, G. Zhang, F. C. M. Lau, S. Mumtaz, and D. B. da Costa, “Analysis and optimization of tail-biting spatially coupled protograph LDPC codes for BICM-ID systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 1, pp. 390–404, Jan. 2020.
[13] J. Tan and G. L. Stuber, “Analysis and design of symbol mappers for iteratively decoded BICM,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 4, no. 2, pp. 662–672, Mar. 2005.
[14] L. Szczecinski, H. Chafnaji, and C. Hermosilla, “Modulation doping for iterative demapping of bit-interleaved coded modulation,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 12, pp. 1031–1033, Dec. 2005.
[15] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[16] A. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. ten Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
[17] Z. Liu, K. Peng, T. Cheng, and Z. Wang, “Irregular mapping and its application in bit-interleaved LDPC coded modulation with iterative demapping and decoding,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 707–712, Sep. 2011.
[18] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” in Proc. IPN Progr. Rep., vol. 154, Aug. 2003, pp. 1–7.
[19] D. Divsalar and C. Jones, “Protograph based low error floor LDPC coded modulation,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf. (MILCOM), vol. 1. Atlantic City, NJ, USA, Oct. 2005, pp. 378–385.
[20] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Washington, DC, USA, Nov. 2007, pp. 3250–3254.
[21] Y. Jin, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Optimized variable degree matched mapping for protograph LDPC coded modulation with 16QAM,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 161–165.
[22] T. V. Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “Threshold of protographbased LDPC coded BICM for Rayleigh fading,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Houston, TX, USA, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–5.
[23] C. Tang, H. Shen, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Optimization of generalized VDMM for protograph-based LDPC coded BICM,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 5, pp. 853–856, May 2014.
[24] H. Zhou, M. Jiang, C. Zhao, and J. Wang, “Optimization of protographbased LDPC coded BICM-ID for the poisson PPM channel,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 12, pp. 2344–2347, Dec. 2013.
[25] Y. Bu, Y. Fang, G. Han, S. Mumtaz, and M. Guizani, “Design of protograph-LDPC-based BICM-ID for multi-level-cell (MLC) NAND flash memory,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 7, pp. 1127–1131, Jul. 2019.
[26] Y. Fang, G. Zhang, G. Cai, F. C. M. Lau, P. Chen, and G. Han, “Root-protograph-based BICM-ID: A reliable and efficient transmission solution for block-fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 67, no. 9, pp. 5921–5939, Sep. 2019.
[27] J. Tan, Q. Wang, C. Qian, Z. Wang, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “A reducedcomplexity demapping algorithm for BICM-ID systems,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 64, no. 9, pp. 4350–4356, Sep. 2015.

[28] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[29] A. Yadav, M. Juntti, and J. Lilleberg, “Partially coherent constellation design and bit-mapping with coding for correlated fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4243–4255, Oct. 2013.
[30] S. Chaabouni, N. Sellami, and M. Siala, “Mapping optimization for a MAP turbo detector over a frequency-selective channel,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 617–627, Feb. 2014.
[31] Q. Li, J. Zhang, L. Bai, and J. Choi, “Performance analysis and system design for hierarchical modulated BICM-ID,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 13, no. 6, pp. 3056–3069, Jun. 2014.
[32] A. Chindapol and J. A. Ritcey, “Design, analysis, and performance evaluation for BICM-ID with square QAM constellations in Rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 944–957, May 2001.
[33] P. Chen, Z. Xie, Y. Fang, Z. Chen, S. Mumtaz, and J. J. P. C. Rodrigues, “Physical-layer network coding: An efficient technique for wireless communications,” IEEE Netw., vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 270–276, Mar./Apr. 2020.
[34] Y. Fang, G. Bi, Y. L. Guan, and F. C. M. Lau, “A survey on protograph LDPC codes and their applications,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1989–2016, 4th Quart., 2015.
[35] V. Nguyen, “Design of capacity-approaching protograph-based LDPC coding systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Doctor Philos. Elect. Eng., Univ. Texas Dallas, Dallas, TX, USA, Dec. 2012.
[36] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of lowdensity parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[37] D. Divsalar, C. Jones, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Protograph based LDPC codes with minimum distance linearly growing with block size,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), vol. 3. St. Louis, MO, USA, Nov. 2005, pp. 1152–1156.
[38] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and C. Jones, “Construction of protograph LDPC codes with linear minimum distance,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Seattle, WA, USA, Jul. 2006, pp. 664–668.
[39] D. G. M. Mitchell, A. E. Pusane, and D. J. Costello, “Minimum distance and trapping set analysis of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 254–281, Jan. 2013.
[40] Y. Fang, P. Chen, L. Wang, and F. C. M. Lau, “Design of protograph LDPC codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2809–2819, Oct. 2012.
[41] Y. Fang, G. Han, G. Cai, F. C. M. Lau, P. Chen, and Y. L. Guan, “Design guidelines of low-density parity-check codes for magnetic recording systems,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 1574–1606, 2nd Quart., 2018.
[42] Q. Chen and L. Wang, “Design and analysis of joint source channel coding schemes over non-standard coding channels,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 5, pp. 5369–5380, May 2020.
[43] Q. Chen, F. C. M. Lau, H. Wu, and C. Chen, “Analysis and improvement of error-floor performance for JSCC scheme based on double protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 69, no. 12, pp. 14316–14329, Dec. 2020.
Zhaojie Yang (Student Member, IEEE) received the B.Sc. degree in applied electronic technology from Lingnan Normal University, China, in 2016. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree with the Department of Communication Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, China. His primary research interest is channel coding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: PROTOGRAPH LDPC-CODED BICM-ID WITH IRREGULAR MAPPING

1065

Yi Fang (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from Xiamen University, China, in 2013. From May 2012 to July 2012, he was a Research Assistant in electronic and information engineering with Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. From September 2012 to September 2013, he was a Visiting Scholar in electronic and electrical engineering with University College London, U.K. From February 2014 to February 2015, he was a Research Fellow with the School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He is currently a Full Professor and the Vice Dean with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, China. His current research interests include information and coding theory, spread-spectrum modulation, and cooperative communications. He served as the Publicity Co-Chair for the International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing 2018.

Pingping Chen (Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering from Xiamen University, China, in 2013. In 2012, he was a Research Assistant in electronic and information engineering with the Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong. From 2013 to 2015, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow with the Institute of Network Coding, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong. He is currently a Full Professor with Fuzhou University, China. His primary research interests include channel coding, joint source and channel coding, network coding, and UWB communications.

Yu Cheng (Member, IEEE) received the bachelor’s and master’s degrees in computer science from Xiangtan University, Xiangtan, China, in 2000 and 2005, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in computer science from Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China, in 2008. He was a Visiting Scholar supported by the Croucher Foundation in machine learning with the Open University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, from 2017 to 2018. He has been a Lecturer with the School of Information Engineering, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou, since 2008. His current research interests include the fields of machine learning, computer vision, and encoding.

Dhafer J. Almakhles (Senior Member, IEEE) received the B.E. degree in electrical engineering from the King Fahd University of Petroleum and Minerals, Dhahran, Saudi Arabia, in 2006, and the master’s (Hons.) and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Auckland, New Zealand, in 2011 and 2016, respectively. Since 2016, he has been with Prince Sultan University, Saudi Arabia, where he is currently an Associate Professor and the Chairman of the Communications and Networks Engineering Department, and the Director of the Science and Technology Unit and Intellectual Property Office, Prince Sultan University. He is the leader of the Renewable Energy Research Team and Laboratory. His research interests include power electronics, control theory, unmanned aerial vehicles, renewable energy systems, and FPGA applications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:25 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

