IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 25, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021

2781

A Low-Latency BF Decoding of LDPC Codes With Dynamic Thresholds
Ming Jiang , Member, IEEE, and Dongli Fan

Abstract— This letter proposes a high throughput bit-flipping (BF) algorithm for regular LDPC codes with dynamic thresholds. In the iterative decoding, the flipping threshold is dynamically updated according to the previous flipping results. Compared to the exiting hard-information-based BF algorithms, the proposed algorithm can get better decoding performance. At the same time, in order to accelerate the convergence speed, we limit the number of occurrences of high thresholds which effectively reduces the invalid decoding iterations. The proposed algorithm has better decoding performance and lower average number of iterations which is suitable for the flash storage systems with low latency and high throughput requirements.
Index Terms— LDPC codes, bit-flipping decoding, dynamic threshold, hard decision.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check codes [1], as linear block codes approaching Shannon’s capacity limit, from rediscovery to the present, in satellite communications (DVB and ATSC standard), the wireless systems (5G NR, WiMAX and WiFi), optical fiber communications, storage systems and other fields are widely used. NAND flash as a storage medium of solid-state drive (SSD) has become one of the main trends in the future development of storage systems. As the capacity approaching error-correcting performance and parallel ultra-fast decoding, the LDPC codes are gradually applied to NAND [2]. However, the less redundancy, high storage density, and limited hardware space in the NAND storage field bring more challenges to the application of LDPC codes. Compared with soft-information-assisted algorithms such as the sum-product algorithm and min-sum algorithm, the hard-decision bit-flipping (BF) algorithms can achieve good performance with ultra-high throughput and very low complexity.
In 1962, the original hard-information-based BF algorithm was proposed by Gallager [1]. In order to balance decoding complexity and decoding performance, many soft-information-assisted BF algorithms have been proposed [3]–[5]. The gradient-descent BF (GDBF) and noise aided GDBF algorithms flip bits adaptively by considering the entropy calculated [6], [7]. These algorithms greatly improve
Manuscript received May 8, 2021; accepted June 8, 2021. Date of publication June 11, 2021; date of current version September 10, 2021. This work was supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (Grant No. 2018YFB1801103) and National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (Grant No. 61771133). The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was B. Matuz. (Corresponding author: Dongli Fan.)
The authors are with the National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China, and also with Purple Mountain Laboratories, Nanjing 211111, China (e-mail: jiang_ming@seu.edu.cn; fandl@seu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2021.3088579

the decoding performance with the aid of soft-information, but when extracting multi-bits soft-information from the NAND flash, it is necessary to read the flash media multiple times, which severely reduces the system throughput [5], [8]. Replacing the soft channel output information by the hard-decision of received signals into the flipping function, some new hardinformation-based BF algorithms, such as the probabilistic GDBF (PGDBF) [9], multiple decoding attempts and random re-initializations (MUDRI) PGDBF [10], information storage BF (ISBF) [11], fine-grained BF (FBF) [12] and probabilistic parallel BF (PPBF) [13] algorithms are proposed. These algorithms usually can achieve noticeable performance gain, but the determination of the flipping thresholds and the locking of the flipping bits require a lot of comparisons.
In the multi-bit flipping (MBF) and approximation of MBF (AMBF) algorithms based on hard-information, only a certain number of bits reaching the threshold are flipped during each iteration to prevent over correction [14]. Although the multi-fixed number of flipping bits improves the convergence speed to some extent, it also limits the flexibility of bit flipping and increases the complexity in the process of selecting flipping bits by sorting. The threshold of the adaptive threshold BF (ATBF) algorithm is adaptively adjusted between the initial value and the maximum flipping function to accelerate the convergence speed of finite geometry LDPC codes [15]. However, the high complexity of sorting still limits the delay and throughput of the ATBF algorithm in hardware implementation. The adaptive bit-local threshold BF (ABTBF) and turbo adaptive bit-local threshold BF (TABTBF) algorithms which are also applicable to finite geometry LDPC codes, eliminate the process of finding the maximum flipping function with almost the same performance as that of the ATBF decoding [16].
We propose a dynamic threshold BF (DTBF) algorithm based on hard-information. In the decoding process, the DTBF algorithm adjusts the threshold of the current iteration according to the flipping results of the previous iteration, and then flips all the bits that reach the updated threshold. Compared with the previous hard-information-based BF algorithms, it not only can obtain better decoding performance, but also has a low complexity. In addition, in order to speed up the convergence, the number of occurrences of high values of thresholds can be limited in the DTBF algorithm, thereby greatly reducing the number of invalid iterations and improving the decoding throughput.
II. HARD-DECISION BASED BIT-FLIPPING ALGORITHMS
A binary regular (N, M) LDPC code can be defined by an M×N dimensional parity-check matrix H, where N and M

1558-2558 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:25:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2782

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 25, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021

represent the lengths of the coded sequence and the syndrome
sequence. The element in the m-th row and n-th column of
H is defined as hm,n , and each column (row) of H contain a fixed number, dv (dc), of 1’s, called column (row) weight. Furthermore, we denote a set of columns and rows with
non-zero entries in the m-th row and the n-th column as B(m) ={n, hm,n = 1} and A(n) ={m, hm,n = 1}.
Assuming c = (c1, …, cN ) is a binary LDPC codeword, which is modulated by binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) to obtain x = (x1, …, xN ), where xi = 2ci − 1, i = 1, …, N . Through an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with zero mean and variance σ2, the received sequence at the output is expressed as y = (y1, …, yN ), where yi = xi + ni , i = 1, …, N . According to the signs of received signals, the hard-decision sequence z = (z1, …, zN ) is obtained by zi = (sgn(yi ) + 1)/2, i = 1, …, N .
In the LDPC decoding process, the estimated codeword is denoted by v = (v1, …, vN ). And the syndrome s = z∗HT = (s1, …, sM ) is used to determine whether the current codeword sequence satisfies the parity-check constraints. If not, calculate
the flipping function of each bit according to the vector s,
as shown in formula (1), where α represents the weighting
factor. The magnitude of En indicates the reliability of the nth bit. And the larger the value of flipping function, the lower
the reliability.

En = α(zn ⊕ vn) +

(2sm − 1).

(1)

m∈A(n)

For the BF algorithm, all the bits with the largest flipping function are flipped to obtain a new codeword sequence in each iteration. Considering that it is inadequate to evaluate the reliabilities of all bits based on the syndromes alone, some new algorithms, such as the WBF, MWBF and GDBF algorithms, introduce the channel output values (y1, . . . , yn) to more accurately evaluate the reliabilities of the coded bits. But the storage of soft values and the real valued functions increase the computational complexity and delay, which inevitably reduce the power efficiency and decoding throughput.
The MBF decoding introduces two fixed parameters, the flipping threshold Th and the maximum number Fx of bits allowed to flip in each iteration. Select all bits with En ≥ Th to form a set of candidate flipped bits, and flip at most Fx bits in this set by the descending order of En. In order to reduce the complexity of sorting, the AMBF algorithm adopts the idea of dividing the codeword bits into Q groups equally by length of the codeword, and puts the bits with the largest En and reaching Th in each group into the candidate bit set. The number of groups can flexibly trade off the overall sorting complexity and decoding performance. The best values of Th and Fx need to be optimized through simulation tests for different LDPC codes with specific degree distributions.
Compared with the MBF decoding, the ATBF decoding has the adaptively adjusted threshold and unfixed number of flipping bits in the iterative process. Similarly, the ATBF decoding with an initialized flipping threshold Th first calculates En for all coded bits and the maximum value of them as Emax. If there exist bits with En ≥ Th, flip these bits and go to the next, otherwise decrease the threshold Th to Emax, and select

the bits of En ≥ Th again to flip. Among them, the initial flipping threshold is obtained through simulation tests.
The BF, AMBF, MBF and ATBF algorithms are all based on En with α = 0. In the PPBF, FBF and ISBF algorithms, the flipping function value En is related not only to the syndromes, but also to the hard-decision sequence of the received signals. Therefore, set α = 2 in the flipping function En of these algorithms. At the same time, for the bits that reach the threshold value, the flip-flags Rn are generated by the Bernoulli function of probability p. The n-th bit is flipped only when Rn = B(p) = 1. These algorithms can get better error correcting performance. However, a large number of comparisons among these algorithms increase the complexity and require a higher maximum number of iterations to achieve better decoding performance, so they are not particularly suitable for NAND systems.
III. PROPOSED BIT-FLIPPING ALGORITHM
A. Dynamic Configuration Threshold
The DTBF algorithm proposed in this letter adjusts the threshold according to the bit-flipping results in the last iteration. Assuming that the column weight of the regular parity-check matrix H is dv, the flipping function, En ∈ {dv + α − kΔ, k = 0, 1, 2, . . .} calculated by formula (1), where Δ = 2 represents the minimum step of En. When all the syndromes participated by the n-th bit zn is not satisfied, that is, for all m ∈ A(n), the syndrome sm = 1, the corresponding flipping function reaches the maximum value En = dv +α. Set dv + α as the initial flipping threshold, which will be adjusted dynamically. Assuming that a total of t bits have been flipped during the last iteration, if t = 0, indicating that there is no flipping function reaches the threshold, then the threshold will be reduced by one step Δ, otherwise the threshold will be set to a higher value according to the number of threshold adjustments in the previous iterations.
As the number of iterations increases, the high thresholds will most probably prevent the bit-flipping, resulting in more useless iterations and slowing down the convergence speed of decoding. Limiting the occurrence of the high thresholds can help improve the flipping efficiency. For the simplicity, we only limit the occurrences of the highest and the second highest flip thresholds, respectively denoted by L0 and L1. For example, after a threshold of Th = dv + α appears L0 times, when t = 0, we adjust Th = dv + α − Δ and not to the highest threshold Th = dv + α again. And after a threshold of dv + α − Δ appears L1 times, when t = 0, then we only decrease the threshold to Th = dv + α − 2Δ in the further iterations. If the value of L0 is set to the maximum number of iterations, it means that there is no limit on the occurrences of high thresholds.
In order to minimize the number of invalid iterations and obtain a faster convergence speed, we optimize the values of L0 and L1 through decoding simulations of different LDPC codes. For some LDPC codes with larger column weights, not only the two highest thresholds, dv + α and dv + α − Δ, but also the remaining high thresholds dv + α − kΔ, k = 2, 3, . . ., should be considered to limit their occurrences. Taking the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:25:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG AND FAN: LOW-LATENCY BF DECODING OF LDPC CODES

2783

limitation on the occurrences of the highest threshold and the second highest threshold as an example, the threshold adjustment method can be described as Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 Threshold Adjustment Method
Parameter t: the number of flipped bits in the last iteration; Th: the flipping threshold; l0: the occurrence of the highest threshold Th = dv + α; l1: the occurrence of the second highest threshold Th = dv + α − Δ;
if t = 0 then Th = Th − Δ; else if l0 < L0 then
Th = dv + α; l0 + +; else if l1 < L1 then
Th = dv + α − Δ; l1 + +; else Th = dv + α − 2Δ.

Algorithm 2 DTBF Decoding Algorithm
Parameter Imax: the maximum number of iterations; L0, L1: the maximum occurrences of the two highest flipping thresholds;
Input hard decisions of channel outputs: z0; Initialize Th = dv + α, t = 0, l0 = 1, l1 = 0; for (i = 1; i ≤ Imax; i + +) do
s = zi−1 ∗ HT , s = sm, m = 1, . . . , M ; if ( sm = 0) terminate the algorithm; for n = 1, 2, . . . , N do
calculate En; if (En ≥ Th) flip zni = zni−1 ⊕ 1, t + +; Threshold Adjustment (Th, t, l0, l1 ); reset the number of flipped bits t = 0.
TABLE I
THE NUMBER OF COMPARISONS IN ONE ITERATION

B. Proposed DTBF Algorithm
When receiving the hard decisions of channel outputs z0, we initialize the flipping threshold Th = dv + α, the number of flipped bits t = 0 and the occurrences of the two highest thresholds l0 = 1, l1 = 0. Then, the proposed decoding process of the DTBF algorithm is shown in Algorithm 2. At the i-th iteration, our algorithm calculates all M syndromes through (s1, . . . , sM ) = zi−1 ∗ HT , according to the hard decision sequence firstly. When all syndromes are satisfied,
sm = 0, the decoding is successful and the current hard decision sequence is output. Otherwise, calculate the flipping function values En, n = 1, . . . , N , of all bits according to formula (1). And we flip all the bits that satisfy En ≥ Th, n = 1, . . . , N to obtain an updated sequence z, where the number of flipped bits t is newly recorded. In the threshold adjustment process, it is judged how to update the threshold according to the number of flipped bits t. If t = 0, it means that this iteration is invalid with no bit to be flipped, we should decrease the flipping threshold of next iteration by a step Th − Δ, otherwise adjust the threshold to the highest value according to the occurrences limitation L0 and L1. The detailed adjustment is described in the Algorithm 1, and considering the parameters involved, it can be expressed as Threshold Adjustment (Th, t, l0, l1) in the DTBF decoding. Then, we reset the number of flipped bits to t = 0 for the next iteration.The iterative decoding is continued until the maximum number of iterations is reached i = Imax.
In the proposed DTBF algorithm, dynamic threshold makes the flipping operation more reliable and efficient. The lowering of flipping threshold can break the decoding process that is trapped in the invalid iterations. On the other hand, the increase of the threshold can prevent over-correction caused by too many bit-flips. Based on these two aspects, the DTBF algorithm can achieve better decoding performance without introducing too high complexity.
C. Decoding Complexity
In contrast to the BF, ATBF, GFBF and ISBF algorithms, DTBF algorithm eliminates a large number of comparisons to

find the maximum value of flipping functions in each iteration which greatly reduces the complexity and decoding latency. Compared with the AMBF algorithm, there is no limit to the number of flipped bits in each iteration, which reduces the process of searching for the Fx bits with the largest value of flipping functions. For an LDPC code with a size of M×N binary parity-check matrix, Table I describes the number of comparisons involved in one iteration of several BF algorithms with the same syndrome and flipping function calculation process as the DTBF algorithm. It can be seen that the proposed algorithm has relatively the lowest decoding complexity and can be carried out in parallel without searching the maximum value of flipping functions. At the same time, the limitation on the high thresholds also reduces the number of invalid iterations and increases the decoding throughput.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND ANALYSIS
Two binary (60Z1, 6Z1) and (81Z2, 8Z2) regular quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, respectively denoted by C1 and C2, are select for testing, where the lifting sizes are set to Z1 = 607 and Z2 = 449 for the column weights dv = 6 and 8, respectively. These two high-rate (about 0.9) LDPC codes both support 4KB length of information bits for storage [17]. BPSK modulation and AWGN channel are used for our simulations. And, we mainly focus on the frame error rates (FER) and the average number of iterations for performance and throughput analysis, respectively.
Fig. 1 and Fig. 2 respectively show the FER performance and the average number of iterations for our proposed DTBF decoding (α, Imax, L0, L1) of C1 and C2, where L0 = Imax means no limitation on the occurrences of the highest threshold. It can be seen from Fig. 1 that for the DTBF decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:25:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2784

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 25, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021

Fig. 1. The FER performance of DTBF algorithm for C1 and C2.

Fig. 3. The average number of the different En values (α = 0) in the n-th decoding iteration of C1 with reliable (‘R’) and unreliable (‘U’) channels.
TABLE II STATISTICS OF THE PROPORTION OF INVALID ITERATIONS

Fig. 2. The average number of iterations of DTBF algorithm for C1 and C2.
of C1 with limited occurrences of high thresholds, L0 = 1 and L1 = 4, can significantly improve the FER performance from 3 × 10−3 to 5 × 10−5 at the raw bit error rate (RBER) of 4 × 10−3 when Imax is set to 50. Under the same maximum number of iterations Imax = 50, the DTBF decoding of C2(0, 50, 1, 2) can obtain more performance gain over that without
limitation on the occurrence of high thresholds, where the FER performance can be lowered from 10−1 to 10−3 at the RBER of 4 × 10−3. Moreover, the DTBF decoding performance of C1 and C2 with limitation on the occurrence of high thresholds
can close to or even better than the DTBF algorithm with L0 = Imax =100 and 150, respectively.
Fig. 3 shows the average numbers of different En values in the iterative DTBD decoding of C1 under the reliable (‘R’ RBER = 3.67 × 10−3) and unreliable (‘U’ RBER = 5.49 × 10−3) channels. Under reliable channel, there are still bits whose values of flipping functions reach En = dv + α. Therefore, it is meaningful and reasonable to limit the occurrence of high thresholds in a reliable channel, which can not only accelerate the convergence speed but also accurately
locate the error bits.

Table II shows the proportion of invalid iterations in the total number of iterations for C1 and C2 with and without the limitation on the high thresholds. After simulation test, for C1, the limitations of the two highest flipping thresholds 6 and 4 appear L0 = 1 and L1 = 4 times respectively. And for C2, the two highest thresholds 8 and 6 appear L0 = 1 and L1 = 2 times respectively. These limitations significantly reduce the proportions of invalid iterations in the decoding process. Obviously, the occurrence of high thresholds causes a large number of invalid iterations and reduces the convergence speed without limitation in the iterative decoding. The FER of C1 under 50 iterations of the DTBF algorithm with limitation is lower than that of the DTBF decoding without limitation under 100 iterations in Fig. 1. Accordingly, Fig. 2 shows that the average iteration number of the DTBF algorithm with limitation for C1 is much lower than that of decoding without limitation. The same simulation results can be seen from the decoding results of C2. Hence, the DTBF algorithm with limitation on high threshold get the optimal decoding performance and ultra-fast convergence speed.
Fig. 4 and Fig. 5 show the FER performance and the average number of iterations of C1 with several hardinformation-based BF algorithms. For α = 0, the saturation number of iterations of the AMBF and ATBF algorithms is less than 50, so continuing to increase the number of iterations will not bring about the improvement on decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:25:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

JIANG AND FAN: LOW-LATENCY BF DECODING OF LDPC CODES

2785

complexity, but also can obtain better decoding performance for the long block regular LDPC codes with large column weight. The algorithm can greatly reduce the number of invalid iterations by limiting the number of high thresholds. This proposed BF algorithm, which achieves a better trade-off between the computation complexity, decoding latency and error performance, provides a promising decoding approach for NAND storage systems.

Fig. 4. The FER performance of several BF algorithms for C1.
Fig. 5. The average number of iterations of several BF algorithms for C1.
performance. However, the DTBF algorithm without limitation can get better decoding performance than AMBF and ATBF algorithms at 100 iterations, but Fig. 5 shows its average number of iterations is much higher. For α = 2, the DTBF algorithm can achieve better decoding performance than the ISBF decoding at a lower maximum number of iterations. Moreover, the number of comparisons of the ISBF algorithm in one iteration is four times that of the DTBF, which makes the latency of the ISBF decoding higher.
V. CONCLUSION This letter proposes a hard-information-based bit-flipping algorithm with dynamic threshold, which not only has lower

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] K. Zhao, W. Zhao, H. Sun, X. Zhang, N. Zheng, and T. Zhang, “LDPCin-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. FAST, vol. 23, no. 4, Feb. 2013, pp. 243–256.
[3] X. Wu, C. Ling, M. Jiang, E. Xu, C. Zhao, and X. You, “New insights into weighted bit-flipping decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 8, pp. 2177–2180, Aug. 2009.
[4] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[5] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814–816, Sep. 2005.
[6] T. Wadayama, K. Nakamura, M. Yagita, Y. Funahashi, S. Usami, and I. Takumi, “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1610–1614, Jun. 2010.
[7] G. Sundararajan, C. Winstead, and E. Boutillon, “Noisy gradient descent bit-flip decoding for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 3385–3400, Oct. 2014.
[8] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “Enabling NAND flash memory use soft-decision error correction codes at minimal read latency overhead,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 2412–2421, Sep. 2013.
[9] O. A. Rasheed, P. Ivanis, and B. Vasic, “Fault-tolerant probabilistic gradient-descent bit flipping decoder,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 1487–1490, Sep. 2014.
[10] P. Ivanis, O. Al Rasheed, and B. Vasic, “MUDRI: A fault-tolerant decoding algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2015, pp. 4291–4296.
[11] H. Cui, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “Information storage bit-flipping decoder for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 28, no. 11, pp. 2464–2468, Nov. 2020.
[12] Y. Chen, H. Cui, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “Fine-grained bit-flipping decoding for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 67, no. 5, pp. 896–900, May 2020.
[13] K. Le et al., “A probabilistic parallel bit-flipping decoder for low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 66, no. 1, pp. 403–416, Jan. 2019.
[14] J. Jung and I.-C. Park, “Multi-bit flipping decoding of LDPC codes for NAND storage systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 979–982, May 2017.
[15] J. Cho and W. Sung, “Adaptive threshold technique for bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 857–859, Sep. 2010.
[16] Y. Liu and M. Zhang, “Hard-decision bit-flipping decoder based on adaptive bit-local threshold for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 789–792, May 2019.
[17] Y. Lee, J. Jung, and I.-C. Park, “Energy-scalable 4KB LDPC decoding architecture for NAND-flash-based storage systems,” IEICE Trans. Electron., vol. E99.C, no. 2, pp. 293–301, 2016.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:25:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

