IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 70, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021

9207

Globally Coupled Finite Geometry and Finite Field LDPC Coding Schemes
Mona Nasseri , Senior Member, IEEE, Xin Xiao , Bane Vasic´ , Fellow, IEEE, and Shu Lin, Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents two types of concatenated LDPC coding schemes which are viewed as generalized globally coupled (GC) LDPC coding schemes in which outer codes serve as the local codes for correcting local errors and inner codes serve as global coupling codes to correct global errors. The first type of concatenated LDPC coding scheme globally couples a finite geometry (FG) LDPC code as the local code and a finite field (FF) LDPC code as the global coupling code. This type of global coupling, called GC-FG/FF-LDPC coupling, combines the distinct features of both FG- and FF-LDPC codes to achieve low error rates at a rapid decoding convergence and an error performance close to the Shannon limit. Decoding of a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code is carried out in two iterative phases, global/local or local/global. In the second type of concatenated LDPC coding scheme, both local and global coupling codes are FF-LDPC codes. If both local and global coupling codes are constructed from the same finite field and have the same graphical structures, a GC-FF/FF-LDPC code can be decoded in one phase or two phases iteratively, otherwise, it can be decoded in two phases. Construction of GC-FF/FF-LDPC codes is very flexible in lengths and rates. The proposed two-phase iterative decoding is practically implementable.
Index Terms—Concatenated coding, finite geometry LDPC code, finite field LDPC code, global coupling, iterative decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L DPC codes [1] perform amazingly well with iterative decoding algorithms based on belief propagation, such as the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [2] or the min-sum algorithm (MSA) [3]. However, with iterative decoding, most LDPC codes have a common severe weakness, known as the errorfloor [4]. For an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, the error-floor of an LDPC code is mostly caused by an undesirable structure, known as a trapping set [5] in the Tanner graph of the code based on which the decoding is carried out.
Let G be the Tanner graph of a binary LDPC code C given by the null space of an m × n matrix H over GF(2). For 1 ≤ κ ≤ n and 0 ≤ τ ≤ m, a (κ, τ ) trapping set is a set T(κ, τ ) of κ variable
Manuscript received October 4, 2020; revised February 2, 2021, April 4, 2021, and June 20, 2021; accepted July 25, 2021. Date of publication August 4, 2021; date of current version September 17, 2021. This work was supported by the NSF under Grants CCSS-2027844 and CCSS-2052751. The review of this article was coordinated by Prof. Yu Ted Su. (Corresponding author: Mona Nasseri.)
Mona Nasseri is with the School of Engineering, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, FL 32224-7699 USA (e-mail: mona.nasseri@unf.edu).
Xin Xiao and Bane Vasic´ are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721-0001 USA (e-mail: 7xinxiao7@email.arizona.edu; vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
Shu Lin is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California Davis, CA 95616-5270 USA (e-mail: shulin@ucdavis.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2021.3102178

nodes (VNs) in G which induces a subgraph of G with exactly τ odd-degree check nodes (CNs), and an arbitrary number of even-degree CNs. The parameter κ is called the size of the trapping set T(κ, τ ). A trapping set simply corresponds to an error pattern with κ errors which prevents an iterative LDPC-decoder to converge. For an AWGN channel, error patterns with small numbers of errors are more probable than error patterns with larger numbers of errors. Consequently, with iterative decoding, the most harmful trapping sets are the trapping sets of small sizes which generally result in high error-floors. If an LDPC code has a reasonably large minimum distance and its Tanner graph contains no harmful trapping sets with sizes smaller than its minimum distance, the code can achieve a very low error rate without a visible error-floor.
Among all the known classes of LDPC codes, the only known class of LDPC codes with large minimum distances whose Tanner graphs contain no trapping sets with sizes smaller than their minimum distances are LDPC codes constructed based on finite geometries such as projective and Euclidean [6]–[10]. These codes are referred to as finite-geometry (FG) LDPC codes and they can achieve very low error rates without error-floors. Iterative decoding of these codes converges rapidly with a small number of iterations, say 5 to 10. Furthermore, these codes are cyclic codes and hence their encoding can be implemented with simple feedback registers in the systematic form [7].
Besides the FG-LDPC codes, there are many other classes of structured LDPC codes constructed based on finite fields. These codes, called finite field (FF) LDPC codes, have a quasicyclic (QC) structure [8]–[12]. The QC-structure of these codes simplifies both encoding and decoding implementations. The construction of FF-LDPC codes is very flexible in lengths and rates. They, in general, perform very well over an AWGN channel in the waterfall region and can achieve relatively low error-floors. However, their minimum distances are, in general, much smaller than that of FG-LDPC codes of the same lengths and rates, and their Tanner graphs do contain small trapping sets if the column weights of their parity-check matrices are too small.
This paper presents two types of concatenated LDPC coding schemes which are viewed as globally coupled (GC) LDPC coding schemes in which outer codes serve as the local codes for correcting local errors and inner codes serve as global coupling codes to correct global errors.
The first type of concatenated LDPC coding scheme globally couples an FG-LDPC code as the local code and an FF-LDPC code as the global coupling code. This type of concatenation

0018-9545 © 2021 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:27:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9208

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 70, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021

is referred to as globally coupled (GC) FG/FF-LDPC coding scheme. The GC-FG/FF-LDPC coding scheme is devised to combine the distinct features of both FG- and FF-LDPC codes to achieve low error rates with a rapid decoding convergence and an error performance close to the Shannon limit. Decoding of a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code is carried out in two iterative phases, global/local or local/global. With the two-phase iterative decoding, trapping sets that trap a local decoder may be un-trapped by the global decoder, and conversely, the trapped global decoder can be un-trapped by the local decoder(s). As a result, a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code can achieve a very low error rate without a visible error-floor. Furthermore, during the global iterative decoding process, the reliability information of each decoded local codeword is shared by the others to enhance the overall reliability of all decoded local codewords. This information sharing among the decoded local codewords enhances the overall decoding performance of a GC-FG/FF LDPC code. Even though GC-FG/FF-LDPC codes have large minimum distances and good trapping set structure, their construction is limited in lengths and rates.
In the second type of concatenated LDPC coding scheme, both local and global coupling codes are FF-LDPC codes which are constructed from finite fields. Such a concatenated LDPC code is referred to as a GC-FF/FF-LDPC code. If both local and global coupling codes of a GC-FF/FF-LDPC code are constructed from the same finite field and have the same graphical structures, it can be decoded either in one phase or two phases iteratively, otherwise, it can be decoded in two phases. Construction of GCFF/FF-LDPC codes is very flexible in lengths and rates. Twophase iterative decoding of a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code or a GCFF/FF-LDPC code can be practically implemented. Examples of concatenated and globally coupled codes were reported in the literature [13]–[15].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Sections II and III present two types of GC-FG/FF-LDPC codes and characterize their random error- and erasure-correction features. Iterative methods for decoding these GC-FG/FF-LDPC codes in two phases are presented. Section IV presents a class of GC-FF/FFLDPC codes in which both local and global coupling codes are constructed from the finite fields. Section V concludes this paper with some remarks on possible applications of GC-FG/FFLDPC codes.

by CPG, with a minimum distance of at least 2s + 2 which is one greater than the column weight 2s + 1 of HPG [6]–[9]. The Tanner graph GPG of CPG has a girth of at least 6, and contains no harmful trapping sets with sizes smaller than 2s + 1 [9]
and [10].
To construct QC-FF-LDPC code based on finite fields with a
girth of at least 6, consider a finite field GF(q) with q elements where q is a prime or a power of a prime. With 1 ≤ m, n ≤ q and primitive element α, let S0 = {αi0, αi1,..., αim-1} and S1 = {αj0, αj1,..., αjn-1} be two arbitrary subsets of elements in GF(q) of size m and n, respectively. We form the following m × n matrix over GF(q) where η is a nonzero element in GF(q):

B (m, n) = αik + ηαjl 0≤k<m, 0≤l<n

(1)

In the matrix B(m, n), all the entries in a row (or a column) are
distinct elements in GF(q); each row (or each column) contains
at most one zero elements; no two rows (or two columns) have identical entries in any position; and each 2 × 2 submatrix of B(m, n) is non-singular (NS) [11], which is referred to as the 2 × 2 submatrix (SM) constraint [8], [11], [17], [18] and is the key structure for constructing QC-FF-LDPC code whose
Tanner graph has a girth of at least 6. For 0 ≤ i < q – 1, we represent the nonzero field element
αi in GF(q) by a circulant permutation matrix (CPM) of size (q – 1) × (q – 1) whose generator (or the top row) has a single 1-component at the position i. For the zero element 0 = α-Ý, we represent it by a zero matrix (ZM) of size (q – 1) × (q – 1). This matrix representation of a field element is called the CPM-
dispersion [8]–[12], [18]. The construction of a 2 × 2 SM-constrained base matrix using
two subsets S0 and S1 can be put in a product form as follows:

B∗ (m, n) = αik αil − η 0≤k<m, 0≤l<n

(2)

If we set m = n = q – 1 and choose S0 = S1 = {1, α, α2,..., αq-2}, then B∗(q – 1, q – 1) can be arranged (by row permutation) as a (q – 1) × (q – 1) circulant Bcyc∗(q – 1, q – 1) over GF(q), in which each row is the cyclic-shift of the row above it one
place to the right and the top row is the cyclic-shift of the last row one place to the right. Any submatrix of Bcyc∗(q – 1, q – 1) can be used as a base matrix to construct a QC-LDPC code
using CPM-dispersion. The resultant code may have a doubly
quasi-cyclic structure [9].

II. A GC-FG/FF-LDPC CODING SCHEME

A. Encoding and Code Construction

In this section, we present a GC-FG/FF-LDPC coding scheme that combines FG-LDPC codes as local codes and FF-LDPC codes as global coupling codes to form a class of structured LDPC codes that possess the distinct features of both the FGand the FF-LDPC codes. The codes in this class are called GC-FG/FF-LDPC codes. Here, we give a brief description of the FG- and FF-LDPC codes and characterize their distinct features.
An FG-LDPC code has a large minimum distance and its Tanner graph contains no small harmful trapping sets and has large connectivity, it can achieve a very low error rate without a visible error-floor. Consider a 2-D PG over the field GF(2s), denoted by PG(2, 2s), where s is a positive integer. The null space over GF(2) of HPG gives 2-D PG-LDPC code, denoted

Let CFG be an (n0, k0) binary FG-LDPC code of length n0 with dimension k0 given by the null space of an n0 × n0 circulant HFG over GF(2) which is the line-point incidence matrix of the 2-D finite geometry FG(2, 2s) over GF(2s). Let d0 be the min-
imum distance of CFG. The Tanner graph GFG of CFG contains
no harmful trapping set with a size smaller than d0 - 1. Let c be a positive integer and CFF be a (cn0 + r, cn0)
binary FF-QC-LDPC code of length cn0 + r and dimension cn0,
where r is the number of parity-check symbols of CFF. The
code CFF is given by the null space of an RC-constrained λ × (cn0 + r) parity-check matrix HFF constructed by the CPM-dispersion of a base matrix B over a finite field GF(2s) that satisfies the 2 × 2 SM-constraint. Note that λ may be greater

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:27:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NASSERI et al.: GLOBALLY COUPLED FINITE GEOMETRY AND FINITE FIELD LDPC CODING SCHEMES

9209

than r if HFF contains redundant rows. In a concatenation of these two codes, both codes are put in systematic form.
Let u be a sequence of ck0 binary information symbols. Encoding of this information sequence consists of two stages, local and global coupling encodings. First, we divide u into c subsequences, denoted by u0, u1, …, uc-1, each consisting of k0 information symbols and called a message. For 0≤ i < c, the message ui is encoded into a codeword vi of n0 code symbols in the local FG-LDPC code CFG. Encoding results in c codewords, v0, v1, …, vc-1, in CFG, called local codewords. Cascading these c local codewords, we obtain a sequence v = (v0, v1, …, vc-1) of cn0 code symbols, called a cascaded codeword. This completes the first stage of encoding, referred to as the local encoding. There are 2ck0 such cascaded codewords which form
a (cn0, ck0) linear code of length cn0, denoted by CFG,casc(c). The parity-check matrix of CFG,casc(c) is a c × c diagonal array, denoted by diag(HFG, HFG, …, HFG), with c copies of HFG lying on its main diagonal and zeros elsewhere. The code CFG,casc(c) is called a cascaded code of CFG and the integer c is called the cascading degree. The minimum distance
and rate of CFG,casc(c) are the same as CFG. In the second stage of encoding, a cascaded code-
word v in CFG,casc(c) is encoded into a codeword w = (p, v) of cn0 + r code symbols in the global coupling FF-LDPC code CFF . The codeword w consists of two parts v and p. The first part v is a cascaded codeword in CFG,casc(c) and the second part p consists of r parity-check symbols, which are formed based on the parity-check matrix HFF of CFF. These r parity symbols connect the c local codewords v0, v1, …, vc-1 of CFG in v.
The encoding performed at the second stage is referred to
as global coupling encoding. Local encoding, cascading, and global coupling encoding result in 2ck0 codewords in CFF in the form of (p, v). These codewords form a (cn0 + r, ck0) linear code which is referred to as a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code,
denoted by CGC,FG,FF. We see that the two-stage encoding of a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code is straightforward and can be easily
implemented.
Based on the formation of CGC,FG,FF, we readily see that a parity-check matrix of CGC,FG,FF is of the following global form:

HGC,F G,F F =

O | diag (HF G, HF G, . . . , HF G) HF F,lef t | HF F,right

(3)

The parity-check matrix HGC,FG,FF of CGC,FG,FF consists of two submatrices, the upper one and the lower one. The upper
submatrix of HGC,FG,FF consists of two parts. The first part is a zero-matrix O of size cn0 × r and the second part is the paritycheck matrix of the cascaded FG-LDPC code CFG,casc(c). The lower submatrix of HGC,FG,FF is the parity-check matrix HFF of the global coupling FF-LDPC code CFF which consists of two parts, denoted by HFF,left and HFF,right, called left and right parts of HFF, respectively. The left part HFF,left of HFF consists of the first (leftmost) r columns of HFF and the right part HFF,right of HFF consists of the rightmost cn0 columns of HFF. Note that the global matrix HGC,FG,FF consists of c disjoint copies of the parity-check

Fig. 1. The Global structure of the Tanner graph of a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code.
matrix HFG of the local code CFG, which are globally connected by the parity-check matrix HFF of the global coupling FF-LDPC code CFF. It can be easily checked that a codeword w = (p, v) in CGC,FG,FF is in the null space of HGC,FG,FF , i.e., w·(HGC,FG,FF )T = 0.
B. Graphical Structure
Let GFG, GFF, and GGC,FG,FF be the Tanner graphs of CFG, CFF, and CGC,FG,FF, respectively. From (3) and the diagonal structure of diag(HFG, HFG,..., HFG), we readily see that the Tanner graph GGC,FG,FF of the GC-FG/FF-LDPC code CGC,FG,FF, consists of c disjoint copies of the Tanner graph GFG of the local FG-LDPC code CFG, which are globally connected by a group of global CNs that correspond to rows of the parity-check matrix HFF of the global coupling FF-LDPC code CFF. Hence, GGC,FG,FF is a CN-based globally coupled graph with c identical and disjoint local graphs GFG, which are connected by the λ CNs of the global coupling graph GFF as shown in Fig. 1.
Since each local graph GFG in GGC,FG,FF is the Tanner graph of the local FG-LDPC code with minimum distance d0, it contains no harmful trapping sets of size smaller than d0 – 1. For κ < d0 - 1, if the global coupling graph GFF contains a harmful trapping set T of size κ, then the κ VNs in T either reside in one local graph or distribute among the c local graphs. Note some of the VNs in T may reside in the subgraph associated with the left part HFF,left of HFF. For 0 ≤ i < c, let κi be the number of VNs in T that reside in the i-th local graph GFG,i. Regardless of the distribution of the κ VNs in T, κi is less than d0 - 1. Hence, the κi VNs will not create harmful trapping set in the i-th local graph GFG,i.
C. Two-Phase Iterative Decoding
Based on the structure of the GC-FG/FF-LDPC code CGC,FG,FF, two iterative decoding methods can be devised to decode the code. Let r be the received vector of cn0 + r symbols. We decode r in two phases. The two-phase decoding can be carried out in two different manners iteratively: 1) global/local iterative decoding, and 2) local/global iterative decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:27:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9210

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 70, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021

With the global/local iterative decoding, we first de- we may use the reduced-complexity revolving iterative decoding

code r based on the parity-check matrix HFF of the global scheme (RID/MSA) [16] for decoding the local FG-LDPC. The

coupling FF-LDPC code CFF using a chosen iterative decod- RID scheme reduces the decoder complexity without (or with

ing algorithm. Set the maximum number of global coupling an ignorable) performance degradation. The decoding is based

decoding iterations to Igc,max. Decode r based on the chosen on a small submatrix of HFG that consists of any l consecutive

iterative decoding algorithm. At the end of each global coupling rows of HFG, even l = 1.

decoding iteration, we check the syndrome SFF of the decoded Note that if the global coupling decoding is successful in an vector x based on HFF. If SFF = 0, then x is a codeword in CFF. iteration loop, we can stop the entire decoding process without If SFF ࣔ 0, we continue the global coupling decoding until checking the syndromes of the decoded local codewords to

either the decoded vector x is a codeword in CFF or the preset determine whether to carry out the outer decoding. This reduces

maximum number Igc,max of decoding iterations is reached. computational complexity and decoding delay.

If a codeword w in CFF is obtained during the global coupling Opposite to global/local decoding presented above, we can

decoding phase, we remove all the r parity-check symbols decode the GC-FG/FF-LDPC code CGC,FG,FF, in a reverse orfrom w. This gives c decoded vectors v∗0, v∗1, …, v∗c-1 for der, i.e., perform local decoding before global coupling decoding

the c transmitted local codewords in CFG. For each decoded in each global decoding loop. Recall that each globally coupled vector v∗i, 0 ≤ i < c, we compute its syndrome SFG,i based on the codeword in systematic form consists of c local codewords in

parity-check matrix HFG of the local FG-LDPC code CFG. If the cascade followed by r parity-check symbols of the global cousyndromes of the c decoded vectors are all zeros, then v∗0, v∗1, pling FF-LDPC code CFF. Local decoding is carried out as soon …, v∗c-1 are codewords in CFG. In this case, we stop the entire as a local vector of n0 symbols corresponding to a transmitted

decoding process. Then, we remove all the parity-check symbols local codeword is received. The decoding of each received local

from the c decoded local codewords and deliver the ck0 decoded vector is based on the local parity-check matrix HFG using a

information symbols to the user (or users in multi-user commu- chosen iterative decoding algorithm, say the RID/MSA. If errors

nications). If the syndrome of any of the c decoded vectors is spread out among the c received local vectors and errors in each

not zero, the local code decoder is activated to perform decoding received local vector do not create harmful trapping set with a

on the decoded vectors whose syndromes are not zero. These size greater than d0 - 2 (very rare), each local decoding will be

vectors are referred to as failed local vectors. The decoding successful.

algorithm used for decoding the local code can be the same If the local decoding fails to give c correctly decoded lo-

or different from the one used for decoding the global coupling cal codewords, the global coupling iterative decoding is then

FF-LDPC code CFF.

activated. The rest of the decoding process is the same as

For decoding of each failed local vector at the output of the the global/local iterative decoding. The local/global iterative

global coupling decoder, we set the maximum number of local decoding is effective for correcting local random errors.

decoding iterations to Ilocal,max. If the decoding of all the failed Since every codeword in CGC,GF,FF consists of c outer

local vectors is successful, we remove all the parity-check sym- codewords in CFG, the global coupling decoding is actually

bols from all the decoded local codewords and deliver the ck0 de- performed on a collection of c received local codewords jointly.

coded information symbols to the user(s). If the decoding of During the decoding process, the reliability information of each

any failed local vector is unsuccessful after Ilocal,max iterations, decoded local codeword is shared by the others to enhance

we switch back to the global coupling code decoding with the the overall reliability of all decoded local codewords. This

decoded information and the channel information as input to joint-decoding and information sharing at the global coupling

decode the received vector r again.

decoding phase reduce the probability of performing the local

We perform the global/local decoding process iteratively until decoding phase and hence make the decoding converge more

either the entire decoding is successful, or a preset maximum quickly. The joint-decoding and information-sharing is the key-

number Imax of global/local decoding iterations is reached. With feature of two-phase decoding.

the global/local decoding of the GC-FG/FF-LDPC code, the The two-phase iterative decoding can be practically imple-

local decoder is used to correct the local errors that the global mented with local FG-LDPC code CFG implemented based on

coupling decoder fails to correct.

the submatrix HFG of HGC,FG,FF and the global coupling code

With the above two-phase decoding, no trapping set of CFF implemented based on the submatrix HFF of HGC,FG,FF .

size smaller than d0 - 1, regardless of the distribution of its Example 1: In this example, we construct a GC-PG/FF-LDPC

VNs, will trap the two-phase decoder of the GC-FG-FF LDPC code with the (1057, 813) PG-LDPC code CPG as the local

code CGC,FG,FF. If a trapping set of size d0 - 2 or smaller traps code and the (10000, 9600) FF-LDPC code CFF as the global

the global coupling decoder, it will be un-trapped by the local coupling code.

decoder.

Consider PG(2, 25) over GF(25) which contains 1057 points

To achieve a good error performance, both inner and outer de- and 1057 lines. The line-point incidence matrix of PG(2, 25) is a

coding algorithms are either the SPA or a properly scaled MSA. 1057 × 1057 circulant matrix HPG over GF(2) of rank 244 with

Decoding with the SPA requires real number multiplications, both column and row weights 33 which has 813 redundant rows.

additions, and comparisons. However, the MSA requires mainly The null space over GF(2) of HPG gives a (33, 33)-regular (1057,

real additions and comparisons. Since an optimized scaled MSA 813) cyclic PG-LDPC code CPG of length 1057 with a rate of

performs just as well as the SPA and requires much less computa- 0.7691 and minimum distance at least 34, a very large minimum

tional complexity, a scaled MSA is normally preferred for decod- distance for an LDPC code of such length and rate. The Tanner

ing an LDPCAutchoodrizee.dTliocernesdeducuseetlhimeiteodvteor:aYlolndseeicUondivin. DgocwonlmoapdleedxointyJ,une g24ra,2p0h26GatP1G2:2o7f:1C1PUGTChfarosmgIiErEthE6Xpalnorde.cRoensttariicntiosnnsoaphpalyr.mful trapping

NASSERI et al.: GLOBALLY COUPLED FINITE GEOMETRY AND FINITE FIELD LDPC CODING SCHEMES

9211

to a local decoding phase, the 87 fill-in zeros are removed, conversely, when decoding is switched from a local decoding phase to a global coupling decoding phase, the 87 fill-in zeros are added back.

D. Punctured GC-FG/FF-LDPC Codes
If we remove the submatrices O and HF,left from the global parity-check matrix HGC,FG,FF given by (3), we obtain a global matrix H∗GC,FG,FF. The null space of H∗GC,FG,FF gives a punctuated GC-FG/FF-LDPC code. Punctuated codes can also be constructed by removing some local parity-check matrices. By puncturing a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code, we obtain globally coupled LDPC codes of various lengths and rates.

E. GC-FG/FG-LDPC Codes

Fig. 2. The BER performance of the GC-PG/FF-LDPC code given in Example 1.
sets of sizes smaller than 33. Each VN in GPG is connected to other 1056 VNs in GPG by paths of length 2.
To construct FF-LDPC code, assume α is a primitive element in the prime field GF(101). We form a 4 × 100 base matrix B(4, 100) over GF(101) in the form of (1) [8], [11], [17], [18] using two subsets S0 = {0, 1, α, α2} and S1 = {1, α, α2, ..., α99}. The CPM-dispersion of B(4, 100) gives a 4 × 100 array HFF(4, 100) of CPMs of size 100 × 100. The array HFF(4, 100) is a 400 × 10000 matrix over GF(2) with column and row weights of maximum 4 and 100, respectively, which satisfies the RC-constraint. The null space of HFF(4, 100) over GF(2) gives a binary (4, 100)-regular (10000, 9600) QC-FF-LDPC code CFF(4, 100) with rate 0.96.
To construct GC-PG/FF-LDPC set the cascading degree c = 9. In construction, an information sequence of 7317 symbols is divided into 9 messages, each consisting of 813 information symbols. We first encode these 9 messages into 9 codewords in CPG. Next, these 9 local codewords are cascaded to form a cascaded codeword v of 9513 code symbols. Then, the cascaded codeword v is extended by adding 87 fill-in zeros to form a word vext of 9600 symbols.
At the second encoding stage, the extended cascaded codeword vext is encoded into a codeword w in the global coupling code CFF. The codeword w consists of 7317 information symbols, 2196 local parity-check symbols, 400 global coupling parity-check symbols, and 87 fill-in zeros. The above local/global coupling encoding results in a (10000, 7317) GCPG/FF-LDPC code CGC,PG,FF with a rate of 0.7317.
To decode CGC,PG,FF, we use global/local two-phase iterative decoding. The BER performance of the code over an AWGN channel decoded using the MSA for the global coupling code and the local code with Igc,max, Ilocal,max and Imax set to 5, 5, and 5, respectively, is shown in Fig. 2. The scaling factors for decoding the global coupling and local codes are 0.625 and 0.275. When decoding is switched from a global coupling decoding phase

The main objective of this section is to combine an FG-LDPC code and an FF-LDPC code to form a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code that possesses the distinct features of both FG- and FF-LDPC codes, large minimum distances, no small trapping sets, fast decoding convergence, and flexibility.
A GC-LDPC code can be constructed using FG-LDPC codes as both local and global coupling codes. However, with this construction, we are limited in choice of length and rate of the global coupling code. For the desired length n0 of a local FG-LDPC code, a desired cascading (or interleaving) degree c, a desired global coupling degree r, and a desired global code rate, there may not exist for a global coupling FG-LDPC code of length cn0 + r. Furthermore, if the length n0 of the local FG-LDPC code is not short and the cascading degree c is not small, the length cn0 + r of the global coupling FG-code may be very long. Iterative decoding of a long FG-LDPC based on a large circulant will be very complex in both hardware and computations even with the complexity-reduced RID/MSA. Construction of global coupling EG-LDPC codes can be made more flexible if we use parallel bundles of lines in the sub-geometry EG∗(2, 2s) [7], [8]. This will not be discussed in this paper.
III. INTERLEAVED GC-FG/FF CODING SCHECME FOR CORRECTING ERASURES
A 2-D FG-LDPC code CFG with minimum distance d0 constructed based on the 2-D finite geometry FG(2, 2s) over GF(2s) is very effective in correcting random erasures over a binary erasure channel (BEC). If the number of erased code symbols, called erasures, in a received vector is d0 – 1 or less, there is at least one check-sum formed by taking the inner product of the received vector and a row in the parity-check matrix HFG of CFG, which contains one and only one erased code symbol. By using this check-sum, we can recover the erased code symbol.
In decoding a received word r, for each erased code symbol x in r, we find a row h in HFG that checks only on this erased symbol and no other erased symbol in r. Form the check-sum Σ = <r, h> which is the inner product of r and h. Set Σ = 0. The equation Σ = 0 contains x as the only unknown. Then, the erased code symbol x is equal to the modulo-2 sum of the known code symbols contained in Σ. The erased symbols in r can be recovered one at a time using the above process, called the erasure

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:27:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9212

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 70, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021

peeling (EPL) process. Using the EPL process, CFG is capable of correcting d0 – 1 or fewer random erasures.
Let c be a positive integer and v0, v1, …, vc-1 be c codewords in CFG. Suppose we interleave these c codewords in CFG symbol by symbol, we obtain an interleaved word y = (y0, y1, …, yn0 -1) which consists of n0 sections, each containing c code symbols. For 0 ≤ j < n0, the j-th section yj of y consists of the j-th code symbols from the c codewords v0, v1, …, vc-1 in CFG. By interleaving each group of c codewords CFG, we obtain an interleaved FG-LDPC code, denoted by CFG,interl(c), where c is referred to as interleaving degree. Let HFG = [h0 h1 … hn0 -1] be the n0 × n0 parity-check matrix of CFG where for 0 ≤ j < n0, hj is the j-th column of HFG. For 0≤ j < n0, we form a c × c diagonal array, denoted by Hj = diag(hj, hj,..., hj), with c copies of j-th column hj of HFG lying on its main diagonal and zeros elsewhere. Then, the parity-check matrix
of the interleaved FG-LDPC code CFG,interl(c) is the following cn0 × cn0 matrix:

HF G,interl (c) = [H0H1 . . . Hn0−1]

(4)

Suppose an interleaved codeword y in CFG,interl(c) is transmitted over a BEC. Let y∗ = (y∗0, y∗1, …, y∗n0-1) be the received word with erasures confined in d0 – 1 or fewer interleaved sections in y∗. To recover the erased code symbols in y∗, we first de-interleave y∗ into c received words v∗0, v∗1, …, v∗c-1, which correspond to the c transmitted codewords contained in y. De-interleaving of y∗ distributes the erased symbols in y∗ into the c received local words v∗0, v∗1, …, v∗c-1, each containing no more than d0 -1 erasures. Using the EPL-algorithm, the erased symbols in each received word v∗i, 0≤ i < c, can be recovered. The maximum number of erasures confined in d0 – 1 interleaved sections, which can be corrected is c(d0 – 1).
Consider the (33, 33)-regular (1057, 813) PG-LDPC
code CPG of Example 1. This code has a minimum distance of 34 and its parity-check matrix has an orthogonal structure.
With EPL-decoding, the code can correct 33 or fewer random erasures. If we interleave this code by a degree c = 100, then
the interleaved code CPG,interl(100) is capable of correcting erasures confined in 33 random interleaved sections, each of
length 100, with a maximum of 3300 erasures.
The GC-FG/FF-LDPC coding scheme presented in the sec-
tion II can be modified by interleaving every sequence of c local
codewords at the first stage of encoding. This results in an
interleaved GC-FG/FF-LDPC coding scheme which can be used
for error control over an AWGN channel as well as a BEC
channel.
In the first stage of encoding, the c outer codewords v0, v1, …, vc-1 at the output of the local encoder are interleaved into codeword y = (y0, y1,..., yn0 -1) in CFG,interl(c). In the second stage of encoding, y is encoded into a codeword w =
(p, y) in the global coupling FF-LDPC code for transmission.
The local encoding, interleaving, and global coupling encod-
ing result in an interleaved GC-FG/FF-LDPC code, denoted
by CGC,FG,FF,interl, with the following parity-check matrix:

HGC,F G,F F,interl =

O | HF G,interl (c) HF F,lef t | HF F,right

(5)

Suppose an interleaved global coupling codeword w = (p, y) is transmitted. Let w∗ = (p∗, y∗) be the received word. In decoding w∗, the decoder first checks whether w∗ contains erasures. If it does, the decoder removes the received paritycheck part p∗ of w∗ and de-interleaves y∗ into c received local words v∗0, v∗1, …, v∗c-1. Then, the local decoder applies the EPL process to recover all erased symbols in each received local word v∗i, 0≤ i < c. If all the erased code symbols are recovered, then decoding stops and the decoder delivers the ck0 decoded information symbols to the user(s). If the number of erased code symbols in any received local word v∗i, exceeds the erasure correction capability d0 – 1, the decoder stops the entire decoding process and declares a decoding failure. The above decoding of a received word is referred to as erasure-correcting mode.
If no erasure is found in the received word w∗ = (p∗, y∗), the two-phase global/local (or local/global) iterative decoding as described in the last section is activated. In decoding, deinterleaving and interleaving of the decoded local words at the outputs of the global coupling and local decoders must be performed before switching from one decoding phase to the other. Each time at the end of the global coupling decoding phase, the decoded interleaved word must be deinterleaved into c decoded local words before the local decoding phase begins, and each time at the end of the local decoding phase, the c decoded local words must be interleaved before the global coupling decoding phase begins. The global coupling decoding/de-interleaving and the local decoding/interleaving processes continue iteratively until either all the local transmitted codewords are successfully decoded or a preset maximum number of global/local (or local/global) iterations is reached.
Since the GC-FG/FF- and the interleaved GC-FG/FF-LDPC codes are combinatorially equivalent, they perform the same over an AWGN channel if the same local and global decoding schemes are used. The two types of codes have the same trapping set structure.
Consider the GC-PG/FF-LDPC code given in Example 1. If the 9 local codewords at output of the local encoder are interleaved before adding 87 fill-in zeros and global coupling encoding, then the resultant interleaved GC-PG/FF-LDPC code is capable of correcting erasures confined in 33 random interleaved sections, each of length 9, with a maximum 297 erasures.
The interleaved GC-FG/FF-LDPC coding scheme may find application for error and erasure control in a compound channel over which both random errors and erasures may occur.
IV. GLOBAL COUPLED FF/FF-LDPC CODING SCHEME
In the construction of GC-FG/FF-LDPC codes, we use FG-LDPC codes as local codes and FF-LDPC codes as global coupling codes. Even though FG-LDPC codes are powerful and have a good trapping set structure, however, their choices are limited. Furthermore, since the two types of codes used in the construction have different structures, the global paritycheck HGC,FG,FF of a GC-FG/FF code, in general, does not satisfy the RC-constraint. Hence, a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code must

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:27:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NASSERI et al.: GLOBALLY COUPLED FINITE GEOMETRY AND FINITE FIELD LDPC CODING SCHEMES

9213

be decoded separately using a two-phase iterative decoding,
global/local or local/global.
In contrast to FG-LDPC codes, the construction of FF-LDPC
codes is more flexible in lengths and rates. In the construc-
tion of a GC-FF/FF-LDPC code CGC,FF,FF, we can either use the same field to construct both local and global cou-
pling codes or use two different fields to construct local and
global code, separately. Construction of a GC-FF/FF-LDPC
code CGC,FF,FF based on a single field, makes it possible to construct a global parity-check matrix HGC,FF,FF that satisfies the RC-constraint. Hence, CGC,FF,FF can be decoded globally in one phase based on the global parity parity-check matrix HGC,FF,FF. Of course, CGC,FF,FF can also be decoded in two phases similar to decoding of a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code
as described in Section II. If local and global coupling codes are
constructed from two different fields, the global parity-check matrix HGC,FF,FF of the resultant GC-FF/FF-LDPC code, in general, does not satisfy the RC-constraint. In this case, the code
must be decoded in two phases.
Constructing a GC-FF/FF-LDPC code using two differ-
ent fields can be achieved by replacing the local paritycheck matrix HFG given in (3) with a parity-check matrix Hlocal,FF constructed based on a field different from the field used in constructing the global coupling matrix HFF.
In the following, we present a construction of GC-FF/FF-
LDPC codes in which both the local and global coupling LDPC
codes are constructed using the same field. The global parity-
check matrices of these codes satisfy the RC-constraint.
Let m0, m1, n0, c and r be 5 positive integers with m0 < n0. Construct a (cm0 + m1) × (cn0 + r) base matrix B(cm0 + m1, cn0 + r) over GF(q) in the form of (1) using two subsets S0 = {αi0, αi1,..., αim-1} and S1 = {αj0, αj1,..., αjn-1} over GF(q) with sizes of m = cm0 + m1 and n = cn0 + r , respectively, and n ≤ q. The matrix B(cm0 + m1, cn0 + r) satisfies the 2 × 2 SM-constraint [12], [17]. Label the rows and columns of B(cm0 + m1, cn0 + r) from 0 to cm0 + m1 – 1 and 0 to cn0 + r –1, respectively. Divide the rows of B(cm0 + m1, cn0 + r ) in to c + 1 disjoint groups, denoted by B0(m0, cn0 + r), B1(m0, cn0 + r), …, Bc-1(m0, cn0 + r) and Bgc (m1, cn0 + r). For 0 ≤ l < c, Bl (m0, cn0 + r) consists of m0 consecutive rows of B(cm0 + m1, cn0 + r ), labeled from lm0 to (l +1)m0 –1. The submatrix Bgc(m1, cn0 + r) consists of the last m1 rows of B(cm0 + m1, cn0 + r ). For 0≤ l < c, let Blocal,l,(m0, n0) be an m0 × n0 submatrices of Bl(m0, cn0 + r), which consists of n0 consecutive columns of Bl(m0, cn0 + r), labeled from ln0 to (l + 1)n0 – 1.
Form the following (cm0 + m1) × (cn0 + r) matrix over GF(q): (6) shown at the bottom of this page.

The matrix BGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) consists of two submatrices, the upper and the lower submatrices. The upper submatrix is a cm0 × (cn0 + r) matrix, which consists of two parts, where the first part O is a cm0 × r zero matrix and the second part diag(Blocal,0,(m0, n0), …, Blocal,c-1(m0, n0)) is a c × c diagonal array with the c submatrices Blocal,0,(m0, n0), …, Blocal,c-1(m0, n0) of size m0 × n0 lying on its main diagonal and zeros elsewhere. The lower matrix Bgc(m1, cn0 + r) of BGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) is m1 × (cn0 + r) which globally connects the c disjoint local matrices, Blocal,0,(m0, n0), …, Blocal,c-1(m0, n0). Hence, BGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) is a globally coupled matrix over GF(q).
The matrix BGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) is a submatrix of the base matrix B(cm0 + m1, cn0 + r ). Dispersing each nonzero entry in BGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) into a (q – 1) × (q – 1) CPM and each zero entry into a (q – 1) × (q – 1) ZM, we obtain the following (cm0 + m1) × (cn0 + r) array of CPMs and ZMs of size (q – 1) × (q – 1): (7) shown at the bottom of this page. Where for 0≤ l < c, Hlocal,l(m0, n0) = CPM(Bloca,l(m0, n0)), Ocpm is a cm0(q – 1)× r(q – 1) zero matrix, and Hgc(m1, cn0 + r) = CPM(Bgc(m1, cn0 + r)). The array HGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) is a (cm0 + m1)(q – 1) × (cn0 + r)(q – 1) matrix, in which the submatrix Hgc(m1, cn0 + r) globally couples c disjoint local submatrices Hlocal,l,(m0, n0), 0≤ l < c.
The null space over GF(2) of HGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) gives a quasi-cyclic (QC) GC-FF/FF-LDPC code
CGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) of length (cn0 + r)(q –1), which is composed of c local QC-FF-LDPC codes Clocal,l(m0, n0), 0≤ l < c, of length cn0 and a global coupling QC-FF-LDPC code Cgc(m1, cn0 + r) of length (cn0 + r)(q – 1). The l-th local QC-FF-LDPC code Clocal,l,(m0, n0) is given by the null space of the l-th local parity-check matrix Hlocal,l(m0, n0) and the global coupling code Cgc(m1, cn0 + r) is given by the null space over GF(2) of the global coupling matrix Hgc(m1, cn0 + r).
Encoding of CGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) consists of two stages. In the first stage, c messages of equal length (maybe from
c different senders) are encoded into c local codewords of length
n0(q – 1) by c local encoders for the c local codes, respectively. In the second stage of encoding, the c local codewords are
cascaded into a word v of length cn0(q – 1) and then v is encoded into a global coupling codeword w in Cgc(m1, cn0 + r) for transmission.
Since the base matrix BGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) satisfies the 2 × 2 SM-constraint, the global parity-check ma-
trix HGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) satisfies the RC-constraint. Hence, the Tanner graph GGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) of CGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) has a girth at least 6. CGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) can be decoded in one phase based

BGC,F F ,F F (m0, m1, n0, c, r) =

O|diag (Blocal,0 (m0, n0) , Blocal,1 (m0, n0) , . . . , Blocal,c−1 (m0, n0)) Bgc (m1, cn0 + r)

(6)

HGC,F F ,F F (m0, m1, n0, c, r) =

Ocpm | diag (Hlocal,0 (m0, n0) , Hlocal,1 (m0, n0) , . . . , Hlocal,c−1 (m0, n0)) Hgc (m1, cn0 + r)

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:27:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9214

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 70, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021

on the entire global matrix HGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) using an iterative algorithm based on belief propagation, say the MSA.
Decoding of CGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) can also be carried out in two phases similar to decoding a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code
to reduce decoding complexity.
Example 2: In the following, we use the prime field GF(101) to construct a GC-FF/FF-LDPC code. First, we set m0 = m1 = 4, n0 = 32, c = 3 and r = 4. Next, we form a 16 × 100 matrix BFF(16, 100) over GF(101) in the form of (1) based on two subsets S0 = {01, α, α2,..., α15} and S1 = {1, α, α2, ..., α99} of GF(101) with η = 1. Label the rows and columns from 0 to 15
and 0 to 99, respectively. Divide the rows of BFF(16, 100) in to 4 disjoint groups, B0(4, 100), B1(4, 100), B2(4, 100) and Bgc(4, 100). For 0 ≤ l < 3, Bl(4, 100) consists of 4 consecutive rows of BFF(16, 100), labeled from 4l to 4(l + 1) – 1. The submatrix Bgc(4, 100) consists of the last 4 rows of BFF(16, 100). For 0 ≤ l < 3, let Blocal,l,(4, 32) be a 4 × 32 submatrix of Bl(4, 100) which consists of 32 consecutive columns of Bl(4, 100), labeled from 32l to 32(l + 1) – 1. Form the following 16 × 100 matrix
over GF(101):

BGC,F F ,F F (4, 4, 32, 34)

=

. O|diag(Blocal,0(4, 32),Blocal,1(4, 32), Blocal,2(4, 32))
Bgc (4100)

The 100 × 100 CPM-dispersion of BGC,FF,FF(4, 4, 32, 34) gives the following 16 × 100 array of CPMs and ZMs of size 100 × 100:

HGC,F F ,F F (4, 4, 32, 3, 4)

=

Ocpm|diag(Hlocal,0(4, 32),Hlocal,1(4, 32), Hlocal,2(4, 32)) Hgc (4100)

which is a 1600 × 10000 matrix over GF(2) with column weights 4 and 8 and two row weights 32 and 100.
The null space of HGC,FF,FF(4, 4, 32, 3, 4) gives a QC-GCFF/FF-LDPC code CGC,FF,FF(4, 4, 32, 3, 4) of length 10000 and rate 0.84, which is composed of 3 local QC-LDPC codes of length 3200, and a global coupling QC-LDPC code of length 10000. The code can be decoded either in one phase based on the global parity-check matrix HGC,FF,FF(4, 4, 32, 3, 4) or in two phases based on local and global coupling parity-check matrices, respectively.
The BER performance of CGC,FF,FF(4, 4, 32, 3, 4) over an AWGN channel using BPSK signaling decoded in one phase based on the global matrix HGC,FF,FF(4, 4, 32, 3, 4) with 20 and 100 iterations of the MSA, scaled by a factor 0.275 is shown in Fig. 3. We see the performance gap between 20 and 100 iterations is very small, about 0.1 dB.
The BER performance of CGC,FF,FF(4, 4, 32, 3, 4) decoded using the global/local two-phase decoding of the MSA with Iout,max = Iin,max = Imax = 5 is also shown in Fig. 3.
We see that one phase decoding and two-phase decoding of the code give almost the same error performance in the simulation range. Simulation results show that one-phase decoding converges slightly faster than two-phase decoding. However, the implementation of two-phase decoding is simpler.
Remarks: If we remove the zero matrix O and the leftmost r column of Bgc(m1, cn0 + r) from the global base matrix

Fig. 3. The BER performance of the GC-FF/FF-LDPC code given in Examples 2 and 3.
BGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c, r) given by (6), we obtain a base matrix BGC,FF,FF(m0, m1, n0, c) in the form for constructing a CN-based GC-FF-LDPC code proposed in [12]. Hence, the construction of GC-FF/FF-LDPC codes presented above in concatenated form is a generalization of the construction of CN-based GC-FF-LDPC codes proposed in [12]. We can also regard a CN-based GC-FF-LDPC code as a punctured GC-FF/FF-LDPC code. The performance of the CN-based GC-FF-LDPC code (punctured GC-FF/FF-LDPC) is shown in Fig. 3
Example 3: In this example, we use the field GF(101) to construct a 2 × 2 SM-constrained 100 × 100 circulant Bcyc∗(100, 100) in the form given by (2).
Suppose we take the top 16 rows of Bcyc∗(100, 100) to form a 16 × 100 submatrix Bcyc∗(16, 100). If we replace the base matrix B(16, 100) in Example 2 by Bcyc∗(16, 100) and follow the same global base matrix construction process and parameters, we obtain the following 16 × 100 global coupled base matrix over GF(101):
Bc∗yc,GC,F F ,F F (4, 4, 32, 34)
( ) O|diag B∗cyc,local,0(4, 32),Bc∗ yc,local,1(4, 32), B∗cyc,local,2(4, 32) = Bc∗ yc,gc(4100)
Following the cyclic structure of Bcyc∗(100, 100), we can readily see that the three local base matrices B∗cyc,local,0(4, 32), B∗cyc,local,1 (4, 32), and B∗cyc,local,2 (4, 32) are identical. Hence, the null space over GF(2) of the 100 × 100 CPM dispersion H∗cyc,GC,FF,FF(4, 4, 32, 3, 4) gives a GC-FF/FF-LDPC code C∗cyc,GC,FF,FF(4, 4, 32, 3, 4) which consists of three copies of a local code of length 3200 connected by a global coupling code of length 10000.
The BER performance of the GC-FF/FF-LDPC C∗cyc,GC,FF,FF(4, 4, 32, 3, 4) over an AWGN channel using BPSK signaling decoded in one phase based on the entire global matrix H∗cyc,GC,FF,FF(4, 4, 32, 3, 4) with 20 and 100 iterations of the MSA, scaled by a factor 0.275 is also shown in Fig. 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:27:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NASSERI et al.: GLOBALLY COUPLED FINITE GEOMETRY AND FINITE FIELD LDPC CODING SCHEMES

9215

V. CONCLUSION AND REMARKS
In this paper, we presented two types of concatenated LDPC codes viewed as generalized globally coupled LDPC codes in which the outer and inner codes serve as local and global coupling codes, respectively. In the construction of a first-type concatenated LDPC code, a cyclic FG-LDPC code is used as the local code and a QC-FF-LDPC code is used as the global coupling code. Such a concatenated LDPC code is referred to as a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code. In the construction of a second-type concatenated LDPC code, both local and global coupling codes are QC-FF-LDPC codes. Such a concatenated LDPC code is referred to as a GC-FF/FF-LDPC code. A GC-FG/FF-LDPC code possesses the distinct features of both FG- and FF-LDPC codes, i.e., large minimum distances, no small trapping sets, fast decoding convergence, capable of correcting both random errors and bursts of erasures. Two two-phase iterative decoding schemes were devised for decoding a GC-FG/FF-LDPC code, one for correcting random errors over an AWGN channel, and the other for correcting random bursts of erasures over a BEC in addition to correcting random errors over an AWGN channel. A GC-FF/FF-LDPC code constructed based on a single field can be decoded either in a single phase or in two phases. The two-phase decoding allows information-sharing in the decoding of local codewords. In one example, we also showed that the two-phase decoding performs almost the same as the one-phase decoding.
The GC-FG/FF-LDPC coding scheme is quite adaptive for hybrid repeat-request-retransmission, called HARQ [7]. Various possible retransmission schemes can be devised depending on the communication environments, the requirements of reliability, throughput efficiency, and system complexity. One such possible retransmission scheme is a retransmission of failed decoded local codewords until all the transmitted local codewords are successfully decoded or a preset maximum number of retransmissions is reached.
Since the local FG code is powerful, the frequency of retransmission-requests is relatively low. Hence, a HARQ system based on the GC-FG/FF-LDPC coding scheme should be able to provide high reliability and high throughput performance.
This direction may deserve further research effort. Finally, the authors would like to point out that a concatenated FGFF-LDPC coding scheme was developed for possible application in a high-speed underwater fiber optical communication system [19].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors disclose an outside interest in Codelucida to the University of Arizona. Conflicts of interest resulting from this interest are being managed by The University of Arizona in accordance with its policies.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] D. J. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[3] J. Chen and M. P. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[4] D. J. MacKay and M. S. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and RamanujanMargulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 74, pp. 97–104, 2003.
[5] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., 2003, vol. 41, no. 3, 1998, pp. 1426–1435.
[6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[7] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding (no. 4). Hoboken, NJ, USA: Prentice hall, 2001.
[8] W. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[9] Q. Huang, Q. Diao, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes on constrained parity-check matrices and their trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 2648–2671, May 2012.
[10] Q. Diao, Y. Y. Tai, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “LDPC codes on partial geometries: Construction, trapping set structure, and puncturing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7898–7914, Dec. 2013.
[11] J. Li, K. Liu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Algebraic quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: Construction, low error-floor, large girth and a reduced-complexity decoding scheme,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 8, pp. 2626–2637, Aug. 2014.
[12] J. Li, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, D. J. Costello Jr., and W. E. Ryan, LDPC Code Designs, Constructions, and Unification. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2016.
[13] P.-H. Chen, J.-J. Weng, C.-H. Wang, and P.-N. Chen, “BCH code selection and iterative decoding for BCH and LDPC concatenated coding system,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 17, no. 5, pp. 980–983, May 2013.
[14] S.-L. Shieh, “Concatenated BCH and LDPC coding scheme with iterative decoding algorithm for flash memory,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 327–330, Mar. 2015.
[15] Y.-C. Liao, H.-C. Chang, and S. Lin, “Scalable globally-coupled lowdensity parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., 2018, pp. 1–5.
[16] K. Liu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A revolving iterative algorithm for decoding algebraic cyclic and Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 4816–4827, Dec. 2013.
[17] Q. Huang, K. Liu, and Z. Wang, “Low-density arrays of circulant matrices: Rank and row-redundancy, and QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2012, pp. 3073–3077.
[18] Q. Diao, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “A matrix-theoretic approach for analyzing Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 4030–4048, Jun. 2012.
[19] M. Nasseri, X. Xiao, S. Zhang, T. Wang, and S. Lin, “Concatenated finite geometry and finite field LDPC codes,” in Proc. 11th Int. Conf. Signal Process. Commun. Syst., 2017, pp. 1–8.
Mona Nasseri (Senior Member, IEEE) received the Ph.D. degree from The University of Toledo, Toledo, OH, USA, in 2015. She has continued her research as a Postdoctoral Fellow with the University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA, developing LDPC codes for high performance optical communication systems. In April 2017, she joined the Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA, as a Postdoctoral Fellow and was with Bioelectronics Neurology and Engineering Laboratory. In 2019, she was promoted to an Assistant Professor of neurology. She is currently an Assistant Professor with Electrical Engineering Department, University of North Florida, Jacksonville, FL, USA. Her research focus with Mayo Clinic was on implementing machine learning and signal processing techniques to develop real time seizure prediction and detection algorithms using minimally invasive monitoring devices to record physiological signals. Her current research interests include information theory, coding theory, mobile communications networks, physiological signal processing, and machine learning.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:27:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

9216

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 70, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2021

Xin Xiao received the B.S. degree in electrical engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2012, the M.E. degree in system LSI from the Graduate School of Information, Production and System, Waseda University, Kitakyushu, Fukuoka, Japan, in 2013, the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2015, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering from the University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA.
From 2016 to 2021, she was a Research Assistant with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, USA. Since 2021, she has been a Research Scientist with Facebook, Inc. Her current research interests include the general area of error correction coding for communication and storage systems, and deep learning and optimization in channel coding.
Dr. Bane Vasic´ (Fellow, IEEE) is currently a Professor of electrical and computer engineering and mathematics with the University of Arizona, and the Director of the Error Correction Laboratory. He is an inventor of the soft error-event decoding algorithm, and the key architect of a detector/decoder for Bell Labs data storage read channel chips which were regarded as the best in industry. His pioneering work on structured low-density parity check (LDPC) error correcting codes and invention of codes has enabled low-complexity iterative decoder implementations. Structured LDPC codes are today adopted in a number of communications standards and data storage systems. He is known for his theoretical work in error correction coding theory and codes on graphs which has led to characterization of the hard decision iterative decoders of LDPC codes, and design of decoders with best error-floor performance known today. He is the Co-Founder of Codelucida, a startup company developing advanced error correction solutions for communications and data storage. He is Fulbright Scholar, da Vinci Fellow, and the past Chair of IEEE Data Storage Technical Committee.

Shu Lin (Life Fellow, IEEE) received the B.S.E.E. degree from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 1959, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Rice University, Houston, TX, USA, in 1964 and 1965, respectively.
In 1965, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI, USA, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. In 1969, he became an Associate Professor and in 1973, a Professor. In 1986, he joined Texas A & M University, College Station, TX, USA, as the Irma Runyon Chair Professor of electrical engineering. In 1987, he returned to the University of Hawaii. From 1978 to 1979, he was a Visiting Scientist with the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, USA, where he worked on error control protocols for data communication systems. He spent the academic year of 1996–1997 as a Visiting Professor with the Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. In 1999, he retired from University of Hawaii and he is currently an Adjunct Professor with the University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA. He has authored or co-authored numerous technical papers in IEEE transactions and other refereed journals. He is the author of the book, An Introduction to Error-Correcting Codes (Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1970). He also co-authored (with D. J. Costello) the book, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications (Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1st edition, 1982, 2nd edition, 2004), (with T. Kasami, T. Fujiwara, and M. Fossorier) the book, Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms, (Boston, MA: Kluwer Academic, 1998), (with W. E. Ryan) the book, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern (Cambridge University Press, 2009), and (with J. Li, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, W. E. Ryan, and D. J. Costello, Jr. ) the book, LDPC Code Designs, Constructions, and Unification (Cambridge University Press, 2017). His most recent book (co-authored with Juane Li) is, Fundamentals of Classic and Modern Error-Correcting Codes (Cambridge University Press, to appear in February 2022). His current research interests include algebraic coding theory, coded modulation, error control systems, and satellite communications. He was the Principle Investigator on 45 research grants funded by the NSF and the NASA of USA. Dr. Lin is a Member of the IEEE Information Theory Society and the Communication Society. From 1976 to 1978, he was an Associate Editor for Algebraic Coding Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, and in June 1988, the Program Co-Chairman of the IEEE International Symposium of Information Theory held in Kobe, Japan. In 1991, he was the President of the IEEE Information Theory Society. In 1996, he was the recipient of the Alexander von Humboldt Research Prize for U.S. Senior Scientists, in 2000, the IEEE Third-Millennium Medal 2000, and in 2007, The Communications Society Stephen O. Rice Prize in the Field of Communications Theory. In 2014, he was awarded the NASA Exceptional Public Achievement Medal. He was also the recipient of the 2019 Albert Nelson Marquis Lifetime Achievement Award and the 2020 IEEE Leon K. Kirchmayer Graduate Teaching Award.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:27:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

