2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding
FAID Diversity via Neural Networks
Xin Xiao∗, Nithin Raveendran∗, Bane Vasic´∗, Shu Lin†, and Ravi Tandon∗ ∗ The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ, 85721. Email: {7xinxiao7, nithin, vasic, tandonr}@email.arizona.edu
†University of California, Davis, CA, 95616. Email: shulin@ucdavis.edu

2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding (ISTC) | 978-1-6654-0943-8/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISTC49272.2021.9594253

Abstract—Decoder diversity is a powerful error correction framework in which a collection of decoders collaboratively correct a set of error patterns otherwise uncorrectable by any individual decoder. In this paper, we propose a new approach to design the decoder diversity of finite alphabet iterative decoders (FAIDs) for Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes over the binary symmetric channel (BSC), for the purpose of lowering the error floor while guaranteeing the waterfall performance. The proposed decoder diversity is achieved by training a recurrent quantized neural network (RQNN) to learn/design FAIDs. We demonstrated for the first time that a machine-learned decoder can surpass in performance a man-made decoder of the same complexity. As RQNNs can model a broad class of FAIDs, they are capable of learning an arbitrary FAID. To provide sufficient knowledge of the error floor to the RQNN, the training sets are constructed by sampling from the set of most problematic error patterns - trapping sets. In contrast to the existing methods that use the cross-entropy function as the loss function, we introduce a frame-error-rate (FER) based loss function to train the RQNN with the objective of correcting specific error patterns rather than reducing the bit error rate (BER). The examples and simulation results show that the RQNN-aided decoder diversity increases the error correction capability of LDPC codes and lowers the error floor.
Index Terms—Decoder diversity, Error floor, LDPC codes, Quantized neural network
I. INTRODUCTION Deep neural networks (DNNs) have gained intensive popularity in communication, signal processing, and data storage communities in the past five years due to their great potential of solving problems relevant to optimization, function approximation, and others. One popular idea, known as model-driven neural networks (NNs), is to combine the model knowledge (or the prototype algorithms) and the NN in conjunction with optimization techniques of NNs to improve the model. In the context of iterative decoding of error correction codes, the deep unfolding framework [1] is particularly attractive as it naturally unfolds the decoding iterations over the Tanner graph into a deep neural network. The activation functions are defined by the prototype decoding rules that mimic the message-passing process [2]. One merit of this framework is that the weight matrices and activation functions over hidden layers are constrained to preserve the message update function symmetry conditions, thus making it possible to train the NN
The work is funded in part by the NSF under grants CIF-1855879, CCF 2106189, CCSS-2027844 and CCSS-2052751. Bane Vasic´ has disclosed an outside interest in Codelucida to the University of Arizona. Conflicts of interest resulting from this interest are being managed by The University of Arizona in accordance with its policies.

on a single codeword and its noisy realizations, rather than on the entire code space.
It has been shown that deep unfolding efficiently optimizes various iterative decoding algorithms such as Belief Propagation (BP) and improves the decoding convergence [3]–[6]. One common feature of most existing model-driven NNs is that the training sets are constructed by randomly sampling channel output sequences at low signal-to-noise-ratios (SNRs), when applied on the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel [3]–[5], or at high crossover probabilities in the case of the binary symmetric channel (BSC) [6]. Consequently, when considering the Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes, this means that the model-driven NNs are optimized for the waterfall region in the curve of decoding performance, where the probability of error starts to drop drastically. However, at low crossover probabilities, low-weight error patterns occur more frequently, and are more likely to cause decoding failure. This requires very long training time to get sufficient statistics on the error floor (EF), making the NN framework impractical for applications that require very small frame error rate (FERs).
The model-driven NNs are agnostic to these problematic uncorrectable error patterns that dominate the error floor, and to make learning efficient, it is thereby crucial to sample from a much smaller set of the most “harmful” error patterns. In addition, to optimize the error floor, our NN must use a new loss function based on FER.
It is well known that the error floors of LDPC codes are caused by specific sub-graphs of the Tanner graph, known as Trapping sets (TS) [7], which prevent an iterative decoder from converging to a codeword. When an LDPC code is transmitted over a BSC and is decoded with a specific decoder D, the slope of its error floor is characterized by its guaranteed error correction capability t [8], defined as the largest weight of all error patterns correctable by the decoder D, i.e., D can correct all error patterns with weight up to t. Generally speaking, the guaranteed error correction capability of a single iterative decoder is far lower than that of maximum likelihood decoder (MLD). To increase the guaranteed error correction capability of a given LDPC code, Declercq et al. [9] proposed an ensemble of finite alphabet iterative decoders (FAIDs), known as decoder diversity, where each FAID can correct different error patterns. The FAIDs, if designed properly, are known to be capable of surpassing the floating-point BP algorithms [10]. In [9], these decoders are selected by going over all error patterns in predefined trapping sets, such that their

978-1-6654-0943-8/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding

combination can correct all the error patterns associated with the predefined trapping sets. Note that this FAID selection is essentially a brute force approach that checks all error patterns for all FAID candidates, and it makes a-priori assumptions on problematic trapping sets, which might not be “harmful” trapping sets for specific Tanner graphs [11].
In this paper, we propose a model-driven NN scheme to design the decoder diversity of FAIDs for regular LDPC codes over BSC, with the objective of performing well in both waterfall and error floor regions. Unlike the brute force approach in [9], our framework is dynamically driven by error patterns to design different FAIDs. The scheme begins with the design of an initial FAID with a good decoding threshold to guarantee waterfall performance. The rest of the FAIDs are designed via a recurrent quantized neural network (RQNN) in order to reduce the error floor. This RQNN models the universal family of FAIDs, thus it is capable of learning any arbitrary FAID. To collect sufficient knowledge of the trapping sets, we need to construct a training set consisting of the most problematic error patterns the initial FAID fails on. For this, we rely on the sub-graph expansion-contraction [11]. The advantage is that the sub-graph expansion-contraction method obtains the training set of harmful error patterns for any FAID without making any a-priori assumptions about which graph topologies are harmful. In addition, the method is computationally efficient compared to Monte Carlo simulation and accurate in comparison with other TS enumeration techniques that do not take the decoder into account. Instead of selecting the FAIDs by checking all error patterns in predefined trapping sets as in [9], we train an RQNN on different error patterns to design FAIDs in a sequential fashion. Since our goal is to correct specific error patterns rather than reducing the bit error rate (BER), we propose the frame error rate as the loss function to train the RQNN. Consequently, the learned FAIDs are optimized in the error floor region and are expected to correct different error patterns. We consider the quasi-cyclic (QC) Tanner code (155, 64) as an example and the numerical results show that the RQNN-aided decoder diversity increases the guaranteed error correction capability and has a lower error floor bound.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Notation
We consider a binary LDPC code C, with a parity-check matrix H of size M × N . The associated Tanner graph is denoted by G = (V, C, E), with V (respectively, C) the set of N variable (respectively, M check) nodes corresponding to the N columns (respectively, M rows) in H, and E the set of edges. Let the i-th variable node (VN) be vi and the j-th check node (CN) be cj. The set of check (respectively, variable) nodes adjacent to vi (respectively, cj) is denoted as N (vi) (respectively, N (cj)). The degree of a node in G is defined as the number of its neighbors. If all the variable nodes have the same degree dv, C is said to have regular column weight dv, and if all the check nodes have the same degree dc, C is said to have regular row weight dc. In the following, we mainly

consider the regular (dv, dc) LDPC codes. Assume that the crossover probability of BSC is α, the codeword transmitted over BSC is x = (x1, x2, · · · , xN ) ∈ C, and the received channel output vector is y = (y1, y2, · · · , yN ) ∈ GF(2)N . Let e = (e1, e2, · · · , eN ) be the error pattern introduced by the BSC, then y = x ⊕ e, where ⊕ is the component-wise XOR operator. The weight of an error pattern e denoted by w(e) is defined as the total number of nonzero components.
A trapping set (TS) T [7], [10] for an iterative decoder is a non-empty set of variable nodes in G that are not correct at the end of a given number of iterations. Note that T will depend on the decoder input as well as decoder implementation.

B. FAID We follow the definition of FAID introduced in [10]. A b-bit
FAID denoted by DF AID is defined by a 4-tuple: DF AID = (M, Y, Φ, Ψ), where M is the domain of the messages passed in FAID defined as M = {0, ±L1, ±L2..., ±Ls}, with Li ∈ R+, 1 ≤ i ≤ s, s ≤ 2b−1 − 1 and Li > Lj if i > j. For a message m ∈ M associated with vi, its sign represents an estimate of the bit value of vi, namely vi = 0 if m > 0, vi = 1 if m < 0, and vi = yi if m = 0, and its magnitude |m| measures the reliability of this estimate. Y is the domain of channel outputs. For BSC, Y = {±C} with some C ∈ R+ as we use the bipolar mapping: 0 → C and 1 → −C. Let z = (z1, z2, ...zN ) be the input vector to a FAID, with zi = (−1)yi C, 1 ≤ i ≤ N . The functions Φ and Ψ describe the message update rules of variable nodes and check nodes, respectively. For a check node cj with degree dc, its updating rule is given by

Ψ(mj )

=

m∈mj

sgn(m)

·

min (|m|),
m∈mj

(1)

where sgn(·) is the sign function and mj is the set of extrinsic

incoming messages to cj, with |mj| = dc − 1 and mj ∈

Mdc−1. For a variable node vi with degree dv, its updating

rule is given by

Φ(zi, ni) = Q

m + ωizi ,

(2)

where ni is the set of extrinmsi∈cniincoming messages to vi, with |ni| = dv − 1 and ni ∈ Mdv−1. The function Q(·) is the quantizer defined by M and a threshold set T =

{T1, ..., Ts, Ts+1 = ∞}, with Ti ∈ R+, 1 ≤ i ≤ s and Ti > Tj for any i > j:

Q(x) =

sgn(x)Li 0

if if

Ti ≤ |x| < Ti+1 . |x| < T1

(3)

The coefficient ωi is a real number. If ωi is a constant for

all possible ni, Φ is the quantization of a linear function,

and its associated FAID is called linear FAID, otherwise, its

associated FAID is called nonlinear FAID. At the end of each

iteration, the estimate of bit associated with each variable node

vi is made by the sign of the sum of all incoming messages and channel value zi, i.e., zero if the sum is positive, one if the sum is negative, and yi if the sum is zero. This sum represents the estimate of bit-likelihoods and we denote it by Υ.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding

Fig. 1. Block diagram of FAID diversity via a recurrent quantized neural network. The design process consists of two steps, the Initialization step shown on the left, and the Sequential design step shown on the right. In the Initialization, the sub-graph expansion-contraction is applied for D1 to find the set of the most problematic error patterns E(1), and E(1) is set to be the first training set. In the i-th round of Sequential design, the RQNN is trained with the training set E(i) to design the FAID Di+1. Once the training is completed, EDi+1 , the subset of E(i) correctable by Di+1, is excluded from E(i).
C. Decoder diversity In this work, we follow the definition of decoder diversity
in [9]. The b-bit decoder diversity D is a set consisting of ND b-bit FAIDs, which can be defined as

D = {Di|i = 1, · · · , ND} ,

(4)

where each b-bit FAID is given by Di = (M, Y, Φi, Ψ), with Φi the VN updating rule of Di. Given an LDPC code C and a set Et consisting of all error patterns with weight no greater than t, the objective is to design D with the smallest cardinality

ND such that the ND FAIDs can collectively correct all the error patterns in Et. The selected FAIDs can be used in either a sequential or a parallel fashion, depending on the memory and

throughput constraints. In next section, we propose a greedy

framework to design D via an RQNN, which might not have

the smallest cardinality ND but still be capable of correcting a great number of error patterns in Et.

III. DECODER DIVERSITY BY RQNNS For simplicity, we call the decoder diversity of FAIDs as FAID diversity. A. A sequential framework Basically, the proposed design of D consists of two main steps, namely, the Initialization and Sequential design, as shown in Fig. 1. In the Initialization step, we begin with the first FAID D1 that has a good decoding threshold for the purpose of good performance in waterfall region. D1 can be designed by various methods, such as the Density Evolution [12] and quantized neural networks [5], [6]. We then use the sub-graph expansion-contraction [11] (as will be introduced in Section III-B) to determine the most problematic error patterns that cannot be corrected by D1. Denote the set consisting of most problematic error patterns as E(1) and the guaranteed correction capability of D1 as t, then for any error pattern e ∈ E(1), w(e) = t + 1. In particular, E(1) will be used as the initial training set in the next step. In the sequential design, we use a recurrent quantized neural network to construct the

rest of the FAIDs with the objective of correcting as many error patterns in E(1) as possible. We train the RQNN in multiple rounds, with one FAID per round. In each round, the RQNN is trained over a training set consisting of all the error patterns that cannot be corrected by any FAID in the most recently updated set D. Once the offline training of the RQNN is completed, the learned FAID corresponding to the current RQNN is added to D, and the error patterns that can be corrected by this FAID are excluded from the training set in the current round.
To be more specific, consider the i-th round as shown in Fig. 1, where i ≥ 1. Let the training set used in the i-th round be E(i), the FAID to be learned in the i-th round be Di+1, and the subset of E(i) corrected by the learned FAID be EDi+1 . Then, for any error pattern e ∈ E(i), it cannot be corrected by any of D1, D2, · · · , Di. The RQNN is trained with E(i) to minimize the training set error so that the cardinality of EDi+1 is maximum. Subsequently, Di+1 is added to D and the training set E(i+1) used in the next round is derived by

E (i+1) = E (i) \ EDi+1 .

(5)

This process continues until E(i) becomes an empty set or

a predefined maximum number of rounds ND − 1 has been reached. If E(i) eventually becomes empty, the designed FAID

diversity can correct all error patterns with weight up to

t + 1 in E(1). Otherwise, the process have completed ND − 1 rounds and the last training set E(ND) is a nonempty set.

As a result, the designed FAID diversity can correct most of

the error patterns with weight up to t + 1, and only E(ND)

uncorrectable error patterns with weight t + 1.

Because of the sequential training strategy, the FAID diver-

sity D uses its decoders in the same order as how its decoders

are determined. Specifically, assume that the predefined max-

imum number of iterations of Di is Ii. To decode an input vector z, D1 with I1 iterations is first applied. If D1 decodes z successfully, the decoding process terminates, otherwise it is

re-initialized with z and switches to D2 with I2 iterations. The decoding process continues decoding z with FAIDs in order

until a FAID Dj corrects z. Otherwise, all FAIDs in D fail on z, in this case, the decoding process claims a decoding failure.

B. Subgraph expansion-contraction
The expansion-contraction method introduced in [11] estimates the error floor of an arbitrary iterative decoder operating on a given Tanner graph of an LDPC code in a computationally efficient way by identifying the minimal-weight uncorrectable error patterns and harmful TSs for the code and decoder. In the expansion step of the method, a list of short cycles (of length g and g + 2, where g is the girth of the Tanner graph) present in the Tanner graph G of the code is expanded to each of their sufficiently large neighborhood in G. The expansion step for a given LDPC code only needs to be executed once and its output: LEXP, the list of expanded sub-graphs can be used for different decoders for the next step of contraction.
Each of the expanded sub-graphs in LEXP are now contracted in order to identify failure inducing sets for a given

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding

Υ

Bit-likelihoods estimate layer

Layer 3

Υ

Bit-likelihoods estimate layer

Layer 6

Υ

Bit-likelihoods estimate layer

Layer 9

Ψ Check node update layer

Ψ Check node update layer

Ψ Check node update la.y..er

z Layer 2 Q

z Layer 5 Q

z Layer 8 Q

Variable node update layer Layer 1
Training sample Input layer

Variable node update layer Layer 4
z

Variable node update layer

Layer 7

z

...

Fig. 2. Block diagram of a RQNN. Each column corresponds to one iteration, where variable nodes are first updated, followed by the quantization function Q. The quantized messages are then used to update check nodes. The output of Ψ and Input layer are fed into both Υ in current iteration and the variable node update layer in next iteration.

decoder D. This is achieved by exhaustively decoding error patterns running D on these sub-graphs (not on the entire Tanner graph G) ensuring that the messages accurately represent the actual messages operating on G. This process lists all minimum-weight failure inducing error patterns which will then be used as the training set for the RQNN. C. A model-driven structure for general FAID

In the Sequential design, we rely on a recurrent quantized

neural network to design Di, i ≥ 2. The proposed RQNN is a model-driven recurrent deep neural network, which is con-

structed by unfolding the general FAID with a given number of

iterations, as shown in [6]. The connection between consecu-

tive layers is determined by the Tanner graph G, and activation

functions over hidden layers are defined based on Φ, Ψ, and

Υ. As it has recurrent structure, the trainable parameters are

shared among all the iterations. As shown in Fig. 2, three

consecutive hidden layers in one column correspond to one

iteration in FAID, with one layer for VN message update, one

layer for CN message update, and one layer for bit-likelihood

estimation. In particular, rather than introducing weights ma-

trices between layers as in most existing model-driven NN

frameworks, the RQNN has only the coefficients ω in (2) as

trainable parameters. Since Φ is a symmetric function mapping

from Y ×Mdv−1 to M, to design a FAID for a given quantizer

Q(·), we only need to determine |M|dv−1 values of ω for the

case where the input value is −C. We use ω[i1, · · · , idv−1] to indicate the coefficient ω to be learned for the case that

the extrinsic incoming message is (i1, · · · , idv−1), where ik ∈ M, k = 1, · · · , dv − 1. Moreover, we are interested in the Φ that is invariant to the ordering of the extrinsic

incoming messages. This means that Φ(zi, ni ) = Φ(zi, ni), where ni is an arbitrary permutation of ni. This rotation symmetry of Φ limits the RQNN to learn the coefficients with

non-decreasing arguments, namely, ω[i1, · · · , idv−1] where

ij ≤ ik, ∀j < k, and reduces the number of trainable

wcoheoffiseciΦenthsasfrroomtat|iM on|dsyv−m1mteotry|M prd|o+vp−dev1r−ty2

. We call the FAID as symmetric FAID.

We denote the set of these trainable coefficients by Ω, i.e.,

Ω =∆ {ω[i1, · · · , idv−1]|ik ∈ M, i1 ≤ · · · ≤ idv−1}. In [6], we proposed using RQNNs to design linear FAIDs. This approach,

however, has limitations when an optimal FAID is nonlinear

whose VN updating rule satisfies specific constraints. In [10],

Lemma 1 provided an example of possible constraints and

showed that any FAID whose Φ satisfying these constraints

cannot be expressed as a quantization of a linear function. This

means that the approach [6] cannot learn the optimal FAID if

the optimal FAID has Φ satisfying the constraints in Lemma 1

[10]. The main reason of these limitations lies in its prototype

VN updating rule, which assumes that the coefficient ω is

a constant. On the contrary, the prototype VN updating rule

in our proposed RQNN can express any arbitrary symmetric

FAID, as shown in the following proposition.

Proposition 1: Given an arbitrary symmetric FAID,

whose values

VN updating mapping {µ[i1, · · · , idv−1]|ik ∈

is determined M, i1 ≤ · · · ≤

by idv

|M|+dv −2
−1 },dv −w1here

µ[i1, · · · , idv−1] ∈ M is the value for the case that the

received input is −C and the extrinsic incoming mes-

sage is ficients

(i1, · · · , idv−1). Then, such that for any ik

there exist ∈ M, i1

|M|+dv −2 dv −1
≤ ··· ≤

coefidv −1 ,

Φ(−C, i1, · · · Noticed that dependently,

tt,hhieedsvpe−r1o)o|M =f d|iµ+vs−[disv11t−,ra2·i·g·hc,tofiodevrfwfi−c1ai]re.dntsas

are we

defined incan deter-

mine each coefficient individually by replacing each µ and

(i1, · · · , idv−1) in (2). Proposition 1 indicates that our RQNN framework, if properly initialized, can learn arbitrary FAID. D. Training RQNN

The coefficients Ω in the RQNN can be initialized by conventional iterative decoders or the decoders constructed by specific techniques such as Density Evolution and the selection approach in [10]. Specifically, we first derive the LUT of some well-known decoder like quantized Offset MS decoder, and take its coefficients as the initialization of the RQNN. Since the RQNN preserves the symmetry conditions, we can simply use the all-zero codeword and its noisy realizations to construct a training set. In particular, to design Di+1 in the i-th round, the RQNN is trained with E(i). Let u be the values in the output layer. Since the objective of the RQNN is to correct the error patterns in E(i) as many as possible, and we assume x = 0, we propose the following FER as the loss function

Γ(u)

=

1 2

1 − sgn

min
1≤i≤N

ui

.

(6)

Note that ui represents the estimate likelihood of the i-th

bit. Since x = 0, each component in u is expected to be

positive. Therefore, a frame is decoded in error if and only

if the minimum component is negative. The quantizer Q(·)

and the sign function in (6) cause a critical issue that their

gradients vanish almost everywhere, making it difficult to use

classical backward propagation. Similar to [6], we leverage

straight-through estimators (STEs) as surrogate gradients to

tackle this issue. In particular, we use the same STEs as [6].

Motivated by the fact that applying different learning rates to

Ω can help training convergence, we employ ADAM [13] with

mini-batches with gradients accumulated in full precision.

IV. A CASE STUDY AND NUMERICAL RESULTS In this section, we consider the Tanner code (155, 64) as an example to demonstrate how to use an RQNN to design a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2021 11th International Symposium on Topics in Coding

TABLE I

STATISTICS ON THE ERROR CORRECTION OF FAID DIVERSITIES

10-12

Error patterns FAID Diversity [9] RQNN-aided FAID Diversity

10-14

E (1)

930

0

E

507966

480655

10-16

3-bit FAID diversity. The Tanner code has column weight of 3 and row weight of 5, with a minimum distance of 20. The M and T are predefined to be M = {0, ±1, ±2, ±3} and T = {±0.5, ±1.5, ±2.5}, respectively. We first select the 3-bit nonlinear FAID D0 in [10][TABLE II] as our D1. As shown in [10], D1 is guaranteed to correct all error patterns with weight up to 5. We apply the sub-graph expansion-contraction method for D1 with 100 iterations, and obtain E(1) consisting of 29294 error patterns with weight of 6. We construct an RQNN with 50 iterations. The size of each mini-batch is set to 20, and the learning rate is set to 0.001. We sequentially train the RQNN in 6 rounds, with the initialization shown in the longer version of this paper [14][Table I]. The training of RQNN in 6 rounds converged within 10, 10, 20, 60, 60, 30 epochs, respectively. The trained coefficients are provided in [14][Table II], from which we derive 6 RQNN-aided FAIDs. Consequently, our RQNN Diversity consists of 7 3-bit FAIDs. Set the maximum number of iterations of these 7 FAIDs to 100, 90, 50, 40, 50, 30, 30 accordingly. For comparison, we consider the FAID Diversity in [9] consisting of 9 3-bit FAIDs, with each FAID performing 50 iterations. Note that the FAID Diversity in [9] starts from D1 as well. Table I summarizes the statistics on the error correction of the FAID Diversity derived by RQNN and the FAID Diversity in [9]. The set E consists of all 1147496 error patterns with weight of 7 uncorrectable by D1, which is obtained by applying the sub-graph expansioncontraction method for D1 with 100 iterations. The numbers in Table I indicate how many error patterns uncorrectable by the corresponding FAID diversity. As shown in Table I, the FAID Diversity derived via RQNNs has less uncorrectable error patterns than the FAID Diversity in [9]. In particular, the error correction capability of the FAID Diversity in [9] is 6, while the error correction capability of the FAID Diversity via RQNNs is 7. Fig. 3 shows the error floor estimation of the FER performance of single FAID D1, FAID Diversity in [9], and the FAID Diversity via RQNNs. The bounds of error floor is estimated by the statistics in Table I. As shown in Fig. 3, the FAID Diversity via RQNNs has the lowest error floor bound compared to the others.
V. CONCLUSION In this paper, we proposed a new approach to automatically design FAID diversity for LDPC codes over BSC via RQNNs. The RQNN framework models the universal family of FAIDs, thus it can learn arbitrary FAID. We applied subgraph expansion-contraction to sample the most problematic error patterns for constructing the training set, and provided a FER loss function to train the RQNN. We designed the FAID diversity of the Tanner code (155, 64) via the proposed framework. The numerical results showed that RQNN-aided

10-18

10-20

10-22

10-24

10-4

10-3

Fig. 3. Error floor estimation of D1, FAID Diversity [9], and RQNN-aided FAID Diversity. FAID Diversity [9] has 9 FAIDs with 450 iterations, while the RQNN-aided FAID Diversity has only 7 FAIDs with 390 iterations.
FAID diversity increases the error correction capability and has a low error floor boRunEdF.ERENCES
[1] J. R. Hershey, R. L. Roux, and F. Weninger, “Deep unfolding: Model-based inspiration of novel deep architectures,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1409.2574, 2014.
[2] A. Balatsoukas-Stimming and C. Studer, “Deep unfolding for communications systems: A survey and some new directions,” in 2019 IEEE International Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS), 2019, pp. 266–271.
[3] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in 54th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2016, pp. 341–346.
[4] B. Vasic´, X. Xiao, and S. Lin, “Learning to decode LDPC codes with finite-alphabet message passing,” in Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA 2018), San Diego, CA, Feb. 2018, pp. 1–10.
[5] X. Xiao, B. Vasic´, R. Tandon, and S. Lin, “Finite alphabet iterative decoding of LDPC codes with coarsely quantized neural networks,” in 2019 IEEE Global Communications Conference (GLOBECOM), 2019, pp. 1–6.
[6] X. Xiao, B. Vasic´, R. Tandon, and S. Lin, “Designing finite alphabet iterative decoders of LDPC codes via recurrent quantized neural networks,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,, vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 3963–3974, 2020.
[7] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proceedings of the annual Allerton conference on communication control and computing, vol. 41, no. 3. The University; 1998, 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[8] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic´, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, 2008.
[9] D. Declercq, B. Vasic´, S. K. Planjery, and E. Li, “Finite alphabet iterative decoders—part II: Towards guaranteed error correction of LDPC codes via iterative decoder diversity,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,, vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4046–4057, 2013.
[10] S. K. Planjery, D. Declercq, L. Danjean, and B. Vasic´, “Finite alphabet iterative decoders—part I: Decoding beyond belief propagation on the binary symmetric channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,, vol. 61, no. 10, pp. 4033–4045, 2013.
[11] N. Raveendran, D. Declercq, and B. Vasic´, “A sub-graph expansioncontraction method for error floor computation,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,, vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 3984–3995, 2020.
[12] T. T. Nguyen-Ly, V. Savin, K. Le, D. Declercq, F. Ghaffari, and O. Boncalo, “Analysis and design of cost-effective, high-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst, vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 508–521, Mar. 2018.
[13] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[14] X. Xiao, N. Raveendran, B. Vasic´, S. Lin, and R. Tandon, “FAID diversity via neural networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2105.04118, 2021. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2105.04118

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:30:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

