2021 IEEE 94th Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC2021-Fall) | 978-1-6654-1368-8/21/$31.00 ©2021 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/VTC2021-FALL52928.2021.9625308

Machine Learning Scaled Belief Propagation for Short Codes
Matthias Hummert, Dirk Wu¨bben and Armin Dekorsy Department of Communications Engineering University of Bremen, 28359 Bremen, Germany
Email: {hummert, wuebben, dekorsy}@ant.uni-bremen.de

Abstract—The problem of finding good error correcting codes for short block lenghts and its corresponding decoders is an open research topic. A frequently applied soft decoder is the Belief Propagation (BP) decoder, however with degraded performance in case of short loops in the Tanner graph. This is especially problematic for short length codes as loops of small length are more likely to occur. In this paper, we propose the Machine Learning Scaled Belief Propagation (MLS-BP) to mitigate the performance loss of BP decoding for short length codes by introducing a learned scaling factor for the receive signals. The key point of this approach is the fact that the implementation of the BP decoder is not changed and the simple scaling leads to performance results comparable to other proposed BP improvements.
Index Terms—Supervised Machine Learning, Belief Propagation, error-correcting codes, short block length
I. INTRODUCTION
In a time where short packet transmissions are getting more and more important, especially for 5G, the research in finding good error correcting codes and corresponding decoders for these data transmissions is of huge importance. In general, the performance of channel codes improves with the block length, therefore finding good performing codes for short block length is not an easy task. Furthermore, optimum maximum likelihood decoding is too complex for most practical scenarios. The Belief Propagation (BP) decoder is a frequently applied soft decoder in particular for Low-Density-Parity-Check (LDPC) codes [1]. This decoder has shown to perform well for long block length, but is in general suboptimal due to loops in the Tanner graph. These loops harm the decoding performance as the reliability of the messages is overestimated due to the inherent dependencies in the code. Therefore, the question arises, if the BP decoder can be modified for decoding short codes.
As reported in [2], Tanner already proposed to scale the messages in each iteration to compensate for the loops in the decoder. For minimizing the BER, [3] proposed to use bruteforce search to find scaling factors in the check to variable messages of the BP and [4] exploited the consistency condition of Log-Likelihood-Ratios (LLRs) to scale the messages. In order to avoid this bruteforce search or complicated analytical

analyis, a machine learning (ML) search has been proposed to find these scaling factors in [5].
Recently, the idea of learning general complete neural networks (NN) for soft decoding has raised significant attention [6]. However this approach only works for small dimension of codes since the procedure of learning a new soft input decoder by using neural networks is doomed by the curse of dimensionality. In order to overcome this drawback several strategies have been proposed e.g. [7]. For sequential decoding numerous approaches exists to learn the decoding of convolutional codes and Turbo codes [8].
Another approach is to interprete the BP decoder as a NN [9], [10]. The so-called Neural Belief Propagation (N-BP) decoder will be discussed in Subsection II-D and used as the benchmark.
In this paper, we propose an alternative approach by introducing a scaling factor for the calculation of the LLR of the receive signals. The key aspect is that the subsequent BP decoder remains unchanged, i.e., no additional scaling factors are incorporated in the passed messaged, only the input of the decoder is changed. This is especially interesting for hardware implementation purposes as an existing implementation of the BP decoder can be used without any modification of the decoder itself. The proposed approach can hence easily be integrated in existing schemes. A supervised learning procedure is introduced to adapt this proposed input scaling which is trained offline without adding extra computations to the online processing.
The paper is structured as follows: after discussing the system model in Section II, the Machine Learning Scaled Belief Propagaion (MLS-BP) and the training procedure are presented in Section III. In Section IV the performance is investigated and the conclusions are provided in Section V.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. System model

w Lch

u

c

x y L(y|x)

L(x)

ENC

BPSK

BP

Fig. 1: System model of coded BPSK transmission over

This work was partly funded by the German ministry of education and research (BMBF) under grant 16KIS1180K (FunKI).

AWGN channel and LLR calculation prior to BP decoding

978-1-6654-13A6u8t-h8o/2ri1z/e$d3l1ic.0e0ns©ed20u2s1e IliEmEitEed to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Consider the given communication chain in Fig. 1 where a binary information word 1 u ∈ Fk2 of length k is encoded (ENC) into the codeword c ∈ Fn2 of length n by a linear block code Γ of code rate Rc = k/n. BPSK modulation is applied to the codeword by x = 1 − 2c, Additive White Gaussian Noise
(AWGN) w is added by the channel leading to the receive vector y ∈ Rn given by y = x + w. For the transmission of
BPSK symbols over AWGN channels the LLRs for the receive
signals are given by

L(yi|xi) = log

P (yi|xi = 1) P (yi|xi = −1)

2 = σw2 yi = Lchyi .

(1)

This LLR equals the receive signal y scaled by the so called channel reliability Lch = 2/σw2 with the noise variance σw2 . Thus, the input of the BP decoder is a scaled version of the

received signal vector y, dependent on the Signal-to-Noise-

Ratio (SNR).

B. Belief Propagation (BP) Decoder
In the following we will briefly summarize the BP decoder [11]. In general, each linear block code is completely described by its parity check matrix H ∈ Fm 2 ×n. Each row of H represents a parity check equation of the code and each column stands for a code bit in the code. The parity check matrix can be graphically represented by a Tanner graph consisting of variable nodes vi (i = 1, . . . , n) and check nodes chkj (j = 1, . . . , m). An edge between variable node vi and check node chkj exists, if the code bit ci participates in the jth check equation, i.e. hji = 1. The BP decoder now uses these parity checks and the input LLRs L(yi|xi) (1) to calculate extrinsic information Le(xi) for every code bit ci by exchanging messages between the check and variable nodes [1]. Every BP iteration consists of two steps. At first, the check node chkj collects the corresponding data from the connected variable nodes vi and calculate extrinsic information Lje (xi) for every connected variable node vi using the boxplus operation. For the second step, every variable node vi sums together all the generated extrinsic information from the connected check nodes to calculate the complete extrinsic information Le(xi) = j∈vi Lej (xi). The extrinsic information Le(xi) is then added to the received LLR L(yi|xi) (1) to finish a decoder iteration (L(xi) = L(yi|xi) + Le(xi)). This iterative decoding process is repeated until a valid codeword is found or another stopping criterion is met. The final soft output of the BP decoder is hence given by L(x) and for estimating the codeword cˆ a hard decision is performed cˆ = sgn (L(x)). We note the maximum number of iterations by Nit. Due to loops in the Tanner graph, the BP decoder is in general suboptimal. A loop is formed, if an information flow in the Tanner graph reaches its source node again. This is especially noticeable for very short code length as short loops are more likely and the performance is harmed. The shortest loop present in a code is called girth. This suboptimality is caused by the fact that the

1We will note vectors by bold symbols x, matrices by upper bold symbols
H and an entry of the vector with subscripts, e.g., xi for the ith entry. Soft estimates are noted as x˜ and hard decisions are marked with xˆ.

BP assumes statistical independence of the passed messages and this assumption is strictly speaking only true for infinite long codes. Due to this assumption LDPC codes are designed in a sparse fashion and in general, longer codes show better performance as the assumption is less violated.
Based on the decoder output L(xi) the expected value for each code bit xi can be calculated by

x˜i = E{xi} = tanh (L(xi)/2) .

(2)

The elementwise tanh function provides a soft estimate x˜ for the transmit word x and will be used to train our approach.

C. Neural Belief Propagation (N-BP) Decoder
The N-BP decoder [9], [10] unfolds the message exchange in the Factor graph over the iterations and interprets it as a NN with trainable weights in order to scale the exchanged messages. To design the NN the number of iterations needs to be fixed in advance and the number of weights increases linearly with the number of BP iterations. The training of all these weights leads to a significant training complexity. Our implementation of the N-BP is based on [12].

III. MACHINE LEARNING SCALED BELIEF PROPAGATION(MLS-BP)

A. Learning Model

In the MLS-BP approach the input of a common BP decoder is rescaled and adapted via supervised learning. For the MLSBP we propose to feed scaled LLRs

L˜(yi|xi)

=

βL(yi|xi)

=

β

2 σw2

yi

=

βLch

yi

(3)

LMLS

to the BP decoder and determine the non-negative scaling factor β by ML. In general, the scaling factor will depend on the channel code Γ and on the SNR. To simplify the nomenclature, we have introduced in (3) the scaling variable LMLS = βLch which can be interpreted as a “learned channel reliability“. In Fig. 2, the training scheme to determine β and LMLS is depicted.

Learn

u ENC

w

c

xy

BPSK

LMLS = βLch L(x)
BP

Fig. 2: MLS-BP learning schematic for the scaling constant LMLS

The learning procedure is used during offline training to adapt the rescaling factor β. Therefore the training is carried out only once and the learned β is applied for inference afterwards. It follows the supervised learning principle where the BP decoder serves as a part of a function that is used to train β accordingly. In (3), the scaling factor LMLS varies with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the SNR as the noise variance σw2 is inverse proportional to the SNR. As a consequence, we should learn one scaling factor for every interesting SNR, respectively.
However, in order to further simplify the MLS-BP approach, we investigate the training of only one scaling factor LMranLgSe for a range of interesting SNRs. We will observe, that this strategy leads only to a minor performance gap.
As a direct comparison to e.g. the N-BP with thousands of learned scaling factors, the MLS-BP approach needs to learn only one scalar factor β and the BP decoder remains untouched. Therefore the computational complexity of our approach is significantly lower as only one weight is adapted.

B. Supervised Learning Approach

The general idea of supervised learning is to tune learnable

parameters of a function using input data (observations) to

match the corresponding labeled output data [13]. Here the observations are the received signals y and the labels are the transmitted symbols x. Our goal is to minimize a loss L(x, x˜) so that the BPSK soft estimates x˜ (2) are as close as possible to

the corresponding labeled data x. The loss reflects some form of distance between the output of the function x˜ and the labels x. In order to minimize the loss, we use a variant of Stochastic

Gradient Descent (SGD). SGD calculates the derivative w.r.t. to learnable parameters (one parameter β here) and tunes them

to minimize the loss function iteratively.

To formalize this, we define the training set consisting of T training samples as (yt, xt) for t = {1, ..., T }, so the training set contains T vectors of length n for x and y, respectively. The observations y and the BPSK soft estimates x˜ are related via the received LLR scaling and BP decoding function x˜ = f (y). For an initial value β the whole decoding chain is executed and soft symbols x˜ are calculated for the

loss L(x, x˜). From the loss the derivative w.r.t. β is determined and the parameter β updates via SGD. The most basic form

of SGD is given by the iteration

β +1 = β − η |S |

∇βL(xt, x˜t)

(4)

t∈S

where denotes the iteration index, η is the step size or learning rate and ∇βL(x, xˆ) is the gradient of the loss function L(x, x˜) w.r.t. the learning paramter β. We divide the training set into subsets |S | < T of equal size in the way that no training data is present twice in any subset. These subsets S are called batches and |S | is named batch size. When all subsets S are processed, the whole training set T has been used once which is called an epoch. Usually many epochs are used to train ML algorithms.

C. Learning procedure for MLS-BP
Considering our system model in Fig. 2 we generate new training vector sets (yt, xt) with size T in every epoch and show our optimizer new training data in each iteration to make the training as efficient as possible. For given loss function and SNR, the processing chain is evaluated and the parameter β adopts accordingly. Here, the Adam optimizer

[14] is used, which is a variant of the SGD method. This supervised learning procedure is implemented using Keras [15] and Tensorflow [16].
Two different loss functions are considered. First the MeanSquare Error (MSE) loss evaluates the Euclidian distance between the labels xt and the soft estimates x˜t

LMSE xt, x˜t

=

xt − x˜t

2 2

.

(5)

Second, the MI loss considers the negative of the approximate mutual information (MI) between xt and the LLR L(xt) given
by

LMI xt, L(xt) = −MI xt, L(xt)

1n

(6)

=− 1− n

log2 (1 + exp (−xiL(xi))) .

i=1

The approximation is motivated by the ergodic theorem and has also been used for EXtrinsic Information Transfer (EXIT) charts to approximate mutual information [17]. The negative MI is considered in order to obtain a minimization problem.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
A. Basic Parameters
For evaluating the MLS-BP we investigate the performance for a Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) code, which has been used for evaluating the N-BP in [9] and [10], and a LDPC code from [18]. For all testing purposes a size of |S | = 100 is used, a learning rate of η = 0.01 is applied and the BP decoder uses a maximum of Nit = 5 iterations, if not mentioned otherwise.

B. Performannce Evaluation for a BCH code
In Fig. 3 we depict the BER for the BCH code (63, 45) versus the scaling factor LMLS for different SNRs. For a fixed SNR, the bruteforce (BF) search sweeps the scaling factor over a fixed range, determines the corresponding BER and selects L∗BF resultung in the miniumun BER ( ). The scaling factors LMLS found by using the MI loss (circle) and the MSE loss ( ) are marked, respectively. For both loss functions, the MLS-BP factor nearly matches the best BER using the bruteforce approach. This bruteforce search yields the best results but needs more computational power. On top our MLSBP approach optimizes e.g. an information theoretic criterion like the MI (6) and has hence a more convenient motivation.
In Fig. 4 we validate this observation by showing the BER versus the SNR. We compare the BP decoder without scaling (”Lch”) with the found scaling factors LB∗F obtained by bruteforce search and the learned scaling factors LMLS,MI for the MI loss. Compared to the common BP decoder without scaling, the demanding N-BP [9] decoder achieves a significant performance improvement of 1.5 dB at BER of 10−4. This performance gap indicates the suboptimality of common BP decoding for codes of small girth, here the girth is just 4. However, the same performance improvement is achieved by all scaling approaches with significant reduction in computational complexity in comparison to the N-BP as many

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10−1.2

Eb/N0 = 2 dB

10−1

BER BER
BER

10−1.4

10−2

10−1.6

Eb/N0 = 3 dB

10−1.8

Eb/N0 = 4 dB

LMLS,MSE
LMLS,MI L∗BF

3

3.5

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

LMLS

10−3

BP, Lch Nit = 5

10−4

MLS-BP, LrManLgSe, Nit = 5

BP, Lch Nit = 10

MLS-BP, LM ranLgSe, Nit = 10

10−5 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Eb/N0 in dB

Fig. 3: BER performance for various scaling factors LMLS for the (63, 45) BCH code
10−1

Fig. 5: (32, 16) LDPC code, BER over Eb/N0 compared for the learned scaling factors LMranLgSe over different number of iterations compared to the channel constant Lch

10−2

10−3

Lch

Lb∗f

N-BP [9]

10−4

MLS-BP, LMLS,MI

MLS-BP, LrManLgSe,MI MLS-BP, LrManLgSe,MSE

10−5 2

3

4

5

6

7

8

6 7 Eb/N0 in dB
Fig. 4: (63, 45) BCH code, BER over Eb/N0 compared for the different approaches

dBextra weight multiplications need to be executed. The MLSBP with learned MI loss achieves virtually the performance of the scaled BP with bruteforce search for the optimum

scaling factor L∗BF. one learned scaling

Interestingly, factor LrManLgSe

even the adaptation of only trained for the SNR range

2, . . . , 8 dB leads to almost the same BER for both, the MI

and the MSE loss function. This is due to the fact that the

receive LLR tend to be ”more” overestimated for high SNR

and hence even one scaling factor for all SNR works nearly

equally well. As the difference in BER performance of the

MI and the MSE loss is negligible, we will concentrate on the

MSE loss (5) subsequently.

scaling the receive signals are smaller in comparison to Fig. 4 as this LDPC code has a higher girth. For example, at a BER of 10−5 the MLS-BP achieves a gain of approximately 0.8 dB for a maximum of 5 BP iterations and 0.6 dB for 10 iterations, respectively. However, the MLS-BP with Nit = 5 iterations even outperforms the common BP with Nit = 10 iterations. Thus, complexity is again saved by our approach.
D. Usability for longer codes
In Fig. 6, we show simulations for LDPC codes that have lengths of n = 128, 256, 512 and 1008 with Rc = 1/2. We train the scaling factors LMranLgSe for the interesting Eb/N0 range
8 of 2, . . . , 4 dB. As expected the gain decrease for increasing
block length due to the higher girth. For the shown codes the performance gains of the approach vanish at the code length of n = 1008 in comparison to the common BP. This should be considered as an indication until which codelength this approach is applicable.
V. SUMMARY AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we propose the Machine Learning Scaled Belief Propagation (MLS-BP) to learn an input scaling factor of the BP decoder to improve the performance for short codes. The MLS-BP approach has only one trainable weight that is learned for each SNR or, with slightly degraded performance, for a SNR range. This very simple approach improves the BER performance of BP decoding for short codes at no additional cost and can directly been used with existing BP implementations.

C. Performance Evaluation for a short LDPC Codes

REFERENCES

In Fig. 5, simulation results of the common BP and the MLS-BP with LrManLgSe,MSE trained between 2 dB and 8 dB are shown for a short (32, 16) LDPC code and varying number
of maximum iterations Nit = 5, 10. Obviously, the gains of

[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density Parity-Check Codes,” IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. MacKay and M. C. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models. Springer, 2001, pp. 113–130.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10−1 10−2

Heterogeneous Systems,” 2015, software available from tensorflow.org. [Online]. Available: http://tensorflow.org/ [17] S. ten Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” Electronics Letters, vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 806–808, May 1999. [18] M. Helmling, S. Scholl, F. Gensheimer, T. Dietz, K. Kraft, S. Ruzika, and N. Wehn, “Database of Channel Codes and ML Simulation Results,” www.uni-kl.de/channel-codes.

BER

(128,64)

10−3

(128,64)

(256,128)

(256,128)

10−4

(512,256) (512,256)

(1008,504)

(1008,504)

10−5 1

2

3

4

5

Eb/N0 in dB

Fig. 6: different LDPC codes, dashed lines represent the MLSBP (LrManLgSe) and solid lines show the standard BP

[3] M. Yazdani, S. Hemati, and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improving belief propagation on graphs with cycles,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 57–59, Jan. 2004.
[4] A. Alvarado, V. Nu´n˜ez, L. Szczecinski, and E. Agrell, “Correcting Suboptimal Metrics in Iterative Decoders,” in Proceedings of IEEE International Conference on Communications, (ICC), Dresden, Germany, June 2009.
[5] M. Lian, F. Carpi, C. Ha¨ger, and H. D. Pfister, “Learned BeliefPropagation Decoding with Simple Scaling and SNR Adaptation,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), June 2019, pp. 161–165.
[6] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, “On deep learningbased channel decoding,” in 51st Annual Conference on Information Sciences and Systems, (CISS), Baltimore, MD, USA. IEEE, March 2017.
[7] S. Cammerer, T. Gruber, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, “Scaling Deep Learning-Based Decoding of Polar Codes via Partitioning,” in 2017 IEEE Global Communications Conference, (GLOBECOM), Singapore. IEEE, Dec. 2017.
[8] H. Kim, S. Oh, and P. Viswanath, “Physical Layer Communication via Deep Learning,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Information Theory, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 5–18, 2020.
[9] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “Deep Learning Methods for Improved Decoding of Linear Codes,” J. Sel. Topics Signal Processing, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, 2018.
[10] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to Decode Linear Codes using Deep Learning,” in 54th Annual Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, USA, Sept. 2016.
[11] J. Pearl, “Reverend Bayes on Inference Engines: A Distributed Hierarchical Approach,” in Association for the Advancement of Artificial Intelligence (AAAI), 1982.
[12] J. Hoydis, “Neural Network BP Decoder,” https://colab.research.google. com/drive/1T8qP0fdXQjm7wH7qaBLuSFwHXmtT4VkE.
[13] O. Simeone, “A Very Brief Introduction to Machine Learning With Applications to Communication Systems,” IEEE Trans. Cogn. Comm. & Networking, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 648–664, Nov. 2018.
[14] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” in 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations, (ICLR), San Diego, CA, USA, Conference Track Proceedings, Y. Bengio and Y. LeCun, Eds., May 2015.
[15] F. Chollet et al., “Keras,” https://keras.io, 2015. [16] M. Abadi et al., “TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:31:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

