1710

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL 42, NO 6, NOVEMBER 1996

Expander Codes
Michael Sipser and Daniel A. Spielman

Abstract-Using expander graphs, we construct a new family of asymptotically good, linear error-correctingcodes. These codes have linear time sequential decoding algorithms and logarithmic time parallel decoding algorithms that use a linear number of processors. We present both randomized and explicit constructions of these codes. Experimental results demonstrate the good performance of the randomly chosen codes.
Index Terms- Asymptotically good error-correcting code, linear-time, expander graph.
I. INTRODUCTION
E PRESENT an asymptotically good family of linear error-correcting codes that can be decoded in linear time. As these codes are derived from expander graphs, we call them “expander codes.” Expander codes belong to the class of low-density parity-check codes introduced by Gallager [101. Gallager [lo] suggested using the adjacency matrix of a randomly chosen low-degree bipartite graph as the parity check matrix of an error-correcting code. He showed that such a code probably has a rate and minimum distance near the Gilbe&Varshamov bound. He also suggested a natural sequential algorithm for decoding these codes, although he was unable to demonstrate that it would correct a constant fraction of error. In our first construction, we replace Gallager’s random graphs with very good expander graphs. In Section V-A, we analyze the natural sequential decoding algorithm in terms of the expansion of this graph, and show that it will remove a constant fraction of error froin a corrupted codeword. In Appendix I, we show that this algorithm succeeds only if the underlying graph is an expander. Zyablov and Pinsker [35] showed that, with high probability over thc choice of the graph, Gallager’s codes could be decoded by circuits of size O(n1ogn) and logxithmic depth. In Section VB, we show that our expander codes can be decoded by slightly simpler circuits of similar complexity. Pippenger [27] pointed out that a proof of the correctness of our parallel decoding algorithm can be obtained from Kuznetsov’s proof of correctness of a construction of fault-tolerant memories derived from Gallager’s codes [17]. Unfortunately, we are unaware of explicit constructions of expander graphs that have the level of expansion needed for the arguments in Section V.
Manuscript received December 15, 1995;revised Apnl20, 1996 Ths work was supported in part by thc U S AE Forcc undcr Contract F49620-92-5-0125, by DAWA under Grant N00014-92-J-1799, and by the NSF under Grant 9212184CCR. The work of D. A Spielman was also supported in part by an NSF Postdoc and the Fannie and John Hertz Foundation.
The authors are with the Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA.
Publisher Item Idenhfier S 0018-9448(96)07304-X.

However, a randomly chosen graph will have the required level of expansion with high probability.
h Section VI, we construct asymptotically good expander codes that rely on graphs with less ‘expansion. As explicit constructions of graphs with such expansion exist present explicit constructions of asymptotically good codes, along with a simple parallel algorithm that can remove a constant fraction of error from these codes. This algorithm can be implemented as a circuit of size O(n1ogn) and depth O(1ogn), or simulated in linear time on a sequential machine.
For the sake of accuracy, we begin this paper with a brief overview of a few important models of computation in which our algorithms can be seen to run in linear time. In Section 111, we recall the properties of expander graphs that we will need in this paper. We conclude with some advice to those who might implement these codes along with the results of some experiments that we performed to test the performance of expander codes derived from randomly chosen graphs.
We are unaware of an algorithm that will encode our expander codes in less than O ( n 2 )time (such a time bound is trivial for linear codes). However, our expander codes are an essential element of a construction of asymptotically good codes that can be both encoded and decoded in linear time r311.
A. Terminology
In this paper, we build linear codes over the alphabet (0, l} (although it is easy to generalize the constructions to larger fields). By a code of block length n and rate r , we mean a code in which the words have n symbols, of which r n are message symbols that may be freely chosen and the remaining (1-r ) nare determined by the choice of the message symbols. In particular, a linear code of block length n and rate r is a subspace of GF (2)” of dimension r n . If a code has minimum relative distance a , then each pair of words in the code differs in at least cm symbols. When we say that an algorithm will
correct an Efraction of errorfrom the code C,we mean that the
algorithm, on input a word w that differs from a word ‘U E C in at most en, symbols, will output ‘U.We make no restrictions on the output of the algorithm n other input words.
n. MODELSOF LINEARn M E
The meaning of “linear ’ depends on the model of computation considered. In section, we provide a brief description of a few standard models of sequential CO under which our algorithms run in linear time. describe the circuit model, which we will use to analyze our parallel algorithms.

0018-9448/96$05 00 0 1996 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SIPSER AND SPIELMAN: EXPANDER CODES

1711

A. The Models

B. Precomputation

We analyze the efficiency of algorithms by measuring their When we measure the efficiency of our decoding algorithms,

running time on a RAM (see [4]).A RAM has a central we assume that some precomputation has occurred before

processor that can access data from a memory. This processor decoding begins. This precomputation is independent of the

should have a few basic operations: addition, subtraction, read word being decoded. The output of the precomputation is an

from memory, store to memory, branch if zero, branch if object whose Size is linear in the codeword length. It should

greater than zero, etc. Under the uniform cost model, each be considered an auxiliary input to the decoding algorithm.

of these operations costs one unit of time. Thus the time used The purpose of the precomputation is to build a graph

by an algorithm in the uniform cost model is just the number associated with the code as well as the check matrix of the

of these basic operations that the processor performs.

code. This graph is the auxiliary input. On a Pointer Machine,

In the logarithmic cost model, the cost of a basic step is the graph is provided to the machine as its input usually is. On

proportional to the length of its argument. Thus the addition a RAM, the graph should be provided in memory as collections

of two n-bit numbers takes time n, even if each fits within a of pointers. For a circuit, the graph is used to decide how the

register. Similarly, reading an n-bit word from memory stored circuit should look. From the description of the codes, it will be

at ain address whose description requires n bits will take time obvious that the precomputation can be performed efficiently

2n. Our sequential decoding algorithms run quite naturally in in polynomial time.

line,ar time according to the uniform cost model: Decoding

a word of length n requires O(n)-bit additions and O ( n ) mernory accesses. To make these algorithms run in linear time in tlhe logarithmic cost model, we need to add an additional layex to the code (see Section VII). This extra layer enables us tlo perform only O ( n / l o g n )memory access, each of which retriieves O(1ogn) bits.
The Pointer Machine (also known as the Kolmogorov-Uspenski; machine) is a model of computation designed to capture the time complexity of algorithms, rather than the architecture of any particular computer. The input, output, and working environment of a Pointer Machine is a constantdegree directed graph. The CPU of the machine is a special node in the graph. At each time step, the CPU looks at the configuration of nodes of distance at most two from itself and,

111. EXPANDERGRAPHS
Expander graphs have been the focus of much study in theoretical computer science and combinatorics. An expander graph is a graph in which every set of vertices has an unusually large number of neighbors. Our constructions require graphs that expand by a constant factor, but which have only a linear number of edges. It is a remarkable fact that such graphs exist. In fact, a simple randomized process will produce one with high probability. Deterministic, polynomial-time constructions also exist.
Let G = (V, E ) be a graph on n vertices. To describe the expansion properties of G, we say every set of at most m
vertices expands by a factor of 6 if, for all sets S c V

depending on their configuration, rearranges the edges between these nodes, possibly creating new edges or new nodes. The

+ JSJ5 m l{y : 3x E S such that ( x , y) E E } > SISI.

Kollmogorov-Uspenskii thesis [151 asserts that any reasonable In our constructions, we will make use of unbalanced

model of computation can be simulated by a Pointer Machine bipartite expander graphs. That is, the vertices of the graph

with at most a constant factor difference in speed. For more will be divided into two sets so that there are no edges between

information about pointer machines, we direct the interested vertices in the same set. We call such a graph ( e , d)-regular

realder to [ll], [15], [18], and [29]. Our sequential decoding if all the nodes in one set have degree e and all the nodes in

algorithms naturally run in linear time on a Pointer Machine. the other have degree d. By counting edges, we find that the

To measure the efficiency of our parallel decoding algo- number of e-regular vertices must differ from the number of

rithims, we will use the model of Boolean circuits (see [9] d-regular vertices by a factor of d / c . We will only consider

ant1 [28] for a more detailed description of this model). Each the expansion of sets of vertices contained within one side

wire in one of these circuits carries a 0 or a 1. Each gate of the graph. We call a graph a (e, d, E , 6 ) expander if it is

in the circuit has as input two wires, and outputs a Boolean a ( e , d)-regular graph in which every subset of at most an E

function of its two inputs. Its output can be directed to as fraction of the e-regular vertices expands by a factor of at least

many wires as desired. We restrict ourselves to considering S. We will use families of ( e , d , E , 6) expanders in which e, d,

acyclic circuits-those in which the directed graph naturally t, and 6 remain constant as the number of vertices increases.

associated with the circuit is acyclic. The inputs of the circuit It is well known that a randomly chosen ( e , d)-regular graph

enter and exit on wires. The size and depth of the circuit will probably be a good expander:

are the number of wires and the length of the longest path Proposition 1: Let B be a randomly chosen (e, d)-regular

in the digraph of the circuit, respectively. This is a very bipartite graph between n e-regular vertices and ( c / d ) n d-
restrictive model of parallel computation, and it captures many regular vertices. Then, for all 0 < a < 1,with high probability,

of the difficulties of implementing our algorithms in hardware all sets of an e-regular vertices in B have at least (although it does ignore the space required to lay out a circuit).

We describe the complexity of our parallel decoding algorithm

in the circuit model to emphasize that it is efficient even in

this restrictive model. We hope that someone implementing

this algorithm will have access to more complex devices.

neighbors, where H ( . ) is the binary entropy function.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1712

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL 42, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 1996

Pro05 See Appendix 11.

U

The most common way to prove that a particular graph is

a good expander is to examine its second-largest eigenvalue.

The largest eigenvalue of a k-regular graph is k. If the second-

largest eigenvalue is far from the first, then the graph is a good

expander. The greatest possible separation between the first-

and second-largest eigenvalues in a graph was achieved in

explicit constructions by Margulis [21] and Lubotzky, Phillips,

and Sarnak 1191.

Theorem 2 (Lubotzky-Phillips-Sarnak, Margulis): For ev-

ery pair of primes p , q congruent to 1modulo 4 such that p is
+ a quadratic residue modulo q, there is a ( p 1)-regular Cayley

graph of PSL(2, Z / q Z ) with q(q2 - l ) / Z vertices such that

the second-largest eigenvalue of the graph is at most 2&.

One can show that a graph with the eigenvalue separation

displayed by these graphs is a good expander by using results

from [6], [13], and [33]. Other constructions that achieve a

similar separation have since appeared ([81, [231, and [241).

From the fact that these graphs are Cayley graphs, one can

show that they have a simple representation.

Proposition 3: Each graph described in Theorem 2 can be

constructed in time polynomial in its number of vertices.

Moreover, this polynomial-time computation can be used to

construct a description of the graph of size logarithmic in the

number of vertices in the graph. There is an algorithm that,

given this description, will produce the labels of the neighbors

of a node in the graph in time polynomial in the length of the

labels (i.e., polylogarithmic in the number of vertices).

In the remainder of this paper, we can ignore the fact that

these graphs are Cayley graphs, and just concentrate on the

relation between their degrees and second-largest eigenval-

ues. Unfortunately, these graphs are not unbalanced-bipartite.

To obtain unbalanced-bipartite expander graphs from these

graphs, we use their edge-vertex incidence graphs. From a

d-regular graph G on n vertices, we derive a (2, d)-regular

graph with d n / 2 vertices on one side and n vertices on the

other.

Dejinifion 4: Let G be a graph with edge set E and vertex

set V. The edge-vertex incidence graph of G is the bipartite

graph with vertex set E U V and edge set

{ ( e ,U) E E x V : w is an endpoint of e}.

To understand the expansion of these edge-vertex incidence graphs, we use a lemma of Alon and Chung [2].
Lemma 5 (Alon-Chung): Let G be a d-regular graph on n
vertices with second-largest eigenvalue A. Let X be a subset
of the vertices of G of size y n . Then, the number of edges contained in the subgraph induced by X in G is at most

We could use this lemma to characterize the edge-vertex incidence graphs of the graphs constructed in Theorem 2 as
(2, d , t, 6)expanders for some E and S.However, we will find
it more convenient to work directly with Lemma 5. We note that Alon et al. [ l ] used expander graphs in a
different way to obtain a uniform construction of asymptoti-

Variables

constraint restricts

W
Fig 1. A constraint restricts the variables that are its neighbors.
cally good low-rate error-correcting codes that lie above the Zyablov bound (see [251 and [361).
IV. THE CONSTRUCTION
To build an expander code, we begin with an unbalanced bipartite expander graph. Say that B is a (c, d)-regular graph
between sets of vertices of size n and ( c / d ) n ,and that d > e.
We will identify each of the n nodes on the large side of the graph with one of the bits in a code of length n. We refer to these n bits as variables. Each of the ( c / d ) n vertices on the small side of the graph will be associated with a constraint on the variables. Each constraint will correspond to a set of linear restrictions on the d variables that are its neighbors (see Fig. 1). In particular, a constraint will require that the variables it restricts form a codeword in some linear code of length d. Because the restrictions we impose upon the variables are linear, the resulting expander code will be linear as well. It is convenient to let all the constraints impose isomorphic codes (on different variables, of course). We will construct asymptotically good families of codes from families of ( e , d)regular expander graphs in which e and d remain constant as their number of vertices increases.
Definition 6: Let B be a (e, d)-regular graph between a
set of n nodes {q,. . . , wn}, called variables, and a set of c n / d nodes {Cl, . . . , Ccn/d},called constraints. Let b ( i , j )
be a function designed so that, for each constraint C,, the
variables neighboring C, are wb(%,1), , wb(%,d).Let S be an
error-correcting code of block length d. The expander code
C(B,S ) is the code of block length n whose codewords
are the words ( 2 1 , . . . , 2,) such that, for 1 5 z 5 e n / & (q1Z), ,.. ., q(,d ),) is a codeword of S.
If B is a sufficiently good expanderahd if the constraints are identified with sufficiently good codes, then the resulting expander code will be a good code.
Theorem 7: Let B be a ( c , d, a , c / d E ) expander and S an
error-co-rrecting code of block length d, rate T > ( e - l)/c, and minimum relative distance c. Then C(B,S ) has rate at
least CT - ( e - 1) and minimum relative distance at least a.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SIPSER AND SPIELMAN: EXPANDER CODES

1713

Pro08 To obtain the bound on the rate of the code, we will count the number of linear restrictions imposed by the constraints. As each constraint imposes (1 - r ) d linear restrictions, the variables suffer at most

these simple codes, we must use a randomized construction of expanders as explained in Section I11 and Appendix 11.
A. Sequential Decoding

n

C
-

(1 -

T)

d

=

cn(1-

T)

d

linear restrictions, which implies that they have at least n(cr(e - 1)) degrees of freedom. To prove the bound on the
minimum distance, we will show that there can be no nonzero codeword of weight an or less. Let w be a nonzero word of weight at most an and let V be the set of variables that are 1 in this word. There are c(VI edges leaving the variables in V. The expansion property of the graph implies that these edges will enter more than (c/dt)lVI constraints. Thus the average number of edges per constraint will be less than de, so there must be some constraint that is a neighbor of V, but which has a number of neighbors in V that is less than the minimum distance of S . This implies that w cannot induce a codeword of
S in that constraint; so, w cannot be a codeword in C(B,S).O
The analysis of our decoding algorithms for these codes will
be extensions of this proof. To ease the presentation of our arguments, we say that a constraint C, is satisfied by a word
(q... , xn) if (q(1,),,..., X b ( , , d ) ) is a codeword of S .
Remark 8: A construction of codes defined by identifying the nodes on one side of a bipartite graph with the bits of the code and identifying the nodes on the other side with constraints first appeared in the work of Tanner 1321. Following Gallager's lead [lo], Tanner analyzed the performance of his codes by examining the girth of the bipartite graph. Margulis [201 also used high-girth graphs to construct error-correcting
codes. It seems that analysis resting on high girth is insufficient to demonstrate that families of codes are asymptotically good.

V. A SIMPLEEXAMPLE
A simple example of expander codes is obtained by letting B be a graph with expansion greater than c/2 on sets of size
at most an and letting P be the-eode consisting of words of even weight, i.e., those (XI,.. ., zd) E (0, l}dsuch that
z, = 0 modulo 2.
The parity-check matrix of the resulting code, C(B,P ) ,is just
the adjacency matrix of B. The code P has rate ( d - l ) / d and
minimum relative distance 2 / d , so C(B,P) has rate 1- c/d and minimum relative distance at least a.
To obtain a code that we can decode efficiently, we will need even greater expansion. With greater expansion, small sets of corrupt variables will induce noncodewords in many constraints. By examining these unsatisfied constraints, we will be able to determine which variables are corrupt. In Sections V-A and V-B, we will explain how to decode these simple expander codes.
Unfortunately, we do not know of explicit constructions of expander graphs with expansion greater than c/2 (Kahale [13] shows that graphs with the eigenvalue separation achieved in Theorem 2 have such expansion, but that eigenvalue separation cannot certify greater expansion). Thus in order to construct

There is a natural algorithm for decoding these simple expander codes. We say that a constraint is satis-ed by a setting of variables if the sum of the variables in the constraint is even; otherwise, the constraint is unsatis-ed. Consider what happens when we flip' a variable that is in more unsatisfied than satisfied constraints. The unsatisfied constraints containing the variable become satisfied, and vice versa. Thus we have decreased the total number of unsatisfied constraints. The goal of the sequential decoding algorithm is to keep doing this until no unsatisfied constraint remains, in which case it outputs a codeword. Theorem 10 says that if the graph used to define the code is a good expander and if the input to the algorithm is close to a codeword, then the algorithm will succeed.
Simple Sequential Decoding Algorithm:
If there is a variable that is in more unsatisfied than satisfied constraints, then flip the value of that variable. Repeat until no such variable remains.
It is easy to implement this algorithm so that it runs in linear time on a Pointer Machine or a RAM under the uniform cost model. In Fig. 2, we present one such way of implementing this algorithm. A discussion of how algorithms such as this one can be modified to run in linear time on a RAM in the logarithmic cost model appears in Section VII.
Lemma 9: For c and d constant, the implementation in Fig. 2 runs in linear time on a Pointer Machine, as well as on a RAM in the uniform cost model.
Proof: We assume that the graph has been provided to the algorithm as a collection of pointers in which each vertex indexes a list of pointers to its neighbors. The implementation runs in two phases: a setup phase that requires linear time, and then a loop that takes constant time per iteration.
During the setup phase, the variables are partitioned into sets by the number of unsatisfied constraints in which they appear. It is trivial to perform this operation in linear time on a RAM in the uniform cost model. A Pointer Machine can perform this operation in linear time because its input contains the graph between the variables and the constraints; thus it can find the neighbors of a variable in constant time, rather than the logarithmic time that would be required to access arbitrary nodes in the graph.
During normal iteration of the loop, a variable that appears in the greatest number of unsatisfied constraints is flipped; the status of each constraint that contains that variable is updated: and each variable that appears in each of those constraints is moved to the set that reflects its new number of unsatisfied constraints. These operations can be performed in constant time because only a constant number of pieces of
'If the variable was 0, make it 1.If it was 1,make it 0.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1714

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL 42, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 1996

Input: a (c,d)-re@ar graph B between variables and constraints, and
an assignment of values to the variables.

Set-up phase

For each constraint, determine whether or not it is satisfied by the variables.
Initialize sets So, ,..,S, to empty sets.

For each variable, count the number of unsatisfied constraints in which it appears.
If this number is i, then put the variable in set S,.

Loop

Until sets Srcpl,...,S,are empty do:

I

Find the greatest i such that S,is not empty

Choose a variable v from set S,

Flip the value of variable v

For each constraint C that contains variable v

Update the status of constraint C For each variable w in constraint C
Recompute the number of unsatisfied constraints in which w appears. Move w to the set indexed by this number.

If all variables are in set So, then outppt the values of the variables. Otherwise, report “failed to d~ec-ode- ”.
Fig. 2. An implernentation or the simple sequential decoding algoiithm.

data are affected, and the constant number of pointers that are

referenced are all linked in the graph.

If, at some point, there is no variable in more unsatisfied

than satisfied constraints, the implementation leaves the loop

and checks whether it has successfully decoded its input. If

all the variables are in the $et ’5’0,then there are no unsatisfied

constraints and the implementation will output a codeword.

To see that the loop will only be executed a linear number

of times, observe that the number of unsatisfied constraints

decreases with each iteration. As there are only a linear number

of constiaints, this decrease can only occur a linear numbel

of times. Note that this i s true regardless of the expansion

properties of the underlying graph.

0

Theorem 10: Let B be a ( e , d, a , 3 ~ 1 4 )expander. Let P

be the code consisting of all even-weight words of length d.

Then, the simple sequential decoding algorithm will correct an

a12 fraction of error from the code C(B,P).

Prouf: When the algorithm is provided with a word that

is within distance an12 of a codeword, we call corrupt the

variables in which the word differs from that codeword. We

say that the decoding algorithm is in state (w, U ) if w variables

are corrupt and U constraints are unsatisfied. We view U as

a potential associated with w. Our goal is to show that the

potential will eventually reach zero. We will show that if the

decoding algorithm begins with a word with at most an12

corrupt variables, then there will always be some variable with

more unsatisfied neighbors than satisfied neighbors, until no

corrupt variables remain.

First, we consider what happens when the algorithm is in

a state (w, U ) with w 5 an. Let s be the number of satisfied

neighbors of the corrupt variables. By the expansion of the

graph, we know that
+U s > (314)cw.
Because each satisfied neighbor of the corrupt variables must share at least two edges with the corrupt variables, and each unsatisfied neighbor must share at least one, we know that

By combining these two inequalities, we obtain

Since each unsatisfied constraint must share at least one edge

with a corrupt variable, and since there are only cw edges

leaving the corrupt variables, we see from inequality (1) that

more than half the edges leaving the compt variables must

enter unsatisfied constraints. This implies that there must be

some corrupt variable such that more than half of its neighbors

are unsatisfied. However, this does not mean that the decoding

algorithm will decide to flip a corrupt variable. It does mean

that, if w 5 an, the algorithm will flip some variable.

We will show that the algorithm successfully decodes its

input if it begins with at most an12 corrupt variables. The only

way the algorithm could fail is if it flips so many uncorrupt

variables that w becomes greater than an. Assume by way

u l contradiction that this happens. Then there must be some

time at which w equals an. At this time, (1) tells us that
U > can/2. This leads to a contradiction because U is initially

at most can12 and can only decreasc during the cxecution of

thc algorithm.

0

In Appendix I, we show that if thc simplc sequential

dccoding algorithm can correct a constant fraction of error

from a code C(B,P),then the graph B must be an-expander.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SIPSER AND SPIELMAN EXPANDER CODES

1715

However, our bound on the expansion B must have is far from Substituting this inequality into inequality (2), we conclude

the bound shown sufficient in Theorem 10.

I (3/4 + ~)(iv+iICI)I I V I- 1 w 4+ ~ W

B. Parallel Decoding which implies
The simple sequential decoding algorithm has a natural

parallel analog: in parallel, flip each variable that appears in

more unsatisfied than satisfied constraints. We will see that

this algorithm can also correct a constant fraction of error if Proposition 12: For c and d constant, the simple parallel the code is derived from a sufficiently good expander graph. decoding algorithm can be implemented as a circuit of size

O ( nlog n) and depth O(1ogn).

Pro08 Each parallel decoding round can be implemented

In parallel, flip each variable that is in more unsatisfied than satisfied constraints. Repeat until no such variable remains.

as a circuit of linear size and constant depth: computing which constraints are unsatisfied can be performed by a constant number of layers of XOR gates, and the decision of whether or not a given variable should flip can be made a circuit that

+ computes the majority of a constant number of inputs. 0

Theorem 11: Let B be a (e, d, a, (3/4 € ) e ) expander,
for any t > 0. Let P be the code consisting of all even-

Remark 13: One can show that this parallel algorithm can be simulated sequentially in linear time. In this sense, Theorem

+ weight words of length d. Then, the simple parallel decoding
algorithm will correct any a0 < a(1 4€)/2 fraction of error

11 is stronger than Theorem 10.We have included Theorem 10 because it is a simple analysis of a more natural algorithm, and

after logl,(l-4e) (aon) decoding rounds.

because the sequential algorithm should be substantially faster

+ Proof: Let V denote the set of corrupt variables in the
input. Assume that /VI < an(1 4€)/2. We will show that

than a sequential simulation of the parallel algorithm. Moreover, our experiments indicate that the sequential algorithm

after one decoding round, the algorithm will produce a word usually corrects more errors than the parallel algorithm (see

that has at most (1 - 4 t ) l V I corrupt variables.

Section VIII), even though this superiority is not evidenced in

L,et F be the set of corrupt variables that fail to flip in our theoretical analyses.

one decoding round, and let C be the set of variables that Remark 14: Zyablov and Pinsker [35]demonstrated that if

were originally uncorrupt, but which become corrupt after one B is a randomly chosen ( e , d)-regular graph, then, with high

decoding round. After one decoding round, the set of corrupt probability over the choice of graph, a parallel algorithm very

varjables will be F UC. Set S so that the number of constraints that contain variables in V is Sc(V(B. y expansion, S > 3 / 4 + ~ .
We first establish that IV U C ( < an. Assume by way of

similar to the preceding algorithm will successfully correct a
constant fraction of error in the code C(B,P ) . Pippenger has pointed out that Kuznetsov’s [171 analysis of a construction of

contradiction that IV U CJ2 an, and consider a subset G’ of
+ C such that (V U C’I = an. By expansion, IN(V U C’)( 2
(3/4 €)can.On the other hand, each variable in C has at

fault-tolerant memories also serves as a proof of correctness of our simple parallel decoding algorithm. Pippenger [26] made a connection between Kuznetsov’s work and expander graphs.

most c / 2 neighbors that are not neighbors of S ; so,

( N ( VU C’)(5 SclV(+ c ( a n - IVl)/2.

VI. EXPLICITCONSTRUCTIONS OF EXPANDECRODES

Combining these two inequalities, we obtain
+ IV( 2 an(1 4€)/(4S - 2).
As S _< 1, this contradicts our assumption that
+ IV( < an(1 4t)/2.
]Because IV U C ( < an, we can bound the
neighbors of V U C by
+ + (3/4 E)C(IV( [Cl)I J N ( VU C)l ISclVl t
We now bound Sc(VJin terms of 18’1. To do this, we bound the number of neighbors of V by observing that each variable in F must share at least half of its neighbors with other corrupt variables. Thus each variable in F can account for at most (3/4)c neighbors. Moreover, each variable in V\F cain account for most c neighbors, which implies

In this section, we present an explicit construction of asymptotically good expander codes (Theorem 19). We will construct codes of the form C(B,S ) , where S is itself a good code of constant block length and B is the edge-vertex incidence graph of one of the expander graphs constructed in Theorem 2. Almost any good code S will suffice; however, to obtain the best possible performance, one should choose the best code available.
We begin with a bound on the minimum distance of these
codes. Lemma 15: If S is a linear code of rate r, block length
d, and minimum relative distance 6, and if B is the edgevertex incidence graph of a d-regular graph with second-largest eigenvalue A, then the code C(B,S ) has rate at least 2r - 1 and minimum relative distance at least

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1I16

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL 42, NO. 6, NOVEMBER 1996

Proot Let G be the d-regular graph from which B is
derived. Let n be the number of vertices of G, so the number
of variables of C(B,S)is dn/2 and the number of constraints
is n. Lemma 5 implies that any set of
dn 2
variables will have at least yn constraints as neighbors. Since each variable has two neighbors, the average number of variables per constraint will be

Pro03 Let G be the d-regular graph from which B is
derived. Let n be the number of vertices of G, so C(B,S)
has d n / 2 variables and n constraints. Let X be the set of o l d n / 2 corrupt variables. The variables
that are corrupt in the output of the decoding round will be those not in X to which a “flip” message is sent and those in X that do not receive a “flip” message. We will call a constraint confused if it sends a “flip” message to a variable that is not in X . We will call a constraint unhelpful if it contains a variable in X , but does not send a “flip” message to that variable.
In order for a constraint to be confused, the constraint must
have at least 3 / 4 ~ dvariables of X as neighbors. Each variable of X is a neighbor of two constraints, so there can be at most

Thus if

47 + ( V a l- 7))< Ed

4
confused constraints. Each of these can send at most dc/4 (3) “flip” signals, so at most

+ then a word of relative weight y2 (X/d)(r - 7’)cannot be
a codeword of C(B,S). Inequality (3) is satisfied for y <

(1- X/d)/(t - X / d ) . So, in particular, C(B,S)cannot have a

nonzero codeword of relative weight ( ( e - X/d)/(l - X/d))’

or less.

U

The decoding algorithm for these codes is slightly more

complicated that the decoding algorithm used in Section

V. Rather than just flipping variables that appear in many

unsatisfied constraints, it will flip the variables most likely

to satisfy those constraints. As we are unaware of a natural

sequential algorithm for decoding these codes, we present a

logarithmic time parallel algorithm and then demonstrate that

it can be simulated sequentially in linear time. The algorithm

proceeds in rounds.

-4a. n_ - de - d n 2a
3-5423
variables not in X will receive ‘‘flip” signals.
For a constraint to be unhelpful, it must have more than
d ~ / 4neighbors in X.Thus there are at most

- dt

t

4

unhelpful constraints. So, by Lemma 5, there can be at most
!2 &((?q+;($))

Parallel Decoding Round for C(B,S ) : (where S has block length d and minimum relative distance E)
0 For each constraint, if the variables in that constraint differ from a codeword of S in at most d ~ / 4places, then send a “flip” message to each variable that differs.
0 In parallel, flip the value of each variable that receives at least one “flip” message.
Proposition 16: For S fixed, a parallel decoding round can be implemented as a linear-size circuit of constant depth.
Lemma 17: Let S be a linear code of rate r , block length d , and minimum relative distance E , and let B be the edgevertex incidence graph of a d-regular graph with second-largest
eigenvalue A. If a parallel decoding round lor C(B,S ) is given
as input a word of relative distance a from a codeword, then it will output a word of relative distance at most
2 16a
from that codeword.

variables both of whose neighbors are unhelpful. As this set

contains all the variables in X that fail to receive a “flip”

message, we have proved the lemma.

0

Remark 18: Unless a < c2((1/3- 4X/td)/16, and by im-

plication t > 12X/d, the output word can be farther from the

codeword than the input is.

We will now build asymptotically good expander codes from

the graphs constructed in Theorem 2 and good codes known

to exist by the Gilbert-Varshamov bound (see [25]).We will

then show that these codes can be decoded by the iteration of

a logarithmic number of parallel decoding rounds.
a ( . ) Theorem 19. For all E such that 1-2 1 7 ( ~ >) 0, where

is the binary entropy function, there exists a polynomial-time

constructible family of expander codes of rate L - 2H(t) and

minimum relative distance arbitrarily close to ’E in which any
a < t2/48 i-raction of errof can be corrected by a circuit of size

O(n1og n ) and depth O(1ogn). Moreover, h e action o l this

circuit can be simulated in linear lime on a Pointer Machine

or a RAM under the uniform cost model.

Proof. From the Gilbert-Varshamov bound, we know

that for all sufficiently long block lengths there exist linear

codes of minimum relative distance t and rate 1- U ( € )W. e

will use one such code in our asymptotic construction.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SIPSER AND SPIELMAN: EXPANDER CODES

1717

Recall that Theorem 2 allows us to build d-regular expander graphs with second-largest’eigenvalueat most Xd = 2 m .
So long as a < c2/48, there is a d such that
< e2(1/3 - 4Xd/td)/16
and (5 > 12Xd/d. Fix such a d along with a code S of block
length d, minimum relative distance E,and rate 1- H(E). From now on, B will be the edge-vertex incidence graph
of a degree d graph constructed in Theorem 2. The bounds on the rate and minimum relative distance of C(B,S ) follow from Lemma 15. By Lemma 17, a parallel decoding round for C(B,S ) will transform a word of relative distance a from a codeword into a word of relative distance at most
2 16a

from that codeword. Let
+ + 0= ( 2 / 3 16a/c2 Xdd/4~).

Because we chose d so that a < c2(1/3 - 4Xd/~d)/16,we have < 1.Thus the iteration of logllp an parallel decoding

rounds will correct an errors in the code C(B,S).Because

S is a fixed code, Proposition 16 implies that this decoding

algorithm can be implemented by a circuit of size O(nlog n)

and depth O(1ogn).

We now explain how this aigorithm can be simulated in

linear time on a Pointer Machine or a RAM under the uniform

cost model. During each round, the simulating algorithm will

construct a list containing a pointer to each constraint that

could possibly be unsatisfied at the beginning of the next

round. We will show that the amount of work performed by

the algorithm is linear in the total size of these lists and that

the total size of all these lists will be linear in n.

Before the algorithm has read its input, any constraint

could be unsatisfied, so it must begin with a list containing

all rhe constraints. However, when it builds its list for the

second round, it need only, include those constraints that

were unsatisfied in the first round and those that contain a

variable that received a “flip” message in the first round. In

general, a constraint can only be unsatisfied in round i if it

was unsatisfied in round i - 1 or if a variable it contains

received a “flip” message in round i - 1. Given the list of

constraints that could possibly have been unsatisfied in round

i - 1, only linear work in the length of this list is needed to

construct the list for round i : one need only check which of

the constraints were actually unsatisfied and which variables

received “flip” messages. Similarly, the work required to

simulate the decoding in round i will be linear in the length

of its list.

To see that the total size of these lists is linear, observe that
the number of corrupt variables decreases by a factor of (1-p)

after each round. So, the sum of the number of variables that

are corrupt during each round is the sum of a geometric series

whose largest term is an, and thus is linear in a n . As only

constraints that contain these variables may be unsatisfied or

send “flip” messages, the total size of the lists is also linear in

n.

0

Remark 20: Some may consider the use of the GilbertVarshamov bound in the preceding argument to be “nonconstructive.” To us, a constant amount of nonconstructivity is negligible. However, we point out that one could replace this argument by using any known asymptotically good code, or just fixing d and picking an appropriate error-correcting code (say, from the back of [25]).In this case, one might want to strengthen the use of Lemma 5 with techniques from [14].
A. Alon’s Generalization
Noga Alon has pointed out that the “edge to vertex” construction that we use to construct expander codes is a special case of a construction due to Ajtai, Komlbs, and Szemerkdi [5]. They construct unbalanced expander graphs from regular expander graphs by identifying the large side of their graph with all paths of length k in the original graph and the small side of their graph with the vertices of the original graph. A node identified with a path is connected to the nodes identified with the vertices along that path. The construction used in Theorem 17 is the special case in which k = 1.
Alon suggested that the codes produced by applying the technique of Theorem 19 to this more general class of graphs can be analyzed by applying the following lemma of Kahale ~41.
Lemma 21 (Kahale): Let G,J be a d-regular graph on n
nodes with second-largest eigenvalue bounded by A. Let S be
a subset of the vertices of Gn,d of size yn. Then, the number of paths of length IC contained in the subgraph induced by S in G,,d is at most
A proof of this fact can also be found in [3].
Theorem 22: For all integers IC 2 2 and all E such that
1 - ~ H ( E>)0, there exists a polynomial-time constructible
family of linear codes with rate 1 - kH(t-) and minimum relative distance arbitrarily close to el+’/(’-’) for which a circuit of size O(n1ogn) and logarithmic depth will decode some Q ( c ’ + ~ / ( ~ - ~f)ra) ction of error. Moreover, this circuit can be simulated in linear time on a sequential machine.
Proof: [Sketch] As in Theorem 17, we will use the graphs known to exist by Theorem 2. We will form a code by using the k-path-vertex incidence graph of Gn,p+land by using a Gilbert-Varshamov good code at the constraints. The Gilbert-Varshamov bound implies that for sufficiently large
+ block length p 1, there exist linear codes of rate T and
minimum relative distance E provided that T 5 1 - H ( E ) .
+ Moreover, as p 1 grows large, the term involving X / d in
Lemma 21 goes to zero. If this term were zero, then we would know that every set containing an E(’+’)/’ fraction of the variables has at least an $1’ fraction of the constraints as neighbors. Because there are nd’ variables of degree k and n constraints of degree kd‘, Theorem 7 would imply that no word of weight up to E(~+’)/‘can be a codeword. However, because X l d never actually reaches zero, we can only come arbitrarily close to this bound.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1718

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL 42, NO 6, NOVEMBER 1996

To decode these codes, we modify the parallel decoding

algorithm so that each constraint sends a ‘‘flip” message to its

variables only if the setting of its variables is within E/h of a

codeword, for some constant h depending on k . An analysis

similar to that in the proof of Lemma 17 shows that if an a

fraction of the variables were corrupt at the start of a round,

;1( then at most an a ( k + l ) + -ah(a-c+h -

I - - :h))

h-1

€

fraction of the variables will be corrupt after the decoding

round. We can choose a to be some fixed fraction of

and a value for h so that this term is less than a.

The idea behind the sequential simulation of this algorithm

is the same as that in Theorem 19.

U

VII. LINEARTIMEIN THE LOGARITHMICCOST MODEL
To construct expander codes that can be decoded in linear time on a RAM in the logarithmic cost model, we will take the product of an expander code with a good code of length log n.
The reason that we cannot decode the codes presented in Sections V and VI in linear time in the logarithmic cost model is that our decoding algorithms make 0 ( n )memory accesses, for which they are charged O(1ogn) time each. To solve this problem, we would like to retrieve logn bits with each memory access. Actually, we will replace each bit in those expander codes with a byte of (log n)/2 bits. Where the previous decoding algorithms would compute the exclusive-or of two bits, our new algorithm will compute the bit-wise exclusive-or of two bytes. In this way, we can obtain a code that can be decoded in linear time. However, this code is not asymptotically good: because this algorithm essentially acts independently on different bits within the bytes, one could corrupt the first component of every byte, which is a total of %n/logn bits, in such a way that the decoding algorithm would not be able to correct the errors.
To fix this problem, we encode each of the bytes with a good linear error-correcting code of length logn and rate 1/2. This type of construction is called the product of two codes (see [25]). It can also be viewed as the concatenation of an expander code over an alphabet of (log n)/2 bits with a binary code of length logn and rate l / 2 . In linear time, the decoding algorithm can produce a table that it can use to perform nearest neighbor decoding for this code. Such a table lookup will require 0(log n) time.
To decode this product code in linear time, we first decode each of the %/log n bytes by a table lookup, This takes O ( n ) time. We then decode the bytes using the expander code. This decoding algorithm will correct a constant fraction of error because, unless a constant fraction of error appears in the encoding of a constant fraction of the bytes, there will be very few errors left after the bytes have been decoded.
Note that there are plenty of explicit asymptotically good codes that we could compose with the expander code. But, since we have linear time and the code only has length (logn)/2, we could find a code that meets the Gilbert-Varshamov bound (see [34, p. 1271).
We have proved the following Corollary:

CorolZary 23: The product of an asymptotically good linear code of length O(1ogn) with one of the expander codes constructed in Section V or VI of length O(n/logn) yields an asymptotically good code that can be decoded in linear
time on a RAM in the loganthmic cost model.
Vm. NOTES ON IMPLEMENTATION AND EXPERIMENTARLESULTS
We imagine using expander codes in coding situations where long block length is required. For small block lengths, special codes are known that will provide better performance. Expander codes should be especially useful for coding on write-once media, such as Compact Discs, where fast decoding is essential, the time required to encode is not critical, and codes of block length roughly 10 000 are already being used u21.
If one intends to implement expander codes, we suggest using the randomized construction presented in Section V. We obtained the best performance from graphs that had degree 5 at the variables. It might be possible to get good performance with randomly chosen graphs and slightly more complex constraints, but we have not yet observed better performance from these.
One drawback of using a randomly chosen graph to generate an expander code is that, while the graph will be a good expander with high probability, we know of no polynomial time algorithm that will certify that a graph has the level of expansion that we need for this construction.’ On the other hand, it is easy to perform experiments to test the performance of an expander code and thereby weed out those that do not work well on average.
We now mention a few ideas that we hope will be helpful to those interested in implementing these codes.
When one chooses a random graph as outlined in Appendix 11, there is a good chance that the graph produced will have a “double edge.” That is, two edges between the same two vertices. We suggest using a simple heuristic to remove one of these edges, such as swapping its endpoint with that of a randomly chosen edge. If one is choosing a relativeIy small graph, say of 2000 nodes, then there is a fair chance that there will be two variables that share two neighbors. Again,‘we suggest discarding such graphs. In general, if one is choosing a relatively small graph, then there is a reasonable chance that it will have some very small set of vertices with low expansion. We were always able to screen these out by experiment. * The sequential decoding algorithm presented in Section V-A can be improved by the same means as many “slopedescent” algorithms. In experiments, we found that a good way to escape local minima was to induce some random errors. The sequential decoding algorithm also benefits from a little randomness in the choice of which variable it flips next. We also found that we could decode more errors when we allowed the algorithm to make a limited
2Computationof the eigenvalues of the graph does not work because Kahale [14] has proved that the elgenvalues cannot certify expansion greater than d / 2 .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SIPSER AND SPIELMAN: EXPANDER CODES

1719

1800
C)
1600 1400 -
1200 -
1000 800 -
600-
400 200 -
0 0.5

I

I

0 0 0

I

I

0 0 0 0
0

1

I

I

0.55

0.6

0.65

0.7

0.75

Fig. 3. Number of errors that some expander codes of length 40 000 could almost always correct. For example, the point in the upper left-hand corner of the figure indicates that an expander code of rate 1 / 2 corrected all of the 50000 patterns of 1720 errors on which it was tested.

amount of negative progress. This finding is evidenced in Fig. 4. The parallel decoding algorithm presented in Section V-B seems better suited for implementation in hardware than the sequential algorithm. The performance of this parallel algorithm can be improved by changing the threshold at which it flips variables. An easy improvement is to start the threshold high and decrease it only when necessary. The algorithm performs even better if one only flips the variables that have the maximum number of unsatisfied neighbors. Of course, many hardware implementations will not allow this flexibility. One can encode expander codes in quadratic time in the same way that one can encode any linear code: multiply the vector of message bits by a matrix so as to produce their corresponding vector of check bits. One can speed up this process by not actually solving for all check bits. The correct values for the remaining check bits can be found by using one of the decoding algorithms. Since the decoding algorithm knows which bits are correct and which bits it needs to compute, it can actually perform much better than if it were trying to correct errors whose location is unknown.
These codes really are easy to implement. We implemented these codes in C after a few hours work and set about testing their performance. In each test, we chose a random bipartite graph of the correct size and tested the performance of various decoding algorithms against random errors. For our tests, we never performed encoding-it suffices to examine the
performance of the decoding algorithms around the 6 word.
We present some results of our experiments so that the reader will know what to expect from these codes. However, we

encourage researchers to implement and try them out on the error patterns that they expect to encounter.
A. Some Experiments
In our experiments, we found that expander codes of the type discussed in Section V performed best when derived from a randomly chosen graph with degree 5 at the variables. We varied the rates of our codes by changing the degrees of the graphs at the constraints. In Fig. 3, we present the results of experiments performed on some expander codes of length 40 000. We began by choosing an appropriate graph at random as described in Appendix 11. We then implemented a variation of the sequential decoding algorithm from Section VA in which we allowed the algorithm to flip a limited number of variables even if they appeared in only two unsatisfied constraints (we call these “negative progress flips”). The algorithm would only make a negative progress flip if there were no variable in more unsatisfied than satisfied constraints. We then tested each code on many error patterns of various sizes. For each size, we choose 50000 error pattems of this size uniformly at random. Points in the graph indicate the number of errors that a code corrected in all 50 000 tests. One can see that the expander codes corrected a remarkably large number of errors.
The results of these experiments are much better than one would expect if one plugged the estimates for the expansion of random graphs from Appendix I1 into Theorem 10. We believe that there are two principal reasons for this disparity. The first is that our estimation of the expansion obtained by a random graph could be improved. The second is that our experiments analyze the average case performance of these codes, whereas Theorem 10 is only concerned with the worst case.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1720

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 42, NO 6, NOVEMBER 1996

number of errors
Fig. 4. A rate 1 / 2 expander code of length 40 000. The points marked by o indicate the probability that the standard sequential decoding algorithm corrected a given number of errors. The points marked by x indicate the probability when the algonthm was allowed to flip up to 700 variables that appeared in one more satisfied than unsatisfied constraint.

In Fig. 4, we compare the performance of a version of the sequential decoding algorithm in which we allow negative progress flips with a version in which we do not. We chose a
rate l/Z expander code of length 40 000. For each number of
errors, we performed 2000 tests of each algorithm and counted the number of times that each successfully corrected the errors. While allowing negative progress flips did not seem to have much impact on the number of errors that the algorithms could “almost always” correct, it did greatly increase the chance that the algorithm could correct a given number of errors.
IX. OPEN QUESTIONS
This paper leaves many questions unanswered. In particular, we would like to know if one can obtain better constants from a construction such as that of Theorem 19. Another interesting question is whether one can construct expander codes with redundant constraints. The bound on the rate of an expander code in Theorem 7 assumes that all the constraints are linearly independent. Expander codes with a moderate amount of redundancy in their constraints could have many interesting applications. See [30, ch. 51 for a discussion of these.

degree d such that the simple sequential decoding algorithm successfully decodes all sets of at most an errors in the code C(B,P).Then, all sets of an variables must have at least
neighbors. Proof: We will first deal with the case in which c is
even. In this case, every time a variable is flipped the number of unsatisfied constraints decreases by at least 2. Consider the performance of the decoding algonthm on a word of weight an. Because the algorithm stops when the number of unsatisfied constraints reaches zero, the algorithm must decrease the number of unsatisfied constraints by at least 2an as it corrects the an corrupt variables. Thus every word of weight an must cause at least 2an constraints to be unsatisfied, so every set of an variables must have at least
2an neighbors. Because we assume that d > c

APPENDIXI NECESSITYOF EXPANSION
We .will now show that the simple sequential decoding algorithm works only if the graph B is an expander graph. Note that the level of expansion that we prove necessary in the following argument is much less than the level of expansion that we need in the argument of Section V-A.
Theorem 24: Let d > e, and let B be a bipartite graph
between n variables of degree c and ( c / d ) n constraints of

and we are done with the case in which c is even. When c is odd, we can only guarantee that the number of
unsatisfied constraints will d crease by 1 at each iteration. This means that every set of an variables must induce at least an unsatisfied constraints. Alone, this is insufficient to demonstrate expansion by a factor greater than 1.
So, let us consider what must happen for the algorithm to be in a state in which an variables are corrupt, but there is no

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SIPSEIR AND SPIELMAN EXPANDER CODES

1721

variable that the decoding algorithm can flip that will cause the number of unsatisfied constraints to decrease by more than 1. Each corrupt variable must have at least (e- 1)/2 of its edges in saitisfied constraints. Because each satisfied constraint can have at most d incoming edges, this implies that there must be at least an(. - 1)/2d satisfied neighbors of the an variables. This, together with the fact that there are at least an unsatisfied constraints, implies that the an variables must have at least
+ an( 1 (e - 1)/2d) neighbors.
Om the other hand, if the algorithm decreases the number of unsatisfied constraints by more than 1, then it must decrease the rmmber by at least 3. For some word of weight an, assume that the algorithm flips Pan variables before it flips a variable that decreases the number of unsatisfied constraints by only 1.
. The original set of an variables must have had at least
+ 3pan (1- p)an
neighbor^.^ On the other hand, once the algorithm flips a
variable that causes the number of unsatisfied constraints to decrease by 1, we can apply the bound of the previous paragraph to see that the variables must have at least
g) (1- i ) a n ( l +

APPENDIXI1 THE EXPANSION OF RANDOMGRAPHS

In this appendix, we will prove upper and lower bounds on the expansion factors achieved by random graphs that become tight as the degrees of the graphs become large.
We use the following procedure to choose a random graph:

How to Choose a Random ( e , d)-Regular Graph: To choose a random ( e , d)-regular bipartite graph, we first
choose a random matching between dn “left” nodes and d n “right” nodes. We collapse consecutive sets of d left nodes to form the n c-regular vertices, and we collapse consecutive sets of d right nodes to form the (c/d)n d-regular vertices. It is possible that this graph will have multiedges that should be thrown away, but this does not hurt the lower bound on the expansion of this graph that we will prove.

We now prove a simple upper bound on the expansion any
graph can achieve. Theorem 25: Let B be a bipartite graph between n e-regular
vertices and ( c / d ) n d-regular vertices. For all 0 < a < 1,there
exists a set of an e-regular vertices with at most

+ n

c -

(1 -

(1 -

a

)

d

)

0(1) neighbors.

d

neighbors. We note that this bound is strictly decreasing in
p, while the previous bound is strictly increasing in @, so the
lower bound that we can obtain on the expansion occurs when
p is chosen so that

+ + Span (1- p>an = (1 -e)- (1l2d

P>a. *

Prooj5 Choose a set X of an e-regularvertices uniformly
at random. Now, consider the probability that a given d-regular vertex is not a neighbor of the set of c-regular vertices. Each neighbor of the d-regular vertex is in the set X with probability a . Thus the probability that the d-regular vertex is not a neighbor of X is
d-1

1+2p = (l-P)(l+%)

=+

p ( 3 + g ) = -c - 1
2d c- 1

i3=0
which tends to (1- a ) das n grows large. This implies that the expected number of nonneighbors tends to n(c/d)(l - a)d.O
This simple upper bound becomes tight as c grows large.

For convenience, we will call the e-regular vertices “vari-

ables” and the d-regular vertices “constraints.”

Theorem 26: Let B be a randomly chosen ( e , d)-regular

When we plug p back in, we find that the set of an variables bipartite graph between n variables and ( c / d ) n constraints.

must have at least

Then, for all 0 < a! < 1, with exponentially high probability

:-)+(I- 5,)) c-1
q 3 ( 3+-

e-1 3+gd

all sets of an variables in B have at least

= an

neighbors.

0

+ + 3 0 n e might be tempted to assume a bound of Span (1- P)an(l
( c -- 1)/2d); but, there could be overlap between the Span constraints that were flipped previously and the extra (1- p ) a n ( c- 1 ) / 2 d .

neighbors, where W(.)is the binary entropy function.
Pro08 First, we fix a set of an variables, V, and estimate the probability that V’s set of neighbors is small. The probability that a given constraint is a neighbor of V is &least 1- (1- Thus the expected number of neighbors of V is
at least n (c/d) (1- (1- a ) d )A. lon suggested that we form a martingale (see [7]) to bound the probability that the size of
the set of neighbors deviates from this expectation. Each node in V will have c outgoing edges. We will
consider the process in which the destinations of these edges are revealed one at a time. We will let X i be the random variable equal to the expected size of the set of neighbors of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1722

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL 42, NO 6, NOVEMBER 1996

V given that the first i edges leaving V have been revealed.
X I , . .., X,,, form a martingale such that

IX%+l - X%Il 1
for all 0 5 i < can. Thus by Azuma’s Inequality (see [7])

Prob [E[X,,,] - X,,, > X

<

But, E[X,,,] is just the expected number of neighbors of V.
Moreover, X,,, is the expected size of the set of neighbors of V given that all edges leaving V have been revealed, which is exactly the size of the set of neighbors of V.
Since there are only (a:) choices for the set V, it suffices to choose X so that

By Stirling’s formula, this holds for large n.if X satisfies

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the many people who made helpful comments after reading early drafts of this paper.
Among them, they would especially like to thank N.Alon,
0. Goldreich, M. Luby, L. Schulman, and S.-H. Teng. The authors wish to thank J. Kilian for asking whether he could use table lookups to speed up the decoding algorithms-the answer led to the material in Section VII. The authors would
also like to thank N.Alon for supplying them with the material
that appears in Section VI-A and for Theorem 26.
REFERENCES
[I] N. Alon, J. Bmck, J. Naor, M. Naor, and R. M. Roth, “Constmction
of asymptotically good low-rate error-correcting codes through pseudorandom graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 509-516, Mar. 1992. [2] N. Alon and F. R. K. Chung, “Explicit construction of linear sized tolerant networks,” Discr. Math., vol. 72, pp. 15-19, 1988. [3] N. Alon, U. Feige, A. Wigderson, and D. Zuckerman, “Derandomized graph products,” Comput. Complexity, pp. 60-75, 1995. [4] A. V. Aho, J. E. Hopcroft, and J. D. Ullman, The Design and Analysis of Computer Algorithms (Addison-Wesley series in computer science and information processing). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1974. [5] M. Ajtai, J. Koml6s, and E. Sze”er$di, “Deterministic simulation in logspace,” in Proc. 19th Ann. ACM Symp. on Theory of Computing, 1987, pp. 132-139. [6] N. Alon, “Eigenvalues and expanders,” Combinarorica, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 83-96, 1986. [7] N. Alon and J. H. Spencer, The Probabilistic Method. New York: Wiley, 1992. [8] F. Bien, “Constructions of telephone networks by group representations,” Notices Amer. Math. Soc., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 5-22, 1989.

[9] R. Boppana and M. Sipser, “The complexity of finite functions,”
in Handbook of Theoretical Computer Science, Volume 4. Algorithms

and Complexity, J. van Leeuwen, Ed Cambndge, MA. MIT Press,

Amsterdam, The Netherlands Elsevier, 1990, pp 757-804 [lo] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Paripcheck Codes Cambridge, MA.

MIT Press, 1963

[111 Y Gurevich, “Kolmogorov maclxnes and related issues,” Bull Europ.

Assoc. for Theor. Clop. Sci., vol. 35, pp. 71-82, June 1988. [12] H. Imai, Essentials of Error-Control Coding Techniques. San Diego,

C A Academic Press, 1990

[13] N. Kahale, “On the second eigenvalue and linear expansion of regular graphs,” in Proc 33rd IEEE Symp on Foundations of ComputerScience,

1992, pp. 2 9 6 3 0 3

1141 __, “Expander graphs,” Ph.D dissertation, MIT, Cambridge, MA,

Sept. 1993. [15] A. Kolmogorov and V. Uspensku, “On the definition of an algorithm,”

Usp. Mat. Nauk, vol. 13, no 4, pp 3-28, 1958 (English translation in

[161).

[16] -,

“On the definition of an algorithm,” Amer Math Soc Transl ,

vol. 29, no. 217-245, 1963

[17] A V. Kuznetsov, “Informatlon storage in a memory assembled from

unreliable components,” Probl. Inform. Transm., vol 9, no 3, pp

254-264, 1973.

El81 L. Levin, ‘Theory of computation: How to start,” SIGACT News,vol

22, no. 1, pp. 47-56, 1991. [19] A. Lubotzky, R. Phillips, and P. Sarnak, “Ramanujan graphs,” Combi-

natorica, vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 261-277, 1988. [20] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of concentrators,” Probl. Pered.

Inform., vol. 9, no 4, pp 71-80, Oct.-Dec 1973 (English translation

in [Zl]) [21] ~, “Explicit constructions of concentrators,” Probl Inform.

Transm., vol. 9, pp 325-332, 1975. [22] -, “Explicit group theorebcal constructions of combinatorial

schemes and thelr application to the design of expanders and

concentrators,” Probl. Inform. Transm., vol 24, no. 1, . p. p. 39-46,

+ July 1988.
- 1231.M. Mor-genstem, “Existance and explicit constructions of Q 1 reg-ular

Ramanujan graphs for every prime power q,” J Comb Theory, Ser B,

vol. 62, pp. 44-62, 1994 .

[24] -,

“Natural bounded concentrators,” Combznatorica, vol. 15, no.

1, pp. 111-122, 1995.

[25] F J MacWilliams and N J. A. Sloane, The Theory ofBror-Correcting Codes. Amsterdam, The Netherlands. North Holland, 1977.
[26] N. Pippenger, “The memory-refresh problem,” Adv. Res. zn VLSI, vol.

6, p. 69, 1988, (abstract of talk).

[27] -, 1994, personal communications.
[28] J. E. Savage, The Complexity of Computing. New York Wiley, 1976. [29] A. Schonhage, “Storage mohfication machines,” SIAM J Comput ,vol.

9, no. 3, pp. 490-508, 1980. [30] D. A. Spielman, “Computationally efficient error-correcting codes and

holographc proofs,” Ph.D. dissertafion, MIT, Cambridge, MA, May

1995 [Online.] Available WWW: http://theory.lcs.mt edu/- spielman [3I] __ , “Linear-time encodable and decodable error-correcting codes,”

t h ~ sissue, pp. 1723-1731.

[32] R. M Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform Theory, vol IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533-547, Sept. 1981.
[33] ___, “Explicit concentrators from generalized n-gons,” SIAM J. Alg.

Disc. Meth., vol. 5, no 3, pp 287-293, Sept. 1984. [34] J. H. van Lint, Introductron to Coding Theory New York Springer-

Verlag, 1992.

[35] V V. Zyahlov and M. S. Pinsker, “Esbmation of the error-correction complexity of Gallager low-density codes,” Probl Inform Transm , vol 11, no. 1, pp. 18-28, May 1976.

[36] V V. Zyablov, “An estimate of the complexity o f constructing binary linear cascade codes,” Probl Inform. Transm., vol. 7, pp. 3-10, 1971

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 08:43:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

