2598

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

Iterative Reduced-Complexity Graph-Based Detection for LDPC Coded 2D Recording Channels
Zhiliang Qin, Kui Cai, and Kheong Sann Chan
Data Storage Institute, Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 117608
In this paper, we consider joint detection and decoding for low-density parity-check (LDPC) coded two-dimensional (2D) intersymbol interference (ISI) channels, where message-passing is performed over an overall factor graph representing both the code structure and the channel model. We propose a low-complexity channel detector based on the Chase decoding algorithm to simplify the check node operation by restricting the a posteriori probability (APP) computation to a small subset of candidate vectors. Simulation results show that the proposed receiver provides an adjustable performance/complexity tradeoff and performs close to the full-complexity graphbased receiver.
Index Terms—Chase decoding, graph detector, LDPC codes, message-passing, two-dimensional (2D) channels.

I. INTRODUCTION
M OTIVATED by coding gains provided by low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels, iterative decoding over coded two-dimensional (2D) intersymbol interference (ISI) channels are being seriously considered for future magnetic recording systems. With bit-aspect ratios reduced to increase recording densities, interference arising from adjacent tracks becomes increasingly significant, which, taken together with downtrack interference, gives rise to a 2D ISI channel model.
Compared with the conventional receiver that performs BCJR detection [1] and LDPC decoding over a one-dimensional (1D) target obtained from 2D equalization, it is shown in [2] and [3] that 2D detection/decoding schemes that directly operate on the 2D channel matrix provide much better performance, thus motivating the research in this area. The implementation of the BCJR algorithm for 2D channels [2], however, has a prohibitive computational complexity growing exponentially with the width of the transmitted bit matrix.
In [3], a suboptimal row/column BCJR detector is proposed assuming that the 2D channel matrix can be written as the product of two 1D vectors and hence has an exponential complexity in terms of the channel memory length in either the row or the column dimension. In [4], a Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) based detection algorithm is proposed whose complexity is polynomial in terms of the 2D ISI size. Though it achieves the best known performance among various schemes, the MCMC detector requires a large memory size to store random samples drawn by Gibbs samplers, which leads to high costs in practical implementations.
In [5], a graph-based approach is used to detect a general 2D channel by performing message-passing over an overall factor graph [6] that represents both the channel model and the LDPC code. Compared with the BCJR algorithm [3] and the MCMC algorithm [4] whose realizations are serialized in nature, the graph-based receiver features an attractive hardware-friendly
Manuscript received November 30, 2012; revised February 17, 2013; accepted March 14, 2013. Date of current version May 30, 2013. Corresponding author: Z. Qin (e-mail: qin_zhiliang@dsi.a-star.edu.sg).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2013.2253763

Fig. 1. System model of LDPC coded 2D ISI channels.

advantage of allowing a fully parallel implementation [7]. The

complexity of the channel check node operation, however, is

still exponential in terms of the check degree , i.e.,

,

where is equal to the number of nonzero coefficients in the

channel matrix.

In this paper, we propose a low-complexity graph-based de-

tector whose check node operation is approximated based on

the Chase decoding algorithm [8], which was previously used

for decoding turbo product codes [9]. The proposed receiver re-

duces the complexity of the channel check node operation to

, where is an arbitrary integer with

. Simulation results show that the proposed receiver provides

a flexible performance/complexity tradeoff and performs close

to the iterative row/column BCJR receiver [3] and the full-com-

plexity graph-based receiver [5] for the considered LDPC coded

2D channel.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

We consider an LDPC coded 2D ISI channel as shown in

Fig. 1. The user data is encoded by a rate- LDPC encoder,

and code bits are scanned into an

matrix with elements

, where is the square root of the LDPC codeword length.

The channel output is an matrix with elements given by

(1)

where

denotes AWGN with zero mean and variance

is the noise one-side power spectral density

level,

denotes the number of elements over which the ISI

extends per dimension, and ,

. For comparisons

0018-9464/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:34:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

QIN et al.: ITERATIVE REDUCED-COMPLEXITY GRAPH-BASED DETECTION

2599

bit nodes to the check node. After some manipulations, we have

(5)

where the metric of a -tuple binary vector

is derived as

Fig. 2. (a) Tanner graph of a 2D ISI channel concatenated with a layer of LDPC

check nodes. The channel matrix has the dimension of 2 2 and transmitted

bits are arranged into a 3 3 matrix. A guard band of width 1 is added around

the transmitted bit matrix. (b) A check node of degree

in the channel

graph.

with [3] and [5], the channel matrix used in our simulations is given by
(2)

and the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as (3)

where is the 2-norm of the channel ISI and is the energy per data bit. Prior to transmission, a width- guard band of
1 bits is added around the bit matrix . The purpose of using guard bits is to isolate sectors and also to provide termination for detection algorithms.

III. GRAPH-BASED RECEIVER

Fig. 2(a) shows the Tanner graph of the 2 2 channel matrix

concatenated with a layer of LDPC check nodes. For illustration

purposes, we assume that transmitted bits are arranged into a 3

3 matrix, i.e.,

. In Fig. 2(a), circles are used to denote

bits read columnwise from the bit matrix and squares are used to

denote check nodes describing ISI-induced dependencies. Note

that guard bits are also accounted for in the channel graph, which

includes all bit nodes of degree-1 or 2. Therefore, the number of

bit nodes and check nodes in the channel graph are

and

, respectively. Contrary to the LDPC code graph, the

received signal is used as input to channel check nodes (instead

of bit nodes) as shown in Fig. 2(b), where the superscript

denotes variables associated with the th check node ,

.

A. APP Channel Check Node Operation

For a specific channel check code, the log-domain

sum-product algorithm (SPA) [6] approximates the APP

log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of bits

connected to the

check node, which is given by

(6)

where is a vector consisting of all nonzero coefficients

read columnwise from the channel matrix. The summations in

the numerator and the denominator of (5) are over all

binary vectors in the space

with

and

, respectively. Hence, the computational complexity

per channel check node grows exponentially with , i.e.,

, where the complexity refers to the average number of

times that the metric (6) is evaluated for detecting all bits.

B. Check Node Operation Based on Chase Decoding
To reduce the complexity, we propose to use the Chase decoding algorithm to simplify the check node operation. Specifically, we propose to approximate (5) by restricting the computation to a candidate list as

(7)

where is defined as a subset of

associated with a

tentative hard estimate

of bits, i.e.

(8)

Let us define the reliability of

as the absolute value of

its a priori LLR

and order the reliabilities of all bit

estimates in an ascending order. We refer to those bits corre-

sponding to the smallest values as the least reliable bits, where

is an arbitrary integer with

. Identifying and per-

turbing these elements ,

, we form a subset

of binary vectors by considering all combinations of bit

patterns on these positions as shown in (9)

... ...

...

...

...

...

(4) (9)

based on the received signal and the a priori LLR

where the first vector in is set to the initial estimate

,

passed as extrinsic messages from superscript is suppressed to simplify notations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:34:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and the

2600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

bit nodes. The channel graph, which consists of the lower two layers, shows the 2D ISI that exists between transmitted bits.
For clarity purposes, the pseudocode of the proposed algorithm, which consists of four message-passing steps over these three layers, is depicted as follows:

Algorithm I. (Message-Passing over LDPC coded 2D ISI channels)

Fig. 3. Block diagram of the graph-based iterative receiver.

To enable message-passing over the channel graph, a check

node must generate soft information for its neighboring bit

nodes. A direct implementation would restrict the computation

to , which, however, causes the a posteriori LLR on reliable

bit positions to have infinite values due to the lack of vectors

in with inverse signs on these positions. A simple restriction

for producing finite LLR is that for each bit position, there

should exist two candidate vectors and in the set such

that

,

. To satisfy this requirement,

we evaluate the metric of each vector in and then select the

best vector as an updated estimate as

(10)

Initialization: Set the tentative hard estimates of LDPC

code bits as those obtained from the LDPC decoder. Initialize

check-to-bit messages

and

over the

channel graph and the LDPC code graph to all zeros,

respectively.

Let

denote the set of check nodes connected to bit node

, and

denote the set of bit nodes that participate in check

in the respective graph. Let

and

denote the

exclusion of from

and from , respectively.

Graph-Based Detection/Decoding: For iterations

, where

is the maximal number of

iterations to be performed over the overall graph:

1) LDPC bit nodes pass extrinsic messages of LDPC code

bits as a priori information in (4) to channel check

nodes based on the 2D channel graph, which is given by

Based on , we proceed to form another subset of

vectors, each of which is obtained by flipping exactly one bit

of on one of

reliable positions; while the bits of

on the least reliable positions remain unchanged, i.e., [see(11)

at the bottom of the page].Finally, the set is obtained as the

union of and , i.e.,

, which consists of a total of

binary vectors. Based on , we approximate the

a posteriori LLR as in (7) from which the a priori LLR will be

further subtracted to obtain extrinsic information as

(12)

where the subscript

denotes messages passed from

check nodes to bit nodes in the channel graph.

C. Receiver Structure
Fig. 3 shows the block diagram of the proposed graph-based receiver. The overall factor graph that represents the system consists of three layers of bit nodes and check nodes. The LDPC code graph, which forms the upper two layers, is a Tanner graph showing connections between LDPC check nodes and LDPC

(13) 2) Channel check nodes generate extrinsic information based
on the Chase decoding algorithm as described in (7), which will be passed to LDPC bit nodes. 3) LDPC bit nodes generate the a posteriori information of LDPC code bits based on the LDPC code graph, which is given by
(14) 4) LDPC check nodes pass check-to-bit messages to bit
nodes as
(15) where the bit-to-check message is

...

...

...

...

...

...

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:34:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(11)

QIN et al.: ITERATIVE REDUCED-COMPLEXITY GRAPH-BASED DETECTION

2601

Fig. 4. Performance of the proposed graph-based channel detector for uncoded Fig. 5. Performance of the proposed graph-based iterative receiver over LDPC

2D ISI channels.

coded 2D ISI channels.

5) Make a hard decision of the LDPC codeword and perform

syndrome checks. If all checks are satisfied, the receiver

stops; otherwise, return to step 1 until the maximal

number of

iterations are reached.

IV. PERFORMANCE RESULTS

In Fig. 4, we present the bit-error-rate (BER) performance

of the proposed detector with various values over the un-

coded 2D channel. The transmitted bits of length-10 000 are

arranged into an

matrix with

prior to trans-

mission over the channel. A 2D minimum-mean-square-error

(MMSE) equalizer [3], whose output is assumed Gaussian, is

used to provide initial estimates and a priori information for the proposed detector. Since the 2D channel matrix in (2) can

Fig. 6. Average number of iterations required for various receivers over LDPC coded 2D ISI channels.

be expressed as the product of two vectors, the performance of

the row/column BCJR detector [3] with 1 and 2 row/column it- per channel check node) narrows the performance loss within

erations is also included in Fig. 4, respectively, as well as the 0.2 dB and reduces the complexity by

. Fig. 5

performance of the full-complexity graph-based detector [5]. shows that the proposed receiver with

, which forms 9

For the considered matrix, the channel check node degree is vectors per check node, achieves performance very close to the

. In the simulation, the maximum number of iterations full-complexity graph-based receiver that considers all

for graph-based detection is set to 8. Despite the fact that the 2D vectors throughout the simulated SNR range. Similar observa-

channel graph contains many short cycles, Fig. 4 shows that the tions are made for frame-error-rate (FER) curves. Fig. 5 also

full-complexity graph-based detector provides almost the same shows that both the full-complexity and the reduced-complexity

performance as that of the row/column BCJR detector over the graph-based receivers have little performance degradation as

uncoded 2D channel. Fig. 4 also shows that the proposed de- compared with the iterative row/column BCJR receiver due to

tector with

has a performance gap of 0.6 dB at the BER the presence of the powerful LDPC code in the system.

of ; while choosing the value of

results in negligible Fig. 6 shows the average number of iterations required for

performance degradation.

various receivers. At low-to-medium SNR, the proposed re-

Fig. 5 shows the performance over LDPC coded 2D channels. ceiver with

needs slightly more iterations to converge

The LDPC code [10] used in the simulation is a length-10 000 to a valid LDPC codeword. However, as SNR increases (e.g.,

rate-0.5 regular (3, 6) code with girth 8, as in [3] and [5]. The

), all three receivers require a similar number

maximum number of overall iterations between the channel de- of iterations to achieve convergence. In this case, the proposed

tector and the LDPC decoder for all receivers is set to 50. For receiver with

reduces the computational complexity

comparison purposes, the performance of LDPC decoding over of the channel check node operation by

AWGN channels with 50 iterations is also included.

without significantly affecting the convergence rate.

In Fig. 5, several reduced-complexity receivers with

,

2, and 3 are considered in the simulation, respectively. The pro-

V. CONCLUSION

posed receiver with

uses 5 binary vectors in each channel In this paper, we proposed a low-complexity graph-based

check node operation and has a performance gap of 1 dB from receiver by restricting the channel check node operation to a

the full-complexity graph-based receiver at the BER of . small subset of binary vectors obtained based on the Chase de-

Increasing the value of to

(corresponding to 6 vectors coding algorithm. Simulation results show that the proposed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:34:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

receiver provides adjustable performance/complexity tradeoffs and performs close to the full-complexity graph-based receiver and iterative row/column BCJR receiver over the considered 2D channel. Future work will include the application of the generalized belief propagation (GBP) algorithm [11] to alleviate the effect of short cycles in the 2D channel graph.
REFERENCES
[1] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[2] M. K. Cheng, J. Campello, and P. H. Siegel, “Soft-decision Reed-Solomon decoding on partial response channels,” in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom, Taipei, Taiwan, Nov. 2002, pp. 1026–1030.
[3] Y. Wu, J. A. O’Sullivan, N. Singla, and R. S. Indeck, “Iterative detection and decoding for separable two-dimensional intersymbol interference,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 2115–2120, Jul. 2003.

[4] M. Shaghaghi, K. Cai, Y. L. Guan, and Z. Qin, “Markov chain Monte Carlo based detection for two-dimensional intersymbol interference channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 471–478, Feb. 2011.
[5] N. Singla, J. A. O’Sullivan, R. S. Indeck, and Y. Wu, “Iterative decoding and equalization for 2-D recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2328–2330, Sep. 2002.
[6] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[7] G. Colavolpe and G. Germi, “On the application of factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm to ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 818–825, May 2005.
[8] D. Chase, “A class of algorithms for decoding block codes with channel measurement information,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 18, pp. 170–182, Jan. 1972.
[9] R. M. Pyndiah, “Near-optimum decoding of turbo product codes: Block turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, pp. 1003–1010, Aug. 1998.
[10] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[11] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free-energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282–2312, Jul. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:34:05 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

