IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

1441

VLSI Implementation of a Multi-Mode Turbo/LDPC Decoder Architecture
Carlo Condo, Maurizio Martina, Member, IEEE, and Guido Masera, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Flexible and reconfigurable architectures have

gained wide popularity in the communications field. In particular,

reconfigurable architectures for the physical layer are an attrac-

tive solution not only to switch among different coding modes

but also to achieve interoperability. This work concentrates on

the design of a reconfigurable architecture for both turbo and

LDPC codes decoding. The novel contributions of this paper

are: i) tackling the reconfiguration issue introducing a formal

and systematic treatment that, to the best of our knowledge,

was not previously addressed and ii) proposing a reconfigurable

NoC-based turbo/LDPC decoder architecture and showing that

wide flexibility can be achieved with a small complexity overhead.

Obtained results show that dynamic switching between most of

considered communication standards is possible without pausing

the decoding activity. Moreover, post-layout results show that

tailoring the proposed architecture to the WiMAX standard leads

to an area occupation of 2.75

and a power consumption of

101.5 mW in the worst case.

Index Terms—Flexibility, LDPC/turbo codes decoder, NoC, VLSI, wireless communications.

I. INTRODUCTION
I N the last years, several efforts were spent to develop systems able to give ubiquitous access to telecommunication networks. These efforts were spent mainly in three directions: i) improving the transmission rate and reliability; ii) developing bandwidth efficient technologies; iii) designing low cost receivers. The most relevant results produced by such a vivid research were included in the last standards for both wireless and wired communications [1]–[7]. Besides, several standards provide multiple modes and functionalities. However, sharing common features is a challenging task to achieve flexibility and interoperability.
Several recent works, including [8], have shown that flexibility is an important property in the implementation of communication systems. Some works investigated this direction facing the challenge of implementing flexible architectures for the decoding of channel codes. In particular, flexible turbo/low-density-parity-check (LDPC) decoder architectures have been proposed not only to support different coding modes

Manuscript received May 13, 2012; revised July 30, 2012; accepted September 06, 2012. Date of publication November 30, 2012; date of current version May 23, 2013. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor J. Ma.
The authors are with Dipartimento di Elettronica e Telecomunicazioni, Politecnico di Torino, Corso Duca degli Abruzzi, 24, 10129 Torino, Italy (e-mail: carlo.condo@polito.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2012.2221216

within a specific standard but also to enable interoperability among different standards. In [9]–[11], flexibility is achieved through the design of processing elements (PEs) based on application-specific-instruction-set-processor (ASIP) architectures, whereas in [12]–[14] PEs rely on application-specific-integrated-circuit (ASIC) solutions. In both approaches, flexible and efficient interconnection structures are required to connect PEs to each other.
Unfortunately, the communication patterns of turbo and LDPC codes suffer from collisions, namely two or more PEs require concurrent access to the same memory resource. To break the collision a network-on-chip (NoC) like approach was proposed in [15] for turbo codes. This idea has been further developed in other works. In particular, in [16] the NoC approach is used as a viable solution to implement flexible and high throughput interconnection structures for turbo/LDPC decoders.
An intra-IP NoC [17] is an application specific NoC [18] where the interconnection structure is tailored to the characteristics of the intellectual property (IP). The use of an intra-IP NoC as the interconnection framework for both turbo and LDPC code decoders has been demonstrated in several works [16], [19]–[21]. This choice enables larger flexibility with respect to other interconnection schemes [16], [22], [23], but introduces penalties in terms of additional occupied area and latency in the communication among PEs.
Stemming from the work presented in [14], [19], [20], where an ASIC implementation of an NoC-based turbo/LDPC decoder architecture is proposed, this paper aims to further investigate and optimize it. In particular, this work features the following novel contributions: i) management of dynamic reconfiguration to switch between a code to another one without pausing the decoding, ii) description of a new PE architecture with an improved shared memory solution which provides relevant saving of occupied area for min-sum decoding algorithm, iii) evaluation of a wide set of standards for both wireless and wired applications: IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX) [5], IEEE 802.11n (WiFi) [6], China Mulitimedia Mobile Broadcasting (CMMB) [3], Digital Terrestrial Multimedia Broadcast (DTMB) [4], HomePlug AV (HPAV) [2], 3GPP Long Term Evolution (LTE) [7], Digital Video Broadcasting—Return Channel via Satellite (DVB-RCS) [1], and iv) complete VLSI implementation of the decoder up to layout level and accurate evaluation of dissipated power.
It is worth noting that, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first work addressing dynamic reconfiguration of flexible channel decoders with an analytical approach, and showing the actual impact of reconfiguration on both performance and complexity. The paper is structured as follows. In Section II, decoding algorithms are briefly discussed, whereas Section III

1549-8328/$31.00 © 2012 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1442

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

deals with the basics of NoC-based turbo/LDPC decoder architectures and summarizes the main results this work starts from. The decoder reconfiguration techniques are detailed in Sections IV and V, while Section VI deals with the description of LDPC and turbo decoding cores, along with their respective memory organization. In Section VII, evaluations of the architecture performance on various existing standards are provided. Implementation results are portrayed and discussed in Section VIII, and conclusions are drawn in Section IX.

is the extrinsic information received from the previous

layer and updated in (5) to be propagated to the succeeding

layer. Term , pertaining to element

of and initial-

ized to 0, is used to compute (1); the same amount is then up-

dated in (4),

, and stored to be used again in the following

iteration. In (2) and (3) is the set of all bit indexes that are

connected to parity constraint .

According to [27], the

function in (2) and (4) can be

simplified with a limited BER performance loss as

II. DECODING ALGORITHMS

(6)

Turbo and LDPC decoding algorithms are characterized by

strong resemblances: they are iterative, work on graph-based

representations, are routinely implemented in logarithmic form,

process data expressed as logarithmic-likelihood-ratios (LLRs)

and require high level of both processing and storage paral-

lelism. Both algorithms receive intrinsic information from the

channel and produce extrinsic information that is exchanged

across iterations to obtain the a priori information of uncoded

bits, in the case of binary codes, or symbols, in the case of non-

binary codes. Moreover, their arithmetical functions are so sim-

ilar that joint or derived algorithms for both LDPC and turbo

decoding exist [24]. In the following, for both codes we will

refer to , and

as the number of uncoded bits, the

number of coded bits and the code rate respectively.

A. LDPC Codes Decoding Algorithm

Every LDPC code is completely described by its

parity check matrix

which is very sparse

[25]. Each valid LDPC codeword satisfies

, where

is the transposition operator. The decoding of LDPC codes

stems from the Tanner graph representation of where two

sets of nodes are identified: Variable Nodes (VNs) and Check

Nodes (CNs). VNs are associated to the bits of the codeword,

whereas CNs correspond to the parity-check constraints. The

most common algorithm to decode LDPC codes is the Belief

Propagation (BP) algorithm. There are two main scheduling

schemes for the BP: two-phase scheduling and layered sched-

uling [26]. The latter nearly doubles the converge speed as com-

pared to two-phase scheduling. In a layered decoder, parity-

check constraints are grouped in layers each of which is associ-

ated to a component code. Then, layers are decoded in sequence

by propagating extrinsic information from one layer to the fol-

lowing one [26]. This process is iterated up to the desired level

of reliability.

Let represent the LLR of symbol and, for column

in , bit LLR

is initialized to the corresponding received

soft value. Then, for all parity constraints in a given layer, the

following operations are executed:

usually referred to as normalized-min-sum approximation,

where

and

.

B. Turbo Codes Decoding Algorithm

Turbo codes are obtained as the parallel concatenation of two

constituent Convolutional Code (CC) encoders connected by

the means of an interleaver . Thus, the decoder is made of

two constituent decoders, referred to as soft-in-soft-out (SISO)

or maximum-a-posteriori (MAP) decoders [28] connected in

an iterative loop by the means of the interleaver and the

de-interleaver . Each constituent decoder performs the so

called BCJR algorithm [29] that starting from the intrinsic and

a priori information produces the extrinsic information. Let

be a step in the trellis representation of the constituent CC,

and an uncoded symbol. Each constituent decoder computes

where

[30],

is the a-posteriori information,

is the a priori

information and

is the systematic component of the in-

trinsic information. According to [29] a-posteriori information

is computed as

(7)

where

is an uncoded symbol taken as a reference (usu-

ally

) and

with the set of uncoded sym-

bols; is a trellis transition and is the corresponding un-

coded symbol. Several exact and approximated expressions are

available for the

function [31]: for example, it can be

implemented as

followed by a correction term, often

stored in a small look-up-table (LUT). The correction term, usu-

ally adopted when decoding binary codes (Log-MAP), can be

omitted with minor bit-error-rate (BER) performance degrada-

tion (Max-Log-MAP). The term in (7) is defined as

(8) (9)

(10)

(1)

(11)

(2)

where

and

are the starting and the ending states

(3)

of ,

and

metrics associated to

are the forward and backward

and

respectively. The term

represents the intrinsic information received from the (4) channel. For further details on the decoding algorithm the reader

(5) can refer to [32].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CONDO et al.: VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF A MULTI-MODE TURBO/LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE

1443

Fig. 1. Node structure.

In a parallel decoder, the decoding operations summarized in

previous paragraphs are partitioned among PEs. When con-

figured in turbo code mode, these PEs operate as concurrent

SISOs. On the other hand, they execute (1)–(5) in parallel for

slices of parity check constraints when configured in LDPC

code mode. In both cases, messages are exchanged among PEs

to propagate

and

amounts in accordance with the

code structure. In the following, we indicate the -th message

received and generated by PE as and respectively.

III. NOC-BASED DECODER

present: the two cores share the memories where the incoming data are stored and the location memory containing the pre-computed values, i.e., the memory addresses to store
. Also the interconnection structure depends only on the location memory size, that sets an upper bound to the number of messages each PE can handle.
The decoding task is divided uniformly among the different nodes. The process is straightforward in turbo mode, with each node being assigned a portion of the trellis that is processed in a sliding-window fashion [33], [34]. Extrinsic and windowinitialization information are carried through the network according to the code interleaving and deinterleaving rules [19]. On the contrary, in LDPC mode the partitioning of the decoding task on the PEs is obtained as follows. Using a proprietary tool based on the METIS graph coloring library [35], the matrix is partitioned on the chosen network topology. At this point, the destination of every message coming out of each decoding core is known. Thus, in both turbo and LDPC modes each outgoing message is made of a payload and a header containing the destination node.
Performance of meshes, toroidal meshes, spidergon, honeycomb, De Bruijn and Kautz graphs were compared, along with a number of other design choices, as routing algorithm and collision management policies. This analysis shows that the Kautz topology yields the best results in terms of area occupation and obtainable throughput. In particular, in [14] a 22-nodes Kautz NoC was used to fully support IEEE 802.16e standard, each node being connected to a decoding PE and to three other nodes via a 4-way router.

The goal of this work is to design a highly flexible LDPC and turbo decoder, able to support a very wide set of different communication standards. The proposed multi-mode/multi-standard decoder architecture relies on an NoC-based structure, where each node contains a PE and a routing element (RE). Each PE implements the BCJR and layered normalized min-sum algorithms. On the other hand, REs are devoted to deliver values to the correct destination.
The node architecture employed in this work for node is represented in Fig. 1. Each RE is constituted by a 4 4 crossbar switch with 4 input FIFOs and 4 output registers. The routing algorithm is the one proposed in [19] as Single-Shortest-PathFIFO-Length (SSP-FL). SSP-FL relies on a distributed tablebased routing algorithm where each table contains the information for shortest path routing. The routing information is precalculated by running off-line the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. Moreover, in SSP-FL shortest path routing is coupled with an input serving policy based on the current status to the FIFOs, namely in case two messages must be routed to the same output port, priority is given to the message coming from the longer FIFO. It is worth noting that the destination of each is imposed by the interleaver and the matrix, respectively. As a consequence, the routing is deterministic.
The PE includes both LDPC and turbo decoding cores: their architectures are structured to be as independent as possible of the supported codes. The LDPC decoding core is completely serial and able to decode any LDPC code, provided that enough memory is available. The SISO core for turbo decoding is tailored around 8-state turbo codes, and no other constraints are

IV. DECODER RECONFIGURATION

Flexible decoders available in the literature [9]–[13], [16],

[17], [19], [20], though supporting a wide range of codes, do not

address the reconfiguration issue. Change of decoding mode,

standard or code parameters requires not only hardware support,

but also memory initialization and specific controls: since in

many standards a code switch can be issued as early as one data

frame ahead [5], a time efficient reconfiguration technique must

be developed.

For the proposed decoder the reconfiguration task consists

of i) rewriting the location memory containing values; ii)

reloading the CN degree

parameters and the window size

in the control unit of LDPC decoding cores and SISOs respec-

tively. In the following, the whole set of storage locations to be

updated at reconfiguration time will be indicated as “reconfigu-

ration memory”. When possible, the decoder must be reconfig-

ured while the decoding process is still running on the previous

data frame. This means that the reconfiguration data can be dis-

tributed by means of the NoC interconnections only at the cost

of severe performance penalties. Consequently, we suppose that

the reconfiguration data are moved directly to the PEs via a set

of dedicated buses, each one linked to

PEs.

In the following, we estimate reconfiguration occurrence

assuming mobile receivers moving at different speeds and the

carrier frequency

. This frequency is included in

most standards’ operation range, and used in a variety of appli-

cations. In this scenario, the communication channel is affected

by fading phenomena, namely slow fading, whose effects have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

the number of memory locations a PE has to read throughout the

decoding process, and consequently to the number of used loca-

tions in the reconfiguration memory . Though the actual re-

lationship between and is affected by memory scheduling

and ratio between PE and NoC clock frequencies, this analysis

is carried out with the worst-case assumption that the reconfig-

uration memory is read at every clock cycle of each iteration,

setting

for both and codes.

We define five phases , , 2, 3, 4, 5 in the configuration

process and for each phase we identify i) as the number of

clock cycles available during phase , and ii)

as the number of locations in each reconfiguration memory that

Fig. 2. Memory reconfiguration process. (a) Decoding of . (b) Upload of reconfiguration data required for (phases to and ). (c) First iteration of and concurrent upload of reconfiguration data .

can be written in clock cycles. In the reconfiguration from code to code ,
words must be replaced with new words. The first part of the configuration can be scheduled during the initial

decoding iterations on and therefore the avail-

very long time constants, and fast fading. Fast fading can be

modeled assuming a change of channel conditions every time

the receiver is moved by a distance similar to the wavelength

of the carrier. Being

, at a speed

, the

channel changes with a frequency

(WiMAX,

WiFi, 3GPP-LTE), whereas, at

(DVB-RCS,

HPAV, CMMB, DTMB) changes occurs at

.

These scenarios result in different reconfiguration probabilities,

whose impact on BER performance is addressed in Section V.

The reconfiguration memory is organized as a circular buffer:

two sets of pointers are used to manage reading and writing

operations. The start of current configuration (SCC) pointer

and the end of current configuration (ECC) pointer delimit the

memory blocks that are currently being used. A read pointer

(RP) is used to retrieve the data during the decoding process,

as shown in Fig. 2(a). The start of future configuration (SFC)

and end of future configuration (EFC) pointers are instead used

concurrently with the write pointer (WP) to delimit the loca-

tions that are going to be used to store the new configuration

data.

The reconfiguration of the considered decoder to switch from

the code currently processed

to a new one

can be

overlapped with the decoding of both current and new code, pro-

vided that enough locations are free in the configuration memo-

ries. In particular, part of the configuration process can be con-

current with the decoding of one or more frames of ; if nec-

essary, another portion of the configuration can be scheduled

during the first iteration of the new code . Finally, in case the

overlap with decoding activity is not sufficient to complete the

whole configuration, a further option is pausing the decoder by

able time is

; in this range of time a

maximum of

words can be

loaded into each buffer. However, assuming that the buffer

size is larger than , we define

as the number of

unused memory blocks in current configuration for code

. Therefore, the actual number of locations written in

is the minimum between

and . The SFC

pointer is thus initialized as ECC [Fig. 2(b)].

During the last iteration on , every memory location

between SCC and the current position of RP is available

for reconfiguration. This means that up to locations are

available for receiving configuration words for . How-

ever, this has to be done during a single iteration, and there-

fore

cycles are available. During these cycles,

up to

words can be loaded.

As mentioned before, part of the configuration can be

overlapped with the first decoding iteration on code.

SCC is initialized as SFC, and RP will take the duration of

a full iteration to arrive to ECC [Fig. 2(c)]. The available

time is

and the maximum number of words that

can be loaded in this phase is

.

In the event that previously listed phases are not suffi-

cient to complete the configuration, an early stopping in the

decoding of code can be scheduled to make available

additional cycles to be used for loading the remaining part

of the configuration words. We indicate the number of cy-

cles available in this phase as

. The number of

words that can be loaded in is

. As

one or more complete iterations are dropped in , is

a multiple of , which can be formalized as

skipping one or more iterations on the last received frame for

and using the available time, before starting the decoding of

(12)

the new frame encoded with .

Let us define as the size of the location buffer available at

Differently from the other four phases, affects the de-

each PE to store configuration data, and as the duration

coder performance, as if

the number of decoding

in clock cycles of a single decoding iteration for codes and

iterations is reduced for code . Evaluating the actual ef-

. Moreover, and express the number of locations re-

fect on BER and FER curves is necessary to understand the

quired to store configurations of codes and at each PE,

feasibility of this approach.

and and their iteration numbers.

If necessary, the reconfiguration process can be over-

In the considered architecture, the duration of one decoding

lapped with the decoding of a number of data frames

iteration expressed in clock cycles is directly proportional to

encoded with , in addition to the last frame, which was

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CONDO et al.: VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF A MULTI-MODE TURBO/LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE

1445

TABLE I RECONFIGURATION PHASES : , AVAILABLE CLOCK CYCLES DURING
AND NUMBER OF LOCATIONS THAT CAN BE WRITTEN IN

A number of preceding frames can be exploited only if enough locations are unused in the buffers during and . This condition can be expressed as

(19)

namely

(20)

already considered in the chosen :

. The available time depends on

Thus, given that depends on as

, the maximum useful value of

(13)

(21)

The five described phases are reported in Table I, together with

the corresponding and . Thus, , ,

and are

design parameters, and their values must be decided based on

decoder parallelism (P) and supported codes, which determine

and .

Two alternative cases can arise during : either this phase

is limited by the available time, or it is limited by the number of

free locations in the reconfiguration memory

(14)

Then, assuming

, we define the threshold (15)

and distinguish between two cases:

1)

(small codes),

2)

( large codes).

Let us study the two cases separately.

A.

: Small Codes

When

, phase is not useful at all, as dropping

decoding iterations has the effect of reducing the time

of by the same amount that is gained in . Therefore, the

following constraint can be set:

Thus, (18) can be better written as

(22)

This means that the size of code has an upper bound and this bound is proportional to the size of code . Therefore, the most critical reconfiguration cases are those involving “small”
codes: in such cases, there could be many codes that violate condition (22). The bound is also proportional to , and can be consequently increased by rising the number of reconfiguration buses.

B.

: Large Codes

In this case,

. Now the use of phase makes sense

as the duration of does not depend on the number of itera-

tions, because it is limited by the number of free locations in the

reconfiguration memory. As a consequence, additional recon-

figuration time can be gained if is reduced. On the contrary,

is not useful for large , because is limited by the avail-

able memory, whereas the number of available cycles is suffi-

cient. Thus, in this case is completed in

cycles (when all the available locations are written) and the con-

straints on is now written as

(23)

If

and

, we have

(16)

(24)

This constraint simply means that the overall available time through , , and must be long enough to update locations in the reconfiguration memories. From the values in the second column of Table I, the constraint in (16) becomes

Also for this case, there is a limit to the size of code that can

replace during phases from to . However, this limit

can be increased by increasing

or .

Then, if

V. RECONFIGURATION: CASES AND EXAMPLES (17)
The reconfiguration method detailed in Section IV has been

, we have

applied to a set of target standards, in order to identify suitable

design parameters (i.e., , , ,

) that enable recon-

(18)

figuration without pausing the decoder for most of code sizes.

The following analysis has been performed with

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

Fig. 3. Maximum plot with varying B.

Fig. 5. Maximum plot with varying .

Fig. 4. Maximum plot with varying .

Fig. 6. Maximum plot with varying

.

Figs. 3–7 plot the maximum , as defined by (22) and (24), curve: later in this section it will be demonstrated how these

for a continuous set of values. The markers represent a skipped iterations are negligible in terms of BER performance.

subset of the considered intra- and inter-standard code changes: In Fig. 6, the effect of different choices of is shown: from

markers below the curve identify reconfigurations that can be the plot it can be seen that

actually increases the max-

performed without pausing the decoder.

imum only for small codes.

Fig. 3 shows the maximum for different values of B: in this Finally, Fig. 7 plots some combinations of the analyzed pa-

plot,

corresponds to

, which is the size of rameters in order to allow dynamic reconfiguration among most

the largest considered , while 160% means

. of considered codes. The represented combinations of , ,

It can be seen that in the cases of small codes, increasing

and

all yield very similar performance: the cost

the buffer size does not affect the positive slope portion of the underlying every parameter choice consequently becomes the

curve.

decision metric. A 20% increase in memory, even if backed

On the contrary, in Fig. 4, the maximum is shown for up by a smaller number of buses, heavily affects the decoder

different values of : in this case, an increase of is reflected area occupation, ruling out the solution represented by the thick

in all areas of the plot. A higher number of buses means a shorter dashed line. Among the remaining three combinations, the one

reconfiguration time, and a larger maximum .

that makes use of six buses yields a higher area occupation than

Variation in the maximum allowed (Fig. 5) only affects the others. Since with

the thin dashed curve crosses

the maximum in case of large codes (negative-slope por- one of the lower markers, the final choice falls on

,

tion of the curve), as shown in (24). It can be noticed that with

,

, and

. Given that

,

all the large codes are below the right side of the and consequently

is not an integer number,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CONDO et al.: VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF A MULTI-MODE TURBO/LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE

1447

Fig. 7. Maximum plot, different solutions.

Fig. 8. LDPC and turbo BER with and without reconfiguration loss, AWGN channel, BPSK modulation.

every bus will be exclusively connected to four nodes, while the reconfiguration of the remaining two nodes will be shared among all five buses.
The impact of the reconfiguration process on the decoder area is addressed in Section VIII, whereas a set of BER simulations has been performed to evaluate the impact of different , on WiFi, DVB-RCS, WiMAX, CMMB, DTMB, 3GPP-LTE, and HPAV codes. Considering the worst case for each tested standard (i.e., the largest block length, the most unfavorable throughput/code rate ratios), the reconfiguration probability can

where different windows can be scheduled, regardless of the size of the interleaver.
This work stems from the results presented in [14], improving the architectures through novel memory scheduling and addressing methods, reduced latency and simpler control. As shown in [36], sharing the datapath of a min-sum based decoder architecture with a log-MAP SISO does not provide significant advantages. As a consequence, in this work logic sharing is not addressed. Experimental results show that the area of the architecture is dominated by memories indeed.

be expressed as the probability for each incoming frame to request a code change, computed as the channel changing fre- A. Quantization and Memory Organization

quency

over the number of coded frames received in a Memory organization evolves from the idea presented in

second:

[14], in which in every decoding core two memories are in-

stantiated: a 7-bit memory and a 5-bit memory. Their usage (25) is shown in the left part of Fig. 9: LDPC VN-to-CN values

where

is the maximum throughput required by the stan-

dard for the and code choices. The reconfiguration prob-

ability ranges between 0.25% and 0.3% in presence of the fast

moving receiver, while it remains under 0.15% in the other case.

Simulation results show how the BER penalty is negligible as

long as

, with the average number of

iterations performed before a correct codeword is obtained and

is the next highest integer value.

Fig. 8 shows the BER curves obtained with

and

, in the pessimistic assumption that a reconfigura-

tion requiring always

occurs with . As it can

be observed, the difference between the case when reconfigura-

tion occurs (solid lines) and the no-reconfiguration case (dashed

lines) is completely negligible.

are stored in the 7-bit memory, together with turbo extrinsic

information and state metrics. The 5-bit memory is instead used

for CN-to-VN values in LDPC decoding, while storing the

intrinsic channel information in turbo decoding. The memories

are sized to the largest WiMAX codes (

,

for LDPC and

for turbo). However, according

to post-layout synthesis results, memory access multiplexers

suffer from excessive area overhead for these particular cuts.

To reduce this problem and to reduce at the same time the

overall memory area occupation, a novel memory organization

technique is proposed, as shown in the rightmost part of Fig. 9.

Different colors highlight different metrics, while black-striped

parts are unused.

Extensive simulations of WiFi, WiMAX, CMMB, and

DTMB have shown how, in LDPC decoding,

and channel

VI. DECODING CORES

LLR quantization can be reduced from 7 to 6 bits without consistent performance degradation. Fig. 10 shows the BER curves

The design of the decoding cores must yield the same degree for some WiMAX, DTMB and WiFi LDPC codes with the two

of flexibility of the NoC, being as independent as possible of quantization choices: the difference is smaller than 0.05 dB for

the set of supported codes. In [14] a completely serial LDPC all rates of medium and large code sizes. On the same graph,

decoding core has been designed, mostly independent of block yielding similar results, a few turbo codes examples (WiMAX

length and code rate: an arbitrary number of CN operations can and HPAV) are plotted, in which

and the channel LLR

be scheduled on it. The same holds true for the serial SISO, representation changes from 7 to 6 bits, and

from 5 to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

Fig. 10. LDPC and turbo BER with quantization change, AWGN channel, BPSK modulation.

Fig. 9. Memory organization, WiMAX maximum usage percentages.

4 bits (the meaning of

will be detailed in Section VI-C1). Fig. 11. Turbo mode in-depth memory organization.

Also for turbo codes, the performance loss introduced by the

proposed quantization change is almost negligible. Very small

codes, as the ones that can be found in 3GPP-LTE and WiMAX, a trellis step, and they can be read in two clock cycles without

suffer more from the quantization reduction (Fig. 10). Curves impairing the throughput.

obtained with floating point precision show improvements With a similar method the 2-bit memory is used in turbo de-

between 0.1 and 0.2 dB w.r.t. the selected precisions. Thanks coding mode to store

and

between iterations, as sug-

to these changes, a single 6-bit wide memory is instantiated, in gested in [34]. Six locations are used to store 2

or

which both

and values are saved. Storing all the

(Fig. 11): since at most three 8-state windows initialization met-

values requires

locations in rics, i.e., 24

and 24

, are stored at the same time, only

each decoding core. However, with the normalized min-sum 144 out of 400 locations are used. Multiple memory accesses are

algorithm the number of necessary bits can be reduced by necessary to read a single value: the issue is handled with ap-

21.2% by changing the addressing mode as follows. For every propriate scheduling (see Section VI–C.2) and does not affect

CN in the matrix metrics are updated. Since can the throughput.

take only two possible values, for each CN we can memorize

magnitudes, and

2-bit indexes that identify the B. LDPC Decoding Core

correct magnitude and its sign.

The LDPC decoding core used in the decoder described in

The sizing of the 6-bit memory is determined by the Double [14] relies on a serial architecture suited for exclusive memory

Binary Turbo Code (DBTC) decoding mode, since it must store usage. The main drawback of this solution is the variable

and

values. To limit the area overhead and speed number of cycles to produce the output. The average number

up the loading process, four

values are stored in three of cycles-per-data varies between one and two. To overcome

memory locations, as portrayed in the left part of Fig. 11. Three this limitation and to share the memory with the SISO a novel

4-bit

are stored in three 6-bit locations: the remaining architecture with limited area overhead is proposed.

metric can be divided in two pairs of bits, and stored in the 1) Architecture: The LDPC decoding core is detailed in

leftover locations. Three clock cycles are used to read the four Fig. 12(a).: this architecture supports all kind of LDPC codes,

values for a trellis step with minimal logic overhead. as long as the memory requirements are met.

In case of single binary turbo codes (SBTC), like those used in A

value (1) is produced at every clock cycle and fed to

3GPP-LTE, only two

and one

are necessary for the minimum extraction unit (MEU) depicted in Fig. 13. Then,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CONDO et al.: VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF A MULTI-MODE TURBO/LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE

1449

Fig. 12. (a) LDPC decoding core and (b) turbo decoding core (SISO).

in the index memory. The correction factor in (6) is ap-

plied before the final addition in (5) and

are sent to the

output buffer.

The length of the delay lines used for

,

magni-

tudes and indexes is initialized by the control unit to .

2) Memory Scheduling: Both 6-bit and 2-bit memories are

implemented as dual port RAMs, allowing two concurrent op-

erations. At iteration , for the -th CN, two clock cycles are

devoted to write on port 1 of the 6-bit memory. This allows the

storage of the two

magnitudes of CN and computed

during current iteration. On the contrary, port 2 is set to read

mode, loading the two

magnitudes of CN

stored

during previous iteration. In the 2-bit memory port 1 is always

in write mode, storing

indexes as soon as they are com-

puted, while port 2 is constantly in read mode. During this first

phase, though, no data is loaded.

The second phase of the scheduling lasts for cycles. The

ports on the 6-bit memory switch functionality: port 1 is used to

store

incoming from the network, while port 2 is used to

read

values of CN . The 2-bit memory is enabled,

loading the

indexes of CN

and storing

indexes

of CN .

C. Turbo Decoding Core

As for the LDPC decoding core, also the SISO core yields

a very high degree of flexibility, limited only by the size of the

memories: any double-binary turbo code can be decoded as long

as the memory capacity is sufficient.

1) Architecture: Fig. 12(b). portraits the designed architec-

ture. The SISO interfaces with the NoC via two dedicated input

and output blocks, respectively called bit-to-symbol conversion

unit (BTS CU) and symbol-to-bit conversion unit (STB CU).

According to [37], symbol-level (SL) information in double-bi-

nary codes can be approximated from bit-level (BL) extrinsics,

Fig. 13. Minimum extraction unit.

with a limited BER loss and an average NoC complexity re-

duction of 1/3. The BTS-CU changes the received a priori BL

to SL

, as required by the algorithm, while the

is compared to the current first and second minimum STB-CU reduces the number of messages to be sent on the NoC

(min1 and min2), that are initialized as the maximum allowed by converting

extrinsic values into BL .

value at the beginning of each CN phase. The minimum of For every trellis step in a window, the branch metric unit

both comparisons (

and

) is passed on and (BMU) and the Extrinsic Computation Unit combine the two

sampled on the rising edge of the clock signal, together with

converted by the BTS-CU with four

values

the previous first minimum

and a flag signaling read from the 6-bit memory to calculate

(11) and to up-

if

. If

, date

, respectively. The output of the BMU is used by the

is substituted with

: min1 and min2 are main computation unit, that tackles the calculation of ,

finally updated on the falling edge of the clock, ready and and (8), (9) and (10). These metrics are computed in this

stable for the next

. Differently from the MEU used in exact order, thus storing

values in a dedicated set of regis-

[14], that could halt the pipeline in case both min1 and min2 ters while

are being processed: the metric, that needs

had to be updated, the negative-edge triggered registers allow both

and , is calculated last.

both updates in a single clock cycle, leading to a constant 2) Memory Scheduling: In turbo mode, each trellis step re-

cycles-per-data rate close to one, after the initial

cycles quires three clock cycles to be completed. However, up to five

latency. Concurrently,

signs are XORed as in (3).

cycles are needed to read all the necessary

and

.

Once min1 and min2 have been successfully extracted, they Early simulation results presented in [14] show that the SISO

are compared to all the

of the CN, that are delayed by a working frequency

can be lower than the NoC’s one

number of clock cycles equal to the degree of the CN

, to

. By timing the memories with the faster clock signal,

compute

as in (4). The CMP unit handles the comparison six values (five memory locations) can be read from port 1 of

and produces the two flags (sign and identification) to be stored the 6-bit memory in three SISO-cycles. Port 2 is kept in write

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

mode for the duration of the decoding, and used to store values

coming from the network.

The 2-bit memory is used in the same way, with port 1 in read

mode and port 2 in write mode. At the beginning of every new

window 16 values are needed (8

and 8 ) from this

memory to initialize the trellis. Due to the memory organization

used for state metrics, see Fig. 11, one

and one

are

spread over 7 memory locations. Consequently, clock cycles

are necessary to load the 16 values. The values must be loaded

from the memory before the window is processed. Thus, they

are loaded during the processing of the previous window. Since

every window is composed of at least 20 trellis steps, requiring

clock cycles to be executed, there is enough time to load

and

values to initialize the next window.

TABLE II IEEE 802.16E STANDARD THROUGHPUT ,
10 ITERATIONS FOR LDPC, 8 FOR TURBO

TABLE III

IEEE 802.11N STANDARD THROUGHPUT

WITH

DIFFERENT

AND NOC SIZES, 10 ITERATIONS

VII. SUPPORTED STANDARDS

The 22-node architecture presented in this work has been

tested on a large set of communication standards. In particular,

the whole set of turbo and LDPC codes included in [1]–[6] have

been tested.

As explained in the previous section, if

is smaller

enough than

, communication time between PEs is negli- • CMMB and DTMB: the CMMB [3] and DTMB [4]

gible. Taking in account the presented 22-node architecture, the

Chinese broadcast standards, though serving the same

maximum ratio

for which this assumption stands

purposes as DVB, work with smaller LDPC codes. Like in

is 2/3 for LDPC codes and SBTC, while 3/5 is necessary for

DVB, also in CMMB codes feature double diagonal sub-

DBTC. The maximum number of iterations

has been

matrices, slightly limiting the concurrent number of row

set to 10 for LDPC codes, and to 8 for turbo codes.

nodes that can be instantiated on the proposed decoder.

Every standard has different throughput requirements: both

Both CMMB and DTMB codes demand an increased

and

can be adjusted consequently.

memory capacity with respect to the aforementioned

• IEEE 802.16e: the WiMAX standard [5], is fully sup-

standards, requiring PE memories to be enlarged by 55%

ported. A high enough throughput

can be

to support CMMB, and by 68% for DTMB. A working

obtained with

and

.

frequency

is sufficient to guarantee

Table II summarizes the results.

the 20.22 Mb/s throughput required by CMMB standard,

• IEEE 802.11n: IEEE 802.11n standard [6] requires a higher

while to comply with DTMB 40.6 Mb/s, frequency must

throughput than WiMAX, demanding for the

,

be risen to

, as shown in Table V.

code up to 450 Mb/s. The 22-node architecture • 3GPP-LTE: the LTE version of 3GPP [7] uses a set of 188

can guarantee it with

. Taking in ac-

SBTC with coding rate 1/3, thus being characterized by a

count the

ratio constraint, this would mean

range of widely spaced block lengths. The required 150

. Both frequencies are over the de-

Mb/s throughput can be obtained on the 22-node archi-

coder maximum working frequency, and two alternatives

tecture with

; however, if we consider

have been devised. By increasing the size of the NoC to 35

the extended 35-node architecture mentioned for the WiFi

nodes, the

still holds at 2/3, but

can be

standard, compliance with the throughput requirement is

lowered to 520 MHz, and

. By choosing

met at

. This standard requires additional

, support still can be given for other WiFi

41% memory capacity w. r. t. WiMAX, WiFi, DVB-RCS

transmission modes, requiring up to 300 Mb/s. The results

and HPAV standards, but can be fully supported by the

are shown in Table III.

CMMB and DTMB memory sizing.

• DVB-RCS: the return channel for DVB satellite communi- Table IV summarizes possible switching among the selected

cations [1], thought for multimedia applications, employs standards, taking in account all possible code combinations.

12 different payloads and 7 coding rates. The throughput The dark gray cells represent the percentages of , combi-

required by this standard is very small, and can go up to nations between two standards whose reconfiguration requires

2.05 Mb/s in case of corporate-driven applications. This pausing of the decoder. A few cases arise between DVB-RCS

throughput is easily sustained by the 22-node architecture and WiMAX turbo codes and within 3GPP-LTE (due to its wide

with

.

variety of codes), while when belongs to the CMMB, DTMB

• HomePlug AV: the HPAV standard [2] makes use of a small and LTE standards, it is more likely to encounter a critical com-

set of DBTC, with interleaver sizes of 64, 544 and 2080. bination. On the contrary, if belongs to CMMB or DTMB

The throughput requirements of HPAV demand at least 150 standards, any reconfiguration can be completed with

:

Mb/s: on the 22-node architecture, with

, this is also the most common situation among the other stan-

achieved throughput is 156 Mb/s.

dards. The choice of maximum

allows to handle all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CONDO et al.: VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF A MULTI-MODE TURBO/LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE

1451

TABLE IV

RECONFIGURATION CASES IN INTRA- AND INTER-STANDARD COMBINATIONS. DARK GRAY: PERCENTAGE OF CODE COMBINATIONS REQUIRING DECODER

PAUSING. LIGHT GRAY: PERCENTAGE OF CODE COMBINATIONS REQUIRING

. WHITE: ALL CODE COMBINATIONS RECONFIGURABLE WITH

.

THROUGHPUT OBTAINED WITH 10 ITERATIONS FOR LDPC, 8 FOR TURBO

TABLE V CMMB AND DTMB STANDARD THROUGHPUT

, 10 ITERATIONS

TABLE VI

THROUGHPUT

RESULTS FOR EACH STANDARD,

WITH EVERY IMPLEMENTATION

the other reconfiguration cases: the light gray cells show the

percentages of code combinations in which

is

necessary.

VIII. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS
The results presented in Section VII show a broad range of possibilities for implementation, and the designed decoder can be scaled with very low effort. Three different complete decoders have been synthesized with TSMC 90 nm CMOS technology: post-layout results have been obtained for all of them, with accurate functional verification, area and power estimation. Synthesis has been carried on with Synopsys Design Compiler, functional simulation with Mentor Graphics ModelSIM, and place and route with CADence SoC Encounter [38].

A. Implementation A

15% of the overall area, while the LDPC cores 11%. Core mem-

The first decoder implementation has been devised to ories account for another 53%, while the NoC, together with

fully support WiMAX, HPAV and DVB-RCS standards. The the reconfiguration buses and additional logic, constitute the re-

memory sizing and organization described in Section VI-A maining 21%. This area overhead is due to two specific func-

is able to handle the addressed standards with 22 PEs. To tionalities that have been introduced in the proposed decoder:

comply with each standard throughput requirements, a single (i) full flexibility in terms of supported turbo and LDPC codes

is sufficient in both LDPC and turbo and (ii) dynamic reconfiguration between different standards.

mode, consequently identifying

and Estimated power consumption, based on the switching ac-

, both under the

constraint. tivity in case of WiMAX LDPC code

,

Obtained throughput is presented in Table VI.

(for ease of comparison with the state of the art) is 87.8 mW;

Each reconfiguration bus is 18 bits wide: 3 bits are the node for WiMAX turbo code with

estimated power is

identifier, used to address one of the connected decoding cores, 5 101.5 mW.

bits are assigned to the node degree or window size information, A screenshot of the final layout is portrayed in Fig. 14: the ir-

and the remaining 10 bits carry the .

regularity of the placement is due to the large number of memo-

These design choices have led to an overall area of 2.75

ries and their complex interconnections. However, two different

after place and route, taking in account the reconfiguration ad- areas can be easily identified: a central zone in which most of

ditional hardware as well. The logic of the SISO cores occupies the logic is found (black contour), and a border area where the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

TABLE VII

AREA EFFICIENCY

FOR DIFFERENT CODES AND IMPLEMENTATIONS.

N/A: CODE NOT SUPPORTED. DASH: RESULTS NOT AVAILABLE

Fig. 14. Implementation A layout screenshot.

majority of memories have been placed, some of which are highlighted with a white line.
B. Implementation B

two further metrics have been introduced: the energy efficiency

, where Pow is the peak power

consumption, expressing the energy spent for decoded bit, and

the area efficiency

,

The second implementation presented extends the set of reported in Table VII, an efficiency figure that considers both

standards supported by implementation A to WiFi LDPC throughput and area occupation.

codes and 3GPP-LTE turbo codes. To limit the complexity Baghdadhi et al. [11] propose an ASIP decoder architecture

of off-chip clock generators, also in this case a single NoC supporting WiMAX and WiFi LDPC codes, and WiMAX,

working frequency has been chosen,

, while 3GPP-LTE and DVB-RCS turbo codes. The A, B and C im-

is necessary to provide high enough plementations are designed such that the minimum throughput

throughput,

can remain set to 200 MHz. The parallelism is sufficient to comply with the supported standards. On the

of the NoC is increased from 22 nodes to 35 nodes, the reconfig- contrary, worst case throughput in [11] is not high enough for

uration buses rise from 5 to 8, and the support of LTE requires WiMAX. Comparison reveals similar area occupations, but

an increase in the size of 6-bit memories. Throughput results very different frequencies. This leads to a better area efficiency

are reported in Table VI. The post place & route estimated area in all three proposed implementations for most of the codes:

is 4.87 , with 331.6 mW of power consumption in LDPC particularly evident is the difference for DBTC (second last

mode, and 183.2 mW in turbo mode.

row of Table VII).

C. Implementation C

The work presented in [9] supports convolutional, LDPC and turbo codes, giving results for WiMAX LDPC, WiFi and gen-

This third implementation extends implementation A’s sup- eral binary and double-binary turbo codes. It yields a very small

port to CMMB and DTMB. Neither frequency nor NoC paral- area occupation with low power consumption and good max-

lelism modification are necessary, but the core and reconfigura- imum throughput for LDPC decoding. On the contrary, it fea-

tion memories must be enlarged. Consequently, an extra bit is tures less interesting figures in turbo mode. This situation is re-

added to the reconfiguration bus data width. The new post place flected both on

and , with Implementation A, B, and

& route estimated area is 3.42 , while power reaches 120 C having, when comparing the same codes, better efficiencies in

mW for both tested turbo and LDPC codes. This is because the turbo mode (last row of Table VII), and worse in LDPC mode.

LDPC consumption is calculated on a DTMB code, that makes However, under the worst case conditions (

,

,

full use of the extended memories, while the memory usage per- 20 iterations), A and B outperform [9] also in LDPC mode.

centages for DBTC remains low. The enlarged memories allow The multi-standard decoder designed in [12] supports

also LTE codes to be decoded, but the SBTC

would need 3GPP-HSDPA, WiFi, WiMAX, and DVB-SH. No specific

to rise up to 333 MHz to meet the throughput requirements. information on the codes used is given, only minimum guar-

Throughput results for CMMB and DTMB are shown in the Im- anteed throughput: for this reason, results in Table VII refer to

plementation C column of Table VI.

the minimum throughput of each standard. Implementation A

D. Comparisons

and B have comparable minimum

when working with

WiMAX LDPC codes, and A, B, and C yield much better results

Table VIII shows the detailed implementation results in com- in turbo mode. When comparing WiFi results [12] guarantees a

parison with the state of the art flexible turbo/LDPC decoders. higher

than A, B and C, even though aiming for a lower

Even though A, B, and C are the only decoders capable of dy- throughput than B. All three proposed implementations yield

namic switching, area, power and efficiency figures prove the better , and both A and C have a smaller area occupation.

effectiveness of this approach.

Sun and Cavallaro describe in [13] a decoder working with

In order to make a fair comparison, normalized area occupa- 3GPP-LTE turbo codes and WiMAX and WiFi LDPC codes.

tion has been included in the Table,

, They obtain very high maximum throughput efficiency in both

where is the total area and Tp is the technology process, LDPC and turbo mode: the range of supported codes is however

together with throughput and power consumption. Moreover, quite limited w.r.t. all considered implementations, and the area

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CONDO et al.: VLSI IMPLEMENTATION OF A MULTI-MODE TURBO/LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURE

1453

TABLE VIII

LDPC/TURBO ARCHITECTURES COMPARISON: DECODER PARALLELISM , CMOS TECHNOLOGY PROCESS (TP), PROCESSING AREA OCCUPATION

, TOTAL AREA OCCUPATION

NORMALIZED AREA OCCUPATION FOR 65 NM TECHNOLOGY

, CLOCK FREQUENCY

,

PEAK POWER CONSUMPTION (POW), ENERGY EFFICIENCY

, DATA WIDTH (DW), MAXIMUM NUMBER OF ITERATIONS

,

CODE LENGTH

AND RATE , INTERLEAVER SIZE

AND THROUGHPUT

occupation is larger than A. Since no power analysis is given,

comparison based on

is impossible, although the differ-

ence in working frequencies would suggest a smaller power

consumption for at least A and C.

IX. CONCLUSIONS
This work describes a flexible turbo/LDPC decoder architecture able to fully support a wide range of modern communication standards. A complete analysis of the never previously addressed inter- and intra-standard reconfiguration issue is presented, together with a dedicated reconfiguration technique that limits the complexity overhead and performance loss. Three different implementations are proposed to cover different sets of standards. Full layout design has been completed to provide accurate area and power figures. Comparison of the proposed architectures with the state of the art show very good efficiency, competitive area occupation and an unmatched degree of flexibility.

REFERENCES
[1] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Interaction Channel for Satellite Distribution Systems, ETSI Std. TR 101 790 V1.I, 2005.
[2] Homeplug AV Specification, Homeplug Alliance Std., 2005. [3] Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting (P. R. China) Part 1: Framing Struc-
ture, Channel Coding and Modulation for Broadcasting Channels. [4] Quality Supervision and Quarantine, GB 20600-2006, Digital Terres-
trial Television Broadcasting Transmission System Frame Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Beijing, China, 2006, China Standard Press Std..

[5] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless, , 2006, IEEE Std 802.16e-2005 Std..
[6] IEEE Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems-Local and Metropolitan Area Networks, , 2009, IEEE Std 802.11n-2009 Std..
[7] Multiplexing and Channel Coding, , 2012, 3GPP Std. TS36.212. [8] A. Polydoros, “Algorithmic aspects of radio flexibility,” in IEEE Inter-
national Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile Communications, 2008, pp. 1–5. [9] M. Alles, T. Vogt, and N. Wehn, “FlexiChaP: A reconfigurable ASIP for convolutional, turbo, and LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. 5th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, 2008, pp. 84–89. [10] F. Naessens, B. Bougard, S. Bressinck, L. Hollevoet, P. Raghavan, L. V. D. Perre, and F. Catthoor, “A unified instruction set programmable architecture for multi-standard advanced forward error correction,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, 2008, pp. 31–36. [11] P. Murugappa, R. Al-Khayat, A. Baghdadi, and M. Jezequel, “A flexible high throughput multi-ASIP architecture for LDPC and turbo decoding,” in Design, Automation Test in Europe Conf. Exhib., 2011, pp. 1–6. [12] G. Gentile, M. Rovini, and L. Fanucci, “A multi-standard flexible turbo/LDPC decoder via ASIC design,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing, 2010, pp. 294–298. [13] Y. Sun and J. R. Cavallaro, “A flexible LDPC/Turbo decoder architecture,” J. Signal Process. Syst., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 1–16, 2010. [14] C. Condo, M. Martina, and G. Masera, “A network-on-chip-based turbo/LDPC decoder architecture,” in Design, Automation Test in Europe Conf. Exhib. (DATE), Mar. 2012, pp. 1525–1530. [15] C. Neeb, M. J. Thul, and N. Wehn, “Network-on-chip-centric approach to interleaving in high throughput channel decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, 2005, pp. 1766–1769. [16] H. Moussa, A. Baghdadi, and M. Jezequel, “Binary de Bruijn interconnection network for a flexible LDPC/turbo decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits and Systems, 2008, pp. 97–100.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 60, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

[17] F. Vacca, H. Moussa, A. Baghdadi, and G. Masera, “Flexible archi-

tectures for LDPC decoders based on network on chip paradigm,” in

Euromicro Conf. Digital System Design, 2009, pp. 582–589.

[18] L. Benini, “Application specific NoC design,” in Design, Automation

and Test in Europe Conf. and Exhib., 2006, pp. 1330–1335.

[19] M. Martina and G. Masera, “Turbo NOC: A framework for the design

of network-on-chip-based turbo decoder architectures,” IEEE Trans.

Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2776–2789, Oct. 2010.

[20] M. Martina, G. Masera, H. Moussa, and A. Baghdadi, “On chip in-

terconnects for multiprocessor turbo decoding architectures,” Elsevier

Microprocessors and Microsystems, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 167–181, Mar.

2011.

[21] H. Moussa, A. Baghdadi, and M. Jezequel, “Binary de Bruijn onchip

network for a flexible multiprocessor LDPC decoder,” in ACM/IEEE

Design Automation Conf., 2008, pp. 429–434.

[22] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible

LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 54, no.

6, pp. 542–546, 2007.

[23] M. Martina, M. Nicola, and G. Masera, “A flexible UMTS-WiMax

Turbo decoder architecture,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs,

vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 369–373, Apr. 2008.

[24] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “Memory-efficient turbo decoder ar-

chitectures for LDPC codes,” in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing

Systems, Oct. 2002, pp. 159–164.

[25] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[26] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered

decoding of LDPC codes,” in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing

Systems, 2004, pp. 107–112.

[27] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. Fossorier, and X. Y. Hu, “Re-

duced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun.,

vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.

[28] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit

error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int.

Conf. Commun., 1993, pp. 1064–1070.

[29] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of

linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[30] M. Martina, G. Masera, S. Papaharalabos, P. Mathiopoulos, and F.

Gioulekas, “On practical implementation and generalizations of

operator for turbo and LDPC decoders,” IEEE Tran. Instrum. Meas.,

vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 888–895, Apr. 2012.

[31] S. Papaharalabos, P. T. Mathiopoulos, G. Masera, and M. Martina, “On

optimal and near-optimal turbo decoding using generalized

op-

erator,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 7, pp. 522–524, Jul. 2009.

[32] E. Boutillon, C. Douillard, and G. Montorsi, “Iterative decoding of con-

catenated convolutional codes: Implementation issues,” Proc, IEEE,

vol. 95, no. 6, pp. 1201–1227, Jun. 2007.

[33] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Algorithm for

continuous decoding of turbo codes,” IET Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no.

4, pp. 314–315, Feb. 1996.

[34] A. Abbasfar and K. Yao, “An efficient and practical architecture for

high speed turbo decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf.,

2003, pp. 337–341.

[35] Family of Graph and Hypergraph Partitioning Software [Online].

Available: http://www.cs.umn.edu/~metis

[36] J. Dielissen, N. Engin, S. Sawitzki, and K. van Berkel, “Multistandard

FEC decoders for wireless devices,” IEEE Trans. Circuits and Syst. II,

Exp. Briefs, vol. 55, no. 3, pp. 284–288, Mar. 2008.

[37] J.-H. Kim and I.-C. Park, “A 50 Mbps double-binary turbo decoder for

WiMax based on bit-level extrinsic information exchange,” in IEEE

Asian Solid-State Circuits Conf., Nov. 2008, pp. 305–308.

[38] A. Pulimeno, M. Graziano, and G. Piccinini, “UDSM trends comparison: From technology roadmap to UltraSparc Niagara2,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 20, no. 7, pp. 1341–1346, Jul. 2012.
Carlo Condo received the M.Sc. degree in electrical and computer engineering from Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy, and the University of Illinois at Chicago in 2010. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Politecnico di Torino. His research interests include design and implementation of architectures for channel coding and networks-on-chip.
Maurizio Martina (S’98–M’05) received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy, in 2000 and 2004, respectively.
He is currently an Assistant Professor at the VLSI Lab, Politecnico di Torino. His research activities include VLSI design and implementation of architectures for digital signal processing and communications.
Guido Masera (SM’07) received the Dr. Ing. degree (summa cum laude) in 1986 and the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering from the Politecnico di Torino, Torino, Italy, in 1992.
Since 1986 to 1988, he was a Researcher with the Centro Studi e Laboratori in Telecomunicazioni (CSELT), Torino, Italy, involved in the standardization activities for the GSM system. Since 1992, he has been an Assistant Professor and then Associate Professor with the Electronic Department, where he is member of the VLSI-Lab group. His research interests include several aspects in the design of digital integrated circuits and systems, with special emphasis on high-performance architecture development (especially for wireless communications and multimedia applications) and on-chip interconnect modeling and optimization. He has coauthored 200 journal and conference papers in the areas of ASIC-SoC development, architectural synthesis, VLSI circuit modeling and optimization. In the frame of National and European research projects, he has been co-designer of several ASIC and FPGA implementations in the fields of Artificial Intelligence, Computer Networks, Digital Signal Processing, Transmission and Coding. Among National Project, he joint Progetto Finalizzato Telecomunicazioni, MADESS I e II, and FIRB PRIMO; he participated also to several European Projects such as RACE-Stratospheric, RACE-dTTb, ACTS DVBIRD, ACTS-iTTi, NEWCOM, NEWCOM++, WiMAGIC, COAST.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:51 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

