IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

2569

Cell-to-Cell Interference Compensation Schemes Using Reduced Symbol Pattern of Interfering Cells for MLC NAND Flash Memory
Taehyung Kim , Gyuyeol Kong , Xi Weiya , and Sooyong Choi
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea Data Storage Institute, A*STAR, Singapore 138632, Singapore
Cell-to-cell interference compensation schemes using reduced symbol pattern of interfering cells for multilevel cell (MLC) NAND flash memory are proposed in this paper. The proposed schemes consist of three procedures, estimation of cell-to-cell interference, compensation for cell-to-cell interference, and generation of log-likelihood ratio (LLR). First, reduced symbol pattern of interfering cells is used to estimate cell-to-cell interference by modifying the levels of the threshold voltage shift from multi page programming to two levels. Second, based on this estimation, cell-to-cell interference is compensated by modifying the read voltage considering the estimated cell-to-cell interference in the proposed scheme 1 and by subtracting the estimated cell-to-cell interference from the sensed voltage in the proposed scheme 2. Finally, after conducting compensation, LLR is calculated for low-density parity check (LDPC) codes in the assumption of free cell-to-cell interference since interference between cells is mitigated by the compensation procedure. By using these techniques, cell-to-cell interference can be relaxed with a simple structure and a high reliability. The bit error rate (BER) performances of the proposed schemes are compared with the conventional schemes on 8-level MLC NAND flash memory. Simulation results show that the proposed schemes show the improved BER performances by more than an order of magnitude compared with the conventional LDPC scheme.
Index Terms—Cell-to-cell interference, interference compensation, low-density parity check (LDPC), multilevel cell (MLC) NAND flash memory.

I. INTRODUCTION
I N THE recent year, multilevel cell (MLC) NAND flash memory has become the main issue in the flash memory market [1]. In alignment with the market’s fast growth, techniques realizing 8-level and 16-level MLC have been strenuously studied [2], [3]. However, as the number of level increases, correspondingly rising cell-to-cell interference becomes the major challenge for further NAND flash memory technology scaling and more aggressive use of MLC. Therefore, it is important to develop techniques that can minimize or compensate cell-to-cell interference [4].
Two approaches have been presented to reduce cell-to-cell interference so far. For the first approach, many prior researches have been focusing on minimizing cell-to-cell interference through device/circuit techniques [3], [5]. For the other approach, signal-processing based cell-to-cell compensation methods have been proposed in [4], [6]. In [4], postcompensation and predistortion schemes were suggested to reduce the effect of cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND flash memory. These schemes first estimate the degree of interference between neighboring cells and then the estimation is used to compensate cell-to-cell interference through postcompensation and predistortion schemes. However, since there are various interference patterns in MLC NAND flash memory, a considerable amount of complexity can be involved. Additionally, as the level increases, the number of interference patterns rises exponentially. Therefore, regardless of the number of levels in MLC NAND flash memory, a simplified cell-to-cell
Manuscript received December 02, 2012; revised February 26, 2013; accepted February 28, 2013. Date of current version May 30, 2013. Corresponding author: S. Choi (e-mail: csyong@yonsei.ac.kr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2013.2251417

interference sensing method should be investigated to reduce latency of MLC NAND flash memory. In [6], calculating the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) based on a mathematical model for low-density parity check (LDPC) codes was proposed in the presence of cell-to-cell interference. While the LLR contains cell-to-cell interference data, this scheme does not possess high error-correction capability since cell-to-cell interference leads to a lowered reliability of the LLR. Therefore, efficient cell-to-cell interference mitigation with error correction codes (ECCs) should also be studied to compensate cell-to-cell interference more effectively.
In this paper, we propose two schemes including cell-to-cell interference compensation and ECCs with a simplified cell-to-cell interference sensing method for MLC NAND flash memory. Reduced symbol pattern of interfering cells can be obtained and used to easily estimate cell-to-cell interference by modifying the levels of the threshold voltage shift from multi page programing to two levels. Based on the estimation, this paper proposed two schemes to effectively alleviate cell-to-cell interference.
In the proposed scheme 1, the read voltage is shifted based on the estimated cell-to-cell interference. With the modified read voltage, the threshold detection for the target cell can be performed. In the proposed scheme 2, interference between cells is compensated by subtracting the estimated cell-to-cell interference from the sensed voltage. In order to provide sufficient accuracy to compensate cell-to-cell interference and to generate the LLR, fine-grained cell-threshold-voltage sensing is used.
Additionally, the LLR calculation method for LDPC codes is proposed based on the threshold voltage distribution after conducting cell-to-cell interference compensation. Since the LLR calculation is performed in the assumption of free cell-to-cell interference, it is easy to calculate and exploit the LLR with high reliability. By using these schemes, we can compensate for cell-to-cell interference with a simpler structure and a higher reliability compared to the conventional methods.

0018-9464/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

Fig. 1. Multipage program for eight-level NAND flash memory.

II. MLC NAND FLASH MEMORY CHANNEL MODEL

A. Cell-to-Cell Interference
The channel model of MLC NAND flash memory is employed as described in [4]. The threshold-voltage shift of a floating-gate transistor can affect the threshold voltage of its neighboring floating-gate transistors due to parasitic capacitance-coupling effect commonly referred to as cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND flash memories. As the level increases in MLC NAND flash memory, cell-to-cell interference becomes more severe. Since multipage programming has better immunity to cell-to-cell interference [4], in the work described here, we use the multipage programming strategy under the even/odd bit-line (BL) structure so as to reduce hardware complexity [4]. As shown in Fig. 1, in case of 8-level MLC, multipage programming with its sequential programming can map the symbol to the cell with small voltage change at the third page [4]. When even/odd BL structure is used, the cells on the even BL are programmed first along each word-line (WL), and then the cells on the odd BL are programmed. Therefore, the effects of cell-to-cell interference for cells in the even and odd BLs can be considered separately. Then, the cell-to-cell interference in the even/odd BL structure is expressed by

Fig. 2. Even/odd BL structure and coupling effect of victim cell.

where and are the mean and standard deviation of the

erased-state threshold voltage. When each cell is programmed,

iterative program-and-verify approach with a step voltage of

is used. Since the verify voltage is used to determine

whether the programming should continue or stop, the threshold

voltage of each programmed state tends to have a uniform dis-

tribution over

. It is assumed that the aggregate

effect of all the other distortions tends to add two symmetric

Gaussian tails on both sides of the uniform distribution [4]. We

thus have the overall probability density function of threshold

voltage

as

if if otherwise
(3)

where is the standard deviation of the Gaussian tails and is the constant which can be obtained by solving
.

III. PROPOSED SCHEME TO COMPENSATE CELL-TO-CELL

INTERFERENCE

(1)

In this section, we will present the proposed cell-to-cell inter-

where

represents the th WL and the th BL position, re-

spectively, as shown in Fig. 2.

and

are the cell-to-

cell interference on even BL and odd BL at

position, re-

spectively.

and

represent the threshold voltage

shift in even BL and odd BL at

position, respectively.

ference compensation schemes. First, a simple cell-to-cell interference estimation method is introduced in the even BL. Second, two cell-to-cell interference compensation schemes based on the estimated cell-to-cell interference are described. Lastly, the calculation of the LLR values for LDPC codes is explained.

, and are the floating gate coupling ratios in the horizontal, vertical, and diagonal directions, respectively.

A. Effective Cell-to-Cell Interference Estimation Method

According to (1), we can evaluate the cell-to-cell interfer-

B. Threshold Voltage Distribution Model

ence in the even BL using the threshold voltage shift values

Each NAND flash memory cell is a floating gate transistor whose threshold voltage can be programmed. Before a flash memory cell is programmed, it must be in the erased-state. The threshold voltage of erased memory cells tends to have a wide Gaussian-like distribution [4]. Therefore, the threshold-voltage distribution of the erased state can be approximately modeled as

of neighboring cells. In the multipage programming scheme, the threshold voltage shift values are determined by the difference between the threshold voltage in the previous page and the threshold voltage in the present page corresponding to the final state. If all the voltage shift values are different from each other, the number of cell-to-cell interference patterns becomes
in even BL for -level cell

(2)

NAND flash memory. Then the numbers of cell-to-cell inter-

ference patterns are 288 and 2176 for

and

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: CELL-TO-CELL INTERFERENCE COMPENSATION SCHEMES

2571

respectively. If the previous page voltage levels are set to spe-

cific values such that all the threshold voltage shift values are

equal as in Fig. 1, then the number of cell-to-cell interference

patterns can be reduced. Let

be the set

of states where represents the erased state. The state has

as the threshold voltage shift value. At

and ,

the threshold voltage shift is

and at

and , the

threshold voltage shift is , respectively. Especially, during

the transition from the erased state in the second page to the

erased state in the third page, the threshold voltage shift,

,

is equal to zero. Additionally, if we assume that

and

is similar, with

replaced by , then the number of

coupling noise pattern is always 18 as shown in Table I, re-

gardless of the value of for the MLC NAND flash memory.

Table I represents the calculated cell-to-cell interference for all

patterns when

. The average cell-to-cell in-

terference,

, can be calculate by

, and

using (1), where

denotes the average of . Let

denote the neighbor interfering symbol where is

the left interfering symbol, is the right interfering symbol,

and is the vertical interfering symbol. For example, when the

symbol pattern

is detected in the even BL, the

pattern index is 6 and the interference pattern is expressed as

. Therefore, when the interference pattern

is sensed by

, the strength of cell-to-cell in-

terference can be easily found as 0.119 from Table I. This esti-

mation is used to compensate cell-to-cell interference in the next

procedure. To sense the interfering cells, hard-decision memory

sensing which is quantized into 3 bits is used for simplicity.

TABLE I EVALUATED AVERAGE CELL-TO-CELL INTERFERENCE

B. Cell-to-Cell Interference Compensation Schemes

reflecting the cell-to-cell interference, 0.224. Since this scheme basically employs hard-decision memory sensing

Based on the estimation in Section III-A, cell-to-cell interfer- which is quantized into 3 bits, BCH codes are appropriate

ence can be effectively compensated. In this paper, we propose for this scheme. For the use of LDPC codes, fine-grained

two cell-to-cell compensation schemes for MLC NAND flash cell-threshold-voltage sensing, which is quantized into more

memory. In the proposed Scheme 1, the read voltage is shifted than 4 bits, will be needed.

by the amount of the estimated cell to cell interference. With 2) Proposed Scheme 2: Let denote the threshold

the modified read voltage, we can perform the threshold detec- voltage difference between the two adjacent states. When

tion for the target cell more correctly. In the proposed Scheme we do oversampling by times referred to fine-grained

2, cell-to-cell interference is compensated by subtracting the cell-threshold-voltage sensing for detecting a target cell, it

estimated cell-to-cell interference from the sensed voltage. In is possible to distinguish

voltage level. The estimated

order to provide sufficient accuracy for compensating cell-to- cell-to-cell interference can be converted to binary bits ac-

cell interference and for generating the LLR, fine-grained cell- cording to voltage interval. Using binary operation, we can

threshold-voltage sensing is used.

eliminate the cell-to-cell interference by subtracting bits rep-

1) Proposed Scheme 1: When a target cell is read, the resenting cell-to-cell interference from the oversampled target

read voltage can be controlled to the specific level reflecting bits. For example, when the symbol pattern is

in

the estimated cell-to-cell interference. If

denotes the the even BL, cell-to-cell interference value becomes 00001

read voltage before compensation and

is the estimated after 4 times oversampling. If the oversampled bits of the target

average cell-to-cell interference for the target cell, the com- cell are 01001 , the compensated output is obtained from

pensated read voltage is then given by

.

. Since this scheme is natu-

With the shift of the read voltage, the cell threshold voltage rally performed by fine-grained cell-threshold-voltage sensing,

is directly sensed and quantized. The read voltage can be soft-decision codes such as LDPC codes are more suitable than

flexibly changed whenever a target cell is detected. For ex- BCH codes for this scheme. The calculation of LLR for LDPC

ample, when the symbol pattern

is detected codes is described in the next section.

in the even BL, the corresponding voltage shift pattern is . Then the cell-to-cell interference can be es- C. LLR Calculation for LDPC Codes

timated as 0.224. If the original read voltage is given by

Because of the aggressive use of MLC storage, the reliability

, the shifted read voltage is of MLC NAND flash memory continues to degrade. Hence,

powerful ECCs replacing BCH codes are required for future

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

MLC NAND flash memory. Advanced ECCs, such as LDPC codes, require accurate LLR information. Since the error-correction capability is significantly dependent on the quality of LLR, it is important to calculate the LLR values with high accuracy. However, without compensation, it is hard to directly calculate the LLR since the calculation of probability density function is considerably complicated and the reliability of the LLR becomes lowered in the presence of cell-to-cell interference. Therefore, in this paper, after cell-to-cell interference is removed by the proposed schemes, the decoding process is conducted not only to easily calculate the LLR but also to increase the reliability of the LLR. If we assume that cell-to-cell interference is perfectly removed by the proposed schemes, the LLR value is obtained by the threshold voltage distribution expressed by a wide Gaussian distribution in the erased state and two symmetric Gaussian tails on both sides of the uniform distribution in the programmed state as described in Section II.
Let represent the sensed threshold voltage after the proposed schemes are performed. Then, the LLR of the th bit stored in one cell is given by

Fig. 3. BER comparisons between the proposed schemes and the conventional schemes.

(4)

If it is assumed that lies

, where and are two

adjacent reference voltages, we calculate the LLR of the th bit

as

(5)

where is the set of states whose th bit is 1 and

is the

probability density function of the threshold voltage of the th

state. The probability density function

is

in the

erased state and

in the th programmed state. Therefore,

with the voltage distributions as shown in (2) and (3), and the

compensated threshold voltage of the memory cells, we can

use (5) to obtain the LLR for LDPC codes.

Fig. 4. BER comparisons of the conventional ECCs scheme and proposed schemes with LDPC codes.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

seen that the conventional scheme shows the worst BER

The bit error rate (BER) performances of the proposed performance. When the read voltage is shifted by the amount

schemes, applied on an 8-level MLC NAND flash memory, of average total coupling noise, this scheme yields the better

was evaluated. For the erased state, the mean and standard BER performance while the improvement is still limited. In

deviation are set to 1.2 and 0.25 V, respectively. For the other order to obtain greater performance gains, accurate cell-to-cell

seven programmed states, their verify voltages, , are set as 2, interference measurement should be reflected in the detection

2.7, 3.4, 4.1, 4.8, 5.5, and 6.2 V, respectively, and the program process. The proposed Scheme 1 and the postcompensation

step voltage

is set as 0.2 V. The standard deviation

scheme [4] gave the best BER performances because the exact

of the double-side Gaussian tails is set as 0.03 V. As in [4], amount of cell-to-cell interference is taken into account by

we set

. modifying the read voltage. When multipage programming is

Here, we introduce a parameter called a cell-to-cell coupling considered, the difference between the proposed Scheme 1 and

strength factor and have

, the postcompensation scheme [4] is the number of interfer-

and

. For ECCs, we construct a rate-19/20 ence patterns each scheme considered, which is 18 and 288,

(34520, 32794) quasi-cyclic LDPC Codes [7].

respectively, as shown in Section III-A. That is, the proposed

Fig. 3 shows the BER comparisons between the proposed Scheme 1 employs the simplified interfering symbol patterns

schemes and the conventional schemes. With no compensation by modifying the levels of the threshold voltage shift while the

for the effects of cell-to-cell interference, it can be clearly postcompensation scheme [4] considers all interfering symbol

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: CELL-TO-CELL INTERFERENCE COMPENSATION SCHEMES

2573

candidates. Hence, the proposed Scheme 1 is much simpler than the postcompensation scheme. Even if the proposed Scheme 1 employs the much simpler cell-to-cell interference measurement method, it has the same BER performance as the postcompensation scheme [4]. Therefore, we can see that the proposed Scheme 1 is much more effective than the postcompensation scheme [4]. The proposed Scheme 2 shows a poorer BER performance than the proposed Scheme 1 since the quantized cell-to-cell interference lacks precision. We can identify that the BER performance of the proposed Scheme 2 improves as the number of quantization level increases.
Fig. 4 shows the BER comparisons of the conventional ECCs scheme and the proposed schemes with LDPC codes. Despite having LLR calculation considering cell-to-cell interference, the conventional ECCs scheme [6] has a poorer BER performance than the proposed schemes since cell-to-cell interference still leads to a lowered reliability of the LLR. The proposed schemes improve BER by more than an order of magnitude when compared with the conventional ECCs scheme. The proposed Scheme 1 provides a better BER performance than the proposed Scheme 2 since the reliability of the LLR in Scheme 1 is higher than that of Scheme 2. For every case, the reliability of the LLR increases as the number of quantization level rises.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed two cell-to-cell interference compensation schemes including ECCs in MLC NAND flash memory. By using a reduced symbol pattern of neighboring interfering cells, cell-to-cell interference is easily estimated and compensated regardless of the number of levels in the MLC

NAND flash memory. Also, the LLR can be obtained with high reliability by the simple method. Simulation results shows that the proposed schemes improve BER by more than an order of magnitude as compared with the conventional ECCs scheme. Therefore, the proposed schemes are highly effective in reducing the latency as well as in increasing the reliability of MLC NAND flash memories.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Park and J. Lee, “Floating-gate coupling canceller for multi-level cell NAND flash,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 47, no. 3, Mar. 2011.
[2] C. Lee, S.-K. Lee, J. Lee, W. Park, Y. Cho, C. Jang, C. Yang, S. Chung, I.-S. Yun, B. Joo, B. Jeong, J. Kim, J. Kwon, H. Jin, Y. Noh, J. Ha, M. Sung, D. Choi, S. Kim, J. Choi, T. Jeon, J.-S. Yang, and Y.-H. Koh, “A 32-Gb MLC NAND flash memory with Vth endurance enhancing schemes in 32 nm CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 97–106, Jan. 2011.
[3] S.-H. Park, S.-K. Lee, S.-J. Park, M.-J. Jung, J.-C. Han, I.-S. Wang, K.-H. Lee, J.-H. Lee, J.-H. Lim, W.-K. Kang, T.-K. Kang, H.-S. Byun, J.-S. Yang, and Y.-H. Koh, “A 48 nm 32 Gb 8-level NAND flash memory with 5.5 Mb/s program throughput,” in Proc. IEEE ISSC Dig. Tech. Papers, San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2009, pp. 240–241.
[4] G. Dong, S. Li, and T. Zhang, “Using data postcompensation and predistortion to tolerate cell-to-cell interference in MLC NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2718–2728, Oct. 2010.
[5] K.-T. Park, M. Kang, D. Kim, S.-W. Hwang, B. Choi, Y.-T. Lee, C. Kim, and K. Kim, “A zeroing cell-to-cell interference page architecture with temporary LSB storing and parallel MSB program scheme for MLC NAND flash memories,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 919–928, Apr. 2008.
[6] G. Dong, N. Xie, and T. Zhang, “On the use of soft-decision errorcorrection codes in NAND flash memory,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 429–439, Feb. 2011.
[7] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:34:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

