IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

2823

EXIT-Chart-Based LDPC Code Design for 2D ISI Channels
Lingjun Kong , Yong Liang Guan , Jianping Zheng , Guojun Han , Kui Cai , and Kheong-Sann Chan
School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 639798, Singapore State Key Laboratory of Integrated Service Networks, Xidian University, Xi’an, 710071 P. R. China
Data Storage Institute (DSI), Agency for Science, Technology, and Research (A*STAR), Singapore 117608, Singapore
In this paper, optimization of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes to approach the symmetric information rate (SIR) of two-dimensional (2-D) intersymbol interference (ISI) channels is proposed for high-density magnetic recording, such as bit-patterned magnetic recording (BPMR) and 2-D magnetic recording (TDMR). The code design makes use of the modified Extrinsic Information Transfer (EXIT) chart, where the optimal variable node degree is searched by selecting the best check node degree to fit the check node decoder (CND) EXIT curve to the EXIT curve of the variable node decoder (VND) curve combined with 2-D detector. Simulation results show that LDPC codes with code length 10 bits optimized for a 2-D ISI channel corresponding to 4 Tb/in recording density can achieve bit error rate 10 at signal-to-noise ratio 0.33 dB away from the SIR. To our knowledge, this is the first capacity-approaching LDPC code successfully optimized for a 2-D ISI channel.
Index Terms—Extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, symmetric information rate (SIR), two-dimensional (2D) intersymbol interference (ISI) channels.

I. INTRODUCTION
D UE to continued strong demand for increasing storage areal densities, bit-patterned magnetic recording (BPMR) and two-dimensional magnetic recording (TDMR) have recently been extensively researched [1]. One way to boost the storage density is to reduce the separation between recording tracks. However, this results in more crosstalk between the tracks, called intertrack interference (ITI). The read-back signal of both the BPMR and TDMR can be modeled by the signal corrupted by a two-dimensional (2-D) intersymbol interference (ISI) which is constituted by both 1-D ISI and ITI [2]–[4].
Coding for a 1-D ISI channel has received much attention, with excellent performance improvement obtained by applying the turbo principle to equalization and decoding [5]–[10]. In [5] and [6], the authors designed LDPC codes optimized for partial response channels (PRCs) by means of a density evolution analysis. Brink used an extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart to design low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes for a multiple input/multiple output (MIMO) channel [7]. A concatenated approach to design LDPC codes can also be found in [8], where the authors performed EXIT chart-based analysis for a decoder in which a soft-input/soft-output (SISO) block, featuring a BCJR algorithm [9] for the PRCs, iteratively exchanged extrinsic information with a SISO decoder associated to the binary code. In [10], an optimization algorithm was derived for LDPC codes based on a Gaussian approximation of the messages exchanged in the graph.
Experiments show that LDPC codes optimized for AWGN channels may not yield good performance when applied to 1-D ISI channels with equalization [10]. Therefore, we infer that a new class of LDPC codes adapted to the 2-D ISI channel is required for BPMR and TDMR, which will be verified in the sequel. To our best knowledge, the problem of designing a capacity-approaching LDPC codes for a 2-D ISI channel has been

open until now. Since magnetic recording only permits binary channel codes, we aim for the symmetric information rate (SIR)
[11] of the 2-D ISI channel, which is defined as the maximum information rate achievable via random coding with equiprobable input symbols. Since linear codes such as LDPC code use all in-
puts equiprobably, the SIR is also the maximum rate achievable with LDPC codes.
In this paper, we extend Brink’s idea to design LDPC codes
that achieve the SIR of a 2-D ISI channel based on the EXIT chart. Unlike normal degree optimization through EXIT chart fitting [7], we start with the EXIT curve of the combined 2-D de-
tector and variable node decoder (VND) and perform the degree optimization by matching the check node decoder (CND) EXIT curve to the combined 2-D detector and VND EXIT curve. The
main advantage of this code optimization approach is that the EXIT curve of the combined 2-D detector and VND can be obtained by statistical averaging over a large number of 2-D de-
tection simulations. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II in-
troduces the 2-D ISI channel model. Then in Section III, LPDC
codes design for 2-D ISI channels is proposed based on the modified EXIT chart. The performance of the proposed scheme is investigated in Section IV where the simulation results are pre-
sented. Finally, Section V presents some conclusions.

II. 2-D ISI CHANNELS MODEL

Let

denote the binary data distributed in an

array with rows and columns, with

, and

. and denote the interference lengths

in the horizontal and vertical directions, respectively. Further-

more, let the 2-D channel response before equalization be rep-

resented by an

channel response matrix

Manuscript received November 28, 2012; revised February 05, 2013; accepted February 16, 2013. Date of current version May 30, 2013. Corresponding author: L. Kong (e-mail: ljkong@ntu.edu.sg).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2013.2248351

...

...

...

...

(1)

0018-9464/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2824
Then, the received signal at position by

can be expressed

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

(2)

where and are noncausality offsets, and

is the

AWGN with zero mean and variance .

Normally, the offsets are set to be

and

. We assume a boundary of 1 around the

data block for initializing the 2-D detector, i.e.,

for

.

As the magnetic recording technology only “writes” signals

in discrete binary levels, we adopt the SIR, defined as the infor-

mation rate when the channel inputs are independent, uniformly

distributed (i.u.d.) and equiprobable [11], as the capacity of the

magnetic recording channel.

The SIR of a 2-D ISI channel is defined as

SIR

Fig. 1. Joint 2-D-DET and decoder scheme for LDPC code optimization.

the

and

from a histogram of the extrinsic

information values, where denotes the element of .

Given the

and

, we calculate the mutual

information of 2-D detector by

(4) where the integral in (4) is estimated using a histogram with bins
defined based on the extrinsic values. In the following, we denote the 2-D detector by 2-D-DET and
its EXIT function by

where

(3) denotes the mutual information. The arrays

(5)

and

denote the binary data array and received signal

array, respectively. A simulation-based method for computing

the SIR has been proposed in [11], employing the Shannon-

McMillan-Breiman theorem and the two-way generalized belief

propagation algorithm. We refer the readers to [11] for further

details on how to calculate the SIR of 2-D ISI channel.

III. CODE DESIGN FOR 2-D ISI CHANNELS

At the heart of this paper is the design of LDPC codes that at-

tempt to achieve the SIR for writing and reading over 2-D ISI

channels. Following the notations used in [12], we define an en-

semble of LDPC codes with the variable and check node degree

sequences

and

,

where and denote the fraction of edges connected to vari-

able nodes of degree and check nodes of degree , respectively.

And let and be the number of different variable node de-

grees and check node degrees, respectively.

The ISI-optimized LDPC codes are designed by selecting the

best sequences to fit the CND EXIT curve as closely as pos-

sible to the EXIT curve of the combined 2-D detector and VND,

while ensuring that they do not cross over.

Note that for each

and code rate of interest, a new

EXIT curve of the 2-D detector needs to be created.

B. EXIT Curve of LDPC Code With 2-D Detector

The joint 2-D-DET and decoder scheme for LDPC code opti-

mization is shown in Fig. 1, where the dashed box corresponds

to the combined 2-D-DET and VND by

, where the

and quantities at various locations denote the a priori

mutual information and a posteriori mutual information of the

corresponding signals at those locations.

We assume that messages entering a degree check node

from its associated variable nodes to verify they are Gaussian

distributed. It is more convenient to use the following simple

approximation to compute the mutual information of the CND

of a degree check node based on the duality theorem [7]

(6)

A. EXIT Curve of 2-D Detector

Computing the EXIT curve of the 2-D detector is similar to

computing the EXIT curve of the MIMO detector with com-

bined demodulation/decoding structure in a multi-antenna wire-

less communication system [7]. The only difference lies in the

way to calculate the a posteriori mutual information

,

given the a priori mutual information

and the observed

2-D-ISI channel output sequence . The 2-D detector EXIT

curve cannot be expressed in closed form, so we evaluate it

by Monte Carlo simulation, statistically averaged over a large

number of 2-D detection simulations.

Once

and are generated, the channel detection is

run. The 2-D detector output log-likelihood ratio (LLR) are

used to calculate the

, which is measured by estimating

where the functions and

are given in [7]. From (6)

we can obtain the EXIT function of an average check node as

(7)
From (7), the check node EXIT curves can be computed in closed form fairly accurately as
(8)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KONG et al.: EXIT-CHART-BASED LDPC CODE DESIGN FOR 2D ISI CHANNELS

2825

Based on [7, (4)], the lower VND in Fig. 1 maps

into

(9)
Then the combined 2-D-DET and VND EXIT function of a degree variable node is

(10)

where the

in (4) will be approximated by a third-order

polynomial based on Fig. 3 (to be shown as follows).

It has been shown that the EXIT curve of a mixture of codes is

an average of the component EXIT curves. The effective VND Fig. 2. Estimated SIR of 2-D ISI channels ( and ). transfer curve is thus

(11)

where

, and is the fraction of

nodes incident to variable nodes of degree .

The ISI-optimized LDPC codes can be designed by matching

the CND EXIT curve (8) to the mixed 2-D-DET and VND EXIT

curve (11). This design problem is equivalent to solving the fol-

lowing linear programming problem:

(12)

channel response matrices are assumed to be (13) and (14), cor-

responding to a magnetic recording density of 1 and 4 Tb/in ,

respectively [2], [3]. In (13) and (14), the row of the matrix

corresponds to the down-track direction, and the column cor-

responds to the cross-track direction. If we compare (13) and

(14), we can see that compared to the case of 1 Tb/in , the ISI

is increased to 0.2299 and the ITI is decreased to 0.1435. The

increase of ISI is due to the increase of recording density in

the down-track direction, while the decrease of ITI is mainly

due to different choices of bit-aspect-ratio (BAR). In particular,

for the 1 Tb/in case, a

is chosen, while for the 4

Tb/in case, a

is chosen for the sake of reducing

ITI as suggested by the HDD industry. We observe from Fig. 2

that as the recording density increases, the 2-D-ISI channel has

a rate loss relative to the BI-AWGN channel, especially in the

low

regime. On the other hand, the capacity gap between

the BI-AWGN channel and 2-D ISI channel closes up when the

is very large, which agrees with intuition

subject to

(13)

(14)

The EXIT curves of 2-D-DET are shown in Fig. 3. We ob-

serve that all the curves resemble straight lines, so the EXIT

where is the total of samples whose step is denoted by

curves of 2-D-DET can be approximated by a third order poly-

between sample

and in the optimization.

nomial which allow us to express the

term in (10) in

closed form.

IV. SIMULATIONS

In Fig. 4, we compare the designed LDPC codes with the conventional LDPC codes optimized for AWGN channel [7],

Simulations are conducted to evaluate the properties and bit in 2-D ISI channels with recording density of 1 and 4 Tb/in ,

error rate (BER) performance of the proposed LDPC codes respectively. The optimized variable node degree sequences of

which are optimized for a 2-D ISI channel. In the simulations, the designed codes are given in Table I. All codes have rate we set the maximum number of iterations between the 2-D of 8/9. All schemes use joint symbol-based BCJR 2-D channel

symbol-based BCJR detector [9] and the LDPC decoder to 10, detectors [9] and belief-propagation LDPC decoders. SIR and

and the maximum number of message propagation iterations in SIR denote the SIR of 1 and 4 Tb/in channel, respectively,

LDPC decoder to 30.

taken from Fig. 2.

Fig. 2 compares the capacity of the Binary input-AWGN (BI- Fig. 4 shows that the performance of our designed code is

AWGN) channel with the SIRs of 2-D ISI channels. The 2-D about 0.2 dB superior to that of LDPC code optimized for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2826

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 49, NO. 6, JUNE 2013
TABLE I VARIABLE NODE DEGREE SEQUENCES OF LDPC CODE OPTIMIZED FOR 2-D ISI AND AWGN CHANNELS

the 4 Tb/in channel, which coincides with the SIR gap (theoretical performance) in Fig. 2.

V. CONCLUSION

In this paper, new LDPC codes optimized for a 2-D ISI

channel have been designed based on EXIT curve fitting of

modified EXIT charts. Monte Carlo simulation results have

verified that our designed LDPC codes for 2-D ISI channel can

achieve better performance than codes optimized for AWGN

channel, and yield BER of 10 at

0.33 dB away

from the SIR for a code length of 13824 in 4 Tb/in magnetic

recording channel.

Fig. 3. EXIT curves of 2-D-DET at

.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by A STAR Singapore under Grant SERC0921560129. The work of J. Zheng was supported by the NSFC under Grant 61201140.

Fig. 4. BER performance for 2-D ISI channels ( and ) with the designed LDPC codes and the LDPC codes optimized for AWGN channel.

AWGN channel at the BER of 10 for two different code

lengths (

) in the 2-D ISI channel with

recording density of 4 Tb/in . When the recording density de-

creases to 1 Tb/in , about 0.1 dB performance gain is achieved.

This suggests that with increasing recording density of a

2-D ISI channel, the performance gain between the designed

ISI-optimized code and conventional AWGN-optimized code

increases.

We also see that the designed codes achieve a BER of 10 at

less than 0.7 dB away from the SIR for

,

and about 0.33 dB away from the SIR for

in 2-D

ISI channel with recording density of 4 Tb/in .

Finally, Fig. 4 shows that the optimized codes for the 1 Tb/in

channel has about 0.4 dB gain in real coded performance over

REFERENCES
[1] R. Wood, M. Williams, A. Kavcic, and J. Miles, “The feasibility of magnetic recording at 10 Tb/in2 on conventional media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 917–923, Feb. 2009.
[2] Y. Ng, K. Cai, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, S. Zhang, and T. C. Chong, “Modeling and two-dimensional equalization for bit-patterned media channels with media noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 45, no. 10, pp. 3535–3538, Oct. 2009.
[3] S. H. Zhang, Z. L. Qin, and X. X. Zou, “Signal modeling for ultrahigh density bit-patterned media and performance evaluation,” in Proc. Intermag 2008 Dig. Techn. Papers, Marid, Spain, May 2008, pp. 1516–1517.
[4] S. Karakulak, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, and H. N. Bertram, “Joint-track equalization and detection for bit patterned media recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 9, pp. 3639–3647, Sep. 2010.
[5] A. Kavcic, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution and code performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1636–1652, Jul. 2003.
[6] N. Varnica and A. Kavcic, “Optimized low-density parity-check codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 168–170, Apr. 2003.
[7] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, Apr. 2004.
[8] H. Song, J. Liu, and V. Kumar, “Convergence analysis of iterative soft decoding in partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 2552–2554, Sep. 2003.
[9] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[10] A. Thangaraj and S. McLaughlin, “Thresholds and scheduling for LDPC-coded partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 2307–2309, Sep. 2002.
[11] O. Shental, N. Shental, S. Shamai(Shitz), I. Kanter, A. J. Weiss, and Y. Weiss, “Discrete-input two-dimensional Gaussian channels with memory: Estimation and information rates via graphical models and statistical mechanics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 54, no. 4, pp. 1500–1513, Apr. 2008.
[12] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low density parity check nodes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:33:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

