IEEE ICC 2013 - Communications Theory

Near-LSPA Performance at MSA Complexity

Joao Andrade, Gabriel Falcao, Vitor Silva Joao P. Barreto, Nuno Goncalves

Valentin Savin

Instituto de TelecomunicacВёoЛңes

Institute of Systems and Robotics

CEA-LETI

Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering Dept. of Electrical & Computer Engineering MINATEC Campus

University of Coimbra, Portugal

University of Coimbra, Portugal

38054 Grenoble, France

Email: {jandrade,gff,vitor}@co.it.pt

Email: {jpbar,nunogon}@isr.uc.pt

Email: valentin.savin@cea.fr

AbstractвҖ”The tradeoff between error-correcting performance and numerical complexity of LDPC decoding algorithms is a well-known problem. In this paper we depict the unseen errorfloor performance of the Self-Corrected Min-Sum algorithm for long length DVB-S2 codes. We developed a massively parallel simulation using GPUs which allowed a comprehensive BER characterization either in the waterfall or in the error-floor region. We show that the self-correction technique increases the BER performance by 0.5 and 0.2 dB, in the waterfall and error-floor region, when compared to the Min-Sum algorithm. Furthermore, it reaches within 0.2 dB to the Logarithmic Sum-Product BER performance and it also outperforms the Normalized Min-Sum at high SNR, a low complexity decoding algorithm which yields good BER performance.
Index TermsвҖ”LDPC codes; Self-Corrected Min-Sum; BER Performance; DVB-S2
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes were introduced in 1962 [1] and recaptured the attention of the scientific community in 1996 [2], providing a very powerful alternative to Turbo codes due to their capacity-approaching characteristics [3]. They have since been adopted in several digital communication standards. However, even by todayвҖҷs standards, the problem of LDPC decoding still poses a very complex numerical problem. Such complexity combined with bandwidth and QoS requirements compelled engineers and the information theory community to investigate more efficient decoding solutions, such as new LDPC code structures and decoding algorithms capable of achieving very fast decoding times. The project and development of real-time field decoders using Application-Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) and Field-Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) technologies provides limited hardware resources. Therefore, strategies need to be adopted that balance a trade-off between decoding complexity and error-correcting capabilities. Typically, suboptimal decoding, and thus lower error-correcting capabilities, is tolerated if faster decoding is achieved, around a trade-off that is application specific.
The Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA) [4], [5] is a very popular soft-decoding algorithm that presents a fair tradeoff between sub-optimal decoding and numerical complexity. This latter characteristic can be dealt with by addressing the suboptimality through offset and normalization corrections [4], [5]. However, another promising strategy can be adopted, namely through the self-correction technique, which addresses the MSA sub-optimality by introducing erasure messages into

the decoding algorithm [6]. In this paper, we analyse how self-correction can outperform
the MSA and reach within a negligible gap of the benchmark decoding algorithm in terms of error-correction for long length irregular LDPC codes. We analyse the numerical complexity of the Self-Corrected Min-Sum Algorithm (SCMSA) against the Logarithmic Sum-Product Algorithm (LSPA), the MSA and the Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm (NMSA). Moreover, we have conducted an error-floor characterization of the SCMSA with a coherent statistical significance.

II. LDPC CODES

LDPC codes are linear block codes characterized by sparse parity-check matrices, which verify the following condition:

c Г— HT = 0, c вҲҲ C,

(1)

where c is a codeword from the set C of possible codewords. In (1), the codeword set C is defined as the null-space of H.
H also defines a bipartite graph, as shown in Figure 1, where rows and columns constitute a node type and the nonnull elements, i.e. the bits or Bit Nodes (BNs) participating in a parity-check equation or Check Node (CN), constitute the graphвҖҷs edges. The following notation will be used throughout the paper regarding LDPC codes:
вҖў N is the coded block length; вҖў K represents information bits length; вҖў M =N вҲ’ K is the number of parity-check equations; вҖў R = K/N is the coding rate; вҖў a BN corresponds to a bit in the codeword; вҖў a CN corresponds to a parity-check equation; вҖў dv and db are the degree of CNs and BNs respectively, or
alternatively the number of non-null elements CNs and BNs possess in the parity-check matrix H; вҖў edges are associated with non-null elements in H and connect BNs to CNs; вҖў Оіn a-priori reliability (LLR) BN n; вҖў Оұnm message sent by BN n to CN m; вҖў ОІmn message sent by CN m to BN n; вҖў ОұЛҶn a-posteriori LLR of BN n.

A. DVB-S2 LDPC Codes
The Digital Video Broadcasting - Satellite 2 (DVB-S2) digital communication standard is one of numerous protocols relying on LDPC codes for their Forward Error Correcting (FEC) systems. These codes define particularly long block

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4673-3122-7/13/$31.00 В©2013 IEEE

3281

Оі0 Оі1 Оі2 Оі3 Оі4 Оі5 Оі6 Оі7

BN 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7

Parity-check

CN Equations

1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 c0+c1+c2=0

00011100
H=
10010010

1 c3+c4+c5=0 2 c0+c3+c6=0

0 1 0 0 1 0 0 1 3 c1+c4+c7=0

Processing CN Оұ1(i4вҲ’1) BN4
ОІ1(i4)

BN5 Оұ1(i5вҲ’1)
CN1 Оұ1(i3вҲ’1)

BN3

CN0 CN1 CN2 CN3 BN0 BN1 BN2 BN3 BN4 BN5 BN6 BN7

CN0 Оұ0(i1)

BN ОІ0(i1)

Processing

ОІ3(i1)

BN1

CN3

Fig. 1. Example LDPC code, defined by the depicted parity-check restrictions, its corresponding Tanner graph and the message-passing procedure for CN1 and BN1.

Algorithm 1 Variants of the LSPA and MSA CN processing

and BN processing.

CN processing:

i) Gallager approach (ПҶ-LSPA):

вҺӣ

вҺһ

ОІm(i)n = ПҶ вҺқ

ПҶ Оұn(iвҲ’m1) вҺ  Г—

sign Оұn(iвҲ’m1) ,

n вҲҲN (m)\n

n вҲҲN (m)\n

ПҶ(x) = log

exp |x| + 1 exp |x| вҲ’ 1

(3)

ii) tanh approach (tanh-LSPA):

вҺӣ

вҺһ

ОІm(i)n = 2 atanh вҺқ

tanh

Оұn(iвҲ’m1) 2

вҺ 

(4)

n вҲҲN (m)\n

iii) Jacobian approach ( -LSPA):

lengths, with 16200 and 64800 bits for short and normal frame modes, which elects them as suitable candidates for long length case studies. Moreover, they belong to the LDPC Irregular Repeat and Accumulate (LDPC-IRA) class which is prone to fast encoding, and their parity-check matrices exhibit periodical properties which can be exploited to efficiently map the BNs and CNs adjacency to memory [7], [8].

III. SOFT-DECODING ALGORITHMS
Soft-decoding algorithms are the elected methods to decode LDPC codes [1], [2], [4], [5] and follow graph-based messagepassing algorithms between BNs and CN of the Tanner graph, as illustrated in Figure 1. The Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) [1], [2] has practical implementation issues related to quantization errors due to the massive use of multiplications, and is too complex for Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) technology, the prime target of LDPC decoders. Hence, variations of the SPA have been proposed that ameliorate the decoding complexity and ease the decoder project.

A. Logarithmic Sum-Product
The LSPA operates on the log-likelihood domain, since multiplications become additions, and its formalization is presented in Algorithm 1. Approaches i-iii) [1], [9], [10] are variations which present different decoding complexities. All of them show dependencies on transcendental functions as seen in Algorithm 1. Approach iii) allows the introduction of forward-backward techniques which minimize the number of instructions issued [10] and a sub-optimal approximation of the function leads to the MSA.

B. Min-Sum Algorithm

The MSA formalization iv), dismisses the transcendental component of the operator in (2), thereby introducing a sub-optimal approximation to the CN processing. This leads to an overestimation of the ОІ messages, due to the log term in (2) being strictly positive.

u

v = sign (uv) Г— min {|u|, |v|}) вҲ’ log

1 + eвҲ’|u+v| 1 + eвҲ’|uвҲ’v|

(2)

ОІm(i)n = n вҲҲN (m)\nОұn(i)m

(5)

iv) (MSA):

ОІm(i)n =

sign

Оұn(iвҲ’m1)

Г—
n

min
вҲҲN (m)\n

|Оұn(iвҲ’m1)|

(6)

n вҲҲN (m)\n

v) (NMSA):

ОІm(i)n =

sign

n вҲҲN (m)\n

Оұn(iвҲ’m1)

Г—

n

min
вҲҲN (m)\n

|Оұn(iвҲ’m1)|

Г—

Оҳ

(7)

BN processing:

i-v): Оұn(im) = Оіn +

ОІm(i) n

(8)

m вҲҲM (n)\m

This problem has been previously addressed by offset and normalization corrections [4].
C. Normalized Min-Sum Algorithm
The NMSA addresses the sub-optimality introduced by the negligence of the second term in (2), by multiplying the minimum term with a normalization factor. The optimal normalization factor is Signal to Noise Ratio (SNR) dependent [11], although a considerable Bit Error Rate (BER) performance gain can be achieved by fixing a constant Оҳ [4] or alternatively by fixing Оҳ1 = 0.75 for the absolute minimum and Оҳ2 = 0.875 for the second minimum [12]. Alternatively, a strategy that also aims towards the correction of such overestimation can be achieved by self-correction [6].
D. Self-Corrected Min-Sum Algorithm
The SCMSA [6] addresses the ОІ messages overestimation at the BN processing side of the algorithm. Whereas ОІ messages are computed through (8) in the LSPA and MSA-variants, the SCMSA BN processing is defined by (9). The rationale behind the SCMSA is that the overestimation of the ОІ messages

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
3282

TABLE I NUMERICAL COMPLEXITY OF THE LSPA-VARIANTS, MSA AND SCMSA
FOR CN AND BN PROCESSING.

Algorithm ПҶ-LSPA in (3) tanh-LSPA (4)
-LSPA (5) MSA (6) NMSA (7) SCMSA (6)
Algorithm
SCMSA (9) all others

Mult.
2dv dv -
Mult.
-

CN Processing Additions
2dv -
dv вҲ’ 1 dv + log dv вҲ’ 2 dv + log dv вҲ’ 2 dv + log dv вҲ’ 2
BN Processing Additions
db db

XOR
dv dv вҲ’1 dv вҲ’1 dv вҲ’1
XOR
db -

Transcendental 2dv ПҶ
dv{tanh, atanh} 3(dv вҲ’ 2) -
Transcendental
-

is not critical unless any given Оұ, through the natural MSA decoding process, goes through a signal change, which in the log-likelihood ratio domain corresponds to a bit state change. Thus, in the SCMSA, an Оұ message signal change is followed by the introduction of an erasure (9).

ОұЛңm (i)n = Оіn +

ОІm(i) n

m вҲҲM (n)\m

Оұm (i)n =

0, sign{ОұЛңm (i)n} Г— sign{Оұm (iвҲ’n1)} < 0 вҲ§ Оұm (iвҲ’n1) = 0 ОұЛңm (i)n, otherwise.

(9)

An erasure in the log-likelihood ratio domain is expressed by a zero message, i.e. bit states 0 and 1 are equiprobable, and due to the CN processing nature, which will update erasures to adjacent BNs, several erased messages will be given to BNs adjacent to the CN that received the erasure. Upon receiving an erased message, the SCMSA acts similarly to the MSA, i.e. messages erased do not remain erased for more than one iteration as the SCMSA processes ОІ messages differently according to their magnitude, as formalized in (9).

IV. NEAR-OPTIMAL BER PERFORMANCE AT LOW NUMERICAL COMPLEXITY
The BER performance improvement achieved by the SCMSA is very promising regarding its implementation effort.

A. LDPC Decoding Numerical Complexity
The different numerical complexities of the CN and BN processing of the LSPA-variants and the MSA-variants are highlighted in Table I [5]. The MSA is very appealing, due to the non-dependence on transcendental functions. However, the degrading BER performance is severe enough to justify the use of offset or normalized variations of the MSA [5]. These variants would imply dv subtractions or dv multiplications per CN. On the other hand, the proposed SCMSA solution requires only an additional db exclusive-or operations and a comparator to properly introduce the erasure as seen in Figure 2.

B. Practical Implementation
Figure 2 depicts a schematic that illustrates the differences between the MSA and the SCMSA datapaths. The SCMSA

Self-Corrected BN

Z bits ОІЛҶm (i)n

ОІm (i)n X bits

se
1 bit 1 bit

Z bits ОІm (i)n
X bits

sgn{Оұm (iвҲ’n1) }
erasure

X bits

ОұЛңm (i)n

X bits

Оіn(i) sgn{ОұЛңm (i)n} ОұЛңm (i)n

X bits (0)

X bits Оұm (i)n

sgn{Оұ(i mn вҲ’1) }
erasure erasure

Self-Corrected CN
X bits Оұm (iвҲ’n1)

Оұm (iвҲ’n1) X bits

CN MSA

ОІm (i)n X bits

sgn{Оұm (iвҲ’n1) }

X bits

Оұm (iвҲ’n1) == 0

Z bits ОІЛҶm (i)n

Min-Sum and Self-Corrected Min-Sum data path Self-Corrected Min-Sum exclusive data path
Fig. 2. Memory-efficient computation of the self-corrected CN and BN processing for a possible hardware implementation. The datapaths of both the MSA and the SCMSA are presented. In the top figure the BN processing is depicted, where the self-correction takes place. As shown, only Z = X + 2 bits per computed Оұ(mi)n have to be loaded, since the ОІЛҶm (i)n message contains both the relevant ОІm (i)n message, sign{Оұ(miвҲ’n1)} and the information regarding whether an erasure has been introduced in the previous iteration. This is possible because the self-corrected CN processing variant has packed both sign{Оұ(miвҲ’n1)} and the erasure bit e into ОІЛҶm (i)n. This allows the SCMSA to be implemented for the same memory requirements of the MSA, if the former employs Y bits fixed-precision for the Оұ and ОІ messages and the latter (Y вҲ’1) bits for Оұ messages and (Y + 1) bits for ОІ messages.
dependency of the sign{Оұm (iвҲ’n1)} in (9) can be dealt with in different ways for software or hardware decoders. The former, targeted at simulation and prototyping, are less constrained by memory impediments as opposed to hardware-based decoders. Thus, equation (9) can be evaluated by loading the actual Оұm (iвҲ’n1) message from memory. In the hardware, memory bottlenecks seriously compromise the decoding execution time, and thus a packed message ОІЛҶm(i)n is proposed, which stores sign{Оұm (iвҲ’n1)}, ОІm(i)n and an erasure bit e together in the same message. The latter is used in the BN processing to inform whether an erasure has been introduced or not, thus avoiding the loading of Оұm (iвҲ’n1) messages.
Thus, an efficient implementation, for both software or hardware platforms, of the SCMSA requires only two extra bits when compared to other LSPA- or MSA-variants.
V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
A. Apparatus
The experiments conducted simulated an Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel under Quadrature Phase-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
3283

Shift Keying (QPSK) modulation for the DVB-S2 normal frame code with N = 64800 bits and R = 1/2. The MSA, NMSA and SCMSA simulations were carried out on Nvidia Tesla M2050 Graphics Processing Unit (GPU) platforms using the Compute Unified Device Architecture (CUDA) programming model [13]. The LSPA decoder was simulated using the Simulink Communication Blockset. This allowed not only to provide the BER performance benchmark, but also to provide a benchmark simulation time to illustrate the potential of using GPU engines in the LDPC BER simulation.
B. Simulation Environment
Simulating on the GPU represents a tremendous improvement in simulation time. Namely, the SCMSA GPU single precision floating-point decoder can compute the BER for a given SNR in about 5 hours for 104 simulated codewords, whereas the equivalent LSPA Simulink decoder takes 22 hours to complete on a ubiquitous Intel Pentium M T2330 in double precision floating-point. We have employed 7.2 and 8.2 fixedpoint data representations (x.y fixed-point data representation should be read as (x вҲ’ y) bits allocated for signal and magnitude representation and y bits for the decimal part). The considerable decoding throughputs (120 to 180 MBit/s) are obtained due to the high levels of data-parallelism and taskparallelism that the massively multithreaded GPU-decoder exploits. Data-parallelism has been exploited by the use of 128-bit vector data types which optimize the GPU achieved memory bandwidth and allows to decode 16 codewords at once. Furthermore, we have employed a Two-Phased Message Passing (TPMP) decoding schedule which allows to express a fine-grained level of parallelism, where each thread is responsible to process a BN or a CN.
Naturally, for the error-floor region, 104 codewords cannot provide statistical significance and in many cases it is not deep enough to observe any errors at all. Thus, the error-floor region was tested for 5Г—108 codewords, which is equivalent to 3.2Г—1013 bits of data. In order to simulate such large datasets we have employed 30 GPU engines to collaboratively and concurrently speed up the decoding time. Each data point is simulated by a group of 10 GPUs. The same random sequence can be sampled starting at any given k-th sample due to the employed Random Number Generator (RNG) XORWOW, available in the CUDA CURAND library [14], and thus each GPU can be allocated to process the corresponding portion of the sequence. Furthermore, the XORWOW RNG presents a period of 2190 вүҲ 1057. This allowed the simulation time to be reduced from a colossal one and a half month to just over one and a half day per data point in the error-floor region.
C. Waterfall BER Performance
The decoding performance, expressed in BER, on the waterfall region is shown in Figure 3 for several decoding algorithms and data representations. The LSPA obtains the best decoding performance, since it is an вҖңoptimalвҖқ decoding algorithm in the sense that no sub-optimality is introduced, besides the one inherent to the cycle effect, and it is used as a

10вҲ’1

10вҲ’2

10вҲ’3

BER

10вҲ’4

LSPA (fp)

MSA (8.2)

SMSA (8.2)

10вҲ’5

SCMSA (fp)

SCMSA (7.2)

SCMSA (8.2)

0.5

1

1.5

ES/N0 (dB)

Fig. 3. LSPA, MSA, NMSA and SCMSA BER performance on the waterfall region. The self-correction technique used by the SCMSA allows an approach of just вҲј 0.2 and вҲј 0.05 dB away from LSPA and the NMSA BER performance, respectively. It should be noted that losing one bit in the precision does not carry any performance penalty on the BER, as seen with the tested 7.2 and 8.2 fixed-point implementation of the SCMSA, where x.y designates (x вҲ’ y) bits for signal and integer representation and y bits for decimal representation. Therefore, the curves for 7.2 and 8.2 bits are hardly distinguishable from one another.

benchmark to the remaining algorithms. Namely, the SCMSA yielded a BER which approaches that of the LSPA by вҲј 0.2 dB. The MSA presents a performance degradation of вҲј 0.8dB, which is the result of the overestimation introduced in (2). Consequently, the SCMSA is вҲј 0.6dB better than the MSA and worse by вҲј 0.2dB than the LSPA. It should be noted that there is no significant penalty in BER performance on the waterfall region between the 7- and 8- bit precision fixedpoint data representation for the SCMSA. Hence, the two bits saved in the 7-bit representation, one per each Оұmn and ОІmn message when compared to the 8-bit fixed-point, can be used for the erasure e and signal sign{Оұm (iвҲ’n1)} representation, meaning that the actual memory requirements of the 8-bit MSA and the 7-bit SCMSA are the same. Another expected result is the ability of the SCMSA decoder in floating-point data representation to outperform by 0.05 dB the 7- and 8-bit fixed-point decoders, and reach within a 0.15 dB of the LSPA BER performance. In fact, arguably 0.15 dB is a negligibly small penalty to incur when numerical complexity is tremendously lowered and decoding times reduced by a considerable factor. However, the ability to capitalize on this result is at most limited as VLSI technology for LDPC decoding is better targeted for fixed-point data representations. Furthermore, the SCMSA floating-point decoder has a similar BER performance than the NMSA, albeit the latter performing 0.05 dB better than the fixed-point SCMSA decoders.
D. Error-floor BER Performance
The error-floor region is depicted in Figure 4. Given the constraints on the GPU available timeslots, we were able to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
3284

10вҲ’7

10вҲ’8

BER

10вҲ’9 10вҲ’10 10вҲ’11

LSPA (fp) MSA (8.2) SMSA (8.2) SCMSA (fp) SCMSA (7.2) SCMSA (8.2)

0.5

1

1.5

2

ES/N0 (dB)

Fig. 4. Captured MSA and SCMSA error-floor BER. Both the decoding algorithms converge to a BER of 10вҲ’11, with the SCMSA reaching its errorfloor 0.5 dB earlier than the MSA. The NMSA starts degrading its decoding performance at 1.2 dB and is outperformed by the fixed-point SCMSA.

find at least 3 error-floor points for the SCMSA and 2 for the MSA algorithm, each using 8-bit data representation. We have shown that the SCMSA lowers to its error-floor 0.5 dB earlier than the non-self-corrected MSA. Such a feature is particularly interesting as it indicates that the SCMSA does not degrade its performance along the waterfall and maintains the same capacity up to the error-floor region. Regarding the NMSA BER curve, it is observed that the fixed-point SCMSA is able to outperform it when the BER falls beyond 10вҲ’7 and while the NMSA worsens its decoding performance at a SNR of 1.2 dB, the SCMSA enters its error-floor at a BER of 10вҲ’11. Despite employing Оҳ values that were optimized for this particular LDPC code [12], the NMSA correcting performance degrades for a SNR above 1.2 dB. The alternative of employing Оҳ values depending on the SNR would further add to the complexity of the FEC system, since in the loglikelihood domain the decoding algorithms are independent of the channel SNR.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
We have shown that a practical and memory efficient implementation of the SCMSA is feasible and achieves nearLSPA performance, 0.1 dB away for floating-point precision and 0.2 dB away for 7- and 8-bit fixed-point representation. Furthermore, the SCMSA also significantly outperforms the NMSA at high SNRs. The proposed implementation requires only two extra bits per ОІЛҶmn message. Moreover, in order to demonstrate the promising SCMSA BER performance, we have developed a massively parallel channel simulator and decoder for the N = 64800 bits, R = 1/2 DVB-S2 LDPC code. The developed SCMSA fixed-point decoding solution was able to simulate the error-floor region of long length DVB-S2

LDPC codes in an acceptable timespan, guaranteeing statistical significance for the obtained results. Aided by a higher-level
of data-parallelism provided by several GPU engines, we were able to execute a one and a half month simulation time in just over one day. The developed simulators are available to the scientific community at http://montecristo.co.it.pt/decoder.
In the near future, we intend to port the developed simulators to a generic parallel programming model, which would allow these simulators to be executed on a wide range of Central Processing Units (CPUs), GPUs and other accelerators, as it has been shown with good performance for the particular case of regular LDPC decoding [15].
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Instituto de TelecomunicacВёoЛңes and by FundacВёaЛңo para a CieЛҶncia e Tecnologia grants PEst-OE/EEI/LA0008/2011 and SFRH/BD/78238/2011 under the European structural programmes POPH-QREN, FSE and national MEC funding.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, вҖңLow-Density Parity-Check Codes,вҖқ IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21вҖ“28, jan 1962.
[2] D. MacKay and R. Neal, вҖңNear Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,вҖқ Electronics Letters, vol. 32, pp. 1645вҖ“1646, 1996.
[3] S.-Y. Chung, J. Forney, G.D., T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, вҖңOn the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,вҖқ Communications Letters, IEEE, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58 вҖ“60, feb 2001.
[4] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, вҖңNear optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406вҖ“414, 2002.
[5] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, вҖңReduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes,вҖқ Communications, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 53, no. 7, p. 1232, july 2005.
[6] V. Savin, вҖңSelf-corrected Min-Sum decoding of LDPC codes,вҖқ in Information Theory. ISIT 2008, IEEE International Symposium on, july 2008, pp. 146 вҖ“150.
[7] F. Kienle, T. Brack, and N. Wehn, вҖңA Synthesizable IP Core for DVBS2 LDPC Code Decoding,вҖқ in DATE вҖҷ05: Proceedings of the conference on Design, Automation and Test in Europe. Washington, DC, USA: IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 100вҖ“105.
[8] G. Falcao, J. Andrade, V. Silva, and L. Sousa, вҖңGPU-based DVB-S2 LDPC decoder with high throughput and fast error floor detection,вҖқ Electronics Letters, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 542вҖ“543, April 2011.
[9] W. Leung, W. Lee, A. Wu, and L. Ping, вҖңEfficient implementation technique of LDPC decoder,вҖқ Electronics Letters, vol. 37, no. 20, pp. 1231 вҖ“1232, sep 2001.
[10] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, D.-M. Arnold, and A. Dholakia, вҖңEfficient implementations of the sum-product algorithm for decoding LDPC codes,вҖқ in Global Telecommunications Conference, 2001. GLOBECOM вҖҷ01. IEEE, vol. 2, 2001, pp. 1036 вҖ“1036E vol.2.
[11] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, вҖңIterative decoding of onestep majority logic deductible codes based on belief propagation,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 931вҖ“937, 2000.
[12] C.-j. Tsai and M.-c. Chen, вҖңEfficient LDPC decoder implementation for DVB-S2 system,вҖқ Proceedings of 2010 International Symposium on VLSI Design, Automation and Test, pp. 37вҖ“40, Apr. 2010.
[13] NVIDIA, CUDA C Programming Guide 5.0. NVIDIA, 2012. [14] NVIDIA, CUDA Toolkit 4.2 CURAND Guide. NVIDIA, 2012. [15] G. Falcao, V. Silva, L. Sousa, and J. Andrade, вҖңPortable LDPC Decoding
on Multicores Using OpenCL [Applications Corner],вҖқ IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 81вҖ“109, 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:38:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
3285

