3354

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

Tree-Structure Expectation Propagation for LDPC Decoding Over the BEC
Pablo M. Olmos, Member, IEEE, Juan José Murillo-Fuentes, Senior Member, IEEE, and Fernando Pérez-Cruz, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—We present the tree-structure expectation propagation (Tree-EP) algorithm to decode low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over discrete memoryless channels (DMCs). Expectation propagation generalizes belief propagation (BP) in two ways. First, it can be used with any exponential family distribution over the cliques in the graph. Second, it can impose additional constraints on the marginal distributions. We use this second property to impose pairwise marginal constraints over pairs of variables connected to a check node of the LDPC code’s Tanner graph. Thanks to these additional constraints, the Tree-EP marginal estimates for each variable in the graph are more accurate than those provided by BP. We also reformulate the Tree-EP algorithm for the binary erasure channel (BEC) as a peeling-type algorithm (TEP) and we show that the algorithm has the same computational complexity as BP and it decodes a higher fraction of errors. We describe the TEP decoding process by a set of differential equations that represents the expected residual graph evolution as a function of the code parameters. The solution of these equations is used to predict the TEP decoder performance in both the asymptotic regime and the finite-length regimes over the BEC. While the asymptotic threshold of the TEP decoder is the same as the BP decoder for regular and optimized codes, we propose a scaling law for finite-length LDPC codes, which accurately approximates the TEP improved performance and facilitates its optimization.
Index Terms—Belief-propagation (BP), binary erasure channel, expectation propagation, finite-length analysis, LDPC codes, random graph evolution.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are well-known channel capacity-approaching linear codes. In his Ph.D. [1], Gallager proposed LDPC codes along with linear-time
Manuscript received December 27, 2011; revised July 25, 2012; accepted January 26, 2013. Date of publication February 06, 2013; date of current version May 15, 2013. This work was supported in part by the Spanish Government (Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia, TEC2012-38800-C03-{01-02}, Consolider-Ingenio 2010 CSD2008-00010, and TEC2009-14504-C02-{01,02}), and in part by the European Union (FEDER). This paper was presented in part at the 2010 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory and in part at the 2012 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
P. M. Olmos and F. Pérez-Cruz are with the Departamento Teoría de la Señal y Comunicaciones, Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, 28911 Madrid, Spain (e-mail: olmos@tsc.uc3m.es; fernando@tsc.uc3m.es).
J. J. Murillo-Fuentes is with the Departamento de Teoría de la Señal y Comunicaciones, Escuela Técnica Superior de Ingeniería, Universidad de Sevilla, 41092 Sevilla, Spain (e-mail: murillo@us.es).
Communicated by D. Burshtein, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2013.2245494

practical decoding methods, among which the belief propagation (BP) algorithm plays a fundamental role. BP was later redescribed and popularized in the artificial intelligence community to perform approximate inference over graphical models (see, for instance, [2]–[4]). Given a factor graph that represents a joint probability density function (pdf) of a set of discrete random variables [5], BP estimates the marginal probability function for each variable. It uses a local message-passing algorithm between the nodes of the graph. The complexity of this algorithm is linear in the number of nodes [2]. For tree-like graphs, the BP solution is exact, but for graphs with cycles, BP is strictly suboptimal [6]–[8].
Linear block codes can be represented using factor (Tanner) graphs [9], where the factor nodes enforce the parity check constraints. For LDPC codes, the presence of cycles in the Tanner graph quickly decays with the code length . For large block lengths, a channel decoder based on BP performs close to the bitwise maximum a posteriori (bit-MAP) decoding, in certain scenarios [3], [10]. Nevertheless, the bit-MAP solution can only be achieved when the code length, code density, and computational complexity go to infinity [11]–[13].
The analysis of the BP for LDPC decoding over independent and identically distributed channels is detailed in [14] and [15], in which the limiting performance and code optimization are addressed. For the binary erasure channel (BEC), the BP decoder presents an alternative formulation, in which the known variable nodes (encoded bits) are removed from the graph after each iteration. The BP, under this interpretation, is referred to as the peeling decoder (PD) [11]. In [16], the authors investigate the PD limiting performance by describing the expected LDPC graph evolution throughout the decoding process by a set of differential equations. The asymptotic performance for the BP decoder is summarized in the computation of the so-called BP threshold [10], [11], [16], [17], which defines the limit of its decodable region for an LDPC code.
The analysis of BP decoding performance in the finite-length regime is based on the evaluation of the presence of stopping sets in the LDPC graph [14], which can severely degrade the decoder performance. In [14] and [18], the authors provide tools to compute the exact BP average performance. However, this task becomes computationally challenging if the degree of irregularity or block length increases [11]. Alternatively, we can separate the contributions to the error rate of large-size errors, which dominate in the waterfall region [19], from small failures, which cause error floors [14]. Scaling laws (SLs) were proposed in [19] and [20] to accurately predict the BP performance in the waterfall region. For the BEC, they are based on the PD covariance

0018-9448/$31.00 © 2013 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

3355

evolution for a given graph as a function of the code length. Covariance evolution was solved for any LDPC ensemble in [21]. On the other hand, the analysis of the error floor is addressed by determining the dominant terms of the code weight distribution [14], [18]. Precise expressions for the asymptotic bit-MAP and BP error floor are derived in [1], [22], [23].
Expectation propagation (EP) [24] can be understood as a generalization of BP to construct tractable approximations of a joint pdf. Consider the set of all possible probability distributions in a given exponential family that map over the same factor graph. EP minimizes within this family the inclusive Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence [25] with respect to the true pdf of the coded bits. In [24] and [26], it is shown that BP can be reformulated as EP by considering a discrete family of pdfs that factorizes as the product of single-variable multinomial terms. EP generalizes BP in two ways: first, it is not restricted to discrete random variables. And second, EP naturally formulates to include more versatile approximating factorizations [27], [28]. In this paper, we focus on EP to construct a Markov tree structure to approximate the original graph. Conditional factors in the tree structure are able to capture pairwise interactions that single factors neglect. We refer to this algorithm as tree-structure expectation propagation (Tree-EP). We borrow from the theoretical framework of the Tree-EP algorithm to design a new decoding approach to decode LDPC codes over discrete memoryless channels (DMCs) and we analyze the decoder performance for the BEC.
For the erasure channel, we show that the Tree-EP can be reinterpreted as a peeling-type algorithm that formulates as an improved PD. We refer to this simplified algorithm as the TEP decoder. The TEP decoder was presented in [29] and [30], where we empirically observed a noticeable gain in performance compared to BP for both regular and irregular LDPC codes. We now explain, analyze, and predict this gain in performance for any LDPC code. First, we extend the TEP decoder the methodology proposed in [16] to evaluate the expected graph evolution of the LDPC’s Tanner graph. As the block size increases, we show the conditions for which the TEP decoder could improve the BP decoder. Nevertheless, for typical LDPC ensembles, the TEP decoder is not able to improve the BP solution. In the second part of the paper, we concentrate on practical finite-length codes and we explain the gain provided by the TEP decoder compared to BP. Based on empirical evidence, we propose an SL to predict the TEP performance for any given LDPC ensemble in the waterfall region, which captures the gain in performance that the TEP achieves with respect to BP for finite-length LDPC codes. Furthermore, the SL can be used for TEP-oriented finite-length codes optimization. These results have been partially presented in [31]. Finally, we also prove that the decoder complexity is of the same order than BP, i.e., linear in the number of variables, unlike other techniques proposed to improve BP at a higher computational cost. For instance, the complexity of variable guessing algorithms [32], the Maxwell decoder [12], and pivoting algorithms for efficient Gaussian elimination [33]–[35], is not linear unless we impose additional restrictions that may

alter/compromise their performance, such as bounding the
number of guessed variables or pivots. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II is de-
voted to introducing the Tree-EP algorithm for block decoding over DMCs. In Section III, we particularize the algorithm for the BEC, yielding the TEP decoder. In Section IV, we derive the differential equations that describe the decoder behavior for a given LDPC graph and we investigate its asymptotic behavior, as well as the algorithm’s complexity. In Section V, we describe the SL proposed to approximate the TEP finite-length performance for a given LDPC ensemble in the waterfall region. We conclude the paper in Section VI.

II. TREE-EP FOR LDPC DECODING LDPC OVER MEMORYLESS CHANNELS

Consider an LDPC binary code with parity check matrix

, of dimensions

, where

, is the code

length, and the rate of the code. By definition, any vector in

belongs to the code as long as

, where is the

-dimensional binary Galois field. Each row of , therefore,

imposes an even parity constraint on a subset of variables:

(1)

where is the th component of , is the set of positions

where the th row of is one and is a Boolean operator,

which takes value one if the condition in its argument is verified.

Note that, given the definition in (1), we can write

.

Assume that an unknown codeword is transmitted through a

DMC [25] and let

be the observed channel output,

where

is the channel output alphabet. A bit-MAP decoder

[36] minimizes the bit error rate by estimating the transmitted

vector

as follows1:

(2)

for

, we have assumed that the channel is memo-

ryless and that all codewords are equally probable

(3)

For any LDPC code of interest, the factor graph associated

with the product

in (2) yields a graph with

1In the following, we use lower case letters to denote a particular realization

of a random variable or vector, e.g.,

means that takes the value.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3356

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

cycles [37]. Hence, the exact computation of the marginals of grows exponentially with the number of coded bits
[6]. BP [1]–[3] is nowadays the standard algorithm to efficiently solve this problem in coding applications, because accurate estimates for each marginal are obtained at linear cost with . BP is typically described as a message-passing algorithm and it additionally has an important variational interpretation: the BP update rules can be seen as a sequential Lagrangian method for solving Bethe’s variational problem for approximate inference [26], [38]. This provides a principled basis for applying BP to graph with cycles [39]. Generalizations of the Bethe approximation and iterative methods to solve such problems yield improving-BP approximate inference techniques [38], [40], among which we focus on Tree-EP [27]. Because, adding a tree approximation that incorporates pairwise marginals in a chain helps to decode unresolved chain of bits, in which BP cannot tell that there is a single valid configuration.
A. Expectation Propagation
EP [24], [41] tries to approximate

(4)

where (5)

Note that in this case,

keeps the same factorization struc-

ture than BP, i.e.,

. Let denote the (expo-

nential) family distribution including all possible . The op-

timal choice for

, denoted by

, minimizes the

inclusive KL divergence2 with

:

for some normalized functions

, where is a subset of

, for

. Under these conditions, the function

in such that

(8)

is constructed as follows: (9)

(10)

where

denotes all the variables in except those in

.

Proof: The proof of this lemma can be found in [44] and

[45].

To efficiently find a solution to the minimization in (6), Minka

[24], [41] proposed a sequential algorithm to iteratively approx-

imate

where only one intractable factor, i.e.,

a parity function for us, is considered at each iteration. This al-

gorithm is described in Section II-B. Besides, he proved that the

sequential EP update rules always have a fixed point when the

approximating family is exponential. However, convergence to

such fixed point is not guaranteed.

A fundamental result that links EP and BP in the discrete case

is the following [24], [42]: if we consider the disconnected ap-

proximation in (5), then the Bethe energy function can be de-

rived from the EP energy function and the EP update rules are

equal to the standard sum–product rules. An alternative proof

can be found in [39], where it is shown that the Bethe entropy

function can be derived from the EP entropy function. Besides,

the Bethe/EP sets of all possible pseudomarginals, the so-called

marginal polytope, are also proved to be same set. Therefore,

in the case

, sequential EP and BP message-

passing are equivalent in the sense that they are Lagrangian

methods for solving the same variational problem [26].

(6) B. Tree-EP Algorithm for LDPC Decoding

where, in general, the solution is not unique. All possible solutions are in one-to-one correspondence with stationary points of the EP energy function or its dual EP entropy function (see [39],

The Tree-EP algorithm [27], [41] improves BP decoding be-

cause it approximates the posterior

in (2) with a tree (or

forest) Markov structure between the variables, i.e.,

[42], and [43] for details). The next lemma, first proved in [44], states that the resolution of the problem in (6) is as complex as

(11)

the bit-MAP decoding problem in (2). In both cases, we have

to perform exact marginalization over the posterior distribution where the set of pairs

forms a tree graph over the

.

original set of variables nodes. For some variable nodes,

Lemma 1 (Moment Matching for Inclusive KL-Divergence might be missing, i.e., is empty, and we use single-variable

Minimization): Consider a set of discrete random variables

factors

. Using the factorization in (11), the complexity of

with joint pdf

. Let be a family of probability distribu- the marginalization in (2) is linear with the number of variables.

tions that share a common factorization

In [41], it is shown that the approximation in (11) provides

more accurate estimates for the marginals

than BP,

(7) since it captures information about the joint marginal of pairs of variables that is then propagated through the graph. When we

2We refer to the inclusive KL divergence with respect to when we minimize

and to the exclusive KL divergence when we minimize

,

which is the one used for mean-field approximations; see [41] for a discussion.

consider an structured factorization for

like the tree struc-

ture in (11), the EP free energy is a generalization of same func-

tion in the disconnected case

. A parallelism

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

3357

exists with generalized BP (GBP) [38], which is essentially a

message-passing Lagrangian method to solve a generalization

of the Bethe variational problem. A discussion around GBP and

structured EP, beyond the scope of this paper, can be found in

[40]. While GBP has had limited success in coding [46], [47],

we show in this paper that the tree approximation proposed for

EP does help.

Let tree be the family of all possible tree distributions of the form (11). Lemma 1 can be directly applied to our case and the

optimum Markov-tree

in tree is such that

(12)

function is denoted by Steps 8–10, we compute problem:

. Then, by Lemma 1, in as the solution of the following

KL

(16)

tree

At this point, the Tree-EP solution becomes suboptimal with

respect to (6) but tractable: the computation of the marginals

for

over

in (21) and (22) can

be performed efficiently. Let us first express the factorization of

in a more convenient way:

for

and

(13)

Lemma 1 only provides the conditions to find the distribution

in the family tree that is optimum in the sense of (6). A different problem arises from the optimization of the family

(17)

tree itself, namely how we choose the parent variables , to

achieve the highest accuracy at the least cost. As discussed in [41], while determining the cost of a given choice is straight-

where we have introduced the following auxiliary functions:

forward, estimating the accuracy for each case is a nontrivial

problem that highly depends on the distribution

and the

application at hand. In our case, the analysis of the Tree-EP de-

(18)

coder for the erasure channel in Section III provides the intu-

ition to construct the family tree for any DMC. To describe the implementation of the Tree-EP algorithm, in the following, we assume the family tree is fixed.
In the following, we present the sequential EP algorithm pro-

Therefore, the marginalization of (17) in (21) yields

posed in [24] and [27] to iteratively approach

. Define

as the EP approximation to

at the end of the th

(19)

iteration and let

be the Tree-EP solution after

convergence.3 Let

with

and

iteration so that

be nonnegative real functions, , that are updated at each
(14)

As in (14), the product

maps over the

same factor graph than the tree structure chosen in (11). There-

fore, the presence of cycles in the factor graph of

is due to the parity factor

. The graph is cycle-free as

Thus, the Tree-EP approximation to the posterior

eration , i.e.,

, is constructed as follows:

long as, among the variables connected to the parity check node

at it-

, none of them are linked by a conditional term

in (11), as illustrated in Fig. 1(a). Otherwise, the graph presents

cycles, as shown in Fig. 1(b). These cycles play a crucial role in

understanding why the Tree-EP algorithm outperforms the BP

solution. In the first case, the marginal computation in (21) is

solved at linear cost by message-passing. For the latter, where

the graph is not completely cycle-free, we can compute the pair-

wise marginals using Pearl’s cutset conditioning algorithm [27],

[48].

(15) Pearl’s algorithm proceeds by breaking each cycle assuming

a set of the variables involved as known, e.g., in Fig. 1(b).

The TEP is described in Section II-B. At iteration , only the

th factor,

, is refined. In Step 7, we replace

by the true value

in the

function. The resulting

Then, the marginals of the remaining variables can be computed at low cost by message-passing. The overall complexity of this method is exponential with the number of assume-observed variables. Note that this quantity is bounded for LDPC codes

3EP as BP might not converge for loopy graphs [41].

with finite maximum check degree. Nonetheless, we prove that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3358

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

for the BEC, the complexity of the Tree-EP algorithm is linear with the number of variables, i.e., of the same order as BP.

Algorithm 1 Tree-EP algorithm for a predefined tree structure.

1:

.

2: Initialize

for

.

3: Initialize

.

4: repeat

5:

.

6: Chose a

7: Remove :

8: Compute

9: Compute 10: 11: Compute

for

.

12:

to refine: from

. and include the true term
(20)

and

for

: (21)
(22)

. from

for

.

. By (15), (23)

.

Fig. 1. Example of factor graph associated with

. In (a), the graph

is cycle free since does not connect any variable with its parent . In

(b), the graph has a cycle since both and

belong to .

This two-state behavior of the likelihood function makes the

pairwise marginal functions

in (19) and (21) alter-

nate between just four states, depending on what we know about

these variables at the end of the th iteration. Furthermore, we

can describe a finite set of scenarios for which

might

alternate between these states. This result is used later to pro-

pose a simplified reformulation of the decoding algorithm. Let

us detail the possible outcomes and cases of interest by running

the algorithm at different times, after initialization.

Iteration

: In Step 7, we compute

(27)

where the likelihood terms

for

take

the form (24)–(26). Over (27), we compute the marginals of

. For any pair

, we observe the following

scenarios:

1) If and have not been erased, then marginalization

yields

13: until all

,

, converge.

(28)

14:

.

III. TREE-EP DECODING FOR THE BEC

For the BEC, the likelihood function for a particular variable

,

, provides a complete description about its value

when it has not been erased:

(24) (25)

where and are, respectively, the values of and .

2) If is erased and is not, then the marginalization in

(27) might reveal the value of . This scenario only hap-

pens if is connected to the check

and, in addition,

the rest of variables connected to this check are known. In

this way, the parity restriction fixes the value of the vari-

able and the marginalization yields the same result than in

(28). Otherwise remains unknown:

In this case, we say that the variable is known. Otherwise, when

(29)

the variable is erased, the likelihood function for this variable is constant and the uncertainty about its value is complete:

where is the value of . For instance, assume that, in Fig. 1(a), and are known. When we compute the

(26)

marginal for , this variable gets revealed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

3359

3) The case where is erased and is not is symmetric to the previous scenario.
4) If both and are erased, we compute

(30)

for any

pair unless these two variables are the

only unknown variables connected to the check

.

In this case, due to the parity constraint, only one value

of

makes

nonzero. In other

words, an equality or inequality relationship between both

variables is found and

either takes the form of

(31)
or (32)

For instance, assume that, in Fig. 1(b), and are

known. Then, we learn that is equal or opposite to .

The latter is of importance to explain the advantage of the

Tree-EP decoder over BP, because we only obtain the result in

(31) or (32) if we compute pairwise marginals. The BP algo-

rithm uses only a disconnected approximation for the factors

and from them we cannot derive the (in)equality constraints in

(31) and (32).

It can be readily checked for the BEC that when we compute

the functions

and

in Steps 9–11 of the

algorithm, they are proportional to the pairwise marginal com-

puted above4: (35)

(36)

(in)equality pairwise condition in (31) and (32). Assume that at

iteration , we learn that and are equal, and at iteration

, we process the check node

depicted Fig. 1(b). If

, then the erased variable should be zero to fulfill the

parity constraint. This scenario would not be possible, if we

could not capture equality relationships, which are voided for

the BP decoder. Therefore, the tree structured approximation

in (11) provides with respect to the BP procedure an extra case

in which a variable can be de-erased. The key aspect is to find

(in)equality conditions between variables that can be used to

decode other variables related to them by parity functions.

Nonetheless, the BEC constitutes an exception for which

we can iteratively construct the optimum chain structure. The

Tree-EP procedure for BEC presented in the next section can

be cast as a sequential search of three particular scenarios

to perform the inference (e.g., build tree), where the only thing that matters is in which we only need to account for the

number of unrevealed variables in the processed check node.

We can further simplify and reformulate this procedure as a

peeling-type decoder. The key idea is to simplify the LDPC

Tanner graph according to the information that we sequentially

obtain from the encoded bits. We rename this reformulated

algorithm as the TEP decoder [29], [30].

Algorithm 2 TEP algorithm for LDPC decoding over BEC.

1: Let be the received codeword:

.

2: Construct the index set

then

.

3: for all

do

4: Remove from the graph variable node .

5: If

, flip the parity of the check nodes connected to .

Iteration : We follow a induction procedure to analyze the

result of the th iteration. Given the factorization of the function

in (17), the current information of each variable is

contained in the

functions for

in

(18). By replacing (36) into (18), we observe that these functions

are also proportional to

. Therefore

6: end for 7: repeat 8: Look for a check node of degree one or two. 9: if is found with degree one, connected to

, then

10: is decoded with value . (37)
11: Remove both and from the graph.

By enumerating the possible outcomes of the marginal 12: If

, flip the parity of the check nodes connected

over

in (37), we conclude that the to .

discussion for

extends for this case almost literally. By

induction, we have proved that the functions

only

belong to one of the four states described in (28)–(32).

13: else if is found with degree two, connected to and , then

Nevertheless, for any

, we reveal a new scenario

for which a variable can be de-erased, thanks to the imposed

4For instance, if we assume that

compute

:

is of the form of (28), we first

14: Remove
15: If to .

and from the graph. , flip the parity of the check nodes connected

and, therefore,

(33) 16: Reconnect to the check nodes connected to .

17: end if
(34)

18: until the graph is empty or there are no degree-one or two

where we take

when

.

check nodes in the graph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3360

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

Fig. 3. In (a), the variables and are connected to a two-degree check node, , and they also share a check node of degree three, . In (b), we show the graph once the TEP has removed and .

Fig. 2. In (a), we show two variable nodes, and , that share a check node of degree two, . In (b), heirs the connections of (solid lines). In (c), we show the graph once and have been removed. If is parity one, the parities of , are reversed.

check node of degree two that also share another check node with degree three, as illustrated in Fig. 3(a). After removing the check node and the variable node , the check node is now degree one, as illustrated in Fig. 3(b). At the beginning of

A. TEP Decoder

Before detailing the TEP decoder algorithm, let us introduce

some basic definitions about Tanner graphs. The Tanner graph

of an LDPC code is induced by the parity-check matrix as de-

tailed in [9] and [36]. The graph has variable nodes

and

parity check nodes

. The degree of

a check node, denoted as , is the number of variable nodes

connected to it in the graph. Similarly, the degree of a variable

node, denoted as , is the number of check nodes connected

to that variable node. In the Tanner graph, we associate a zero

parity value to each check node in the graph. As we iterate, the

parity of a certain check node , which is denoted hereafter as

, might change.

the decoding algorithm, this scenario is very unlikely. However, as we remove variable and check nodes, the probability of this event grows, as we are reducing the graph and increasing the degree of the remaining variable nodes.
Another important result of the TEP algorithm is that it applies the Tree-EP algorithm with no initial pairwise relations. The tree structure is not fixed a priori. It dynamically includes a new pairwise relation in the tree structure whenever it processes a degree-two check node, i.e., it updates tree on the fly. In Appendix A, we show that the TEP decoding is independent of the ordering in which the variables are processed, as different processing orderings yield equivalent trees in the graph.
B. Connection to Previous Works

The TEP decoder is detailed in Algorithm 2. It is based on the A similar procedure for removing degree-two check nodes

sequential procedure of degree-one and two check nodes in the was considered in the analysis of accumulate-repeat-accumu-

graph. Processing a degree-one check node in Steps 10–12 of late (ARA) LDPC codes [50], [11]. ARA codes were proposed

Algorithm 2 is equivalent to find an erased variable connected to achieve channel capacity under BP decoding at bounded com-

to a check node where the rest of variables are known. Since the plexity. Roughly speaking, ARA codes are formed by the con-

BP solution is restricted to this case, the description of the BP catenation of an accumulate binary encoder, an irregular LDPC

as a peeling-type algorithm is obtained if we do not consider code, and another accumulate binary encoder. In [51] and [52],

Steps 13–16 in Algorithm 2 [16], [49]. In this sense, the TEP Pfister and Sason showed that ARA codes can be described for

decoder emerges as an improved PD. Besides, we claim that the BEC as an equivalent irregular LDPC ensemble, and hence, they

complexity of both decoders is of the same order, i.e.,

. were able to compute the BP threshold for ARA LDPC codes

We intentionally leave to Section IV-E a detailed analysis of the using standard techniques [10]. To obtain such equivalent LDPC

TEP complexity.

ensemble, parity checks of degree two, corresponding to the ac-

The removal of a degree-two check node in Steps 13–16 of cumulate encoding, were processed similarly to how the TEP

Algorithm 2 represents the inference of an equality or inequality decoder processes degree-two check nodes. Once they obtained

relationship. This process is sketched in Fig. 2. The variable

the equivalent irregular LDPC ensemble, they just consider BP

heirs the connections of (solid lines) in Fig. 2(b). Finally, decoding. Nevertheless, we want to emphasize that the novelty

the check and the variable can be removed, as shown of our proposal is twofold: first, we consider, describe, and mea-

in Fig. 2(c), because they have no further implication in the sure the effect of the removal of degree-two check nodes to im-

decoding process. is de-erased once is de-erased. Note prove the BP solution for any block code. And second, we have

that, when we remove a check node of degree two, we usually shown that the idea of propagating pairwise relationships can be

create a variable node with a higher degree, while the degree of extended for any binary DMC using the EP framework.

the check nodes remains unaltered. The TEP decoder eventually creates additional check nodes

IV. TEP DECODER EXPECTED GRAPH EVOLUTION

of degree one, when we find a scenario equivalent to the one Both the PD and the TEP decoder sequentially reduce the

depicted in Fig. 3. Consider two variable nodes connected to a LDPC Tanner graph by either removing check nodes of degree

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

3361

one, or degree one and two. As a consequence, the decoding process yields a sequence of residual graphs. In [16] and [49], it is shown that if we apply the PD to elements of an LDPC ensemble, then the sequence of residual graphs follows a typical path or expected evolution [11]. The authors described this path as the solution of a set of differential equations and characterized the typical deviation from it. Their analysis is based on a result on the evolution of (martingale) Markov processes due to Wormald [53].
In this section, we first introduce Wormald’s Theorem and then particularize it to compute the expected evolution of the residual graphs for the TEP, which is used in the following to evaluate the decoder performance.

A. Wormald’s Theorem

Consider a discrete-time Markov random process

with finite -dimension state space

that depends on

some parameter

. Let

denote the th component

of

for

. Let be a subset of

containing those vectors

such that

2) There exists a constant such that (43)

for

and for

solution given by (42) for

, where

is the

(44)

The result in (43) states that each realization of the process
has a deviation from the solution of (42) smaller than if is large enough. Our goal is to show that this
theorem is suitable to describe the LDPC graph evolution during the TEP decoding process in certain scenarios.

B. LDPC Ensembles and Residual Graphs

In this section, we introduce some basic notation about

LDPC ensembles. An ensemble of codes, denoted by

, is defined by the code length and

the edge degree distribution (DD) pair

[10]:

(38)

(45)

We define the stopping time to be the minimum time so that

. Furthermore, let for

, be functions from

such that the following

conditions are fulfilled:

1) (Boundedness). There exists a constant such that for all

and

(39)

for all

.

2) (Trend functions). For all

and

(46)
where represents the fraction of edges with left degree in the graph and is the fraction of edges with right degree . The left (right) degree of an edge is the degree of the variable (check) node it is connected to. The graph is specified in terms of fractions of edges, and not nodes, of each degree; this form is more convenient to analyze the convergence properties of the decoder. If the total number of edges in the graph is denoted by
, it can be readily checked that
(47)

(40)

for all

, where

.

3) (Lipschitz continuity). For each , the function is

Lipschitz continuous on the intersection of with the half

space

, i.e., if ,

belong

to such intersection, then there exists a constant such that

The design rate of the LDPC ensemble

is

set as follows [11]:

(48)

where

and

are, respectively, the average variable de-

gree and the average check node degree in the graph. They can

be computed from the graph DD:

(49)

(41) (50)

Under these conditions, the following holds:

1) For

, the system of differential

equations

To analyze the expected graph evolution, each time step cor-

responds to each step of the decoder.

and

are, re-

spectively, the number of edges with left degree and right de-

(42) gree in the residual graph at time and we define

and

. We denote by the number

has a unique solution in for

with

of edges in the graph at time and define

.

,

.

Hence,

for

and

for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3362

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

are the coefficients of the DD pair that de-

fines the graph at time . As we show in Section IV-C, an small

fraction of degree-one variable nodes might appear during the

decoding process. Note that we have included an explicit depen-

dence with time in

. As we described in Section III-A,

the removal of degree-two check nodes tends to increase the

variable degree, and consequently, we expect the maximum left

degree to grow.

The remaining graph at time

only depends on the

graph at time , and hence, the sequence of graphs

along the time is a discrete time Markov process, where

,

. It can be shown

that the DD sequence of the residual graphs constitutes a suffi-

cient statistic [16], [19] for this Markov process, and therefore,

it suffices to analyze their evolution.

For a given LDPC ensemble and a BEC with parameter , the

TEP decoder performance is analyzed and predicted using the

expected evolution of

and

along time. In this sec-

tion, we first identify their dependence with the rest of the com-

ponents of the DD in the graph. Then, we show the conditions

in which they can be estimated along time using Worlmald’s

theorem.

Fig. 4. Examples of Subscenarios in (a), given the check node the variable nodes and only share the check node , and in (b), in which they share another check node of degree .

for

. In the following, we omit the pair

in the expectations to keep the notation

uncluttered.

The terms in (54) and in (55) correspond to one iteration

of the BP decoder and they were already computed in [16]. We

include them for completeness:

(56)

for

,

C. Expected Graph Evolution in One TEP Iteration
We analyze the average evolution of the DD pair in one iteration of the TEP decoder, i.e.,
(51) (52) At time , the TEP looks for a check node of degree one or two to remove it. With probability
(53)

for tion and

(57) , where is the Kronecker’s delta func-
(58)

the decoder selects a check node of degree one, which is denoted

as .SAcelntearrnioatively, in Scenario , a check node of degree two

is removed with probability

. The expected

change in the process

between and

can be

expressed as follows:

(54)

is the average edge left degree at time . We now compute the

terms and in (54) and (55), respectively. When a check

node of degree two is removed, e.g., in Fig. 4, there are two

possible subscenarios.

1) : The variable nodes and connected with the

check node do not share another check node, depicted

in Fig. 4(a).

2) : The variable nodes and connected to the check

node share at least another check node, depicted in

Fig. 4(b).

Let

be the probability of scenario , i.e.,

. In Appendix B, we show that this probability is

given by

for

and

(59)

(55) where

(60)

is the average edge right degree. In Appendix B, we also show that the scenario is dominated by the case in which the two variables connected to a check node of degree two only share another check node, as illustrated in Fig. 4(b). To compute
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

3363

and in (54) and (55), we first evaluate the graph expected For the case

change for and and then average them using

:

, we have

(61)

(62)

where

. Now we evaluate each term in (61)

and (62).

1) Expected Change in the Graph Assuming : At time ,

we remove the check node in Fig. 4(a), which is connected

to and . If is the remaining variable, its degree becomes

. From the edge perspective, the graph losses

edges with left degree and edges with left degree ,

and gains

edges with left degree

. Note

also that we have the same result if is the remaining variable.

The node degrees and are asymptotically pairwise inde-

pendent [54], and, thus, and are degree with probability

for

.

We first focus on the evolution in the number of edges with

left degree

at time , i.e.,

. The sample space

of

is given by

(63)

where

1)

, if (

XOR

) AND

.

2)

, if

.

3)

, if

,

AND

.

4)

, otherwise.

The probability associated with each case can be easily eval-

uated. Finally, the expected change in the number of edges with

left degree yields

(66)

Note that degree-one variable nodes are not created in neither nor scenarios. Regarding the edge right DD, only two edges of right degree two are lost, and hence
(67)

(68)

2) Expected Graph Evolution Assuming : We study now

the scenario depicted at Fig. 4(b), where the variables and

are also linked to another check node of degree . In

this case, the degree of the remaining variable is

and the check node losses two edges and its degree reduces

to

. On the left side, the graph losses edges with

left degree and edges with left degree , and gains

edges with left degree

.

For a given degree

,

takes value in

the set in (63). The possible combinations of , , and the

associated

values are now as follows:

1)

, if (

XOR

) AND

.

2)

, if

.

3)

, if

,

AND

.

4)

, otherwise.

The expected value of

for

is given by

(69)

and, for the case (64)

, we obtain

For

, the sample space reduces to

and, it is straightforward to show that

(70)

The values of for which the number of edges involved in

(64) and (69) is larger than the number of edges in the graph

are not allowed. We set a zero probability for them. We do not

(65)

enumerate the complete list of these combinations for the sake of the readability of the section.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3364

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

The importance of scenario lies in the fact that the check

node losses two edges and its degree reduces to

.

Therefore, check nodes with right degree one can be created.

Since the check node has degree

with probability

, it can be shown that

(71)

for

,

(72) and

(73)

With the results in (64)–(73) and the probability

in (59),

we are able to compute the terms and in (54) and (55),

obtaining the expected graph evolution in one iteration of the

TEP decoder. It is important for the following analysis to note

that, in any possible scenario,

and

only depend on

the left DD through

.

D. Analysis of

in the Asymptotic Limit

The application of Wormald’s Theorem to guarantee the con-

centration around the TEP expected graph evolution derived in

the previous subsection is not formally possible in the limit

. First, the maximum left degree

is not bounded and

the boundedness condition in (39) might not hold. And second,

note that the dimension of the Markov process

is

not bounded either. However, the asymptotic limit performance

can be studied by observing the evolution of the average left

degree

, which measures how likely is the creation of de-

gree-one check nodes by removing degree-two check nodes (see

Fig. 3).

If we assume an

ensemble with

bounded complexity, i.e., finite ,

and

values,

then in the limit

we get

. As long as

, the TEP and BP solutions are equivalent. Therefore,

the BP decoding threshold is only improved for those LDPC

ensembles for which, as the TEP decoder runs, there exists

some

such that

or, equivalently, if there exists some

(74) such that
(75)

since the rest of the terms in (74) stay bounded during the TEP

procedure if

. If

becomes infinite, the asymp-

totic decoding threshold for the TEP might be higher than the

decoding threshold of the BP decoder. However, we cannot rely

on Wormald’s Theorem to find the TEP threshold . In this

section, we analyze the conditions for

to go to infinity,

which opens the possibility for

. Although, we have

not found so far any LDPC ensemble with a finite DD meeting

these conditions and, besides, the strategies followed to maxi-

mize this effect yield ensembles that lack practical interest, as

shown later. We leave as an interesting open problem the search

for practical LDPC ensembles for which

and the

exact computation of such threshold.

Assume an LDPC ensemble of infinite length. As proven in

Appendix A, the processing order is irrelevant and, hence, we

can always run the BP first. The removal of degree-one check

nodes does not increase the left average degree, i.e.,

is

finite [11]. Over the BP residual graph, processing a degree-two

check node can be explained with a Polya urn model. Consider

urns labeled

. In urn we place a ball

for each variable of degree in the graph. In each iteration,

we take two balls from the urns. The urns are chosen indepen-

dently with probability proportional to the number of balls per

urn times its label. One ball is thrown away and the other one is

placed in the urn labeled by the sum of the labels of the picked

balls minus 2, introducing a new urn if it did not previously

exist. For example, if we pick a ball with label “3” and a ball

with label “4,” we put one ball in the urn labeled “5.” We repeat

this process times, the number of degree-two check nodes in

the BP residual graph. The resulting

is the sum of the

number of balls in all urns multiplied by their labels divided by

the total number of balls.

It is straightforward to conclude that, as we process check

nodes of degree two,

increases, but does it becomes infi-

nite? On the one hand, if we start with balls and

,

becomes infinite as

. On the other hand, if

is small enough such that we do not pick twice the same ball,

stays finite. There must be an intermediate value for

for which

becomes infinite, i.e. a phase transition.

Let us illustrate this result with the (3, 6) regular LDPC code.

We run the urn model described above to numerically compute

. In Fig. 5(a), we plot

for

,

,

,

, as a function of the fraction of processed

variables

. In Fig. 5(b), we plot the ratio between

for

and

for

, 3 , and 4

. Although the urn model is only valid asymptotically and

as long as

, we can see there is a clear phase transition.

If we process less than 74% of the variables nodes, we should

not expect

to go to infinity. For a BEC channel with

erasure probability just above the BP threshold

,

the ratio between degree-two check nodes and variables in the

BP residual graph is 0.625 [16]. Therefore, for this ensemble,

the TEP decoder performs asymptotically as the BP decoder,

i.e.,

, because

stays finite.

In order to maximize the fraction with respect to the

number of variables in the BP residual graph, there are two

basic strategies. We can either design LDPC ensembles to

minimize the size of the residual BP graph or we can design the

ensemble to increase the presence of degree-two check nodes.

Given the known analytical expressions for the BP residual

graph [16], it is easy to prove that in the first case the solution

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

3365

Fig. 5. In (a), we plot the average left degree

computed using the urn model for

of processed variables. In (b), we plot the ratio between

for

and

, 1000 ,

,

, as a function of the fraction

for

, 3 , and 4 .

yields standard irregular ensembles for which

,

i.e., codes for which the threshold is given by the stability

condition [15], [16], [22]. In this case, there is no margin

and

. In the second case, the ensemble

presents severe limitations: for instance, by (48), any ensemble

where all the check nodes are of degree two, i.e.,

,

has a rate

(76)

Lemma 3: The complexity per iteration of the TEP algorithm

for decoding LDPC codes of positive rate and finite maximum

variable and check node degrees remains constant for any code

for which

. Compared to the BP complexity, the

TEP complexity differs at most in a constant complexity per

iteration.

The complexity per iteration can grow as a function of only

for

and for those ensembles for which the limiting

condition in (74) is fulfilled.

Proof: See Appendix D.

where ,

are such that

. Either the code presents

minimum distance of only one bit if

or zero rate if

.

We approach this undesired behavior as we increase the fraction

of degree-two check nodes .

F. TEP Decoder Differential Equations

Unlike the asymptotic case, for finite-length LDPC ensem-

bles such that

, Wormald’s Theorem can be ap-

plied to estimate the expected graph evolution along the de-

E. TEP Decoder Complexity

coding process. In particular, we are interested in the evolution of and , which is basic to predict the finite-length per-

In the next two lemmas, we prove that, for most LDPC codes, formance, as we later discuss in Section V. Consider the TEP

namely those for which

, the TEP complexity lin- decoding of an arbitrarily large

ensemble

early scales with the code length .

with finite code length. First, note that expressions (54) and (55)

Lemma 2: Consider a transmission over a BEC of parameter play the role of the trend functions in Wormald’s theorem:

using a code sampled at random from

,

where the polynomials and are of finite order and the

(77)

code length

. Let

and

be the

evolution under TEP decoding of the average variable and check

node degrees when the channel realization is . For any vector

,

and

are bounded during the whole

(78)

decoding process.

Proof: See Appendix C.

The boundedness property of the variable degree evolution

under TEP decoding, proved in Lemma 2, has a significant im- for

and

, where

pact in the decoding complexity.

. Regarding the bounding condition in (39), for finite

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3366

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

ensembles, any individual realization

and where the BP threshold for this code is

. For this

are bounded by at any time. This condition code, by running the urn model procedure described previously

also ensures the Lipschitz continuity of the functions

and in Section IV-D, we also find that

does not scale with .

in (77) and (78) for all contained in the set defined In both cases, when we are below the BP threshold, both the

in (38). In this case, is simply the region of possible initial expected evolution curves and the empirical trajectories rep-

conditions for the DD, i.e., the region within the hypercube of resent successful decoding since degree-one check nodes do

unit length and dimension

.

not vanish until tends to zero. Besides, note also that the

Given the former discussion, Wormald’s theorem ensures that longest deviation happens around

and

, when

when we solve the differential equations:

the predicted curves for both

and

have a relative

minimum. This point is known as critical point and plays a fun-

(79) damental role in the derivation of SLs to predict the performance

in the finite-length regime [11], [19], as explained in Section V.

(80) In [19] and [20], the authors show that the graph initial DD are

Gaussian distributed around the mean in (82) and (83). Further-

(81)

more, they observe that as the PD performs, individual realizations are also Gaussian distributed around the mean computed

for

and

with initial conditions

and

, then the so-

lution for

and

is unique and, with high probability,

by (43), does not differ more than

from any partic-

ular realization of

for

and 2. The deviation that

in [16] using Wormald’s theorem. And they show that the stan-

dard deviation is

, lower than the one warranted by

Wormald’s theorem. This result is a consequence of the channel

properties. In Fig. 6, we observe the same results for the TEP

decoder.

we can expect with respect to the solution given by (79)–(81)

might rise up to

, because of the expected

graph evolution equations derived in Section IV-C assumed in-

V. TEP DECODING OF LDPC ENSEMBLES IN THE FINITE-LENGTH REGIME

dependence. As we show in Appendix B, any cycle involving

variables decays as . The most dominant component, i.e.,

, is not significant compared to maximum deviation guar-

anteed by Wormald’s theorem.

Note that the initial conditions,

and

, contain the

information about the ensemble

and the

channel [16], [11]:

(82)

A. Motivation
In [29] and [30], we empirically observed the gain in performance obtained when the TEP decoder is applied to decode some finite-length LDPC ensembles over the BEC. The gain of the proposed algorithm for practical codes can be analyzed from a different perspective based on the work by Polyanskiy et al. [55]. They present bounds on the maximum achievable coding rate for binary memoryless channels in the finite-length regime.

(83) These bounds can be regarded as the extension of the Shannon coding rate limit when the number of channel uses, i.e., code

It is important to remark that, as described in Section IV-A,

the solution of (79)–(80) only holds for all

. In our sce-

nario, the stopping time is given by either the time instant at

which the decoder stops, because there are no degree-one or de-

gree-two check nodes, or the time when cancels, denoting

that all variables in the graph have been decoded.

Let us illustrate the accuracy of this model to analyze the

TEP decoder properties for a very large code length,

.

In Fig. 6(a), we compare the solution of the system of differ-

ential equations in (79) and (80) for

and

for a regular (3, 6) code with 20 particular

decoding trajectories obtained through simulation. We consider

two cases: below

and above

the BP

threshold, i.e.,

. We depict their evolution along

the residual graph at each time, i.e., . We plot in thick lines

the solution of our model for

and

, and in

thin lines the simulated trajectories,

in solid and

in dashed line. In Fig. 6(b), we reproduce the same experiment

for the irregular LDPC ensemble:

length, is fixed. For a given channel, a target probability of error

, and a desired code rate , we can compute the minimum

code length for which there exists a code that satisfies these

requirements.

In Fig. 7, we plot the dependence-testing (DT) lower bound

in [55] to the maximal achievable rate for a target block error

rate of

over a BEC of parameter

. In

[55], this lower bound is shown to be tight and much simpler

to compute than the nonasymptotic maximum achievable rate.

We considered two LDPC ensembles, referred to as code A and

B. In both codes,

, while

and

. The rate of each code is, respec-

tively,

and

. In Fig. 7, we depict the

minimum code length for both the TEP and the BP decoders to

empirically obtain a performance below

for each one of

the two LDPC ensembles proposed. We observe that the use of

the TEP decoder reduces by roughly half the block length to the

optimum case given by the DT bound. Since the complexity of

both algorithms is of the same order for these ensembles, the

TEP decoder emerges as a powerful method to decode practical

(84)

finite-length LDPC codes. In the light of these results, we focus on a theoretical de-

(85) scription of the TEP gain with respect to BP for finite-length

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

3367

Fig. 6. In (a), we include the predicted evolution of

and

for a regular (3, 6) code with

and an erasure probability

(top) and

(bottom), where

. In (b), we include the same result for the irregular DD defined in (84) and (85) and an erasure probability

(top) and

(bottom), where

. We include in thin lines a set of 20 individual decoding trajectories chosen at

random.

codes. We show that the TEP differential equations proposed in Section IV-F are the key to measure and predict such gain. This result is used to extend to the TEP decoder the closed-form expressions proposed in [19] and [20] to estimate the BP performance for some LDPC ensembles of regular or quasi-regular DD. They are referred to as BP SLs. For the TEP, we propose a simple SL, in which all parameters are analytically known as a function of the DD. We start by reviewing some important steps in the analysis of the BP performance for finite-length LDPC ensembles that are need for the TEP finite-length analysis.

time instants during the whole decoding process. These points

are referred to as critical points.

Definition 1: BP-critical point of an LDPC ensemble. For a

given LDPC ensemble with BP threshold , let

be the

expected evolution of the fraction of degree-one check nodes

under BP decoding at in the limit

. We say that is a

BP-critical point of the ensemble if

(86)

B. BP Decoder in the Finite-Length Regime In [19] and [20], the authors proved that the BP performance

In [16] and [49], the authors analytically compute a function of the LDPC DD and the channel parameter :

as

for finite-length LDPC codes can be predicted by analyzing the statistical presence of degree-one check nodes at a finite set of

(87)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

Fig. 7. DT lower bound to the maximal achievable rate with supreme block

error rate

over a BEC of parameter

[55]. We include

the minimum code length computed to obtain a valid performance for both the

TEP and the BP and two LDPC ensembles and of rates

and

.

2) The variance is of order

. We denote it as

.

3) For any , the distribution of

tends with to a

(truncated) Gaussian pdf.

Let us focus for simplicity on LDPC ensembles with a single

critical point5 at . In [19] and [20], it is shown that the BP de-

coder at

successes with very high probability as

long as

, i.e., if there exists a positive fraction

of degree-one check nodes at the BP-critical point. In Fig. 8, we

include a random set of 100 realizations of

for the

(3,6) LDPC ensemble,

and

along with the

density evolution (DE) mean prediction in (87), in thick line.

The ensemble has a single critical point at

. Around

this point, we can see that the DE curve reaches a relative min-

imum and the global error probability is clearly dominated by

the failure probability at this point. Thus, the finite-length per-

formance can be roughly estimated by just evaluating the cumu-

lative density function (cdf) of

at the unique critical

point :

(88)

where

is the average block error probability for the

code

under BP decoding. To eval-

uate (88) assuming

is Gaussianly distributed, we

need its mean and variance. The mean can be computed for each

from (87), but in [19], the authors show that the first-order

Taylor expansion around the BP-critical point, i.e.,

(89)

is as precise and more convenient, as it allows computing a SL

that measures the performance as a function of the distance to

the threshold.

Closed-form expression for the variance,

, for any

LDPC ensemble can be found in [21] and, for large enough

at the critical point, we can ignore the dependence of

with respect to [19].The error probability can be approximated

by [19]

(90)

where (91)

Fig. 8. Set of 100 realizations of

for

and

with the DE mean prediction in (87), thick line.

along

For sufficiently large code lengths, this scaling function pro-

where

. The decoding process starts at

and fin-

ishes at

. Let

be the random process that rep-

resents the evolution of the fraction of degree-one check nodes

along the decoding process for a given ensemble of code length

. Note that any realization

of such process repre-

vides an accurate estimation of the BP error probability. A comparison between (90) (dashed lines) and empirical BP performance curves (solid lines) can be found, respectively, in Fig. 11(a) and (b) for the regular (3, 6) LDPC ensemble and for the irregular LDPC ensemble in (84) and (85).

sents a successful decoding as long as it is positive for any

. The process

presents some important

properties [19], [20].

1)

closely follows

in (87). For moder-

C. TEP Decoding in the Finite-Length Regime
For describing the TEP decoder finite-length performance, we follow a similar approach and study the random process

ately-sized codes the mean of the process is essentially in-

5This includes any regular ensemble and typically codes with small degree of

dependent of .

irregularity, for instance the code defined in (84) and (85).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

3369

, which represents the evolution of the fraction of

edges with right degree 1 along the TEP decoding process for

a given ensemble of code length , around its local minima.6

As for the BP, the analysis centers on the points during the de-

coding processes for which the presence of degree-one check

nodes vanishes. As for the BP analysis, we define similarly the

critical points for the TEP decoder and we also prove that these

critical points are identical for both decoders.

Definition 2: TEP-critical point of an LDPC ensemble. For

a given LDPC ensemble with TEP threshold

, let

be the expected evolution of the fraction of degree-one

check nodes under TEP decoding at in the limit

. We

say that is a TEP-critical point of the LDPC ensemble if

(93)

Lemma 4: For a given ensemble LDPC

, the

number of TEP critical points is equal to the number of BP

critical points.

Proof: In the regime

, we have proven that, with

high probability, the TEP decoder is not able to create any addi-

tional check nodes of degree one with respect to the BP solution

and, as a consequence,

. Besides, given the TEP

independence of the processing order proved in Appendix A,

we can implement the TEP decoder by first removing all the

degree-one check nodes, i.e., a BP stage, and then process de-

gree-two check nodes if the BP does not succeed. Hence, for

and

,

and

match during the

whole decoding process and, therefore, the ensemble presents

the same number of critical points for both decoding algorithms.

The process

behaves as

and present

the same statistical properties, namely:

1)

closely follows

, which is com-

puted as solution of the TEP decoder differential equations

in (79)–(81).

2) The variance decays as

. We denote it as

.

3) For any , the distribution of

tends with to

a (truncated) Gaussian pdf.

As discussed before, for codes with a single critical point ,

we estimate the TEP finite-length performance by computing

the cdf of the process

at :

to the BP case. The mean can be computed using the first-order Taylor expansion around the TEP-critical point, i.e.,

(95)

In this case, there exists a nonzero value for the zero-order

Taylor expansion that indeed explains the improvement of the

TEP decoder over the BP for finite-length codes. For the BP

decoder, the mean process evolution in (87) is independent

of . Therefore, at and the corresponding critical point,

7 and hence the expression in (89). For

the TEP decoder, the mean evolution depends on the code

length and the mean at the critical point is nonzero. We can

understand why

is nonzero by assuming

that we first process all degree-one check nodes, and then all

degree-two check nodes. After we process all the degree-one

check nodes for

and, at

and large , we

should get stuck at the BP critical point with high probability

and hence

. Now, when we process all

the degree-two check nodes, we move from to and we

can generate degree-one check nodes for finite length codes,

because

in (59) is nonzero. This value is captured

by a nonzero

in (95). The evaluation of

for different code lengths using the TEP

differential equations shows that it decays as , namely

(96)

because the probability that two variables nodes share the same

two check nodes decays as and we process a fraction of

of degree two check nodes after we have process all degree-one

check nodes. For instance, in Fig. 9, we plot

(solid lines) computed from (79)–(81) for different code lengths,

where

. We include in dashed lines sample av-

erage curves obtained by simulation. Note that all curves con-

verge at the critical point. The exact computation of

is

obtained by solving (79)–(81), and it is shown in Appendix E

how it can be computed for any DD. For instance, the (3, 6)

LDPC ensemble has a

and the irregular LDPC

ensemble in (84) and (85) presents a

.

By (94), we estimate the TEP performance as follows:

(94)

where

is the average block error probability for the

code

under TEP decoding. To eval-

uate (94) assuming

is Gaussianly distributed, we

need its mean and variance, which can be computed analogously

(97)

6We could have also studied the evolution of

(92) where

is the TEP block error rate for the code

where

represents the evolution of the fraction of edges with right

degree along the decoding process for a given ensemble of code length . But

the processing of degree two does not decode any additional variable unless

degree-one check nodes are created and hence we only focus on the evolution

of the random process

that tell us how many additional variables

we can decode.

and we have used the values computed in [19], [21], [56], and [57] for the BP (namely and
) for the TEP performance. These values measure the mean and variance of the degree-one check nodes and mainly
7The BP gets stuck, because it has run out of check nodes of degree one.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3370

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

In Fig. 11, we compare the SL solution in (97) in dashed lines

with real performance data obtained through simulation in solid

lines for the regular (3, 6) LDPC ensemble (a) and for the ir-

regular ensemble defined in (84) and (85) (b). The match be-

tween dashed and solid lines is as good as for the BP estimates

as for the TEP, showing the accuracy of the model for the TEP

performance and the proposed parameter estimation. In both

plots, due to the parameter overestimation when assuming the

BP values for

and

, we slightly overestimate

the TEP error probability. The overestimation is also augmented

because in our estimate of

under TEP decoding we do

not take into account scenarios where two variables that share

a degree-two check node, also share more than one additional

check node. For the code lengths considered, these scenarios

can be eventually found and the mean can be slightly higher. In

addition, there exists

trajectories that go to zero at

some point, but eventually can be positive again by removing

degree-two check nodes.

Fig. 9. For the (3, 6) ensemble, we plot

(solid lines) com-

puted from (79)–(81) for different code lengths, where

. We

include in dashed lines sample average curves obtained by simulation. We have

averaged them over 500 realizations.

Fig. 10. We include the TEP average evolution

(in

solid lines) empirically computed using a set of 500 realizations of

for the (3, 6) ensemble with

and

,

and

. We also include the BP sample mean evolution in dashed lines

for comparison.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present the EP algorithm to address the LDPC decoding process over any DMC. The posterior distribution of the variables is approximated with a Markov-tree probability distribution, over which the marginal estimate can be efficiently performed. By construction, the solution improves the BP estimate. For the BEC, we show that the Tree-EP algorithm reduces to a peeling-type algorithm, i.e., the TEP decoder, that outperforms the BP solution by additionally processing degree-two check nodes and not only degree-one check nodes. The TEP decoder improvement in performance is significant for practical finite-length LDPC codes. We prove that the complexity of this additional step is bounded even in the limiting case and therefore, the TEP complexity is of the same order than the BP algorithm. In the asymptotic regime, we have shown the conditions that needs to be fulfilled by an LDPC ensemble to improve the BP threshold. The TEP decoder differential equations provide the graph mean evolution under TEP decoding. Using Wormald’s theorem, we proved that the dispersion around the mean evolution is bounded. These results are used to explain and predict the TEP decoder improvement. Along with empirical support, we have developed an SL to predict the performance. The analysis of the BEC case developed in detail in this paper for both the asymptotic and finite-length regime is a guideline to construct efficient implementations of the Tree-EP algorithm to outperform the BP solution in other channels like the binary symmetry channel and the binary additive white Gaussian noise channel.

depend on the DD ensemble and the channel dispersion [55].

We could expect the value of

and

to slightly grow with respect to the BP estimates, because

APPENDIX A TEP SOLUTION AND PROCESSING ORDER

we are additionally processing degree-two check nodes. Em- We now prove that the TEP decoder solution is independent

pirically, we observe that

is slightly larger of the processing order, i.e., the order in which check nodes

of degrees one and two are removed. Given the parity check

than

, as shown in Fig. 10, and we observe an matrix of a linear block code , we first show that any operation

insignificant reduction in the variance.

of the TEP decoder has an associated linear operator over .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

3371

Fig. 11. In (a), we include the BP/TEP performance for the regular (3, 6) ensemble (solid lines) along with their respective SL approximations in (90)/(97) (dashed

lines) for

and . The SL parameters are

,

, and

. In (b), we reproduce the same figure

for the irregular LDPC code defined in (84) and (85). The SL parameter is

,

, and

.

Finally, we prove that these operations commute, proving the

independence on the processing order.

Consider the

parity check matrix of the code, . The

TEP algorithm is initialized by removing from the graph all the

known variables. The removal of any of these variables from the

graph is equivalent to applying a binary linear transformation

over the matrix to get a new one, , where the variable is

completely disconnected, i.e.,

(98)

where is an -dimensional identity matrix where the th element is zero.
To remove a check node of degree two from , e.g., connected to variables and , the resulting matrix, , is obtained as follows:

(99) (100)

share a degree-two check node. Therefore, not every sequence

of operations is valid.

We study the commutativity of two valid sequences and .

If we prove that every pair of operations commutes, we may

reorder the operations in the second sequence as in the first one.

Particularly, we have to show the conditions for which following

matrices commute:

1) and commute for all , ,

2)

and

commute for all possible pairs

and

for

and

,

3) and commute for all the possible triples

for

,

where , , , , and belong to

. The first case is

straightforward since diagonal matrices always commute.

For the other two cases, we need to prove the conditions for

which

, which can be express as follows

using (100)

where

and is an

zero matrix with

(101)

. We have assumed that variable has been removed and

inherits its connections. The symmetric transformation, i.e., remove instead of , is performed by applying the oper-

(102)

ator. Since the final result is one variable with all connections, is equivalent to . With no loss of generality we as-
sume that the removed variable is the leftmost variable in Tanner graph or, equivalently, the leftmost column in the parity check matrix.

Note that, to prove both 2) and 3), we have to show that

the matrices and

commute for all the possible triples

and that

and

commute as well. Regarding

the first case, we have

When applying after a sequence of operations (transformations), variable must be connected to a degree-one check

(103)

node. If it was not in the original graph, in , some operations are needed first. Similarly, for , we need variables and to

(104)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3372

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

share

check nodes, one of them at least of degree two. If

we compute the probability

(106)

Fig. 12. TEP decoder can process the graph by either removing the degree-one check node and then process the degree-one check node (once has been processed becomes degree one) or, indistinctly, remove first the degree-two check node and then process the degree-one check node .

then the probability parameter :

is computed by summing over the (107)

where is the -square zero matrix. Hence, we can conclude

that and

commute for every triplet, as long as

and

. If

,

and do not commute, but

neither

nor

are valid sequences, because once

we have removed variable , we cannot remove it again. If

, and do not commute, but in this case

is a

valid sequence, while the reverse is not valid. But, if we examine

the operation

closely, it means that and share a

degree-two check node and is connected to degree-one check

node. Hence, we can find in Sequence the operations

and in Sequence the operations

, because once we have

remove variable , the check node that variables and shared

is now a degree-one check node, and these two operations are

equivalent, as can be seen in Fig. 12.

Finally, to conclude the proof, we have to show that the ma-

trices and commute. It is easy to check that

In what follows, we proceed by evaluating the probability of scenarios and to finally conclude that

(108)

and, for large enough graphs, we have

(109)

which means that, in practice, we only have to consider the sce-

nario to study the TEP decoder for large code lengths.

1) Probability of Scenario : We first focus on the sce-

nario , illustrated in Fig. 4(b). Our goal is to compute the

probability

, where

corresponds to the case

where and share just a check node of degree two and a

check node of degree . Then, the probability (109) is computed

by summing over the degree :

otherwise.

(105)

(110)

If the four indices are different, the matrices commute. If one of

the indices is repeated, we have three possible scenarios.

1)

, the matrices commute and

and

are invalid sequences, because we would remove variable

twice in both cases.

2)

, the matrices commute and both sequence are valid.

3)

(or equivalently

), the matrices do not com-

mute and one order gives a valid sequence, i.e.,

,

and the other does not, i.e.,

, because once we

have removed the variable we cannot use it again. But

we could find in the Sequence the matrices in this order

and in the Sequence the matrices in this order

, because after we process , inherits all the

check nodes of , hence if had a degree-two check node

with after we have processed , now this degree-two

check node is between and .

Hence, we have proven that any two matrices in the first se-

quence commute or have a valid alternative in the second.

If

denotes the number of edges connected to

that have right degree , we propose to obtain the probability

by marginalizing over the following probability

function:

(111)

for

,

. The mass prob-

ability function in (111) represents the probability that and

share another check node of degree , the degree of and

is, respectively, and , has edges of right degree

and has edges of right degree . The pdf in (111) can be

rewritten applying the properties of conditional probability:

(112)

APPENDIX B PROBABILITY OF SHARING TWO CHECK NODES

The degrees of two given nodes in the graph are (asymptotically) pairwise independent [54], and hence, for sufficiently large graphs, we can assume
(113)

In this appendix, we compute the probability

in (59).

Recall that it is defined as the probability for scenario , in

which two variables share a check node of degree two and,

at least, another check node of arbitrary degree, as illustrated

in Fig. 4(b). Let

the particular case where both variables

for ,

. Each edge connected to a variable

node has right degree with probability

. The number

of edges connected to either or with right degree are

asymptotically distributed according to binomial distributions

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

3373

and

, respec-

tively, where

denotes a binomial distribution over

with parameters and [58]. Note that we

subtract 1 from and since we know that one edge is

connected to a check node of degree two. Therefore, the second

term in (112) is

(114)

We have already computed all the factors in the joint mass func-

tion in (112). In (118), given at the bottom of the page, we

marginalize over , , , and to obtain

:

(117)

Finally, the probability of scenario ming over the degree as follows:

is computed by sum-

Finally, we have to compute the first term in (112), i.e., the

probability that variables and share a check node of degree

when the variables have, respectively, and edges with right

degree . Note first that the graph has

edges with right

degree . Let us assume that the edges of one of the variables,

, for example, are fixed and that the edges of are now

randomly set.

If the graph is large enough, with probability

(115)

each edge of shares a check node of degree with an edge of . For large graphs, the number of checks shared between both
variables is asymptotically described by a binomial distribution . The probability that they share at least
one check node of degree in (112) yields

(119)

As expected, the probability of two variables sharing a check

node in a random graph (aside from the check node of degree

two that we know they are sharing) is

, i.e., in-

verse to the total number of edges in the graph. This result is

consistent with the theory of random graphs [59].

2) Probability of Scenario for

: A similar anal-

ysis can be extended for the case . If we define the sub-

scenario

, where both variables share two check nodes

of degrees and , the probability

is obtained by

counting over all possible cases:

(120)

(116)

The probability

can be obtained with a sim-

ilar procedure than the one used to compute

. In

this case, we marginalize over the joint mass probability func-

tion of the degrees of both variables

the number of

edges in each variable with right degree

and the number of edges in each variable with right degree

(118)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

. Now we factorize the joint mass function applying the conditionality properties, as we did in (112):

where is the design rate,

and

are the av-

erage node and check degrees that we compute from , and

and

are the same parameters computed directly from

the pair

using (49) and (50). The design rate is fi-

nite, because the ensemble has bounded maximum degrees. Be-

sides, the true rate

of the code is defined as

(121)

where the last factor

does not change with re-

spect to (113) and the second one, similarly to (114), can be ex-

pressed as a product of binomial distributions. In the first term

in (121), we have fixed the degrees of and and the number

of edges of both variables with right degree and . Following

the same procedure considered to derive (116), it can be shown

that

(126)

and it can be easily verified that

, where in the limit

the equality only holds for a certain subset of ensembles

[22], [60].

Although unusual, we can construct LDPC ensembles with

negative design rate. For instance, the ensemble

(127)

(122)

The constant (120). Hence

does not depend on the marginalization in

(123)

and, in general, we have

(124)

for

. Therefore,

for

are negligible

compared to

for sufficiently large graphs.

Probability

is crucial to evaluate the expected graph

evolution under TEP decoding in Section IV. In addition, for

asymptotically large graphs, to evaluate how the graph changes

in one iteration of the TEP decoder, it is a good approximation

to consider that two variables that are sharing a check node of

degree two, share at most one extra check node, as illustrated in

Fig. 4(b).

has a design rate

but, despite this, the DD is well de-

fined and the construction of graph samples follows the standard

procedure [11]. When we sample from such class of random en-

sembles, we obtain parity matrices that contain dependent rows,

which are sometimes referred to as redundant LDPC parity ma-

trices. By extension, ensembles such as (127) are called redun-

dant ensembles [61], [62].

Redundant ensembles also appear when we analyze the

residual graph after transmission over the erasure channel. Let

define an LDPC ensemble of positive design rate

and finite maximum degrees, which is used for transmission

over the erasure channel. As shown in [16], the DD that defines

the residual ensemble after removing the set of known bits from

the Tanner graph has the form

(128)

(129)

where

(130)

APPENDIX C BOUNDEDNESS ON THE GRAPH DEGREES. PROOF OF LEMMA 2

The proof of this lemma is straightforward, but it is conve-

nient to review first some basic definitions. We make use of

LDPC ensembles and DD polynomials, which are defined in

Section IV-B.

1) Design Rate, Code Rate, and Redundant Codes: Con-

sider an LDPC ensemble defined by

with finite

maximum degrees. Let be the parity matrix of a code sample

of length chosen at random and let

and

de-

note, respectively, the number of rows and columns of the ma-

trix. In the limit

, the expected presence of double edges

in is zero [11] and the matrix presents the exact DD defined

by

. The following expression is true in this case:

The ensemble

has, in most cases, a negative de-

sign rate.8 An important property of this ensemble is that its de-

sign rate is always finite as long as the original ensemble has

finite maximum degrees. As a consequence, by (125), the num-

bers of variable and check nodes in the residual graph are of the

same order.

2) Proof of Lemma 2: Let

define an LDPC en-

semble of positive design rate and finite maximum degrees. Let

be a sample from such ensemble that is used for transmission

over a

. Any channel realization

gives

rise to a residual parity matrix sampled from

in (128)–(130).

8For instance, for the (3,6) ensemble and

we get

(125) for which the design rate is

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

As discussed above, the residual ensemble after removing the

known bits has finite rate, and therefore,

and

are of the same order. The TEP decoder works over the ini-

tialized graph by removing one column and one row per iter-

ation, and thus, the sequence of residual parity matrices for

, satisfies the same property.

By removing degree-one or degree-two check nodes, on the

one hand, we know that the average check degree

does

not grow. On the other hand,

might grow as we remove

degree-two check nodes. To show that the latter cannot grow

unbounded, note that

and

are linked by ,

i.e., the number of edges in the residual matrix :

Fig. 13. Most likely scenarios when a degree-two check node.

(131)

3375 and we are about to process

Equation (131) proves that if

and

and

are of the same order, then

and

have to keep the same order as well, which proves the lemma.

APPENDIX D TEP COMPLEXITY PER ITERATION. PROOF OF LEMMA 3

A step of the PD algorithm, summarized in the linear trans-

formation in (98), has a constant complexity and the PD overall

complexity is . By putting together (98) and (100), we ob-

serve that the removal of a degree-two check node in a step of

the TEP is performed by a basic PD operation followed by the

summation of two columns of the code parity check matrix .

The cost of this operation is given by the number of ones in both

columns. For LDPC codes, once we select a degree-two check

node, the two associated variable nodes have in average degree

, where

is the average edge left degree defined in

Fig. 14. We plot the solution for

computed to estimate

for a (3, 6) regular code at

. The code lengths considered are

,

and

. The BP was first run and then

degree-two check nodes were processed.

(58).

In Section IV-D, we show that there might exist codes for

which, in the limit

the average edge left degree

diverges to at some point of the TEP decoding process. How-

ever, the conditions are too restrictive and we can say that, for

most of the ensembles,

is bounded during the whole de-

coding process. In this case, TEP decoder iteration just adds a

likely that those recently created check nodes are connected to

variables of infinite degree. By (57), the removal of such nodes

starts a process of massive creation of degree-one check nodes

that brings down

. In Fig. 13(b), we have a double con-

nection that can be removed at no cost.

constant complexity to the PD cost per iteration.

For those ensembles for which

may diverge at some

point, the complexity of the TEP decoder remains linear as long

as we only focus on degree-one nodes. If there are not any of

APPENDIX E

COMPUTATION OF THE

PARAMETER

them left and

, an eventual iteration of quadratic We compute

, based on the TEP solution independence

cost (with ) is required. However, we expect the fraction of of the processing order proven in Appendix A:

such iterations throughout the decoding process to be low for 1) Start the TEP algorithm by running a BP stage. Compute

several reasons. First, since the variable average degree

the BP residual graph expected DD at

[16]. Alter-

is always bounded, then the fraction of variable nodes with in-

natively, we can obtain such DD by evaluating the differen-

finite degree is small compared to the rest of the code. And

tial equations for the TEP in (79)–(81) if we set

second, each time we remove a degree-two check node and

in (53) for any until the fraction of degree-one check

, we face very high probability one of the fol-

nodes in the graph cancels.

lowing two scenarios depicted in Fig. 13. In the scenario (a), 2) Using this graph as input, evaluate the graph expected

the probability that the two variables share an additional check

evolution when we only remove degree-two check nodes:

nodes is close to one and then degree-one check nodes can be

solve the system (79)–(81) by setting

in (53) for

created. If this happens,

is of the same order and it is very

all until the graph runs out of degree-two check nodes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 59, NO. 6, JUNE 2013

3)

, once we have run out of degree

two check nodes.

In Fig. 14, we represent the evolution of

after following the previous steps for the regular (3, 6)-LDPC

code and

,

, and

. At

, the BP decoder gets stuck and we begin to remove

degree-two check nodes. In this second phase, we can notice

that

is independent of .

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[4] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[5] H. A. Loeliger, “An introduction to factor graphs,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28–41, Feb. 2004.
[6] F. R. Kschischang, B. I. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[7] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electr. Eng., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
[8] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.
[9] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[10] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, Mar. 2008.
[12] C. Measson, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “Maxwell construction: The hidden bridge between iterative and maximum a posteriori decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5277–5307, Dec. 2008.
[13] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb. 2011.
[14] C. Di, D. Proietti, T. Richardson, E. Telatar, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[15] P. Oswald and A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3017–3028, Dec. 2002.
[16] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[17] A. E. Ashikhmin, G. Kramer, and S. T. Brink, “Extrinsic information transfer functions: Model and erasure channel properties,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2657–2673, Nov. 2004.
[18] J. Zhang and A. Orlitsky, “Finite-length analysis of LDPC codes with large left degrees,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2002.
[19] A. Amraoui, A. Montanari, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength scaling for iteratively decoded LDPC ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 473–498, Feb. 2009.
[20] A. Amraoui, R. Urbanke, and A. Montanari, “Finite-length scaling of irregular LDPC code ensembles,” presented at the IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Aug. 2005.
[21] N. Takayuki, K. Kasai, and S. Kohichi, “Analytical solution of covariance evolution for irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 7, pp. 4470–4780, Jul. 2012.
[22] C. Di, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Weight distribution of lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 11, pp. 4839–4855, Nov. 2006.

[23] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, J. Zhang, and S. Member, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.
[24] T. P. Minka, “Expectation propagation for approximate Bayesian inference,” in 17th Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., 2001, pp. 362–369.
[25] T. M. Cover and J. A. Thomas, Elements of Information Theory. New York, NY, USA: Wiley-Interscience, 2005.
[26] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Generalized belief propagation,” in Proc. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Conf., 2001, vol. 13, pp. 689–695.
[27] T. Minka and Y. Qi, “Tree-structured approximations by expectation propagation,” presented at the Neural Inf. Process. Syst. Conf., 2003.
[28] Z. Ghahramani and M. I. Jordan, “Factorial hidden Markov models,” Mach. Learn., vol. 29, pp. 245–273, Nov. 1997.
[29] P. M. Olmos, J. J. Murillo-Fuentes, and F. Pérez-Cruz, “Tree-structure expectation propagation for decoding LDPC codes over binary erasure channels,” presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Austin, TX, USA, 2010.
[30] P. Olmos, J. Murillo-Fuentes, and F. Pérez-Cruz, “Tree-structured expectation propagation for decoding finite-length LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 235–237, Feb. 2011.
[31] P. Olmos, F. Perez-Cruz, L. Salamanca, and J. Murillo-Fuentes, “Finite-length analysis of the TEP decoder for LDPC ensembles over the BEC,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2012, pp. 2346–2350.
[32] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 439–454, Mar. 2004.
[33] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Efficient maximum-likelihood decoding of LDPC codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2837–2844, Nov. 2004.
[34] G. Liva, B. Matuz, E. Paolini, and M. Chiani, “Pivoting algorithms for maximum likelihood decoding of LDPC codes over erasure channels,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., Dec. 2009, pp. 1–6.
[35] S. Kim, S. Lee, and S.-Y. Chung, “An efficient algorithm for ML decoding of raptor codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 578–580, Aug. 2008.
[36] T. K. Moon, Error Correction Coding: Mathematical Methods and Algorithms. New York, NY, USA: Wiley-Interscience, 2005.
[37] T. Etzion, A. Trachtenberg, and A. Vardy, “Which codes have cycle-free Tanner graphs?,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2173–2181, Sep. 1999.
[38] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Constructing free energy approximations and generalized belief propagation algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2282–2312, Jul. 2004.
[39] M. J. Wainwright and M. I. Jordan, “Graphical Models, Exponential Families, and Variational Inference,” Found. Trends Mach. Learning, 2008.
[40] M. Welling, T. P. Minka, and Y. W. Teh, “Structured region graphs: Morphing EP into GBP,” in Proc. 21st Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., Edinburgh, U.K., Jul. 26–29, 2005, pp. 609–614.
[41] T. P. Minka, “A family of algorithms for approximate Bayesian inference,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, USA, 2001.
[42] T. Minka, The EP energy function and minimization schemes 2001, Tech. Rep.
[43] M. Opper and O. Winther, “Expectation consistent approximate inference,” J. Mach. Learn. Res., vol. 6, pp. 2177–2204, Dec. 2005.
[44] S. L. Lauritzen, “Propagation of probabilities, means and variances in mixed graphical association models,” J. Amer. Statist. Assoc., vol. 87, no. 420, pp. 1098–1108, 1992.
[45] X. Boyen and D. Koller, “Tractable inference for complex stochastic processes,” in Uncertainty in Artificial Intelligence. San Mateo, CA, USA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1998, pp. 33–42.
[46] O. Shental, A. J. Weiss, N. Shental, and Y. Weiss, “Generalized belief propagation receiver for near-optimal detection of two-dimensional channels with memory,” presented at the IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, 2004.
[47] P. Pakzad and V. Anantharam, “Kikuchi approximation method for joint decoding of LDPC codes and partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 7, pp. 1149–1153, Jul. 2006.
[48] A. Becker, R. Bar-Yehuda, and D. Geiger, “Randomized algorithms for the loop cutset problem,” J. Artif. Intell. Res., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 219–234, 2000.
[49] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory Comput., 1997, pp. 150–159.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OLMOS et al.: TREE-STRUCTURE EXPECTATION PROPAGATION FOR LDPC DECODING OVER THE BEC

3377

[50] A. Abbasfar, D. Divsalar, and K. Yao, “Accumulate-repeat-accumulate codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 55, no. 4, pp. 692–702, Apr. 2007.
[51] H. Pfister and I. Sason, “Accumulate-repeat-accumulate codes: Capacity-achieving ensembles of systematic codes for the erasure channel with bounded complexity,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 6, pp. 2088–2115, Jun. 2007.
[52] H. Pfister, “Finite-length analysis of a capacity-achieving ensemble for the binary erasure channel,” presented at the IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Sep. 2005.
[53] N. C. Wormald, “Differential equations for random processes and random graphs,” Ann. Appl. Probabil., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1217–1235, 1995.
[54] M. Mèzard and A. Montanari, Information, Physics, and Computation, 1st ed. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford Univ. Press, 2009.
[55] Y. Polyanskiy, H. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Channel coding rate in the finite blocklength regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2307–2359, May 2010.
[56] J. Ezri, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “A generalization of the finitelength scaling approach beyond the BEC,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2007, pp. 1011–1015.
[57] J. Ezri, A. Montanari, S. Oh, and R. Urbanke, “The slope scaling parameter for general channels, decoders, and ensembles,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2008, pp. 1443–1447.
[58] A. Papoulis, Probability, Random Variables, and Stochastic Processes, 4th ed. New York, NY, USA: McGraw-Hill, 2002.
[59] B. Bollobas, Random Graphs, W. Fulton, A. Katok, F. Kirwan, P. Sarnak, B. Simon, and B. Totaro, Eds. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2001.
[60] C. Measson, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, “Asymptotic rate versus design rate,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2007, pp. 1541–1545.
[61] T. Wadayama, “Average stopping set weight distributions of redundant random ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4991–5004, Nov. 2008.
[62] M. Schwartz and A. Vardy, “On the stopping distance and the stopping redundancy of codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 3, pp. 922–932, Mar. 2006.

Pablo M. Olmos (M’09) was born in Granada, Spain, in 1984. He received the M.Sc./B.Sc. degrees in telecommunication engineering in 2008 and the Ph.D. degree in telecommunication engineering in 2011 from the University of Sevilla. He is currently an assistant professor at University Carlos III de Madrid. He has visited Princeton University and École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL) as invited researcher. His research interests lie machine learning, approximate inference methods for Bayesian learning and its applications to coding and information theory and digital communications. A detailed CV and list of publications can be accessed at http://www.tsc.uc3m.es/~olmos.
Juan José Murillo-Fuentes (SM’10) was born in Sevilla in 1973. He received his Telecommunications Engineering degree in 1996 from the Universidad de Sevilla, Spain, and his Ph.D. degree in Telecommunication Engineering in 2001 from the Universidad Carlos III de Madrid, Spain. He is currently an Associate Professor at the Department of Signal Theory and Communication, Universidad de Sevilla. His research interests lie in algorithm development for machine learning, and their application to digital communications. Juan J. MurilloFuentes has been teaching in B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. courses for more than ten years. He teaches radiocommunications at the University of Seville since 2001, teaching fundamentals in wireless communications and wireless systems. He is also a professor of the Vodafone Master. Since July 2010 he is a Senior member of the IEEE.
Fernando Pérez-Cruz (SM’06) was born in Sevilla, Spain, in 1973. He received a Ph.D. in Electrical Engineering in 2000 from the Technical University of Madrid and an MSc/BSc in Electrical Engineering from the University of Sevilla in 1996. He is an Associate Professor with the Department of Signal Theory and Communication at University Carlos III in Madrid. He has been a visiting professor at Princeton University under the sponsorship of a Marie Curie Fellowship. He has held position. at the Gatsby Unit (London), Max Planck Institute for Biological Cybernetics (Tuebingen), BioWulf Technologies (New York) and the Technical University of Madrid and Alcala University (Madrid). His current research interest lies in machine learning and information theory and its application to signal processing and communications. He has authored over 90 contributions to international journals and conferences. He has also co-authored a book in Digital Communications. A detailed CV and list of publications can be accessed at http://www.tsc.uc3m.es /~fernando.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 02:36:31 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

