2015 IEEE 16th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC)

Spatially Coupled Codes and Optical Fiber Communications: An Ideal Match?

Laurent SchmalenŌłŚ, Detlef SuikatŌłŚ, Detlef Ro┬©senerŌłŚ, Vahid ArefŌłŚ, Andreas LevenŌłŚ, Stephan ten BrinkŌĆĀ ŌłŚAlcatel-Lucent Bell Laboratories, Lorenzstr. 10, 70435 Stuttgart, Germany, first.last@alcatel-lucent.com
ŌĆĀUniversity of Stuttgart, Institute of Telecommunications, Pfaffenwaldring 47, Stuttgart, Germany

AbstractŌĆöIn this paper, we highlight the class of spatially coupled codes and discuss their applicability to long-haul and submarine optical communication systems. We first demonstrate how to optimize irregular spatially coupled LDPC codes for their use in optical communications with limited decoding hardware complexity and then present simulation results with an FPGAbased decoder where we show that very low error rates can be achieved and that conventional block-based LDPC codes can be outperformed. In the second part of the paper, we focus on the combination of spatially coupled LDPC codes with different demodulators and detectors, important for future systems with adaptive modulation and for varying channel characteristics. We demonstrate that SC codes can be employed as universal, channel-agnostic coding schemes.
Index TermsŌĆöError correction codes, Low-density paritycheck codes, Spatial coupling, Optical Communications
I. INTRODUCTION
Modern high-speed optical communication systems require high-performing Forward Error Correction (FEC) implementations that support throughputs of 100 Gbit/s or multiples thereof, that have low power consumption, that realize Net Coding Gains (NCGs) close to the theoretical limits at a target Bit Error Rate (BER) of 10ŌłÆ15, and that are preferably adapted to the peculiarities of the optical channel.
Especially with the advent of coherent transmission schemes and the utilization of high resolution Analog-to-Digital Converters (ADCs), soft-decision decoding has become an attractive means of reliably increasing the transmission reach of lightwave systems. Currently, there are two popular classes of codes for soft-decision decoding that are attractive for implementation in optical receivers at decoding throughputs of 100 Gbit/s and above: Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes and Block Turbo Codes (BTCs). The latter can be decoded with a highly parallelizable, rapidly converging soft-decision decoding algorithm, usually have a large minimum distance, but require large block lengths of more than 100, 000 bits to realize codes with small overheads, leading to decoding latencies that can be detrimental in certain applications. With overheads of more than 15% to 20%, these codes no longer perform well, at least under hard-decision decoding [1]. LDPC codes are understood and are suited to realize codes with lengths of a few 10, 000 bits and overheads above 15%.
Recently, the class of Spatially Coupled (SC) codes [2] has gained widespread interest due to the fact that these codes are asymptotically capacity-achieving, have appealing
Parts of this work were supported by the German Government in the frame of the CELTIC+/BMBF project SASER-SaveNet.

encoding and decoding complexity and show outstanding practical decoding performance. SC codes are an extension of existing coding schemes by a superimposed convolutional structure. The technique of spatial coupling can be applied to most existing codes, the most popular are however LDPC codes [2] and BTCs [3], which have found use in optical communications (staircase codes) and show outstanding performance, operating within 0.5 dB of the capacity of the harddecision AWGN channel.
In this paper, we discuss the use of SC codes in optical communications and especially focus on SC-LDPC codes. We summarize some recent advances and design guidelines for SC-LDPC codes and show by means of an FieldProgrammable Gate Array (FPGA)-based decoding platform that large gains at low bit error rates can be realized with relatively small codes when compared with state-of-the-art LDPC codes. The aim of this paper is to show that SC-LDPC codes are mature channel codes that are viable candidates for future optical communication systems with large NCGs. Furthermore, their universality makes them attractive for flexible transceivers with adaptive modulation.

II. LDPC & SPATIALLY COUPLED LDPC CODES

An LDPC code is defined by the null space of a sparse

parity-check matrix H of size dim H = M ├Ś N where the

code contains all binary code words x of length N such that HxT = 0, i.e., CLDPC = {x Ōłł {0; 1}N : HxT = 0}.
Each row of H is considered to be a check node, while

each column of H is usually termed variable node. We say

that the variable degree (or variable node degree) of a code is

regular with degree dv if the number of ŌĆ£1ŌĆØs in each column is constant and amounts to dv. We say that the check degree (or check node degree) of a code is regular with degree dc if the number of ŌĆ£1ŌĆØs in each row of H is constant and amounts

to dc. The class of irregular LDPC codes has the property that

the number of ŌĆ£1ŌĆØs in each column and/or row is not constant.

The degree profile of an irregular LDPC code indicates the

fraction of columns/rows of a certain degree. More precisely,

av,i represents the fraction of columns with i ŌĆ£1ŌĆØs (e.g., if

av,3

=

1 2

,

half

the

columns

of

H

have

three

ŌĆ£1ŌĆØs).

Note

that

i av,i = 1 has to hold. Similarly, ac,i represents the fraction

of rows (i.e., checks) with i ŌĆ£1ŌĆØs.

LDPC codes form an important class of codes in optical

communications [4]. LDPC codes with soft-decision decoding

are currently being deployed in systems operating at 100 Gbit/s

and, e.g., utilizing 16 iterations [5]. Modern high-performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:43:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4799-1931-4/15/$31.00 ┬®2015 IEEE

460

2015 IEEE 16th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC)

FEC systems in optical communications are sometimes constructed using a soft-decision LDPC inner code which reduces the BER to a level of 10ŌłÆ3 to 10ŌłÆ6 and a hard-decision algebraic outer cleanup code which pushes the system BER to levels below 10ŌłÆ12 [6]. The outer cleanup code is used to combat the error floor that is present in most LDPC codes. Note that the implementation of a coding system with an outer cleanup code requires a thorough understanding of the LDPC code and a properly designed interleaver between the LDPC and the outer code. Recently, there has been some interest to avoid the use of an outer cleanup code and to use only soft-decision LDPC codes with very low error floors, leading to coding schemes with less rate loss and less latency. With increasing computational resources, it is now also feasible to evaluate very low target BERs of LDPC codes and optimize the codes to have very low error floors below the systemŌĆÖs target BER [7]. Although the internal data flow of an LDPC decoder may be larger by more than an order of magnitude [8] than that of a BTC, several techniques can be used to lower the data-flow, e.g., the use of layered decoding [9] and minsum decoding, requiring only two q-ary, dc + 1 binary and one log2 dc -ary message per check node.
SC-LDPC codes were introduced more than a decade ago [10] but their outstanding properties have only been fully realized recently, when Lentmaier et al. noticed [11] that the estimated decoding performance of a certain class of terminated protograph-based SC-LDPC codes with a simple message passing decoder is close to the performance of the underlying code ensemble under Maximum Likelihood (ML) decoding as n grows, which was subsequently proven rigorously in [2], [12], if certain particular conditions on the code structure are fulfilled.
A left-terminated SC-LDPC code is basically an LDPC code with a structured, infinitely extended parity-check matrix

’Ż½ H0(0)

’ŻČ

’Ż¼ H1(1) H0(1)

’ŻĘ

’Ż¼ ’Ż¼

...

’Ż¼

’Ż¼ ’Ż¼H┬Ą(┬Ą)

HSC

=

’Ż¼ ’Ż¼

’Ż¼

’Ż¼

’Ż¼

H1(2) ...
H┬Ą(┬Ą + 1)

. .

. .

. .

...

H0(t) H1(t + 1)

’ŻĘ

’ŻĘ

’ŻĘ

’ŻĘ

’ŻĘ

’ŻĘ

’ŻĘ

.

.

’ŻĘ .’ŻĘ’ŻĘ

(1)

’Ż¼ ’Ż¼ ’Ż¼ ’ŻŁ

... H┬Ą(t + ┬Ą)

.

.

’ŻĘ .’ŻĘ

’ŻĘ

.

.

’ŻĖ .

with Hi(t) being sparse binary parity-check matrices with dim Hi(t) = m ├Ś n and ┬Ą denoting the syndrome former memory of the code. Every code word x of the code has to fulfill HSCxT = 0. One advantage of SC-LDPC codes is that the infinitely long code words can conveniently be
decoded with acceptable latency using a simple windowed
decoder [13]. In practice, in order to construct codes of

Originally, these codes were called LDPC convolutional codes. The term ŌĆ£spatially coupledŌĆØ has been introduced [2] to denote the more general phenomenon of coupling several independent code(word)s, by a superimposed, convolutional-like structure.

finite length, e.g., to adhere to certain framing structures in the communication system at hand, the infinitely extended matrix HSC is terminated resulting in finite length code. One example of termination is zero-termination, where the matrix HSC is cut off after t = L parts, resulting in a code of length N = Ln and a parity-check matrix HS[TCerm.] of size dim HS[TCerm.] = (L + ┬Ą)m ├Ś Ln. Note that this termination leads to a rate loss, which can however be kept small if L is chosen large enough. For a discussion of termination schemes, we refer the interested reader to [4], [14].
SC codes are now emerging in various applications. Two examples of SC product codes are the staircase code [8] and the braided BCH codes [15], for hard-decision decoding in optical communications. SC-LDPC codes may also be viable for pragmatic coded modulation schemes [14], [16].
In order to simplify the design of hardware, we first drop the time dependency and only consider the time-independent (left-terminated) parity-check matrix with Hi(t) = Hi, ŌłĆi Ōłł {0, 1, . . . , ┬Ą}, which is attractive for implementation as the sub-matrices Hi can be easily reused in the encoder and decoder hardware. In this time-invariant construction with dim Hi = m ├Ś n, we can give the following upper bound on the minimum distance of the code [4, Eq. (7)]

dmin Ōēż (m + 1)(┬Ąm + 1) .

(2)

To construct codes with large enough minimum distances, we maximize the size of the sub-matrices Hi, i.e., m, which has a quadratic influence on (2). In order to keep the complexity of
the so-constructed code small, we restrict ourselves to small values of the syndrome former memory ┬Ą with either ┬Ą = 1 or ┬Ą = 2. We call such codes weakly coupled codes [17].

III. RAPIDLY CONVERGING SC-LDPC CODES

In the past, irregular block LDPC codes have been used

to design codes that perform very well for low SNRs, but

these schemes do sometimes suffer from relatively high error

floors requiring the use of an outer code that leads to inherent

rate losses. In the case of SC-LDPC codes, we can use the

irregularity to control the propagation speed of the decoding

wave of a windowed decoder, i.e., we can minimize the

number of iterations Ireq that are necessary until a windowed decoder can advance by one step [18]. To simplify the code

construction and to illustrate the concept, we only use the most

simple form of irregularity and construct slightly irregular SC-

LDPC codes with degree-3 and additionally with either degree-

4 or degree-6 variable nodes. We avoid degree-2 variables

nodes due to their potentially detrimental effect on the error

floor. Also, in contrast to block LDPC codes, degree-2 nodes

are not of the same importance for SC-LDPC codes. We vary

the fraction of degree-4 or degree-6 nodes between 0 and 1 and

select

the

check

nodes

such

that

a

rate

r

=

4 5

(25%

overhead)

code is constructed. We perform full density evolution using

the irregular version of KudekarŌĆÖs (dv, dc, w, L) ensemble [2] for random spatial coupling with w = 3 using an AWGN

channel and measure the required Eb/N0 values to advance the decoding wave by Ireq steps.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:43:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
461

2015 IEEE 16th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC)

Required Eb/N0 (dB)

3

Ireq = 1

Ireq = 3

Ireq = 5

2.8

├ŚD

Uniform Random Number Gener.
Uniform Random Number Gener.

Box-Muller Transform

Windowed Decoder

Error Statistics

├ŚD

├ŚD

├ŚD

External Interface

2.6 Ireq = 10

0

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

Fract. deg.-4 nodes (av,4), Fract. deg.-6 nodes (av,6)

Fig. 1. Required Eb/N0 to operate a windowed decoder with Ireq iterations per segment for slightly irregular weakly coupled SC codes with degree3 nodes and additionally degree-4 (dashed lines) or degree-6 (solid lines) variable nodes. (results obtained by density evolution)

The density evolution results are shown in Fig. 1 for varying av,4 and av,6. We can see that using additionally degree4 (besides degree-3) variables does not lead to noteworthy
gains, which is why we focus on additional degree-6 nodes
in this paper. The convergence speed improves by selecting a proper value of av,6 leading to a smaller required Eb/N0. The selection depends however on Ireq. As we intend to construct low complexity decoders with Ireq Ōłł {1, 3}, we can see that in this case, the optimum is achieved with av,6 = 0.2 (20% of degree-6 variable nodes, 80% of degree-3 variable nodes). We can see that by proper selection of av,6, we can obtain codes that have an improved decoding convergence,
however, we also see that depending on the selection, a worse
convergence behavior than for the regular case can result. We
also observe that if we want a code that operates extremely close to capacity, the optimum value of av,6 is larger (around 0.5) than for the more practical case, where the optimum lies at av,6 = 0.2. Note that although we use KudekarŌĆÖs ensemble for density evolution, the codes we construct in the next section
are generated from protographs, similar to those in [11], as
these exhibit better finite length performance.

A. FPGA-based Verification
In order to verify the performance of the rapidly converging weakly coupled SC-LDPC codes, we use a FieldProgrammable Gate Array (FPGA) platform, whose high-level diagram is illustrated in Fig. 2 [17]. This platform is similar to other platforms reported in the literature [7] and consists of three parts: A Gaussian noise generator, an FEC decoder and an error detecting circuit. The Gaussian noise generator generates Gaussian distributed Log-Likelihood Ratios (LLRs), stemming from BPSK transmission over an AWGN channel, using uniform random number generators and the Box-Muller transform. These are then fed to the LDPC decoder after quantization to 15 levels. The LDPC decoder is based on the layered decoding algorithm [9] and uses a scaled-minsum check node computation rule with constant scaling factor.
The windowed decoder that is implemented can be sub-

Fig. 2. High-level schematic of the FPGA evaluation platform.

divided into three steps. In the first step, a new sub-block of n quantized LLRs is received from the random number

generator and put into the vacant position of the decoderŌĆÖs LLR
memory. Decoding takes place by considering W = 13 copies of (H┬Ą H┬ĄŌłÆ1 ┬Ę ┬Ę ┬Ę H0). The windowed decoded considers an equivalent matrix of size W m ├Ś (W + ┬Ą ŌłÆ 1)n which it processes before shifting in n new values. In order to

maximize the hardware utilization, within a window, we use

two parallel decoders that operate on non-overlapping portions

of that matrix. In a first step, the first decoding engine operates on the first m check nodes of the matrix under consideration while the second engine operates in parallel on the m check nodes starting at position 6m. In general, the first engine processes the check nodes at position i Ōłł [1, W m] while the second engine processes the check node (i + 6m ŌłÆ 1) mod W m + 1. Note that only a single iteration is carried out

to guarantee the required throughput, corresponding effectively to 2W iterations per bit (due to the use of two engines).

The output of the LDPC decoder is connected to the

BER evaluation unit, which counts the bit errors and reports

the error positions. We use Virtex-7 FPGAs allowing for

a throughput of several Gbit/s to evaluate the BER perfor-

mance of

several

coding schemes of

rate

r

=

4 5

=

0.8,

i.e., of 25% coding overhead. We select this particular rate

due to its importance in todayŌĆÖs Dense Wavelength Division Multiplex (DWDM) systems. Current and future 100 Gbit/s (with QPSK) or 200 Gbit/s (with 16-QAM) systems are often operated in 50 GHz channels with an exploitable bandwidth of roughly 37.5 GHz due to Reconfigurable Add-Drop Mul-

tiplexers (ROADMs) with non-flat frequency characteristic.

With almost rectangular pulse shapes (root-raised cosine with small roll-off ╬▒) and todayŌĆÖs generation of Digital-to-Analog Converters (DACs), symbol rates of 32 GBaud can be realized.

With dual-polarization QPSK transmission, gross bit rates of

128 Gbit/s can be realized. Assuming signaling and protocol

overheads of 3 Gbit/s, this leads to a code that adds 25 Gbit/s parity overhead (i.e., of rate r = 0.8). We compare three codes:

Ōłć As reference, we consider a regular block QC-LDPC code (marker Ōłć) with variable node degree dv = 3 and check node degree dc = 15. The code is a quasi-cyclic code of girth 10 and block length N = 31, 200, constructed using cyclically shifted identity matrices of size 32 ├Ś 32 and decoded with I = 26 row-layered iterations.
SC-LDPC Code A ( ) is the rapidly converging irregular code with syndrome former memory ┬Ą = 2, av,6 = 0.2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:43:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
462

2015 IEEE 16th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC)

’Ż½

’Ż½’Ż½

xi(

)

=

’ŻŁ1

ŌłÆ

fD

’ŻŁ1

ŌłÆ

L

’ŻŁ1

ŌłÆ

1 w

wŌłÆ1

1

ŌłÆ

1 w

wŌłÆ1
xi(ŌłÆŌłÆj1+)k

dcŌłÆ1’ŻČ’ŻČ’ŻČ ’ŻĖ’ŻĖ’ŻĖ

┬Ę

╬╗

’Ż½ ’ŻŁ1

ŌłÆ

1 w

wŌłÆ1

1

ŌłÆ

1 w

wŌłÆ1

xi(ŌłÆŌłÆj1+)k

dcŌłÆ1’ŻČ ’ŻĖ

(3)

j=0

k=0

j=0

k=0

and av,3 = 0.8 and check node degree dc = 18. The sub-block size is n = 7500 (dim Hi = 1500 ├Ś 7500). ŌÖ” SC-LDPC Code B (ŌÖ”) is a regular dv = 4 code with dc = 20 and syndrome former memory ┬Ą = 1. The size of the sub-matrices is identical to those of SC-LDPC code A, however, we select ┬Ą = 1.
Both SC codes are constructed from cyclic permutation matrices of size 30├Ś30 and are terminated after L = 90 subblocks. The simulation results are shown in Fig. 3. The block code, which has a matrix that has been optimized for low error floors, is outperformed by both SC-LDPC codes. SC-LDPC code A offers a coding gain of around 0.3 dB at a BER of 10ŌłÆ12 compared to the conventional block LDPC code, but an error floor starts to manifest. This error floor is not due to any trapping sets, but due to a few uncorrected bits after windowed decoding, which can be recovered with a few-error correcting outer code. Code B has a BER curve that starts to decay at worse channels, but the BER curves cross at Ōēł 10ŌłÆ13. For the next simulated point, we did not observe any bit errors, and hence we conjecture a lower error error floor than for Code A. Note that no special measures have been taken to combat an error floor: only a plain scaled min-sum decoder has been used. With the block code, post-processing [7] may be necessary to combat the error floor.
Another advantage of SC-LDPC codes is that they are future-proof: While the block code does not benefit from further decoding iterations, as its performance is already close to its decoding threshold, the scaling behavior of the SCLDPC code allows to carry out further iterations and achieve still larger coding gains, as the gap to the decoding threshold is still non-negligible. This makes these codes attractive for standardization.
IV. SC-LDPC CODES FOR MODULATION AND DETECTION
As future optical networks tend to become increasingly flexible and elastic, transceivers that integrate a certain amount of flexibility with respect to coding and modulation formats are required. Especially the modulation format is expected to change when transceivers are designed for long-haul or short-haul applications, where the latter require high spectral efficiencies (e.g., data center interconnects). In this section, we show that SC codes are perfectly suited to be combined with varying modulation formats due to their universality properties [12]. We combine SC-LDPC codes with a modulator and use density evolution to show how the detector front-end influences the performance of the codes. In conventional (block) LDPC code design, usually the code needs to be ŌĆ£matchedŌĆØ to the transfer curve of the detection front-end [19]. If the code is not well matched to the front-end, a performance loss occurs. If the detector front-end has highly varying characteristics, due

100

Block LDPC (dv = 3)

SC-LDPC Code A

10ŌłÆ3

SC-LDPC Code B

10ŌłÆ6

BER

10ŌłÆ9

10ŌłÆ12 No errors after 6.7 ├Ś 1015 transmitted bits

10ŌłÆ152.6

2.7

2.8

2.9

3

3.1 3.2

Eb/N0 (dB)
Fig. 3. Simulation results with FPGA-based windowed decoding, W = 13, two decoder instances.

to, e.g., varying modulation formats or channels, several codes

would need to be implemented and selected depending on the

conditions, which is not feasible in optical networks, where

feedback is usually difficult to realize and where different

codes cannot be implemented due to hardware constraints.

In contrast to many block LDPC codes, spatially coupled

LDPC codes can converge below the pinch-off in the EXIT

chart due to the effect of threshold saturation [2]. Hence, even

if the code is not well matched to the demodulator/detector

from a traditional point of view, we can hope to successfully

decode. We can hence use a single code which is universally

good in all scenarios and the code design can stay agnostic to

the channel/detector behavior. In order to illustrate the concept,

we model the detector by a linear EXIT characteristic

IE[D]

=

fD (IA[D] )

=

a

┬Ę

IA[D]

+

IC

ŌłÆ

a 2

where a controls the slope of the characteristic and IC =

1 0

fD

(Žä

)dŽä

describes

the

mutual

information

of

the

com-

munication channel. The slope a models the effect of e.g.,

different modulation formats, different bit labelings in higher

order modulation and different detectors. We assume that the

output of the detector can be modeled using a Binary Erasure

Channel (BEC). There therefore also use BEC message pass-

ing. We compare two different code approaches; first we use

the spatially coupled (dv, dc, w, L) ensemble presented in [2]

with the density evolution equation for iterative detection given
by (3) where L(╬Š) = i av,i╬Ši denotes the node-perspective degree distribution polynomial, ╬╗(╬Š) = L (╬Š)/L (1) the edgeperspective degree distribution, and xi( ) the edge message erasure probability of spatial position i at iteration . Addition-

ally, we generate protograph based codes end employ Multi-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:43:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
463

2015 IEEE 16th International Workshop on Signal Processing Advances in Wireless Communications (SPAWC)

Rapidly conv. code Regular code, dv = 4 0.2

Decoding threshold IC
Req. Iter.

0.18 0.16 0.14

30

25

20

15

(3,

15)

10
block5c0ode

0.1 0.2 0.3 Slope a

0.4

0.12 0

0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

Slope a

Fig. 4. Decoding thresholds of different SC-LDPC codes for varying detector characteristics with varying slope a and a regular (3, 6) block code.

Edge-Type (MET) density evolution [11] including iterative

detection. We consider two code families of rate 0.8: The

first family is the rapidly converging code from Sec. III with

L(x)

=

4 5

x3

+

1 5

x6

and

dc

=

18

where

we

use

w

=

3

and L = 100 in KudekarŌĆÖs ensemble and B0 = B1 =

B2 = 2 1 1 1 1 with ┬Ą = 3 in the protograph

ensemble. The second code is a regular code where we use

KudekarŌĆÖs 1(dv = 4, dc = 20, w = 3, L = 100) ensemble and a protograph ensemble with B0 = 1 2 1 2 1 and B0 = 3 2 3 2 3 with ┬Ą = 2 [16].

Figure 4 shows the DE results where we use solid lines

( ) to show the decoding thresholds for KudekarŌĆÖs en-

semble and dashed lines ( ) for the protograph-based en-

semble. All SC codes have decoding thresholds close to the

theoretical limit of IC,max = 0.2 and the decoding threshold is almost independent of the detector characteristicŌĆÖs slope a. A

regular block LDPC code has a highly varying threshold for

different slopes a. The flat threshold behavior for SCLDPC

codes indicates a universal, channel-agnostic behavior. Even

an optimized irregular LDPC code will only be good for a

single slope parameter [20]. In order to improve the decoding

threshold, we may deliberately select a precoder that has an

EXIT characteristic with slope a > 0, however, as the inset of

Fig. 4 shows, the slope affects the decoding speed (measured at

IC = 0.185), i.e., the number of iterations required to advance the decoding wave by one step, so that the complexity will

grow alongside. For the case of the rapidly converging code,

a > 0 further increases the decoding speed.

We have presented an example of such a system with

differential detection (a Ōēł 0.2) that is adapted to a channel

with varying phase noise in [21]. Therein, a single spatially

coupled code was able to outperform two different LDPC

codes optimized for different channel characteristics.

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we have highlighted Spatially Coupled (SC)LDPC codes as potential candidates for future lightwave

transmission systems. We have optimized SC-LDPC codes for
convergence speed and shown by means of an FPGA-based
simulation that very low error rates can be obtained. Finally,
we have shown that SC-LDPC can be good candidates if they
employed in a system with iterative decoding and detection:
a single code can be used in various channel conditions.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Justesen, ŌĆ£Performance of product codes and related structures with iterated decoding,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 407ŌĆō415, Feb. 2011.
[2] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, ŌĆ£Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, Feb. 2011.
[3] L. M. Zhang and F. R. Kschischang, ŌĆ£Staircase codes with 6% to 33% overhead,ŌĆØ J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 32, no. 10, May 2014.
[4] A. Leven and L. Schmalen, ŌĆ£Status and recent advances on forward error correction technologies for lightwave systems,ŌĆØ J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 32, no. 16, Aug. 2014.
[5] E. Yamazaki et al., ŌĆ£Fast optical channel recovery in field demonstration of 100-GBit/s Ethernet over OTN using real-time DSP,ŌĆØ Optics Express, vol. 19, no. 14, pp. 13 179ŌĆō13 184, Jul. 2011.
[6] Y. Miyata, K. Kubo, H. Yoshida, and T. Mizuochi, ŌĆ£Proposal for frame structure of optical channel transport unit employing LDPC codes for 100 Gb/s FEC,ŌĆØ in Proc. OFC/NFOEC, paper NThB2, 2009.
[7] Z. Zhang, L. Dolecek, B. Nikolic, V. Anantharam, and M. Wainwright, ŌĆ£Investigation of error floors of structured low-density parity-check codes by hardware emulation,ŌĆØ in Proc. GLOBECOM, 2006.
[8] B. P. Smith, A. Farhood, A. Hunt, F. R. Kschischang, and J. Lodge, ŌĆ£Staircase codes: FEC for 100 Gb/s OTN,ŌĆØ J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 110ŌĆō117, 2012.
[9] D. Hocevar, ŌĆ£A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,ŌĆØ in Proc. IEEE SiPS, 2004.
[10] A. J. Felstro┬©m and K. S. Zigangirov, ŌĆ£Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181ŌĆō2191, Jun. 1999.
[11] M. Lentmaier, D. G. M. Mitchell, G. P. Fettweis, and D. J. Costello, Jr., ŌĆ£Asymptotically regular LDPC codes with linear distance growth and thresholds close to capacity,ŌĆØ in Proc. ITA, Jan. 2010.
[12] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, ŌĆ£Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,ŌĆØ arXiv:1201:2999v1, Tech. Rep., 2012.
[13] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, ŌĆ£Windowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303ŌĆō2320, April 2012.
[14] C. Ha┬©ger, A. Graell i Amat, F. Bra┬©nnstro┬©m, A. Alvarado, and E. Agrell, ŌĆ£Comparison of terminated and tailbiting spatially coupled LDPC codes with optimized bit mapping for PM-64-QAM,ŌĆØ in Proc. ECOC, Cannes, France, 2014, paper Th.1.3.1.
[15] Y.-Y. Jian, H. D. Pfister, K. R. Narayanan, R. Rao, and R. Mazareh, ŌĆ£Iterative hard-decision decoding of braided BCH codes for high-speed optical communication,ŌĆØ in Proc. GLOBECOM, Atlanta, USA, 2013.
[16] L. Schmalen and S. ten Brink, ŌĆ£Combining spatially coupled LDPC codes with modulation and detection,ŌĆØ in Proc. ITG SCC, Munich, Germany, 2013.
[17] L. Schmalen, V. Aref, J. Cho, D. Suikat, D. Ro┬©sener, and A. Leven, ŌĆ£Spatially coupled soft-decision error correction for future lightwave systems,ŌĆØ J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 33, no. 5, Mar. 2015.
[18] V. Aref, L. Schmalen, and S. ten Brink, ŌĆ£On the convergence speed of spatially coupled LDPC ensembles,ŌĆØ in Proc. Allerton Conference on Communications, Control, and Computing, Oct. 2013, arXiv:1307.3780.
[19] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, ŌĆ£Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670ŌĆō678, 2004.
[20] D. Pflu┬©ger, G. Bauch, F. Hauske, and Y. Zhao, ŌĆ£Design of LDPC codes for hybrid 10 Gbps/100 Gbps optical systems with optional differential modulation,ŌĆØ in Proc. ITG SCC, 2013.
[21] L. Schmalen, S. ten Brink, and A. Leven, ŌĆ£Spatially-coupled LDPC protograph codes for universal phase slip-tolerant differential decoding,ŌĆØ in Proc. OFC, Los Angeles, CA, USA, Mar. 2015, paper Th3E.6.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 16:43:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
464

