2836

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2022

Multi-Layer Progressive Tree-Structured Edge Growth Algorithm for Nested Lifting Design of 5G-NR-Like LDPC Codes
Zhitong He , Student Member, IEEE, Kewu Peng , Senior Member, IEEE, and Jian Song , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract— We proposed an algorithm called multi-layer progressive tree-structured edge growth, to design rate-compatible length-scalable raptor-like quasi-cyclic LDPC codes with nested base matrices and nested lifting, like 5G new radio (NR) LDPC codes. The nested lifting design is mainly investigated in this letter. To deal with the complicated dependency of the performance for nested base matrices and lifting sizes simply and effectively, the design of nested lifting is decomposed into the lifting design of each lifting size, which is called a layer. In each layer, the lifting of nested base matrices is designed via progressive tree-structured edge growth algorithm, where tree structure is employed to reserve diversified intermediate results and achieve better trade-off of error floor performance among nested base matrices. The criterion composed of improved cycle classification, minimum distance test and performance evaluation is employed for tree pruning, which could better optimize the error floor performance under acceptable complexity. The effectiveness of the proposed algorithm is demonstrated via construction and simulation.
Index Terms— 5G new radio, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, rate-compatible, length-scalable, low error floor.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes has been employed in 5G new radio (NR) enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) scenarios [1], for their superior threshold performance with rate-compatibility and length-scalability. With raptor-like quasi-cyclic (QC) structure, the base matrices of various code rates are naturally nested for 5G-NR LDPC codes to achieve rate-compatibility. Meanwhile, the lifting of small lifting sizes is embedded within the lifting of large lifting sizes in a family of 5G-NR LDPC codes to achieve lengthscalability. Though the nested base matrices are carefully designed to ensure the superior threshold performance among all code lengths and code rates [2], the nested lifting design for 5G-NR LDPC codes has not been disclosed yet. Furthermore, error floor can be observed at block error rate (BLER) above 10−5 for several code rates and code lengths of 5G-NR LDPC codes, under belief propagation (BP) decoding [3]. Hence the nested lifting design for 5G-NR LDPC codes still have
Manuscript received 4 July 2022; revised 2 August 2022; accepted 28 August 2022. Date of publication 1 September 2022; date of current version 12 December 2022. This work was supported by National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2022YFE0101700. This work was also supported by the funding of Peng Cheng Laboratory under the contract number of PCL2021A10. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M.-R. Sadeghi. (Corresponding author: Kewu Peng.)
The authors are with the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology and the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Peng Cheng Laboratory, Nanshan, Shenzhen 518055, China (e-mail: hezt20@ mails.tsinghua.edu.cn; pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn; jsong@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2022.3203403

room for improvement, in order to be further employed in ultra-reliable low latency communication (uRLLC) scenario, which requires higher reliability and lower latency than eMBB scenario. 5G-NR LDPC codes with short block length are considered with high priority in this letter, since the low latency requirement is fulfilled and the error floor is more notable for short block-length 5G-NR LDPC codes.
Previous lifting design methods are generally for a single base matrix and lifting size. For example, the widely adopted circulant progressive edge growth (cPEG) algorithm [4] is directly employed on the largest base matrix of state-of-the-art rate-compatible QC-LDPC codes, such as accumulate-repeat-4-jagged-accumulate LDPC codes [5] and protograph-based raptor-like LDPC codes [6]. However, the performance trade-off among nested base matrices and lifting sizes is difficult for 5G-NR LDPC codes, and these lifting design methods cannot be directly employed.
The error floor of LDPC codes mainly attribute to trapping sets under BP decoding, while trapping sets are closely related to short cycles with low graph connectivity. Hence girth [7] and approximate cycle extrinsic message (ACE) values [8] are widely employed as simple but effective criteria to construct QC-LDPC codes with low error floor. However, girth and ACE values are not the decisive factor for error floor, especially for raptor-like LDPC codes. As an instance, minimum distance of LDPC codes notably influence the error floor as well [9], and BLER performance evaluation is the most precise but time-consuming criterion to sieve LDPC codes with low error floor.
The contributions of this letter are summarized as follows. Firstly, we propose an algorithm called multi-layer progressive tree-structured edge growth (ML-PTG), to design the nested lifting of 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes (i.e., LDPC codes with the structures similar to those in 5G-NR). The design of nested lifting is naturally decomposed into multiple layers, and each layer corresponds to a single lifting size. In each layer, the lifting of the nested base matrices is designed via progressive tree-structured edge growth algorithm, which could result in better trade-off of the error floor performance among different base matrices and lifting sizes. Moreover, the improved cycle classification combined with minimum distance test and BLER performance evaluation is set as the criterion for tree pruning, to better optimize the error floor performance under acceptable complexity. Finally, the proposed algorithm is employed to optimize the nested lifting of 5G-NR LDPC codes, and the simulation results for optimized 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.
The rest of this letter is organized as follows. Section II introduces the structure of 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes, as the preliminary. Section III describes the proposed ML-PTG algo-

1558-2558 © 2022 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: MULTI-LAYER PROGRESSIVE TREE-STRUCTURED EDGE GROWTH ALGORITHM

2837

rithm, including the details of tree growth, tree pruning and the combined criteria. Section IV presents the simulation results and Section V draws the conclusion of this letter.

II. STRUCTURE OF 5G-NR-LIKE LDPC CODES

With the raptor-like and quasi-cyclic structures, the parity check matrix (PCM) of a single code rate and lifting size for 5G-NR LDPC codes can be constructed from the base matrix B of size K × (K + M ) with the following structure:

B=

(BH )G×(K+G) (BU )(M−G)×(K+G)

0G×(M −G) I(M −G)×(M −G)

,

(1)

where BH and BU denote the highest-rate code part and the incremental redundancy code part, respectively, and 0, I denote zero matrix and identity matrix, respectively. The first K columns and the last M columns of B are called the information columns and the parity-check columns, respec-
tively. The first V columns of the information columns
are punctured, and the design rate can be computed as Rdesign = K/(K + M − V ). The parameter G represents the number of rows for BH .
The base matrix B is designed without parallel edges, i.e., the entries of B can only be 0 or 1. The base matrix B can be equivalently represented by a bipartite graph called base graph (BG), where each non-zero entry of B corresponds to an edge in the BG. To generate the PCM, the zero entries in B are substituted by Z × Z zero matrices, while the non-zero entries are substituted by Z × Z circulant matrices, where Z
is called lifting size. Each circulant matrix can be obtained
by shifting the identity matrix, and represented by an integer 0 ≤ s < Z called lifting value, which denotes the position of
non-zero entry in the first row. The information block length can be computed as k = KZ.
5G-NR LDPC codes employ a set of nested base matrices to
achieve rate-compatibility. For the information block length k
within the given range, the set of nested base matrices can be represented by B1, B2, . . . , BL, where all the Bl has the same structure as (1), and Bl−1 is embedded in Bl for 2 ≤ l ≤ L. For 5G-NR BG2 LDPC codes with k ≤ 192, the nested base matrices is shown in Fig. 1, where K = 6 is fixed, V = 2 and M is varying to support all the required code rates. For larger
information block length k, the new set of nested base matrices
with larger K is employed, which can be obtained from the set of nested base matrices with K = 6 via information column
extension. However, short block-length 5G-NR LDPC codes
are mainly considered in this letter, and K is assumed fixed such that the set of nested base matrices B1, B2, . . . , BL is fixed for all the information block lengths k, for simplicity.
The length-scalability of 5G-NR LDPC codes is achieved
via nested lifting. The supported lifting sizes are separated into eight families for 5G-NR LDPC codes, i.e., ΦA = {Z = A2j, 0 ≤ j ≤ JA} for A = {2, 3, 5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 15}, where A is the smallest lifting size in the family. For each family, an integer value 0 ≤ sˆ(A, e) < A2JA is assigned for each edge e in the largest base matrix BL, and the lifting value s(Z, e) for each lifting size Z ∈ ΦA is determined by sˆ(A, e) modulo Z. Obviously, for any Z1 < Z2, Z1, Z2 ∈ ΦA, we have s(Z1, e) is equal to s(Z2, e) modulo Z1 for each edge e in BL.

Fig. 1. Nested base matrices of 5G-NR BG2 LDPC codes with K = 6.
The squares and crosses denote the 1-entries and 0-entries, respectively. Bi is embedded in Bi+1 for i = 1, 2, 3, and B1, B2, B3, B4 has M = 8, 14, 20, 26, respectively.

Hence the lifting with small lifting size is embedded within the lifting with large lifting size.
The proposed ML-PTG algorithm is for 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes, which is more generally defined with all the features of 5G-NR LDPC codes introduced above. Specifically, 5G-NRLike LDPC codes are raptor-like QC-LDPC codes with a set of nested base matrices B1, . . . , BL. The set of lifting sizes ΦA = {Z = A2j, 0 ≤ j ≤ JA} is supported and the lifting with small lifting size in ΦA is embedded in the lifting with large lifting size in ΦA via modulo operations.

III. PROPOSED ML-PTG ALGORITHM

The nested lifting design should trade-off the performance

of nested base matrices and lifting sizes for 5G-NR-Like

LDPC codes. Nevertheless, the base matrices and lifting

sizes supported by 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes could form a

2-dimensional grid, and the dependency of the performance

for different base matrices and lifting sizes is complicated,

because of the nested relation of base matrices and lift-

ing. The proposed ML-PTG algorithm utilizes the fact that

the performance of the lifting with large lifting sizes is

strongly correlated to the performance of the lifting with

small lifting sizes, for the cycles in their Tanner graphs are

highly related [2]. Therefore, the design of nested lifting is

decomposed into the successive design for the lifting sizes
Z = A, 2A, . . . , A2JA, and the lifting design for lifting size Z = A2j is denoted as layer j. The multi-layer design process

could assure the performance trade-off of nested lifting sizes,

and need only deal with simpler 1-dimensional dependency of

the nested base matrices in each layer.

In each layer j, the progressive tree-structured edge growth

algorithm is employed to design the lifting of the nested base

matrices B1, B2, . . . , BL. Firstly, all the edges e in the largest

base matrix BL are indexed as follows. Suppose there are

tl edges in Bl\Bl−1, i.e., in Bl but not in Bl−1, where

B0 is assumed the empty matrix embedded in B1. Hence

there are totally τl =

l l1 =1

tl1

edges

in

the

base

matrix

Bl.

All the τL edges in BL are indexed as e1, e2, . . . , eτL, such

that the first τl edges e1, e2, . . . , eτl are all the edges in Bl.

In other words, eτl−1+1, eτl−1+2, . . . , eτl are all the tl edges in

Bl\Bl−1, where it is assumed that τ0 = 0. The lifting values

sj,τ := s(A2j, eτ ) for τ = 1, 2, . . . τL are determined in order.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2838

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2022

Unlike conventional lifting design algorithms, tree structure
is employed in the proposed ML-PTG algorithm, and diversified intermediate results for the lifting of B1, . . . , BL could be reserved, which is beneficial for the performance trade-off
of these nested base matrices. Specifically, the tree in layer j
is denoted as Tj. Each Tj has maximum 1 + τL levels, which are indexed as level 0, 1, . . . , τL. The node in level 0 is the root node, while each node in level τ ≥ 1 denotes a candidate of the lifting values (sj,1, sj,2, . . . , sj,τ ), i.e., a candidate of lifting for the edges e1, e2, . . . , eτ with lifting size Z = A2j. The node (sj,1, sj,2, . . . , sj,τ ) in level τ is naturally the child node of the node (sj,1, sj,2, . . . , sj,τ−1) in level τ − 1, and each node in level 1 is the child node of root node. The current
maximum level index of Tj is denoted as ηj, and the number of nodes in level τ of Tj is denoted as σj,τ , which represents the number of candidate liftings for the edges e1, e2, . . . , eτ with lifting size Z = A2j. The tree size of Tj is defined as σj := σj,ηj , which represents the number of candidate liftings for all the currently determined edges e1, e2, . . . , eηj .

Algorithm 1 Multi-Layer Progressive Tree Growth

Input: Lifting size set ΦA, Nested base matrices B1, . . . BL, Complexity parameters σ1, σ2, σ3, σth.
Output: Lifting values sˆ(A, e) for each edge e in BL. 1: Index the edges within BL as in (2). 2: for j ← 0 to JA do 3: Initialize Tj with only the root node, ηj ← 0. 4: Initialize the parameters l2 ← 0, l3 ← 0.
5: while ηj < τL do
6: // Tree Growth.

7: if j = 0 then

8:

Connect each node in level ηj of Tj to exactly A

child nodes with sj,ηj = 0, 1, . . . A − 1.

9: else

10:

Connect each node in level ηj of Tj to child nodes

according to Tj−1 and the nested relation of lifting.

11: end if

12: ηj ← ηj + 1. 13: // Tree Pruning.

14: if σj > σ1 then

15:

while σj > σth do

16:

if τl3+1 ≤ ηj and σj,τl3+1 < σ3 then

17:

l3 ← l3 + 1, BLER performance evaluation to

prune the nodes in level τl3 .

18:

else if τl2+1 ≤ ηj and σj,τl2+1 < σ2 then

19:

l2 ← l2 + 1, minimum distance test to prune the

branches in stage τl2 .

20:

else

21:

Improved cycle classification to prune the nodes

in level ηj, reserve at most σth nodes.

22:

end if

23:

end while

24: end if

25: end while

26: end for

The major procedures of the proposed ML-PTG algorithm are tree growth and tree pruning in each layer j. In each step

of the tree growth procedure, the lifting value for a new edge
is determined according to the predefined edge indexes, and
all the choices of that lifting value are reserved. Specifically,
the tree growth of each Tj starts from the tree with only the root. For layer 0, since each lifting value could be arbitrarily chosen in the set {0, 1, . . . , A−1}, in each step of tree growth,
each node in level ηj is connected to exactly A child nodes, with lifting value of the new edge sj,ηj+1 = 0, 1, . . . , A − 1, respectively. For layer j > 1, the nested relation between the lifting with lifting size Z = A2j−1 and Z = A2j should be
considered. Specifically, suppose the node (sj,1, . . . , sj,ηj ) in Tj corresponds to the node (sj−1,1, . . . , sj−1,ηj ) in Tj−1, i.e.,

sj,τ ≡ sj−1,τ mod A2j−1, ∀1 ≤ τ < ηj ,

(2)

and the node (sj−1,1, . . . , sj−1,ηj ) is connected to q child nodes with sj−1,ηj+1 = s1, s2, . . . , sq, respectively, then the node (sj,1, . . . , sj,ηj ) in Tj is connected to exactly 2q child nodes with sj,ηj+1 = s1, s1 + A2j−1; . . . ; sq, sq + A2j−1. Hence the tree size σj grows A times larger for layer 0 and at least twice larger for layer j > 1 in each step of tree growth.
Since each node in level τ of Tj represents a candidate of lifting for the edges e1, e2, . . . , eτ , and for τ = τl, the edges e1, e2, . . . , eτl are all the edges in Bl, each node in level τl of Tj represents a candidate PCM constructed from base matrix Bl with lifting size Z = A2j. Furthermore, each node in other levels τ of Tj represents a partial PCM constructed from the edges e1, . . . , eτ as well, by treating the edges eτ+1, . . . , eτL in the base matrix BL as zero entries. Harmful graph structures such as cycles or trapping sets of the partial PCM would be
a subset of harmful graph structures of the complete PCMs constructed from the base matrices Bl, Bl+1, . . . BL, where τl > τ . Therefore, tree pruning with the combined criteria is employed in the proposed algorithm, to prune the nodes in multiple levels of Tj and achieve better trade-off of error floor performance for the nested base matrices with acceptable
complexity.
The details of tree pruning are described as follows. When tree size σj is larger than the preset threshold σ1, tree pruning is employed to prune the nodes till the tree size σj reduces to less than σth, and tree growth continues. The improved cycle classification combined with minimum distance test and BLER
performance evaluation are set as the criteria for tree pruning.
The improved cycle classification criterion classifies cycles in
the PCM into multiple types, and prune the nodes with more
cycles of harmful types. Due to the quasi-cyclic structure, the
cycles in the PCM corresponds to the closed paths in the BG.
Hence the number of cycles can be counted by firstly finding
all the closed paths in the BG and then analyzing whether the
lifting values of the edges in each closed path could lead to
cycles in the PCM. Hence the improved cycle classification
criteria has relatively low complexity, and could be employed to prune the nodes in any level of Tj. The minimum distance test criterion evaluate minimum distance of PCMs via approx-
imate nearest codeword (ANC) algorithm [10], and prune
the nodes with lower minimum distance. The complexity of
the minimum distance test criterion is larger but can prune the
nodes with worse error floor performance more precisely. The
BLER performance evaluation criterion directly evaluates
the BLER at error floor region for the PCMs, which has the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HE et al.: MULTI-LAYER PROGRESSIVE TREE-STRUCTURED EDGE GROWTH ALGORITHM

2839

Fig. 2. Instance of tree growth and tree pruning procedure with the nested base matrices B1 and B2 and larger base matrices which B2 is embedded in. (a) Tree growth of Tj from ηj = 3 to ηj = 4. The partial exponent matrices of each level are shown at the right side, which correspond to the partial PCMs of each level. The ∞ elements correspond to zero matrices in the partial PCMs, and other elements correspond to circulant matrices with that lifting value. (b) Tree pruning of Tj, where (1) improved cycle classification, (2) minimum distance test and (3) BLER performance evaluation.
highest complexity but the highest precision to evaluate error floor performance.
The aforementioned combined criteria can be adopted to prune different levels of Tj. Specifically, the minimum distance test criterion is adopted on level τl with σj,τl < σ2, and the BLER performance evaluation criterion is employed on level τl with σj,τl < σ3. The improved cycle classification is directly employed on level ηj when tree size σj > σ1. Naturally, the parameters σ1, σ2, σ3 satisfy σ3 σ2 σ1. Suppose that the average complexity of employing the three criteria on each candidate (or node) is c1 c2 c3, respectively, then the parameters σ1, σ2, σ3 are chosen such that the total complexity σ1c1, σ2c2, σ3c3 of these three criteria are of the same order of magnitude. The minimum distance test criterion and the BLER performance evaluation criterion are both employed on each level τ1, . . . , τL exactly once, and the total computation complexity C in each layer can be computed as

In that instance, the BLER performance evaluation is firstly

employed in level τ1 = 2, and then the minimum distance test is employed in level τ1. The improved cycle classification is finally employed in the deepest level ηj = 4. It can be seen from Fig. 2b that when a node is pruned, all the child nodes

of that node would be pruned.

Finally, the details of improved cycle classification criterion

are introduced as follows. Note that variable nodes and check

nodes in the Tanner graph correspond to columns and rows in

the PCM, respectively. Similar to the basic idea in [11], cycles

are classified by the cycle length g and the number λ of check

nodes which are connected to degree-1 variable nodes (called

1-CNs below). To explain why 1-CNs are distinguished from

other check nodes, we consider the check node processing in

BP decoding:

⎛

⎞

mci→vj = 2 tanh−1 ⎝

tanh mvj →ci ⎠ (4) 2

j ∈N (i)\j

where ci denotes the i-th check node and vj denotes the j-th variable node, mci→vj and mvj→ci denote the log-likelihoodratio (LLR) message sent from check node ci to variable node vj and from variable node vj to check node ci, respectively, and N (i) denotes the neighbor variable node index set of ci. Suppose the decoding is nearly finished as expected in the
error-floor region, for vj which is outside the trapping set and has degree ≥ 2, we can assume that mvj →ci → ∞ [12]. For degree-1 variable nodes vj , mvj →ci exactly equals to the extrinsic channel information. Hence from (4), variable nodes
inside the trapping set could only get limited message from
outside the trapping set via any check nodes except 1-CNs.
Therefore, cycles with less 1-CNs are more harmful, and the
improved cycle classification criterion prunes the candidates with more cycles of smaller g or smaller λ. The ACE value of a cycle can be computed as i(di −2), where di is the degree of the i-th variable node in the cycle. Hence the improved
cycle classification criterion is simpler and more effective
than ACE criterion for rate-compatible raptor-like LDPC codes
with varying M , since λ of the same cycle is fixed for nested
base matrices, but the ACE value of the same cycle might vary,
for the degree of variable nodes changes for the nested base
matrices. The simulation results in the next section reflects the
effectiveness of the improved cycle classification.

C ∼ O(L(σ1c1 + σ2c2 + σ3c3)).

(3)

In the actual implementation, σ1 ∼ 105, σ2 ∼ 103, σ3 ∼ 102 is chosen according to the computing resources.
Under acceptable complexity, error floor performance could

be better optimized. In Alg. 1, the completed description of

the proposed ML-PTG algorithm is presented, including the

conditions and the order that the three criteria are employed

in tree pruning. l2, l3 are introduced to record the maximum base matrix index that the minimum distance test and the

BLER performance evaluation criterion has been employed,

respectively. An instance of tree growth and tree pruning

procedure is shown in Fig. 2, where the nested base matrices

are simply assumed as B1 =

1 1 and B2 =

110 101

.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, the ML-PTG algorithm is employed to optimize the lifting of 5G-NR LDPC BG2 codes with K = 6 and the set of lifting sizes Φ13 = {Z = 13 × 2j, 0 ≤ j ≤ 1}. In tree pruning procedure, BLER performance evaluation is adopted at the SNR points where the average BLER of all the candidates is near 10−5 at each pair of code length and code rate, i.e., each pair of base matrix and lifting size. The optimized 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes are compared with the original 5G-NR LDPC codes at code rates 0.375 ≤ R ≤ 0.75 via simulation, which is conducted over binary-input AWGN channels with 50 iterations under layered BP decoding, and at least 100 block errors are observed at each

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2840

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 26, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2022

Moreover, the minimum distance of the modes with Z = 26 is close to the minimum distance upper bound of the 5G-NR base matrices [9]. Hence the base matrices of 5G-NR LDPC codes should be further optimized to achieve better error floor performance, which will be the next step of our work.
V. CONCLUSION
In this letter, the ML-PTG algorithm is proposed for design the nested lifting of 5G-NR-Like LDPC codes. To deal with complicated performance dependency for nested base matrices and lifting sizes in the design process, the ML-PTG algorithm utilizes the performance correlation of the nested lifting, and decompose the nested lifting into multiple layers, while each layer corresponds to a single lifting size. In each layer, the lifting for the nested base matrices of a single lifting size is designed and tree structure is adopted to reserve intermediate results and trade-off the error floor performance among nested base matrices. Furthermore, the combined criterion for tree pruning enables the improvement of the error floor performance with acceptable complexity.

Fig. 3. Comparison of original 5G-NR LDPC codes and optimized 5G-NR LDPC codes with K = 6 and Z = 13, 26 for (a) SNR gap to Shannon limit at BLER = 10−5, (b) minimum distance, (c) percentage of undetected errors at dSNR = 4.25dB for Z = 13 and dSNR = 3.30dB for Z = 26. The refined normal approximation of finite block-length bound [13] at BLER = 10−5 for the cases Z = 13 and Z = 26 is also shown in (a).
case. The SNR gaps to Shannon limit (also called dSNR) at BLER = 10−5 are observed. 1
As shown in Fig. 3a, it can be observed that the error floor performance across all the modes with Z = 13 and the modes with R ≤ 0.55 and Z = 26 has been largely improved, while the error floor performance across other modes is maintained. The performance is about 1dB away at all the code rates for both Z = 13, 26 from the finite block length bound in [13]. From Fig. 3b, it can be observed that the minimum distance property has also been significantly improved. As the result, the percentage of undetected errors has been largely improved, as shown in Fig. 3c, where undetected errors mean that the output of the decoder is an incorrect codeword, and are counted in the BLER. For various improved BP decoding algorithms such as collaborative BP decoding [14], undetected errors might be more harmful since these errors could not be detected and corrected by additional operations. Therefore, the performance improvement of optimized 5G-NR LDPC codes might be larger under improved BP decoding.
1The PCMs of optimized 5G-NR LDPC codes and other extended design instances are shown in https://github.com/Hezt20/Optimized-5G-NRLike-LDPC-Codes.

REFERENCES
[1] Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network: NR; Multiplexing Channel Coding (Release 16), document TS 38.212, Version 16.7.0, 3GPP, Sep. 2021.
[2] T. Richardson and S. Kudekar, “Design of low-density parity check codes for 5G new radio,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 56, no. 3, pp. 28–34, Mar. 2018.
[3] Evaluation of Channel Coding Schemes, document R1-1801468, TSG RAN WG1 Meeting #92, 3GPP, Huawei, HiSilicon, Feb. 2018.
[4] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., vol. 2, Nov. 2004, pp. 1990–1994.
[5] D. Vukobratovic and V. Senk, “Generalized ACE constrained progressive edge-growth LDPC code design,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 32–34, Jan. 2008.
[6] S. Naseri and A. H. Banihashemi, “Construction of girth-8 QC-LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 1904–1908, Nov. 2019.
[7] M. Diouf, D. Declercq, M. Fossorier, S. Ouya, and B. Vasic, “Improved PEG construction of large girth QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 9th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process. (ISTC), Sep. 2016, pp. 146–150.
[8] T. Tian, C. R. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.
[9] S. V. S. Ranganathan, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Quasi-cyclic protograph-based raptor-like LDPC codes for short block-lengths,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 65, no. 6, pp. 3758–3777, Jan. 2019.
[10] X.-Y. Hu, M. P. C. Fossorier, and E. Eleftheriou, “On the computation of the minimum distance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, vol. 2, Jun. 2004, pp. 767–771.
[11] J. Song, Z. He, K. Peng, and C. Zhang, “MET-DE aided design of low-rate DTMB-A LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Broadband Multimedia Syst. Broadcast. (BMSB), Aug. 2021, pp. 1–4.
[12] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 7416–7441, Dec. 2014.
[13] Y. Polyanskiy, H. V. Poor, and S. Verdu, “Channel coding rate in the finite blocklength regime,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 5, pp. 2307–2359, May 2010.
[14] A. A. Zamzami, K.-C. Chao, and S.-C. Lin, “Stopping-set assisted reinforced belief propagation for decoding short LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 505–508, Mar. 2022.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:54:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

