1504

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Neural Self-Corrected Min-Sum Decoder for NR LDPC Codes
Taehyun Kim and Joo Sung Park, Member, IEEE

Abstract— In this letter, a neural self-corrected min-sum (NSCMS) decoder is proposed for 5G new radio (NR) lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes. Training in real-time on a rapidly changing channel requires low latency and minimal resource utilization. Unfortunately, typical neural decoders for LDPC codes use large and deep neural networks proportional to the code length, leading to latency and resource problems. In the network of NSCMS similar to network model pruning, certain nodes meeting the self correction condition are deleted and excluded from learning. This reduces the computational complexity of learning, compared to conventional networks. Thus, the NSCMS decoder has high practicality in real-time training using machine learning. Furthermore, self-correction allows for more reliable message-based learning and significantly improves performance. Simulation results demonstrate that NSCMS decoders exhibit lower error rates than previously proposed min-sum decoders.
Index Terms— LDPC codes, iterative decoding, min-sum decoding, self-correction, deep learning.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are adopted for various communication systems including the data channel of enhanced mobile broadband scenario in 5G new radio (NR) [2]. For LDPC decoding, several iterative decoding algorithms are used. Among these algorithms, the belief-propagation (BP) algorithm and sum-product (SP) algorithm provide optimal performance, but their high complexity impedes their practicality. In order to reduce the computational complexity of the decoder, the min-sum (MS) algorithm [3] using a mathematical approximation was proposed, but with noticeable performance degradation. To mitigate the performance degradation, normalized MS (NMS) algorithm and offset MS (OMS) algorithm [4], which apply a factor to the MS algorithm, are widely used in practical applications.
Recently, rapid development in machine learning has provided impressive performance enhancements in physical layer communications. In the field of error correction, the application of factors optimized by machine learning to existing algorithms resulted in improved error correction. In [5], neural SP decoder for high-density parity-check (HDPC) codes showed better performance than the conventional SP decoder. In addition, the neural decoders with hyper-networks proposed in [6] outperformed the BP decoders for the block codes. The NMS and OMS decoders with learnable factors also provide better performance than conventional decoders [7], [8].

However, their results were shown for short linear block codes, and NR LDPC codes usually have longer lengths. The structure of the neural decoder is closely related to the paritycheck matrix. Therefore, as the code length increases, the size of the learnable parameters in the neural decoder increases. It means that the complexity of training can be very high. Furthermore, the neural decoder for codes with long code lengths can be very deep. The reason is that the depth of the neural decoder is proportional to the number of iterations. The longer linear code requires more iterations to converge. Thus, the deep neural decoder leads to the vanishing gradient problem. Wu et al. proposed a MS algorithm using linear approximation (LAMS) for NR LDPC codes, which has the block error rate (BLER) closer to the BP algorithm than the NMS or OMS algorithm [9]. They applied the trained normalization and offset factors to each iteration of the MS decoder. In order to reduce the complexity of training, their neural network is constructed based on the base matrix that is smaller than the parity check matrix.
In this letter, we propose a neural MS decoder, which is called a neural self-corrected MS (NSCMS) decoder. The self-corrected MS (SCMS) algorithm [10] is one of the variants of the MS algorithm and achieves performance improvement through erasing unreliable messages. In the NSCMS algorithm, four learnable factors are applied to the SCMS algorithm. The factors can have different values at each iteration and are optimized through machine learning. The four learned factors make NSCMS closer to BP by reducing errors caused by mathematical approximations still present in the SCMS algorithm. In the neural network of the NSCMS, nodes that meet the self-correction condition are removed, similar to pruning [11]. Pruning is the one of the model compression methods that remove some connections to reduce the complexity of the model. When the model is compressed through self-correction, it reduces the amount of calculations required. Simulation results show that the NSCMS decoders have better error correction performance than the SCMS and LAMS decoders, and the improvement increases as the coderate decreases and the code length increases.
The remainder of this letter is organized as follows. In Section II, the details of the proposed NSCMS algorithm and its neural network for factor optimization are explained. The performance evaluation results are discussed in Section III. Finally, Section IV concludes this letter.

Manuscript received 14 March 2024; revised 22 April 2024; accepted 17 May 2024. Date of publication 22 May 2024; date of current version 12 July 2024. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was A. Balatsoukas-Stimming. (Corresponding author: Taehyun Kim.)
The authors are with Samsung Research, Samsung Electronics, Seoul 06765, South Korea (e-mail: th8978.kim@samsung.com; jsjoo.park@samsung.com).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2024.3404110

II. NEURAL SELF-CORRECTED MIN-SUM DECODER
A. Neural Self-Corrected Min-Sum Decoding Algorithm
A binary (N, K) LDPC code is identified by a M ×N parity check matrix H, where M is equal to N − K. In general, the LDPC decoding algorithm is represented as the exchange

1558-2558 © 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:40:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM AND PARK: NEURAL SELF-CORRECTED MIN-SUM DECODER FOR NR LDPC CODES

1505

of messages between variable nodes vn for n ∈ {1, . . . , N } and check nodes cm for m ∈ {1, . . . , M }. Let LV 2C (m, n) and LC2V (m, n) denote the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of the exchanged messages between the m-th check node and the n-th variable node. The a posteriori LLR of the n-th variable node obtained from the received signal y(n) is denoted by Lch(n).

P (c(n) = 0|y(n))

Lch(n) = ln P (c(n) = 1|y(n))

(1)

The LLRs LV 2C propagated from the n-th variable node are initialized to Lch(n). Then, the propagated message from the m-th check node to the n-th variable node at the l-th iteration is calculated as follows:

L(Cl)2V (m, n)

=

sgn

n′∈N (m)\{n}

L(Vl−2C1)(m, n′)

· max

α(l) min
n′∈N (m)\{n}

LV(l−2C1)(m, n′)

+ β(l), 0

(2)

The term n′ ∈ N (m) \ {n} denotes the indices of the neighbors of the m-th check node except for the n-th variable node. The parameters α(l) and β(l) are the normalization factor and offset factor for the l-th iteration, respectively, and are optimized through machine learning. Then, the a posteriori LLR LAP P of the n-th variable node is calculated as

L(Al)P P (n) = sgn (Lch(n)) max αc(lh) |Lch(n)| + βc(hl), 0

+

L(Cl)2V (m′, n).

(3)

m′∈M (n)

The term m′ ∈ M (n) denotes the indices of the neighbors of the n-th variable node. The parameters αc(lh) and βc(hl) are channel normalization factor and channel offset factor for the
l-th iteration, respectively, and are optimized through machine learning. The decoded codeword ˆc(l) is obtained by observing the sign of L(Al)P P . The validity of ˆc(l) is checked by the syndrome vector s(l) ∈ {0, 1}M obtained as s(l) = H · ˆc(l). When s(l) is equal to a zero-vector, the decoded codeword is
considered as a valid codeword, and the decoding is stopped.
If the decoded codeword is not valid, the LLRs LV 2C are
updated as follows:

L(Vl)2C (m, n) = LA(l)P P (n) − LC(l)2V (m, n).

(4)

If the sign of the calculated LV(l)2C (m, n) and the sign of L(Vl−2C1)(m, n) are different, the information in L(Vl)2C (m, n) is considered as unreliable and erased (i.e., L(Vl)2C (m, n) = 0). But, if L(Vl−2C1)(m, n) is zero, the L(Vl)2C (m, n) is always updated to the calculated value regardless of its sign. The
decoder performs the above process until it reaches the maximum number of iterations (i.e., l = Imax). The proposed NSCMS algorithm is summarized in Algorithm 1.

B. Training for Factor Optimization
Fig. 1 shows the structure of the neural network for the NSCMS decoder. The number of layers is related to the

Algorithm 1 Neural Self-Corrected Min-Sum Algorithm

1: Initialize: LV(02)C (m, n) = Lch(n), L(C02)V (m, n) = 0 2: for 1 ≤ l ≤ Imax do 3: Compute LC(l)2V with factor α(l), β(l) 4: Compute L(Al)P P with factor αc(lh), βc(hl) 5: Determine cˆ(l)
6: if s(l) = 0 then

7: Stop decoding process

8: end if

9: Compute L(Vl)2C

10: if sgn(LV(l−2C1)) ≠ sgn(L(Vl)2C ) then

11:

L(Vl)2C = 0

12: end if

13: end for

Fig. 1. Neural network for NSCMS algorithm.

maximum number of iterations, and the number of nodes in each layer is related to the code length and code rate of the LDPC code. The data for the input of the neural network is L(V12)C . The node outputs of odd layers are equal to LV 2C and LAP P , and the node outputs of even layers are LC2V . The connection between nodes is closely related to the paritycheck matrix of the LDPC code.
In the NSCMS decoder, the LV(l)2C (m, n) is erased according to the sign change of the message. As a result, some nodes in odd layers are erased, and their locations are different depending on the weights of the network and training data. According to the rules of the aforementioned self-correction, the input layer does not have any erased node. However, in the case of NR LDPC codes, the first 2Z codeword bits are punctured, where Z is lifting factor. Therefore, some nodes in the input layer are also erased when NR LDPC codes are used.
We divide the network into several shallow neural networks with one hidden layer, as represented in Fig. 1. The number of shallow neural networks is Imax. Each shallow network corresponds to one iteration of the NSCMS decoder and is identical to each other. Therefore, a neural network is reusable for training the NSCMS decoder with Imax iterations.
Let L(inl)(m, n) denotes the input of the l-th shallow neural network. Then, the output of a node in hidden layer can be represented as follows:

L(hld)(m, n) =

sgn Li(nl)(m, n′)

n′∈N (m)\{n}

· ReLU

wα min
n′∈N (m)\{n}

Li(nl)(m, n′)

+ wβ

.

(5)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:40:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1506

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 7, JULY 2024

The function ReLU(x) = max(x, 0) is an activation
function widely used in neural networks. The parameters wα and wβ are weights of the neural network, and their optimized values are α(l) and β(l), respectively. At last, the calculation
at the output layer is

L(olu)t(n) = sgn (Lch(n)) · ReLU (wαch |Lch(n)| + wβch )

+

L(hld)(m′, n), (6)

m′∈M (n)

where wαch and wβch are weights of the neural network, and their optimized values are αc(lh) and βc(hl), respectively. The
forward propagation of the neural network is quite similar to one iteration of the NSCMS algorithm. The output L(olu)t(n) in the neural network corresponds to L(Al)P P (n) in the NSCMS
algorithm. In the decoder, the step function is applied to LA(l)P P (n) to calculate the hard decision. However, the step
function is not friendly to the neural network because of

the zero-derivative everywhere. Therefore, instead of the step function, the sigmoid function is applied to Lo(lu)t as

o(l)(n)

=

1 1 + e−Lo(lu)t(n) .

(7)

Then, the loss to be minimized for factor optimization is set as a cross-entropy function.

Loss(l)

N

=−

(1 − c(n)) ln(o(l)(n)) + c(n) ln(1 − o(l)(n)) .

n=1
(8)

After the factors for the l-th iteration is optimized, the forward propagation of the lth shallow neural network is performed as follows to obtain the input of the (l+1)th shallow neural network, i.e., L(inl+1).

Lh(ld)(m, n)

=

sgn

n′∈N (m)\{n}

Li(nl)(m, n′)

· ReLU

α(l) min
n′∈N (m)\{n}

Li(nl)(m, n′)

+ β(l)

.

(9)

Li(nl+1)(m, n) = sgn (Lch(n)) ReLU αc(lh) |Lch(n)| + βc(hl)

+

Lh(ld)(m′, n).

m′∈M (n)\{m}

(10)

If the signs of Li(nl+1)(m, n) and L(inl)(m, n) are different, the node with L(inl+1)(m, n) is erased. If the node L(inl)(m, n) is erased, the node with L(inl+1)(m, n) is not erased regardless of its sign. The process is repeated until the factors for the Imax shallow neural networks are optimized. The training for the proposed NSCMS decoder is summarized in Algorithm 2.
This iteration-by-iteration training process provides several benefits. The LDPC code length can be increased up to tens of thousands of bits. Following the relationship between an LDPC code and its neural network represented in this section, the number of nodes in a layer increases as the LDPC code

Algorithm 2 Training Factors for Neural Self-Corrected Min-

Sum Decoder

1: Initialize: Set the number of shallow neural networks

(Imax) and collect training data set {Lch}

2: for 1 ≤ l ≤ Imax do

3: if initial set-up then

4:

Initialize weights and biases {wα, wβ, wαch , wβch } to

{1, 0, 1, 0}

5: else if real-time training then

6:

Initialize weights and biases {wα, wβ, wαch , wβch } to

the learned values from previous training

7: end if

8: repeat

9: Randomly select training input data

10: Erase the nodes according to the self-correction rule

11:

Feed Li(nl) into the shallow neural network and

compute o(l) according to (5), (6), (7)

12: Compute loss function according to (8)

13:

Update wα, wβ, wαch , and wβch using gradient

descent algorithm

14: until loss converges or a maximum apochs is reached 15: Return α(l), β(l), αc(lh), and βc(hl) 16: Calculate L(inl+1) according to (9), (10)
17: end for

length increases. Furthermore, the longer LDPC code tends to converge slower. This means that the longer LDPC code requires more iterations to achieve the target performance. As a result, the neural network for LDPC codes can be extremely large, and its depth is too deep. Therefore, the training complexity is high, and the vanishing gradient problem may occur. In addition, according to the results of recent research, a gradient explosion problem may occur in neural decoders for LDPC codes [12]. By learning multiple shallow networks instead of a deep neural network with dozens of hidden layers, it is possible to reduce the learning complexity and prevent the vanishing gradient problem and exploding gradient problem.
Another benefit is reusable factors. The factors at each iteration are optimized regardless of the maximum number of iterations. The iteration-by-iteration training process tries to find optimum factors for decoding the message at the end of each iteration. Therefore, the factors can be reused for all cases where the maximum number of iterations is set to Imax or less. For example, The values of αi, βi, αcih and βcih for i ∈ {1, . . . , 20} trained when the maximum number of iterations is set as 30 are equal to those trained when the maximum number of iterations is set to 20. Therefore, even if the maximum number of iterations is changed from 30 to 20, the factors can be reused without training again.
In addition, self-correction, another key technique in NSCMS, reduces the number of connections in the neural network by erasing nodes with insignificant inputs for decision making. Fewer connections results in a reduction in the amount of computation and latency for training. This process is similar to pruning for network model compression. The difference is that the self-correction has been proven to be effective

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:40:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM AND PARK: NEURAL SELF-CORRECTED MIN-SUM DECODER FOR NR LDPC CODES

1507

Fig. 2. Weights and biases of NSCMS decoder for NR BG2 LDPC codes with K = 520, R = 1/3: (a) weights and biases for normalization and offset factors; (b) weights and biases for channel normalization and offset factors.
in improving LDPC decoding performance. Therefore, selfcorrection is beneficial not only in reducing the amount of training computation but also in improving inference accuracy.

Fig. 3. Error correction performance on AWGN channel of LDPC decoders using NR LDPC codes: (a)K = 520, R = 1/3; (b)K = 520, R = 1/4; (c)K = 520, R = 1/5; and (d)K = 260, R = 1/3.

III. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

Simulations are performed over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and a Rayleigh fading channel. NR LDPC codes with various information bit lengths (260 and 520) and code rates (1/2, 1/3, and 1/4) are used to evaluate the performance. For the performance comparison with the NSCMS decoding algorithm, we simulate three previous decoding algorithms: NMS [4], SCMS [10], and LAMS [9]. In addition, to show the effect of self-correction on the error correction performance, we also simulate neural-normalizedoffset MS (NNOMS), which is equivalent to the absence of self-correction in NSCMS. As the reference of the best performance, the BP is also simulated. The normalization factor of NMS for each LDPC code is optimized by simulation within 0.1 accuracy range (i.e., 0.6 for the code with K = 520, R = 1/5 and 0.7 for the other codes), and the factors of LAMS are optimized through a neural network represented in [9]. The maximum number of iterations is limited to 30.
A. Training Results
The size of the training dataset is 1000 and the batch size is 100. Therefore, the weights and biases are updated 10 times in every epoch, and the same dataset is used for all epochs. The number of epochs is different according to LDPC codes. The training dataset consists of LLRs Lch collected in the SNR region that achieves the BLER of 10−1. Since the SNR to achieve the BLER of 10−1 is different according to the LDPC code, training was performed in a different SNR range for each code. For example, we collected the dataset for the LDPC code with K = 520, R = 1/3 at the SNR range from 0.75 to 1.0 dB. The initial values of wα, wβ, wαch , and wβch are 1, 0, 1, and 0, respectively. For a fair comparison with NMS and LAMS, the factors are optimized within the 0.1 accuracy range. To minimize loss function, we use the Adam optimizer [13] with a learning rate of 10−3. Note that

Fig. 4. Average number of iterations for LDPC decoders on AWGN channel: (a)K = 520, R = 1/3; (b)K = 520, R = 1/4; (c)K = 520, R = 1/5; and (d)K = 260, R = 1/3.
weights and biases are specifically trained for each code length and code rate.
The weights and biases for the NSCMS decoder using NR BG2 LDPC codes with K = 520, R = 1/3 are shown in Fig. 2. The weights and biases of each neural network are used as normalization and offset factors for the corresponding iteration. We can observe that α(l) varies a lot with the iteration compared to the others and increases up to 1.2. In general, the factors that make the absolute value of L(Cl)2V smaller are used to improve performance. Therefore, the normalization factor of NMS is a positive value less than 1, and the offset factor of OMS is a negative value. However, in NSCMS, even if α(l) is greater than 1, the performance improvement can be achieved because the negative offset factor is used together. Meanwhile, the channel normalization and channel offset factors remain stable at around 1.3 and 0.2, respectively.
B. Simulation Results
Fig. 3 shows the BLER performance of decoding algorithms in the AWGN channel. The NSCMS algorithm shows

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:40:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1508

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 28, NO. 7, JULY 2024

Compared to the NMS and OMS decoders, the NSCMS decoder requires more memory to store the sign of the LLR and erase bit indication for self-correction. However, it can be implemented using simple bitmap memory, and the NSCMS decoder shows excellent performance that is closer to BP than other MS decoders.

Fig. 5. Error correction performance on Rayleigh fading channel of LDPC decoders using NR LDPC code (K = 520, R = 1/3).
the performance closest to the BP among the simulated decoding algorithms in the operating SNR region. The performance gaps between the NSCMS algorithm and other MS algorithms tends to increase as the code rate decreases and code length increases. In addition, the difference in performance between NNOMS and NSCMS demonstrates the performance improvement effect achieved through selfcorrection. Furthermore, compared to other algorithms, the NSCMS algorithm has a faster convergence speed. The convergence speed of each algorithm in the AWGN channel is represented in Fig. 4 in terms of the average number of iterations. We also perform simulations with the optimized factors on a larger dataset (i.e., dataset size = 10000) to confirm the effect of generalization error. Recently, the generalization gap of neural BP decoder was provided as a function of training dataset size, number of decoding iterations, and code parameters [14], [15]. It is known that increasing the dataset size has the effect of improving the generalization performance. Even in NSCMS, increasing the size of the dataset results in slight improvements in error correction, although not noticeable.
Fig. 5 shows the performance of NSCMS decoder in a Rayleigh fading channel with factors optimized using the dataset collected from the AWGN channel. It is confirmed that the NSCMS decoder still outperforms other MS decoders even though it was not trained on the Rayleigh fading channel.
C. Complexity Analysis
The training complexity is measured by the ratio of nodes erased by self-correction. In the shallow neural network for the first iteration, 2Z nodes are fixedly erased by puncturing of NR LDPC codes, regardless of the training dataset. In the shallow networks for the second and subsequent iterations, the proportion of erased nodes varies depending on the input dataset. When training with the dataset used in this letter, the ratio of erased nodes in the neural network for the second iteration ranges from 0.1 to 0.15, and the ratio tends to decrease as the training progresses toward the last shallow neural network. This is because, due to the nature of the channel decoder, the reliability of the information increases each time it passes through the shallow neural network, reducing the effect of self-correction, which erases unreliable information.

IV. CONCLUSION
The NSCMS decoder for NR LDPC codes is proposed in this letter. For performance improvement, well-trained four factors and the self-correction are applied to the MS decoder. In comparison with other modified MS algorithms, the error correction performance of the NSCMS algorithm is closest to the BP algorithm at a small cost of complexity. To overcome vanishing gradient and gradient explosion problems, the iteration-by-iteration training is performed. In addition, selfcorrection has the effect of error correction performance improvement and reducing the amount of training computation by giving the effect of pruning to the training process.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] Technical Specification Group Radio Access Network; NR; Multiplexing and Channel Coding (Release 16), document TS 38.212 v16.11.0, 3GPP, Mar. 2023.
[3] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[4] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[5] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear codes using deep learning,” in Proc. 54th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. (Allerton), Sep. 2016, pp. 341–346.
[6] E. Nachmani and L. Wolf, “Hyper-graph-network decoders for block codes,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), Dec. 2019, pp. 2326–2336.
[7] L. Lugosch and W. J. Gross, “Neural offset min-sum decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jun. 2017, pp. 1361–1365.
[8] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, L. Lugosch, W. J. Gross, D. Burshtein, and Y. Be’ery, “Deep learning methods for improved decoding of linear codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 119–131, Feb. 2018.
[9] X. Wu, M. Jiang, and C. Zhao, “Decoding optimization for 5G LDPC codes by machine learning,” IEEE Access, vol. 6, pp. 50179–50186, 2018.
[10] V. Savin, “Self-corrected min-sum decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2008, pp. 146–150.
[11] M. C. Mozer and P. Smolensky, “Skeletonization: A technique for trimming the fat from a network via relevance assessment,” in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. (NIPS), 1988, pp. 107–115.
[12] L. Wang, C. Terrill, D. Divsalar, and R. Wesel, “LDPC decoding with degree specific neural message weights and RCQ decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 72, no. 4, pp. 1912–1924, Apr. 2024.
[13] D. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learn. Represent. (ICLR), 2015, pp. 1–11.
[14] S. Adiga, X. Xiao, R. Tandon, B. Vasic´, and T. Bose, “Generalization bounds for neural belief propagation decoders,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 70, no. 6, pp. 4280–4296, Jun. 2024.
[15] S. Adiga, R. Tandon, B. Vasic´, and T. Bose, “Generalization bounds for neural normalized min-sum decoders,” in Proc. Int. Telemetering Conf., Oct. 2023, pp. 1–10.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:40:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

