2024 14th International Symposium on Communication Systems, Networks and Digital Signal Processing (CSNDSP)
Code-Aware Anti-Jamming Method for FHSS Systems: Leveraging Diversity Combination
Yuchen Xu∗, Yunzhu Xian∗∗, Jiaxuan Li∗∗, Xiangyuan Bu∗∗, and Xuhui Ding∗ ∗School of Cyberspace Science and Technology ∗∗School of Information and Electronics Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
Email: {xuyuchen, xianyunzhu, lijiaxuan, bxy, dingxuhui}@bit.edu.cn

2024 14th International Symposium on Communication Systems, Networks and Digital Signal Processing (CSNDSP) | 979-8-3503-4874-3/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/CSNDSP60683.2024.10636420

Abstract—Frequency hopping spread spectrum (FHSS) systems exhibit exceptional resilience against jamming through the utilization of time-frequency diversities, which, when coupled with near-Shannon limit channel codes, yield favorable performance outcomes. The coherently combined and decoded signals at the receiver effectively eliminate the impact of partial-band jamming. This letter proposes a novel low complexity lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) code-aware diversity combining anti-jamming (LCA-DCAJ) method for fast frequency hopping (FFH) systems. Our approach seamlessly integrates multidimensional (time-frequency) diversities, FFH strategies, and LDPC coding techniques, resulting in outstanding suppression of interference within the time-frequency domain. Addressing concerns over complexity, we propose a triple log-likelihood ratio (LLR) threshold detection algorithm to further streamline implementation procedures. Bit error rate (BER) and average processing delay (APD) analyses underscore the superiority of the proposed anti-jamming method, validating its effectiveness in practical scenarios.
Index Terms—anti-jamming, frequency hopping, channel coding, LLR, LDPC.
I. INTRODUCTION
In both military and civilian wireless communication scenarios, the reliability and effectiveness of systems are crucial factors in ensuring overall robustness [1]. Frequency hopping spread spectrum (FHSS) technology, combined with advanced channel codes, is widely utilized in numerous tactical communication systems to mitigate time-frequencydependent channel disturbances such as hostile jamming, non-ideal channel fading, and the near-far effect. FHSS systems can be generally categorized into fast and slow frequency hopping (FFH & SFH) based on the correspondence between symbol and frequency hopping rate. The FFH system, in particular, offers more flexible time-frequency diversities against channel disturbance, making it widely applied in error-correcting coded systems to further improve anti-jamming capability [2]. This technology is essential in maintaining the security and reliability of communication systems in the face of dynamic and challenging environments.
As a signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) amplifier [3], low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are widely applied to FHSS
This work was supported in part by the National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant 2023YFC3305904, and in part by the National Natural Scientific Foundation of China under Grants 62301049.

systems due to their near-shannon limit bit error rate (BER) performance and parallel processing capability [4]. Concerning the time-frequency dimensional diversity capacity, the cascading of LDPC codes and channel diversity approaches has become a focus of research within FHSS systems. In a study by S. Lin et al. in 2007 [4], the performance of Reed-Solomon (RS) codes, LDPC codes, and Turbo codes in slow frequency hopping (SFH) systems were compared, with the conclusion that multi-LDPC codes require a lower SNR than other code types under partial-band jamming (PBJ). Subsequently, [5] analyzed the performance of LDPC code diversity transmission systems under PBJ conditions and proposed a robust combination based on the generalized maximum likelihood ratio test (GMLRT). J. Zhang [6] further examined the performance of FFH systems in Rayleigh fading channels under PBJ and multiple tone jamming (MTJ) but did not consider channel coding. Furthermore, [7] derived the general LDPC diversity combination technology of the FFH system under Rayleigh fading channel and MTJ conditions. A novel LDPC code is proposed to deal with the jamming of Rayleigh block fading channels in hopping systems [8].
However, the existing anti-jamming algorithms for partialband suppression interference with large-time occupation do not sufficiently address the integration and merging mechanism between channel codes and FFH systems. Additionally, code-aware anti-jamming methods bear a high processing complexity due to the presence of decoding iterations [9].
Inspired by the above analysis, this paper focuses on the FFH/PSK communication system in the presence of frequency domain partial bandwidth channel interference. An efficient LDPC code-aware diversity combining antijamming (LCA-DCAJ) strategy for FFH/FHSS systems is proposed to explore the message-passing paradigm between LDPC decoders and diversity combining models. Additionally, a triple-LLR threshold detection method is introduced to reduce the implementation complexity of the overall algorithm. Monte Carlo simulations are conducted to validate the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.
II. SYSTEM MODEL
The system model for the LDPC-coded FFH/BPSK system is depicted in Fig. 1, where the channel is modeled as a combination of time-frequency block-jamming additive white

979-8-3503-4874-3/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

373

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:44:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2024 14th International Symposium on Communication Systems, Networks and Digital Signal Processing (CSNDSP)

Gaussian noise (AWGN) and PBJ. Specifically, the singleside power spectral density (PSD) of the AWGN is denoted as N0, while the PBJ channel is characterized by an on-off jammer distributing its power evenly over a fraction ρ of the total bandwidth. This results in the single-side PSD of the PBJ being expressed as NJ /ρ with NJ representing the total jamming power of the PBJ within the system’s bandwidth. Therefore, the channel exhibits dual states - jammed and unjammed - denoted as J = 1 and J = 0, respectively. In the presence of PBJ, the total jamming-noise power spectral density is given by NJ /ρ + N0, where it is simply N0 in its absence. Additionally, the probability of transitioning to a jammed state is represented as Pr(J = 1) = ρ, while the probability of transitioning to an unjammed state is given by Pr(J = 0) = 1 − ρ.

LDPC Encoder
LDPC Decoder

Modulation

Hopper

Demodulation Dehopper

Probablity ¶

AWGN

J=1
Partial Band

J=0

Jamming

Fig. 1. LDPC coded FFH/BPSK system with PBJ.

In the LDPC coded FFH/PSK system, the k-th encoded bit

ck

is

mapped

into

an

MPSK

symbol

with

sk

=

ej

2π M

ck

,

where

M represents the modulation order (For the BPSK case,

M = 2). Subsequently, these symbols are transmitted within

a frequency slot determined by the hopping mechanism. It

is assumed that the receiver has achieved precise frequency-

hopping synchronization to facilitate the analysis of the

system’s anti-jamming performance [10]. Consequently, the

output signal yk obtained from the demodulator, which is

utilized to compute the initial log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of

the BP decoder, can be modeled as,

yk = sk + nk + wk,

(1)

where nk and wk are the samples of noise and PBJ, respectively. The conditional probability density function (PDF) of yk for the AWGN channel can be expressed as follows,

p (yk

|

sk )

=

√1 2πσ2

exp

−

(yk

− sk 2σ2

)2

,

(2)

where σ2 = σ02 represents the unjammed state and σ2 = σJ2 + σ02 symbolizes the jammed state. The variance of the noise and PBJ can be expressed as σ02 = 1/ (2REb/N0) and σJ2 = 1/ (2ρREb/Nj), respectively. Here, R denotes the code rate, and Eb stands for the bit energy before encoding. Note that ck and sk exhibit a one-to-one mapping relationship. Assuming that ck takes the value of zero and one with equal probability, then the initial LLR message of
the BP decoder with ck can be expressed as,

zk

=

log

P P

(ck (ck

= =

0 1

| |

yk ) yk )

=

y 2
σJ2 +σ02 k

2 σ02

yk

,J = 1 .
,J = 0

(3)

III. LDPC CODE-AWARE ANTI-JAMMING SCHEME

This section introduces an LDPC code-aware diversity combining anti-jamming (LCA-DCAJ) method for FFH systems, which builds upon traditional coded FFH systems. The

methodology is depicted in Fig. 2. It is important to note that the hopper and dehopper are omitted as ideal synchronization is assumed in this context.

frequency
Ċ

Ċ

Ċ
time domain

Probablity ¶

x LDPC c Encoder

Diversity

C Modulator S Hopper P Pseudo Code Frequency

AWGN

J=1 Partial Band
J=0 Jamming

Ċ

Generator

Synthesis

Channel

LDPC m Decoder

g

Combining

V

Interference Suppression Y

Dehopper

Estimation R

Fig. 2. LDPC code-aware anti-jamming FFH/BPSK system with PBJ.

As shown in Fig. 2, the proposed anti-jamming method adopts an extra codeword retransmission mechanism in the transmitter. After the initial information bits x are encoded by generating matrices c = x · G, the codeword c is duplicated L times and then transmitted over L continuous frequency slots serially denoted as C = c(1), . . . , c(L) , where L represents diversity numbers. Then, the serial codewords C with a length of LN are then BPSK mapped to form the modulated symbol S = s(1), . . . , s(L) . The sequence S undergoes a rapid frequency-hopping transformation to produce P. Finally, P is transmitted over the AWGN channel with PBJ, and the received signal can be denoted as R = r(1), . . . , r(L) , where r(l) = (rl1, . . . , rlN ).
At the receiver side, with the utilization of spectrum sensing, we assume that the jammed frequency slots have been correctly detected and are known to the receiver. Therefore, the corresponding jammed positions of the modulated symbols would be well identified because they uniquely correspond to the jammed frequency slots. Here, we denote all the jammed and unjammed positions of these modulated symbols as T and Tc, respectively. After receiving the signal R, dehopping is first performed and signal Y is obtained. Afterwards, the serial-to-parallel convert of Y is carried, transforming Y to L parallel vectors y(1), . . . , y(L). Then, we set the values of all the interfered symbols (marked with red blocks in Fig. 2) to zeros and get signal V as

vlk =

ylk , ((l − 1)N + k) ∈ Tc 0 , ((l − 1)N + k) ∈ T

,

l = 1, . . . , L, k = 1, . . . , N.

(4)

Subsequently, according to signal V coherent combination

is performed by the coherent merger, which produces a

vector g of the dimension of 1 × N , i.e., g =

L l=1

v(l)

.

Finally, the decoded result is obtained by processing signal

g with the LDPC BP decoder.

The primary objective of the analysis is to ensure reliable

transmission by eliminating the presence of jammed or

interfered bits in the designated channel position and improv-

ing the confidence level of each symbol through coherent

combination. This proposed method aims to standardize

block-jamming across different symbols, and enhance the

input LLR of the decoder by integrating channel diversities.

Additionally, the utilization of multiple diversities can be

viewed as an extension of the signal bandwidth, leading

to a reduced SNR requirement for each individual symbol.

374
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:44:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2024 14th International Symposium on Communication Systems, Networks and Digital Signal Processing (CSNDSP)

Consequently, the signals obtained through this interference homogenization approach provide enhanced belief to the decoder, thereby enhancing overall communication tolerance.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS AND SIMULATIONS
In this section, we conduct a numerical evaluation of the simulation results to demonstrate the effectiveness of the LCA-DCAJ method. Specifically, we employ the (256,128) CCSDS LDPC codes for evaluation as detailed in [11]. The performance in terms of BER under various jamming ratios (ρ) and diversity numbers (L) is illustrated in Fig. 3, with a comparison against the advanced algorithm referenced in [12].

1

1

1

1

2.1 dB

2.2dB

1.5 dB

1.5 dB

Fig. 3. The influence of diversity numbers on the anti-jamming performance of LCA-DCAJ.
As shown in Fig. 3, the LCA-DCAJ method adopts outstanding anti-jamming performance. When the jamming ratio ρ equals 10%, the LCA-DCAJ method results in an approximately 1.5 dB enhancement in BER. A gain of 2.1 dB at a BER of 10−5 is produced with the jamming ratio and diversity number of 20% and 2, respectively. Enhancing the diversity number to L = 3 results in an increase in antijamming performance by 2.2 dB under consistent conditions.

the diversity number is further increased to 6. Therefore, it is imperative that the decoder is integrated with a higher diversity number to guarantee the reliability of its inputs, particularly at elevated levels of ρ.

V. TRIPLE LLR THRESHOLDS BASED COMPLEXITY
REDUCTION APPROACH

Motivated by the analysis of APD in Section IV, code-

aware systems function as iterative receivers, resulting in

significant implementation complexity and processing delay.

The proposed LCA-DCAJ method introduces linear weight-

ing of channel LLR, causing perturbations that impact the de-

coder during the initialization process, ultimately leading to

anti-jamming capabilities. Building upon our prior research

[13], a real-time online belief monitoring approach has been

shown to effectively reduce the implementation complexity

of the LCA-DCAJ system.

In this case, our focus is on characterizing the evolutionary

pattern of the LLR domain throughout the iterative process.

As depicted in Fig. 4, the system exhibits a significant

APD at low to medium SNR, suggesting the potential for

complexity reduction. In the iterative decoding process, each

independent check node corresponds to a check equation,

which makes it possible to define the check node LLR as

follows

⎛

⎞

CN Rj(t) = 2tanh−1 ⎝

tanh LV Ni→CNj ⎠ , 2

V Ni∈R(CNj )

(5)

where j denotes the j-th calibration node, (t) denotes the t-th

iteration. On this basis, we define the joint check nodes LLR

(JCN-LLR) as shown in (6) which can be used to monitor

the status of the whole iteration system.

CN R(t)

=

1 m

m

CN Rj(t).

(6)

j=1

1 1 1
2.1dB

0.9dB

Fig. 4. Simulation results of LCA-DCAJ anti-jamming performance and iteration complexity under high jamming ratio.
Fig. 4 presents the BER and average processing delay (APD) simulation results with ρ increased to 50%, indicating that the LCA-DCAJ still exhibits excellent anti-jamming performance at a high diversity number, where APD represents the average number of iterations. When the diversity order L equals 2, the majority of a priori information from the channel is set to zero, exceeding the correction capability of the LDPC code. However, increasing the diversity number to 3 results in a significant improvement in the BER of LCADCAJ by more than 0.9 dB, with a gain of 2.1 dB when

Fig. 5. The evolutionary pattern of the JCN-LLR throughout the iterative process.
The evolutionary patterns of the JCN-LLR for the LCADCAJ method are shown in Fig. 5, where PBJ is superimposed on the original signal. A vast majority of undecodable frames exhibit JCN-LLR behaviors which fluctuate or converge at lower belief levels. Differently, the decodable

375
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:44:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2024 14th International Symposium on Communication Systems, Networks and Digital Signal Processing (CSNDSP)

frames’ JCN-LLR eventually converges at higher belief levels. It is important to highlight that certain decodable frames exhibit a declining trend in JCN-LLR values, as evidenced in frame 2. These frames need to be effectively differentiated from undecodable frames using suitable algorithms.
Consequently, complexity reduction can be achieved by judging the convergence of JCN-LLR’s. So, the JCN-LLR complexity reduction-based LCA-DCAJ algorithm can be summarized as Algorithm 1, and the corresponding simulation results regarding BER and APD are shown in Fig. 6, where the parameters selected are characterized using JCNLLR(ζ ,μ,λ).

Algorithm 1: JCN-LLR based LCA-DCAJ algo-

rithm.

1 According to channel received symbols Y, perform

the serial-to-parallel conversion;

2 According to (4), set all the jammed symbols to

zeros and obtain the signal V;

3 Perform coherent combining and obtain the

combined signal g =

L l=1

v(l);

4 According to (3) with J = 0, initialize the decoder

probability information;

5 Set the parameters ζ, μ and λ, and reset cnt ← 0;
6 for t = 1 : tmax do 7 Update node information; 8 Compute the CN R(t) according to (5) and (6); 9 if CN R(t) > ζ then

10

Close the stopping criterion;

11 else

12

if CN R(t) − CN R(t−1) < μ then

13

cnt = cnt + 1;

14

else

15

cnt = 0

16

end

17

if cnt > λ then

18

Break;

19

end

20 end

21 if stopping criterion is closed & HˆcT == 0 then

22

Break;

23 end 24 end

1 Reduced by 90%

0.2dB
Fig. 6. Simulation results of APD and BER.

As depicted in Fig. 6, the JCN-LLR complexity reductionbased LCA-DCAJ algorithm exhibits a significant reduction of 90% in the number of invalid iterations in low SNR regions, with only a marginal 0.2 dB loss observed in the high SNR region.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this study, we have proposed a novel code-aware diversity combining an anti-jamming method for FFH systems. Specifically, in coded FFH communication systems with flexible diversity dimensions, a weighted merging method for the initialization LLR information of the LDPC decoder is designed to enhance the belief of received symbols transmitted through the block-jamming AWGN channel. The corresponding BER performance indicates a gain of 2.2 dB compared to the advanced algorithm. Additionally, we have introduced a triple-LLR threshold detection complexity reduction method aiming at lowering the APD. The proposed algorithm demonstrates a significant reduction in the number of invalid iterations with minimal impact on the BER performance. Specifically, the APD of the proposed method can be reduced by up to 90%.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Bae, S. Kim, and J. Kim, “Efficient frequency-hopping synchronization for satellite communications using dehop-rehop transponders,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 52, no. 1, pp. 261–274, 2016.
[2] J. Zhang, K. C. Teh, and K. H. Li, “Maximum-likelihood FFH/MFSK receiver over rayleigh-fading channels with composite effects of MTJ and PBNJ,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 675–679, 2011.
[3] X. Ding, K. Zhou, G. Li, K. Yang, X. Gao, J. Yuan, and J. An, “Customized joint blind frame synchronization and decoding methods for analog LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., 2023.
[4] S. Lin, M. R. Masse, M. B. Pursley, T. C. Royster, and S. Song, “Frequency-hop antijam communications with nonbinary error-control coding,” in Proc. IEEE Mil. Commun. Conf., pp. 1–7, 2007.
[5] X. Wu, C. Zhao, X. You, and S. Li, “Robust diversity-combing receivers for LDPC coded FFH-SS with partial-band interference,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 7, pp. 613–615, 2007.
[6] J. Zhang, K. C. Teh, and K. H. Li, “Maximum-likelihood FFH/MFSK receiver over rayleigh-fading channels with composite effects of MTJ and PBNJ,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 3, pp. 675–679, 2011.
[7] J. Dai, D. Xu, and Y. Jing, “The performance of LDPC coded FFH/BFSK system over rayleigh fading channel under multitone jamming,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Comput. Commun. Netw. Technol., pp. 1– 5, 2014.
[8] C. Kim, J.-S. No, J. Park, H.-Y. Song, and J. Ahn, “Anti-jamming partially regular LDPC codes for follower jamming with Rayleigh block fading in frequency hopping spread spectrum,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Inf. Commun. Technol. Converg., pp. 583–587, 2016.
[9] M. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, 1999.
[10] H. Xu, Y. Cheng, and P. Wang, “Jamming detection in broadband frequency hopping systems based on multi-segment signals spectrum clustering,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 29980–29992, 2021.
[11] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, D. Divsalar, and J. Thorpe, “Design of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes for deep-space applications,” IPN Progress Report, vol. 42, no. 159, pp. 42–159, 2004.
[12] K. Yang, B. Zhang, H. Wang, and D. Guo, “The performance analysis of LDPC coded SFH/BPSK anti-jamming system,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Signal Process., pp. 1–5, 2015.
[13] X. Ding, J. An, Z. Zhao, X. Bu, and K. Yang, “Low-density paritycheck coded direct sequence spread spectrum receiver based on analog probabilistic processing,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 70, no. 7, pp. 6355–6370, 2021.

376
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:44:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

