2024 19th International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS) | 979-8-3503-6251-0/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISWCS61526.2024.10639097

Weighted Residual Layered Belief Propagation for LDPC Decoding

Hassan Touati and Rodrigo C. de Lamare CETUC, DEE, PUC-Rio, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil
University of York, UK Email: touati.hassan@hotmail.com and rodrigo.delamare@york.ac.uk

Abstract—In this work, we investigate the decoding of LowDensity Parity-Check (LDPC) codes using informed dynamic scheduling algorithms that require a reduced number of iterations. In particular, we devise the weighted residual layered belief propagation (WR-LBP) decoding algorithm, which exploits the residual within a structured layer framework to speed the number of required decoding iterations. The proposed WR-LBP algorithm is assessed against important LDPC decoding algorithms, in terms of the number of iterations required for convergence and the bit error rates.
Index Terms—WR-LBP, RBP, BP, IDS, LBP, SVNF, URW
I. INTRODUCTION
The concept of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes was introduced by Robert Gallagher in his doctoral dissertation thesis in 1960 [1], however, at that time, LDPC codes did not gain widespread attention. LDPC codes can increase channel capacity by using a belief propagation decoding algorithm, which exchanges decoding messages iteratively between variable and check nodes. The potential of LDPC codes for error correction appeared after a long time in the 1990s by Mackay and Neal [2]. LDPC codes, characterized by sparse parity check matrices due to their linear block code nature, have only a small fraction of non-zero elements. This property enhances their suitability for transmission and storage channels. Additionally, LDPC codes are widely employed in modern communication systems, particularly in wireless communication standards such as Wi-Fi (IEEE 802.11n, 802.11ac), 4G LTE, and 5G NR.
In LDPC decoding, scheduling relates to the sequence and timing of message updates between variable nodes and check nodes inside the factor graph representation. The choice of scheduling technique affects the convergent speed, error correction performance, and overall complexity of the decoding algorithm. Informed dynamic scheduling (IDS) techniques [3], [4] have an important role in the context of belief propagation (BP) decoding [5] for LDPC codes. Noted for their capacity-approaching performance, they depend on iterative decoding processes, and the scheduling of these iterations strongly impacts
This work was supported by CAPES, CNPq and FAPERJ.

the efficiency and effectiveness of the decoding algorithm used with a few iterations to have better performance than flooding BP. In this context, the Silent-Variable NodeFree RBP (SVNF) [6] algorithm tackles the issue of silent variable nodes by sequentially selecting and updating each C2V message with the highest residual generated by the check node connected to each variable node. Residual Belief Propagation (RBP) and Residual-Decaying-Based Residual Belief Propagation (RD RBP 0.9) [7], [8], [9] algorithms reduce the decoding algorithm’s greediness by gradually decaying the updated C2V residual, reducing the likelihood of selecting an edge in dynamic decoding algorithms. Whereas, in the reliability-based residual belief propagation (Rel RBP) [10] and [11], the update of the node with the greatest advantage occurs by assessing the reliability of the Log-Likelihood Ratios (LLRs) exchanged during message passing. Additionally, a distinct measure is introduced for each iteration. Uniformly Reweighted Belief Propagation (URW BP) [12], [13] aims to improve convergence speed and error correction capabilities through systematic reweighting of messages. The Layered Belief Propagation (LBP) [14] algorithm is particularly effective for decoding large graphical models in error-correcting LDPC codes.
In this paper, we introduce an enhanced IDS strategy, termed the Weighted Residual Layered Belief Propagation (WR-LBP) algorithm. The main idea behind the proposed WR-LBP algorithm is to employ a weighted residual strategy in the LBP algorithm This innovative algorithm showcases notable advancements, exhibiting diminished complexity and enhanced performance in comparison to conventional BP techniques founded on IDS methodologies. The distinctive weighting mechanism embedded within WR-LBP significantly enhances its efficiency, leading to a reduction in computational cost while concurrently achieving superior performance outcomes when benchmarked against established algorithms in the domain.
The succeeding portions of this work are structured as follows. In Section II, we present a succinct overview of the system model and articulate the problem statement. Section III offers our suggested method targeted at minimizing the complexity and latency inherent in various variants

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:42:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 979-8-3503-6251-0/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

of LDPC codes through the deployment of our WR-LBP decoding algorithm. The subsequent discussion in this section comprises simulation findings across multiple IDS settings. In Section IV, we assess the proposed WR-LBP and competing algorithms using simulations and in Section V we draw concluding remarks about this work.
II. SYSTEM MODEL AND PROBLEM STATEMENT
In a digital communication system, several key elements collaborate to enable effective information transfer. Commencing with the raw data, referred to as information, it undergoes encoding at the source through a source encoder.

Arranging the parity check matrix of an LDPC code in systematic form, we have

Hsys = [I | P(n−k)×k]

(3)

where P is the (n−k)×k parity matrix and I is an identity matrix. Rearranging the systematic parity check matrix, we get the generator matrix G:

G = [PT(n−k)×k | I]

(4)

The multiplication are GF(2), We can verify our results as :

G × HT = 0

(5)

Fig. 1. Basic elements of a digital communication system.
This encoded data, along with additional redundancy for error correction, is further processed by the channel encoder. The modulator then translates the digital signal into a suitable modulation form such as binary-phase shiftkeying (BPSK) for propagation through the channel, as depicted in Fig. 1. As the signal is transmitted over the channel, it encounters noise and distortion. At the receiving end, the demodulator extracts the transmitted signal, and the channel decoder corrects errors introduced during transmission. The reconstructed output, created using the source encoder, completes the repetitive cycle of digital communication. Each element, represented in Fig. 1, plays a key role in guaranteeing the correctness and reliability of information transmission in the communication system.
Generally, the mathematical description of the communication system in [15] Fig. 1 is given

LDPC codes are often represented by the n − k × n paritycheck matrix H, which is represented by

 h11

h12 · · ·

h1n 

 h21

H=  

...

h22 · · ·

...

...

h2n 

...

  

(6)

h(n−k)1 h(n−k)2 · · · h(n−k)n,

where hij are the elements of H from the field over which the code is defined, ’commonly the binary field GF(2) for binary codes’. H is carefully designed based on the properties of the specific linear block code.

y = c + n,

(1)

where y is the n-dimensional received vector, c is the ndimensional codeword and n is n-dimensional noise vector that is assumed to be Gaussian with zero mean and variance σ2.
The code c must be generate by:

c = m × G,

(2)

Fig. 2. Tanner Graph, exchanges intrinsic information between check nodes to variable nodes

to be valid if it satisfies the syndrome calculation s = cHT . where m is the k-dimensional message vector with R = k/n < 1 being the code rate, G is the k × n generator matrix and × denotes the modulo-2 multiplication.

The parity-check matrix H under a bipartite graph shown in Fig.2. can be represented in the following way: The nodes are of two types: variable nodes represent the symbols of the codeword c, which are circles, and check

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:42:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

nodes correspond to the parity equation, which are squares. A check node ci is connected to a variable node cj when the element of hij is a one. The quantity µci→vj represents a message from the check node to the variable node. We also assume µvj→ci is the message sent from a variable node to the check node. The indices vj and ci might refer to specific nodes in a graphic model.
A great deal of research currently focuses on improving LDPC decoding algorithms to enhance communication system performance and reduce latency. Specifically, it aims to create an intelligent scheduling strategy for LDPC decoding, limiting repeated updates for precise error correction. The goal is to reduce processing overhead and delay by strategically prioritizing the decoding process. This work aims to address LDPC decoding subtleties and contribute to advancing error correction techniques in communication systems.
III. PROPOSED WR-LBP DECODING ALGORITHM
In this section, we review the standard BP algorithm that is widely used for LDPC decoding and then present the proposed WR-LBP algorithm.

From (8) to (9), we use the mathematical rule

log(

1+x 1−x

)

=

2 tanh−1(x),

and

we

obtain



µc(ki→ ) vj = 2 tanh−1 

tanh

j′∈N (ci)\j

µ(vkj′)→ci 2

  , (9)

The Third step is to compute the message from the variable nodes to the check nodes µv(kj+→1c)i by

µv(kj+→1c)i = Lj +

µ(cki′)→vj ,

i′∈N (vj )\i

(10)

At the end of each iteration, the variable node computes the total LLR of Mj given by

Mj(k+1) = Lj +

µc(ki→ ) vj ,

i∈N (vj )

(11)

In step four, the reliability value is calculated by equation (11) then the transmitted bits (cˆ, j = 1, 2, . . . , N ) are estimated from the hard decision according to

A. Flooding Belief propagation
The BP algorithm, also known as the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [16], is a method used to compute the messages passed between variable nodes and check nodes, or vice versa, in the Tanner graph (see Fig. 3.). We assume that a codeword ci = (c1, c2, ...., cN ), is transmitted using BPSK modulation. This sequence is sent through a channel Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) and the codeword estimated is cˆi = (cˆ1, cˆ2, ...., cˆN ).

The BP algorithm is decomposed into four steps: The first step involves initializing the variable nodes by the value of the log likelihood ratio (LLR) Lj of the received sequence yj at each iteration given by

Lj = log

P (ci = 1|yj) P (ci = 0|yj)

,

(7)

where this step can accelerate decoding by verifying the syndrome s = cHT where H is a parity-check matrix and c is the codeword. If s = 0 then the codeword is found
and the process ends.
If not, the process continues to the second step, ”Row Processing” where the computed message µ(cki→ ) vj at the check nodes is transmitted to the variables nodes:

 1 + tanh−1

µc(ki→ ) vj

=

log

 

 1 − tanh−1

j′∈N(ci)\j tanh j′∈N(ci)\j tanh

µ(vkj′)→ci 2
µ(vkj′)→ci 2



 

,



(8)

cˆ = 1 if Mj <0, ,

(12)

0 otherwise

If the syndrome is zero then the parity equation is satisfied, and the decoding stops and gives the codeword cˆ as a result. If not, the algorithm will be repeated, returning to step 2 until a valid codeword is reached or until the maximum number of iterations is reached. This terminates the decoding process.

B. Weighted Residual Layered Belief Propagation algorithm
The RBP algorithm, as explained in reference [3], [17], [18], operates by processing messages passed from check to variable nodes. This strategy, referred to as residual passing, involves examining the difference between newly updated messages and previous versions, In the binary RBP decoder, the selection of the next message to be updated is determined by the message residuals. In the RBP algorithm, r(µc(ki→ ) vj ) is the residual used and the message µ(cki→ ) vj is the newly update for check to variable nodes, whereas µc(ki→ −1v)j is the previous update from the check to the variable nodes. The residual is written in terms of the messages according to

r(µ(cki→ ) vj ) = µ(cki→ ) vj − µc(ki→ −1v)j .

(13)

The main notion of the RBP algorithm (13) is to prioritize the propagation of messages from check nodes to variable nodes, focusing on those where the residual has the most important impact on decoding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:42:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 WR-LBP Algorithm

1: Initialization:

Message from check to variable nodes:

µc(0i→ ) vj = 0

Message from variable to check nodes:

µv(0j)→ci

=

Cv

=

−

4·rx N0

2: Initialize Variables and Matrices:Rcv = 0M×N .

Layer Assignment:

3: Before the horizontal step, the code calculates a layer

assignment for each row of the LDPC matrix H.

4: determines the highest level of recoverability L among

the variable nodes in each row.

5: Determine layer Assignment ML. Horizontal Step:

6: For each iteration row in parity matrice H:

7: Updated messages from check nodes to Variable nodes

by Equation (8) or (9).

Multiply the result of updated messages passing in

check nodes, by Layer Assignment ML. 8: Update residual matrix. r(µc(ki→ ) vj ) 9: End For

Iteration:

10: while the stopping rule is not satisfied do

11: find maximum value in Rcv 12: end while

13: For the selected check node, cb, identify and calculate the next-largest residual rWR−LBP (µ(vkc)→cd ) and record the message Mc(bk→+1v)p .
14: Update each µ(vkc+→1c)d ,where d ∈ N (c)\b and messages
passing from variable node to check node according

to (10) and (11) respectively, and set the appropriate

position in each id to one. 15: for each e ∈ N (d)\c do

Perform the indicator vector check as above.

Identify and calculate the check node residual rWR−LBP (µe(k+1)) and record the message µ(cke→ +1v)q ,
storing the value q also.

end for

Decoding Condition:

16: If the number of messages passed is divisible by the

total number of edges , indicating the completion of

an iteration:

17: The decoded vector is calculated as the result of a

comparison between the variable node messages mv and zero, converted to a double vector.

18: End Function;

19: The algorithm incorporates auxiliary functions, includ-

ing level Of Recoverability and layer Weight computed

by: w(i)

=

1 2(l−level+1)

, to manage the decoding

process effectively.

This prioritizing helps quicker convergence times, particularly when these messages from check nodes to variable

nodes are relayed first. The proposed WR-LBP algorithm employs the residual concept of the RBP algorithm in the layered structure to the message-passing procedure, nodes are structured into layers, thereby facilitating a sequential exchange of messages between adjacent layers. This type of structure helped to improve the convergence speed and overall efficiency of the decoding process. Firstly, before the horizontal step, we determine a layer assignment for each row of the LDPC matrix H by

ML = max(L(µc(ki→ ) vj ), l),

(14)

where L is the high level of recoverability among variable nodes in each row. The layer corresponding to the residual to be exchanged is given by

L(µ(cki→ ) vj ) = min

(l

+ 2

1)

×

((1

+

sign(µc(ki→ ) vj

)),

l)

,

(15)

where sign is the sign function that returns -1 for negative values, 0 for zero, and 1 for positive values, the result truncated to be within the range [0 1] and l is a constant determined through empirical simulation or optimization we use the value 0.9.
The messages propagate from check to variable nodes, which was computed in the proposed WR-LBP algorithm by multiplying the residual belief propagation (RBP) in equation (13) by the layer assignment ML, which results in

rWR−LBP (µ(cki→ ) vj ) = α(ML) × µ(cki→ ) vj − µ(cki→ −1v)j , (16)

where α(ML) is a constant based on ML and determined

by layer Weight

1 2(l−ML +1)

.

C. Computational complexity analysis

One of the primary drivers behind the novel decoding
algorithm WR-LBP introduced in this study was to address
the significant computational burden imposed by existing
IDS schemes when dynamically selecting each message for
updating.
We assume that the total number of edges in the Tanner graph is given by E = dˆv × N = dˆc × M , where N represents the variable nodes and M represents the check nodes, with dˆc being the average number of check nodes and dˆv being the average number of variable nodes. All algorithms
under consideration maintain the same number of updates from check nodes to variable nodes, denoted as E, and
also feature an identical number of updates from variable nodes to check nodes, specifically E(dˆv − 1), except for BP and VFAP algorithms, which have E updates in this
regard. The pre-computation requirement for BP, VFAP, and LBP algorithms is 0, whereas for other algorithms, it amounts to E(dˆv − 1)(dˆc − 1). Similarly, the comparison

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:42:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

process for BP, VFAP, and LBP algorithms incurs no precomputation cost (0), while for the remaining algorithms, it results in a cost of E(E − 1), except for SVNF, where it is E(dˆv(dˆc − 1) − 1).
The complexity of the algorithms outlined in this paper is detailed in Table I, indicating the frequency of utilization for both the variable and check node update equations. Notably, the figures in the table denote the usage of each update equation per standard iteration for every scheduling scheme. In the case of the modified iteration, each scheme uniformly employs the check node update equation a consistent number of times.
IV. SIMULATIONS
This section presents a simulation study illustrating the performance comparison of various algorithms including BP Flooding [5], RBP [3], RD RBP 0.9 [7], [8], Rel RBP [11], SVNF [6], LBP [14], URW [13], VFAP [19], and our proposed WR-LBP. The simulations utilize a parity check matrix H with dimensions k = 256 and n = 512, and a codeword length n. A regular LDPC code is employed, where each variable node and each check node possess identical degrees of connectivity. The code rate is set to R = 1/2, and the number of blocks used to obtain Fig. 3. and Fig.4. is fixed at 5000 frames. Fig. 3 employs 3 decoding iterations whereas Fig. 4. employs 5 iterations. Additionally, a BPSK modulation method is applied, transforming data from binary form (0, 1) to waveforms (−1, +1), which are then transmitted over an AWGN channel. Fig. 3. and Fig. 4. depict the comparison of Bit Error Rate (BER) versus the Signal-to-Noise Ratio (Eb/N0 dB).

BER

BER

10−1

BP

VFAP

10−2

URW

LBP

Rel RBP

10−3

RBP SVNF

RD RBP 0.9

WRB-LBP

10−4 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 4. BER using 5 iterations and 5000 blocks.

BP

VFAP

URW

LBP

Rel RBP

RBP

10−2

SVNF

RD RBP 0.9

WRB-LBP

0

10

20

30

40

Iterations

Fig. 5. BER versus the number of iterations with Eb/N0=3.5

10−1

BP

10−2

VFAP

URW

10−3

LBP Rel RBP

RBP

10−4

SVNF

RD RBP 0.9

10−5

WRB-LBP

1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 3. BER using 3 iterations and 5000 blocks.
All algorithms commence with an initial SNR of 1 dB and remain consistent until reaching 1.5 dB. Beyond this threshold, the WR-LBP algorithm begins to exhibit superior performance in terms of BER compared to other algorithms. For instance, in Fig.3., at an SNR of Eb/N0 =

4 dB, the algorithm closest to our proposal, RD RBP 0.9 , yields a BER of 1.48 10−4dB, whereas WR-LBP produces a BER of 9.765 10−4dB, resulting in a gain of approximately 1.38 10−4. Similarly, in Fig. 4. at an SNR of Eb/N0 = 3.5 dB, WR-LBP outperforms other algorithms in decoding, achieving a gain of 0.001164 BER over the nearest competitor, RD RBP 0.9.
In Fig. 5 we illustrate the BER corresponding to a specific Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) of Eb/N0 = 3.5 dB while varying the number of iterations from 1 to 40. The simulation reveals that our proposed method outperforms RD RBP 0.9, SVNF, RBP, and other approaches. However, it is notable that the convergence of our method is relatively slower within the initial 15 iterations. Nevertheless, beyond this point, our proposed technique demonstrates stable performance with a consistent BER.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have introduced a novel IDS-type decoding algorithm, denoted as WR-LBP, by integrating a limited iteration count (5 and 3) and making use of a

BER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:42:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I COMPLEXITY OF DECODING ALGORITHMS

Schedules V2C Update C2V Update Pre-computation Comparison

BP

E

E

0

0

VFAP

E

E

0

0

LBP

E(dˆv − 1)

URW E(dˆv − 1)

Rel.RBP E(dˆv − 1)

RBP

E(dˆv − 1)

RD RBP 0.9 E(dˆv − 1)

SVNF E(dˆv − 1)

WR-LBP E(dˆv − 1)

E

0

0

E

E(dˆv − 1)(dˆc − 1)

E(E-1)

E

E(dˆv − 1)(dˆc − 1)

E(E-1)

E

E(dˆv − 1)(dˆc − 1)

E(E-1)

E

E(dˆv − 1)(dˆc − 1)

E(E-1)

E

E(dˆv − 1)(dˆc − 1) E(dˆv(dˆc − 1) − 1)

E

E(dˆv − 1)(dˆc − 1)

E(E-1)

designated parity check matrix. The proposed WR-LBP algorithm operates within a structured layer framework for message passing. This methodology entails the arrangement of nodes into distinct layers, facilitating the systematic exchange of messages among adjacent layers. By orchestrating this organized communication flow, the proposed WR-LBP algorithm optimizes information dissemination and processing efficiency. Through extensive experimentation and comparative analysis, the WR-LBP algorithm demonstrates superior performance and complexity metrics when juxtaposed with competing algorithms in the field, establishing its efficacy and relevance in modern information processing systems.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” Ph.D. dissertation, 1963.
[2] M. R. Tanner, “A Recursive Approach to Low Complexity Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 27, September 1981.
[3] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot and R. D. Wesel, ”Informed Dynamic Scheduling for Belief-Propagation Decoding of LDPC Codes,” 2007 IEEE International Conference on Communications, Glasgow, UK, 2007, pp. 932-937.
[4] A. I. V. Casado, M. Griot and R. D. Wesel, ”LDPC Decoders with Informed Dynamic Scheduling,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470-3479, December 2010.
[5] Bich Ngoc Tran-Thi, Thien Truong Nguyen-Ly, Hoa Nguyen Hong, Trang Hoang, “An Improved Offset Min-Sum LDPC Decoding Algorithm for 5G New Radio,” 2021 International Symposium on Electrical and Electronics Engineering (ISEE), 2021.
[6] C. Adnan Aslam, Y. L. Guan, K. Cai and G. Han, ”Low-Complexity Belief-Propagation Decoding via Dynamic Silent-Variable-NodeFree Scheduling,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28-31, Jan. 2017.
[7] W. Guan and L. Liang, ”Check-Belief Propagation Decoding of LDPC Codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 71, no. 12, pp. 6849-6858, Dec. 2023.
[8] H. Zhang and S. Chen, ” Residual-Decaying-Based Informed Dynamic Scheduling for Belief-Propagation Decoding of LDPC Codes, ” in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 23656-23666, 2019.
[9] X. Liu, L. Zi, D. Yang and Z. Wang, ”Improved Decoding Algorithms of LDPC Codes Based on Reliability Metrics of Variable Nodes,” in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 35769-35778, 2019,
[10] C. Healy and R. C. de Lamare, ”Knowledge-aided informed dynamic scheduling for LDPC decoding,” 2015 IEEE International Conference on Communication Workshop (ICCW), London, UK, 2015.

[11] Healy, C., Shao, Z., Oliveira, R.M., de Lamare, R.C. and Mendes, L.L. (2018), Knowledge-aided informed dynamic scheduling for LDPC decoding of short blocks. IET Communications, 12: 10941101.
[12] H. Wymeersch, F. Penna and V. Savic, ”Uniformly Reweighted Belief Propagation for Estimation and Detection in Wireless Networks,” in IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 1587-1595, April 2012.
[13] C. Lindberg, J. M. Hendrickx, H. Wymeersch. ” Optimizing Reweighted Belief Propagation for Distributed Likelihood Fusion Problems ”, arxiv,2018.
[14] B. Wang, Y. Zhu and J. Kang, ” Two Effective Scheduling Schemes for Layered Belief Propagation of 5G LDPC Codes,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1683-1686, Aug. 2020.
[15] A. G. D. Uchoa, C. Healy, R. C. de Lamare and R. D. Souza, ”Design of LDPC Codes Based on Progressive Edge Growth Techniques for Block Fading Channels,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 15, no. 11, pp. 1221-1223, November 2011
[16] M. Zhu; M. Jiang; C. Zhao, “ Adaptive Belief Propagation Decoding of CRC Concatenated NR LDPC and Polar Codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, Vol. 70, No. 8, August 2022.
[17] T. C. . -Y. Chang, P. -H. Wang, J. -J. Weng, I. -H. Lee and Y. T. Su, ”Belief-Propagation Decoding of LDPC Codes With Variable Node–Centric Dynamic Schedules,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 69, no. 8, pp. 5014-5027, Aug. 2021.
[18] R. Yuan, T. Xie and Z. Wang, ”A Reliability Profile Based LowComplexity Dynamic Schedule LDPC Decoding,” in IEEE Access, vol. 10, pp. 3390-3399, 2022.
[19] J. Liu and R. C. de Lamare, ”Low-Latency Reweighted Belief Propagation Decoding for LDPC Codes,” in IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 16, no. 10, pp. 1660-1663, October 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:42:44 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

