2024 19th International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS) | 979-8-3503-6251-0/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE | DOI: 10.1109/ISWCS61526.2024.10639052

On the Design of LDPC-Based Error-Reducing Codes
Dawit Simegn, Kirill Andreev, Pavel Rybin, Alexey Frolov
Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology, Moscow, Russia {dawit.simegn, k.andreev, p.rybin, al.frolov}@skoltech.ru

Abstract—In this paper, we continue our investigation into the error-reducing properties of superposition codes started in Andreev, et al. (2023), where the focus was on Sparse Regression Codes (SPARCs) with Gaussian signals. However, despite their high performance, SPARCs are known to have noticeable limitations in their application due to their high decoding complexity. This prompted us to propose a Low-Density Parity Check (LDPC)-based superposition scheme with low-complexity Soft Successive Interference Cancellation (SIC) decoding. In this paper, we focus on such a scheme and perform a detailed analysis of it. We have developed a low-complexity quantized density evolution (DE) procedure for the proposed scheme under the SIC decoder to estimate the output bit error rate. It is shown that the obtained DE procedure quite accurately predicts the behavior of the considered LDPC-based superposition scheme. The procedure predicts not only the waterfall region, but also the errorfloor region, which we assume to be caused by interference of component LDPC codes. This helps us to obtain highly optimized constructions of proto-graphs of LDPC code components and significantly improve the bit error rate performance of the whole construction. In addition, for the proposed scheme we have analyzed the output error count distribution, which is crucial for concatenated code constructions, where usually error-reducing codes are used as inner code. All numerical results and analysis are presented at the end of the paper.
Index Terms—error-reducing codes, sparse regression codes, LDPC codes, hard-decision, soft-decision, successive interference cancellation
I. INTRODUCTION
Wireless communication systems of the next generation impose more stringent requirements on transmission rate, latency, and reliability. The target peak data rate for 6G networks should be no less than 1 Tb/s, comparable to existing fixed network solutions like long-haul optical transport networks. Consequently, it’s essential to explore long high-rate codes to meet these challenges. However, modern code constructions utilizing soft-decision decoding (SDD) tend to consume high power and introduce significant decoding delays, making their implementation on modern hardware platforms complex or infeasible. On the other hand, code constructions employing hard decision decoding (HDD) have limited error-correcting capabilities and fail to meet the specified requirements.
A potential solution involves combining soft and hard approaches, such as employing a concatenated solution comprising a powerful outer HDD code and a high-rate inner
The research was carried out at Skolkovo Institute of Science and Technology and supported by the Russian Science Foundation (project no. 23-1100340), https://rscf.ru/en/project/23-11-00340/

SDD code. In this scenario, the inner code acts not merely as an error-correcting code (ECC) but as an adapter to enhance channel quality, known as an error-reducing code (ERC). The concept of error-reducing codes was initially introduced in [1] to construct asymptotically good codes with linear complexity encoding and decoding algorithms. On the other hand, the error-reducing problem can be viewed as a specific instance of joint source-channel coding (JSCC) [2]–[5]. In practice, short Hamming codes with simple and fast Chase decoding are commonly employed as inner error-reducing codes [6], [7]. However, these schemes often necessitate long interleavers due to undesirable output distribution and possess limited errorreducing capabilities. Motivated by these challenges, recent studies in [8], [9] demonstrated that non-linear codes can achieve lower bit error rates (BER) than any linear code in the error-reducing regime for the binary erasure channel (BEC). Additionally, the authors of the papers introduced constructions like low-density majority codes (LDMC), outperforming linear codes as error-reducing codes. However, the performance of LDMC codes in the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel remains inferior [10]. Another approach, proposed in [11], [12], involves concatenating Staircase codes with linear low-density generator matrix (LDGM) or LDPC codes. While effective, these schemes suffer from excessively large code lengths (about 20000 bits) for the desired throughput.
In current study, we extend our investigation into superposition codes introduced in [13], where Sparse Regression Codes (SPARCs) with Gaussian signals were our main focus. Currently, these codes are being actively researched for single and multi-user communication scenarios (see [14], [15] for more details). In our previous work, we found that SPARCs significantly enhance error-reducing capabilities at the cost of complexity. Therefore, we proposed low-complexity schemes employing non-orthogonal superposition of two LDPC codes with different power levels.
In current paper, we focus on the last scheme with different number of LDPC code components and perform a detailed analysis of them. We’ve developed a low-complexity quantized density evolution (DE) procedure for the proposed scheme under Soft Successive Interference Cancellation (SIC) decoding to estimate the output bit error rate. Our DE procedure accurately predicts the behavior of the considered LDPC-based superposition scheme, including the waterfall and error-floor regions resulting from interference among component LDPC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply. 979-8-3503-6251-0/24/$31.00 ©2024 IEEE

codes. The DE-based optimization procedure enhances the bit error rate performance of the entire construction. Additionally, we analyze the output error distribution, crucial for concatenated code constructions where error-reducing codes serve as inner codes.
To compare with the previous results, we employ an outer code with HDD, specifically the Staircase code with 6.25% overhead (OH, that is defined as (1/R − 1) × 100%, where R is the coding rate) achieving a target output bit error level (BER) of 10−15 at an input BER of 4.7 × 10−3 (see [16]), corresponding to the desired output BER for the inner code. Our primary focus lies on the energy efficiency of the inner code with an overhead of 8.24%, influencing the energy efficiency of the concatenated scheme with an overall OH of 15%.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II the system model under consideration is presented and used notations are introduced. Section III gives a brief description of the LDPC-based superposition scheme and the soft SIC decoder. Section IV is devoted to the description of the quantized DE and the optimization tools. Section V contains the numerical results and analysis. In section VI we draw a conclusion and discuss future work.
II. PRELIMINARIES
Let us consider an information vector u = (u1, . . . , uk) ∈ {0, 1}k and the encoder function f : {0, 1}k → Rn to obtain the codeword c = (c1, . . . , cn) ∈ Rn. The codeword is transmitted over the channel with AWGN noise resulting in the following observation on the receiver side:
y = c + w, w ∼ N (0, In) , ∥c∥2 = P n. (1)
Based on this observation, the decoder g obtain the estimation on the information bits uˆ = g(y). In this case the output bit error rate (BER) is defined as
1k Pb = k P [ui ≠ uˆi] .
i=1
Let D represents the desired BER or distortion level. Thus, the error-reducing property, that is on the main focus of this paper, can be formulated in the following way:
P [g(y) ∈ Bk (u, Dk)] ≥ 1 − ϵ, ∀u ∈ {0, 1}k
where Bk (u, Dk) is a k-dimensional ball with center in u and radius Dk, and ϵ > 0 is a small positive number.
In other words, this condition requires that nearest codewords to the given codeword f (u) correspond to the information words inside the ball Bk (u, Dk) with high probability.
So our goal is to minimize the SNR such that Pb ≤ D for a given D. To be consistent with previous work, we consider Eb/N0 = nP/2k and Es/N0 = P/2.
Notation: In this paper, the scalar values are represented by non-boldface letters such as x or X, while vectors are represented by boldface small letters such as x (here we consider vectors as columns), and matrices are represented by

boldface capital letters such as X. The identity matrix of size n × n is denoted by In. For any positive integer n, we use the notation [n] = {1, . . . , n}. We use the notation N (0, In) to represent a standard normal random vector. Lastly, we use the symbol E to denote the expectation operator and P [E] to represent the probability of the event E. By δ (·) we assume a Dirac delta-function. Considering a function f (χ) of random variable χ, we assume a random variable, whose realizations are a value of function f (·) taken over realizations of χ. If function f (·) has multiple arguments, we assume them independent.

III. LDPC-BASED SUPERPOSITION CODES

In [13], we considered sparse regression codes (SPARCs) and found that a smaller number of sections leads to better BER performance. Unfortunately, a small number of sections makes the decoding problem of SPARCs intractable. To address this problem, we considered an LDPC-based superposition coding scheme with two components. Each of the components is modulated with BPSK and their sum is transmitted over the channel. We found some decoding performance improvement over a single-component scheme with a noticeable degradation comparing to the SPARCs. We expected that larger number of components in LDPC-based scheme will demonstrate better performance, because the signal in each channel use approaches a Gaussian distribution with component number growth, as a sum of growing number of random BPSK modulated signals. In this paper, we study the LDPC-based schemes with L = 2 and 3 components. We perform an optimization of these schemes by density evolution, which is described in section IV. Before proceeding to the description of density evolution, we recall the soft successive interference cancellation algorithm for superposition LDPC codes.
Consider the transmitted codeword c given by

L
c=
ℓ=1

Pℓfℓ(mℓ),

fℓ : {0, 1}kℓ → {±1}n ,

where m = ℓ mℓ represents the direct sum of the information message split into m1, . . . , mL with k1, . . . , kL bits, respectively, such that ℓ kℓ = k. Here, fℓ(·) denotes the encoding and BPSK modulation function for ℓ ∈ [L].
The choice of LDPC codes, the allocation of information bits between kℓ, and the power allocation scheme {Pℓ} are parameters to be optimized.
For readers’ convenience, Algorithm 1 outlines the iterative
soft successive interference cancellation decoding algorithm,
considered in [13] and inspired by the treat interference as
noise (TIN) decoder followed by soft SIC from [17], [18]. The interference vector ρℓ is estimated using the output loglikelihood ratios (LLRs) of the j-th LDPC decoder, where j ∈ [L] \ ℓ, and the interference power Pℓ is used to recalculate the signal-to-interference-plus-noise ratio (SINR) with the expectation E[1−tanh2(γj/2)] taken over all channel uses.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LDPC 1

LDPC L

···

f (χd+1, . . . , χD)

···

···

χ1 χ2 χ3 · · · χd−1 χd χd+1 · · · χD−1 χD

···

···

Soft SIC
Fig. 1. Soft successive interference cancellation algorithm graph.. Square nodes represent check nodes of each code component, circles represent variable nodes of each code component, and triangle nodes represent functional nodes, where the interference cancellation is performed.

We choose the soft-SIC decoding algorithm because of its simplicity in interference estimation, which is advantageous as L becomes larger.

Algorithm 1 Soft interference cancellation decoder

γℓ ← 0, for ℓ ∈ [L] for outer iterations do
for ℓ ∈ [L] do

▷ Initialize LLRs for each code ▷ Try decoding each LDPC code

▷ Estimate interference signal ρℓ and its power Pℓ:

ρℓ = j=[L]\ℓ Pj tanh γj /2 Pℓ = j=[L]\ℓ Pj E 1 − tanh2 γj /2

SINR = Pℓ/

γ

(in) ℓ

=

2

(y

(N0 + Pℓ) √ ▷ − ρℓ) × SINR/ Pℓ

Noise power N0 ▷ Input LLRs

γˆℓ ← decodeℓ

γ

(in) ℓ

▷ ℓ-th LDPC decoder

end for

γℓ ← γˆℓ for ℓ ∈ [L] end for

▷ Update output LLRs

In the initial stage, the decoder operates without prior

knowledge of the interference. Assuming the power allocations

Pℓ are predetermined, BPSK demodulation is performed on

the received sequence y, treating the remaining codewords

as

interference.

This

demodulation

yields

LLR

vectors

γ

(in) ℓ

,

subsequently utilized by the iterative LDPC decoding algo-

rithms. Throughout our simulations, we adopt the normalized

min-sum decoding algorithm. Following this, given the output

LLRs γˆ, one can derive the expected interference ρ using the

formula tanh(γˆℓ/2) from [18]. Furthermore, the interference power Pℓ can be estimated and utilized to recompute the input

LLRs for each decoder.

IV. QUANTIZED DENSITY EVOLUTION OVER PROTO-GRAPH
A. Overview
In this section, we consider an optimization tool for LDPCbased superposition codes. We use a density evolution (DE) approach over proto-graphs. Note that Algorithm 1 is a message-passing algorithm over a graph presented in Fig. 1, where messages are log-likelihood ratios (LLRs). The LDPC

f (χ1, . . . , χd−1) f (χ1, χ2, χ3) = f (f (χ1, χ2) , χ3)

Fig. 2. Processing of variable or check node having degree D. Each rectangle corresponds to the function f (·) over distributions, and arrows represent function inputs. Using associative property of f (·), the d-th output can be computed as a function of two distributions f (χ1, . . . , χd−1) and f (χd+1, . . . , χD) using a chain rule f (χ1, χ2, χ3) = f (f (χ1, χ2) , χ3) .

decoding function γˆℓ ← decodeℓ

γ

(in) ℓ

corresponds to sev-

eral iterations of message exchange between variable (circles)

and check (squares) nodes, and soft interference cancella-

tion (4) is a part of functional (triangle) node processing.

The DE algorithm is the same message-passing algorithm,

but the messages are the LLR distributions rather than a

single realization from the channel. To describe the DE algo-

rithm, we need to specify operations over LLR distributions

performed at variable, check, and functional nodes. During

the component decoding, several message exchange iterations

between variable and check nodes are executed. Variable and

check node operations are described in Section IV-B. During

the functional node processing, interference estimation and

cancellation are performed, see Section IV-C. We run the

DE algorithm over a base graph, and each code component

ℓ ∈ [L] has nb variable nodes. To make the DE implementation computationally feasible, we use several simplifications.

First, we consider the LLR distribution as a probability mass

function (p.m.f.).

2J

pγℓ(i) =

pj(i,ℓ)δ γℓ(i) − γj ,

(2)

j=0

where

j

γj = γmax

−1 J

,

and i ∈ [nb] is the variable node index. The probability mass is concentrated at 2J + 1 points γj located uniformly in the interval [−γmax, γmax], and LLRs are clipped by the maximum absolute value γmax.
Second is a zero-codeword assumption for any code component decoding, and the one-half codeword [19] assumption for proper interference estimation.
Finally, considering the BER estimate as a loss function, we perform the optimization procedure (Section IV-D), where the optimal power split {Pℓ} and base parity check matrices {Hb,ℓ} of each code component ℓ ∈ [L] are found.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Node operations for component code decoding

Consider some deterministic function f (·) over D independent random variables χ1, · · · , χD. Let all random variables have the probability mass function, with the mass located at points γj (2). Assume that f (·) : [2J + 1]D → [2J + 1] also applies the nearest neighbor interpolation and clipping. Thus, the output χ = f (χ1, . . . , χD) can be considered as follows. Let χi be the i-th input of f (·), having the following p.m.f.

2J
pχi = p(χji)δ (γ − γj ) .
j=0

Thus, the j-th probability value in the output p.m.f. pχ of χ can be calculated as follows:

p(χj) =

p(χj11) × . . . × pχ(jDD). (3)

j1,...,jD :f (γj1 ,...,γjD )=γj

Now let us consider the variable or check node processing in the Tanner graph corresponding to code component. We assume that the LLRs at different variable nodes of the base graph are independent random variables. To calculate d-th outgoing message of some Tanner graph node, a function f (χ1, . . . , χd−1, χd+1, . . . , χD) should be evaluated. At the variable node, this function is a sum (the output distribution (3) is a convolution of its inputs). For the check node, this function corresponds to min-sum rule. Given the nearest neighbor interpolation, both sum and min-sum functions are associative. The final property allows us to estimate the dth outgoing message of node with degree D by using a chain-rule presented in Fig. 2. We use normalized min-sum (NMS) with scaling factor 0.75 in our DE implementation and subsequent simulations. Note that this scaling factor may break the associative property (due to the nearest neighbor interpolation), but we still perform node processing as shown in Fig. 2 to reduce the computational complexity.

C. Interference estimation
Given the soft-SIC decoding algorithm 1, ℓ-th LDPC component suffers from interference caused by j = [L] \ ℓ components.

ρℓ =

Pjνj, νj = tanh γj/2 . (4)

j={1,...,L}\ℓ

Let us consider the soft-interference vector νj produced by
j-th code component. As mentioned in [19], given a random information word, the BPSK-modulated codeword bj, b(ji) ∈ {±1} with probability 1/2. The residual interference signal
after the soft SIC step at variable node i equals to

1 − νj(i) =

+1 − tanh(+γj(i)/2), −1 + tanh(−γj(i)/2),

b(ji) = +1 b(ji) = −1

,

(5)

because tanh (·) is an odd function, and −1 − tanh(γj(i)/2) = −1 + tanh(−γj(i)/2). Then, this residual interference will be scaled by a factor Pj. Next, let us introduce γ0(i,j) = bj(i)γj(i). The meaning is that γ0(i,j) < 0 corresponds to the decoding error

in i-th variable node, which corresponds to all zeros codeword LLRs. Now we can rewrite (5) using γ0(i,j).
1 − νj(i) = bj(i) 1 − tanh(γ0(i,j) /2) .
When running DE between variable and check nodes, we consider a zero-codeword (all-ones BPSK-modulated). To estimate the residual interference properly, we need to consider a random codeword, where b(ji) = ±1 equiprobably [19]. Thus, the distribution of interference is a 1 − tanh (·) applied to the output LLR distribution (corresponding to all zeros codeword) of j-th code component as described in Section IV-B. Then, the resulting p.m.f. is split into two mixture components to produce ± (1 − tanh (·)).
This technique allows us to run LDPC DE with all-zeros codeword assumptions for each code component. Hence, the per-variable node (per-VN) BER can be estimated as P γj(i) < 0 .
D. Optimization procedure
The output BER is the average number of misdecoded information bits. To estimate this BER, we need to choose the information set – a kb,ℓ number of bits that define a codeword for the ℓ-th component in a base-graph. During our experiments, we found that the per-VN BER differs for different VNs. Thus, we need to choose the information set that has a minimum average BER. This problem requires an exhaustive search, and we use a suboptimal greedy solution. The goal of the optimization procedure is to reduce the output BER estimated by the quantized DE described above.
Remark 1: When lifting the Hb,ℓ, the information set must be chosen again. As in the case of the base graph, we do this by applying a greedy algorithm. Note that the information set of the lifted matrix may differ from that obtained in the base graph. Nevertheless, the proposed BER estimation gives us a good approximation of the resulting decoding performance.
We perform the optimization of power split {Pℓ} and a search of the optimal {Hb,ℓ} separately. To find {Pℓ}, we fix {Hb,ℓ}, ∀ℓ ∈ [L], and run optimization using standard techniques that do not require an explicit gradient evaluation. At the second stage, we find optimal {Hb,ℓ}. These steps are alternated until the BER convergence.
Optimization of {Hb,ℓ} requires a search over discrete parameter space. We use a greedy random optimization. At each optimization step, we apply random disturbances to the best-performing configuration. We do this by picking some ℓ and randomly disturbing {Hb,ℓ} by flipping some small number of randomly chosen elements. This approach is similar to [20].
To find the best split of information bits between code components {kb,ℓ}, ℓ ∈ [L], we run independent optimization procedures for multiple rate splits. The SNR point at which we perform the optimization gradually decreases when the DE predicts the output BER below the required threshold.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I NUMERICAL EXPERIMENTS PARAMETERS

Density evolution parameters Base graph block length Base graph information bits count The number of points in LLR p.m.f. Clipping LLR value γmax The number of inner iterations The number of outer iterations The number of components to optimize Inner decoding algorithm Min. SNR optimization point for 2 components Min. SNR optimization point for 3 components
Simulation parameters Lifting factor Lifting algorithm The number of information bits The number of real channel uses The number of inner iterations The number of outer iterations Inner decoding algorithm
Reference parameters Target bit error rate Reference SNR (single component, BPSK)

nb = 26 kb = 24
257 16 10 10 {2, 3} NMS (0.75) 2.40 dB 2.50 dB
231 random circulants
k = 5544 n = 6006
10 20 NMS (0.75)
D = 4.7 × 10−3 3.39 dB

0.16 0.73 0.99 1.56

0.40 1.36

BPSK
2 components
3 components
Fig. 4. Resulting constellation for single-component code (BPSK) and superposition codes with 2 and 3 components. Best-performing configurations shown.
1.0 0.8 0.6

1.00

Quantile of experimental error count distribution

10−1
Uncoded BPSK
10−2

DE, 2 sections DE, 3 sections S-SIC, 2 sections S-SIC, 3 sections SPARCs, M = 210
Target BER BPSK LDPC

Bit error rate

10−3
1.6 1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8 3.0 3.2 3.4 3.6 Es/N0, dB
Fig. 3. Bit error rate as a function of the SNR (Es/N0). Green lines represent the best-performing superposition coding scheme with 2 components, and blue lines – with 3 components. Solid lines represent the simulations of soft-SIC (S-SIC) algorithm, and dashed lines represent the results of density evolution (DE). The best-performing single component LDPC code with BPSK modulation is shown by an orange line. n = 6006 real channel uses, the number of information bits is k = 5544.

TABLE II SNR AT TARGET BER FOR DIFFERENT LIFTING FACTORS

Block length 12012 6006 4290 3016

Factor 462 231 165 118

2 components 2.39 dB 2.47 dB 2.54 dB 2.57 dB

3 components 2.52 dB 2.58 dB 2.63 dB 2.70 dB

0.4

0.2 0.0
0.0

1 comp., 3.39 dB, pe = 4.66 × 10−3 2 comp., 2.48 dB, pe = 4.27 × 10−3 3 comp., 2.54 dB, pe = 4.75 × 10−3

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1.0

Quantile of binomial distribution with parameter pe

Fig. 5. QQ-plot for error count distribution. Horizontal axis represents a quantile of binomial distribution with parameter pe – simulated BER, the vertical axis represents a quantile of experimental error count distribution for superposition codes with 2 and 3 components.

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
Using the DE algorithm, we performed the optimization for the superposition coding scheme for L = 2 and 3 components. In this section, we evaluate these optimal schemes via simulations. Reference scenario and simulation parameters are presented in Table I. Among multiple rate splits, we found that the best-performing configuration has kb = [9, 15] information bits in the base graph for two components (with power splits [0.229, 0.771] respectively) and kb = [3, 7, 14] for three components (power split [0.081, 0.173, 0.746]). To represent the optimal power splits visually, we have√plotted the resu√lting equivalent constellation with points ± P1 ± . . . ± PL, see Fig. 4.
To generate LDPC codes of the desired block length, we have lifted the obtained base graph parity check matrices with a factor value of 231 to get the k = 5544, n = 6006 superposition coding scheme. We performed lifting with random circulant matrices. Then, we constructed the information set using a greedy algorithm as described in Section IV-D

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and considered the generator matrix in systematic form. The resulting simulated BER is presented in Fig. 3. As a reference, we also considered the BER curves predicted by the DE and found that these curves are pretty similar. Note that for simulations, we have increased the number of outer iterations and added an early stop (by the syndrome of each component). As a reference, we have plotted the SPARCs performance with 10 bits per section (a maximum tractable section size) and a single-component optimal LDPC code with BPSK modulation. We find that at the same number of real channel uses n = 6006, the best-performing superposition coding scheme achieves the target BER D = 4.7 × 10−3 at 2.47 dB, resulting in ≈ 0.9 dB gain. This result is very close to the sparse regression codes with section codebook size M = 210 (2.16 dB) [13].
Finally, we have tested our optimal base graphs for different lifting factors (see Table II). We found that a significant block length decrease (almost two times) resulted in a performance loss of just 0.1 dB.
Our final investigation relates to the “quality” of the bit errors generated by the superposition coding scheme. In the “ideal” case, we expect that the number of bit errors has a binomial distribution with parameter pe – the output BER. To check this, we considered the error count distribution and compared the resulting distribution with a binomial one. The results are shown in Fig. 5 in the form of QQ-plots. For each line, the parameter of the binomial distribution equals the actual simulated BER. The SNR values and the simulated BER are listed in the legend. We find that any solution does not generate the “ideally”-distributed number of errors, but larger L values result in a more heavy-tailed distribution. This phenomenon may result in the performance degradation of the concatenated scheme. We will address this issue through further research.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we investigate the performance of a superposition coding scheme. We analyzed the soft successive interference cancellation decoding and designed a low-complexity quantized density evolution algorithm. The designed optimization tool predicts the bit error rate values quite accurately at block lengths 6000–12000 and allows us to perform optimization of each LDPC code component to significantly improve the bit error rate performance.
Compared to the single-component coding scheme, the twocomponent scheme achieves the target bit error rate D = 4.7 × 10−3 at an approximately 0.9 dB lower SNR. We find this approach promising for designing high-throughput coding schemes for future wireless communications.
We also analyzed the distribution of errors that happened during decoding. Unfortunately, the superposition scheme demonstrates a longer tail compared to a single-component case at the same bit error rate level. In our future work, we propose to find a loss function that will make the error count distribution closer to binomial. We expect a small performance loss in this case.

As soon as the best-performing configuration consists of just
two components, we also plan to modify the decoding algo-
rithm (especially the functional node processing responsible
for the interference estimation and cancellation) to improve
the performance of the decoding scheme.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Spielman, “Linear-time encodable and decodable error-correcting codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1723–1731, 1996.
[2] Y. Kochman, O. Ordentlich, and Y. Polyanskiy, “A Lower Bound on the Expected Distortion of Joint Source-Channel Coding,” in 2019 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), 2019, pp. 1332– 1336.
[3] ——, “Ozarow-Type Outer Bounds for Memoryless Sources and Channels,” in 2018 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), 2018, pp. 1774–1778.
[4] Z. Reznic, M. Feder, and R. Zamir, “Distortion Bounds for Broadcasting With Bandwidth Expansion,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 3778–3788, 2006.
[5] V. Kostina and S. Verdu´, “Lossy Joint Source-Channel Coding in the Finite Blocklength Regime,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 59, no. 5, pp. 2545–2575, 2013.
[6] B. Mu¨ller, M. Holters, and U. Zo¨lzer, “Low complexity Soft-Input SoftOutput Hamming Decoder,” in 2011 50th FITCE Congress - ”ICT: Bridging an Ever Shifting Digital Divide”, 2011, pp. 1–5.
[7] Y. Wang, J. Lin, and Z. Wang, “A Low-Complexity Decoder for Turbo Product Codes Based on Extended Hamming Codes,” in 2018 IEEE 18th International Conference on Communication Technology (ICCT), 2018, pp. 99–103.
[8] H. Roozbehani and Y. Polyanskiy, “Graceful degradation over the BEC via non-linear codes,” in 2020 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), 2020, pp. 280–285.
[9] ——, “Low density majority codes and the problem of graceful degradation,” 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1911.12263
[10] G. Balitskiy, A. Frolov, and P. Rybin, “Linear Programming Decoding of Non-Linear Sparse-Graph Codes,” in 2021 XVII International Symposium ”Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems” (REDUNDANCY), 2021, pp. 149–154.
[11] L. M. Zhang and F. R. Kschischang, “Low-Complexity Soft-Decision Concatenated LDGM-Staircase FEC for High-Bit-Rate Fiber-Optic Communication,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 35, no. 18, pp. 3991–3999, 2017.
[12] M. Barakatain and F. R. Kschischang, “Low-Complexity Concatenated LDPC-Staircase Codes,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 2443–2449, 2018.
[13] K. Andreev, P. Rybin, and A. Frolov, “On the error-reducing properties of superposition codes,” in 2023 XVIII International Symposium Problems of Redundancy in Information and Control Systems (REDUNDANCY), 2023, pp. 148–152.
[14] T. Li, Y. Wu, M. Zheng, D. Wang, and W. Zhang, “SPARC-LDPC Coding for MIMO Massive Unsourced Random Access,” in 2020 IEEE Globecom Workshops (GC Wkshps, 2020, pp. 1–6.
[15] J. R. Ebert, J.-F. Chamberland, and K. R. Narayanan, “On Sparse Regression LDPC Codes,” 2023.
[16] L. M. Zhang and F. R. Kschischang, “Staircase Codes With 6% to 33% Overhead,” Journal of Lightwave Technology, vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 1999– 2002, 2014.
[17] X. Wang, S. Cammerer, and S. Ten Brink, “Near-Capacity Detection and Decoding: Code Design for Dynamic User Loads in Gaussian Multiple Access Channels,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 67, no. 11, pp. 7417–7430, 2019.
[18] L. Ping, L. Liu, K. Wu, and W. Leung, “Approaching the capacity of multiple access channels using interleaved low-rate codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 4–6, 2004.
[19] C. Ha¨ger, H. D. Pfister, A. Graell i Amat, and F. Bra¨nnstro¨m, “Density evolution for deterministic generalized product codes on the binary erasure channel at high rates,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 63, no. 7, pp. 4357–4378, 2017.
[20] A. Elkelesh, M. Ebada, S. Cammerer, and S. ten Brink, “Decoderin-the-Loop: Genetic Optimization-based LDPC Code Design,” 2019. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1903.03128

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:41:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

