JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 25, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2007

2879

Low-Latency Decoding of EG LDPC Codes
Juntan Zhang, Jonathan S. Yedidia, Member, IEEE, and Marc P. C. Fossorier, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—We describe simple iterative decoders for low-density parity-check codes based on Euclidean geometries, suitable for practical very-large-scale-integration implementation in applications requiring very fast decoders. The decoders are based on shuffled and replica-shuffled versions of iterative bit-flipping (BF) and quantized weighted BF schemes. The proposed decoders converge faster and provide better ultimate performance than standard BF decoders. We present simulations that illustrate the performance versus complexity tradeoffs for these decoders. We can show in some cases through importance sampling that no significant error floor exists.
Index Terms—Bit-flipping (BF) decoding, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, optical communications, weighted BF decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were first discovered in 1960s [1] and have received significant attention recently because of their excellent performance when decoded using iterative decoders [2], [3]. LDPC codes can be constructed using random or deterministic approaches. In this paper, we focus on a class of LDPC codes known as Euclidean geometric (EG)-LDPC codes, which are constructed deterministically using the points and lines of a Euclidean geometry [4]. The EG-LDPC codes that we consider are cyclic, and consequently, their encoding can be efficiently implemented with linear shift registers. Minimum distances for EG codes are also reasonably good and can be derived analytically. Iteratively, decoded EG-LDPC codes generally do not suffer as much from the error-floor problems that plague some randomly constructed LDPC codes. For these reasons, EG-LDPC codes are good candidates for use in applications like optical communications that require very fast encoders and decoders and very low biterror rates (BERs).
LDPC codes can be decoded using hard-decision, softdecision, and hybrid decoding methods. Soft decoding algorithms such as belief propagation (BP) provide good performance, but require high decoding complexity, and are therefore not very suitable for very-large-scale-integration (VLSI) implementations. Instead, hard-decision and hybrid schemes such as bit flipping (BF) and quantized weighted BF (QWBF) offer

a better tradeoff between error performance, complexity, and decoding speed or latency.
Most standard iterative decoders of LDPC codes require at least several tens of iterations for the iterative decoding process to converge, which is not always realistic for highspeed VLSI implementations. In [5], a decoding scheme called “shuffled BP” was presented to reduce the required number of iterations of standard BP decoding. Related BF algorithms based on the shuffled BP idea are easy to construct. Recently, an improved but more complex iterative algorithm named “replicashuffled iterative decoding” was developed to further decrease the required number of decoding iterations [6]. In this paper, we study the performance of shuffled and replica-shuffled versions of BF and QWBF decoders for EG-LDPC codes.
Another problem for VLSI implementations of LDPC decoders is related to the fact that to achieve a good performance, the LDPC code must have a large codeword length and a correspondingly large parity-check matrix. The large parity-check matrix makes it difficult to implement the iterative decoder in a fully parallel manner. To deal with this problem, it makes sense to consider shuffled and replica-shuffled algorithms which divide the codeword bits into groups and update one group of bits at a time [5], [6].
The application of closely related LDPC codes based on projective geometries to optical communications has in fact already been proposed by Djordjevic and Vasic [7], who demonstrated the attractiveness of these codes for this application. Some of the new features present in this paper compared to the work of Djodjevic and Vasic are the study of longer codes which are better suited to the application: the use of replica shuffled BF decoders, which use simpler hardware and are more parallelized compared to the min-sum algorithm and, therefore, generally need fewer iterations, and the analysis of the error floor regime using importance sampling.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the construction of EG-LDPC codes. Section III briefly reviews standard BF, weighted BF, and QWBF decoders. Shuffled and replica-shuffled versions of these decoders are presented in Sections IV and V, respectively. In Section VI, group-shuffled and replica group-shuffled schemes are discussed. Finally, in Sections VII and VIII, we provide simulation results for the various presented decoding methods.

Manuscript received August 1, 2005; revised August 1, 2006. J. Zhang was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA. He is now with Availink Inc., Germantown, MD 20874 USA (e-mail: jzhang@availink.com). J. S. Yedidia is with Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories, Cambridge, MA 02139 USA (e-mail: yedidia@merl.com). M. P. C. Fossorier is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: marc@spectra.eng. hawaii.edu). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JLT.2007.903311

II. DEFINITION OF EG LDPC CODES
A binary LDPC code is specified by a parity-check matrix containing mostly zeros and only a small number of ones. A regular binary (N, K)(dv, dc) LDPC code has a transmitted codeword block length N , a information block length K, and a parity-check matrix with precisely dv ones in each column

0733-8724/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2880

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 25, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2007

and dc ones in each row. We refer to the N elements of an LDPC codeword w = [wn] as bits, and the M rows of the parity-check matrix H = [Hml] as checks. Accordingly, in a regular binary LDPC code, every code bit is checked by exactly dv parity checks, and every parity check involves exactly dc code bits. We denote the set of bits that participate in check m by N (m) = {n : Hmn = 1} and the set of checks in which bit n participates as M(n) = {m : Hmn = 1}.
EG-LDPC codes [4], [8] are regular LDPC codes characterized by a parity-check matrix which is constructed using a finite Euclidean geometry. Let α = (α1, α2, . . . , αm) be an m-tuple whose component αi is from the Galois field GF(2s). The set of all possible αs has cardinality 2ms and forms an m-dimensional Euclidean geometry over GF(2s), which is denoted by EG(m, 2s). Each m-tuple α is called a point in EG(m, 2s). The all-zeros point is called the origin. Let α1 and α2 be two linearly independent points in EG(m, 2s). Then, the collection of {α1 + βα2}, with β ∈ GF(2s), has 2s points and forms a line (1-flat) in EG(m, 2s). There are J0 = ((2(m−1)s − 1)(2ms − 1))/(2s − 1) lines in EG(m, 2s) that do not contain the origin.
To construct a cyclic EG-LDPC code based on EG(m, 2s), we form the parity-check matrix HEG whose columns are all of the 2ms − 1 nonorigin points in EG(m, 2s), and whose rows are the incidence vectors of all of the J0 lines in EG(m, 2s) that do not contain the origin. Note that many of the rows of the matrix defined in this way are redundant, so that an important decision that must be made for practical decoders is how many of the redundant rows should be used, and how many should be discarded. In the decoders described in this paper, we actually used a square parity-check matrix with an equal number (N = M = 2ms − 1) of rows and columns. Thus, we discard most of the redundant rows, but not all of them.
III. BF AND QWBF DECODING
Assume a codeword w = (w1, w2, . . . , wN ) is transmitted over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with zero mean and variance N0/2 using binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) signaling, and let y = (y1, y2, . . . , yN ) be the corresponding received sequence.

The received vector z is a codeword if and only if s = 0. If s = 0, errors are detected, and any nonzero syndrome sm indicates a parity failure. Let Fn be the set of nonzero syndromes checking on bit n, i.e., Fn = {sm : sm = 1 and m ∈ M(n)}. In standard BF decoding, the decoder computes all the syndromes and then flips any bits which are involved in more than a fixed number δ of parity failures. Based on these new values, the syndromes are recomputed, and the process is repeated until a codeword is found or the maximum number of iterations is reached.
Thus, the standard BF decoding is carried out as follows.
Step 1) Compute s = (s1, s2, . . . , sM ) = z · HT. Step 2) For n = 1, 2, . . . , N , flip zn with |Fn| ≥ δ. Step 3) Repeat Steps 1) and 2) until s = 0 or the maximum
number of iterations Imax is reached.
It should be noted that this version of BF decoding can be viewed as a simplified version of the conventional Gallager algorithm B [1]. This simplification can be justified by the large values of dc and dv for EG-LDPC codes.

B. WBF Decoding
The performance of standard BF decoding can be improved upon by using a soft-valued reliability measure for the received symbols. The standard weighted bit-flipping (WBF) algorithm [4] first computes for m = 1, 2, . . . , M

|y|min −m = min |yn|.

(3)

n:n∈N (m)

As explained below, |y|min −m is a measure of the reliability of the mth check.
Next, WBF decoding is carried out as follows.

Step 1) For m = 1, 2, . . . , M , compute the syndrome sm =

N n=1

znHmn

from

z.

Step 2) For n = 1, 2, . . . , N , compute

En =

(2sm − 1)|y|min −m.

(4)

m∈M(n)

A. Standard BF Decoding

Step 3) Flip the bit zn for n = arg max1≤n≤N En.

The standard BF decoding is a hard decision algorithm. Let z = (z1, z2, . . . , zN ) be the binary hard decision sequence obtained from y as follow:

Steps 1) to 3) are repeated until all the parity-check equations are satisfied, or until the maximum number of iterations Imax is reached.

zn =

1, 0,

if yn ≤ 0 if yn > 0.

WBF decoding achieves better performance than BF decoding by making more accurate decisions for each bit based on a flipping criteria that considers soft reliability information. For

Let s be the vector of syndromes of z s = (s1, s2, . . . , sM ) = z · HT
where

the AWGN channel, a simple measure of the reliability of a
received symbol yn is its magnitude |yn|. The larger the magni(1) tude |yn| is, the larger the reliability of the corresponding hard-
decision digit zn is. For m = 1, 2, . . . , M , |y|min −m given in (3) can be viewed as a measure of the reliability of the syndrome

N
sm = znhmn.
n=1

sm computed with zns, n ∈ N (m). For n = 1, 2, . . . , N , the (2) larger En is, the less likely the hard decision zn is, which is
why the bits with the largest values for En are flipped first.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LOW-LATENCY DECODING OF EG LDPC CODES

2881

C. QWBF Decoding

flipped too, and the processing of the remaining bits are based

From the practical point of view, WBF decoding is problematic, because a real number |y|min −m must be stored for each check, these real numbers must be added to determine the reliability En of each bit, and the bits must then be sorted according to their values of En. In a more practical version of WBF decoding, which we call QWBF decoding, each bit is assigned a “high” or “low” reliability based on whether |yn| is greater or less than a preassigned threshold ∆1. Then, for each check, if all the bits involved in that check have “high” reliability, the
check is also considered to have high reliability, but if even a
single bit involved in the check has “low” reliability, the check
is considered to have low reliability. High-reliability checks are assigned a value of |y|min −m = 2, while low-reliability checks are assigned a value of |y|min −m = 1. Next, QWBF decoding proceeds as follows.

Step 1) For m = 1, 2, . . . , M , compute the syndrome sm =

N n=1

znHmn

from

z.

Step 2) For n = 1, 2, . . . , N , compute

on these new syndrome values. Because the more reliable bit values are taken advantage of as soon as available, the shuffled version of BF (or WBF or QWBF) decoding is expected to converge faster than the standard one.
Shuffled BF is carried out as follows. Initialization Compute s = (s1, s2, . . . , sM ) = z · HT.
Step 1) For n = 1, 2, . . . , N , if |Fn| ≥ δ, flip zn and {sm : m ∈ M(n)}. Recalculate Fns.
Step 2) Repeat Step 1) until s = 0 or Imax is reached.
Similarly, the shuffled WBF is carried out as follows: For n = 1, 2, . . . , N , assign each bit a value zn, and a one-
bit reliability |yn|. For m = 1, 2, . . . , M , compute the reliability value |y|min −m using the one-bit reliabilities |yn| and the threshold ∆1.
Step 1) For n = 1, 2, . . . , N , compute

En =

(2sm − 1)|y|min −m.

(6)

m∈M(n)

En =

(2sm − 1)|y|min −m. (5)

m∈M(n)

Step 3) Flip all bits zn for which En exceeds a predefined threshold ∆2.
Steps 1) to 3) are repeated until all the parity-check equations

Step 2) For n = 1, 2, . . . , N , if |En| ≥ ∆2, flip zn and {sm : m ∈ M(n)}. Recalculate Ens.
Steps 1) and 2) are repeated until all the parity-check equations are satisfied or Imax is reached.

are satisfied, or until the maximum number of iterations Imax is reached.

V. REPLICA-SHUFFLED BF AND QWBF DECODING

Note that in QWBF decoding, two predetermined thresholds ∆1 and ∆2 have to be specified. In the simulations described below, these thresholds were chosen by empirical testing. Our chosen thresholds should be reasonably good, although we cannot be certain of how far they are from the optimal thresholds; a theoretical analysis would certainly be desirable.
Compared to WBF decoding, QWBF decoding has the advantages that only one bit needs to be stored to record the reliability of each bit and check that all the addition is simple integer arithmetic and that no sorting of the bits by reliability needs to be done. For these reasons, we consider QWBF decoding to be much more realistic than WBF decoding for our target applications.

The plain shuffled BF (or QWBF) decoding presented in the previous section is a bit-based sequential approach, and the scheme just presented is based on a natural increasing order, i.e., flipping decisions of bits are made according to order n = 1, 2, . . . , N . The larger the value of n, the more newly delivered values are used in making the flipping decision and the more accurate that decision becomes. Consequently, the reliability of the bits increases and the error rate decreases with increasing n. Clearly then, in a shuffled BF (or QWBF) decoder based on a natural decreasing order, after each iteration, the reliability of the bits would decrease with increasing n.
To take advantage of this property of plain shuffled BF (or QWBF) decoders, in a replica-shuffled BF (or QWBF) decoder

[6], two shuffled subdecoders (“replicas”) based on different

IV. SHUFFLED BF AND QWBF DECODING
As mentioned in Section I, standard BF decoders require an undesirably large number of iterations to converge. Shuffled BF (or shuffled QWBF) decoding is designed to accelerate the decoding process. Let us first assume, for the sake of argument, that the bits are processed serially; one bit is processed in each unit time. During a given iteration of decoding, we assume that the nth bit is processed in the nth unit of time. If the flipping condition is satisfied, this bit is flipped. Generally, the new value of zn is more likely to be correct than the old one. Consequently, the syndromes {sm : m ∈ M(n)} based on the new value of zn are more reliable than the corresponding old ones. In shuffled BF (or QWBF) decoding, at each iteration, once a bit is flipped, all the syndromes involving in this bit are

updating orders operate simultaneously and cooperatively. Af-

ter each iteration, the replica subdecoders exchange bit values

with each other (according to the rule that each replica is

“responsible” for those bit values that it decoded later), and

the next decoding iteration is based on these new values. It is

also straightforward to extend replica-shuffled BF (or QWBF)

decoding to cases in which more than two replica subdecoders

are employed. It will require more study to determine the

optimal ordering of the updates for each of the subdecoders,

even for just two replicas. In general, replica-shuffled decoders

obtain faster decoding at the price of duplicating subdecoders.

Let → −D and ←D− be two replica subdecoders using increasing

and the

decreasing updating orders, corresponding notations

respectively. Let associated with

→ −s , −→z , F−→n decoder

be →−D .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2882

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 25, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2007

Notations associated with decoder ←D− are defined in a similar way. Replica-shuffled BF decoding with two subdecoders is carried out as follows.

Initialization Compute −→s =←−s =z · HT. Let −→z =←−z =z. Step 1) For n = 1, 2, . . . , N , subdecoders ←D− and → −D

simultaneously operate, respectively, accord-

iIInff g||F−←F→−tonN|th−≥enδ|fo,≥lflloiδpw, z−→iflnnigpar←n−zudlNe{s−s−.→nma:nmd {∈←−sMm (:nm)}∈.

M(N − n)}.

Step 2) For n = 1, 2, . . . , N/2, let −→z n = ←−z n,

Step 3)

←−z N−n Repeat

S=te→ −pz N1)−annadnSdtueppd2a)teu→ −nstila→ −nsd

←−s . =0

(or

←−s = 0) or Imax is reached.

Note that Step 2) is the stage at which information is exchanged between the replicas. Each replica is responsible for those bit values that it updated more recently.
Replica shuffled QWBF decoding is carried out in an analogous way; the full description is omitted here.
VI. GROUP-SHUFFLED AND REPLICA GROUP-SHUFFLED SCHEMES

Fig. 1. Error rate of the (4095, 3367) EG-LDPC code with the standard BF and group shuffled BF algorithm, for G = 2, 16, 4095, and at most, two iterations.
as ordering the updates based on the strength of the channel information, but we preferred to avoid any approach that would require sorting or would interfere with the natural cyclic ordering of the bits.

An entirely serial implementation of replica-shuffled BF decoding would be desirable from the point of view of perfor-

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS OF SHUFFLED SCHEMES

mance, but is not very realistic in terms of VLSI implementation. On the other hand, an entirely parallel implementation is not so desirable, nor even realistic given the large block-lengths that one would expect to use.
Thus, a more realistic scenario is for the bits in an EG-LDPC code to be processed in groups of bits, where the groups are processed serially, but the bits within a group are processed in parallel. We call such decoding schemes “group-shuffled” decoding or “replica group-shuffled” decoding, depending on whether replica subdecoders are used.
Assume the N bits of a codeword are divided into G groups and each group contains (N/G) = NG bits (assuming N mod G = 0 for simplicity). Grouped shuffled BF decoding is carried out as follows.

Two-dimensional EG-LDPC codes are decoded with various schemes to show the performance of the proposed schemes. For any positive integer s ≥ 2, the 2-D EG-LDPC code has length, dimension, and minimum distance 22s − 1, 22s − 3s, and 2s + 1, respectively. The geometry EG(2, 2s) contains 22s − 1 lines that do not pass through the origin. The parity-check matrix H therefore is a (22s − 1) × (22s − 1) square matrix.
Fig. 1 depicts the error rate of iterative decoding of the (4095, 3367) EG-LDPC code with standard BF and group shuffled BF algorithm, for G = 2, 16, 4095. The maximum number of iterations for group shuffled BF was set to be only two. The word error rates and bit-error rates (BERs) are shown simultaneously in many of our plots; obviously, the bit-error rates are the lower curves.

Initialization Compute s = (s1, s2, . . . , sM ) = z · HT.
Step 1) For g = 1, 2, . . . , G a) process the following step in parallel: for g · NG + 1 ≤ n ≤ (g + 1) · NG + 1, if |Fn| ≥ δ, flip zn; b) process the following step in parallel: for g · NG + 1 ≤ n ≤ (g + 1) · NG + 1, if |Fn| ≥ δ, flip {sm : m ∈ M(n)}.
Step 2) Repeat Step 1) until s = 0 or Imax is reached.
Replica group-shuffled BF (or QWBF) decoders operate in

Note in Fig. 1 that for group-shuffled BF decoding, using 16 groups is nearly as good as 4095 (fully serial operation). Note also that the word error rate performance using 16 groups and two iterations in group-shuffled decoding is nearly as good as that using ten iterations in standard BF decoding.
Fig. 2 depicts the error rate of iterative decoding of the (4095, 3367) EG-LDPC code with standard QWBF and group shuffled QWBF algorithm, for G = 2, 16, 4095. The maximum number of iterations for group shuffled BF was set to be five.
The threshold parameters used were ∆1 = 0.09 and ∆2 = 8.0. There is clearly a performance gain from using QWBF instead of BF (about 0.5 dB at a BER of 10−5).

an analogous way; the full details are omitted here.

Fig. 3 depicts the error rate of iterative decoding of the

Note that in all these decoders, including the replica group- (16 383, 14 179) EG-LDPC code with the standard BF and

shuffled decoders, the order in which all the steps proceed is the group shuffled BF algorithm, for G = 2, 16, 4095. The

always fixed ahead of time, which is convenient for a hardware maximum number of iterations for group shuffled BF was set

implementation. It is possible to consider other ideas, such to be 2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LOW-LATENCY DECODING OF EG LDPC CODES

2883

Fig. 2. Error rate of the (4095, 3367) EG-LDPC code with the standard QWBF and group shuffled QWBF algorithm, for G = 2, 16, 4095, and at most, five iterations.

Fig. 4. Error rate of the (4095, 3367) EG-LDPC code with the standard BF and group replica shuffled BF algorithm with four subdecoders, for G = 2, 16, 4095, and at most two iterations.

Fig. 3. Error rate of the (16 383, 14 179) EG-LDPC code with the standard BF and the group shuffled BF algorithm, for G = 2, 16, 4095, and at most two iterations.

Fig. 5. Error rate of the (4095, 3367) EG-LDPC code with the standard BF and group replica shuffled BF algorithm with four subdecoders, for G = 2, 16, 4095, and at most, ten iterations.

VIII. SIMULATION RESULTS OF REPLICA SHUFFLED SCHEMES

theoretical than practical; to demonstrate that replica-group shuffled BF decoding outperforms BF decoding when Imax is large enough.

Fig. 4 depicts the error rate of iterative decoding of the (4095, An important issue in optical communications systems and

3367) EG-LDPC code with standard BF and group replica in storage systems is the performance at very low error rates.

shuffled BF algorithm with four subdecoders, for G = The question that must be answered is whether there is a hidden

2, 16, 4095. The maximum number of iterations Imax for group error floor in the high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regime. This

replica shuffled BF was set to be two. We observed that the question is difficult to answer through simulations, but we

word error rate (WER) performance of group replica shuffled can make some progress, and set worst case bounds on the

BF decoding with four subdecoders and Imax = 2, and group error floor, by using importance sampling for the case of BF

number, larger or equal to four, was approximately the same decoding.

as that of the standard BF with Imax = 10, while the BER To obtain performance for very low error rates, we generated

performance is even better.

random errors of fixed weight n, and for each weight n,

Fig. 5 depicts the error rate of the same code decoded by we evaluated the corresponding bit-error performance P (n).

the standard and replica shuffled BF methods, with Imax = 20 Fortunately, we can assume that no errors at all will occur if and Imax = 10, respectively. The point of this figure is more n ≤ t, where t is the bounded error correcting capability of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2884

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 25, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2007

Fig. 6. WER of the (4095, 3367) EG-LDPC code with the standard BF and group replica shuffled BF algorithm with four subdecoders, for G = 2, 16, 4095, and at most, two iterations for fixed number of errors.

Fig. 7. Group replica shuffled BF decoding of the (4095, 3367) EG-LDPC code for fixed number of errors with four subdecoders and G = 16, Imax = 2. The point of this figure is to show the extrapolations used in constructing the worst case (upper bound), best case (lower bound), and likely case (extrapolated) performance curves at very low error rates.

code t = (dmin − 1)/2 (this corresponds to the reasonable assumption that the decoder has a built-in low-complexity bounded-distance decoder; such decoders were developed for these codes already in the 1960s [8]). For the (4095, 3367) code, dmin = 65, and t = 32.
The overall bit-error performance Ps was then obtained by the average

Ps =

N

P (n)

N n

pne (1 − pe)N−n.

(7)

n=t+1

For BPSK signaling over AWGN channel, the transition

probability pe = Q( REb/N0), where R is the code rate and Eb/N0 is the SNR per information bit.
Fig. 6 depicts the error performance of the standard and

replica group-shuffled BF decoding methods with four subdecoders for decoding the (4095, 3367) EG-LDPC code with a fixed number of errors. The maximum number of iterations for replica shuffled BF was set to 2.

Fig. 8. Group replica shuffled BF decoding of the (4095, 3367) EG-LDPC code in high SNR regime with four subdecoders and G = 16, Imax = 2. Note that the worst case performance is never more than 1 dB worse than the likely case performance, indicating that there is no error floor.

Using the results from Fig. 6, we can determine worst case,

best case, and extrapolated performances for this decoder down

to very low error rates.

Fig. 8 depicts the performance of the replica shuffled BF

For word error rates (WERs) smaller than 10−4 (BER smaller decoding for the (4095, 3367) EG-LDPC codes in the high SNR

than 10−7), no reliable evaluation of P (n) was possible, so regime based on Fig. 7. Note that the best case and likely case

we computed: 1) a worst case upper bound on (7) by assum- scenarios are nearly identical. More importantly, the worst case

ing the same P (nmin) as the smallest simulated for weights n , t < n < nmin, 2) a best case lower bound on (7) by assuming P (n) = 0 for weights n , t < n < nmin, and 3) a likely case approximation by extrapolating P (n ) for weights

scenario is only slightly worse (less than 1 dB) than the likely case scenario for BERs between 10−10 and 10−15. This means
that we can be confident that there will be no significant error
floor using this decoding method.

n , t < n < nmin.

Fig. 9 depicts the error rate of iterative decoding of the

Fig. 7 depicts these extrapolations. The worst case upper (16 383, 14 179) EG-LDPC code with standard BF and group

bound is derived using the horizontal line in this figure, the replica shuffled BF algorithm with four subdecoders, for G =

best case lower bound is derived using the vertical line, and 2, 16, 16 383. The maximum number of iterations for group

the likely case extrapolation is derived using the curved line. replica shuffled BF was set to be two. We observe that the WER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LOW-LATENCY DECODING OF EG LDPC CODES

2885

IX. CONCLUSION

Fig. 9. Error rate of the (16 383, 14 179) EG-LDPC code with the standard BF and group replica shuffled BF algorithm with four subdecoders, for G = 2, 16, 16 383, and at most, two iterations.

We have described many different decoders, and it may be worthwhile to give some final pointers to orient the reader. The major conclusion is that group-shuffled BF decoders and replica group-shuffled BF or QWBF decoders give good performance using a very small number (two) of iterations and a relatively small number (16, but in fact four is often sufficient) of groups, comparable or better than that of standard decoders using ten or more iterations. This reduction in the reduction of the number of iterations will translate into a better decoding throughput and/or latency. The gain obtained by upgrading from BF to QWBF is rather large (probably about 0.5 dB), but one must be able to quantize the channel output using one bit (“high” versus “low” reliablility. Replica group-shuffled decoders using four replicas also have a further performance advantage compared to ordinary group-shuffled decoders, but the gain is not very large. Finally, we have demonstrated that group-shuffled and replica-group shuffled BF decoders will not have a significant error floor. Although it would be harder to demonstrate using importance sampling, there is no reason to expect error floors for QWBF decoders either.

Fig. 10. Error rate of the (16 383, 14 179) EG-LDPC code with the standard BF and group replica shuffled BF algorithm with four subdecoders, for G = 2, 16, 18 383, and at most ten iterations.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and more,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[5] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. 36th Annu. Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. and Comput., Nov. 2002, pp. 8–15.
[6] J. Zhang, Y. Wang, M. Fossorier, and J. Yedidia, “Replica shuffled iterative decoding,” MERL, Cambridge, MA, MERL Tech. Rep. 2005-063, Dec. 2004.
[7] I. Djordjevic and B. Vasic, “Projective geometry low-density parity-check codes for ultra-long haul WDM high-speed transmission,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 15, no. 5, pp. 784–786, May 2003.
[8] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.

performance of group replica shuffled BF decoding with four

subdecoders and maximum number of two, and group number

larger or equal to 16, are approximately the same as that of the

standard BF with maximum number of ten. Fig. 10 depicts the error rate of the same code decoded by
the standard and replica shuffled BF methods, with Imax = 20 and Imax = 10, respectively. With respect to the ultimate performance after full convergence, the replica shuffled BF

Juntan Zhang received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Hawaii, Honolulu.
He is currently with Availink, Inc., Germantown, MD.

decoding is observed to outperform the standard BF. This can

be partly explained by less error propagation involved in replica

shuffled method. Although not presented here, other geometry LDPC codes
were also simulated with the standard and the replica decoding schemes. Based on the simulation results, replica decoding shows similar improvements in the required number of decoding iterations for codes with different codeword lengths, either shorter or longer than those shown here.

Jonathan S. Yedidia (M’01) received the Ph.D. degree in physics from Princeton University, Princeton, NJ, in 1990. His graduate work and his postdoctoral work focused on the statistical mechanics of disordered systems.
During 1990–1993, he was a Junior Fellow with Harvard’s Society of Fellows, Cambridge. From 1993 to 1997, he was a Teacher. He is currently a Research Scientist with Mitsubishi Electric Research Laboratories (MERL), Cambridge. His main research interests since joining MERL in 1998 have been in algorithms for probabilistic inference and their applications in communications, signal processing, and artificial intelligence.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2886

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 25, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2007

Marc P. C. Fossorier (S’90–M’95–SM’00–F’06) was born in Annemasse, France, on March 8, 1964. He received the B.E. degree from the National Institute of Applied Sciences, Lyon, France, in 1987 and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, in 1991 and 1994, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
He is a Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering of the University of Hawaii. His research interests include decoding techniques for linear codes, communication algorithms, combining coding and equalization for ISI channels, magnetic recording, and statistics. He coauthored (with S. Lin, T. Kasami, and T. Fujiwara) the book Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms (New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998).
Dr. Fossorier is a recipient of a 1998 National Science Foundation Career Development award. He has been serving as Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS since 1996, as Associate Editor for the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS since 1999, and is currently the First Vice President of the IEEE Information Theory Society. He was Program Cochairman for the 2000 International Symposium on Information Theory and its Applications and Editor for the Proceedings of the 2003 and 1999 Symposium on Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error Correcting Codes (AAECC). He is a member of the IEEE Information Theory and IEEE Communications Societies.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

