Girth conditioning of LDPC codes through Modified Breadth First Search Algorithm
Samuele Bandi†, Velio Tralli, Andrea Conti and Maddalena Nonato †Corresponding author.
Authors are with ENDIF, University of Ferrara, via Saragat 1, 44100 Ferrara, Italy (e-mail: samuele.bandi@gmail.com, vtralli@ing.unife.it, a.conti@ieee.org, nntmdl@unife.it )

Abstract— This paper proposes a method to improve the performance of a low-density parity-check code, by selectively removing some cycles from the associated bipartite graph. The method is based on a modified version of breadth-first search (BFS) algorithm, that we call modified BFS (MBFS). Throughout the paper we will give a detailed description of the algorithm and analytically study its complexity. Simulation results will show that applying MBFS to a given code leads to significant improvement of its performance.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes ( [2], [3], [1],) are linear block-codes whose associated parity-check matrix is very sparse, that is it contains only few non-zero elements. An M × N parity check matrix H (with entries in GF (2), i.e., the Galois Field of order 2) is associated to a bipartite graph G(H) with N left nodes and M right nodes (e.g., see Fig. 1). This graph is usually called Tanner Graph (TG), left and right nodes are also said variable and check-nodes, respectively. While regular LDPC are those for which all nodes of the same type have the same degree, for irregular LDPC the degrees of each set of nodes are chosen according to some probability distribution. Various techniques have been devised to optimize these degree distributions in the asymptotic case of N = +∞. The success of LDPC codes is mainly due to the existence of efficient iterative decoding algorithm based on message passing (MP) between variable and check-nodes, to date Belief-Propagation (BP) and Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) are the MP algorithm which perform better [4].
The performance of an LDPC code with iterative decoding depends on some structural properties of the associated TG. One of these structural properties is the girth, defined as the length of the shortest cycle in the graph representing the LDPC code. A code with girth g is free of cycles having length less than g. Since short cycles degrade performance significantly (as will be explained in the next section) it is often desirable to have a lower bound on the cycle length, thus a fixed value of the girth. In this paper, instead of proposing a method to construct a parity-check matrix of given girth, we propose an effective method to increase the girth of the TG associated to a given LDPC, thus increasing its performance. This approach is quite “non-standard” and has been rarely addressed, a reference in this direction is [5]. As in [5], we propose an algorithm to increase the girth of a TG, by removing some edges that cause cycles. The novel algorithm we propose is based on a modified version of the well known breadth first search algorithm (BFS)

and we will call it modified BFS (MBFS). Throughout the paper, the complexity of MBFS will be studied and simulation results will show that with our girth conditioning approach we can achieve significant coding gain. Quite differently from [5] we address the issue of removing as few edges as possible, and propose a greedy approach to deal with it; through the complexity analysis it we will show that our algorithm has lower complexity than the one proposed in [5] and therefore can be applied to larger family of codes and that it leads to significant improvement of a code performance.
II. THE GIRTH ISSUE FOR LDPC It is well known that cycle-free TG, with SPA or BP algorithm yeilds optimal decoding, in the sense that Symbol error probability is minimized [6] [7]. Cycle-free TG however, have small minimum distance leading to poor BER. When TGs have cycles, BP decoding is suboptimal: a message sent by a node involved in a cycle, will propagate back to the node itself after some iterations of BP algorithm thus causing loss of independence in the messages sent thereafter [6]. Quite intuitively, short cycles are those that challenge the performance the most. Many methods have been proposed to generate parity-check matrices whose associate TG were is of short cycles [7], [8], [9] and [10]. As said before, in this paper we do not propose a construction method, we rather suggest a method to improve the performance of an existing LDPC code which can be generated
Fig. 1. Example of Tanner graph containing a cycle of length 8 {d, l, e, h, a, g, c, i}.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

in any way, by removing some of the TG edges involved in cycles. A drawback of our approach could be that by removing cycles, we modify the degree distribution of both variable and checknodes. Degree distributions however, are optimized in the asymptotic case only, that is, when the graph has infinite number of nodes and no cycle occurs. Our approach instead applies to a real, finite-length code. This is obviously very attractive for practical purposes. The algorithm we propose for cycles removal, will be described in the next sections and is summarized as follows:

1: for all nodes s ∈ V do

V is the variable node set

2: procedure TO EXPLORE Ts UP TO LEVEL g/2

3:

Ts is the support tree rooted in s

4:

= 1, C = ∅, Q ← s, Q ←

5:

Ps = ∅

Pj is the ancestor of j in Ts

6:

while Q = ∅ do

7:

take t ∈ Q

8:

if t is a node then

9:

for all h ∈ δ (t) do

10:

for all neighbors of t except Pt

11:

Q = Q {h}; Q = Q {∗};

12:

Q = Q/{t}; C = C {h} ;

13:

end for

14:

else

15:

if t is a number and t ≤ g/ then

16:

++; Q = Q { };

17:

else

18:

if t is an asterisk then donothing;

19:

else Break;

20:

end if

21:

end if

22:

end if

23:

end while

24: end procedure

25: procedure TO FIND CYCLES INCLUDING NODE s

26:

k=0;

27:

for all t appearing at least twice in Q do

28:

m=g/2; Ct = ∅; k++;

29:

while m = 1 do

30:

move to the left in L = (C; Q) until the

occurence of number m

31:

call γ the number of asterisks met before

finding m

32:

move to number m − 1 in C, move γ

positions to the right, skipping asterisks

33:
Ct(k) {v}

let v be the node in this position, put Ct(k) =

34:

end while

35:

m=m-1

36:

end for

37:

put in Ct all possible couples of Ct(k), ∀k

38:

C= tCt

C is the set of all cycles of length g

39: end procedure

40: end for

the meaning of symbols is introduced in the next section.

III. ALGORITHM DESCRIPTION Consider a bipartite graph G: if G contains a cycle of length that includes a node s, then some nodes will occur at least twice at level /2 of the support tree rooted in s (Ts). In Fig 2, for example, two repetitions of node d at level 4 of the support tree Ta show the existence of a cycle of length eight. In order to find edges constituting the cycle, we must find the path from node d on the left side of the tree and node a and then the path from d on the right side of the support tree and a. To explore Ta up to a certain level we can simply use the classic Breadth First Search (BFS) algorithm [11]. Standard BFS algorithm however, does not tell us which edges form a cycle, whereas MBFS proposed here exploits the bipartite structure of the TG to find the nodes that compose a cycle by a simple extension of BFS. The MBFS algorithm actually consists of two steps, the former is finding the cycles up to a desired length, the latter removing them by deleting as few edges as possible. We will describe this two operations in the next sections. A. Finding Cycles To find a cycle of lenght involving a variable node a we simply explore Ta up to /2. To do this we simply use two lists: the open list Q and the closed list C. We start from a variable node a, first we put a into the open list Q, then we pass a to the closed list C and add all its neighbors to Q. At the generic step we take the first element (say u) of Q, we pass it to the closed list C, and we add all its neighbors to Q. Repeating this process g/2 times, we can discover if the TG has a cycle of length g, in this case in facts some node will appear twice in Q. There is a subtle point in this algorithm, which makes it different from standard BFS: suppose that node u was added in Q because it was neighbor of s, when we pass u from Q to C, we add in Q all the neighbors of u except s. This is very important since our graph is undirected. In order to implement this we simply need a vector P to keep track of the predecessor of a node in C. As a matter of facts there is no need to use two lists to implements MBFS: since we never
Fig. 2. A cycle of length can be found exploring the support tree up to level /2, nodes e and h occur twice at level 2, this corresponds to two 4-cycles

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

extract elements from C, and Q is a FIFO queue, it suffices to use a vector L = (C; Q).
To make things clearer let us consider how MBFS works on the support tree Ta of Fig. 2. Start with C and Q both empty, then place a in Q. Since a is the only node at level “zero” of Ta, move to explore the nodes at level 1 of Ta and remark this by adding a 1 to C. Add all neighbors of a to C. Now the vector L is
L = {a, 1, ga, ha}
where we added the subscript a to the elements g, h to keep track that they are neighbors of a, this is actually implemented using the vector of predecessors P . Since ga and ha are the only nodes at level 1 of Ta, move to explore the nodes at level 2 of Ta and remark this by adding a 2 to C. Next move ga to the closed list C and we add its neighbors to Q. Place an asterisk and do the same for ha. Now L becomes
L = {a, 1, ga, ha, 2, cg, fg, ∗, eh, }
as we mentioned before, a is not added in L since ga was added in L as a neighbor of a (as indicated by the subscript). Now we will simply write the value of L up to depth 4:
L = {a, 1, ga, ha, 2, cg, fg, ∗, eh, 3, ic, ∗, ∗, le, 4, di, ∗, bl, dl}
Obviously, to compute the girth of the graph this algorithm must be used for each variable node, if the graph has a girth less or equal to gmax, some nodes will appear more than once within depth gmax/2 of the list L. In our example the double appearance of node d after number 4 in L, means the existence of a cycle of length 8 involving a. Up to now we have not shown how to find the nodes that compose a cycle. To do this we have to find the path from each node at the same depth of L and the first element of L, i.e. the root of the support tree. Suppose we want to find the path from the second appearance of node d at depth 4 (that is de) and a (the root of the support tree Ta), we proceed as follows:
• take node dl appearing in the L-list after number 4. • move to the left and count the number δ of asterisks
before the occurrence of number 4. (Having chosen dl δ = 1) • go to L = 3 and move (δ + 1) positions (excluding asterisks) to the right, the letter in this position marks a node which is in the cycle. (in our example this letter is le) • iterate the procedure. (In our example starting from dc, count δ = 2 asterisks up to 3 and then we take the 3rd letter starting from 2 that is eh. Iterating twice, we find h and a. The path from de to a is therefore {d, l, e, h, a}. In the exactly same way we can find the path from di in L to a, the path is {d, i, c, g, a}. By combining the two paths together we obtain the cycles of length 8 involving node a: {d, l, e, h, a, g, c, i}. By applying this algorithm to each variable node, that is N times, we can build up a simple table containing all the cycles of a given length in the TG. We will use this table to remove some edge from the TG in order eliminate cycles of a given length.

B. Removing Cycles
The cycle-removal must be performed carefully: removing too many edges could destroy the structure of the graph a little too much and degrade the performance. We define the following rules:
• Cycles must be removed deleting as few edges as possible.
• An edge must not be removed if this means disconnecting a node from the rest of the TG.
Our target is to find solutions which accomplish cycles removal according to these two rules. It is quite evident that, whenever we respect the first rule, the second one is automatically respected, since any node which is part of a loop is connected to at least two edges. In the next section we show that the minimization problem belongs to a well-known class of NP-complete problems, this justifies the greedy approach we will propose.

Operational research remark: the minimization of the number of erased edges, can be seen as a problem of setcovering. The set-covering problem is a classical question in computer science and complexity theory, it was one of Karp’s 21 NP-complete problems shown to be NP-complete in 1972 [11]. Several sets are given as input, which may have some common elements. We want to select a minimum number of these sets so that the sets we have picked contain all the elements that are contained in any of the sets in the input. In our case the set to cover is the set of cycles of length g. In particular, we want to select the minimum number of edges so that each cycle of length g contains at least one of the selected edges. The removal of the selected edges destroys all cycles of length g. Let Cg be the set of cycles of minimum length returned by the MBFS, and let y be the characteristic vector of cycle on the edge set E, i.e. yi,j = 1 iff edge (i, j) belongs to the -th cycle; then the set covering model can be described by this objective function

min

xi,j ,

(1)

(i,j)∈E

constrained by:

xi,j yi,j ≥ 1 ∀ ∈ Cg

(2)

(i,j)∈E

where the solution xi,j ∈ {0, 1} and (i, j) ∈ E. This problem, as mentioned, is in general NP-complete. We therefore proceed with a suboptimal greedy approach.

To remove the cycles, we process the table of the cycles starting from the first row. For each edge ei,j we increase a counter Ki,j (initialized to zero), every time we find ei,j in the table. As a memorization space for the different counters, the H matrix itself can be used. If one of the elements of the matrix, say Ki,j, exceeds one, at any time, it means that the corresponding ei,j is involved in more than one cycle. We first store all counters Ki,j in the H matrix and then eliminate the edges corresponding to the largest value of the counter. After eliminating an edge eh,k we decrease the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

counters Ki,j corresponding to each ei,j belonging to the cycles in which eh,k is involved. Obviously, after eliminating cycles which contain edges also involved in more than one cycle, we must eliminate also the remaining cycles: this can be done by simply scanning the cycles table one more time. This approach does not guarantee that we remove the smallest number of edges, but it can be considered as a greedy solution to a seemingly NP-hard problem.

IV. ANALYSIS OF COMPLEXITY
Now we want to analyze the algorithm complexity. Since girth-conditioning through MBFS is performed off-chip before using an LDPC, temporal complexity is not really an issue. Spatial complexity (i.e. memory occupation), on the contrary must be a major concern. When working with long LDPC codes (with up to 105 nodes) a memory non-efficient algorithm can be infeasible. In this paper we will treat spatial complexity only and we will refer to it whenever we talk about complexity.
When we apply our algorithm to variable node s, it explores all the nodes belonging to Ts up to a certain level /2 (half the length of the cycles we are trying to remove). For each variable node the exploration is made according to standard BFS. If the TG represents a regular (α, β)-LDPC where every variable (check) nodes has degree α (β), any support tree Ts rooted in the generic variable node s, contains X nodes at level . Denoting with α = α−1 and β = β −1, the following realtion holds:

X

=

αβ

· (αβ)

−2 2

≤

(αβ)

/2

(3)

The number of edges up to level is therefore

+1

W

=X
i=0

≤

(αβ)

/2

=

(αβ) 2

(αβ

)

1 2

−1 −1

=

O( (αβ) 2

)

(4)

As we said the MBFS-algorithm is a simple modification of BFS algorithm and thus, when it works on a graph with W nodes and E edges, it has complexity O(W + E). The complexity of MBFS working on the tree seen by any variable node is therefore

O(2W − 1) ≤ O (αβ) 2 .

(5)

Since every list L used to explore the generic support tree s, can be cast away after finding all cycles involving s, we
do not need to multiply by N the previous expression. For an irregular LDPC, if dv and dc are the greatest variable and check nodes degree respectively, equation 4 can be used to derive an upper bound on complexity:

O(2W − 1) ≤ O (dvdc) 2 .

(6)

In Table I we show some values of this upper bound for some codes appeared in literature. We can notice that even for the longest codes of N = 30000 the spatial complexity, though high, is still manageable, thus the girth conditioning operation feasible.

TABLE I SPATIAL COMPLEXITY COST, OF QUASI-CYCLIC CODES PROPOSED IN [5]
AND MNC CODES PROPOSED IN [2]

QC(510,255), dc = 8, dv = 16, N=510

gmax

O(2W − 1)

6

1.6384 · 104

8

2.09 · 106

10

2.684 · 108

MNC(30000,2000), dc = 3, dv = 4, N=30000

gmax

O(2W − 1)

8

1.728 · 103

10

2.0736 · 104

12

2.4883 · 105

V. NUMERICAL RESULTS
The MBFS-based girth conditioning technique that we introduced can be used either to improve the performance of a given LDPC or to construct a new LDPC. If we start with a bipartite graph G0 with girth g0 and we apply the girth conditioning technique once, we can obtain a new graph G1 with girth g1 = g0 + 2. Applying this technique k times we can obtain a new bipartite graph Gk with girth gk = g0 + 2k. Of course we will continue to apply girth conditioning as long as the performance, in terms of either BER of FER, increase. Since [5] proposed a girth conditioning technique that removes edges as we do, following a completely different Trellis-based algorithm, we decided to condition the same QC-LDPC code proposed in Example 1 of [5] in order to compare our results with those of [5]. As described in [5] our starting LDPC code has a 255 × 510 H0 parity check matrix over GF (2) which consist of two 255 × 255 circulants M1 and M2. An n × n circulant is characterized by a polynomial g(X) = g0+g1X1+g2X2+· · ·+gn−1Xn−1 over GF (2). This polynomial corresponds to a vector g = (g0, g1, · · · , gn−1) which is simply the first row of the circulant. Then the g and its n − 1 cyclic shifts form the circulant. The characteristic polynomial of M1 and M2 are (see [5]) g1(X) = 1 + X47 + x72 + X104 + X106 + X191 + X212 + X225 and g2(X) = 1+X8+x37+X87+X125+X137+X149+X161. Fig 3 show that starting with code G0 with girth g0 = 4 by applying MBFS we can obtain a new code G1 with girth g1 = 6 which gives better performance with a coding gain of about half dB. Starting with code G1 with girth g1 = 6 and applying MBFS we obtain code G2 with girth g2 = 8 gaining approximately one dB. As soon as we proceed to obtain the new code G3 with girth g3 = 10, however, the performance degrades for some valued of Eb/N0. This behavior can be easily explained observing Fig. 5 and 6 where the columns and rows weights distributions are portrayed for different values of girth. Starting with the regular code G0 for which all the column have weight 8, and all the rows 16, the application of MBFS leads to an irregular graph G1 whose weight distributions can be seen in Fig. 5 and 6. Subsequent applications of MBFS move the weight distributions towards the left, i.e. MBFS application generates more and more low weight columns and rows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This can be interpreted as a progressive destruction of the structural properties of the code, which eventually leads to a degradation of performance. Comparing our results of Fig. 3 we the ones obtained in [5] we can observe that our algorithm gives the same performances despite its lower complexity. The lower complexity of our algorithm, moreover makes it feasible for larger classes of codes, for which algorithm proposed in [5] is not applicable.
Another interesting question concerns the speed of convergence of a code obtained after the girth conditioning operation. Fig 4 shows the decoding performance of code G2 with girth 8, when used for transmission over the AWGN channel. Decoding is done using standard sum-product algorithm which is terminated if the syndrome of the codeword estimate is zero or if a maximum number of iterations is reached. We can observe that the performance obtained by fixing the maximum number of iterations (maxit) to 5 is only a fraction of dB away from the performance achievable when maxit = 40. The performance fixing maxit = 40 and maxit = 20 is almost the same. The difference in performance varying maxit, is almost the same for both the original code and the code with girth conditioned to g2 = 8. This observations shows that the decoding complexity is not significantly increased by girth conditioning.

100

10-1

10-2

BER

10-3

max. iterations=5, girth=8 max. iterations=20, girth=8

max. iterations=40, girth=8

max. iterations=5, girth=4

10-4

max. iterations=20, girth=4 max. iterations=40, girth=4

10-5 0

1

2

3

4

5

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 4. Convergence speed of QC-LDPC(255, 510) after being conditioned to have girth 8.

0.5

girth=6

girth=8

0.4

girth=10

100

0.3

Percentage

Error Rate

10-1

10-2

girth=4 BER

10-3

girth=6 BER girth=8 BER

girth=10 BER

girth=4 FER

girth=6 FER

10-4

girth=8 FER

girth=10 FER

0.2

0.1

0

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Columns weights

Fig. 5. Column weights distributions, after several applications of MBFS.

0.4

10-5 0

1

2

3

4

5

Eb/N0 (dB)

0.3

Fig. 3. Performance of QC-LDPC(255, 510) after several applications of MBFS algorithm for girth conditiong

0.2

girth=6 girth=8 girth=10

Percentage

VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper we introduced an algorithm that we called MBFS which can be used to detect cycles of a Tanner graph. We proposed MBFS-based girth conditioning method that can be used either to improve the performance of and existing LDPC or to construct a new code. The reduced complexity of MBFS algorithm makes this method feasible even for long block length codes, without the need to memorize big trellis structured as proposed by other methods in literature [5]. Our girth-conditioning method has proved to be effective showing that a good LDPC code can be constructed from a poorer one by progressively increasing its girth, through

0.1

0 1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9 10 11 12 13 14

row weights

Fig. 6. Row weights distributions, after several applications of MBFS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

successive application of the proposed MBFS algorithm.
REFERENCES
[1] T. Richardson, R. Urbanke “Efficient Encoding of Low-Density ParityCheck Codes” IEEE Transaction on Information Theory ,vol. 47 , no. 2. pp 638-656, Feb. 2001
[2] Mac Kay “Good Error-Correcting Codes Based on Very Sparse Matrices” IEEE Transaction on Information Theory ,vol. 45 , no. 2 pp 399-431,
[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density Prity-Check Codes” MA: MIT Press, 1963 [4] David J. C. MacKay, “Information Theory, Inference, and Learning
Algorithms”, Cambridge University Press, 2003 [5] L.Lan, Y.Y.Tai,L.Chen,S.Lin, and K.Abdel-Ghaffar “A Trellis-Based
Method for Removing Cycles From Bipartite Graphs and Construction of Low Density Parity Check Codes” IEEE Communications Letters, vol 8; No 7, July 2004 [6] Jos M.F. Morua, J, Lun and Haotian Zhang, “Structured Low-Density Parity-Check Codes” IEEE Signal Processing Magazie, January 2004. [7] D. Leyba, O. Milenkovic, Bennet and N. Kashyap “ New partitionregular sequences and array codes of large girth ” Proc 42nd Annual Allerton Conference on Coomunication, Control and Computing , Monticello IL 2004 [8] “Algebraic Construction of Sparse Matrices With Large Girth ” IEEE Transaction on Information Theory ,vol. 52 , no 2 pp. 718-727, February 2006 [9] J. L. Fan, “Array Codes as low-density parity check codes ” Proc 2nd Int. Symposium on Turbo Codes ,Brest, France, 2000 pp,543-546 [10] M. P. C. Fossorier “Quasicyclic, low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices” IEEE Transaction on Information Theory ,vol. 50, no. 8 pp. 1788-1793, Aug. 2004 [11] T.H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein. “Introduction to Algorithms”, Second Edition. MIT Press and McGraw-Hill, 2001. ISBN 0-262-03293-7 [12] Tao Tian, “Selective Avoidance of Cycles in Irregular LDPC Code Construction ” IEEE Transaction on Communications ,vol. 52, no 8 pp 1242-1247, August 2004 [13] R. J. McEliece, “The Theory of Information and Coding: A Mathematical Framework for Communication. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1977.codes, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 17231731, Nov. 1996. [14] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, R. L. Urbanke, “Design of Capacity-Approaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes” IEEE Transaction on Information Theory ,vol. 47, no. 2 pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001 [15] Sheldon M. Ross “Applied Probability Models With Optimization Application”, Dover Publications.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:24:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

