ITW 2007, Lake Tahoe, California, September 2 - 6, 2007
LDPC Decoder Message Formatting Based on Activity Factor Minimization Using Differential
Density Evolution
Vincent C. Gaudet, Christian Schlegel, and Russell Dodd Department of Electrical and Computer. Engineering University of Alberta Edmonton, AB T6G 2V4 {vgaudet,schlegel,rdodd}@ece.ualberta.ca

Abstract— The power consumption of digital implementations of low-density parity-check decoders is studied using a density evolution approach which allows the capture of the switching statistics of the messages through the code communications network. Messages are crafted specifically to reduce the switching activity during a decoding cycle, which forms the major cause of power consumption. Low-power message formats are designed, particularly differential signaling with various bit sizes. The performance and potential of these novel message formats are evaluated and compared to hardware measurements and simulations. It is shown that the power consumption of an LDPC decoder can be as low as a few tens of pico joules per decoded information bit, even with standard state-of-the art silicon technology.
I. INTRODUCTION
While efficient utilization of channel resources close the theoretical limits is afforded by advanced coding methods, such as turbo [1] and low-density parity-check coding [3], [4], receiver power consumption is a concern that thus far has received significantly less attention from communication theorists. However, under extreme low-power requirements, such as in ad-hoc networks, or in situations where very high data rates (see for example the 10GBASE-T standard [5]) push the power consumption of the receiver beyond acceptable limits, the processing power of the error control decoder may become a key parameter to consider. From the point of view of a practitioner of error control coding, it is very important not only that the decoding algorithm completes successfully, but also that it does so with a minimum of processing power required.
Indeed, the promise of low processing power was one of the major motivations inspiring the class of analog decoders [6], [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. Such analog decoders have been built and tested with power consumption rates as low as 40pJ/decoded bit [13], while current digital implementations in ASICs require on the order of nJ/decoded bit [14], though it should be noted that these figures are highly algorithm, code, and SNR dependent. It can easily be appreciated that such levels of required power may be too high for high-speed applications or ultra-low power environments.
The topic of this paper is to present a novel information

theoretic approach to the design of energy efficient message passing decoders. The main tool used is density evolution (DE) [15], a methodology which allows to compute the statistical behavior of the messages communicated in the interconnect network of an iterative decoder. DE was originally used to compute convergence thresholds for LDPC codes and thus allowed the calculation of the performance of ideal, large LDPC codes [16]. In [17][18], density evolution was extended to make predictions on the activity factors in stochastic iterative decoders, and to evaluate code ensembles in terms of their relative decoding energy requirements. Here we use the DE technique not only to evaluate expected energy consumption of a decoding algorithm, but as a tool to craft energy efficient message formats to be used in the iterative decoding algorithm.
Since power consumption in digital decoders is mainly determined by the switching activity of the circuit, we are interested in minimizing the switching activity without compromising the error control behavior of the algorithm. If one analyzes the typical behavior of an iterative LDPC message passing decoder using an average number of iterations and 6-8 bit representations of the messages, one finds that the data flow in numbers of bits through the interconnect network between the processing nodes of an LDPC decoder is easily three orders of magnitude higher than the channel data rate, reaching terabits/s for higher speed applications. The communications in the decoder network therefore represents a major power burden. It is this power demand that we address in this paper.
First we notice that most messages, which in silicon implementations typically have fixed limits on the maximum magnitudes, quickly assume their final values and further communicating them throughout the network seems wasteful. This prompts us to consider differential signaling, where only the difference between current and previous messages is communicated. In this fashion, the network will effectively shut itself down other than in areas of slow convergence. For the purpose of gaining an analytical handle on the issue, we modify DE into what we term differential DE, and use it to compute the average number of bit changes, the activity factor, of all the messages in the interconnect network. Since power is tied to the activity factor, our version of DE allows

1-4244-1564-0/07/$25.00 ©2007 IEEE

571

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:55:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

us to accurately compute the power consumption used in the interconnect network. The processing power of the computational nodes can easily be estimated and, together, allow us to calculate accurate estimates of the energy required to complete a decoding cycle, and thus the power requirements of a decoder. We apply our principles to LPDC codes for different message formats. With suitable minor modifications, these concepts can easily be applied to turbo coding, or other factor-graph-based processing algorithms.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a review of density evolution and of its use in evaluating decoding energy tradeoffs in code design. Then Section III provides results of a DE study on the prediction of activity factor in an LDPC decoder that uses a bit serial message passing format. Then a more energy efficient message format, differential messaging, is evaluated. Section II-B then introduces differential DE that enables and provides analytical and simulation results. Finally, Section IV concludes this paper.

Both Turbo and LDPC codes use novel iterative decod-

ing algorithms: Turbo codes use two or more a posteriori

probability (APP) component decoders for small convolutional

codes [20], while LDPC codes use a specialized version of

belief propagation (BP) [21]. LDPC decoding consists of

sending messages along the connecting edges, from variable

nodes, initialized with received channel messages, to parity-

check nodes and back. Each node type performs different com-

putations, utilizing the extrinsic principle, which prescribes

that an outgoing message on an edge excludes information

received along the same edge.

Basically, each check node j performs the following com-

putation for its outgoing message βj→l to variable node l, assuming check node degree dc (number of edge connections):

⎛

⎞

βj→l = 2 tanh−1 ⎝⎜ dc

tanh

μk→j 2

⎟⎠

(1)

k=1

(k=l)

II. DENSITY EVOLUTION AS AN ACTIVITY PREDICTOR and each variable node message performs the following com-

A. Overview of Message Passing and Density Evolution

putation for its outgoing LLR message to parity check node

j, assuming variable node degree dv:

LDPC decoding is viewed graphically via a bipartite graph,

or factor graph [19]. The factor graph has both variable nodes, representing the codeword bits, and parity check nodes,

dv

μl→j = λch,l +

βp→l

(2)

representing the parity check equations of the code’s parity

p=1 (p=j)

check matrix H. Edges connect variable nodes to check nodes

according to the check equations. Each edge connecting a where λch,l is the channel LLR available for bit l.

variable node i to a parity check node j is indicated by hij=1, Density evolution [15] is a statistical method which comand variable i participates in the parity check equation of row putes the distribution of the message values in an LDPC

hj. Each of the parity check equations, when multiplied by a decoder under idealized assumptions. These are primarily that

codeword x must sum to zero, that is, Hx=0.

the code has infinite size, in which case the code network can

The factor graph is a visual representation of H, and at the same time a blueprint for an iterative decoder. Figure 1 shows such a factor graph for a N =16 LDPC of constant variable node degree dv=3 and check node degree dc=6, termed a (3,6)regular LDPC code. Node degree indicates how many edges connect to a node, and the term regular denotes constant, rather than varying, node degree. N is the number of variable nodes, and the code length.

be unwrapped into a infinite-sized tree without cycles. This in turn makes all participating messages dependent only on the sub-trees from which they come and allow the computation of statistical properties of these messages, primarily their probability distribution. In practice, the densities need to be tracked numerically since the PDFs of the messages are not resolvable analytically. However, a Gaussian approximation to these probability densities [2] produces very accurate approximations, and is much easier to compute, since only the

parameters of the Gaussian PDF need to be computed.

+ + + + + + + +

In this paper, however, the question of approximations does

not arise, since we work with finite precision message formats,

we are interested in the exact probability mass distribution of

1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 0 1 1 1 2 1 3 1 4 1 5 1 6 these messages. Like in the original density evolutions, these

probability mass functions need to be tracked numerically.

⎡

⎤

1101000010011000

Finally, we wish to comment on the appropriateness of this

H = ⎢⎢⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢

0 0 0 0 1

1 0 0 0 0

1 1 0 0 0

0 1 1 0 0

1 0 1 1 0

0 1 0 1 1

0 0 1 0 1

0 0 0 1 0

1 0 0 0 1

1 1 1 0 0

0 0 1 0 1

0 0 0 0 0

0 0 1 1 0

0 1 0 1 0

1 0 0 1 0

0 1 0 0 1

⎥⎦⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥

methodology for the purpose of energy consumption computations. Density evolution captures the statistical behavior of a message passing decoder with great accuracy, but is not suitable to compute bit error rates, especially in the error floor

0100001100010011 1010000100110100

region of the code. However, power consumption is a statistical

quantity, that is, we are interested in average values, and low

Fig. 1. Factor graph and parity check matrix H corresponding to a regular probability outlier events which may require more power to

[3,6] length-16 LDPC code.

decode are of no consequence to this average value.

572
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:55:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Differential Density Evolution
In order to capture inter-message correlation, as well as statistics of differential signaling to be discussed below, we propose differential DE. As shown in Figure 2, in DE the LDPC network is unwrapped into a tree and the statistics of the outgoing signals are computed assuming independence from the incoming signals due to the tree structure, which is well approximated by a large-size interconnect network. In differential DE we are interested in the evolution of the differences between messages of successive iterations, denoted by Δμ and Δβ. It turns out that we need to keep track of joint distributions.
BΔ(i)|B(i−1)

signal representations used in practice a numerical procedure
is readily feasible. For any subsequent iteration j ≥ 3, a value for Δβ(j−1)
is drawn from BΔ(j−1)|B(j−2), where the input value β(j−2) is the one from the previous iteration associated with a
particular edge. The remainder is straightforward: Generate
the differential values

dv −1

Δμ(j) =

Δβl(j−2)

l=1

as well as

μ(j) = μ(j−1) + Δμ(j)

and β(j), from which the distributions B(j) and BΔ(j)|B(j−1) are calculated. The statistics for all further iterations are computed
by repeating the last steps.

Δμ(1i), μ(1i) y1

Δμ(li), μ(li) yl

Δμ(dic)−1, μd(ic)−1 ydc−1

Δβ(i)|β(i−1)
Fig. 2. Tree segment to compute differential message densities.

In a first step, a received symbol y which is Gaussian
distributed, (see [16, Equation 9.29] for notation) is received
by the variable node and simply transmitted to all connected check nodes, i.e., μ(1) = Δμ(1) = y. The check node connected to this variable node receives μ(1), and dc other μ-values computed in the same way. It computes the check
node output signal according to [16, Equation 9.8]. Numerically a probability distribution of β(1) can be com-
puted by generating sufficient instances of the channel inputs
y1, · · · , ydc . Any signal limitations or finite precision representation can readily be incorporated into this procedure.
From this process we obtain a sample PDF of the first-stage output values β(1), denoted by B(1). Note that the values β(1) = Δβ(1) since all internal variables are set to zero before
each decoding cycle. For the second iteration, random samples Δβi(1) are drawn
from B(1) and fed into the variable nodes as shown in Figure
2. The variable nodes compute the differential output messages

dv −1

μ(1) − μ(2) = Δμ(2) =

Δβi(1)

i=1

as the sum of the differential input messages.
The check nodes can now compute β(2), and their PDF,
denoted by B(2), as well as the PDF of the differential values β(2) − β(1), denoted by BΔ(2). Unfortunately, these statistics are not sufficient, and we also require the conditional PDF of (Δβ(2)|β(1)), denoted by BΔ(2)|B(1). Keeping track of joint statistics is more demanding, but with typical finite-precision

C. Energy Consumption and Signal Activity
There are three dominant sources of energy consumption in digital complementary metal oxide semiconductor (CMOS) integrated circuits, namely static power, short-circuit power, and dynamic power [22]. Static power is due to constant currents throughout the circuit. In digital circuits, current is typically drawn when switching one of the circuit nodes, and hence constant currents only exist in the form of leakage currents - parasitic currents due to second-order effects such as reverse-biased currents in PN junctions and gate tunneling. Short-circuit power is consumed during switching events, for the very brief period where the input voltage to a logic gate is approximately half of the supply voltage; at this point both PMOS and NMOS transistors are switched on, creating a direct current path from the supply voltage to ground; shortcircuit power is thus closely related to the rate at which switching events occur. Finally, dynamic power describes the rate at which energy is used to switch the voltages representing logic values, on circuit capacitances. When raising the voltage on a capacitance C from 0 to VDD through a PMOS transistor to create a logic 1, CVD2D/2 is stored onto the capacitor, while the same amount is dissipated as heat through the transistor. Then, when discharging the capacitor through an NMOS transistor to create a logic 0, the CVD2D/2 of energy that was stored on the capacitor is dissipated as heat through the NMOS transistor. Thus, over a time period where a capacitor goes through a 0-to-1-to-0 cycle, a total of CVD2D joules of power is consumed. We typically express this time period in terms of a clock frequency fCLK, and the proportion of clock cycles during which we observe a 0-to-1 transition, α, is called the activity factor. Summing up the power consumption over all nodes we obtain the total dynamic power as

Pdyn =

αnodefCLKCnodeVD2D.

(3)

nodes

In this paper we focus on the design of sum-product algorithm message formats where the activity factor α is low, leading to low dynamic power consumption. Since the activity factor varies with iterations, we will focus on the total number

573
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:55:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of 0-to-1 transitions observed during a decoding cycle. We will call this the transition count, which is given by

T=

αiteration.

(4)

iterations

We define a transition count for the output of variable nodes Tvar and one for the output of check nodes Tchk. Of course we could also define such counts for the internal computations of variable and check nodes but for simplicity we will omit these, arguing that the interconnect network consumes the majority of the power, and that any power consumed in the nodes will (at least approximately) track the activity on its incoming and outgoing message lines.
In [17], [18], DE is used as a mechanism to predict the transition count values for a stochastic iterative decoding algorithm [23], [24], with very close agreement between DE results and tabulations from bit-true Monte Carlo simulations. Here we extend this basic idea to conventional (non-stochastic) message formats. Assuming quantized messages, each message bin in a DE pdf is assigned a binary representation, e.g., 2’s complement message or a sign-and-magnitude. The conversion to a message format affects the actual 1’s and 0’s that will be sent over the interconnect network. The DE output gives us information about the message frequency, and therefore permits the evaluation of transition counts.

III. POWER EFFICIENT MESSAGE FORMATS
A. Bit Serial Message Passing
Various methodologies for constructing LDPC decoder integrated circuits have been reported in the literature. Among these we see memory-based approaches [25] and parallel approaches [14], [26]. In the former, decoding throughput is limited by the number of computational units that are used and the number of simultaneous memory accesses that can be performed. In the latter, the achievable code size is limited by the silicon area required to fully implement a code. In the approach in [14], an n-bit LLR message is transmitted over the interleaver using a bundle of n wires. This large number of wires limits the density of computation in terms of silicon area. As an alternative, bit-serial approaches in which n message bits are transmitted over single wires using n clock cycles have recently been proposed and built [27], [28]. Bitserial messaging allows for much larger area utilization than the routing intensive parallel message format.
We will now characterize the transition counts for bit-serial message passing algorithms by tabulating the frequency of 0to-1 transitions in bit-serial messages. For each message we assume MSB-first transmission. Therefore we must count the number of 0-to-1 transitions in each message representation, and DE givess the frequency of each message at each iteration.
For simplicity we will conduct DE assuming the all-zero codeword. However this will bias the estimate of the transition since the representation for positive and negative numbers differ in the amount of 0-to-1 transitions, due to the fact that the one and zero representation have different MSB values. However, the linearity of the code allows us to easily

Average transitions per message

incorporate this imbalance in the tabulation process. Consider the transition from message S1XXXX → S2XXXX, where S1 and S2 are the sign bits of these messages. If the transmitted bit variable connected to these messages was a one instead of the zero from the all-zero codeword assumption, the transition would be S1XXXX → S2XXXX instead, where S1 and S2 are the opposite values of S1 and S2. The algorithm simply considers both transitions and weighs them by half each, assuming uniformly distributed variable bits in the codeword generated by a uniform input information bit distribution.
2.5
Optimized for low LLR values 2

1.5
Conventional LLR format
1

0.5

0

0

5

Var Node, Conv Chk Node, Conv

Optimized for high LLR values

10

15

20

25

Iteration

Var Node, Low 0 Chk Node, Low 0 Var Node, High 0

30 Chk Node, High 0

Fig. 3. Number of transitions versus iterations in the waterfall region for (3,6)-regular LDPC codes with bit-serial message passing and 5-bit messages, at signal-to-noise ratio of 1.8dB.
Figure 3 shows the average transition count at each iteration, in the waterfall region, for both variable node outputs and check node outputs for a (3,6)-regular LDPC code ensemble with 5-bit messages, using a min-sum algorithm. The maximum LLR magnitude that can be represented is 3.75 divided by the noise variance. In the figure we used three different message representation formats. The first is a conventional sign-and-magnitude representation (labeled CONV). However, we note that as the decoder converges, the messages all converge to the maximum LLR values. We therefore crafted two other message formats: one where there are fewest transitions for low LLR values (labeled LOW 0), which would have few transitions towards the beginning of decoding, and one where there are the fewest transitions for high LLR values (labeled HIGH 0), which would have the fewest transitions once the decoder has converged. Of course the creation of these crafted message values would require a form of lookup table in the hardware realization, which would come at a possbly higher cost than the conventional message format. As expected, the HIGH 0 message format has the lowest number of transitions as the decoder converges.
B. Differential Messaging
We would like to craft message formats such that the decoder stops consuming dynamic power as a decoder converges. One such message format is a differential message format,

574
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:55:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

where the difference between the current LLR and the previous LLR is sent across the interleaver. A block diagram for such a decoder is shown in Figure 4.

Figure 5 shows the transition count at each iteration, at 1.8dB, for both variable node outputs and check node outputs for a (3,6)-regular LDPC code ensemble. Once more we used three different message representation formats. The first is a conventional sign-and-magnitude representation of the LLR difference. Since the LLRs used 5 bits, we assumed a 6-bit representation of the difference, and label it as 6b. We also used a 5-bit difference, where we saturated the difference when it reached the maximum values that could be represented using the 5-bit format (labeled 5b). We also crafted a message format where message representations with low transitions counts were used for low LLR difference values (labeled LOW 0).
Since LLR differences converge to 0, and all message formats represent this value as a sequence of zeros without transitions, activity converges to zero for all message formats. However, as we expect, the LOW 0 message format has the lowest number of transitions before convergence.

45

Transitions per Iteration Transition Count

Fig. 4. System block diagram of a message passing decoder that transmits differential LLR messages over the code interconnect network.
Unfortunately, traditional DE provides statistics on LLRs, but not on their dynamic behavior, in other words, how signals change from iteration to iteration. In order to derive these statistics, we use the differential DE from Section II-B.
C. Differential Message Passing
We now evaluate the differential message passing scheme using the differential DE tool. Again we use the all-zero codeword but account for 50% of the bits being logic ones in the algorithm. We once more assume a bit-serial MSB-first transmission. We observed that message differences greater than 3 in magnitude are rare, even though with a maximum LLR magnitude is 3.75 a difference up to 7.5 is possible. We also notice that as the decoder converges, the probability of a difference of 0 becomes very high.

1.6 Check nodes: 5 bits and 6 bits
1.4

1.2

1

Variable nodes

5 bits and 6 bits

0.8

0.6

0.4 Optimized for low LLR values
0.2

0 0
Var Node, 6b

5 Chk Node, 6b

10

15

Iteration

Var Node, 5b

Chk Node, 5b

20

25

Var Node, Low 0

30 Chk Node, Low 0

Fig. 5. Number of transitions vs iteration in waterfall region for a (3,6)regular LDPC code ensemble with differential bit-serial message passing and 5-bit messages, at 1.8dB.

40 Check nodes: 5 bits and 6 bits
35

Variable nodes:

30

5 bits and 6 bits

25

20

15 Optimized for low LLR values
10

5

0

1.6

1.65

1.7

1.75

1.8

1.85

1.9

1.95

2

Eb/N0

Tvar, 6b

Tchk, 6b

Tvar, 5b

Tchk, 5b

Tvar, Low 0

Tchk, Low 0

Fig. 6. Transition Density vs Eb/N0 for (3,6)-regular code ensemble with differential bit serial message passing, 5-bit messages, check node and variable
node outputs, tabulated over 32 iterations.

Figure 6 shows the total transition counts for variable and check node outputs, over all iterations, as a function of Eb/N0. Similarly to the non-differential case, the crafted message format has the lowest transition count in the SNR region of interest. At an SNR of 2dB, we have observed a twothirds reduction in variable node activity from the conventional LLR message format to the differential format crafted for low transitions. The reduction in the check nodes is similar.
Figure 7 shows the transition counts for a decoder using parallel message passing with differential messages. Two sets of curves are shown, both sets contain variable node and check node activity figures. The first set is derived with the differential density evolution approach discussed in this paper, the second set of figures is derived from a fixed-point Csimulations specifically engineered to keep count of the bit changes in the messages. Results are shown for a regular (3,6) code of length n = 10, 000 with 32 iterations. As can be seen, the two results show good agreement, validating our analytical approach. Note that the activity figures for the simulated code are shifted towards higher SNR values, and show a less

575
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:55:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

pronounced “waterfall” effect. This is completely analogous

REFERENCES

to the finite-sized code’s error behavior, which relates to the [1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon Limit Error-

ideal performance threshold of an infinite-sized code in the

Correcting Coding and Decoding: Turbo-Codes”, IEEE Intl. Conf. on

same way (see [16]). The results again show that there is about a three-fold power difference between the low bit error rate regime and the high-noise regime of the code.

Communications, Vol. 2, pp. 1064–1070, May 1993. [2] S.-Y. Chung, T.J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, ”Analysis of sum-product
decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 657–670, February, 2001. [3] R.G. Gallager, “Low Density Parity Check Codes”, IRE Trans. on Inf. Theory, Vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, 1962.

40

[4] D. Mackay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low

Density Parity Check Codes,” IEE Electronics Letters, Vol. 32, No. 18,

35

pp. 1645-1646, 1996.

[5] IEEE, “IEEE 802.3 CSMA-CD: Ethernet,” http : //ieee802.org/3/.

30

Check nodes -- top

[6] C. Winstead, J. Die, S. Yu, C. Myers, R. Harrison, and C. Schlegel,

Variable nodes -- bottom

“CMOS Analog MAP Decoder for (8,4) Hamming Code,” IEEE J. Solid

25

Simulations

State Cir., pp. 122-131, vol. 39, no. 1, Jan. 2004.

Transition Count

[7] S. Hemati, A.H. Banihashemi, and C. Plett, “A 0.18-um CMOS Ana-

20

log Min-Sum Iterative Decoder for a (32,8) Low-Density Parity-Check

(LDPC) Code,” IEEE J. Solid-State Cir., Vol. 41, Nov. 2006.

15
10
Check nodes -- top Variable nodes -- bottom Density Evolution
5

[8] M. Moerz, T. Gabara, R. Yan, and J. Hagenauer, “An Analog 0.25um BiCMOS Tailbiting MAP Decoder,” 2000 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference Digest of Technical Papers, pp. 356-357, Feb. 2000.
[9] V. Gaudet and G. Gulak, “A 13.3Mbps 0.35um CMOS Analog Turbo Decoder IC with a Configurable Interleaver,” IEEE J. Solid-State Cir.,

Vol. 38, No. 11, pp. 2010-2015, Nov. 2003.

0 1.6

1.7

1.8

1.9

[10] D. Vogrig, A. Gerosa, A. Neviani, A. Graell I Amat, G. Montorsi, and

2

2.1

2.2

2.3

2.4

2.5

S. Benedetto, “A 0.35um CMOS Analog Turbo Decoder for the 40-bit

Eb/N0

Rate 1/3 UMTS Channel Code,” IEEE J. Solid-State Cir., Mar. 2005.

Fig. 7. Transition density vs Eb/N0 for (3,6)-regular codes with differential bit-parallel message passing, 5-bit messages. Results are shown for differential density evolution as well as for a simulated size n = 10, 000 code.
D. Relation to Energy Consumption

[11] F. Lustenberger, M. Helfenstein, G. Moschytz, H.-A. Loeliger, and F. Tarkoy, “AllAnalog Decoder for a Binary (18,9,5) TailBiting Trellis Code,” European Solid-State Circuits Conf., pp. 362-365, Sept. 1999.
[12] N. Nguyen, C. Winstead, V. Gaudet, and C. Schlegel, “Low-Voltage CMOS Circuits for Analog Iterative Decoders,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I, Vol. 53, No. 4, pp. 829-841, Apr. 2006.

In a (3,6)-regular LDPC code, each information bit is attached to 6 interconnect wires from variable nodes, and 6 wires from check nodes. To compute the energy consumption

[13] A. Blanksby and C. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, Rate-1/2 Low-Density Parity-Check Code Decoder,” IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, Vol. 37, No. 2, pp. 404-412, Mar. 2002.
[14] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The Capacity of Low-Density Parity-

per information bit we need the supply voltage and capacitance per wire. An assumption of 1V and 0.5pF is reasonable. With this we obtain

Ebit = (CVD2D)(6Tvar + 6Tchk).

(5)

For the differential messaging with messages crafted for low

Check Codes Under Message-Passing Decoding,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, February 2001. [15] C. Schlegel and L. Perez, Trellis and Turbo Coding, Wiley, 2004. [16] V. C. Gaudet and W. J. Gross, “On Density Evolution and Dynamic Power Estimation in Stochastic Iterative Decoders,” in Proceedings of the Fifth Analog Decoding Workshop, (Torino, Italy), June 2006. [17] V. Gaudet and W. Gross, “Evaluating Energy Consumption Profiles of Stochastic LDPC Decoders,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Commun.

transition counts, this results in an energy per bit of 61pJ per information bit, as opposed to 182 pJ for the original scheme. A 1Gbps decoder would therefore consume 61mW.
IV. CONCLUSIONS
We have proposed and demonstrated the use of differential density evolution (DDE) for the prediction of energy consump-

[18] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor Graphs and the Sum-Product Algorithm,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, Vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[19] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal Decoding of Linear Codes for Minimizing Symbol Error Rate”, IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, Vol. IT-20, pp. 284-287, Mar. 1974.
[20] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference, Morgan Kaufmann 1988.
[21] J. Rabaey, A. Chandrakasan, and B. Nikolic, Digital Integrated Circuits

tion in interleaver networks of LDPC codes for a variety of message passing formats. With differential message passing scheme we have shown substantial possible reductions in decoder energy consumption. Differential messaging saves close to an order of magnitude in power compared to conventional messaging. A further overall reduction of approximately two-

Prentice Hall 2003. [22] V. C. Gaudet and A. Rapley, “Iterative Decoding Using Stochastic
Computation,” IEE Electronics Letters, vol. 39, pp. 200-301, Feb. 6, 2003. [23] S. Sharifi-Tehrani, W. J. Gross, and S. Mannor, “Stochastic Decoding
of LDPC Codes,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 10, Oct. 2006. [24] E. Liao, E. Yeo, and B. Nikolic, “Low-Density Parity-Check Code Con-
structions for Hardware Implementation,” IEEE International Conference on Communications, pp. 2573-2577, Paris, France, June 2004.

thirds in energy consumption is achieved using 5-bit messages. The results have been confirmed via simulation and actual activity counting in a large LDPC code. We foresee that an extension of this technique to irregular LDPC and Turbo codes is quite straightforward, providing researchers with a tool not only to predict power consumption of iterative decoders, but allowing the design of messaging formats and the trade-off of performance versus power at the implementation stage.

[25] M. Mansour and N. Shanbhag, “High-Throughput LDPC Decoders,” IEEE Transactions on VLSI Systems, Vol. 11, No. 6, Dec. 2003.
[26] A. Darabiha, A. Carusone, and F. Kshischang, “A Bit-Serial Approximate Min-Sum LDPC Decoder and FPGA Implementation,” IEEE International Symposium on Circuits and Systems, Greece, May 2006.
[27] T. Brandon, R. Hang, G. Block, V. Gaudet, B. Cockburn, S. Howard, C. Giasson, K. Boyle, P. Goud, S. S. Zeinoddin, A. Rapley, S. Bates, D. Elliott, and C. Schlegel, “A 250-Mbps Min-Sum LDPC Decoder with Bit-Serial Message Exchange,” submitted to Elsevier Integration - The VLSI Journal, 18 pages, Dec. 2007.

576
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:55:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

