IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019

1

Analysis of the Joint Viterbi Detector/Decoder (JVDD) Over a Coded AWGN/ISI System as an LDPC Alternative
Kheong Sann Chan , Senior Member, IEEE, and Susanto Rahardja , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—The joint Viterbi detector/decoder (JVDD) has been proposed as an alternative to the powerful and ubiquitous lowdensity parity check (LDPC) coding schemes, that are used in the majority of channel coding applications today. At shorter block lengths, the JVDD is able to outperform the state-ofthe-art LDPC decoder that can be found in many of today’s systems, from deep-space communications to the digital video broadcasting standard, to the advanced television standard committee 3.0. Researchers have developed the tools to analyze the performance of the LDPC decoder, which is known as the sumproduct algorithm or message passing algorithm. These tools include density evolution (DE) and extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts. To date, no similar such analysis exists for the JVDD. In the current paper we perform a similar preliminary analysis on the JVDD algorithm akin to what DE and EXIT charts are for the LDPC decoder. The current new analysis of the JVDD allows prediction of its probability of error based on the probability distribution functions of the metrics used within the algorithm. Our analysis plays a similar role to the abovementioned tools developed for the LDPC decoder: it allows us to predict the performance of the JVDD under various conditions (such as varying SNR’s, thresholds, and block lengths), it improves our understanding of the JVDD algorithm and the match against Monte-Carlo simulations verifies our assumptions on the main error-causing mechanisms within the JVDD.
Index Terms—ISI channels, JVDD analysis, iterative detector, LDPC codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW DENSITY parity check (LDPC) codes are widely used in broadcasting and communications applications because of their very good, capacity-approaching performance over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. They are currently part of the digital video broadcasting - satellite version 2 (DVB-S2) standard [1]–[3], digital video broadcasting - terrestrial version 2 (DVB-T2) standard [4], [5], the advanced television systems committee 3.0 (ATSC 3.0) [6]–[8] standard, and they are also used in the
Manuscript received October 6, 2017; revised January 25, 2018 and May 4, 2018; accepted June 18, 2018. Date of publication August 13, 2018; date of current version March 4, 2019. (Corresponding author: Susanto Rahardja.)
K. S. Chan is with the Communication Engineering School, Nanjing Institute of Technology, Nanjing 211167, China (e-mail: chanks@njit.edu.cn).
S. Rahardja is with the School of Marine Science and Technology, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, China (e-mail: susanto@nwpu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2018.2855646

hard disk drive channel [9]. The reason for their widespread acceptance in many communications applications is because of their capacity approaching performance over an AWGN channel which gives them the ability to achieve higher data rates and lower error rates within the limited bandwidth and signalto-noise ratio (SNR) of a communications channel. However to achieve the full potential of their performance, the block size of the code and computational complexity of the decoder need to be large, leading to longer processing delays and greater computing and memory resources.
LDPC codes were initially proposed in Gallager’s thesis in 1963 [10] and are defined by a parity check matrix that is sparse. Not a lot of subsequent attention was paid to LDPC codes until the 1990’s when the impressive performance of Turbo codes was discovered [11] and LDPC codes were then re-discovered [12]–[14] to outperform the Turbo codes with the advent of the iterative decoding algorithms of the sum-product algorithm or message passing algorithm (SPA or MPA) on factor graphs [15], [16]. When the LDPC codes are used over an AWGN channel with intersymbol interference (ISI), they are typically employed in conjunction with a softoutput detection scheme such as the Bahl, Cocke, Jelinek, Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [17] (also known as the maximum a-posteriori probability, or MAP detector) or the soft output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) [18]. The soft-output detector produces a-posteriori probabilities (APP) for the channel bits which are fed into the SPA decoder in a scheme known as turbo equalization [19], [20], or the iterative detector/decoder (IDD). In this turbo equalization framework, information is iterated between the detector and decoder until a valid codeword is achieved at the end of the decoding, at which point the iterations end. While the above-described IDD relies on exchanging increasingly refined information between two independent blocks, it might be thought that a more integrated and holistic approach could possibly achieve better performance.
It is within this context that researchers have more recently been exploring the possibility of doing the detection and decoding of the turbo-equalization setup, jointly rather than separately (iteratively). The standard IDD (shown in the upper branch of Fig. 1) consists of a SOVA detector that typically operates over a trellis, combined with the LDPC decoder that operates over a factor graph and iteratively exchanges information between the two algorithms operating on the two individual and separate data structures. An approach to

0018-9316 c 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019

Fig. 1. A coded communication system block diagram depicting the stateof-the art iterative detector/decoder (IDD) at the top and the competing joint Viterbi detector/decoder (JVDD) at the bottom. The channel consists of an encoder block followed by the channel model, which is the AWGN/ISI channel for the purposes of this work. On the receiver side is the SOVA or BCJR detector followed by the LDPC decoder. The proposed competing detector/decoder is the JVDD shown below. Both detection schemes attempt to return the transmitted code word cˆk with minimum probability of error.
perform the detection and decoding jointly, is to modify the underlying algorithm and supporting data structure of one of the operations into that supported by the other, and then running the same algorithm (or a modification of it) on the same data structure to accomplish both operations jointly. In other words, the approach would be either to modify the detection operation to function on a factor graph, or modify decoding operation to function on a trellis.
Narasimhan et al. [21], Colavolpe and Germi [22], and Taghavi and Siegel [23] take the approach of replacing the soft-output detector with a version that operates on a factor graph. The detector and decoder factor graphs can be combined into a single factor graph that encompasses both the operations and the MPA can run over the combined graph. This has the advantage that the operations on the factor graph are less resource demanding than those on the trellis. However, the Viterbi and BCJR algorithms are both optimal when the noise is AWGN. Thus any replacement of the BCJR/SOVA with an alternative implementation cannot result in a performance better than the (previously optimal) original.
Chan et al. [24] have proposed the joint Viterbi detector/decoder (JVDD) that removes the LDPC decoder box, and combines the detection and decoding operations onto the channel trellis. As the decoder component (consisting of the MPA running over a factor-graph) of the turbo-equalization scheme is not optimal, replacing this suboptimal portion with something new, has a chance of producing a combined algorithm that performs better than before. Indeed, the JVDD is optimal over an AWGN/ISI channel if it is given sufficient resources. However the optimality comes with a cost: as noted above, the algorithms operating over the trellis tend to be more resource-demanding than algorithms over the factor graph and the computational complexity of the JVDD can render it practically intractable, especially as the block size grows.
Nevertheless, the JVDD’s performance can be traded-off against its complexity by modifying its internal parameters. Knowing how well such a conditionally optimal algorithm performs at different block-sizes, code rates and complexity/performance trade-offs, is of interest to those searching for the best performing algorithm at the lowest cost. In the current paper we develop a novel method to predict the performance

of the JVDD based on the distributions of its internal metrics and analyze its performance compared to Monte-Carlo simulations.
The JVDD is depicted in the lower branch of Fig. 1, and is the proposed scheme for reliably retrieving data over a coded AWGN/ISI channel that we analyze in this work. The JVDD outperforms the conventional IDD with the LDPC decoder over the AWGN/ISI channel when computational resources are sufficient. This condition of resource sufficiency is easily met when the codeword length (or block size) is short, but gets more challenging as the codeword length increases. LDPC codes were initially proposed by Gallager [10], later re-discovered in the 1990’s [12], [13] and a subsequent flurry of interest has led to significant research into their analysis and methods to design better codes. The performance analysis and design of LDPC codes has been analyzed and discussed in [12] and [25]–[30].
MacKay and Neal [12] discuss the sum-product algorithm that performs very well in the decoding of LDPC codes. The performance of the SPA with LDPC codes was found to give rise to a thresholding effect in which error-free communication is possible if, and only if the noise is below a threshold, asymptotically as the codeword length tends to infinity. Above such a threshold, the error probability does not drop even as the codeword length approaches infinity, as was suggested in Shannon’s classic paper [31]. In [25], an analysis based on the exchange of extrinsic information was proposed via extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) charts that enabled the design of high performing LDPC codes.
In [26], they have defined the threshold for an ensemble of irregular codes and developed a method named density evolution (DE) which allows the calculation if the densities of the messages iterated during decoding, and thereby analyze the performance of the SPA. DE can also be used to design high performing LDPC codes. As DE is computationally expensive to perform, in [27] and [28], they have made a simplifying assumption by using a Gaussian approximation for the densities to make the analysis more tractable. Sharon et al. [29] have computed the exact expressions for the EXIT functions of repetition and single parity check codes and generalized on the EXIT chart methods proposed in [25], giving a faster and more accurate approximation to the DE algorithm. Li et al. [30] have proposed and analyzed a construction algorithm of a subclass of LDPC codes named quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes. These codes are particularly suitable for hardware implementation due to their underlying structure.
However the JVDD is a more recently proposed algorithm [24] that is neither based on factor graphs, nor on the SPA, and it has not yet been subjected to the same degree of analysis as the IDD. Indeed, the same tools used to analyze performance of the SPA, such as DE/EXIT charts, cannot be applied to the JVDD, as the JVDD operates over a trellis while DE/EXIT charts are applicable to factor graphs. In this paper, we perform the preliminary steps in the analogous task of analyzing the performance of the JVDD by measuring and extrapolating the distributions of several of the key metrics in the JVDD algorithm, and then comparing the performances of the simulated and predicted frame error rate (FER) results.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHAN AND RAHARDJA: ANALYSIS OF JVDD OVER CODED AWGN/ISI SYSTEM AS LDPC ALTERNATIVE

3

Fig. 2. The JVDD trellis diagram depicting the 2 key operations of the JVDD: metric thresholding that occurs at every time instant, and parity checking, that occurs at those instances in the trellis corresponding to the last 1 of some row of the parity check matrix H.
Such analysis will help in the understanding and prediction of the JVDD performance under various conditions and would enable it to progress towards its potential as a viable alternative to the commercialized IDD.
The paper is divided into the following sections. In Section II we describe the JVDD algorithm and the methodology we develop to analyze its expected performance while in Section III we measure the key statistical parameters that are needed in the JVDD analysis. In Section IV we use the statistics from the metrics measured in the previous section to derive the probability of a frame error for the JVDD and then in Section V we compare that error against those measured via Monte-Carlo simulations. Finally we conclude in Section VI.
II. THE JVDD ALGORITHM
The JVDD performs the detection and decoding, jointly on a single trellis as depicted in Fig. 2. The goal of the JVDD is to return the minimum-metric legal codeword (MMLC), that is, the bit pattern that simultaneously has the smallest metric, and is a legal codeword. It is a legal codeword if it satisfies the syndrome check cHT = 0 where c is the candidate codeword and H is the parity check matrix of the code. The metric mentioned above, is the same metric computed in the conventional Viterbi algorithm.
To achieve this desired goal, the JVDD has 2 stages for managing a list of survivors. Firstly, it uses the Viterbi algorithm to obtain a set of low metric survivor paths that are contenders for the MMLC. Secondly, at certain points in the trellis, the JVDD performs parity checks on the surviving paths, eliminating those that are not legal codewords. What emerges at the end of the trellis, is necessarily a legal codeword, and if it is not lost during the earlier stages of the algorithm, that codeword is also the MMLC.
To keep the size of the survivor list manageable, the JVDD also defines a threshold. Any survivor with a metric larger than the minimum metric plus the threshold, is discarded as it is unlikely to be the MMLC. However, in the event that the MMLC is discarded due to the thresholding, the JVDD will fail to return the MMLC and makes an error. In this analysis, we assume this to be the dominant mechanism through which the JVDD makes errors: by discarding the MMLC because its metric exceeds the minimum metric by a value greater than the stipulated threshold and we evaluate the probability of this event occurring. In fact, we define 2 types of error events in this work as follows:

Type-1: The JVDD loses the MMLC during thresholding. When this happens, either the JVDD fails to return a codeword, or returns an incorrect codeword, making an error in either case.
Type-2: The JVDD manages to keep the MMLC and returns it at the end of the trellis. However due to the noise, the MMLC was not the transmitted codeword, and the JVDD is in error.
It is noted that the type-1 error is exclusively associated with the JVDD algorithm, while the type-2 error occurs for any detector/decoder. In this paper, we evaluate the probability of the type-1 error occurring. In reality the JVDD will make both type-1 and type-2 errors. However the approach we take is progressive and systematic: we compute the probability of type-1 errors in the current work and validate this computation against simulation results while the computation of the type-2 errors is left for a future work. When only type-1 errors are included in the analysis, we expect to see the prediction of the error rate to be good in the situations where the type-1 errors dominate, and less good in those situations where they do not. When type-2 errors are included into the analysis in the future, the prediction of the JVDD errors will improve in accuracy over a greater range of system parameters. This work takes the first step by analyzing the occurrence of the type-1 errors only.
Our methodology is to gather statistics on the metrics of the survivors in the JVDD trellis and to proceed to fit known distributions to the metric statistics. We then attempt to obtain parameters on these distributions as the time index k increases. Based on these parameter distributions, we can predict the probability that the MMLC is lost due to metric thresholding. Even if it is not lost due to the thresholding, the MMLC still has a non-zero probability of making a type-2 error. In the current analysis, we focus exclusively on the probability of the type-1 error of losing the MMLC due to thresholding. Thus our analysis constitutes in a sense, a lower bound on the probability of the JVDD as a function of the SNR and of the threshold. Type-2 errors will be included into the model and the analysis in the future.
III. STATISTICS OF THE JVDD METRICS
The statistics of the JVDD metrics were obtained numerically by running the JVDD algorithm and binning the frequency of occurrence of the desired metrics. It is noted that the JVDD metric is the same as the metric used in the Viterbi algorithm, and that the metric counted here is the path metric for each survivor. For the simulations, an ideal AWGN/ISI channel is used with SNR=10 dB and the 4-tap ISI coefficients were [1,2,2,1]. The exact values of these ISI coefficients are non-critical for the purposes of this analysis and were selected as they have a typical pulse shaped response that could easily be the choice of an equalizer target. A random JVDD code with codeword length (CWL) = 64 and rate R=0.8 was used for testing the methods developed in this paper. The particular code used is shown in Fig. 3. This code was generated randomly, subjected to the JVDD construction constraint that the last ones in each row of the parity check matrix are evenly

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019

Fig. 3. The parity check matrix of the N=64, M=13, R=0.8 JVDD code used in these simulations. Black squares denote ones while the white region denotes zeros within the parity check matrix H of this code.

distributed throughout the trellis. Such a code is constructed with the JVDD requirements in mind and is less suitable for the IDD, as the parity check matrix is neither designed to be low-density, nor to eliminate short-cycles. The exact structure of the code is not a critical choice from the perspective of this analysis, so long as it is a good code, which randomly generated codes are generally known to be. As the focus of this paper is on the analysis the JVDD algorithm, we hold the code constant in this paper to the one shown in Fig. 3.
As the JVDD algorithm progresses, the branch metrics (which are always positive numbers) accumulate and the JVDD path metrics necessarily grow in magnitude. Hence the JVDD-metric distribution depends on and varies with the time index k. The metric histograms for sample values of k = 10, k = 35 and k = 62 corresponding to near the beginning, around the middle and near the end of the trellis, are shown in Fig. 4.

A. Metric Distributions
There are 4 sets of metric distributions shown in the plots of Fig. 4, and that exist at any time instant k. The red points correspond to the metric distribution for all metrics existing in the JVDD trellis (at time k), the green points correspond to the metric distribution for the minimum metric in the JVDD trellis, the blue points represent the correct metric in the JVDD trellis and the purple points are the difference between the correct (blue) and minimum (green) distributions. For the purposes of gathering the statistics of the correct and difference distributions, the correct bit sequence was supplied to the JVDD algorithm in this case, though in normal usage this would not be available to the algorithm. On observing the distributions, it was hypothesized that the minimum and correct metrics each follow a log-normal distribution given by:

1

(log(x) − μ)2

f (x) = √ exp − xσ 2π

2σ 2

.

(1)

A random variable X with a log-normal distribution can be written as X = eY where Y has normal distribution with parameters μ and σ . The log of X is then normally distributed. μ and σ are the mean and standard deviation of the normally distributed random variable Y. The mean and variance of the
log-normal distribution X are then given as:

mean = exp μ + σ 2 and 2

var = exp σ 2 − 1 exp 2μ + σ 2

(2)

respectively.

We can easily estimate the mean and variance of our metric distributions in Fig. 4 and then compute the μ and σ param-

eters of the assumed underlying log-normal distributions as:

σ 2 = log

var mean2

+

1

and

μ = 2 log [mean] − σ 2

(3)

which when substituted into equation (1) produces the best-fit log-normal curves shown in Fig. 4. It is observed that while the minimum and correct JVDD-metrics seem to follow a lognormal distribution quite well, the totality of the metrics (red points) do not, and thus have not been fit with log-normal curves in Fig. 4. For the purpose of our analysis, we note that the JVDD algorithm compares the minimum metric with each metric in the list and discards that metric if it is greater than the minimum metric plus a user-defined threshold. The JVDD error-event that we are targeting in this paper occurs when the correct metric exceeds the minimum metric by more than the threshold, in which case, the correct survivor path will be discarded making a type-1 error.
The purple distribution in Fig. 4 captures the statistics of the difference between the correct and minimum metrics and it is interesting to see that these values seem to follow an exponential-like distribution. It is also interesting to note that while the minimum (green) and correct (blue) distributions change with k (they generally increase with k), the difference distribution (purple) seems to be relatively constant with k. It is the behavior of this difference distribution that we are primarily interested in because the JVDD makes its dominant error whenever the true path metric exceeds the minimum path metric by more than the threshold: th, or equivalently, when the difference distribution exceeds th. We therefore need an accurate model for this difference distribution. In particular, we want to get the tails of this distribution modeled accurately in order to make predictions in the low-error rate regime.
One interesting noteworthy feature of this difference distribution is the existence of a delta-spike at 0, apart from which, the distribution seems to fit an exponential distribution quite well. This delta-spike implies that there is a higher probability that the correct metric is the minimum metric. This is naturally true when k is small and there is not much noise. For the purposes of modeling and predicting the probability of error of the JVDD, we find the best-fit curve through the points excluding the delta-spike. Including the delta-spike in the curve-fitting will skew the distribution towards the low values, rendering it less useful for predicting what might happen at the higher values of the distribution that have lower probabilities. It is noted that unlike with the log-normal fits, the best fit line for the difference distribution shown in Fig. 4 is not a probability density function (pdf), as the integral under the curve = 1. Rather than fitting the standard exponential distribution: f (x) = λe−λx, we have instead fit a 2 parameter exponential function of the form:

f (x) = Ae−Bx

(4)

solving for A and B that minimizes the difference between the points and the curve, excluding the delta-spike. This yields the best fit difference distribution curves shown in Fig. 4

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHAN AND RAHARDJA: ANALYSIS OF JVDD OVER CODED AWGN/ISI SYSTEM AS LDPC ALTERNATIVE

5

Fig. 4. Metric histograms for k = 10 (left), k = 35 (center), k = 62 (right). The bin size for accumulating the metrics was set to 1, and the metric frequency was averaged over 1000 frames of the JVDD execution. The red points correspond to the distribution of all the metrics in the JVDD list, the green points are the distribution of the minimum JVDD metric in the list, the blue points are the distribution of the correct path’s metric in the JVDD list and the magenta are the difference between correct and minimum metrics. Log-normal distribution curves have been fit to the minimum and correct metric distributions and they fit the simulated data very well. An exponential form is fit to the difference metric, it too produces a good fit.

Fig. 5. The metric histograms varying the threshold parameter on the top row, and the channel SNR on the bottom. In all cases, the distribution at a constant time of k = 35 is used. For the variable threshold plots, the SNR is held constant at 5 dB while for the variable SNR, the threshold is held constant at 20.

and it is seen that the difference distribution seems relatively independent of k.
To get a better idea of how these distributions behave, we plot the metric histograms at varying thresholds and SNRs in Fig. 5. The top row shows an interesting deviation from log-normal assumption in the minimum metric when the threshold is small with a “tail” appearing in the minimum and total metric distributions. The phenomenon disappears at larger thresholds. The reason is because at small thresholds, the MMLC can be lost during the thresholding. The existence of the correct path in the list of survivors, ensures that the minimum metric value cannot grow larger than the correct metric value, which, being the correct metric, is small. If the correct metric path is lost, then this constraint

on the minimum metric is removed, and as the previously smaller metric paths start to die, either through thresholding, or more likely, through parity checking, the remaining minimum metric paths should naturally be larger than they otherwise would have been. This creates a “tail” in the minimum (and total) metric distribution that causes it to deviate from our previous log-normal assumption. However, the correct metric distribution remains log-normal, as it is only counted in those cases where it has survived and things are status quo. This also explains why there are cases where the minimum metric (green) distribution has values that exceed in value the correct (blue) metric distribution. In those particular cases, the correct metric distribution has been lost due to the thresholding, as just mentioned, and thus does not appear

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019

probability that the difference metric exceeds the threshold:

P(losing the MMLC at time k) = P(Xk > th) (5)

where Xk is a random variable taken from a distribution with parameters Ak and Bk of the exponential form in equation (4). It is noted that the fact that the exponential form does not

satisfy the integral Ak exp(−Bkx) = 1 does not matter for the purposes of our analysis. We are interested in the behavior

of the tails of the distribution, that are appropriately modeled

by the exponential form. We can easily evaluate the probability

in equation (5) as:

P(Xk > th) =

∞ th

Ak

exp(−Bkx)dx

=

Ak Bk

exp(−Bk

·

th),

(6)

Fig. 6. Evolution of μ and σ 2 as a function of k for the minimum (green) and correct (blue) metric distributions, and Ak and Bk for the difference distribution. The μ parameters are marked with × and have been fitted with a logarithmic function while the σ 2 parameters are marked with an o and are fitted with a exponential functions (y = αeβx + γ ). The purple points are the Ak and Bk parameters of the difference distribution: y = Ak exp(−Bkx). SNR=10 dB, threshold=20, CWL=64 and R=0.8 in this simulation.
in the plot. Another interesting observation in the top row plots of Fig. 5 is that the difference metric that we are primarily interested in, is relatively unaffected by the threshold parameter.
The second row of plots in Fig. 5 show the metric variation with SNR, and other interesting observations can be made here. At higher SNRs, the branch metrics are all smaller and therefore, so are the path metrics, leading to the smaller values of all 4 distributions. We can see that the steep drop-off of the difference metric means that the probability of error is going to be much smaller at these SNRs, and thus correspondingly smaller thresholds can be used. At lower SNRs, we are again seeing some deviation of the minimum metric distributions from its assumed log-normal distribution, and also of the difference distribution from the assumed exponential form. This deviation could lead to inaccuracies in our predictions at lower SNRs. However, we note that the primary use-case of interest is not the low-SNR regime where the FER will be equal to 1, but the high SNR regime. So this deviation is not too serious for our purposes.
To get a better picture we also plot the trends of the model parameters for the minimum, correct and difference distributions as a function of k in Fig. 6. The μ and σ trends of both the minimum and correct metric distributions follow a logarithmic and exponential distribution respectively. The parameters of the difference distribution on the other hand, appear noisier and do not fit an obvious analytical trend.
IV. COMPUTING THE PROBABILITY OF ERROR
In this work, we evaluate the probability of the JVDD making a type-1 error via losing the MMLC due to thresholding: our assumed dominant error mechanism of the JVDD. The probability of losing the MMLC, is equivalent to the

corresponding to the error that the MMLC is lost at a given time instant k. This has to be accumulated over all k:

P(error) = 1 −
k

1

−

Ak Bk

exp(−Bk

·

th)

(7)

to obtain the overall probability of losing the MMLC over all time instances. This is the probability of the dominant error event occurring. A first order approximation to equation (7) is:

P(error) =

k

Ak Bk

exp(−Bk

·

th).

(8)

V. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Evaluating either equation (7) or equation (8) is simple to do, if given the values of Ak and Bk. These values can be obtained by finding the best fit values of Ak and Bk in the form of equation (4) to the difference metric distribution at each time k, such as shown in Fig. 6. Alternatively, if a smooth curve through the points in Fig. 6 can be found, it can be used to generate the values of Ak and Bk at each time k. In the current paper, no simple mathematical trend suggests itself for the Ak and Bk parameters in Fig. 6 and we have thus chosen to simply use the exact values for Ak and Bk at each time k to evaluate the probability of error in equation (7). Fig. 7 shows the results comparing the numerically simulated and theoretically computed FERs as a function of SNR for 3 different values of the threshold. For the simulations, 100,000 frames of CWL=64 were executed to evaluate both the numerical FER as well as the distributions of the metrics used to determine the parameters of the relevant metric distributions.
There are several interesting points to discuss in Fig. 7. We start by highlighting the very good agreement between the numerical and theoretical curves in the case when the threshold is a relatively small value of 5. When the threshold is small, the probability of losing the MMLC due to thresholding (a type-1 error) is high which makes the assumption of this being the dominant error event a good one. Thus a good fit between the theoretical and simulated curves is observed, validating our methodology of extrapolating the distributions to estimate the probability of the type-1 error event.
At th = 20, an inaccuracy at low SNRs can be observed in Fig. 7. As was explained previously, this is due to the distributions at low SNR in Fig. 5 not being well modeled by the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHAN AND RAHARDJA: ANALYSIS OF JVDD OVER CODED AWGN/ISI SYSTEM AS LDPC ALTERNATIVE

7

Fig. 7. Theoretical and simulated FER of the JVDD with CWL=64 at different SNRs and thresholds. Solid curve are derived from numerical simulations while dotted curves come from evaluating equation (7).
exponential form. As was discussed there, this is not such a critical region of interest, but it is still useful to explain the cause of this discrepancy.
The high SNRs (at th = 20) on the other hand, are of interest and here we also observe that the match between the numerical and theoretical curves is less than perfect. This is because the underlying assumption of the dominance of the type-1 errors is not as accurate in this regime. When the threshold is large, the probability of losing the MMLC due to thresholding drops with increasing SNR to the point that it is lower than the type2 errors. In this analysis, the type-1 errors were assumed to be dominant, and we have only computed their probabilities in equations (5) and (7) and plotted their theoretical curves in Fig. 7. However, even when the MMLC is not lost, there is still a non-zero probability of the type-2 error occurring. Type-2 errors occur when the MMLC is not the transmitted codeword, which happens when the noise pushes the received waveform closer to a competing codeword than the actual codeword that was transmitted. When this occurs, the JVDD makes an error (this applies to any detection/decoding scheme including the IDD) even when it correctly returns the MMLC. The probability of type-2 errors are not yet accounted for in our current analysis leading to the difference between the theoretical and numerically simulated curves at high thresholds and high SNRs in Fig. 7, as this is the SNR/threshold regime in which the type-2 errors become more dominant. It is also for this reason that we assert our theoretical curves form a “lower bound”, even though it is above the simulated curves in the low SNR regime (which as mentioned, was due to inaccuracy in the estimate of the difference distribution model).
Understanding the cause of this gap between the theoretical and numerical plots at th = 20 to be caused by the omission of the type-2 errors, gives us an indication of the error distribution being made by the JVDD in the different SNR and threshold regimes, and suggests a clear way forward to mitigating this gap. It is clear from Fig. 7 that their inclusion becomes more important at higher thresholds and higher SNRs and we expect this gap to be significantly reduced when type-2 errors are

included in the model. Any residual gap (after the inclusion of the type-2 errors in the future) would be an indication of some other, as-of-yet unidentified error mechanism in the JVDD.
It is also very interesting to note that the numerical th = 10 and th = 20 plots seem to be approaching each other with increasing SNR in Fig. 7. The explanation for this follows the same lines as the explanation for the gap between the theoretical and numerical th = 20 curves, namely that we are moving into a regime where the type-1 errors are becoming less dominant, and eventually insignificant compared to the type-2 errors. It should be noted that the type-1 errors are threshold-dependent, while the type-2 errors are threshold independent. In fact, the type-2 errors are detector/decoderindependent as they will exist for any detection and decoding scheme: type-2 errors depend exclusively on the code, and not on the decoder. They are caused when the noise pushes the transmitted codeword closer to a competing codeword, thus codes with a small minimum distance, will have a higher probability of making a type-2 error. Especially at shorter CWL’s these type-2 errors will be more prominent; we would expect them to decrease as the CWL, and minimum distance, increase. As the SNR increases, the occurrence of the type-1 errors decreases faster, especially at higher thresholds leaving behind primarily the type-2 errors. When the type-2 errors dominate, the curves will be independent of the thresholds as is observed in the merging of the th = 10 and th = 20 curves at higher SNR’s in Fig. 7.
One last feature of interest in Fig. 7 that needs explanation is the occurrence of the noisy FER curves at higher SNRs for all three threshold’s plotted. The normal expectation is that analytical curves ought to be smoother than their corresponding simulated counterparts, but this is not what is being observed here. This phenomenon can be understood with reference to the high SNR plot shown in Fig. 5. We see there, that the difference distribution drops more and more sharply with increasing SNR. In this set of simulations, we have binned the distributions with a spacing of 1. At this bin spacing, we can see that the number of samples in the bins is going to drop as the SNR continues to increase especially above 10 dB in this particular instance. This will lead to fewer samples being available to fit the exponential form to, in equation (4), leading to less accurate estimates for Ak and Bk, and thus noisier FER estimates in equation (7). The solution should be to use smaller bin sizes at the larger SNRs, or to transition from using numerical methods for estimating the distributions, to using analytical ones.
We would like to finish this section with comments on the computational complexity of our proposed method. In both the theoretical and numerical plots in Fig. 7, Monte-Carlo simulations were run: to compute the metric distributions in the former case, and to compute the FER directly in the latter. The question may be raised, as to whether there is any benefit in taking the route of the analysis done in this paper, compared to simply computing the FER’s directly, and whether there are any computational savings achieved by estimating the FER through this analysis. The answer is that in the regions of high FER (> 10−2), there is little benefit of the analytical path we have chosen: the Monte-Carlo simulations could

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

8

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019

have as well been used to compute the FER as to estimate the metric distributions which in turn are used to estimate the FER. However, it is in the low-FER (high-SNR) regions that the benefit of such methods becomes clearer, and these are the regions of interest for real system-designers, as the real products need to operate in the low-FER regime, that is often out of reach of the field-of-view of Monte-Carlo FER simulations. In such cases, accurate prediction of the slopes of the FER plots as CWL increases would allow the systemdesigner to optimize the codes and detection schemes in the real operating regions of interest. These low-FER regions can reach FER ranges of 10−10 or lower that are too slow to be evaluated through Monte-Carlo simulations in software, and practically, very challenging to implement in hardware simulations. Therefore, the analysis for which this work can be considered the first step of, is very important to the task of designing and optimizing a detection and decoding scheme using the JVDD.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we have performed the first stage analysis of the novel JVDD algorithm, that is akin to that done on the existing IDD and LDPC decoders. This analysis deepens the understanding of the JVDD algorithm and the error-creating mechanism within. It also gives us the capability to estimate the performance of the JVDD under different conditions, in the long run giving us the ability to determine the main factors that could affect the complexity/performance trade-off in the JVDD. In the future, we would expect this understanding to enable the JVDD to progress forwards, towards its potential as a viable alternative to the commercialized IDD. The customers for our algorithm in which the IDD could be replaced by the JVDD, include wireless communication channels, and magnetic recording systems.
Our proposed method to analyze the performance of the JVDD involves estimating the metric distributions, and then using them to compute the probability of losing the MMLC from the trellis. We have assumed this to be the dominant error mechanism of the JVDD in the current analysis. We have found that the minimum and correct metrics fit log-normal distributions very well, with the log-normal parameters μ and σ that follow smooth predictable trends as the JVDD progresses forward with time k. On the other hand, we model the difference distribution (between the correct and minimum metrics) using an exponential form, whose parameters do not follow such a smooth predictable trend.
Using these parameters, we have estimated the probability of losing the MMLC and compare that to the overall probability of the JVDD making an error. We have found a good match between our predictions and Monte-Carlo simulations at low thresholds, when our underlying assumption is good, but the match gradually decreases as the threshold increases, and a second error mechanism begins to dominate. Our plan to improve this match would be to include the next most dominant error event into the probability of error, which we expect would cause the curves to become much closer at larger thresholds.

Additional future work in the analysis of the JVDD includes increasing the domain of study to include longer codeword lengths to validate the accuracy of the analysis at different block sizes. A second possible extension to this work includes analytical prediction of the distributions rather than using numerical methods to derive them.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Morello and V. Mignone, “DVB-S2: The second generation standard for satellite broad-band services,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 210–227, Jan. 2006.
[2] S. Papaharalabos et al., “DVB-S2 LDPC decoding using robust check node update approximations,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 120–126, Mar. 2008.
[3] M. Eroz, F. W. Sun, and L. N. Lee, “DVB-S2 low density parity check codes with near Shannon limit performance,” Int. J. Satellite Commun. Netw., vol. 22, pp. 269–279, Jun. 2004.
[4] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame Structure Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), Eur. Telecommun. Stand. Inst. EN Standard 302 755, Apr. 2012.
[5] I.-W. Kang, H.-N. Kim, and L. H. Hanzo, “EXIT-chart aided design of row-permutation assisted twin-interleaver BICM-ID,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 64, no. 1, pp. 85–95, Mar. 2018.
[6] L. Michael and D. Gómez-Barquero, “Modulation and coding for ATSC 3.0,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Broadband Multimedia Syst. Broadcast. (BMSB), Jun. 2015, pp. 1–5.
[7] K.-J. Kim et al., “Low-density parity-check codes for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 159–171, Mar. 2016.
[8] L. Fay, L. Michael, D. Gómez-Barquero, N. Ammar, and M. W. Caldwell, “An overview of the ATSC 3.0 physical layer specification,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, Mar. 2016.
[9] H. Song and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Low-density parity check codes for partial response channels,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 56–66, Jan. 2004.
[10] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[11] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding,” in Proc. Int. Commun. Conf. (ICC), Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[12] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Proc. 5th IMA Conf. Cryptography Coding (LNCS 1025), C. Boyd, Ed. Berlin, Germany: Springer, 1995, pp. 100–111.
[13] M. Sipser and D. A. Spielman, “Expander codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1710–1722, Nov. 1996.
[14] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1645–1646, Mar. 1997.
[15] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[16] H.-A. Loeliger, “An introduction to factor graphs,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 28–41, Jan. 2004.
[17] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-20, no. 2, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[18] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoecher, “A Viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Dallas, TX, USA, Nov. 1989, pp. 1680–1686.
[19] C. Douillard et al., “Iterative correction of intersymbol interference: Turbo-equalization,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 507–511, Sep./Oct. 1995.
[20] D. Raphaeli and Y. Zarai, “Combined turbo equalization and turbo decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, no. 4, pp. 107–109, Apr. 1998.
[21] T. L. Narasimhan, A. Chockalingam, and B. S. Rajan, “Factor graph based joint detection/decoding for LDPC coded large-MIMO systems,” in Proc. Veh. Technol. Conf. (VTC Spring), Yokohama, Japan, 2012, pp. 1–5.
[22] G. Colavolpe and G. Germi, “On the application of factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm to ISI channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 818–825, May 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CHAN AND RAHARDJA: ANALYSIS OF JVDD OVER CODED AWGN/ISI SYSTEM AS LDPC ALTERNATIVE

9

[23] M. H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Graph-based decoding in the presence of ISI,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2188–2312, Apr. 2011.
[24] K. S. Chan, S. S. B. Shafiee, E. M. Rachid, and Y. L. Guan, “Optimal joint Viterbi detector decoder (JVDD) over AWGN/ISI channel,” in Proc. ICNC, Honolulu, HI, USA, Feb. 2014, pp. 282–286.
[25] S. ten Brink, “Designing iterative decoding schemes with extrinsic information transfer charts,” AEU Int. J. Electron. Commun., vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 389–398, 2000.
[26] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[27] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[28] F. Lehmann and G. M. Maggio, “Analysis of the iterative decoding of LDPC and product codes using the Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 11, pp. 2993–3000, Nov. 2003.
[29] E. Sharon, A. Ashikhmin, and S. Litsyn, “Analysis of low-density paritycheck codes based on EXIT functions,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 1407–1414, Aug. 2006
[30] L. Li, M. Zhu, F. Yang, and Y. Zhang, “Performance analysis of QCLDPC construction based on distance graph,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Ind. Elect. Appl., Melbourne, VIC, Australia, Jul. 2013, pp. 1162–1166, doi: 10.1109/ICIEA.2013.6566542.
[31] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 379–423, 1948.
Kheong Sann Chan received the bachelor’s degree from Northwestern University in 1996 and the Ph.D. degree from the National University of Singapore in 2000 and is currently a Professor with the Nanjing Institute of Technology, China. His research interests are in coding and signal processing for recording channels, channel modeling, and detection/decoding for wireless communications. He was awarded an NRF grant in 2014 to explore novel joint detection/decoding schemes for satellite channels. In 2017, he transferred to the Nanjing Institute of Technology. His research work has contributed to the information storage industrial consortium (INSIC) and advanced storage technology consortium (ASTC) in the U.S. He was a recipient of the INSIC Technical Achievement Award for his work on advanced channel modeling in 2009 and the Jiangsu Distinguished Professor Award at Nanjing Institute of Technology. He has been granted two recent ASTC sponsored projects in 2015 and 2016.

Susanto Rahardja received the B.Eng. degree from the National University of Singapore in 1991 and the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 1993 and 1997 respectively. He is currently a Chair Professor with Northwestern Polytechnical University under the Thousand Talent Plan of Peoples Republic of China. His research interests are in multimedia, signal processing, wireless communications, and discrete transforms and signal processing algorithms and implementation. He contributed to the development of a series of audio compression technologies such as Audio Video Standards AVS-L, AVS-2, and ISO/IEC 14496-3:2005/Amd.2:2006, ISO/IEC 14496-3:2005/Amd.3:2006 in which some have been licensed to several companies. He has over 15 years of experience in leading research team for media related research that cover areas in signal processing (audio coding and video/image processing), media analysis (text/speech, image, and video), media security (biometrics, computer vision, and surveillance), and sensor networks. He was a past Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON AUDIO, SPEECH AND LANGUAGE PROCESSING and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA, a past Senior Editor of the IEEE JOURNAL OF SELECTED TOPICS IN SIGNAL PROCESSING, and is currently serving as Associate Editors for the Elsevier Journal of Visual Communication and Image Representation and the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MULTIMEDIA. He was the Conference Chair of 5th ACM SIGGRAPHASIA in 2012 and APSIPA 2nd Summit and Conference in 2010 as well as other conferences in ACM, SPIE, and IEEE. He was a recipients of the numerous awards, including the IEE Hartree Premium Award, the Tan Kah Kee Young Inventors’ Open Category Gold Award, the Singapore National Technology Award, A*STAR Most Inspiring Mentor Award, the Finalist of the 2010 World Technology and Summit Award, the Nokia Foundation Visiting Professor Award, and the ACM Recognition of Service Award.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

