172

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019

Performance Analysis of Practical QC-LDPC Codes: From DVB-S2 to ATSC 3.0
Shuang Chen , Kewu Peng , Senior Member, IEEE, Jian Song, Fellow, IEEE, and Yushu Zhang

Abstract—In this paper, a new analysis method is introduced to predict the gap between Shannon limit and successful decoding signal-to-noise ratio threshold (SNR loss) of practical quasi-cyclic low-density parity check (QC-LDPC) codes. The SNR loss of a QC-LDPC code is summed up from three aspects: 1) the base matrix; 2) the number of iterations for decoding; and 3) the finite codeword length. As an example, the SNR loss of DVB-S2 and ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes is analyzed with the proposed method. Results show that a large portion of the SNR loss of DVB-S2 LDPC codes is due to their base matrices, which is significantly improved in latest ATSC 3.0 standard. Furthermore, with the aid of the proposed analysis method, newly designed QC-LDPC codes with raptor-like structure are proposed. Bit-error rate simulations show that the proposed codes are only 0.4 dB away from Shannon limit under binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channel and only 0.65 dB away from Shannon limit under binary-input Rayleigh fading channel, which are comparable with state-of-art design.

TABLE I
GAP BETWEEN THE SNRth OF PRACTICAL LDPC CODES AND SHANNON LIMIT

Index Terms—Low-density parity-check code, QC-LDPC, density evolution, DVB-S2, ATSC 3.0.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) code is a well-known capacity approaching forward error correction code and has been widely deployed in wireless communication standards, e.g., Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) series standards [1]–[3] and Advanced Television Systems Committee (ATSC) standards [4]–[7]. As a linear block code with sparse parity-check matrix (PCM), an LDPC code can be represented by a Tanner graph which consists of variable nodes, check nodes and edges connecting them, and each edge corresponds to a ‘1’ in the PCM. Owing to the sparsity of its PCM, low-complexity belief propagation (BP) based iterative decoding algorithm can be adopted.
In the past decade, LDPC codes have already been shown as a class of capacity-approaching channel codes with acceptable decoding complexity. For example, Richardson proposed a random-structured irregular LDPC code within only 0.04 dB to Shannon limit [8]. And Kudekar proposed a spatially coupled regular LDPC code which is capacity-approaching and universal for all binary-input memoryless symmetric channels [9].
Manuscript received February 12, 2018; revised May 18, 2018 and July 11, 2018; accepted October 16, 2018. Date of publication November 30, 2018; date of current version March 4, 2019. This work was supported in part by the Research and Development Project of the Science, Technology and Innovation Commission of Shenzhen Municipality under Grant JCYJ20160331171115521, and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61471219. (Corresponding author: Kewu Peng.)
S. Chen and Y. Zhang are with the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
K. Peng and J. Song are with the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the Key Laboratory of Digital TV System of Guangdong Province and Shenzhen City, Research Institute of Tsinghua University in Shenzhen, Shenzhen 518057, China (e-mail: pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2018.2881364

In a practical LDPC coded system, the implementation complexity and flexibility, which might affect the error-correction performance of the system, also need to be considered. For example, the length of the codeword is usually restricted due to limited hardware memory resources and decoding delay at receiver. Besides, the number of iterations for decoding in a practical system is also restricted because of limited computational resources and throughput requirement. Furthermore, the code structure in a practical system also needs to be designed to facilitate full-parallel or partial-parallel decoding procedure.
Quasi-cycle LDPC (QC-LDPC) [10]–[12] codes are a class of implementation-oriented LDPC codes whose PCMs are quasi-cyclic matrices. More specifically, the PCM of a QC-LDPC code can be partitioned into an array of square block sub matrix, which can be a zero matrix, a cyclic permutation matrix or the sum of disjoint cyclic permutation matrices. Due to the quasi-cyclic property of its PCM, a QC-LDPC code can also be studied by its base matrix, where each “0” entry in the base matrix denotes a zero sub matrix in the PCM and each non-zero entry in the base matrix denotes a cyclic permutation matrix in the PCM. Owing to the low hardware-implementation complexity and flexibility, QC-LDPC codes have been widely deployed. For example, irregular repeat accumulate (IRA) [13] LDPC codes used in DVB series standards can be easily converted to QC-LDPClike codes via simple permutation of check nodes and parity-bit variable nodes, and the newly proposed LDPC codes in ATSC 3.0 standard are also QC-LDPC codes or other LDPC codes that can be easily converted to QC-LDPC codes [6].
Due to varieties of limitation in practical LDPC coded systems, bit-error rate (BER) simulation results show that the error-correction performances of LDPC codes proposed in DVB-S2 and ATSC standards are still a bit away from Shannon limit of binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BI-AWGN) channel and binary-input Rayleigh fading (BI-Rayleigh) channel with perfect channel state information at receiver, where Shannon limit denotes the binary-input bit-interleaved coded modulation capacity determined by the code rate [14] in this paper. In Table I, the gaps between the successful decoding signal-to-noise thresholds (SNRths) of practical LDPC codes and Shannon limit (also referred as SNR loss) are presented, where the number of iterations for decoding is limited to 60 and

0018-9316 c 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019

173

SNRths are obtained at BER = 10−5. As shown in the table, these practical LDPC codes are still 0.4 dB to 0.7 dB away from Shannon limit under BI-AWGN channel and 0.7 dB to 1.0 dB away from Shannon limit under BI-Rayleigh channel. There are several factors that might cause the noticeable gap, e.g., the number of iterations for decoding is limited, the length of the codeword is 64800 which might not be sufficiently large, etc.
In this paper, a new analysis method is proposed to predict the SNR loss of a QC-LDPC code. Firstly, the SNR loss of a QC-LDPC code is analyzed from three aspects: the base matrix, the number of iterations for decoding and the finite codeword length. Then, SNR loss from these three aspects are summed up to estimate the SNR loss of the QC-LDPC code analyzed. The SNR loss caused by base matrix and limited number of iterations are analyzed via QC block-wise multi-edge type density evolution (QC-MET-DE), density evolution based extrinsic information transfer (DE-EXIT) chart tool and a modified density evolution algorithm. And the SNR loss caused by finite codeword length is predicted via finite-length capacity analysis.
The proposed analysis method is able to not only accurately predict the SNR loss of a QC-LDPC code, but also analyze the main factors that cause the SNR loss. As an example, the SNR losses of 1/2-rate and 2/3-rate DVB-S2 codes as well as 7/15-rate, 8/15-rate and 2/3rate ATSC 3.0 codes are analyzed. The analysis matches the BER simulation results of these LDPC codes and reveal that the SNR loss of some of these codes are mainly due to base matrix, especially DVB-S2 codes. Furthermore, novel raptor-like QC-LDPC codes are designed to minimize the SNR loss with the aid of the proposed analysis method. Simulation results show that the performances of the proposed codes are comparable with state-of-art design.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the proposed analysis method is introduced and several LDPC codes from DVB-S2 and ATSC 3.0 standards are analyzed as an example. In Section III, a newly designed near-capacity raptor-like QC-LDPC code is proposed and analyzed. Section IV concludes the paper.
II. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS
In this section, a new method is proposed to predict the SNR loss of a QC-LDPC code. The SNR loss is analyzed from three aspects: SNR loss caused by base matrix, SNR loss caused by limited number of iterations for decoding and SNR loss caused by finite codeword length. Then SNR losses caused by these three aspects are summed up to estimate the whole SNR loss of the QC-LDPC code analyzed.
The rest of this section is organized as follows. First of all, in Section II-A QC-MET-DE is introduced as an accurate tool to estimate the SNRth of a QC-LDPC code instead of conventional analysis tools. Then in Sections II-B, II-C, and II-D, the SNR losses caused by the three aspects are introduced respectively with DVB-S2 and ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes analyzed as examples. Finally, Section II-E summarizes the analysis results of DVB-S2 and ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes.
A. QC Block-Wise Multi-Edge Type Density Evolution
For predicting SNRth or calculating the maximum noise level for successive iterative decoding, density evolution was introduced by Richardson et al. [15]. By tracking the probability density functions (PDFs) of the extrinsic information exchanged between variable node decoder and check node decoder, SNRth can be predicted according to the convergence behavior of the PDFs.
Traditional density evolution treats all edges in Tanner graph as the same edge type and their PDFs are merged linearly after each variable node or check node decoding procedure, which is named

single-edge type density evolution (SET-DE). However, the single-

edge type assumption might not be valid for irregular LDPC codes,

e.g., IRA codes [13], AR4JA codes [16], raptor-like codes [17], etc.

For accurately predicting SNRth of irregular LDPC codes, multiedge type density evolution (MET-DE) is proposed [18]. The edges in

the Tanner graph are classified into several predetermined edge types,

only PDFs of edges from the same edge type are merged after each

iteration. In traditional MET-DE, the edge type is manually decided

during code design. For example, when designing raptor-like codes,

the edges represented by the pre-coding sub matrix are treated as a

single type and the edges represented by the extension sub matrix are

treated as another type [18]. Compared with SET-DE, such MET-DE

is able to do a more accurate SNRth prediction. However, due to single-edge type assumption in the sub matrix, the SNRth prediction might still be inaccurate when the sub matrix is irregular.

In this paper, we propose QC-MET-DE to predict SNRth of a QC-LDPC code. Generally speaking, the edges in the same square

block sub matrix (QC sub matrix) are treated as the same edge type

and edges from different QC sub matrices are treated as different

edge types. In this way, the only single-edge assumption is that the

edges in the same QC sub matrix are the same edge type, which is

always true according to the cyclic symmetry property of QC matrix.

Hence, we are able to accurately predict the SNRth for any regular or irregular QC-LDPC codes with QC-MET-DE.

The QC-MET-DE procedure can be described as follows. First

of all, we initialize each PDF of each non-zero QC sub matrix in

the PCM. Hence, If the sub matrix at i-th QC row and j-th QC

column is a non-zero matrix, its PDF (PDFi,j) is initialized such

that

+δ −δ

PDFi,j

(x)dx

=

1.

Then,

iterative

decoding

procedure

is

performed and the evolution of these PDFs is tracked as follows.

At each variable node decoding (also referred as vertical process),

the PDFs in j-th QC column are updated as

PDFi(,2jn+1) = PDFj(ch) +

PDF(e2,jn),

(1)

e∈M(j)\i

where M(j)\i denotes the set consisting of indexes of non-zero QC
sub matrices in j-th QC column except i, “+” and “ ” between
PDFs denote convolution operations since convolution operations are commutative. PDFi(,nj) denotes the PDF after n-th decoding procedure. Since the iteration decoding procedure consists of variable node decoding and check node decoding procedure, PDFi(,2jn) denotes the PDF after n-th iterations. And PDF(jch) denotes the PDF of the a-priori log likelihood ratio (LLR) at i-th QC variable nodes with allzero code. For BI-AWGN channel with zero-mean and variance-σ 2
Gaussian noise, we have [19]

PDFj(ch)(x) =

σ2 exp

(x −

−

2 σ2

)2σ 2

,

8π

8

(2)

and for BI-Rayleigh channel with normalized fading and zero-mean and variance-σ 2 Gaussian noise, we have [19]

PDF(jch)(x) =

σ 2 · exp

−

1 2

2

2σ 2 + 1 · |x| − x 2σ 2 + 1

.

(3)

At each check node decoding (also referred as vertical process), the PDFs in i-th QC column are updated as

PDFi(,2jn+2) =

PDFi(,2en+1),

(4)

e∈N(i)\j

where N(j)\j denotes indexes of non-zero QC sub matrices in i-th QC row except j, and “ ” between PDFs denote the new convolution of PDFs proposed in [15], which is also commutative.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

174
TABLE II GAP BETWEEN THE SNRth OF PRACTICAL LDPC CODES AND
SHANNON LIMIT (BI-AWGN CHANNEL)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019
TABLE III GAP BETWEEN THE SNRth OF PRACTICAL LDPC CODES AND
SHANNON LIMIT (BI-RAYLEIGH CHANNEL)

In this way, after several iterations, we are able to obtain the PDFs of all non-zero QC sub matrices. Finally, the PDFs of all posterior LLRs of variable node can be calculated as

PDF(j2n) = PDF(jch) +

PDF(e2,jn),

(5)

e∈M(j)\i

where PDF(j2n) denotes the PDF of posterior LLRs of j-th QC variable nodes, which can be used to predict a decoding success or a decoding
failure. Thus, when the PDFs tend to δ+∞ as the number of iterations goes to +∞, a decoding success is predicted for the QC-LDPC code
and specific SNR.

TABLE IV
SNRth AND SNR LOSS FOR DVB-S2 CODES PREDICTED BY QC-MET-DE OR SET-DE (BI-AWGN CHANNEL)

B. SNR Loss From Base Matrix
As an example, we analyze the performance of the DVB-S2 1/2rate and 2/3-rate codes [2] and ATSC 3.0 7/15-rate, 8/15-rate and 2/3-rate codes via QC-MET-DE under BI-AWGN channel and BIRayleigh channel. As shown in Table II and Table III, the SNRths predicted via QC-MET-DE are listed and compared with Shannon limit.
According to the analysis, for LDPC codes proposed in DVB-S2 standards, the SNRth of the 1/2-rate code is 0.67 dB and the SNRth of the 2/3-rate code is 2.79 dB under BI-AWGN channel. Hence, the base-matrix losses of both 1/2-rate and 2/3-rate codes from DVB-S2 standards are 0.48 dB under BI-AWGN channel. Similarly, under BI-Rayleigh channel, the base-matrix losses of 1/2-rate and 2/3-rate codes from DVB-S2 standards are 0.69 dB and 0.65 dB respectively.
While for LDPC codes proposed in ATSC 3.0 standard, the SNRth of the 7/15-rate code, the 8/15-rate code and the 2/3-rate code are 0.00 dB, 0.89 dB and 2.50 dB respectively under BI-AWGN channel. Therefore, the base-matrix losses of the 7/15-rate code, the 8/15-rate code and the 2/3-rate code from ATSC 3.0 standards are 0.26 dB, 0.27 dB and 0.19 dB respectively, which are more than 0.20 dB superior to those of DVB-S2 codes at comparable code rate. And under BI-Rayleigh channel, the base-matrix losses of the 7/15-rate code, the 8/15-rate code and the 2/3-rate code from ATSC 3.0 standards are 0.40 dB, 0.50 dB and 0.42 dB respectively, which are also about 0.20 dB superior to those of DVB-S2 codes.
The SNRths predicted via SET-DE as well as the difference between two methods are also presented in Table IV to reveal the fact that the SET-DE is not as accurate as expectation. For the DVB-S2 1/2-rate code, Table IV shows the difference between the SNRth predicted by QC-MET-DE and SET-DE is up to 0.18 dB, which is a significant inaccuracy for designing near-capacity LDPC codes.
Furthermore, as the density evolution does not provide a visual tool to reveal the extrinsic information exchanged or the iterative decoding trajectory, DE-EXIT chart tool is proposed in this paper. Conventional extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart was introduced by ten Brink [19] as a visual analysis tool for iterative decoding. However, the single-edge type and Gaussian LLR distribution assumption make it even more inaccurate than SET-DE. Hence, in this paper, we firstly

calculate PDFs of all extrinsic information by QC-MET-DE and the mutual information of each edge can be accurately calculated. Then, the extrinsic information transferred between CND and VND can be measured by calculating the average mutual information of all edges. Generally speaking, by combining QC-MET-DE and conventional EXIT chart tool, the tool of DE-EXIT chart is derived. As an example, the DE-EXIT charts of DVB-S2 codes are plotted in Fig. 1. With the aid of DE-EXIT chart, we are able to not only analysis the convergence behavior of the PCM, but also analyze the bottleneck of the decoding procedure to guide further optimization.
As shown in Fig. 1(a), when we analyze the DVB-S2 1/2-rate code by SET-DE, the DE-EXIT chart shows that the EXIT curve of CND well matches that of VND and the SNRth is predicted to be 0.49 dB. However, with QC-MET-DE, the DE-EXIT chart reveals that the EXIT curve of CND mismatches that of VND and the SNRth is far from 0.49 dB, which is about 0.67 dB. The significant difference between SET-DE and QC-MET-DE reveals the fact that the singleedge type assumption is unstable and the analysis based on the singleedge type assumption, e.g., analysis via traditional EXIT tool, is not as accurate as expected.
C. SNR Loss From Limited Number of Iterations
As mentioned before, in a practical BP-based LDPC decoder, the number of iterations for decoding is limited due to hardware complexity and decoding delay, which will also affect the performance. To measure and predict the loss due to the limited number of iterations for decoding, a modified density evolution is proposed. In a traditional density evolution or multi-edge type density evolution, the successive decoding condition is that the PDFs of variable nodes tend to δ+∞ when the number of iterations goes to +∞. However, when the number of iterations is limited to a finite value, e.g., 50 or 60, the PDFs will not tend to δ+∞.
In these cases, we proposed a new successive decoding condition as the target BER, e.g., 10−5, calculated by the PDFs of variable nodes at target SNR. In other words, for a given target SNR, we firstly calculate the PDFs of variable nodes after n-th iterations and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019

175
TABLE V PREDICTED SNR LOSS DUE TO LIMITED NUMBER OF
ITERATIONS (BI-AWGN CHANNEL)

TABLE VI PREDICTED SNR LOSS DUE TO LIMITED NUMBER OF
ITERATIONS (BI-RAYLEIGH CHANNEL)

Fig. 1. The DE-EXIT chart of the DVB-S2 codes with code rate of 1/2 (a)
and 2/3 (b) analyzed by QC-MET-DE or SET-DE. IA denotes the a-prior information of VND or CND and IE denotes the extrinsic information from VND or CND. Two EXIT curves denotes the decoding behavior of VND and
CND of the LDPC code. EXIT Tunnel denotes the gap between the EXIT
curve of CND and the EXIT curve of VND.

the BER of each bit can be calculated by:

0

BER(bi) = PDFbi (x)dx,

(6)

−∞

where PDFbi (·) If the average

denotes BER of

the all

PDF of the LLR of bi. bits is below the target BER,

e.g.,

10−5,

the decoding is claimed successful. Thus, the SNRth under limited number of iterations can be determined via bisection method and the

gap between limited and infinite number of iterations (Niter) predicts the SNR loss caused by the limited number of iterations. The pre-

dicted SNR losses due to limited number of iterations are listed in

Table V and VI. As shown in the table, the SNR losses due to limited

number of iterations are a bit different for different base matrices.

D. SNR Loss From Finite Codeword Length
Previous analysis is based on the assumption that the code length is infinite. However, in practical system, the length of LDPC is finite and the performance of such LDPC code is restricted by the capacity

TABLE VII ESTIMATED SNR LOSS DUE TO FINITE CODEWORD LENGTH
of finite-length code. Thus, approximately, we can estimate the SNR loss by analyzing the finite-length capacity loss. In [20], the capacity of finite-length code under BI-AWGN channel is given. By comparing the capacity of finite-length code with that of infinite-length code, the SNR loss caused by the finite codeword length can be estimated. As shown in Table VII, the estimated SNR loss due to finite codeword length are listed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

176
TABLE VIII GAPS BETWEEN SNRth AND SHANNON LIMIT CAUSED
FROM THREE FACTORS (BI-AWGN)

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019
TABLE X ARGUMENTS OF PROPOSED LDPC CODES (b = 360)

TABLE IX
GAPS BETWEEN SNRth AND SHANNON LIMIT CAUSED FROM THREE FACTORS (BI-RAYLEIGH)

E. Discussions on Analysis Results As a summary of this section, we compare the practical SNRth
of DVB-S2 1/2-rate and 2/3-rate and ATSC 3.0 8/15-rate and 2/3rate LDPC codes with our analysis results. According to the above analyses, the gap between Shannon limit and actual SNRth of DVBS2 1/2-rate LDPC code would be about
0.48 dB (base matrix) + 0.07 dB (limited number of iterations) + 0.13 dB (finite codeword length)
= 0.68 dB.

Similarly, the gaps between Shannon limit and actual SNRth of other practical codes are presented in Table VIII and Table IX, where “Base.”, “Iter.”, “Len.” and “Sum.” in Table VIII and Table IX denotes the SNR loss caused by base matrix, limited number of iterations, finite codeword length and summarized results, respectively. All of the analysis results match the actual values sampled from BER simulations presented in Table I.
According to the analysis results, most of the SNR losses of DVBS2 LDPC codes are caused by base matrix. And then, in latest ATSC 3.0 standards, the base matrix is redesigned and optimized, therefore these SNR losses are largely retrieved. For example, at near-half rate, the SNR losses of ATSC 3.0 7/15-rate and 8/15-rate code are about 0.2 dB superior to those of DVB-S2 under both BI-AWGN channel and BI-Rayleigh channel, which largely retrieves the SNR loss of DVB-S2 1/2-rate code caused by base matrix. And at 2/3 rate, the SNR loss of ATSC 3.0 code is about 0.3 dB superior to that of DVBS2 code under BI-AWGN channel and about 0.2 dB superior to that of DVB-S2 code under BI-Rayleigh channel. In short, most of the SNR loss of DVB-S2 code caused by base matrix is retrieved in latest ATSC 3.0 standards.

Fig. 2. The DE-EXIT chart of the proposed codes with code rate of 1/2 (a) and 2/3 (b) analyzed by QC-MET-DE.
III. NEWLY PROPOSED CODE As summarized in Section II, the SNR losses of DVB-S2 caused by base matrix are largely retrieved in latest ATSC 3.0 standards. In this section, the base matrices are further optimized to obtain QC-LDPC codes with better threshold performance, since the SNR losses of DVB-S2 and ATSC 3.0 codes are still mainly caused by base matrix. As shown in Fig. 1, the SNR loss caused by base matrix is mainly due to the mismatch between the EXIT curve of CND and that of VND. By redesigning the base matrix, variable node degree distribution and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019

177

Fig. 3. The BER and FER simulations of the proposed codes, DVB-S2 LDPC codes and ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes with code rate of 1/2 (a) and 2/3 (b) under BI-AWGN channel.

Fig. 4. The BER and FER simulations of the proposed codes, DVB-S2 LDPC codes and ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes with code rate of 1/2 (a) and 2/3 (b) under BI-Rayleigh channel.

check node degree distribution, the SNR loss caused by base matrix can be retrieved. Referring to the raptor-like base matrix in [21] and the PBRL code in [17], we propose a new QC-LDPC code scheme whose parity check matrix can be represented as

H=

AmAb×nAb BmBb×nBb

O I

,
mb×nb

(7)

where O is a zero matrix, I is an identity matrix, A and B are two quasi-cyclic matrix composed of b×b zero matrices and circulant permutation matrices. For better performance, the variable node degree distribution of A and B can be irregular. As the parity check matrix have some of the Raptor code’s properties [22], the benefit of such structure can be obtained, such as near-capacity performance at low code rate, simple encoding algorithm and being decodable with a punctured codeword. In our design, we reveal that such structure can also achieve near-capacity performance at medium code rate such as 1/2 or 2/3.
The optimization of sub matrix A and B can be summarized as follows.
Firstly, the sizes of A and B are determined according to target codeword length, the size of cyclic matrices and some other design rules. For example, the size of each QC sub matrix should be 360 ×

360 such that hardware designed for DVB-S2 or ATSC 3.0 can be directly deployed.
Secondly, the check node degree distributions of A and B are assumed semi-regular, and the variable node degree distribution of A and B are optimized by conventional hill-climbing algorithm. Generally speaking, the optimization starts from a random generated degree distribution. Then, a small modification is performed on variable node degree distribution of A or B. For each modification, a base matrix of H is generated by progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm and the SNRth of H is calculated by QC-MET-DE. If the SNRth of H is superior to that of previous one, the modified degree distribution of A and B are updated. Otherwise, some other small modification will be performed until a better H is found.
Finally, after several iterations of such modification, an optimized PCM H is obtained. Due to semi-regular check node degree distribution assumption of A and B and local optima problem, the optimization result H might not always be the best PCM from raptorlike ensemble. Even though, practical optimization result shows that the optimized PCM H is still comparable with state-of-art design.
As an example compared with DVB-S2 and ATSC 3.0 code with long codeword length, the arguments of H are described in Table X,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

178

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 65, NO. 1, MARCH 2019

where (·) and P(·) denote the variable and check node degree distribution functions, the size of each sub matrix is 360 × 360.
By performing the same analysis on the proposed code, the SNR loss caused by the base matrix is shown in Fig. 2 by the DEEXIT chart and the SNR loss caused by the limited number of iterations (Niter) is listed in Table V and Table VI.
According to the analysis before, SNR loss of the proposed 1/2-rate code under BI-AWGN channel would be:
0.12 dB (base matrix) + 0.14 dB (limited number of iterations)
+ 0.13 dB (finite codeword length)
= 0.39 dB.
And the gap between theoretical limit and SNRth of the proposed 2/3rate code under BI-AWGN channel would be: 0.13 dB (base matrix) + 0.11 dB (limited number of iterations) + 0.11 dB (finite codeword length) = 0.35 dB.
For illustrating our results, the BER and frame-error rate (FER) simulations are also performed. As shown in Fig. 3 and Fig. 4, the simulation results show that the proposed 1/2-rate code and 2/3rate code are only 0.39 dB and 0.37 dB away from Shannon limit under BI-AWGN channel, and are only 0.60 dB and 0.65 dB away from Shannon limit under BI-Rayleigh channel, respectively, which matches the predictions during code design.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a new analysis method is proposed to accurately predict the SNR losses of QC-LDPC codes. Besides, based on the proposed method, we are able to not only accurately predict the SNR loss of a QC-LDPC code, but also analyze the main factors that cause the SNR loss to guide further optimization.
As an example, we analyzed factors that cause the gaps between theoretical limit and SNRths of DVB-S2 and ATSC 3.0 LDPC codes from the following three aspects: the base matrix, the number of iterations for decoding and the finite codeword length. The analysis results show that a large portion of the SNR loss of DVB-S2 LDPC codes is due to base matrix. And for the LDPC codes in the latest ATSC 3.0 standard, the SNR loss caused by base matrix are largely retrieved, which is a significant improvement.
Finally, with the aid of the proposed analysis method, newly designed QC-LDPC codes with raptor-like base matrix at 1/2 rate and 2/3 rate are proposed. The proposed codes are able to achieve near-capacity performance under the restriction of limited number of iterations and finite codeword length. Analysis and BER simulation results show that the proposed 1/2-rate code and 2/3-rate code are only 0.39 dB and 0.37 dB away from Shannon limit under BI-AWGN channel, and are only 0.60 dB and 0.65 dB away from Shannon limit under BI-Rayleigh channel, respectively, and are comparable with state-of-art design.
It needs to be pointed out that, the analysis method and the newly designed QC-LDPC code are aimed at the optimization of the water fall region of the code and improving the decoding threshold at target BER. While in practical systems, e.g., DVB-S2 or ATSC 3.0, much more factors should also be considered, e.g., error floor performance, encoding algorithm, hardwareimplementation complexity, performance with various constellations

and coded modulation schemes, etc. Therefore, implementation-
oriented capacity-approaching QC-LDPC design is still an open
problem.
REFERENCES
[1] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame Structure Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), Version 1.3.1, ETSI Standard EN 302 755, Apr. 2012.
[2] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second Generation Framing Structure, Channel Coding and Modulation Systems for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications, Version 1.3.1, ETSI Standard EN 302 307, Mar. 2013.
[3] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Next Generation Broadcasting System to Handheld, Physical Layer Specification (DVB-NGH), Version 1.1.1, ETSI Standard EN 303 105, Jun. 2013.
[4] ATSC Standard: Physical Layer Protocol, Adv. Television Syst. Committee Standard A/322:2017, Jun. 2017.
[5] L. Fay, L. Michael, D. Gómez-Barquero, N. Ammar, and M. W. Caldwell, “An overview of the ATSC 3.0 physical layer specification,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 159–171, Mar. 2016.
[6] K.-J. Kim et al., “Low-density parity-check codes for ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 189–196, Mar. 2016.
[7] H. Jeong et al., “Flexible and robust transmission for physical layer signaling of ATSC 3.0,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 62, no. 1, pp. 204–215, Mar. 2016.
[8] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[9] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec. 2013.
[10] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[11] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894–2901, Aug. 2005.
[12] J. Thorpe, “Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from protographs,” InterPlanetary Netw., Pasadena, CA, USA, IPN Progr. Rep. 42-154, 2003.
[13] A. Roumy, S. Guemghar, G. Caire, and S. Verdú, “Design methods for irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1711–1727, Aug. 2004.
[14] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, “Capacity of bit-interleaved channels,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 12, pp. 1060–1061, Jun. 1996.
[15] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[16] O. Book, Experimental Specifications, Low Density Parity Check Codes for Use in Near-Earth and Deep Space Applications, document CCSDS 131.1-O-2, CCSDS, Reston, VA, USA, Sep. 2007.
[17] T.-Y. Chen, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protograph-based raptor-like LDPC codes with low thresholds,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Jun. 2012, pp. 2161–2165.
[18] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” in Proc. Workshop Honoring Prof. Bob McEliece 60th Birthday California Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, USA, 2002, pp. 24–25.
[19] S. T. Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[20] J.-H. Park, “Analysis on nonuniform channels and LDPC codes in the finite block length regime,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Korea Adv. Inst. Sci. Technol., Daejeon, South Korea, 2012.
[21] S. I. Park, Y. Wu, H. M. Kim, N. Hur, and J. Kim, “Raptor-like rate compatible LDPC codes and their puncturing performance for the cloud transmission system,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 239–245, Jun. 2014.
[22] A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 2551–2567, Jun. 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:38:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

