IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 66, NO. 3, MARCH 2019

397

An Efficient Post-Processor for Lowering the Error Floor of LDPC Codes
Hangxuan Cui , Jun Lin, and Zhongfeng Wang , Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Error floor is one major reason for limited use of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in applications requiring very low bit error rate. In this brief, an efficient erasure searching post-processor (ESPP) is proposed to lower the error floor of LDPC codes. Here, when a decoding failure is detected, the most unreliable symbols in the decoder output vector are erased, then their values are re-calculated by solving a system of linear equations with a sparse coefficient matrix. Compared to the stateof-the-art post processors, the ESPP has much lower computation complexity. Simulation results show that the proposed method significantly improves the decoding performance of LDPC codes in the error-floor region. Additionally, a well-optimized hardware architecture is developed for the proposed post-processor. Algorithmic transformation and architecture optimization are well explored to reduce the hardware complexity and latency. Synthesis results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed architecture.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, error-floor, post-processor, low complexity, performance improvement, VLSI implementation.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have received increasing attention in recent years for their capacityapproaching performance. LDPC codes can perform close to Shannon limit in the waterfall region when paired with message-passing decoding algorithms, such as sum-product algorithm (SPA) and min-sum algorithm (MSA), in which the decoding messages are iteratively exchanged between two distinct phases. The decoder designed based on SPA and MSA are developed in [1] and [2]. However, as the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) continues to increase, LDPC codes may suffer from the error-floor phenomenon, which limits the use of LDPC codes in applications requiring very low error-rate. As a competitor to LDPC codes, polar codes do not suffer from the error floor phenomenon [3], [4]. Therefore, the work to improve the performance of LDPC codes in the error floor region is very useful.
Manuscript received May 4, 2018; revised June 13, 2018; accepted June 16, 2018. Date of publication June 25, 2018; date of current version February 26, 2019. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 61774082 and Grant 61604068, and in part by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant 021014380065 and Grant 021014380087. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor F. C. M. Lau. (Corresponding authors: Jun Lin; Zhongfeng Wang.)
The authors are with the School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Nanjing University, Nanjing 210008, China (e-mail: haxcui@163.com; jlin@nju.edu.cn; zfwang@nju.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2018.2849504

TABLE I NOTATION TABLE
It has been proved that small trapping sets are the main cause of the error-floor phenomenon. Many techniques have been proposed to improve the error correction performance of LDPC codes [5], [6]. Some ideas based on post-processing are attractive since they are applicable to any LDPC codes without requiring the prior knowledge of their trapping sets [7], [8]. In [7], an algorithm is proposed which consists of a standard belief propagation (BP) decoder followed by a list erasure decoder. Once the BP decoding is finished, a certain number of positions are erased using a combination of a reliability criterion and a set of masks. List erasure decoder is then applied to the resulting codeword. In [8], for an incorrect output codeword, some bits are identified and flipped by targeting small trapping sets. Then the decoding is restarted to help the decoder jump from the trap. However, we observe that the complexities of the post-processing in the above methods are even higher than a standard BP decoder. It will induce excessive resource consumption which is not favored by the hardware implementation.
In this brief, an efficient erasure searching post-processor (ESPP) is proposed to improve the error correction performance of LDPC codes. After a decoding failure is detected, a small fraction of bits in the decoder output are erased based on the reliability values obtained from the regular decoder. Reconstructing the codeword can be considered as decoding on a binary erasure channel (BEC). Decoding an LDPC code over BEC with L erasures can be accomplished by solving a system of linear equations of order L. It is noted that the coefficient matrix of these equations is a sparse matrix. Assuming the number of erasures is set to be small, most of the equations can be transformed to equations with only one unknown quantity, where the values of erasures can be determined directly. Based on this assumption, the complexity of the post-processor is reduced drastically. Simulation results demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed method.
II. PRELIMINARIES In this brief, we consider a linear LDPC code C over GF(2) of length N defined by an M × N parity check matrix H. M parity check equations correspond to M rows in the parity check matrix, indexed by J = {0, 1, . . . , M − 1}. Each of the

1549-7747 c 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

398

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 66, NO. 3, MARCH 2019

TABLE II THE NUMBER OF SYMBOLS WITH |Li| SMALLER THAN THE THRESHOLD

Fig. 1. The reliability values of the (2304,1152) LDPC code after αMS layered decoding.

N codeword symbols, indexed by I = {0, 1, . . . , N − 1}, corresponds to a column in H. Nc(j) denotes the neighborhood of check j, which is the set of indices i ∈ I that participate in the j-th check, i.e., Nc(j) = { i | hj,i = 1}. Similarly, Nv(i) = { j | hj,i = 1}. A length-N binary vector u is a codeword if and only if (iff) all parity checks are satisfied, i.e., uHT = 0. For a regular (J, K) quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code, H consists of J × K submatrices. The submatrix Hi,j is obtained by circularly shifting a Z×Z identity matrix ci,j times. If the shifting factor ci,j = −1, Hi,j is a zero square matrix. We denote the submatrices in the same row as a block row
and the submatrices in the same column as a block column,
respectively.
Assume an LDPC codeword is transmitted over a BEC with
erasure probability . Vector uˆ denotes the receive vector and uˆi ∈ {0, 1, ø}. I(e) is the set of indices of all erasures, i.e., I(e) = { i | uˆi = ø}. hi is the i-th column of H and L is the number of erasures. We denote HI(e) as a matrix that consists of all columns corresponding to the erasure locations, i.e.,
HI(e) = { hi | i ∈ I(e)}. The maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding aims to determine
a vector u ∈ C that satisfies uHT = 0, which can be reduced to:

uI(e)HTI(e) = sIc(e),

(1)

where Ic(e) = I \ I(e) and the binary syndrome vector

sIc(e) = uIc(e)HTIc(e) = uˆ Ic(e)HITc(e).

(2)

P is the rank of HI(e). The solution of Eq. (1) is unique if P = L. Otherwise it will contain 2L−P candidate solutions.

All codewords are modulated with the binary phase shift keying (BPSK) scheme. Each error symbol is marked with a red circle and the others with a black cross. As shown in Fig. 1, the reliability values of error symbols are relatively smaller than that of the correct ones. Hence, error symbols can be identified and erased based on the reliability values. Then the codeword can be recovered by solving the linear check equations like Eq. (1).
To verify the effectiveness of this feature, 50 failed codewords are collected under different SNRs. In each failed codeword, the maximum |Li| of wrong information symbols is recorded. The number of information symbols with |Li| smaller than this value are shown in Table II. As can be seen, the average count number decreases as SNR increases. Moreover, we observed that the count numbers are very small for most of the failed codewords while the count numbers are very big for the rest codewords. Hence, most of the failed codewords can be recovered based on the following methods.
A. Methods to Select Erasures
From Table II we know that the number of wrong symbols in uˆ is relatively small in the error floor region, so we need to erase only a limited number of symbols. The following two methods are designed to meet different requirements.
• Method 1: For |Li| shows the reliability of uˆi, reorder uˆ in accordance with the value of |Li| from small to large. Symbols with the smallest ρN (ρ 1) reliability values will be set as erasures.
• Method 2: I(e) = { i | |Li| ≤ σ }. To avoid the situation that L is too large to solve the erasures, we introduce a constant number Lmax expressing the maximum number of erasures. The selection will be terminated when L reaches Lmax.
Compared to Method 1, Method 2 simplifies the selection process by avoiding the sorting operation.

III. THE PROPOSED ESPP
Let u be a transmitted codeword over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. Binary vector uˆ is the output of an LDPC decoder. We define uˆ as a pseudo-codeword if uˆ HT = 0. Li represents the summation of all the messages received at the i-th variable node, which is initialized to
the posteriori log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of the corresponding symbol. From literature we know the value of uˆi is determined by Li. Fig. 1 shows the reliability values (|Li|) of the information symbols of the (2304,1152) WiMAX LDPC code after a failed normalized min-sum (αMS) layered decoding. |Li| is quantized with 9 bits (4 integer bits and 5 fraction bits). The maximum allowable number of iteration Tmax = 60 and the scaling factor α = 0.8125. The figure is drawn based on Monte Carlo method and five failed codewords are collected.

B. Methods to Solve Erasures
As mentioned above, after the erasures are determined, recovering the codeword is equivalent to solving Eq. (1). HI(e) is the coefficient matrix of Eq. (1). Since H is sparse, the number of nonzero entries is far less than zero entries in each row. Assuming L N and L M, it is possible to find some rows in HI(e) with only one nonzero entry. Hence, the corresponding equations can be solved directly. Based on our observations, most of the erasures can be solved in this way if L is properly selected. As a result, searching these rows in HI(e) with only one nonzero entry is the main effort to recover the transmitted codeword. When an erasure is solved, the set I(e) should be updated immediately. If the erasures are not solved completely, we provide two solutions to determine the values of them.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CUI et al.: EFFICIENT POST-PROCESSOR FOR LOWERING ERROR FLOOR OF LDPC CODES

399

Algorithm 1: The Proposed ESPP

input : uˆ = (uˆ0, uˆ1, · · · , uˆN−1) 1 if uˆ HT = 0 then

2 for i = 0 to N − 1 do

3

if Li < σ and L ≤ Lmax then

4

vi = ø, L = L + 1

5

else vi = uˆi

6

I(e) ← { i | vi = ø }, sIc(e) = vIc(e)HTIc(e)

7

Obtain a system of linear equations: vI(e)HIT(e) = sIc(e)

8 while a row j in HI(e) with only one erasure vi do

9

vi = sIc(e)[j], L = L − 1, I(e) = I(e) \ j

10

Update sIc(e)

11 if L = 0 then for all vi = ø: vi = uˆi 12 Return v

Fig. 2. FER performances of the αMS decoder and ESPP-embedded αMS decoders with different scaling factors.

TABLE III THE OPTIMAL VALUES OF ρ AND σ VERSUS SNRS

Fig. 3. Top architecture of the proposed ESPP-B.

• Solution 1: For all unsolved erasures, assign the corresponding values in uˆ to them.
• Solution 2: Denote the number of the unsolved erasures by L1. First, construct a list of 2L2 (L2 ≤ L1) candidate vectors by flipping the symbols unsolved. μ denotes the Euclidean distance between vector uˆ and the candidate vector. We select the candidate vector with minimum μ. Alternatively, we can maximize the scalar product of uˆ and candidate vectors.
Algm. 1 is one of the possible implementations of the proposed ESPP. Compared with Solution 2, Solution 1 is of lower complexity and more suitable for hardware implementation. Hence, Solution 1 is used in Algm. 1 and the subsequent discussions.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
The effects of employing the proposed ESPP in an LDPC decoder are evaluated by numerical results. The simulation environment settings are same as that in Fig. 1. In our simulations, an αMS LDPC decoder with layered schedule is employed first. The ESPP is started once a decoding failure is detected. We have also simulated the codes defined in Wi-Fi and Wi-Gig standards with different code rates. Due to limited space, we only present the simulation results for the (2304, 1152) WiMAX LDPC code without loss of generality. The parameter Lmax is set to 50 in all simulations.
Denote ESPP-A and ESPP-B as the ESPP choosing erasures by Method 1 and Method 2, respectively. We first study the choices of ρ and σ . In Table III, we present the optimal values for ρ and σ in different SNR points. We can summarize that the optimal values are almost the same in all SNR points. Since the performance in the error floor region is our concern, σ = 3 and ρ = 2% for the simulated codeword.
The performance of the αMS decoding algorithm is influenced by the scaling factor α. FER performances of employing the ESPP in an αMS decoder with different scaling factors

are shown in Fig. 2. The first thing to note is that both the ESPP-A and ESPP-B improve the performance in the error-floor region significantly. Second, we can observe severe performance degradation caused by the suboptimal scaling factor. When implemented with a suboptimal scaling factor (α = 0.75), the ESPPs improve the performance more obviously. Therefore, the proposed algorithm can also be used to reduce the performance degradation caused by the suboptimal scaling factor, which leads to more efficient hardware implementations.
V. EFFICIENT HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE OF ESPP-B
From Section IV we observe that the performances of ESPP-A and ESPP-B are similar when the scaling factor is properly selected. Compared to ESPP-A, ESPP-B is more efficient since it simplifies the selection process by avoiding the sorting operation. Hence, the hardware architecture of ESPP-B is explored in this brief. For the proposed architecture, we first introduce a structure to parallelly collect the indices of erasures in order to reduce the latency. Second, the computation of syndrome is divided into two distinct parts leading to a more efficient implementation. Moreover, a shifter is applied to replace matrix multiplication operations. Finally, the sparsity of the parity check matrix is adopted to reduce the size of LUTs. The size of LUTs can be reduced from code-length (2304) to row-weight (7) for the simulated codeword.
A. Top Architecture
The top architecture is illustrated in Fig. 3. The channel message memory (CMEM) stores the pseudo-codeword and the corresponding LLRs. The parity check matrix memory (HMEM) stores the information of matrix H. First, erasures are located by the address finder unit (AFU) and indices are stored in the A memory (AMEM). Second, the syndrome calculation unit (SCU) calculates the syndrome vector sIc(e). Then, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

400

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 66, NO. 3, MARCH 2019

Fig. 4. The proposed AFU and the i-th IF unit.

count and update units (CUU) counts the number of erasures in each row and update the syndrome vector sIc(e). Finally, the erasures which satisfy the condition described in Algm. 1 will be recovered in the recovery unit (RU). If the erasures are not recovered completely, CUU will be started again and the decoding process will be continued.
1) AFU: As shown in Fig. 4, the AFU is used to determine the indices of erasures in parallel. Assume the degree of parallelism is x, a length x vector e is defined by Eq. (3), where i ∈ {1, 2, . . . , x}. So the indices of erasures in the pseudo-codeword are the indices of ‘1’s in vector e.

ei = 0, |Li| > σ. ei = 1, |Li| ≤ σ.

(3)

To get the indices of ‘1’s in vector e, it is concluded that

if sumn−1 = i − 1 and en = 1, the index of the i-th ‘1’ is

n, where sumn−1 =

n−1 j=1

ej.

The

index

finder

(IF)

unit

is

designed based on the above criterion. The i-th IF unit is used

to determine the index of the i-th ‘1’, as shown in Fig. 4. In

the i-th IF unit, the temporary variable wn = 1 only when sumn−1 = i − 1 and en = 1. Otherwise wn = 0. It can be

proved that there are only one ‘1’ in vector w at most. The

output value Ai = n if the only ‘1’ in vector e is wn. Since there are x ‘1’s in vector e at most, we need x IF units to get

the indices of them in parallel. Additionally, sumx indicates the number of erasures in the pseudo-codeword.

2) SCU: The SCU calculates the syndrome vector sIc(e), which is stored in SMEM. Combining Eq. (2) and the fact

that the number of erasures is far less than the length of the

codeword, it is more convenient to calculate syndrome in the

following form.

sIc(e) = uˆ HT ⊕ uˆ I(e)HIT(e) = s ⊕ sI(e).

(4)

s and sI(e) are calculated in SCU1 and SCU2 simultaneously. Consider the submatrix with the shifting factor ci,j = 1
shown in Fig. 5. The syndrome of this submatrix

st = cHTt = [c1 c2 c3 c4 c5 c6 c7 c0] = cs.

(5)

So st can be obtained by circularly shifting c for one time. Divide a (J, K) QC-LDPC code by block column, i.e.,:

uˆ = [uˆ 0 uˆ 1 · · · uˆ K−1]. H = [H0 H1 · · · HK−1].

(6)

The syndrome vector s can be expressed as:

s = uˆ 0H0T ⊕ uˆ 1H1T ⊕ · · · ⊕ uˆ K−1HTK−1.

(7)

The partial syndrome uˆ iHi is obtained from the shifter similar to the architecture shown in Fig. 5, where the shift number is
adjusted by ci,j. In SCU1, the partial syndromes are calculated one by one to reduce hardware resource consumption.

Fig. 5. An 8 × 8 submatrix and the architecture of the corresponding shifter.

For the i-th erasure Ai = n, only the syndrome set {sI(e)[m] | m ∈ Nv(n)} could be affected by this erasure. Denote this set as related set. To obtain sI(e), we need to find the related sets of all erasures and determine the values of
them. Ai = n means that the i-th erasure corresponds to the nth column in matrix H. The n-th column is in the n2-th column of the n1-th block column, where

n1 = n/Z . n2 = n mod Z.

(8)

To avoid involving complex division and modulo units, n1 and n2 are calculated by comparators, adders, and a multiplexer, which reduce the complexity obviously.
After the neighbors of the n-th column have been determined based Eq. (9), where j ∈ {0, 1, . . . , J − 1}, the values of the related set should be updated by performing an XOR operation with uˆn. sI(e) will be obtained after all erasures have been processed.

mj = jZ + n2 − cj,n1,

n2 ≥ cj,n1.

mj = (j + 1)Z + n2 − cj,n1, n2 < cj,n1.

(9)

3) CUU: The CUU is designed to count the number of unsolved erasures in each row and update the syndrome vector. The erasures are processed one by one. First, the related rows (neighbors) of the erasure should be determined based on Eq. (9). Then, the operation is subject to the state variable of the erasure ri, which is stored in the RMEM. ri = 0 means that the i-th erasure has not been recovered. For the related rows of this erasure, the variables used to count the number unsolved erasures should be added 1. ri = 1 means that the i-th erasure has been recovered but the related set of this erasure have not been updated. A unit which is similar to SCU2 will be invoked to update the related set. ri = 2 means that all calculations have been accomplished. So no more operations will be performed for this erasure.
4) RU: The RU is designed to recover the unsolved erasures (state variable equals 0). In the rows with only one unsolved erasure, the index of this erasure is just selected from the column with nonzero entry. So the number of candidate positions is reduced from code-length to row-weight. Hence, the size of LUTs can be notably reduced by virtue of the sparsity of the parity check matrix. The value of this erasure is the syndrome corresponding to this row. Due to the structure of QC-LDPC code, an erasure could be recovered only once in a block row. So the recovery process is performed block-row-wise to avoid memory access conflicts. If an erasure is recovered in a block row, the state variable of it will be transformed to ‘1’ immediately to prevent its value from being altered. The decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

CUI et al.: EFFICIENT POST-PROCESSOR FOR LOWERING ERROR FLOOR OF LDPC CODES

401

Fig. 6. The average number of clock cycles.
Fig. 7. The performances comparison result. TABLE IV
IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS FOR THE (2304,1152) LDPC CODE
TABLE V THE AREA OF EACH UNIT

The hardware architecture of the ESPP-B for the (2304, 1152) WiMAX LDPC code is synthesized under the TSMC 90nm CMOS technology using the Cadence RTL compiler. The implementation results are compared with the LDPC decoder with the same technology in [9] and shown in Table IV. Table V shows the area of each unit in detail. As can be seen, the area of our post-processor is far less than a well optimized LDPC decoder. In [8], the LDPC decoder would be restarted for at least four times for an incorrect codeword. If the maximum number of iteration is set to 50, the decoder in [7] may takes at least 200 extra iterations, which may incur excessive extra energy and latency. However, the ESPP-B post-processor will be executed only once for an incorrect codeword. CUU and RU are started only twice on average. Hence, the relative overhead of our post-processor is far less than that of [8]. Moreover, the proposed post-processor will only be applied when a decoding failure is detected, so it won’t increase the overall power consumption too much.
VI. CONCLUSION
In this brief, we have proposed an efficient post-processor for lowering the error floor of LDPC codes. The key idea is to identify and erase an unreliable information set in the output vector after a decoding failure is detected and then reconstruct the codeword. The sparity of the parity check matrix is exploited to solve the erasures efficiently. We have further developed a well-optimized post-processor architecture for general QC-LDPC codes. Shift and partially parallel structures are utilized to reduce the complexity and increase the throughput.

will start a new iteration loop from CUU if there exists an erasure with state variable equals zero. Otherwise the decoding will be terminated.

B. Implementation Results
Now we show the number of cycles for the proposed architecture that are required to decode a codeword. In the AFU, x symbols are processed in one clock cycle, so N/x cycles are needed to locate erasures. The erasures are send into SCU2 and CUU one by one, so the latency is L cycles for them. SCU1 is performed block column-wise and RU is performed block row-wise. For a (J, K) LDPC code, K cycles are needed for SCU1 and J cycles are needed for RU. Since s and sI(e) are calculated simultaneously, max{K, L} cycles are needed for SCU. If CUU and RU are started a times, the total number of cycles

T = N/x + max{K, L} + a × (L + J).

(10)

Fig. 6 shows the simulation results for the average number of clock cycles with the codeword used in Section IV, where x = 64 and Lmax = 50. The maximum iteration number is set to 10 to ensure the performance as shown in Fig. 7, so the longest latency is 706 cycles.

REFERENCES
[1] C.-W. Sham, X. Chen, W. M. Tam, Y. Zhao, and F. C. M. Lau, “A layered QC-LDPC decoder architecture for high speed communication system,” in Proc. IEEE Asia–Pac. Conf. Circuits Syst. (APCCAS), Kaohsiung, Taiwan, Dec. 2012, pp. 475–478.
[2] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Memory system optimization for FPGA-based implementation of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 98–111, Aug. 2011.
[3] C. Xia et al., “A high-throughput architecture of list successive cancellation polar codes decoder with large list size,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 66, no. 14, pp. 3859–3874, Jul. 2018, doi: 10.1109/TSP.2018.2838554.
[4] S. A. Hashemi et al., “Decoder partitioning: Towards practical list decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., to be published, doi: 10.1109/TCOMM.2018.2832207.
[5] Y. Hu et al., “A dominating error region strategy for improving the bitflipping LDPC decoder of SSDs,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 62, no. 6, pp. 578–582, Jun. 2015.
[6] J. H. Lee and M. H. Sunwoo, “Low-complexity first-two-minimum-values generator for bit-serial LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 483–487, May 2016.
[7] I. E. Bocharova, B. D. Kudryashov, V. Skachek, and Y. Yakimenka, “Low complexity algorithm approaching the ML decoding of binary LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Barcelona, Spain, 2016, pp. 2704–2708.
[8] J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error-floors of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64–73, Jan. 2011.
[9] M.-R. Li, C.-H. Yang, and Y.-L. Ueng, “A 5.28-Gb/s LDPC decoder with time-domain signal processing for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 592–604, Feb. 2017.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:39:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

