Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes and the Multiple Access Channel
(Invited Paper)
Sebastian Cammerer, Xiaojie Wang, Yingyan Ma, and Stephan ten Brink Institute of Telecommunications, Pfaffenwaldring 47, University of Stuttgart, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany
{cammerer,wang,tenbrink}@inue.uni-stuttgart.de

Abstract—We consider spatially coupled low-density paritycheck (SC-LDPC) codes within a non-orthogonal interleave division multiple access (IDMA) scheme to avoid cumbersome degree profile matching of the LDPC code components to the iterative multi-user detector (MUD). Besides excellent decoding thresholds, the approach benefits from the possibility of using rather simple and regular underlying block LDPC codes owing to the universal behavior of the resulting coupled code with respect to the channel front-end, i.e., the iterative MUD. Furthermore, an additional outer repetition code makes the scheme flexible to cope with a varying number of users and user rates, as the SC-LDPC itself can be kept constant for a wide range of different user loads. The decoding thresholds are obtained via density evolution (DE) and verified by bit error rate (BER) simulations. To keep decoding complexity and latency small, we introduce a joint iterative windowed detector/decoder imposing carefully adjusted sub-block interleavers. Finally, we show that the proposed coding scheme also works for Rayleigh channels using the same code with tolerable performance loss compared to the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.
I. INTRODUCTION
While in the single-user case the Shannon capacity has been almost achieved for practical coding schemes [1], [2], the situation changes when considering the multi-user nonorthogonal multiple access (NOMA) scenario, i.e., when multiple transmitters and a single receiver share the same medium [3]. Although several NOMA approaches exist (see [4], [5] and references therein), it is still an open and interesting research direction to find low-complexity coding (and detection) schemes that operate close to the multi-user capacity. Further, multi-user systems open up yet unsettled research opportunities such as the flexibility towards a dynamically varying number of users and, likely, having different power levels.
One attractive NOMA scheme, featuring low-complexity, parallelizable computation and asynchronous transmission, is interleave division multiple access (IDMA) [6], [7]. In this work, we focus on the IDMA scheme, where a low-complexity parallel interference cancellation (PIC) receiver is used and an effective separation between users is done by an individual interleaver. Relying on feedback from single-user channel decoders, the performance of IDMA systems strongly depends on the performance of the underlying channel codes.

Thus, in classical low-density parity-check (LDPC)-based IDMA systems, the LDPC code needs to have matched degree profiles [8], [9] to the channel front-end, i.e., the multi-user detector (MUD). As this optimization depends on several parameters such as the channel type, the number of users and the individual signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs), the drawback is that in practice either multiple LDPC codes need to be (pre-)designed, or a degraded system performance has to be accepted. In this work, we make use of the fact that spatially coupled low-density parity-check (SC-LDPC) codes do not have this drawback as they are known for a universal behavior regarding the channel front-end [10], [11].
SC-LDPC codes are widely known for their capacity achieving decoding behavior via threshold saturation [12]. More precisely, it has been shown that coupled codes approach the maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding performance of the underlying block LDPC code under low-complexity belief propagation (BP) decoding for properly chosen code parameters. However, a second powerful property of SC-LDPC codes is not so often referred to, but can be seen in their universality with respect to the channel front-end, i.e., for carefully chosen code parameters SC-LDPC codes do not need any re-design when the channel characteristics change. It also offers potentially low error-floors as typically a regular code design suffices which simplifies the code construction. This universality renders SC-LDPC codes into a promising candidate for NOMA schemes where a wide range of different scenarios must be supported such as different number of users, channels and user power.
Unfortunately, as SC-LDPC codes are constructed out of multiple coupled sub-blocks, they typically introduce long block lengths. Thus, for practical decoder implementations, i.e., feasible decoding complexity, a windowed decoder is crucial [13]. We show that the MUD can be integrated into the iterative detection/decoding scheme with negligible performance loss. Yet, this requires some attention with respect to the decoding window and the interleaver design to separate individual users, as the iterative detection/decoding loop needs to be performed sub-block-wise to maintain the benefits of threshold saturation.

978-1-7281-1151-3/19/$31.00 ©2019 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SC-LDPC Encoder

b1

Rc

...

bN

REP Encoder
Rr ...

Interleaver
π1 ... πN

Mapper and
Phase-Scrambler

ϕ1

x˜1

Channel AWGN n

...

...

x˜n ϕN

Demapper

SC-LDPC Decoder

REP Decoder

Deinterleaver

and

LAD,1 = LER→D,1

LRA←M,1 = L˜ M E ,1

De-scrambler

LM E ,1

y1

bˆ 1

Rc

Rr

π1−1

ϕ−1 1

LDE,1 = LAR←D,1

LER→M,1 = L˜ M A ,1

...

...

...

LM A ,1

...

xˆ1

SoICMUD

y

bˆ N

π−N1

ϕN−1

Fig. 1. IDMA system model; all users have the same coding and modulation scheme; note that boldface letters denote vectors. The receiver can be implemented in a windowed version (see Sec. IV for details), however, for simplicity indices related to windowed decoding are omitted.

II. IDMA SYSTEM MODEL

Fig. 1 shows the IDMA system model with N uncooperative

users. Each user encodes and decodes its data separately using

a channel encoder (SC-LDPC code here) of code rate Rc and a

common

serially

concatenated

repetition

code

of

rate

Rr

=

1 dr

(see [9] for details). Note that the SC-LDPC code and, thus,

also the code parameters, e.g., degree profile and coupling

width W , are the same among all the N users. Thus, the total

code-rate is Rtot = RcRr. The interleaver is, on the contrary,

user-specific to allow efficient user separation at the receiver.

After interleaving, the coded bits are mapped to symbols, e.g.,

using binary phase shift keying (BPSK), and transmitted over

the Gaussian multiple access channel (GMAC).

The mth received signal (i.e., the mth element of y in

Fig. 1) of all users can be written as

N

ym =

Pihi,m · xi,m · ejϕi,m + nm

(1)

i=1

:=xi,m

√ where m is the discrete-time index, Pi denotes the signal

power of the ith user, hi,m is the uncorrelated (both over

time and among different users) small-scale Rayleigh fading

channel coefficient, nm is circularly symmetric (complexvalued) AWGN with zero mean and variance σn2 , and ϕi,m is a pseudo random phase scrambling to avoid ambiguity of

the super-constellation (Cartesian product of all user constel-

lations). This random phase shift could also be the conse-

quence of, e.g., the channel and/or explicit “scrambling” and

we include this into each user’s mapper (only in AWGN

channels; for Rayleigh channels this step can be omitted).

Throughout this paper, the phases ϕi,m are independently and uniformly distributed in [0, π). The output of the mapper of

the ith user with BPSK modulation at the mth time instant is x˜i,m ∈ ±ejϕi,m . The phase scrambling can improve the
superimposed multiuser codeword distance [14], particularly

in AWGN channels. The so-called multi-user SNR is defined

as

γ=

N i=1
σn2

Pi

.

(2)

The received signal is first processed by a multi-user detec-

tor (MUD). An optimum MUD is to compute the maximum

a posteriori (MAP) probability of each bit. This requires a complexity of O M N where M denotes the number of

constellation symbols per user. The exponentially increasing

complexity with the number of users N prohibits its practical

implementation for a large number of users. Therefore, a

sub-optimal soft interference cancellation (SoIC) based low

complexity MUD was proposed in [6]. The sub-optimal MUD

first cancels out the other users’ signals; for instance, the ith

user’s signal is estimated by the conditional minimum mean-

square error (MMSE) estimator for BPSK

xˆi = tanh

LM A ,i 2

· ejϕi

based on, e.g., the a posteriori knowledge of the channel decoder LM A ,i (the SC-LDPC decoder output is LRA←D,i; it is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

then re-encoded by a repetition code (REP) and re-interleaved with the outputs denoted by L˜AM,i and LM A ,i, respectively). For an arbitrary user j (the symbol index m is dropped for brevity),
the output of the MUD after the SoIC can be written as

yj =

N
Pj hj xj +
i=1,i=j

Pihi (x˜i − xˆi) + n.

Then, each user starts its single user detection and decoding in parallel. The (soft) demapper computes the log-likelihoodratio (LLR) of each bit while treating the residual interference as noise. For BPSK, an approximation of the true a posteriori LLR can be computed according to

LM E ,j = 4

Re Pj

yj · h∗j · e−jϕj σI2,j + σn2

where the noise variance σn2 , the random phase shifts ϕj and

the channel coefficients hj are assumed to be known at the

receiver. The interference power can be estimated by

⎡

⎤

2

σI2,j = E ⎢⎣ e−jϕj

Pihi (x˜i − xˆi) ⎦⎥

i=j

⎛

⎞

(3)

=

Pi |hi|2 ⎝1 − E tanh

LM E ,i 2

2
⎠

i=j

where the interference term is assumed to be Gaussian dis-

tributed, provided that the number of users N is large enough

and the transmitted symbols are independent among users

(central limit theorem). Then, the LLRs are deinterleaved (denoted by L˜M E ,j =
LRA←M,j which means the extrinsic message from the MUD corresponds to the a priori knowledge of the REP obtained

by the MUD) and sent to a repetition decoder. The extrinsic

message from the repetition code to the LDPC decoder is given

by

(m+1)dr −1

LDA,j,m = LER→D,j,m =

L˜M E ,j,k.

k=mdr

Subsequently, channel decoding can be performed by the

corresponding channel decoder.

III. SPATIALLY COUPLED LDPC

We follow the definitions in [15], i.e., consider SC-LDPC

code ensembles defined by their protograph matrix B. Pro-

tographs can be seen as a blueprint of larger graphs, where

S copies of the protograph are randomly connected by edge

permutations. Each non-zero entry of the corresponding base

matrix B represents the number of connected edges to this

node type. For further details we refer interested readers to

[15], [16].

For the sake of spatial coupling, B can be divided into W

sub-matrices Bi of dim⎡ension M⎤× N [15], i.e.,

B0

B = ⎣⎢ ... ⎦⎥

.

BW −1 W M ×N

The approach from [15] is used to construct the SC-LDPC

protograph matrix BL,W, where L denotes the replication factor (i.e., the number of sub-blocks). For a terminated code

and a coupling window W = 3, we get

⎡

⎤

BL,W =3 = ⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎢⎣

B0 B1 B2

B0 B1 B2

... ... ...

B0 B1

⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥

.

B2 (L+W −1)M ×LN
Finally, a lifting step with lifting factor Z results in the parity-check matrix HL,W,Z .

A. Density Evolution for the GMAC with iterative detection/decoding

The decoding threshold can be obtained via density evolu-
tion [16], [17]. We apply a Gaussian approximation (GA),
i.e., we only track the mean value μ of messages passed
along within the decoder and the iterative MUD with transfer
function fMUD(μA,MUD) as in [10]. We denote the entry of BL,W in the j-th row and the
i-th column as Bj,i. Let μi←j denote the mean value of messages passed from check node decoder (CND) cj with spatial position j to a connected variable node decoder (VND) vi at spatial position i and let μi→j denote the mean value passed from VND vi to CND cj . The update rules become1 [10], [17]

μi←j = φ−1 1− [1 − φ (μi→j )]Bj,i−1

(4)

LN

·

[1 − φ (μi→j )]Bj,k

k=1;k=i

with φ (μ) as in [17]

φ (x) =

1

−

√1 4πx

∞ −∞

tanh

u 2

exp

−

(u−x)2 4x

du ,

x>0

1,

x=0

Due

to

the

serial

concatenation

of

a

REP

of

rate

Rr

=

1 dr

,

the mean of the messages passed from VND vi (including the

REP code) to the MUD is therefore

LM

μD←i = (dr − 1) μD→i +

Bk,i · μi←k.

(5)

k=1

Here μD→i denotes the mean of the message from MUD to VND vi after the PIC processing at MUD nodes. These updated messages can be written as [9]

μD→i

=

N σn2

+ (N

4 − 1)

·

. φ (μD←i )

1For readability, we only consider edges where Bj,i = 0, all unconnected edges (Bj,i = 0) virtually transmit μ = 0.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I
DENSITY EVOLUTION-BASED DECODING THRESHOLDS OF DIFFERENT CODES FOR 8 USERS OVER THE GMAC AND dr SUCH THAT Rsum = 1
AND THE SHANNON LIMIT γSh = 0 dB

dr dv dc uncoupled (γu∗n) coupled2 (γS∗C)

4 36

2.54 dB

1.55 dB

4 48

3.43 dB

1.42 dB

4 5 10

4.11 dB

1.33 dB

4 6 12

4.62 dB

1.13 dB

2 34

3.96 dB

0.74 dB

2 68

14.98 dB

0.69 dB

2 9 12

–

0.69 dB

IE,V , IA,C

1

0.8

0.6

Block LDPC gets stuck

0.4

Block LDPC gets stuck

The variable node update from VND vi to CND cj is

LM

μi→j = drμD→i + (Bi,j − 1) · μi←j +

Bk,i · μi←k.

k=1,k=j

In this work, we use codes as proposed in [15]:

• C1: SC-LDPC (dv = 3, dc = 6, L, W = 3) code with

Rc,L→∞ = 0.5 and B0 = B1 = B2 = [1 1]

• C2: SC-LDPC (dv = 3, dc = 4, L, W = 2) code with

Rc,L→∞ = 0.25,

⎡

⎤

1100

⎡

⎤

0011

B0 = ⎣0 1 1 0⎦ and B1 = ⎣1 0 0 1⎦ .

0011

1100

Table I shows the decoding thresholds γu∗n and γs∗c for the uncoupled and the SC-LDPC ensemble, respectively. As expected a higher node degree degrades the uncoupled thresholds, however, the SC-LDPC codes show an improved threshold which coincides well with the effect of threshold saturation [12].

B. EXIT analysis
Fig. 2 shows the extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) chart for the proposed MUD system with a SC-LDPC code at an SNR of γ = 2.3 dB, i.e., below the uncoupled decoding threshold of γu∗n = 2.54 dB. As it can be seen, convergence is possible although no open decoding tunnel exists in the EXIT chart (cf. micro-convergence in [10]). As successful decoding is possible even if VND and CND curves intersect, no extensive degree profile matching of the code components is required anymore. This intuitively visualizes the universal behavior of SC-LDPC codes as their decoding thresholds are (approximately) universal for varying channel conditions [10], [11].

IV. WINDOWED MUD AND CHANNEL DECODER
So far, we considered full BP decoding, meaning that all spatial positions are updated in parallel for each iteration. However, the authors in [13] showed that a windowed decoding scheme reduces decoding complexity without significant bit error rate (BER) performance loss. Throughout this work, we assume a constant number of iterations per window shift, yet, an adaptive implementation is possible [18].

2Remark: for a better comparison the rate loss due to termination effects is not considered here.

MUD+REP+VND

0.2

CND

SC-LDPC Trajectory

Block LDPC Trajectory

00

0.2

0.4

0.6

0.8

1

IA,V , IE,C

Fig. 2. EXIT chart of a (3, 6)-SC-LDPC IDMA system at SNR γ = 2.3 dB and dr = 4 and 8 user, i.e., Rsum = 1.
A. Windowed receiver
The windowed decoder makes use of the fact that the BER per spatial position converges in a wavelike manner, i.e., subsequent blocks can only be decoded if the previous blocks have been successfully decoded. Therefore, it is sufficient to only update nodes within a few spatial positions (active window), i.e., per decoding iteration only Wd ≥ W sub-blocks are active. We keep the decoding structure as in Fig. 1, but activate the same window for all users in parallel (i.e., all nodes at the same spatial positions). The windowed MUD estimates the SNR per sub-block (see Sec. IV-B for the intuition behind) and updates its outgoing messages accordingly. Finally, the window position is shifted by one spatial position after Imax decoding iterations until all sub-blocks are decoded. For further details on the initialization, see [18].

B. Subblock interleaving

The general idea of IDMA systems is to separate users by user-specific interleavers which are straightforward to implement for block-codes (besides complexity considerations). However, for SC-LDPC codes (and also due to the windowed receiver scheme) these interleavers require some further attention regarding the interleaving depth.
In (5), we assumed that the incoming messages from the MUD are all from spatial position i for all users, i.e., they have the same underlying statistics and, thus, μD←i is the same for all users. However, when assuming random interleaving over the whole BSC , the update in (5) changes to

μ˜D

=

μ˜D←i

=

1 LN

LN

μD←k

k=1

and, thus, a full interleaver potentially destroys the locality of the SC-LDPC code and spatial positions with high interference noise (yet unconverged positions) hinder wavelike

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

user 1
μi /μmax 1
0.5

window pos. i

2468

spatial pos. i 10 12 14

BER with sub-block interleaving, windowed decoder BER with full interleaving, full BP decoder BER with full interleaving, windowed decoder Thresholds, AWGN
100

Π user 2
μi /μmax 1
0.5

spatial pos. i

10−3

BER

2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Fig. 3. Illustration of wavelike-decoding in a two-user IDMA system with a full interleaver accessing random spatial positions of user 2 that are not yet converged.

convergence. Further, the windowed MUD does not even

update spatial positions outside the currently active window.

Intuitively, this can be explained as illustrated in Fig. 3 for the

two-user scenario. As the current decoding progress of spatial

position i shares messages with the other users, a random inter-

leaver causes the access of random spatial positions (messages

potentially not yet updated) of the other users. This means a

user observes the high interference noise as if no (only little)

a priori knowledge at the receiver exists. Thus, the overall

performance can be approximated by a non-iterative scheme,

where the initial estimate of the MUD provides a lower bound on its performance, i.e., f˜MUD(μA,MUD) ≈ fMUD(0).

To keep the spatial structure of the code, we propose to use

sub-block interleavers which only permute locally within a

spatial position. This suffices for the required user separation,

but still maintains the locality of the SC-LDPC code. However,

the price to pay is a potentially smaller interleaver size (or

larger sub-block size) and, thus, a slightly degraded BER

performance of the IDMA system. Fig. 4 compares the BER

performance for a system with the proposed sub-block inter-

leaver (simulation parameters in Sec. V). It can be seen that

the decoding performance under full interleaving together with

windowed decoding degrades to the expected non-iterative

performance, i.e., each user the sub-block interleaving

sees the SINR yields results

1 (N −1)+N
close to

σn2γS∗wChiales

provided in Table I. If full BP decoding is used with full

interleaving, the performance can be dramatically enhanced

with 1500 allowed iterations, but is still worse than the sub-

block interleaved version with windowed decoding.

V. SIMULATION RESULTS

We consider an IDMA system with N = 8 users and

a targeted sum-rate of Rsum

=

N

Rc dr

=

1. Both, AWGN

and Rayleigh fading channel models are considered. For the

AWGN channel case, an explicit phase scrambling is included

into the symbol-mapper to improve the distance between

multi-user superimposed codewords [14]. For Rayleigh fading

channels, we consider that the channel states are uncorrelated

10−6 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6 1.8 2

Eb N0

[dB]

Fig. 4. BER performance of the SC-LDPC (dv = 3, dc = 6) IDMA system with 8 users and dr = 2 for different interleaver implementations.

GMAC capacity
Thresholds, AWGN (3,4) code, N = 8, dr = 2, AWGN (3,4) code, N = 8, dr = 2, Rayleigh (3,6) code, N = 8, dr = 4, AWGN (3,6) code, N = 8, dr = 4, Rayleigh Block LDPC, Rc = 0.124, N = 8, dr = 1, AWGN Block LDPC, Rc = 0.124, N = 8, dr = 1, Rayleigh

10−1

BER

10−3

10−5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

Eb N0

[dB]

Fig. 5. BER performance of SC-LDPC-coded IDMA systems with window decoder in AWGN and Rayleigh fading channels; N = 8 users with equal-

power and equal-rate are considered.

among users and vary rapidly from symbol to symbol (ergodic

fading, i.e., uncorrelated fast fading) and, therefore, a phase

scrambler is not necessary in Rayleigh channels. Furthermore,

the received signal power levels are assumed to be the same,

i.e.,

Pi

=

1 N

, ∀i

and

BPSK

is

used

as

modulation

format.

For

the unequal-power case, the repetition code can be used as

”power equalizer” (see [9]).

Fig. 5 shows the BER results for such SC-LDPC-coded

IDMA systems with the windowed detection and decoding

scheme as described in Sec. IV. In the simulations, we use

a decoding window length of Wd = 10 sub-blocks, each consisting of 8000 symbols; Imax = 40 iterations are carried out per window shift. As provided in Sec. III-A, the code

construction C1 with dv = 3, dc = 6, dr = 4, W = 3 and the construction C2 with dv = 3, dc = 4, dr = 2, W = 2 are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Gap to GMAC capacity in dB

3

dr = 2

dr = 3

dr = 4

2.5

dr = 8

dr = 6 dr = 10

Block LDPC, Rc = 0.0975, dr = 2 [9]

2

1.5

1 8 16 24 32 40 48 56 64
No. of users N
Fig. 6. DE-based thresholds of the SC-LDPC (dv = 3, dc = 6, L, W = 3) code C1 with varying number of users N and repetition factor dr.

considered (for sum-rate one) and the total codeword length of the serially concatenated SC-LDPC and repetition code is fixed to NCW = 4 · 105. The simulated BERs for both cases at 10−6 in AWGN channel are about 0.2 dB larger than the decoding thresholds obtained from density evolution. The gap to the ultimate GMAC capacity is about 1 dB and 1.7 dB for the (3,4) and (3,6) codes, respectively. Compared to the AWGN channel case, the performance loss due to Rayleigh fading is only 0.4 dB for both codes, due to the so-called multiuser diversity in fading channels [3]. The performance of block LDPC code (code-word length is NCW = 4 · 105, same as SCLDPC codes) with EXIT chart based matching degree profiles is included for comparison. Besides the cumbersome matching procedure, the required irregularity in the parity-check matrix unfortunately degrades the error-floor performance of the code.
As the number of users in a MAC system can vary, we propose to use the additional REP to cope with the varying number of users [9]. Fig. 6 shows the GA DE-based gapto-capacity results for various repetition codes and number of users, while for all those curves the used SC-LDPC (dv = 3, dc = 6, L, W = 3) code C1 is fixed. It can be observed that increasing the repetition factor dr leads to a quite universal support over a wide range of number of users N . For instance with dr = 10, the gap-to capacity can be kept below 2 dB for the number of users in the range N ∈ [8, 64]. For comparison, the results for a block LDPC code with optimized degree profile are also included, where the block LDPC code is of the rate Rc = 0.0975 ≈ 0.1. With a further repetition code of dr = 2, the total code rate is the same as the (3,6) SC-LDPC code with dr = 10. It is obvious that (if fixed) the SC-LDPC code can support a wider range of users, although the gap-to-capacity can be larger for some number of users.
VI. CONCLUSIONS AND OUTLOOK
We have analyzed SC-LDPC codes as coding scheme for an IDMA multi-user system with a sliding windowed-based iterative detection and decoding receiver. We have examined the decoding thresholds through density evolution and shown that thresholds saturation occurs. The SC-LDPC codes benefit

from the anticipated universal behavior of SC-LDPC codes
with respect to the channel front-end and, thus, do not re-
quire explicitly matched degree profiles for a specific number
of users or changing channel characteristic. It also relaxes
potential error-floor issues in finite-length code design, as
regular node degrees instead of highly irregular degree profiles
are sufficient. Further, a windowed receiver implementation,
consisting of both windowed detector and windowed decoder,
keeps the overall decoding complexity within a feasible range
but requires sub-block interleaving. As a result, the proposed
system operates below 1 dB away from the GMAC capacity at a BER of 10−6 for finite length code constructions.
REFERENCES
[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error–correcting coding and decoding: Turbo–codes,” Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Commun. (ICC), pp. 1064–1070, May 1993.
[2] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, 2001.
[3] D. Tse and P. Viswanath, Fundamentals of Wireless Communications. Cambridge University Press, 2005.
[4] L. Dai, B. Wang, Z. Ding, Z. Wang, S. Chen, and L. Hanzo, “A survey of non-orthogonal multiple access for 5G,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 2294–2323, 2018.
[5] L. Dai, B. Wang, Y. Yuan, S. Han, C. I, and Z. Wang, “Non-orthogonal multiple access for 5G: solutions, challenges, opportunities, and future research trends,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 53, no. 9, pp. 74–81, Sep. 2015.
[6] L. Ping, L. Liu, K. Y. Wu, and W. K. Leung, “Approaching the capacity of multiple access channels using interleaved low-rate codes,” IEEE Comm. Letters, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 4–6, Jan 2004.
[7] L. Ping, L. Liu, K. Wu, and W. K. Leung, “Interleave division multipleaccess,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 938–947, April 2006.
[8] S. ten Brink, G. Kramer, and A. Ashikhmin, “Design of low-density parity-check codes for modulation and detection,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 670–678, April 2004.
[9] X. Wang, S. Cammerer, and S. t. Brink, “Near Gaussian multiple access channel capacity detection and decoding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1811.10938, 2018.
[10] L. Schmalen and S. ten Brink, “Combining spatially coupled LDPC codes with modulation and detection,” in ITG Conference on Systems, Communication and Coding (SCC). VDE, 2013, pp. 1–6.
[11] S. Cammerer, L. Schmalen, V. Aref, and S. ten Brink, “Wave-like decoding of tail-biting spatially coupled LDPC codes through iterative demapping,” in Proc. Internat. Symp. Turbo Codes, 2016, pp. 121–125.
[12] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, 2013.
[13] A. R. Iyengar, P. H. Siegel, R. Urbanke, and J. K. Wolf, “Windowed decoding of spatially coupled codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 59, no. 4, pp. 2277–2292, 2013.
[14] G. Song and J. Cheng, “Distance enumerator analysis for interleavedivision multi-user codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 4039–4053, July 2016.
[15] D. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello Jr., “Spatially coupled LDPC codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 4866–4889, Sept 2015.
[16] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[17] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, Feb 2001.
[18] K. Klaiber, S. Cammerer, L. Schmalen, and S. ten Brink, “Avoiding burst-like error patterns in windowed decoding of spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. Internat. Symp. Turbo Codes, 2018.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:42:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

