IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2019

745

Adaptive Artificial Neural Network-Coupled LDPC ECC as Universal Solution for 3-D and 2-D, Charge-Trap and Floating-Gate NAND Flash Memories
Toshiki Nakamura , Yoshiaki Deguchi , Student Member, IEEE, and Ken Takeuchi, Member, IEEE

Abstract— Adaptive artificial neural network (ANN)coupled low-density parity-check (LDPC) error-correcting code (ECC) (ANN-LDPC ECC) is proposed to increase acceptable errors for various NAND flash memories. The proposed ANN-LDPC ECC can be the universal solutions for 3-D and 2-D, charge-trap and floating-gate NAND flash memories. In 3-D NAND flash, lateral charge migration, vertical charge de-trap, inter floating-gate capacitive coupling noise, and inter word-line variations cause errors. On the other hand, in 2-D NAND flash, the charge de-trap and the harsh inter floating-gate capacitive coupling of adjacent word-lines and bit-lines cause errors. To solve these reliability problems, the proposed ANN automatically and adaptively compensates for complex memory cell errors. Moreover, the proposed ANNLDPC can reproduce the dynamic endurance and data-retention time dependence of errors. In addition, this paper evaluates the impacts of the chip-to-chip variations on the proposed ANN-LDPC. The proposed ANN-LDPC is implemented in the storage controller and can precisely and adaptively estimate bit-error rate (BER) and log-likelihood ratio (LLR). By using the precise LLR, LDPC decoder effectively corrects errors. As a result, ANN-LDPC extends the acceptable data-retention time by over 76× and 45× compared with conventional Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) ECC in 3-D and 2-D triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash memories, respectively.
Index Terms— 2-D triple-level cell (TLC) nand flash memory, 3-D TLC nand flash memory, artificial neural network (ANN), low-density parity-check (LDPC) error-correcting code (ECC), storage.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N VERTICAL 3-D triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash, data-retention errors are complicated. Because the diameter
of the cylindrical channel varies among word-lines, com-
plicated inter word-line variations of errors exist (Fig. 1) [1]. In addition, errors vary among three page types,
upper/middle/lower pages, in TLC NAND flash [Fig. 2(a)].
Since the higher VTH states have more data-retention
Manuscript received June 30, 2018; revised October 4, 2018 and November 24, 2018; accepted November 25, 2018. Date of publication January 1, 2019; date of current version February 21, 2019. This paper was approved by Guest Editor Samuel Palermo. This work was supported by JST CREST, Japan, under Grant JPMJCR1532. (Corresponding author: Toshiki Nakamura.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo 112-8551, Japan (e-mail: toshiki.nakamura@takeuchi-lab.org; deguchi@takeuchi-lab.org; takeuchi@takeuchi-lab.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2018.2884949

Fig. 1. Complicated inter word-line variations in vertical 3-D NAND flash [1]. Different memory cell sizes cause complicated memory cell errors.
errors, bit-error rate (BER) of upper page, which has the read reference voltage (VREF) between “F” and “G”-states, becomes higher. In the charge-trap cell, the vertical charge de-trap from the tunnel oxide to the channel causes the large memory cell VTH shift. What is worse, this VTH shift depends on the VTH state from “A” to “G” [Fig. 2(b)] [1], [2]. The charge loss is also caused by the lateral charge migration in the charge-trap layer [3]–[5], which strongly depends on the data pattern of adjacent cells of neighboring word-lines [Fig. 2(c)] [6]. In the floating-gate cell, the charge de-trap from the tunnel oxide and the inter floating-gate capacitive coupling cause errors, which again depends on the VTH state and the data pattern of adjacent cells (Fig. 3) [7]. In Fig. 3, BER of memory cells at WL (n) is low if the VTH state at WL (n + 1) is “A,” “C,” “E,” or “G”-states. This can be explained as follows. At the program operation before the third (upper) page of floating-gate 3-D TLC NAND flash, “Erase,” “B,” “D,” and “F”-states are already programmed. Then, at the program operation in the upper page, only “A,” “C,” “E,” and “G”-states are programmed. Thus, the floating-gate capacitive coupling from “A,” “C,” “E,” and “G”-states at WL (n + 1) increases VTH at WL (n) and compensates the VTH reduction caused by

0018-9200 © 2019 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:40:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

746

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2019

Fig. 3. Inter floating-gate capacitive coupling noise of floating-gate 3-D NAND flash [7]. Inter floating-gate capacitive coupling noise causes complicated memory cell errors.

Fig. 2. Data-retention characteristics of charge-trap 3-D NAND flash. (a) Page type, (b) vertical charge de-trap [1], [2], and (c) lateral charge migration [3]–[6] cause memory cell errors.

Fig. 4. Error characteristics of 1 nm (second generation below 20 nm) 2-D TLC NAND flash. In 2-D NAND flash, (a) charge de-trap from the tunnel oxide [8] and (b) and (c) inter floating-gate capacitive coupling [9] cause errors.

the vertical charge de-trap during the data-retention time. As a result, BER of WL (n) decreases.
On the other hand, in 2-D NAND flash, which is a floating-gate cell, the charge de-trap from the tunnel oxide [Fig. 4(a)] [8] and the inter floating-gate capacitive coupling [9] of both adjacent word-lines and bit-lines [Fig. 4(b) and (c)] cause errors. If the neighboring cell is programmed to the high VTH state, memory cell VTH at WL (i ) and BL (s) shifts upward due to the floating-gate capacitive coupling. Therefore, BER of “Erase”-state at WL (i ) and BL (s) becomes higher as the neighboring cell is programmed at the higher VTH state.
In the actual storage at data centers, the storage controller must manage various generations of flash memories provided by various memory vendors. There are three different types

of NAND flash memory, that is, charge-trap 3-D, floatinggate 3-D, and floating-gate 2-D NAND flash memories. The previously proposed manually controlled ad hoc error correction methods that fit only with specific types of flash memories are not acceptable in the actual operation at data centers.
To solve these complicated reliability problems, this paper proposes an artificial neural network (ANN)-coupled lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) error-correcting code (ECC) (ANN-LDPC ECC) [10] to adaptively and automatically correct errors. The proposal is the universal solution for pooled storage at data centers where the storage controller manages both 3-D and 2-D, charge-trap and floating-gate NAND flash memories [11]. Because the proposed ECC implements only the inference of ANN, there is no storage controller area overhead. During the testing, training of ANN is performed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:40:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAKAMURA et al.: ADAPTIVE ANN-COUPLED LDPC ECC AS UNIVERSAL SOLUTION

747

Fig. 5. Concept of the proposed ANN-coupled LDPC ECC (ANN-LDPC ECC) [10]. Proposed ANN-LDPC ECC automatically estimates BER of memory cells.

Fig. 7. Training of the proposed ANN. During the testing, training of ANN is performed by using the measured data obtained from several chips. Calculated synaptic weights are pre-recorded in the proposed storage controller.

Fig. 6. Relation between LLR and BER. LLR is calculated from predicted BER [15]. LDPC decoder corrects errors based on LLR.
by using the measured data from several chips by operating only the single GPU chip. Then, calculated synaptic weights are pre-recorded in the proposed storage controller for the inference that correct errors.
The key idea of the proposal is that BER of memory cells has complicated correlations with the VTH state, adjacent cell data, word-line number, read offset level, data-retention time, and endurance (write/erase cycles). Whatever the types of memory cells such as charge-trap 3-D, floating-gate 3-D, and floating-gate 2-D NAND flash, the proposed ANN automatically estimates these correlations as synaptic weights based on randomly sampled measurement data without detailed tests or redundant tables. If ANN is not used, a detailed huge amount of measurements are necessary to define correlations, which drastically increase the test cost [12]–[14]. What is worse, correlations obtained by the test should be recorded in the huge (2.9 GB) tables, which increase the storage costs (Fig. 5). The proposed ANN-LDPC precisely and automatically estimates BER and calculates the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) based on predicted BER for various types of memory cells (Fig. 6) [15]. By the precise LLR prediction, the LDPC decoder effectively corrects errors. The proposed ANN-LDPC extends acceptable BER by over 9.1× and 3.0× in 3-D and 2-D NAND flash, respectively.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, training and inference of ANN are explained. Section III shows the proposed ANN-LDPC for charge-trap and floating-gate 3-D

and 2-D TLC NAND flash memories. In Section III, training of ANN is performed by using one-chip data, which means chipto-chip variation is not considered. Section IV evaluates the impacts of chip variation on proposed ANN-LDPC. Finally, a conclusion is given in Section V.
II. TRAINING AND INFERENCE OF ANN
In Fig. 7, during the training, measured error information of randomly sampled 4-MB cells is input to ANN. With a unit of batch, 20-KB cells are trained simultaneously. In the first batch, for one measured cell, parameters, x1 ∼ xK, are input to ANN. By Softmax function as the activation function, the output of ANN, y1 and y2, is between 0 and 1 where y1 + y2 = 1. y1 is the probability that the cell has no error. y2 is the probability that the cell has an error. The correct answer of the training is L1 and L2. If the measured cell has an error, the answer data, L1 and L2 are 0 and 1, respectively. If the measured cell has no error, L1 and L2 are 1 and 0, respectively. Then, the loss function, E = −[L1 ln(y1) + L2 ln(y2)], is calculated. E expresses how the outputs of ANN, y1 and y2, coincide with the answers, L1 and L2.
During the training of ANN, for each 20-KB cells, E1 to E20KB are simultaneously calculated. Then, the average value, EAVE, is estimated. By the backpropagation algorithm of ANN, the synaptic weights are adjusted to minimize EAVE. As a result, the outputs of ANN, y1 and y2, become close to answers, L1 and L2. By weights obtained at the first batch as initial values, the second batch is trained. The 1st–200th batches are trained sequentially, which correspond to one epoch. In total, 50 epochs are repeated by using the weights of the previous epoch as the initial values of the next epoch. In this way, the synaptic weights are gradually

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:40:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

748

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2019

Fig. 8. Inference of the proposed ANN. The proposed storage controller implements only the inference of ANN to correct errors.

Fig. 10. Read operation of Cases 1–3. WL (n − 1) and WL (n + 1) are read for input parameters when the read target is WL (n). In Case 3, read offset level is obtained with extra reads by changing the read word-line voltage at WL (n).

Fig. 9. Input parameters of ANN with Cases 1–3 for 3-D and 2-D NAND flash.

Fig. 11. Example of input parameters of Case 1. In Case 1, only page
type, upper/middle/lower pages, and the VTH state are input parameters. After reading one word-line, the input parameters x1–x11, whose values are 0 or 1, are determined.

adjusted so that the outputs of ANN, y1 and y2, successfully reproduce answers, L1 and L2. During the testing, this training completes within 10 h by operating the single GPU chip, which is NVIDIA Quadro GP 100.
In Fig. 8, during the inference, the proposed storage controller automatically predicts BER based on weights obtained during the training.
III. PROPOSED ANN-LDPC
This paper proposes ANN-LDPC with various input parameters of Cases 1–5 for 3-D and 2-D TLC NAND flash. Input parameters are added step-by-step from Cases 1 to 5. As more parameters are used in the training from Cases 1 to 5, LLR becomes more precise and more errors are corrected.
A. Proposed ANN-LDPC With Cases 1–3
Fig. 9 shows input parameters of Cases 1–3. Cases 1–3 are one-hidden-layer ANN that uses only static information such as VTH state, page type, word-line number, adjacent cell data, and read offset level as input parameters. Case 1 considers only page type, upper/middle/lower pages, and the VTH state as input parameters. Thus, only the electric field effects across the tunnel oxide on the vertical charge de-trap are considered.

In Case 2, VTH states of adjacent word-lines and the wordline number inside the NAND block are added for 3-D TLC
NAND flash. On the other hand, VTH states of adjacent wordlines and bit-lines are added as input parameters for 2-D TLC
NAND flash. Moreover, in Case 3, the read offset level that
represents the precise VTH location within each VTH state is also included as the input parameters. In this evaluations, each
VTH state is divided into eight levels. Fig. 10 shows read operation of Cases 1–3. In Case 2,
to input VTH states of adjacent word-lines, WL (n − 1) and WL (n + 1) are read. Since the read offset level is obtained with extra reads by changing the read word-line voltage, Case 3 needs 63 VREF sensing at WL (n). In conventional soft-decoding LDPC [16], LLR is obtained by 49 VREF sensing. Case 2 has a smaller number of VREF sensing (21 VREF sensing) than the soft-decoding LDPC [16], which has 49 VREF sensing. Fig. 11 shows the example of input parameters of Case 1. After reading upper/middle/lower pages of one word-line, the input parameters x1 ∼ x11, whose values are 0 or 1, are determined. If page type of read data is
“lower” and VTH state is “erase”-state, value of x1 and x11 is 1 and the other values are 0. Then, x1 ∼ x11 are input to ANN.
Fig. 12 shows the relation between measured BER (answer
data) and predicted BER of Case 2. Note that the vertical axis

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:40:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAKAMURA et al.: ADAPTIVE ANN-COUPLED LDPC ECC AS UNIVERSAL SOLUTION

749

Fig. 13. Comparison between measured BER (answer data) and predicted BER. BER at each read offset level is successfully reproduced by the proposed ANN.

Fig. 14. Measured LDPC decoding results of Cases 1–3 in (a) charge-trap 3-D and (b) floating-gate 2-D NAND flash memories. In Case 3, the acceptable data-retention time increases by 76× and 45× compared with conventional BCH ECC in charge-trap 3-D and 2-D NAND flash memories, respectively.

Fig. 12. Comparison between measured BER (answer data) and predicted BER. (a) Lateral charge migration of charge-trap 3-D TLC NAND flash and (b) floating-gate capacitive coupling of floating-gate 2-D TLC NAND flash are successfully reproduced by the proposed ANN.
in Fig. 12(a) is calculated as follows:
BER of read “F”-state at WL(n) = # of error bits in “F”-state read from nand flash . (1) # of bits in “F”-state read from nand flash If “G” to “F” VTH down error which is the highest data-
retention error occurs, the error is included in “F”-state in Fig. 12(a). In addition, because the “G” to “F” VTH down error caused by lateral charge migration is also observed, “F”-state is chosen at WL (n) in Fig. 12(a). In Fig. 12(b), “Erase”-state is chosen at WL (i ) and BL (s) because the VTH increase caused by inter floating-gate capacitive coupling

noise is large in “Erase”-state. As shown in Figs. 12 and 13, predicted BER fits well with measured BER (answer data) even if the inference of ANN is performed by using the one-hidden-layer ANN. In a charge-trap 3-D NAND flash, the lateral charge migration is successfully reproduced by ANN [Fig. 12(a)]. When the VTH differences between adjacent cells become larger, the lateral electric field becomes larger [3], [6]. The stored charge moves to the adjacent cells and increases errors. In 2-D NAND flash memories, the inter floating-gate capacitive coupling in both adjacent word-lines and bit-lines is successfully reproduced by ANN [Fig. 12(b)]. Moreover, in Case 3, read offset level, which is the most strongly related to BER, is successfully reproduced by ANN (Fig. 13). Because more detailed information of charge loss and interference is included, BER is more precisely predicted.
Fig. 14 shows measured LDPC decoding results of Cases 1–3 in charge-trap 3-D and 2-D NAND flash memories. Acceptable data-retention time is defined as the maximum

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:40:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

750

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2019

Fig. 15. Input parameters of ANN with Cases 4 and 5 for 3-D NAND flash.

Fig. 16. Example of input parameters of Case 4. In Case 4, both static and dynamic parameters are input to ANN simultaneously. The input parameters of data-retention time and write/erase cycles are continuous values.

data-retention time at the fixed write/erase cycles while LDPC ECC corrects errors within 30 iteration cycles. Acceptable BER is defined as BER at the acceptable data-retention time. In the 3-D TLC NAND flash, Cases 1–3 extend acceptable BER by 1.3×, 2.1×, and over 9.1×, which extend the data-retention time by 2.1×, 5.3×, and over 76× compared with conventional Bose–Chaudhuri–Hocquenghem (BCH) ECC, respectively [Fig. 14(a)]. On the other hand, in the 2-D TLC NAND flash, Case 2 does not extend data-retention time compared with Case 1 [Fig. 14(b)].
These results provide us with interesting insight about the difference between 3-D and 2-D NAND flash memories. In 3-D NAND flash, lateral charge migration is strongly related to BER of read data as shown in Fig. 12(a), which means adjacent word-line data have a large impact on BER of WL (n). Thus, Case 2 predicts BER more precisely and data-retention time is extended compared with Case 1. On the other hand, in 2-D NAND flash, the inter floating-gate capacitive coupling noise [Fig. 12(b)] is weakly related to BER compared with lateral charge migration of 3-D NAND flash [Fig. 12(a)], which means adjacent both word-line and bit-line data have a small impact on BER of WL (n). Thus, Case 2 does not predict BER more precisely and data-retention time is not extended compared with Case 1. As a result, the read offset level information becomes essential just like Case 3. In Case 3, acceptable data-retention time is extended by over 45× compared with conventional BCH ECC.
B. Proposed ANN-LDPC With Cases 4 and 5
Fig. 15 shows the proposed ANN-LDPC with Cases 4 and 5. Cases 4 and 5 also consider dynamic information such as data-retention time and endurance, compared with Cases 1 and 2, respectively. The data-retention time can be automatically estimated by evaluating the BER of pre-recorded sample data [12]. The charge loss depends on both data-retention time and endurance. Fig. 16 shows an example of input parameters of Case 4. The input value of data-retention time and write/erase cycles is a continuous value. Static information is input to ANN as same as Case 1.
Fig. 17 shows the comparison of one-hidden-layer ANN and two-hidden-layer ANN in Case 4. Cases 1–3 have onehidden-layer ANN because predicted BER achieves sufficient

Fig. 17. (a) Comparison of one-hidden-layer ANN and two-hidden-layer ANN in Case 4. In the case of one-hidden layer ANN, predicted BER does not fit well with measured BER (answer data) at (b) page type and (c) data-retention time.
accuracy even by one-hidden-layer ANN which has smaller weight data than two-hidden-layer ANN. However, when the data-retention time and write/erase cycles are added to input parameters, predicted BER does not coincide with measured BER (answer data) by using one-hidden-layer ANN. On the other hand, two-hidden-layer ANN reproduces precise BER at various data-retention time and endurance. Thus, Cases 4 and 5 are evaluated with two-hidden-layer ANN.
Fig. 18 shows the weight tables of ANN-LDPC. Because BER has correlations with data-retention time and write/erase cycles, weight data vary as the data-retention time and write/ erase cycles increase. In Cases 1–3, training of ANN is necessary for each data-retention time and endurance because data-retention time and endurance are not considered as input parameters [Fig. 18(a)]. On the other hand, Cases 4 and 5 use data-retention time and write/erase cycles as input parameters of ANN and thus do not need such redundant tables. As a result, only one set of synaptic weights is used [Fig. 18(b)]. The weight table size of ANN-LDPC is shown in Fig. 18(c).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:40:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAKAMURA et al.: ADAPTIVE ANN-COUPLED LDPC ECC AS UNIVERSAL SOLUTION

751

Fig. 18. Weight tables in (a) Cases 1–3 and (b) Cases 4 and 5. (c) Weight table size of Case 5 is 5.2 × 104 times smaller than Case 2 because only one set of weights are needed.

Fig. 20. Measurement results of Cases 4 and 5. Acceptable data-retention time increases by 3.9× and 3.2× compared with conventional BCH ECC in (a) charge-trap and (b) floating-gate 3-D NAND flash cells, respectively.

acceptable BER increases by 1.7× and 2×, which extends the data-retention time by 3.9× and 3.2× compared with conventional BCH ECC in charge-trap and floating-gate cells, respectively. Note that Case 5 precisely and automatically predicts BER of both charge-trap and floating-gate 3-D NAND flash. Thus, the proposed ANN is a versatile technique that adaptively describes relations of BER and various physical mechanisms such as lateral charge migration of charge-trap cells [Fig. 12(a)] and inter floating-gate capacitive coupling of floating-gate cells (Fig. 19).

Fig. 19. Predicted BER of Case 5. In the floating-gate 3-D NAND flash, inter floating-gate capacitive coupling is successfully reproduced by ANN.
The table size of Cases 1–3 is estimated by assuming that the number of measurement points of data-retention time and write/erase cycles are 100. The table size of Case 5 decreases from 928 MB of Case 2 to 490 KB, which is 5.2 × 104 times smaller [Fig. 18(c)].
Fig. 19 shows the prediction results of Case 5. Predicted BER of Case 5 has some mismatch compared with measured BER (answer data). However, this mismatch is acceptable for LDPC decoding, as shown in Fig. 20. Fig. 20 shows measured LDPC decoding results of Cases 4 and 5. ANN-LDPC with Case 5 decodes with only slightly smaller iteration cycles compared with LDPC with measured BER. LDPC with measured BER is the ideal case where LDPC decodes by using LLR calculated based on measured BER (answer data). In Case 5,

IV. COMPARISON OF TRAINING WITH MIXED MULTIPLE CHIP DATA AND EACH CHIP DATA
In this section, the chip-to-chip variation of the training data is evaluated. The training of ANN is performed with random data composed of mixed multiple chip data with variations and compared to training with each chip data without variations (Fig. 21). Random data are generated by using a Mersenne Twister algorithm [17]. In the case of training with each chip data (without chip variation), predicted BER of ANN is more precise because training and inference are performed with different memory cells in the same chip, which means the influence of the inter-chip variation is not considered. However, training of ANN becomes mandatory for each single chip, which increases the test cost. If training of ANN is performed per one chip, about 10 h training is required per one NAND flash chip by operating the single GPU chip. On the other hand, in the case of training with mixed multiple chip data, training of ANN is not performed for each chip. If BER is predicted based on the single-chip data, the predicted LLR is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:40:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

752

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2019

Fig. 21. Comparison of training with one-chip data (without variation) and mixed three-chip data or five-chip data (with variation). Training data size of both training with one-chip data and three-chip data are 5.0 MB. In the case of training with five-chip data, more training data (8.7 MB) are prepared.

Fig. 22. Measured chip variation of Chip #1–#6. After 6-day data-retention, BER of the least reliable Chip #3 is 2.0× higher than that of the most reliable Chip #4.

not strictly precise. However, if the average value of multiple chips is used, the prediction fits well with LLR of each chip. First, in this evaluation, three-chip data (Chips #1–#3) or fivechip data (Chips #1–#5) are mixed (Fig. 21). The training data size of training with each chip data and three chip data are 5.0 MB. In the case of training with five-chip data, 8.7-MB training data are prepared. Training data are composed of various data-retention time and write/erase cycles.
Fig. 22 shows the measured chip variation of Chips #1–#6. Measured BER of the least reliable Chip #3 is 2.0× higher than that of the most reliable Chip #4. This chip variation of errors degrades the accuracy of predicted BER [Fig. 23(a)].
In Fig. 23(a), the red, blue, and green lines show prediction results by using ANN with Case 5 trained with each chip data, three-chip data, and five-chip data, respectively. Input parameters of Case 5 are shown in Fig. 15. When predicting Chips #1 and #5, predicted BER trained with each chip data and multiple chip data are almost same and fits well with measured BER (answer data). On the other hand, when predicting Chips #2–#4, predicted BER trained with multiple chip data does not fit with measured BER (answer data).

Fig. 23. Variation comparison results of training with each chip data, threechip data, and five-chip data. (a) When predicting Chip #2–#4, predicted BER that are trained with three-chip data varies due to chip variations. (b) However, Case 5 trained with each chip data decodes with the only slightly small iteration cycles compared with Case 5 trained with three-chip data. Thus, the chip variation may only slightly affect the LDPC decoding results in the proposed ANN-LDPC. Moreover, Case 5 trained with five-chip data decodes with smaller iteration cycles compared with Case 5 trained with three-chip data, which means that more training data can improve the error correction capability.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:40:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

NAKAMURA et al.: ADAPTIVE ANN-COUPLED LDPC ECC AS UNIVERSAL SOLUTION

753

Fig. 25. Photograph of the proposed storage [10].
training data can improve the error correction capability of ANN-LDPC.

Fig. 24. Summary of the proposed ANN-LDPC for 2-D and 3-D NAND flash.
In the most reliable Chip #4, predicted BER trained with three-chip data is 1.5× higher than the measured BER (answer data). Similarly, in the least reliable Chip #3, predicted BER trained with three-chip data is 0.8× lower than the measured BER (answer data). In the case of Chip #6 whose data are not included in the training data, predicted BER trained with multiple chip data fits well with measured BER (answer data).
Fig. 23(b) represents the LDPC decoding results of training with each chip data, three-chip data, and five-chip data. When comparing Case 5 trained with each chip data (black line) and three-chip data (red line), Case 5 trained with each chip data decodes with only slightly smaller iteration cycles. Especially, in Chips #2– #4, although predicted BER trained with three-chip data is varied due to chip variations, the error correction capability of ANN-LDPC is only slightly degraded. Thus, the chip variation has a little influence on the proposed ANN-LDPC as long as this paper evaluates 6 chips. Thus, the influence of the chip variation can be small. Evaluation for mass chips is the future work. In addition, when comparing Case 5 trained with three-chip data (red line) and five-chip data (blue line), Case 5 trained with five-chip data can decode with smaller iteration cycles. This result means that more

V. CONCLUSION
Fig. 24 shows the summary of this paper and Fig. 25 shows the photograph of the proposed storage. This paper evaluates five cases of ANN-LDPC with various input parameters. Cases 1–3 predict BER by using only static information such as VTH state, page type, word-line number, adjacent cell data, and read offset level. In addition, Cases 4 and 5 consider dynamic information such as data-retention time and write/erase cycles. Case 5 is the most optimal choice that achieves the fast read and high reliability with minimum weight tables. Case 5 extends the acceptable data-retention time by 3.9× and 3.2× in charge-trap and floating-gate 3-D NAND flash, respectively. When the reliability is seriously degraded by the excessive endurance, the read offset level is also considered as input parameters of ANN just like Case 3. Case 3 extends acceptable data-retention time by over 76× and 45× in charge-trap 3-D and 2-D NAND flash, respectively.
In addition, this paper evaluates the impacts of chip variation on proposed ANN-LDPC. As a result, the chip variation can have a small influence on the proposed ANN-LDPC. Moreover, more training data can improve the error correction capability of ANN-LDPC.
Because the proposed ANN-LDPC can adaptively correct errors of scaled charge-trap and floating-gate 3-D and 2-D NAND flash, it will be the universal solution for the future solid-state storage at data centers.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Mizoguchi, T. Takahashi, S. Aritome, and K. Takeuchi, “Dataretention characteristics comparison of 2D and 3D TLC NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), Monterey, CA, USA, May 2017, pp. 1–4.
[2] C. Kim et al., “A 512 Gb 3b/cell 64-stacked WL 3D V-NAND flash memory,” in ISSCC Dig. Tech. Papers, San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2017, pp. 202–203.
[3] B. Choi et al., “Comprehensive evaluation of early retention (fast charge loss within a few seconds) characteristics in tube-type 3-D NAND flash memory,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Technol., Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2016, pp. 1–2.
[4] A. Maconi et al., “Comprehensive investigation of the impact of lateral charge migration on retention performance of planar and 3D SONOS devices,” Solid-State Electron., vol. 74, pp. 64–70, Aug. 2012.
[5] H.-J. Kang et al., “Comprehensive analysis of retention characteristics in 3-D NAND flash memory cells with tube-type poly-Si channel structure,” in Proc. Symp. VLSI Technol. (VLSI), Kyoto, Japan, Jun. 2015, pp. T182–T183.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:40:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

754

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2019

[6] K. Mizoguchi, S. Kotaki, Y. Deguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “Lateral charge migration suppression of 3D-NAND flash by VTH nearing for near data computing,” in IEDM Tech. Dig., San Francisco, CA, USA, Dec. 2017, pp. 19.2.1–19.2.4.
[7] K. Parat and C. Dennison, “A floating gate based 3D NAND technology with CMOS under array,” in IEDM Tech. Dig., San Francisco, CA, USA, Dec. 2015, pp. 3.3.1–3.3.4.
[8] R. Yamada, Y. Mori, Y. Okuyama, J. Yugami, T. Nishimoto, and H. Kume, “Analysis of detrap current due to oxide traps to improve flash memory retention,” in Proc. IEEE 38th Annu. Int. Rel. Phys. Symp., San Jose, CA, USA, Apr. 2000, pp. 200–204.
[9] J.-D. Lee, S.-H. Hur, and J.-D. Choi, “Effects of floating-gate interference on NAND flash memory cell operation,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 264–266, May 2002.
[10] T. Nakamura, Y. Deguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “9.1× Error acceptable adaptive artificial neural network coupled LDPC ECC for charge-trap and floating-gate 3D-NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE Custom Integr. Circuits Conf. (CICC), San Diego, CA, USA, Apr. 2018, pp. 1–4.
[11] S. Kazama, S. Gokita, S. Kuwamura, E. Yoshida, J. Ogawa, and Y. Honda, “Memory expansion technology using software-controlled SSD,” in Proc. Flash Memory Summit, Santa Clara, CA, USA, Aug. 2017, pp. 1–10.
[12] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Over-10×-extendedlifetime 76%-reduced-error solid-state drives (SSDs) with errorprediction LDPC architecture and error-recovery scheme,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, San Francisco, CA, USA, Feb. 2012, pp. 424–426.
[13] T. Tokutomi, S. Tanakamaru, T. O. Iwasaki, and K. Takeuchi, “Advanced error prediction LDPC for high-speed reliable TLC nand-based SSDs,” in Proc. IEEE 6th Int. Memory Workshop (IMW), Taipei, Taiwan, May 2014, pp. 1–4.
[14] Y. Deguchi, T. Tokutomi, and K. Takeuchi, “System-level error correction by read-disturb error model of 1Xnm TLC NAND Flash memory for read-intensive enterprise solid-state drives (SSDs),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp. (IRPS), Pasadena, CA, USA, Apr. 2016, pp. MY6-1–MY-6-4.
[15] S. Tanakamaru, Y. Yanagihara, and K. Takeuchi, “Error-prediction LDPC and error-recovery schemes for highly reliable solid-state drives (SSDs),” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 48, no. 11, pp. 2920–2933, Nov. 2013.
[16] C. Kim et al., “A 21 nm high performance 64 Gb MLC NAND flash memory with 400 MB/s asynchronous toggle DDR interface,” in Symp. VLSI Circuits-Dig. Tech. Papers, Honolulu, HI, USA, Jun. 2011, pp. 196–197.
[17] M. Matsumoto and T. Nishimura, “Mersenne twister: A 623-dimensionally equidistributed uniform pseudo-random number generator,” ACM Trans. Model. Comput. Simul., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 3–30, Jan. 1998.
Toshiki Nakamura received the B.E. degree from the Department of Electrical, Electric, and Communication Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan, in 2017, where he is currently pursuing the M.S. degree.
He has been involved in research on reliability of NAND flash memory.

Yoshiaki Deguchi (S’17) received the B.E. and M.E. degrees from the Department of Electrical, Electric, and Communication Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan, in 2016 and 2018, respectively.
He is currently working with the Research and Development Group, Hitachi Ltd., Yokohama, Japan. He has been involved in research on reliability enhancement techniques, ECCs, data compression techniques, and approximate computing for NAND flash memory-based solid-state drive (SSD).
Ken Takeuchi (M’01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in applied physics and the Ph.D. degree in electric engineering from The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1991, 1993, and 2006, respectively, and the MBA degree from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA, in 2003.
In 1993, he joined Toshiba, Yokohama, Japan. where he was leading Toshiba’s NAND flash memory circuit design for 14 years. He was an Associate Professor with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, from 2007 to 2012. In 2012, he joined Chuo University, Tokyo, where he is currently a Professor with the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Engineering, Faculty of Science and Engineering. He is currently working on the database storage system for big-data application, VLSI circuit design, signal processing and device such as the emerging non-volatile memories, 3-D-integrated solid-state drives (SSDs), low-power 3-D-LSI circuits, and ultralow-voltage SRAMs. He designed six world’s highest density NAND flash memory products including 0.7-µm 16-Mbit, 0.4-µm 64-Mbit, 0.25-µm 256-Mbit, 0.16-µm 1-Gbit, 0.13-µm 2-Gbit, and 56-nm 8-Gbit NAND flash memories. He has authored numerous technical papers. He holds 228 patents worldwide including 124 U.S. patents. He invented Multipage Cell Architecture, presented at the Symposium on VLSI Circuits in 1997. He successfully commercialized the world’s first multi-level cell NAND flash memory in 2001. Dr. Takeuchi was a Program Committee Member of the International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), the Symposium on VLSI Circuits, the Custom Integrated Circuits Conference, the Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference, the International Reliability Physics Symposium, the International Memory Workshop, the International Conference on Solid-State Devices and Materials, and Non-Volatile Memory Technology Symposium. He served as a Tutorial Speaker for ISSCC 2008, Forum Speaker for ISSCC 2015, Solid-State Drive (SSD) Forum Organizer for ISSCC 2009, 3D-LSI Forum Organizer for ISSCC 2010, Ultra-Low Voltage LSI Forum Organizer for ISSCC 2011, and Robust VLSI System Forum Organizer for ISSCC 2012. He serves as Program Chair of the Symposium on VLSI Circuits. He was a recipient of the Takuo Sugano Award for Outstanding Paper at ISSCC 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:40:49 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

