IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

1061

A New Linear Programming Approach to Decoding Linear Block Codes
Kai Yang, Student Member, IEEE, Xiaodong Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, and Jon Feldman, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a new linear programming formulation for the decoding of general linear block codes. Different from the original formulation given by Feldman, the number of total variables to characterize a parity-check constraint in our formulation is less than twice the degree of the corresponding check node. The equivalence between our new formulation and the original formulation is proven. The new formulation facilitates to characterize the structure of linear block codes, and leads to new decoding algorithms. In particular, we show that any fundamental polytope is simply the intersection of a group of the so-called minimum polytopes, and this simplified formulation allows us to formulate the problem of calculating the minimum Hamming distance of any linear block code as a simple linear integer programming problem with much less auxiliary variables. We then propose a branch-and-bound method to compute a lower bound to the minimum distance of any linear code by solving a corresponding linear integer programming problem. In addition, we prove that, for the family of single parity-check (SPC) product codes, the fractional distance and the pseudodistance are both equal to the minimum distance. Finally, we propose an efficient algorithm for decoding SPC product codes with low complexity and maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding performance.
Index Terms—Fractional distance, fundamental polytope, linear programming (LP) decoding, message-passing decoder, pseudodistance, single parity-check (SPC) product code.
I. INTRODUCTION
R ECENTLY, a linear programming (LP) approach has been proposed in [2], [3], and [1] for decoding binary linear codes. This method is based on an LP relaxation of the original maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding problem, which makes it simpler to analyze than the conventional message-passing decoders. For example, the concept of pseudocodeword arising from the LP decoding has been used to explain why iterative decoding algorithms for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes such as the sum–product algorithm fail in certain scenarios [4]–[7]. Moreover, under the LP formulation, the decoder can be any algorithm that solves the LP exactly or approximately. For certain linear codes, one may exploit some specific structures to obtain efficient decoders. Given the large arsenal of powerful algorithms to solve very large-scale LP, the LP approach may
Manuscript received November 3, 2006; revised November 8, 2007. This work was supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation (NSF) under Grant DMS 0244583, and in part by the U.S. Office of Naval Research (ONR) under Grant N00014-03-1-0039.
K. Yang and X. Wang are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 USA (e-mail: kyee@ee.columbia. edu; wangx@ee.columbia.edu).
J. Feldman was with the Department of Industrial Engineering and Operations Research, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 USA. He is now with Google, New York, NY 10011 USA (e-mail: jonfeld@ieor.columbia.edu).
Communicated by I. Dumer, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2007.915712

lead to a paradigm shift in decoding error-correction codes. In fact, in [8], several LP decoders are developed for LDPC codes. In [9], an LP-based algorithm similar to the sum–product algorithm is proposed, and in [10], an adaptive LP decoding method is proposed to reduce the computational complexity of the LP decoder.
So far, most works in this area were based on the formulation given in [1]. In general, the number of auxiliary variables and constraints in this formulation increases exponentially with the maximum degree of the check nodes, which renders it inapplicable to linear codes with a high-density parity-check matrix.
The main contributions of this paper are threefold. First, we give a new LP formulation of decoding linear block code that is much simpler than the original formulation. In our formulation, the number of variables and constraints to characterize a parity-check constraint is less than twice the degree of the check node. We prove that this new formulation is equivalent to the original formulation. We introduce a new concept called the “minimum polytope.” We show that the fundamental polytope of an arbitrary linear code is the intersection of a group of minimum polytopes. This formulation provides a means to characterize the structure of any linear block codes and offers insight into some fundamental problems such as how to calculate the minimum distance of any linear codes. Second, we show that, under the new LP formulation, the fractional distance of any linear block code can be easily calculated by solving a group of LPs. We also propose a branch-and-bound method to compute a nontrivial lower bound to the minimum distance of any linear block code. We further show that, for the family of SPC product codes, the fractional distance and pseudodistance are both equal to the minimum distance. Finally, based on the new formulation, we develop an efficient subgradient decoder that achieves the ML decoding performance for SPC product codes.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we present a new LP formulation of the decoding problem and prove the equivalence between the new formulation and the original one. In Section III, we discuss the calculation of the fractional distance and a lower bound to the minimum distance of any linear codes. In Section IV, we propose an efficient decoding algorithm for SPC product codes. Section V contains the conclusions.
II. NEW LP FORMULATION
Let denote the transmitted codeword over the noisy channel, and denote the received codeword. Given , the ML decoding problem is to obtain the estimated codeword that maximizes the likelihood of observing under the channel model.

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1062

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

Fig. 1. Graph illustration of the proposed scheme to decompose a parity-check constraint with degree-6 into four parity-check constraints with degree-3.

Define as the log–likelihood ratio given by

(1)

The ML decoding over any binary memoryless sym-

metric channel corresponds to finding the codeword

that minimizes

[1]. We

may interpret as the “cost” of decoding

.

Denote the parity-check matrix of the binary linear code as

; the integer programming formulation of the

ML decoding problem is then given by

and

However, both constraints in (2) are nonlinear, thus it is chal-

lenging to obtain a proper relaxation of the original problem.

In [1], the ML decoding problem is reformulated based on the

corresponding Tanner graph. The key idea is to introduce auxil-

iary variables and to replace the constraints

,

, by certain linear equalities and inequalities. However, the

number of constraints and variables in this formulation increases

quickly with the degree of the check node.

Here, we propose a new formulation for the LP decoding

problem. The number of variables and constraints in our new

formulation is only about twice the degree of the check node.

The basic idea is to decompose a high-degree check node into

several low-degree check nodes. We can then use simple equal-

ities and inequalities to represent the local constraints. This de-

composition approach is demonstrated in Fig. 1. Considering

the following parity-check constraint:

(2)

(3)

where denotes the modular- operation. A. Basic Idea

define auxiliary variables , , and . It is easy to verify that the parity-check constraint in (3) is equivalent to the following set of constraints:

In this section, we present a cascaded integer programming

formulation for the problem of ML decoding of a binary linear

code. This leads directly to the LP formulation via relaxation.

The integer programming problem given in (2) is very hard

to solve, because the polyhedron determined by the constraints

(4)

cannot be described in polynomial time of the code length. A

standard approach is to relax the original polyhedron to be some The previous transformation is performed because each parity-

other convex set so that the transformed problem is tractable. check constraint

can be characterized by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: A NEW LINEAR PROGRAMMING APPROACH TO DECODING LINEAR BLOCK CODES

1063

a group of linear constraints which, together with the integer

constraints

, lead to an equivalent representation

of the constraints in (3). Specifically, it can be verified that the

parity-check constraints given in (4) are equivalent to the fol-

lowing group of constraints:

satisfy the constraints given in (7) or (8) . Then,

.

Proof: Assume is an even number, for any

, and

let

, ; it follows that

. We can

generate

by the following:

(9)

Thus, we have

, which means

.

Therefore, we have

. Similarly, we can show that

. Thus,

. We can show that the proposi-

tion holds in a similar way for the case of an odd number.

(5)

We can then relax the integer constraints

into the linear constraints

such that a new for-

mation of the LP decoding problem can be obtained. A general

statement of the previous transformation and the corresponding

proofs are given next.

Moreover, if

, we can recursively further decompose

the parity-check constraint

similar to (7) or

(8). Let

. At the th decomposition step, we have

. The transformation at the th step can be written as

B. Cascaded Integer Programming Formulation of Ml

Decoding

if

Assume there are ones in the th row of the parity-check

matrix with the index

. Thus, the th parity-

if

check constraint can be written as

(6)

Let

, if is an even number, i.e.,

;

similarly to the previous example, the original parity-check con-

straint in (6) can be rewritten as follows:

(7)

where

(10)

Proposition 2: Assume there are s in the th row of the

parity-check matrix , and let

represent the index

of s. Denote

,

,

satisfy the constraints given in (10) . We

have

.

Proof: From Proposition 1, we have

,

. Thus,

.

If is an odd number, i.e., similar transformation given by

, we can have the

The previous decomposition approach can be treated as the

extension of the reformulation of a Tanner graph in [11, Fig. 19].

However, the decomposition scheme here provides a more gen-

eral hierarchical structure and rigorous mathematical proof. Let

and

. Since should sat-

isfy all parity-check constraints, we have

, . Thus,

the original optimization problem given in (2) can be written as

(11) (8)

Proposition 1: Assume there are ones in the th row of

the parity-check matrix , then let

represent the

index of s. Define

,

,

satisfy the constraints given in (6) ,

From Proposition 2, we can replace any by , without changing the solution. In particular, we can
replace each by and obtain the following optimization problem:

and

,

,

(12)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1064

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

C. New LP Formulation
The motivation of the LP decoding is to replace in (11) by their corresponding convex
hulls to obtain an LP problem, given by

(13)

However, the set is specified by the nonlinear parity-

check constraint and integer constraints thus its convex hull

cannot be obtained directly. One approach is to introduce auxil-

iary variables and replace the nonlinear parity-check constraint

by a group of linear constraints so that the corresponding convex

hull can be obtained by simply relaxing the integer constraints.

It follows from Proposition 2 that

, and therefore,

. We will show next that the convex

hull of each set can be easily generated by simple inequality

constraints, as in (5). We first give the following proposition.

of is a tree, it follows from [5, Lemma 28] that the polytope

of the LP relaxation problem is the convex hull of codewords,

i.e.,

.

We assume

. Because the polytope for

is

simply

, without loss of generality, we

assume

hereafter. In addition, from (10), it is seen

auxiliary variables are generated to reduce a parity-check with

degree to a parity-check with degree . Denote the number

of auxiliary variables to characterize a parity-check with degree

as . We show next

and

.

As shown in Fig. 1, the number of edges connected to the check

node, the number of original variable nodes, and the number of

auxiliary variable nodes are , respectively. Thus, we have

(15)

In addition, the number of nodes in a tree is equal to the number of edges plus . Therefore, we have

Proposition 3: Denote

(16)

, and

.

Then,

and the convex hull of is given

by

. Sim-

ilarly, denote

and

.

Then,

and the convex hull of is given by

.

Proof: By simply enumerating all the feasible solutions,

we have

and

. In addition, the set of all

extreme points of is equal to , and the set of the extreme

points of is equal to . Thus, and are the convex

hulls of and , respectively.

The previous proposition gives a compact representation of the convex hull of the set corresponding to the parity-check constraint with three elements. Specifically, the polytope is defined as minimum polytope hereafter. We will show in the following theorem that the convex hull of the set can be represented by the intersection of a group of minimum polytopes.

Theorem 4: Assume

. Let denote the projection

onto the original space of . Denote

as the th min-

imum polytope of the th parity-check constraint, and

as

the number of minimum polytopes for the th parity-check con-

straint. The convex hull of the set characterized by the th parity-

check constraint is equivalent to the intersection of a group of

minimum polytopes projected onto the original space of ,

i.e.,

(14)

Proof: It follows from Proposition 2 that

, thus

. In addition, since the Tanner graph

From (15) and (16), we can obtain that

and

.

Therefore, by relaxing the integer constraints in (12), we can

obtain the following LP formulation:

(17)

Because

, the optimization

problem in (17) is equivalent to the original LP relaxation ob-

tained in [1]. For simplicity, the original LP in [1] is denoted

as LP and the new LP is denoted as C-LP (cascaded LP) here-

after. We assume every symbol of the codeword is involved in

at least one parity check. Denote and , respectively, as the

maximum degree of any variable node and check node in the

Tanner graph. It has been shown that the number of variables

and constraints in original LP formulation are

and

, respectively [1]. A modified for-

mulation has

variables and

constraints [1]. On the other hand, because

, there are at most

auxiliary variables and original

variables to characterize a parity-check constraint. Thus, at most

variables are required to characterize a parity-check

constraint. Moreover, we need

groups of constraints for

each parity check, and there are four constraints in each group.

Hence, for parity-check constraints, the new C-LP formula-

tion needs

variables and

con-

straints, which is of much lower complexity than original LP

formulation.

Furthermore, as shown in [9], the idea of LP decoding is

also to replace the local constraints enforced by each parity-

check constraint with its corresponding convex hull. Thus, it

leads to the same formulation as (17) and we have the following

corollary.

Corollary 5: The C-LP is equivalent to the original LP, i.e., decoding using one formulation leads to the same result as using the other.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: A NEW LINEAR PROGRAMMING APPROACH TO DECODING LINEAR BLOCK CODES

1065

Therefore, the C-LP decoder shares the same properties of the LP decoder, such as the ML-certificate property and the all-zero assumptions[1]. In particular, it has been shown in [1, Th. 12] that the LP decoder is equivalent to the belief propagation (BP) decoder under the binary erasure channel (BEC). Hence, the following corollary follows immediately.

Corollary 6: Under the BEC, the C-LP decoder obtains the same result as given by the BP decoder.

Recall that denotes the length of the codeword and de-

notes the degree of the th parity-check constraint. Thus, for a

parity-check matrix , we need

vari-

ables and

constraints to characterize it.

Moreover, we can perform modular- summations between dif-

ferent rows of to create more s and obtain a new parity-check

matrix without changing the codewords, which may further

reduce the number of constraints and variables in the new for-

mulation. However, note that such manipulation of changing the

parity-check matrix may change the relaxed polytope of the LP

decoder. After we submitted this paper, we found that Chertkov

and Stepanov [12] proposed a similar approach independently

and at about the same time as we did.

The idea of both C-LP and LP is to get a tight relaxation of

each parity constraint, i.e., replacing in the original con-

straints by its corresponding convex hull

, so that the local constraint of each check node is

satisfied. Ideally, if we can get the convex hull of all the code-

word, i.e.,

, then the ML codeword

can be achieved by performing the LP decoding over this convex

hull. It is known from [5, Lemma 28] that the LP relaxation is

exact for trees. We can then obtain the following propositions.

Proposition 7: For a parity-check matrix , if it satisfies for some and , then we have
.

Proposition 8: If there exists at most one “ ” in each column of the parity-check matrix , we have
. Thus, the pseudocodeword obtained by the LP decoder is the ML codeword.

However, in general, the polytope used in LP is not equivalent to the convex hull of the codewords, thus the ML decoding performance cannot be obtained. For codes with small length, we can employ efficient integer programming techniques such as the branch-and-bound method to improve the decoding performance [8].

formulation can be used to efficiently calculate the fractional distance of any linear block code at affordable complexity. In addition, although the fractional distance provides a nontrivial lower bound of the minimum distance, this bound may be loose for certain codes. Here, we develop a new method to calculate a better lower bound. This method is carried out in a multistage manner. At each stage, an improved lower bound over that of the previous stage is obtained by solving a group of LP problems. Then, we prove that for SPC product codes the fractional distance and pseudodistance are both equal to the minimum distance.

A. Calculation of Fractional Distance

Denote

and

as the

total number of auxiliary variables and the number of minimum

polytopes in the C-LP formulation. Denote

and

, where

represents the auxiliary

variables. Due to Propositions 2 and 3, the original integer pro-

gramming problem given in (2) can be written as

(18)

where the matrix is a

matrix representing the

first four constraints of each minimum polytope in Proposition

3 , and is the corresponding right-hand side obtained from

these constraints.

denotes elementwise inequalities, i.e.,

. Thus, the corresponding C-LP is given by

(19)

Any feasible solution of the LP decoding problem in (13) is

defined as a pseudocodeword of the original decoding problem.

Note here any codeword is a pseudocodeword. Moreover, the

fractional distance is defined as the minimum weight of any

nonzero pseudocodeword.

Let

. The binary-input additive white Gaussian noise

(BIAWGN) channel pseudodistance [5], [13] of is defined to

be

(20)

if

and

, otherwise, where

and

are the and norm of , respectively. Let

be a vector with the same components as but in nonincreasing

order. Define

III. COMPUTING A LOWER BOUND OF MINIMUM DISTANCE

The minimum Hamming distance is a classical measure of code performance. However, the exact calculation of the minimum distance of an arbitrary code is very difficult. On the other hand, the fractional distance of an LDPC code can be efficiently calculated by solving the LP formulation given in [1], which servers as a lower bound of the minimum distance. However, the formulation in [1] cannot be used to compute the fractional distance of a code with high-density parity-check matrix due to its high complexity. In this section, we will show that our new

The BSC pseudodistance [5], [13] is defined to be

if

and

, otherwise. The BEC pseudo-

distance [5], [13] is defined as the number of nonzero elements

in .

In [1], the fractional distance of an LDPC code is calculated

by solving a group of LP problems. An objective function is

minimized over the facet of the original polytope. However, its

complexity increases quickly with the degree of the check node.

On the other hand, in our C-LP formulation, the facet of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1066

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

Fig. 2. Fractional distance, minimum distance, and the lower bound of the minimum distance obtained by a branch-and-bound method for a random LDPC code. Code length is 60, the rate is , the left and right degrees of the corresponding Tanner graph are  = 3 and  = 4, respectively.

corresponding polytope can be easily obtained and the number of the following three constraints into the original C-LP, i.e.,

of facets increases only linearly with the degree of check node.

,

, and

.

Thus, the fractional distance can be easily calculated. First, we Denote the corresponding objective values as , , and ,

give the following definition.

respectively. We have

, where

Definition 1: The facet of a polytope on which the all-zero codeword does not sit is defined as a nonzero facet.

and denote the fractional distance and the minimum distance, respectively. Thus, we obtain a lower bound of the minimum distance. Notice this method is performed in a multistage

The following proposition shows how to efficiently calculate manner and this lower bound can be improved by performing

the fractional distance of an arbitrary linear code.

more stages, as given in [8], and will eventually converge to the

Proposition 9: Any nonzero facet of the C-LP polytope must be one of the nonzero facets of its minimum polytopes.
Proof: Due to the definition of facets in [14], one of the inequalities in (19) must be active to form a facet of the C-LP polytope on which the zero codeword does not sit. Because the C-LP polytope is the intersection of a group of minimum polytopes, this inequality must be active for one of the facets of a

Hamming distance.

The pseudodistance [5] is a better metric to characterize the

performance of the LP decoding. Denote , , and as the

fractional distance, pseudodistance, and minimum distance, re-

spectively. In general, we have

, and thus the

performance of the LP decoding is inferior to that of the ML

decoding.

minimum polytope on which the zero codeword does not sit.

Numerical Example: The fractional distance, the minimum

For a minimum polytope

, the facet on which

the zero codeword does not sit can only be formed by one of

the following equalities, i.e.,

,

,

, and

together with . In addition, since the first

three equations are contained in the fourth equation as special

cases, we only need to consider the facet formed by the cut-

ting plan

. Therefore, we can easily compute

the fractional distance of an arbitrary linear code by solving a

group of LP problems. In addition, because the calculation of

the minimum distance can be treated as a special case of the de-

distance, and the lower bounds to the minimum distance of a

random LDPC code are shown in Fig. 2. The length of the

LDPC codeword is 60. The left degree is

and the right

degree is

. It is seen that the fractional distance is far

less than the minimum distance, which may explain the perfor-

mance gap between the ML and LP decoder for a random LDPC

code as illustrated in [8]. On the other hand, it is seen that the

branch-and-bound method can provide a nontrivial lower bound

of the minimum distance. In addition, this lower bound can be

improved successively as the number of iterations increases.

coding problem in which all the log–likelihood ratios (LLRs) are set as , the adaptive branch-and-bound method proposed

B. Distance Properties of SPC Product Codes

in [8] can be applied with minor modification. For example, we It has been observed in [8] that for the family of SPC product

can select two bits

out of the codeword and add one codes, the LP decoder offers the same performance as the ML

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: A NEW LINEAR PROGRAMMING APPROACH TO DECODING LINEAR BLOCK CODES

1067

decoder at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Here, we show the-

oretically that for SPC product codes the fractional distance is

equal to the minimum distance, i.e.,

.

An SPC product code is a relatively large code built from

smaller codeword blocks and its practical performance can be

within 1 dB of the Shannon limit [15]. In addition, it has been

shown that the asymptotic performance can be driven to zero

within 2 dB of the capacity of the additive white Gaussian noise

channel [16] for an SPC product code. A general SPC product

code may have a different length in each dimension. Here, we

consider only the

SPC product code [15], where is

the length of its component code in each dimension and is

its dimension. This code can be represented as a -dimensional

cubic and the component code in each dimension is an SPC code

with block length . Thus, the length of this code is and its

rate is

. For example, the 2-D SPC product code con-

sists of a data block, parity checks on the rows, parity checks on

the columns, and checks on checks. Note that although the rate

of this code approaches zero when the block length grows to

infinity, it can achieve near-capacity performance for practical

block length and code rates [15]. In addition, asymptotic anal-

ysis has shown that there exist SPC product codes with nonzero

rate which can approach the channel capacity when the block

length goes to infinity [16]. In order to show

, the fol-

lowing two corollaries are needed.

Corollary 10: The fractional distance of the fundamental polytope of any SPC code is equal to .
Proof: The parity-check matrix of any SPC code contains exactly one “ ” in each column. Thus, it follows from Proposition 8 that the pseudocodeword is always the codeword of the SPC code. Therefore, its fractional distance is equal to , which is the minimum distance of any SPC code.

Corollary 11: Any feasible solution to the LP decoding

problem given in (17) for any SPC code is either an all-zero

codeword or it contains at least two nonzero variables, i.e.,

and

,,

.

Proof: Because the polytope given in (17) of any SPC code

is a convex hull, any point inside can be expressed as a linear

combination of its extreme points. It follows from Corollary 10

that any nonzero extreme point contains at least two nonzero

elements. Therefore, if is not an all-zero codeword, it must

contain at least two nonzero elements.

Based on the previous two corollaries, we are ready to prove the following theorem.

Theorem 12: The fractional distance of the fundamental

polytope of any -dimensional SPC product code is equal to

its minimum distance, i.e.,

.

Proof: It follows from Corollary 11 that Theorem 12 holds

for

. We will prove this theorem by induction. Suppose

that it is true for

. It follows from Corollary 11 that each

nonzero pseudocodeword of the

SPC product code

contains at least two nonzero variables. Due to the special struc-

ture of the SPC product code, an

SPC product code

can be decomposed into component codes where each com-

ponent code is an

SPC product code. This decomposi-

tion can be performed along each of the

dimensions and

we can always find a decomposition scheme for which the two

nonzero variables fall into different component codes. Assume

the fundamental polytopes of the original polytope and the two

component codes are , , and , respectively. In addition,

let , , and denote the set containing all possible cut-

ting plans

for polytopes

, , and , respectively. The codewords of the

SPC product code and two component codes are denoted as

,

,

and

, respectively. From the defini-

tion of fractional distance, we have

(21)

(22)

(23)

(24)

Here, the first equation is derived from the definition of frac-

tional distance and Proposition 9. Equation (22) is obtained be-

cause of

, and Corollary 11, i.e., any nonzero pseu-

docodeword contains at least two nonzero variables. Because

,

,

, and

, we have

(23). Equation (24) is derived by the assumption that the frac-

tional distance of a

SPC product code is . Thus, the

fractional distance of an

code is at least twice of

the fractional distance of an

code, i.e., . It is known

that the minimum weight of an

SPC product code is

[15]. Therefore, the fractional distance of any -dimen-

sional SPC product code is equal to .

Because the BIAWGN, BSC, and BEC pseudodistances of any linear block code are lower bounded by the corresponding fractional distances, we then have the following corollary.

Corollary 13: The BIAWGN, BSC, and BEC pseudodistances of any SPC product codes are equal to .

The concept of pseudoweight spectrum gap has been introduced in [17] to characterize the performance gap of the ML decoder and LP decoder. The pseudoweight spectrum gap can be loosely defined as the difference between the smallest pseudoweight of the noncodeword pseudocodeword and the minimum distance. If the pseudoweight spectrum gap is strictly positive, the performance of the LP decoder will converge to that of the ML decoder when SNR grows to infinity. Since the fractional distance of the class of codes under consideration is equal to their minimum distance, it is easy to obtain the following proposition.

Proposition 14: If the fractional distance of the fundamental polytope of a code is equal to its Hamming distance, the BIAWGN pseudoweight spectrum gap of this code is strictly positive.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1068

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

Proof: Recall that is the minimum Hamming distance. For

any noncodeword pseudocodeword

, it

must contain at least one noninteger variable. Because

, , we have

. Therefore,

. Thus, the pseudoweight spectrum gap is

strictly bigger than zero.

Because the fractional distance of the fundamental polytope of any SPC product is equal to its Hamming distance, we have the following corollary.

Corollary 15: The BIAWGN pseudoweight spectrum gap of the SPC product code is strictly positive.

IV. FAST DECODER FOR SPC PRODUCT CODES

Typically, general LP problems are solved by the interior-

point method or the simplex method [18] and their variations.

On the other hand, some codes exhibit specific structures that

can be exploited to devise more efficient decoding algorithms.

For example, low-complexity algorithms based on the LP for-

mulation are proposed in [8]–[10] for LDPC codes.

In this section, we develop a fast decoding method for the

SPC product code based on the Lagrange dual method for in-

teger programming problem (cf. [18, Ch. 11]). Such technique

provides a better approximation to the original ML decoding

problem than the LP decoder. In particular, for the class of

SPC product code under consideration, this dual approach will

always converge to an ML codeword if the LP decoder yields

an integral solution. If the LP decoder reaches a fractional

solution, the dual approach will converge to a solution with

same objective function of this fractional solution (cf. [18, Th.

11.4, Ch. 11]). Note that the parity-check matrix of an

SPC product code can be decomposed into submatrices

such that each submatrix satisfies the conditions for Propo-

sition 8; that is, there exists at most in each column of the

matrix. Hence, and in (18) and (19) can be decomposed

as

and

, and the

optimization problem in (19) can be reformulated as

hand, due to Proposition 8, the pseudocodeword of the LP de-

coding problem given in (26) must be integer; and thus, the con-

straints

,

, are equivalent to the following

constraints:

(27)

Let

. Denote

, because

Equation (26) can be reformulated as

, where .
(28)

The second optimization problem in (28) is given by (29)

which can be easily solved by setting the

if

and

if

. For the first optimization problem in

(28)

(30) Because the vectors and are independent of , we have

(31)

and is determined by

(32)

Because satisfies Proposition 8, every parity-check of this

submatrix is independent of the others. Thus, the optimization

problem in (31) can be fully decomposed into independent sub-

problems as follows. Suppose that there are ones in the th

row of , located at

. The subproblem can be

written as

(25)

By employing the Lagrange dual method [19], for a given

vector

, (25) can be transformed into the following

Lagrange problem:

(33) This subproblem can be efficiently solved by the following Wagner subroutine [20].

(26) Procedure

-

.

where consists of all submatrices of other than , i.e.,

• Set

.

and

. In addition, denote as the

— If

, stop.

parity-check submatrix corresponding to . Define the auxil-

iary variables

, where corresponds to the

auxiliary variables generated by the parity-check matrix .

Recall that

. Because the submatrix of corre-

— Otherwise, let

the elements of the set

• Output

.

, where is one of .

sponding to is a zero matrix, we have

,

where is the submatrix of corresponding to

.

Similarly, the submatrix of corresponding to is a zero

matrix, therefore, we have

, where is

Assume there are rows in the submatrix . We can simply run the previous subroutine in parallel for each row to solve the first optimization problem in (28). After we generate the codeword , we can get the auxiliary variables

the submatrix of corresponding to

. On the other from the solution to (32) and (29).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: A NEW LINEAR PROGRAMMING APPROACH TO DECODING LINEAR BLOCK CODES

1069

  Fig. 3. Convergence behavior of the subgradient decoders against the iteration number for a (4; 4) SPC product code. L denotes the optimal objective value of
the problem given in (35). L , 1 j 4, denotes the objective values against the iteration number for the jth subgradient decoder.

Assume that the optimal solution to the original C-LP is .

We have

. In order to obtain the optimal solution

to the original C-LP problem, we need to solve the following

problem:

(34)

This problem can be solved by the subgradient method. A

subgradient of a concave function

at is a vector such

that

for all . Denote as the

solution of (28), a subgradient of the function

is given by

. Therefore, we can obtain the following subgradient

decoding algorithm.

Algorithm (Dual decomposition method for C-LP decoding)

1) Set

and

.

2) Solve the primal problem given in (28) as outlined previously to obtain .

3) Calculate the subgradient

.

4) If

, stop; otherwise, let

,

; go to step 2).

Here, denotes the projection onto the nonnegative orthant and is a predefined threshold. is a stepsize; and if it satisfies certain conditions such as those given in [18, p. 505], then this method converges.
Furthermore, we may employ a joint subgradient decoder to improve the decoding performance. In this decoder, we can select one group of constraints in (25) as the hard constraints and move the other constraints to the objective function, leading to the following problem that is similar to (26):
(35)
Note that the solution of this method is integral, because the Wagner decoder always outputs an integral solution. If this integral solution is a feasible codeword, it must be the optimal solution of the ML decoding problem. However, in practice, it may not converge to a feasible codeword because we have moved part of the constraint to the objective function. In addition, we can run a given number of iterations of the previous subgradient decoding algorithm for each problem in (35) and then the one with the maximum objective value is taken as the final result. Such a method can provide a diversity gain and thereby improve the decoding performance. Note that the proposed subgradient decoder is based on a dual-decomposition approach, which is different from the subgradient methods used in [1] and [9].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

Fig. 4. WER performance of the subgradient decoder with different number of iterations. A (5; 2) SPC product code is used. The code length is 25 and rate is = 0:64. The average WER is obtained by counting 100 decoding errors in the simulations.

Fig. 5. WER performance of the subgradient decoder, joint subgradient decoder, the LP decoder, and the corresponding ML lower bound. The number of iterations

for subgradient decoders is set as 100. A (5; 2) SPC product code is used. The code length is 25 and rate is

= 0:64. The average WER is obtained by counting

100 decoding errors in the simulations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: A NEW LINEAR PROGRAMMING APPROACH TO DECODING LINEAR BLOCK CODES

1071

 Fig. 6. WER performance of the subgradient decoder, joint subgradient decoder, the LP decoder, and the corresponding ML lower bound. A (4; 4) SPC product

code is used. The code length is 256 and rate is

0:32. The average WER is obtained by counting 100 decoding errors in the simulations.

 Fig. 7. WER performance of the sum–product decoder, subgradient decoder, and joint subgradient decoder. The number of iterations for the sum–product decoder

and subgradient decoder is set as 10. A (10; 3) SPC product code is used. The code length is 1000 and rate is

0:729. The average WER is obtained by

counting 100 decoding errors in the simulations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1072

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 54, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

Simulation: The convergence behavior of the proposed sub-

gradient decoder for a

SPC product code is shown in

Fig. 3. The word error rate (WER) performance of the subgra-

dient decoder with different number of iterations for a

SPC product code is shown in Fig. 4. The performance of the

subgradient decoder, the joint subgradient decoder, the LP de-

coder, and the corresponding ML lower bound are illustrated

in Figs. 5 and 6 for a

code and a

code, respec-

tively. The number of iterations is set as for all decoders.

It is seen that the LP decoder can practically achieve the ML

lower bound. The performance of the simple subgradient de-

coder incurs loss of a fractional of a decibel with respect to that

of the LP decoder. Moreover, the joint subgradient decoder can

achieve the ML decoding performance at high SNR at the ex-

pense of a higher complexity. The performance of the subgra-

dient and joint subgradient decoders are compared against the

sum–product decoder in Fig. 7 for a

code. For fair com-

parison, we use a lookup table to approximate the function

in the sum–product decoder. Thus, the sum–product decoder

employed here has a similar complexity of the proposed sub-

gradient decoder. The number of iterations for the subgradient

and the sum–product decoders is set as . It is seen that the

subgradient decoder provides slightly better performance than

the sum–product decoder, while the joint subgradient decoder

significantly outperforms the sum–product decoder.

V. CONCLUSION
We have proposed a new LP formulation for the decoding of general linear block codes. The new formulation is much simpler than the original one proposed in [1]. The new formulation offers new insight into the structure of general linear block codes. In particular, we have proved that, for the family of SPC product codes, the fractional distance, BIAWGN, BSC, and BEC pseudodistance are equal to the minimum distance. Moreover, we have developed efficient ML decoders by exploiting the code structure and our new LP formulation for SPC product codes. This is the first class of practical codes that have been shown to asymptotically achieve the ML decoding performance by using methods inspired by LP decoding. Finally, we remark that the proposed new LP formulation may open up new avenues to the analysis of other structured block codes as well as the design of the corresponding efficient decoding algorithms.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 954–972, Jan. 2005.
[2] J. Feldman, “Decoding error-correcting codes via linear programming,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Electr. Eng. Comput. Sci., Massachusetts Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 2003.
[3] J. Feldman, D. R. Karger, and M. J. Wainwright, “Using linear programming-based decoding of turbo-like codes and its relation to iterative approaches,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun. Control Comput., Allerton, IL, Oct. 2002, pp. 250–260.
[4] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 75–82.
[5] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finite-length analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, submitted for publication.
[6] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On the relationship between linear programming decoding and min-sum algorithm decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Parma, Italy, Oct. 2004, pp. 991–996.
[7] P. Chaichanavong and P. H. Siegel, “Relaxation bounds on the minimum pseudo-weight of linear block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 805–809.
[8] K. Yang, J. Feldman, and X. Wang, “Non-linear programming approaches to decoding low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 1603–1613, Aug. 2006.
[9] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Toward low-complexity linear-programming decoding,” in Proc. 4th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006, pp. 1603–1613.
[10] M. H. Taghavi and P. Siegel, “Adaptive linear programming decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2006, pp. 1374–1378.
[11] F. R. Kschischang, B. Frey, and H. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[12] M. Chertkov and M. Stepanov, “Pseudo-codeword landscape,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2007, pp. 127–131.
[13] R. Smarandache and P. Vontobel, “Pseudocodeword analysis of tanner graphs from projective and euclidean planes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, submitted for publication.
[14] W. Cook, W. Cunningham, W. Pulleyblank, and A. Schrijver, Combinatorial Optimization. New York: Wiley, 1998.
[15] D. M. Rankin and T. A. Gulliver, “Single parity-check product codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 8, pp. 1354–1362, Aug. 2001.
[16] D. M. Rankin, T. A. Gulliver, and D. P. Taylor, “Asymptotic performance of single parity-check product codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 2230–2235, Sep. 2003.
[17] P. O. Vontobel, R. Smarandache, N. Kiyavash, J. Teutsch, and D. Vukobratovic, “On the minimal pseudo-codewords of codes from finite geometries,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Sep. 2005, pp. 980–984.
[18] D. Bertsimas and J. N. Tsitsiklis, Linear Optimization. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 1997.
[19] D. P. Bertsekas, Nonlinear Programming, 2nd ed. Belmont, MA: Athena Scientific, 1999.
[20] J. Snyders and Y. Be’ery, “Maximum likelihood soft decoding of binary block codes and decoders for the golay codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-35, no. 5, pp. 963–975, Sep. 1989.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

