572

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, MARCH 2008

Layered Approx-Regular LDPC: Code Construction and Encoder/Decoder Design
Haibin Zhang, Member, IEEE, Jia Zhu, Huifeng Shi, and Dawei Wang

Abstract—Layered approximately regular (LAR) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are proposed, with which one single pair of encoder and decoder support various code lengths and code rates. The parity check matrices of LAR-LDPC codes have a “layer-block-cell” structure with some additional constraints. An encoder architecture is then designed for LAR-LDPC codes, by making two improvements to the Richardson–Urbanke approach: the forward substitution operation is entirely removed and the dense-matrix-vector multiplication is handled using feedback shift-registers. A partially parallel decoder architecture is also designed for LAR-LDPC codes, where a layered modified min–sum decoding algorithm is used to trade off among complexity, speed, and performance. More importantly, the interconnection network, which is inevitable for partially parallel decoders, has much lower hardware complexity compared with that for general LDPC codes. Both the encoder and decoder architectures are highly flexible in code length and code rate.
Index Terms—Code construction, encoder, decoder, hardware architecture, low-density parity check (LDPC).
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes are linear block codes with very sparse parity check matrices. An LDPC code can be represented by a bipartite graph [1], [2] consisting of two sets of nodes: bit nodes in one set and check nodes in the other set. Regular LDPC codes have the same degree for each set of nodes, while irregular LDPC codes have the degree of each node chosen according to some degree distributions [3], [4]. There exist many LDPC decoding algorithms, allowing various tradeoffs among complexity, speed and error-correction performance. The iterative belief propagation (BP) algorithm offers very good performance at the cost of a long decoding delay. The iterative min–sum (MS) algorithm simplifies check-node operations to reduce the decoding complexity but offers poor performance [5]. Several modifications [5]–[7] to the MS algorithm aim to balance decoding complexity and performance: e.g., Heo [7] scaled the soft information to improve performance and showed that 0.8 is the optimal scaling factor for (3,6) regular LDPC codes. Layered decoding [8], [9] utilizes updated information more quickly to speed up the decoding, as long as the rows of the
Manuscript received April 1, 2006; revised January 25, 2007. This work was supported by the National Hi-Tech Research and Development Program of China (National 863 Program) under Grant 2003AA123310, and by the National Science Foundation of China under Grant 60332030. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor F. C. M. Lau.
H. Zhang, J. Zhu, and D. Wang are with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200030, China (e-mail: hbzh@sjtu.edu.cn; david1147@sjtu.edu.cn).
H. Shi is with the R&D Department of Micronas Company, Shanghai 200233, China (e-mail: barowind@sjtu.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2008.916433

parity check matrix can be grouped into layers and each column has at most a weight of one in each layer. Hocevar [9] showed that the overall decoder architecture of the layered BP decoding can be reduced by nearly 50% compared with that of the normal BP decoding.
Generally there exist three approaches to LDPC encoder design.
1) The traditional method multiplies the information bits by the generator matrix, derived from the sparse parity check matrix. The generator matrix’s denseness requires complex hardware, thereby rendering this approach unattractive.
2) Directly construct the parity check matrix in special forms, such as those described in [10], for encoder implementation with less hardware consumption and (or) lower latency. This method is most efficient for LDPC encoding, but is limited to LDPC codes with special code parameters.
3) The Richardson–Urbanke (RU) approach [11], preprocesses the parity check matrix into an approximate lower triangular (ALT) form first and then encodes in hardware later [11], [12]. The preprocessing step can be precomputed ahead of hardware implementation, as it needs to be performed only once for a specific parity check matrix. The actual encoding complexity is near-linear. Many recently proposed encoder hardware schemes essentially follow the idea of the RU approach [13]–[15].
There also exist three general approaches to LDPC decoder design: serial [16], fully parallel [17], and partially parallel [18]–[20]. The serial architecture has simple hardware but low throughput. On the contrary, the fully parallel architecture provides a high throughput at the cost of complex hardware. The partially parallel architecture trades off between throughput and complexity and is of great interest to many practical applications.
In some practical applications, e.g., in next generation mobile communications, various code lengths and code rates are needed to support different kinds of services (i.e., different quality-of-service requirements) in different environments. Hence, LDPC encoders and decoders compatible with various code lengths and code rates are desirable [21]–[25]. Zhang et al. [13], [19] proposed a joint code–encoder–decoder design strategy, which facilitates highly structured encoder and decoder architectures of low hardware complexity while introducing little performance degradation. However, only a limited set of codes are supported by one single encoder (or decoder) in this approach. Hocevar [26] proposed a single-decoder architecture allowing flexible hardware implementation for diverse code lengths and code rates. But he did not consider encoder architecture design. Yang et al. [27] and Mansour et al. [28] independently designed multirate decoders for their specifically constructed LDPC codes. But both of the two

1549-8328/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LAR LDPC: CODE CONSTRUCTION AND ENCODER/DECODER DESIGN

573

approaches can only support a fixed code length, and also did

not consider encoder architecture design. Urard et al. [29]

designed a multirate and 2-length decoder for the LDPC codes

specified in the digital video broadcasting (DVB)-S2 standard.

The authors of [14], [15], [30] proposed efficient encoding

strategies for quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes. But they did not

consider the flexibility in code length and code rate.

The aim of this paper is to design flexible LDPC encoder and

decoder architectures, with which one single pair of encoder

and decoder can support various code lengths and code rates. To-

wards this purpose, some constraints should be applied to LDPC

code construction.

The contribution of this paper consists of three parts.

1) A special class of QC LDPC codes, called layered ap-

proximately regular (LAR) LDPC codes, are proposed.

LAR-LDPC codes approach progressive-edge-growth

(PEG) codes’ error-correction performance,1 at the same

degree distributions and the same girth. An LAR-LDPC

code is defined as a QC LDPC code whose parity check

matrix has following features.

• The parity check matrix has a “layer-block-cell” struc-

ture: it has a layered structure; each layer can be parti-

tioned into an array of submatrices, called blocks; each

block can be further partitioned into an array of sub-sub-

matrices, called cells; each cell is either a zero matrix or

a cyclic-shifted version of an identity matrix.

• There are two different column weights ( and

)

and two different row weights ( and

) in the

parity check matrix, where is the maximum column

weight and is the maximum row weight. The number

of columns with weight of

and the number of

rows with weight of

are both very small. So the

parity check matrix is approximately regular.

• The rightmost square submatrix of the parity check ma-

trix is full rank.

2) A flexible encoder architecture, with two improvements to

the RU approach, is proposed for LAR-LDPC codes.

• The forward substitution (FS) operation, which is per-

formed serially and introduce long encoding latency in

the RU approach, is entirely removed to reduce encoding

latency and improve throughput.

• The dense-matrix–vector multiplication with ,

whose computation complexity is linearly proportional

to the square of the gap size in the RU approach, is

handled using feedback shift-registers to further reduce

encoding latency. The hardware consumption of these

registers is .

• One single encoder can support various code lengths and

code rates.

3) A flexible partially parallel decoder architecture is pro-

posed for LAR-LDPC codes.

• A layered modified MS (LMMS) decoding algorithm

is proposed, by merging the ideas of modified MS

decoding and layered decoding. The LMMS algo-

rithm with 10 iterations offers a bit error rate (BER)

approaching that of the normal BP algorithm with

1By PEG codes, we mean LDPC codes constructed using the PEG algorithm [31]. For some optimized degree distributions, PEG codes have been shown to have approximately 0.5 dB better performance than randomly constructed codes.

20 iterations, while significantly reducing hardware complexity. • The interconnection network, which is unavoidable for partially parallel decoders, can be implemented with much lower complexity compared with that for general LDPC codes. • One single decoder can support various code lengths and code rates. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the code construction of LAR-LDPC codes, and compares the performance between LAR-LDPC codes and PEG codes. Sections III and IV present the flexible encoder and decoder architectures, respectively. An implementation example of encoder and decoder in Xilinx XC2V6000-5bf957 field-programmable gate array (FPGA) is given in Section V, with a maximum encoder throughput of 1 200 Mbps and a maximum decoder throughput of 180 Mbps at a clock frequency of 100 MHz. Finally, concluding remarks are given in Section VI.

II. LAR-LDPC CODE CONSTRUCTION

A duplex expansion (DEx) method is proposed herein below

to construct LAR-LDPC codes. For clarity, some definitions are

given first.

Definition 1 (Permutation Expansion, Cyclic-Shift Expan-

sion): By permutation expansion (PEx) of a matrix, each 1 in

the matrix is replaced with a column-permutated version of an

identity matrix, while each 0 in the matrix replaced with a zero

matrix with the same size of the identity matrix. We denote the

parameters of a PEx as

, where

is the PEx factor and

is the column permutation corresponding to the -entry in

the original matrix.

if the -entry

is 0. By cyclic-shift expansion (CSEx) of a matrix, each 1

in the matrix is replaced with a cyclic-shifted version of an

identity matrix, while each 0 in the matrix replaced with a zero

matrix with the same size of the identity matrix. We denote

the parameters of a CSEx as

,

where

is the CSEx factor and is the cyclic-shift

value corresponding to the -entry in the original matrix.

if the -entry is 0.

Definition 2 (LAR-I, LAR-II): A Type-I LAR (LAR-I) matrix

can be equally divided into layers. In each layer, at most one

column has a weight of zero while others have a weight of one,

and at most one row has a weight of

while others have a

weight of . Meanwhile, the columns with a weight of zero in

different layers are different. If a matrix is obtained by CSEx of

an LAR-I matrix, we call it a Type-II LAR (LAR-II) matrix.

A. DEx Method

As depicted in Fig. 1, the methodology of the DEx method is:

first select a base matrix (denoted as ), which is a

all-1 matrix; then a mother matrix (denoted as , which is an

LAR-I matrix) is obtained by PEx of , with an additional

operation of “full ranking”; finally the parity check matrix ,

which is an LAR-II matrix, is constructed by CSEx of .

The detailed description of the DEx method is as follows.

Step 1) Base matrix selection: The base matrix should

be an all-1 matrix, and the row number

and

column number

of equal to the expected

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

574

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, MARCH 2008

TABLE I PARAMETERS OF EXAMPLE LAR-LDPC CODES

Fig. 1. LDPC code construction by DEx.

maximum column weight and the expected max-

imum row weight of , respectively. Step 2) PEx: The mother matrix is obtained by PEx
of , where is randomly chosen and
satisfies

the parity check matrix. Each layer consists of blocks. Each entry in the mother matrix is expanded into a submatrix, called a cell, of a block. Each cell is either a zero matrix or a cyclic-shifted version of an identity matrix. Each block consists of cells. This special “{layer-block-cell}”

(1) structure facilitates the flexible encoder and decoder architecture designs, as described in following sections. Moreover, the

where is the expected column number of is not necessarily full rank after this step.

fact that is full rank simplifies the dense-matrix-vector multiplication in the encoder architecture.

Step 3) “Full ranking”: In each layer of except the first one, we pick up a column randomly and replace B. Code Examples

the only one 1 in this column with 0, with the fol- To demonstrate the error-correction performance, we con-

lowing two constraints: 1) each column is picked up struct four rate-1/2 or 7/8 LAR-LDPC codes whose parame-

no more than once; and 2) the rightmost

ters are listed in Table I. For performance comparison, we also

square submatrix of is full rank, where construct four PEG codes, with the same code parameters, deis the row number of . If the rightmost gree distributions and girths of the four LAR-LDPC codes. Note

square submatrix of is still not

full rank after this step, then go back to step 2) to

choose a different set of ’s.

Step 4) CSEx and short cycle elimination: The parity check

matrix is obtained by CSEx of , where

satisfies (1) and

)(

is the column number of

) is chosen randomly with the constraint of a

target girth in . The elimination of cycles shorter

than the target girth is guaranteed by the rule pro-

posed in [32]. Sometimes, these cycles cannot be

completely eliminated, especially for codes with

both high code rate and short length (e.g., code rate

and code length

for a target girth of

6 in our simulations). In such cases, this constraint

should be skipped or a smaller target girth be set.

Denote the row number of as and the right-

that, during the construction of PEG codes, we do not specify

check-node degrees, but finally the PEG codes we constructed

also have the same check-node degree distributions as those of

LAR-LDPC codes.

Figs. 2 and 3 show both the float-point and fixed-point perfor-

mance comparison between LAR-LDPC codes and PEG codes,

for rate-1/2 and 7/8, respectively. The BP decoding algorithm

is adopted here, with 100 iterations. For the fixed-point BP al-

gorithm, according to our implementation experience, different

data width ’s are applied to different logarithmic likelihood

ratio (LLR) messages. That is

for the channel mes-

sages,

for the LLR messages from bit nodes,

for the sums of LLR messages,

for the LLR messages

from check nodes. It can be seen that LAR-LDPC codes ap-

proach PEG codes’ performance in both BER and frame error

rate (FER), for both high and low code rates and in both float-

point and fixed-point performance.

most

square submatrix of as . In

most cases, is full rank. If not, then reselect a

III. ENCODER ARCHITECTURE DESIGN

different set of ’s until is full rank.

An LDPC code constructed with the DEx method is not com-

pletely regular: there are two different column weights ( and

) and two different row weights ( and

) in the

layer-structured parity check matrix. The number of columns

A flexible encoder architecture is proposed in this section for LAR-LDPC codes. This architecture is designed with some improvements to the RU approach, so a brief description of the RU approach is given first.

with weight of

and the number of rows with weight of A. RU Approach

are both

, which is very small compared

with and . That is the reason why we call it a LAR-LDPC

code. The code rate of LAR-LDPC codes can be calculated

by

In the preprocessing step of the RU approach, row and column

permutations are performed to bring the parity check matrix

into an ALT form as shown in Fig. 4, where

, and

are sparse matrices, and is a sparse lower triangular matrix.

The greedy algorithms [11], [12] can be used to find the best

possible lower triangularization of , to make the gap size as

small as possible.

Each entry in the base matrix is finally expanded into a

Split a codeword into information bits and parity bits, i.e.,

submatrix, called a block, of a layer of

, where is the vector of information bits,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LAR LDPC: CODE CONSTRUCTION AND ENCODER/DECODER DESIGN

575

Fig. 2. Performance comparison between LAR-LDPC codes and PEG codes (R = 1=2). (a) BER. (b) FER.

Fig. 3. Performance comparison between LAR-LDPC codes and PEG codes (R = 7=8).

Fig. 4. Parity check matrix H in an ALT form.

with them introduce much more complexity than other operations and greatly influence encoding latency and throughput of the entire encoder. To reduce the computational complexity of the multiplication with , an FS operation is typically used to replace the direct multiplication [12], [13]. But it still introduces long encoding latency since it’s performed serially. To reduce the computational complexity of the multiplication with
, which is linearly proportional to should be designed as small as possible.

and are the vectors of parity bits, with the length of and B. Overall Encoder Architecture

, respectively. and can be obtained by [11], [12]

The main ideas of this architecture are: 1) to entirely remove

(2) the FS operation; 2) the dense-matrix-vector multiplication with

(3)

be handled using feedback shift-registers whose hardware

consumption is .

where

is assumed to be nonsingular. Let’s first explain how the FS operation is entirely removed.

If is singular, we swap columns of with columns to the left The dense-matrix-vector multiplication with will be dis-

of and keep doing this until becomes nonsingular.

cussed in detail in Section III-D.

In the actual encoding step of the RU approach, and

Following the idea of the RU approach, we re-orga-

are computed according to (2) and (3), as depicted in Fig. 5. In nize into submatrices

and , as de-

general and are dense matrices, so the multiplications picted in Fig. 6. is composed of

blocks:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

576

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, MARCH 2008

Fig. 5. Pipeline chart of the RU approach.

Fig. 7. Pipeline chart of the proposed encoder architecture.

each cell in a cell-structured matrix is uniquely represented by

it’s rightward cyclic-shift value (modulo

) in this example.

Suppose to be

where , and (modulo

) are the rightward cyclic-shift

values of the corresponding cells in , and we have

The result of multiplying

with a cell-structured matrix

is shown in (4), at the bottom of the next page, where

Fig. 6. Parity check matrix divided into different parts.

are the rightward cyclic-shift values of the cor-

responding cells in . Thus, we only need to store in ROM the

cyclic-shift values of cells in

and the FS operation is

is composed of

blocks:

is composed of

blocks:

is composed of

blocks:

is composed

of

blocks:

, and is composed

of only one block: .

It is transparent that must be full rank, since it only takes up

removed. Since the FS operation is entirely removed, the overall
pipeline phase number is reduced, as depicted in Fig. 7. Only the multiplication with is a dense-matrix-vector multiplication, the other multiplications are all sparse-matrix-vector multiplications. In the following, we will give detailed hardware implementations of these two kinds of multiplications.

one block. When is multiplied by a cell-structured matrix, only the cyclic-shift values of cells in the matrix are modified, C. Sparse-Matrix-Vector Multiplication

leaving the entire structure unchanged. To make it more clear,

, , and all have a “layer-block-cell” structure, so

an example is given as follows where

. For simplicity, a multiplication with

, or can be decomposed into

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LAR LDPC: CODE CONSTRUCTION AND ENCODER/DECODER DESIGN

577

multiplications with layers of these matrices. A multiplication

with each layer of

, or has a form written as

...

...

...

...

...

(5)

where is a multiple of ; each is either a

zero matrix or a cyclic-shifted version of the

identity matrix; and are

sub-vectors

of input vector and output vector , respectively. Since each

column of has weight of one or zero, there is at most one

nonzero matrix among

, and

.

Denote as a rightward cyclic-shifted version of the

identity matrix by bits. If a vector

is multiplied by , the result is just a copy of upward

cyclic shifting by bits. So the multiplication in (5) reduces

to a set of vector XORs (modulo 2 summations). To obtain

a tradeoff between throughput and hardware complexity, an

inter-vector-serial/inter-block-parallel computational style can

be used to implement these vector XORs: all the sub-vec-

tors

in each layer are computed serially, but

operations corresponding to different blocks are performed in

parallel, in computation of each output sub-vector.

Since each row of a block has weight of one or zero, every

time there’s only one cell in each block actually taking part

in the computation of a specific output sub-vector. So we can

share some hardware resource (actually binary counters as

described below) in time-division multiplexing (TDM) mode

among input sub-vectors corresponding to the same block.

The only cost is an additional -select-1 read chip select

decoder (RCSD) to generate the chip select signal. In addition,

the

output sub-vectors can also share some hardware

resource (also binary counters) with a cost of an additional

-select-1 write chip select decoder (WCSD) to generate

the chip select signal.

The detailed hardware structure of the sparse-ma-

trix-vector multiplication is shown in Fig. 8. Each input

sub-vector and output sub-vector are stored in reg-

ister and , respectively. The read address of registers

corresponding

to block is generated by a binary preload counter

in TDM mode. The numbers of RPCs and RCSDs are both

. The write address of all the registers ’s is gen-

erated by a binary counter WPC (write preload counter). At the

beginning of each

clock cycles,

select one of the

registers

for

operation. The operations corresponding to different blocks are

performed in parallel.

clock cycles are needed to com-

pute one output sub-vector, and the whole sparse-matrix-vector

multiplication costs

clock cycles for each layer.

Operations in different layers are also designed to perform in

parallel, so the total number of clock cycles needed for this

kind of multiplication is independent of the number of layers

involved.

Note that, although the structure in Fig. 8 looks similar to the

structure in [13] for sparse-matrix-vector multiplication, their

computational style are quite different.

D. Dense-Matrix-Vector Multiplication

Obviously,

, and are all QC matrices.2 It can be

proved that the inverse of a QC matrix, product and sum of QC

matrices are also QC matrices [33], so is a QC matrix. If we

can prove is full rank, then is also a QC matrix.

Proof: Multiplying from the left of with

where is an identity matrix, we will get

Since is full rank, the result of multiplying with a lower triangular matrix is also full rank. So must be full rank.
So far, we have proven that is also a QC matrix. The structure of can be written as

...

...

...

where each is a

circulant matrix.

2A QC matrix is an array of circulant matrices. A circulant matrix is a square matrix, in which each row is the one-bit rightward cyclic shift of the row above it and the first row is the one-bit rightward cyclic shift of the last row.

(4)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

578

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, MARCH 2008

Fig. 8. Hardware structure of sparse-matrix-vector multiplication.

So a multiplication with can be decomposed into mul-

tiplications with ’s, which can be performed using the feed-

back shift-registers [30] demonstrated in Fig. 9. In the first clock

cycle, the first column of is loaded into the register bank and

the first bit of the input vector is loaded into the 2-input AND

gates. Afterwards, we rightward cyclically shift the contents of

registers by one bit and load the next bit of the input vector into

the AND gates, to obtain one output bit in each clock cycle. The

entire process costs

clock cycles.

In practical implementation, the dense-matrix-vector multi-

plication is also performed in the inter-vector-serial/inter-block-

parallel computational style, and operations in different layers

are also designed to perform in parallel. So the number of total

clock cycles needed is also

, independent of the

number of layers involved.

E. Flexibility in Code Length and Code Rate

The relationship among code parameters is given by

, and

. Fig. 9. Hardware structure of dense-matrix-vector multiplication.

For a fixed code rate, different code lengths can be obtained by

only changing

. Whereas for a fixed code length, different

code rates can be obtained by jointly changing and

to- factors,

and

, are selected for dif-

gether, while keeping

a constant. Both the flexibili- ferent code lengths or code rates. feedback shift-registers,

ties in code length and code rate can be implemented by online 2-input AND gates and 2-input XOR gates are needed for

reconfiguration for different code parameters, with the cost of flexible implementation, and a 3-select-1 MUX module is used

some acceptable hardware redundancy.

to select whether the feedback is from the th, th or th reg-

The modifications by different

’s to the sparse-matrix- ister. If (or ) is selected, the 2-input AND gates and 2-input

vector multiplication are the depth of RAMs and the maximum XOR gates numbered from

(or

) to are disabled.

values of binary counters, which slightly affect the overall struc- The modifications by different ’s to the sparse-ma-

ture. As to the dense-matrix-vector multiplication, the modifica- trix-vector multiplication are the numbers of RPCs and RCSDs.

tions are the number of feedback shift-registers and the number This can be handled by setting both numbers according to the

of 2-input AND gates and 2-input XOR gates. The latter can be maximum . The change of will not change the structure

handled by setting both numbers to the maximum

. An of dense-matrix-vector multiplication at all, since the matrices

example is illustrated in Fig. 10, where three different CSEx

, and do not change with the change of .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LAR LDPC: CODE CONSTRUCTION AND ENCODER/DECODER DESIGN

579

TABLE II RESOURCE CONSUMPTION OF THE ENCODER ARCHITECTURE

TABLE III ENCODER RESOURCE CONSUMPTION COMPARISON BETWEEN LAR-LDPC AND BLOCK-LDPC CODES

selected:

, and

. For the construction of the example “Block-LDPC”

code, the following parameters are selected:

, the size of “block matrices”

, the number of

macro-block identity matrices

, the maximum number of

colors used in the tasking schedule for the sparse matrix-vector

multiplications

, the total number of nozero blocks in

the parity check matrix

, and

( is denoted

as the ratio of the number of nonzero blocks in the summatrix

divided by . Interested readers can refer to [13] for more

information about “Block-LDPC” codes.

It can be concluded from Tables II and III that, compared

with that of “Block-LDPC” codes, the proposed encoder

architecture:

• removes the FS operation, which results in much higher

throughput and a lot shorter encoding latency;

Fig. 10. Hardware structure of dense-matrix-vector multiplication for various CSEx factors.

• makes the consumption of “ping-pong” RAMs3 even less, as the pipeline phase number is reduced;

• requires more resource on the amount of registers, ROMs,

F. Resource Consumption

AND gates and XOR gates for the dense-matrix-vector-multiplication structure, and the consumption is

Table II gives the resource consumption of the encoder archi-

, for LAR-LDPC codes).

tecture, where

denotes the maximum value of the corre-

sponding parameter. Note that,

and

are used

to calculate the amount of RAMs, registers, 2-input AND and

2-input XOR gates consumed. And these resources can be shared

by different codes supported. On the other hand, each code has

IV. DECODER ARCHITECTURE DESIGN
An LMMS decoding algorithm is proposed first, to gain a good tradeoff among complexity, speed and error-correction performance.

its own parameters that should be stored in ROM individually, so

the total amount of ROMs is the sum of ROMs needed for each

code. The encoding latency is calculated by

including the input and output stages, and

the throughput is calculated by

, where is the

working frequency of encoders.

As an example, Table III give the encoder resource consump-

tion comparison between an LAR-LDPC code and a “Block-

LDPC” code [13] whose encoder is also designed following the

A. LMMS Algorithm
The LMMS decoding algorithm integrates the ideas of modified MS decoding and layered decoding. Since MS-type decoding algorithms only care about the relative magnitudes of bit nodes’ LLRs, received symbols can be directly used for decoding.
Denote the received symbol corresponding to bit node the scaling factor, the set of bit nodes neighboring to check

idea of the RU approach but has a different architecture from that node

the a posterior LLR message of bit node after

of LAR-LDPC codes, with the working frequency of encoders MHz. To make it a fair comparison, we construct
the example codes in the following way to make them have the same code parameters as many as possible. For the construction of the example LAR-LDPC code, the following parameters are

the mth layer’s operation in the nth iteration,

the LLR

3By “ping-pong” RAM, we mean dual-bank RAM which allows one RAM bank to store a waveform or a sequence of waveforms, while the other is being read out. “Ping-pong” RAM can be used in pipeline architecture to provide parallel access to RAM resources.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

580

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, MARCH 2008

Fig. 14. Example of decoding procedure.

Step 6) Terminate if exceeds the maximum number of iterations, otherwise go to step 2).

Fig. 11. Performance comparison between BP and LMMS decoding algorithms for (2304, 1152) LAR-LDPC code.

message passed from check node to bit node after the mth

layer’s operation in the nth iteration, and

the LLR mes-

sage passed from bit node to check node after the mth layer’s

operation in the nth iteration, the LMMS decoding algorithm

can be written in steps as follows.

Step 1) Initialization:

.

Step 2) Column (Bit node) Update-a:

Fig. 12. Performance comparison between BP and LMMS for (2304, 2016) LAR-LDPC code.

Step 3) Row (Check node) Update of the mth layer

Fig. 13. Overall decoder architecture.

Figs. 11 and 12, where the scaling factor

, show

Step 4) Column (Bit node) Update-b

that the LMMS algorithm with 10 iterations offers a BER approach-ing that of the BP algorithm with 20 iterations, for low

and high code rates, respectively. This proves its character of

quick convergence after limited number of iterations. And after

sufficient decoding, e.g., 100 iterations, both algorithms behave

Step 5) Terminate if the hard decision is correct, otherwise almost the same. Figs. 11 and 12 also show the performance

; If exceeds the number of layers of the fixed-point LMMS algorithm, with

. With 10 itera-

in the parity check matrix (e.g., , for LAR-LDPC tions, the fixed-point LMMS algorithm’s performance is around

codes), then

and

.

0.1 dB worse than that of the float-point LMMS algorithm at

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LAR LDPC: CODE CONSTRUCTION AND ENCODER/DECODER DESIGN

581

Fig. 15. Hardware structure of BNU.

BER of , which is acceptable for practical applications. The
! simplicity of data width selection is brought by the simplicity of
MS-type algorithms, compared with that for the BP algorithm. Fig. 16. Hardware structure of BNU CNU interconnection network.

B. Overall Decoder Architecture

As depicted in Fig. 13, the proposed partially parallel

decoder architecture contains bit-node computation units

(BNUs),

check-node computation units (CNUs) and an

interconnection network, where is the parallelization factor.

The interconnection network is in essence a block network

(see Section IV-D), which results from the PEx. Only the

cyclic-shift values of nonzero cells in are stored in ROM,

Next, Adder(1) fulfills the computation of bit-node update-b,

where

is accumulated.

stores the check-node

update of the current layer’s operation, i.e.,

, and ex-

ports the check-node update of the next layer’s operation in

the previous iteration, i.e.,

. Adder(2) completes

the computation of bit-node update-a and writes the result, i.e.,

, into

so as to be prepared for the next

which is facilitated by the CSEx. Unlike the BNUs and CNUs layer’s operation. The result of Adder(1) can be hard decided as

in [19] that separate the operations of bit-node computation and the final estimation of the bit node.

check-node computation clearly, BNUs of the proposed decoder Since MS simplification is adopted in the LMMS algorithm,

architecture also perform the operations of minimum-selecting BNUs can be explicitly implemented with a few registers,

and scaling in the step 3) of the LMMS algorithm. Therefore, adders, multiplexers and indispensable memory blocks. By

the outputs of CNUs are the minimal and sub-minimal ’s carefully selecting the scaling factor that approaches the

of all the bit nodes connecting to the corresponding check optimal value and has a compact binary representation (such

nodes.

as

as well, each multiplier can be

As shown by the arrow-headed lines in Fig. 14, BNUs reduced into limited number of shifters and adders.

process bit nodes in consecutive cells, respectively in each clock cycle. When all the nonzero cells in one layer have D. Interconnection Network

been visited once,

check-node computations could be The structure of an interconnection network highly depends

accomplished. Such process is repeated

times to fulfill on the code construction. In the worst case, the complexity of

one layer’s operation.

a fully interconnected network is almost proportional to the

C. BNU

square of the I/O port number. A compromising solution to this problem is to divide the

The structure of a BNU is shown in Fig. 15. Bit-node overall network into blocks. Benefiting from the PEx, the hard-

computation starts by extracting

, which is calculated ware complexity of the interconnection network of the proposed

during the previous iteration, from

and sending it architecture is linearly proportional to

,

to the interconnection network for check-node computation. which is remarkably less than that of a fully interconnected

It takes

clock cycles for BNUs to receive the two

network for general LDPC codes, especially when

smallest ’s (the minimal and sub-minimal ’s) from

is small. The realization of this interconnection network

their corresponding CNUs. Note that, if there are more than one can be the combination of multiple smaller fully interconnected

values that are equal to the smallest , the sub-minimal networks, i.e., crossbars, each of which corresponds to a block

is actually the same as the minimal . In order to have in the parity check matrix.

the flexibility in and

, the output of Multi-Level FIFO Fig. 16 shows the structure of the

BNU CNU inter-

is delayed for various clock cycles by an inner multiplexer.

connection network, which contains

copies of

Min&Scale module is responsible for minimum-selecting

crossbars. The CNU BNU interconnection network has

and scaling operations of the check-node computation. In case a similar structure except that every single arrow-headed line

that

from multi-level FIFO is equivalent to the minimal in the BNU CNU interconnection network is replaced with a

from the relevant CNU, the sub-minimal

of the couple of arrow-headed lines indicating the minimal and sub-

relevant CNU will be selected as the result of the check-node minimal ’s.

computation for the current bit node. Otherwise, the min- An example, showing the relationship between a block and

imal

will be selected. Sign computation and scaling are its corresponding crossbar, is illustrated in Fig. 17. The nonzero

performed with a 1-bit 2-input XOR gate and a multiplier, cells in the block are denoted as

and , where

respectively.

means there is a connection between the input of the th BNU

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

582

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, MARCH 2008

TABLE IV RESOURCE CONSUMPTION OF THE DECODER ARCHITECTURE

Fig. 17. Example of block and its corresponding crossbar.

sub-minimal

results just pass through the close loop

including COMP&SIGN and

for updating. Only

in the last clock cycle, the outputs of

are sent to the

interconnection network as the final minimal and sub-minimal

’s.

It is easy to notice that the computation of minimum com-

parison and sign multiplication is deliberately divided into two

COMP&SIGN modules. In view of hardware implementation,

the close loop cannot be pipelined since in each clock cycle the

temporary minimal and sub-minimal ’s should be updated

once. In order to achieve a high post-routing frequency in the cir-

cuits, the complexity within the close loop is desired to be as low

as possible. Therefore, the COMP & SIGN

performs a

pre-processing which can be done in a pipelined mode, while the

subsequent COMP &SIGN has a constant number of inputs

and its complexity is independent of and . This devised

structure is of great help in boosting the maximum throughput

and enriching the flexibility of decoders.

F. Flexibility in Code Length and Code Rate

Once the decoder is fixed, both and are unchangeable

since the interconnection network structure has been settled. For

decoder architecture design, only and

can be adjusted

to achieve different code lengths and (or) code rates.

First we analyze the flexibility in code length for a fixed

coder rate . The relationship among code parameters can be

rewritten as

(6)

It seems at first sight that an arbitrary pair of and

will

Fig. 18. Hardware structure of CNU.

generate a feasible code length. However, there is a constraint to

and the output of the th CNU through the crossbar. For instance,

indicates that the input of

is sent to the output of

, etc.,

from the decoder architecture: of and must be a multiple of

must be a multiple as well. Then we get
(7)

The interconnection rule of crossbars is exclusively deter-

mined by the distribution of nonzero cells instead of nonzero en-

tries in the parity check matrix. This greatly reduces the memory

consumption of “Select” signals of crossbars.

where is a positive integer. So

(8) must be an integer

E. CNU

and, furthermore, a multiple of invariant

.

Now we revise the analysis of flexibility in code length

Fig. 18 shows the hardware structure of a CNU, where as follows: 1) first choose a code rate from the set of

COMP&SIGN compares

input ’s to pick out pairs that satisfy (8); 2) there might be one or more attain-

the minimal and sub-minimal ones and performs sign mul- able ’s that belong to

tiplication; D-FF is simply a D-type flip-flop. In each clock

; 3) any code length generated by se-

cycle, each CNU processes

bit nodes so that a lecting from

and assigning an arbitrary posi-

total of

clock cycles are needed to complete tive integer to

is supported by the decoder.

one check-node computation. Therefore, during the first Then, we analyze the flexibility in code rate for a fixed

clock cycles, the temporary minimal and code length . From (6) and (7), we have

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LAR LDPC: CODE CONSTRUCTION AND ENCODER/DECODER DESIGN

583

TABLE V EXAMPLE LAR-LDPC CODES FOR IMPLEMENTATION

TABLE VI RESOURCE CONSUMPTION OF EXAMPLE ENCODER AND
DECODER IN XILINX XC2V6000-5BF957 FPGA

. Therefore, as long as the selection of and

satisfies

, it will generate a valid code

rate supported by the decoder.

G. Resource Consumption

Table IV shows the resource consumption of the decoder ar-

chitecture, where

denotes the number of all the supported

code rates. ROM consumption is determined by the mother ma-

trices of all the supported codes. The decoder throughput can be

calculated by

, where is the iteration number

and is the clock frequency of decoders. Note that, in order

that each supported code length can combine with all supported

code rates to form valid codes, each code length should be a

multiple of the minimum common factor of the column num-

bers of the mother matrices of all supported codes.

in parallel in one FPGA. For instance, by implementing 3 example decoders in one Xilinx XC2V6000-5bf957 FPGA, a throughput of 180 Mbps can be expected. According to Table IV, even, for instance, when we set the code lengths of our example LAR-LDPC codes four times larger by setting
four times larger (with a maximum code length of 9216), only the amount of RAM will be four times larger and the amount of ROM will be 2 times larger, whereas other resource consumption of the decoder will not change. Compared with the example 9-kbit multirate LDPC decoder in [27], our decoder requires quite less resource but with a higher throughput, at the same clock frequency and almost same code length. Interested

V. IMPLEMENTATION EXAMPLES
As an example, we implement a pair of LDPC encoder and decoder that supports the 4 LAR-LDPC codes shown in Table V, in Xilinx XC2V6000-5bf957 FPGA which totally has 684 input/ output blocks (IOBs), 33 792 slices, 144 Block RAMs and 16 global clocks (GCLKs). The design is prototyped with Verilog

reader can refer to [27] for the detail of its example decoder. Note that, in the implementation of the example encoder and
decoder, all the registers, AND gates, XOR gates, ROMs, and RAMs except those used for the buffer of information bits are inferred by Slices, whereas the RAMs used for the buffer of information bits are inferred by Block RAMs.

HDL, synthesized by Xilinx ISE 7.1, behavior-simulated by

Mentor ModelSim 6.0a, translated, mapped, placed, and routed

by Xilinx ISE 7.1, and timing-simulated by Mentor ModelSim

6.0a.

In order to support all the 4 LAR-LDPC codes, according

to Table II, the example encoder consumes totally 36 864 bits

of RAMs, 12 426 bits of ROMs, 4 608 bits of registers, 1 536

2-input AND gates, and 1 536 2-input XOR gates. The resource

consumption of the example encoder, implemented in Xilinx

XC2V6000-5bf957 FPGA, is shown in Table VI. The encoding

latencies of the 4 LAR-LDPC codes are 1 152, 2 304, 576, and

1 152 clocks, respectively, and their throughputs are 600, 600,

1 200, 1 200 Mbps, respectively, with

MHz.

For the implementation of the example decoder, we use

and

. In order to support all the 4 LAR-LDPC

codes, according to Table IV, the example decoder consumes

totally 2 457 bits of 4-LUT, 64 512 bits of RAMs, 1 890

bits of ROMs, and 336 bits of registers. The resource con-

VI. CONCLUSION
We have presented an LAR-LDPC coding system, including code construction and encoder/decoder design. Simulations showed that LAR-LDPC codes approaches PEG codes’ error-correction performance. By making two improvements to the RU approach, we designed an encoder architecture for LAR-LDPC codes. Both improvements reduce encoding latency and improve throughput. A partially parallel decoder architecture was also designed for LAR-LDPC codes, where the LMMS decoding algorithm is used to tradeoff among complexity, speed and performance. The interconnection network has much lower complexity than that for general LDPC codes, and can be realized using an array of smaller crossbars. Both the encoder and decoder architectures are highly flexible in code length and code rate. One hardware implementation, in Xilinx XC2V6000-5bf957 FPGA, was also provided to validate the feasibility of the encoder and decoder architectures.

sumption of the example encoder, implemented in Xilinx

XC2V6000–5bf957 FPGA, is also shown in Table VI. The

decoding latencies of the 4 LAR-LDPC codes are 3 072, 6 144,

3 072, and 6 144 clocks, respectively, and their throughputs

are all 60 Mbps, with

MHz and

. Higher

throughput can be exploited by using a larger with the con-

straint that the column number of each corresponding mother

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank K. T. Wong (Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hong Kong), and A. Hekstra (NXP, Eindhoven, The Netherlands), for their discussions during the preparation of the manuscript; Dr. Xiao-Yu Hu (IBM Research, Switzerland), for his advice on progressive-edge-growth code construction; and the anonymous reviewers for their construc-

matrix is a multiple of , or by implementing several decoders tive comments.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

584

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, MARCH 2008

REFERENCES
[1] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[2] B. J. Frey, F. R. Kschischang, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[3] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical loss-resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1997, pp. 150–159.
[4] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[5] A. Anastasopoulos, “A comparison between the sum-product and the min–sum iterative detection algorithms based on density evolution,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. (GLOBECOM 2001), San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 1021–1025.
[6] F. Zarkeshvari and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min–sum algorithm for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf. (GLOBECOM 2002), Taipei, Taiwan, Nov. 2002, pp. 1349–1353.
[7] J. Heo, “Analysis of scaling soft information on low density parity check code,” Electron Lett., vol. 39, no. 2, pp. 219–221, Jan. 2003.
[8] H. Sankar and K. R. Narayanan, “Memory-efficient sum-product decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 8, pp. 1225–1230, Aug. 2004.
[9] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SIPS 2004), Austin, TX, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[10] M. Yang, W. Ryan, and Y. Li, “Design of efficiently encodable moderate-length high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 564–571, Apr. 2004.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[12] D. Lee, W. Luk, C. Wang, and C. Jones, “A flexible hardware encoder for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 12th Ann. IEEE Symp. Field-Programmable Custom Computing Machines (FCCM 2004), Apr. 2004, pp. 101–111.
[13] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Block-LDPC: A practical LDPC coding system design approach,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 766–775, Apr. 2005.
[14] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894–2901, Aug. 2005.
[15] D. E. Hocevar, “Efficient encoding for a family of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. Global Telecomm. Conf. 2003, San Francisco, CA, Dec. 2003, vol. 7, pp. 3996–4000.
[16] M. Cocco, J. Dielissen, M. Heijligers, A. Hekstra, and J. Huisken, “A scalable architecture for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. Design, Automation and Test in Europe Conf. Exhibition 2004, Paris, France, Feb. 2004, pp. 88–93.
[17] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[18] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. R. Kschischang, “Decoder-first code design,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 459–462.
[19] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “Joint (3; k)-regular LDPC code and decoder/encoder design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1065–1079, Apr. 2004.
[20] M. Karkooti, “Semi-Parallel architectures for real-time LDPC coding,” M.Sc. dissertation, Rice Univ., Houston, TX, 2004.
[21] H. Jeongseok, K. Jaehong, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible puncturing of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 11, pp. 2824–2836, Nov. 2004.
[22] M. Yazdani and A. Banihashemi, “On construction of rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 159–161, Mar. 2004.

[23] H. Jeongseok and S. W. McLaughlin, “Optimal puncturing of irregular low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Commun. Conf. (ICC 2003), Alaska, USA, May 2003, pp. 3110–3114.
[24] M. Oh and K. Chung, Scalable LDPC coding scheme for OFDMA. IEEE802 [Online]. Available: http:www.ieee802.org/16/tge/contrib/ C80216e-04_242.pdf
[25] M. Oh, K. Chung, and K. Cho, LDPC Support in IEEE802.16e. IEEE802 [Online]. Available: www.ieee802.org/16/tge/contrib/ C80216e-05_066r3.pdf
[26] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation,” in Proc. Int. Communications Conf. (ICC 2003), May 2003, pp. 2708–2712.
[27] L. Yang, H. Liu, and C. -J. R. Shi, “Code construction and FPGA implementation of a low-error-floor multirate low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 892–904, Apr. 2006.
[28] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[29] P. Urard, E. Yeo, L. Paumier, P. Georgelin, T. Michel, V. Lebars, E. Lantreibecq, and B. Gupta, “A 135 Mb/s DVB-S2 compliant codec based on 64800b LDPC and BCH codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISSCC 2005, San Francisco, CA, Feb. 2005, pp. 446–447+609.
[30] Z. Li, L. Chen, and L. Zeng, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[31] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[32] J. Kang, P. Fan, and Z. Cao, “Flexible construction of irregular partitioned permutation LDPC codes with low error floors,” in IEEE Commun. Lett., Jun. 2004, vol. 9, no. 6, pp. 534–536.
[33] R. M. Gray, Toeplitz and Circulant Matrices: A Review. Stanford Univ., Stanford, CA [Online]. Available: http: www-ee.stanford.edu/ gray/toeplitz.pdf
Haibin Zhang (M’05) received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China in 1992, 1995, and 2002, respectively.
He joined the Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, in 1996, where he became an Associate Professor in 2002. From 2006 to 2007, he was a Visiting Professor (Marie Curie Fellow) at Philips Research, Eindhoven, The Netherlands. His current research interests include signal processing for wireless communications, with the emphasis on error-correcting coding, multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO), and orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM).
Jia Zhu received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2004. He is working towards the M.S. degree in telecommunication and information system at the same university.
His current research interests include theory and application of low-density parity-check codes with emphasis on the wireless digital communication systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG et al.: LAR LDPC: CODE CONSTRUCTION AND ENCODER/DECODER DESIGN
Huifeng Shi received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, in 2003 and 2006, respectively.
Since 2006, he has been a member of the R&D Department, Micronas Company, Shanghai, China. His general research interests include digital signal processing and channel coding for wireless communications.

585
Dawei Wang received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China in 2004. He is working toward the M.S. degree in the Department of Electronic Engineering of the same university.
His research interests focus on low-density paritycheck and other channel codings.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:43:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

