120

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

DVB-S2 LDPC Decoding Using Robust Check Node Update Approximations
Stylianos Papaharalabos, Marco Papaleo, Student Member, IEEE, P. Takis Mathiopoulos, Senior Member, IEEE, Massimo Neri, Member, IEEE, Alessandro Vanelli-Coralli, Senior Member, IEEE, and Giovanni E. Corazza, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Broadband satellite services to fixed terminals are currently offered in the forward link by the 2nd Generation (2G) Digital Video Broadcasting Satellite (DVB-S2) standard. For this standard the use of powerful Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) error correcting codes has been adopted performing within approximately 1 dB from the Shannon capacity limit. This paper studies and compares for the first time in a systematic manner different approximation methods used in check node update computation of DVB-S2 LDPC decoding with the aim of reducing computational complexity. Various performance evaluation results are presented for a wide range of DVB-S2 parameters, such as LDPC codeword size, coding rate, modulation format and including several decoding algorithms. It is shown that the proposed check node update approximations have a robust behavior, i.e. the resulting performance is quite independent of the DVB-S2 modulation and coding parameters. It is further shown that these approximations perform very close to the optimal Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) in degradation, which is less than 0.2 dB. Despite this small degradation, the reduction in computational complexity compared to the optimal SPA is significant and can be as high as 40% in computational time savings.
Index Terms—Broadcasting, iterative decoding, Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were proposed initially by Gallager in the early 1960s [1] but they were not used for many years mainly because the technology was not mature for their practical implementation. In 1981 Tanner proposed a graphical representation of these codes, also known as Tanner graphs [2]. However, it was not until the late 1990s when they were rediscovered by MacKay [3] and others [4]–[6]. LDPC codes can achieve near Shannon capacity limit performance over the Binary Erasure Channel (BEC) as well as over the Additive White Gaussian Noise (AWGN) channel with moderate decoding complexity [3], [7]. Recently, they have been adopted by the new version of the Digital Video Broadcasting by Satellite (DVB-S2) standard [8]. In this standard, an inner LDPC code is incorporated with Adaptive Coding and Modulation (ACM) techniques as well as optimized high order modulation schemes for satellite
Manuscript received August 1, 2007; revised October 15, 2007. This work was supported in part by IST SatNEx-II FP6 Project (IST-027393).
S. Papaharalabos and P. T. Mathiopoulos are with the Institute for Space Applications and Remote Sensing (ISARS), National Observatory of Athens, 15236 Athens, Greece (e-mail: spapaha@space.noa.gr; mathio@space.noa.gr).
M. Papaleo, M. Neri, A. Vanelli-Coralli and G. E. Corazza are with the Department of Electronics, Computer Science and Systems (DEIS), University of Bologna, 40136 Bologna, Italy (e-mail: mpapaleo@deis.unibo.it; mneri@deis. unibo.it; avanelli@deis.unibo.it; gecorazza@deis.unibo.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2007.911365

transmission signals, such as the Amplitude Phase Shift Keying (APSK) signaling. It is interesting to note that the resulting capacity increase for the new DVB-S2 over DVB-S standard has been approximately 30% in broadcasting mode and more than 100% for unicasting (i.e. broadband) interconnections [9], [10]. Nowadays, the provision of digital broadcasting multimedia contents to mobile users has been a new emerging technology. For example, a special journal issue entitled ‘Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting’ focusing mainly on terrestrial systems has been recently published [11]. In this journal issue, it is noted that circulant LDPC codes have been adopted to provide Digital Terrestial/Television Multimedia Broadcasting (DTMB) services in China [12], [13]. The evolution of the new DVB-S2 standard to support fully mobility is another research topic currently under investigation [14]. It aims at offering broadband interactive services to mobile users situated on aircrafts, ships and high-speed trains targeting a niche market.
LDPC codes can be decoded by the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA), which is based on the message passing principle [3]. To reduce its complexity several decoding algorithms have been proposed over the past years. A detailed review of the currently available SPA reduced complexity decoding algorithms for LDPC codes can be found in [15]. Two practical implementation aspects of DVB-S2 LDPC decoding were proposed in [16] reducing the number of iterations as well as the computation operations. Some recent hardware implementations of the DVB-S2 LDPC codec can be found in [17]–[20]. Among the critical technical issues addressed in these references were the encoder/decoder architecture, the area size and the achieved overall throughput. A DVB-S2 digital receiver was reported in [21] dealing with several practical aspects, such as frame syncronization, timing acquisition, signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) estimation and digital predistortion. It should be noted that although in the previously mentioned references there have been various performance evaluation results published, this was done in a rather ad-hoc manner without using a systematic approach.
Motivated by this observation, the purpose of this paper is to present for the first time a systematic and thorough performance evaluation study of DVB-S2 LDPC codes with different modulation and coding parameters in conjunction with reduced complexity decoding algorithms. Following [22], we have used either a Piecewise (PW) linear function with a few entries or a small Look-Up Table (LUT) to approximate the check node update computation as accurate as possible and applied them to DVB-S2 LDPC decoding. It is shown that the adopted approximations, which were optimized for pseudo-random based LDPC codes in [22], offer two potential advantages when applied to DVB-S2 systems: (i) robust behavior that is independent on the modulation and coding parameters, and (ii) good trade-off between performance and complexity.
The structure of this paper is organized as follows. After this introduction, a brief overview of coding and modulation used in

0018-9316/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

121

DVB-S2 standard is presented in Section II. Then, various algo- the check nodes corresponding to the parity-checks of a bipartite rithms (i.e. both optimal and sub-optimal) used to decode LDPC graph and is the bit nodes corresponding to the encoded bits. codes are described in Section III. The adopted approximations Moreover, each bit node is connected to check nodes and each

used in check node update computation of DVB-S2 LDPC de- check node is connected to bit nodes, i.e. a regular LDPC

coding are introduced in Section IV. Various performance eval- code is being considered. In following,

denotes the set of

uation results assuming the DVB-S2 LDPC code with different check nodes connected to bit node and

denotes the set

modulation and coding parameters are presented in Section V of bit nodes participating in the -th parity-check equation. In

and finally conclusions are made in Section VI.

addition,

represents the set

, excluding the -th

II. CODING AND MODULATION FOR THE DVB-S2 STANDARD
Exploiting the increased feasibility of Application Specific Integrated Circuit (ASIC) technology, the DVB-S2 committee has chosen to adopt a solution where Forward Error Correction (FEC) encoding is performed into three steps using: (i) an outer systematic Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) code; (ii) an inner LDPC code and (iii) a block bit-interleaver [8]. With reference to the outer encoding, BCH codes are well-known -error correcting block codes that prevent the propagation of unde-

check node and

represents the set

, excluding

the -th bit node.

Consider now that a codeword of size is Binary Phase

Shift Keying (BPSK) modulated and transmitted over the

AWGN channel. Also, is the received codeword corre-

sponding to the transmitted codeword with the same size . In

general, the sum-product algorithm is composed of three steps:

(i) initialization; (ii) iterative process and (iii) hard decision

[15]. Step (ii) includes the check node and bit node updates,

which are the core of the algorithm. These updates can be

computed from

tectable errors generated by the inner LDPC decoder.

LDPC codes are linear block codes with sparse parity-check

matrix characterized by columns and

rows, where

is the information block length, is the codeword length and

is the redundancy length added by the encoder. The

(1)

LDPC codes standardized by DVB-S2 are irregular with vari- and

able bit node degrees and produce codewords of either 64800 or

16200 bits, i.e. long and short size codewords, respectively. The

adoption of irregular codes is because bit nodes with high de-

(2)

grees collect more information from their adjacent check nodes

so that they can be corrected after a small number of iterations.

DVB-S2 LDPC codes have a well-defined structure, which is

imposed of an appropriate parity-check matrix construction,

by producing systematic codes in a very simple encoding opera-

tion, that is the use of Irregular Repeat Accumulate (IRA) codes

[23].

Even though parity-check matrices of LDPC codes are

sparse, in general generator matrices needed for encoding

may be not. The latter matrices can be derived using the classical

Gaussian elimination method. Furthermore, a non-sparse matrix

can generate both storage and encoding complexity problems.

For that reason, DVB-S2 has chosen to adopt methods that par-

tially solve this problem by restricting a sub-matrix of the parity-

check matrix to be lower triangular and thus eliminating the

need to derive a generator matrix [23]. In this way, linear en-

coding complexity is feasible. In more detail, the parity-check

matrix has the form of

where is a staircase

matrix with column weight equal to 2, and

is a random sparse matrix of size

with column

weight ranging between 3 and 13 depending on the coding rate.

Another important feature is the periodicity of the sub-matrix

, in order to reduce memory storage requirements by a factor

of . In particular, for a group of bit nodes the check nodes

connected to the first bit node need only to be specified, whereas

the check nodes connected to -th bit node with

can be

determined by a pre-calculated formula [23]. In DVB-S2 the pa-

rameter

is chosen.

where

is the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) of the

message that the -th check node sends to the -th bit node,

based on all the bits checked by except , and

is

the LLR of the message that bit node sends to check node ,

based on all the checks involving except , respectively. In

addition,

is the a posteriori probability of each bit node

after transmission through the channel, i.e.

where is the noise variance.In order to obtain a wide range

of spectral efficiencies in DVB-S2 standard, 11 different coding

rates (1/4, 1/3, 2/5, 1/2, 3/5, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5, 5/6, 8/9, 9/10) are

available together with four different modulation schemes.

Apart from the well-known -ary Phase Shift Keying (PSK)

modulation formats, such as Quadrature PSK (QPSK) and

8-PSK, the hybrid amplitude and phase modulation format, re-

ferred to as -ary APSK, is mainly considered for two reasons:

(i) increased bandwidth efficiency which is achieved for high

values of , such as

and

, and (ii) its ability

to better cope with typical non-linear distortion introduced by

satellite transponders. Following the notation

where denotes the number of constellation points on the

-th ring, the considered in the DVB-S2 standard 16-APSK

and 32-APSK modulation formats are composed of a double

ring (4, 12) and a triple ring (4, 12, 16), respectively. Note that

the constellation parameters are optimized as a function of the

LDPC coding rate [8]. In the case of 8-PSK, 16-APSK and

32-APSK modulation formats, a simple block bit-interleaver is

III. OPTIMAL AND SUB-OPTIMAL REPRESENTATIONS OF THE SUM PRODUCT ALGORITHM (SPA)

Let

be a binary LDPC code described by a sparse

added after the LDPC encoding, in order to increase the code

diversity. Coded bits are serially written column-wise into the

interleaver, and then are serially read row-wise.

The above algorithm is also known as the

rule [15].

Apart from it, [15] provides a description of two more optimal

parity-check matrix of size

, where

is algorithms with different check node update computation than

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

122
TABLE I PIECEWISE LINEAR APPROXIMATION OF THE tanh(1) FUNCTION [22]

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

TABLE II LUT APPROXIMATION OF THE tanh(1) FUNCTION [22]

Fig. 1. Comparison of the two approximations of the tanh(1) function based on PW linear and LUT with the exact curve.

in (1). These are: (i) Gallager’s approach and (ii) Jacobian approach. In the first case, the check node update computation can be expressed as

Fig. 2. Normalized computational time against the number of decoding iter-
N R ations using different decoding algorithms for the DVB-S2 LDPC code. Short
codeword of = 16200 bits, coding rate ( ) 2/3, 8-PSK modulation, AWGN channel and a maximum of 70 decoding iterations.

(3)

where

denotes the signum function, the use of summa-

tions is preferred instead of multiplications and also another

function is used, i.e.

. In the second case, the check

node update computation is applied into pairs of incoming mes-

sages in recursive form. It is based on the fact that for two

random variables and , with LLR values

and

respectively, the following formula exists [15]

where denotes the logical Exclusive OR (XOR) operator. The

logarithm in the right part of (4) can be stored in memory by

using a Two-Dimensional (2D) LUT, usually with eight entities,

in which both the sum and difference of the two LLR values

and

are required.

For the min-sum algorithm, the correcting factor from (4) is

omitted, so that the check node update can be computed from

(5)

It can be observed that the LLR values from (5), i.e. for min-sum algorithm, are always greater than those from (3), i.e. for SPA. In the open technical literature there exist several approaches that improve the performance of the min-sum algorithm at the expense of some complexity increase. For instance, in [15] two algorithms were proposed, namely normalized min-sum (4) (NMS) and offset min-sum (OMS) algorithms. Both are based
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

123

N Fig. 3. PER performance of DVB-S2 LDPC code, = 16200 bits, over the AWGN channel, a maximum of 70 decoding iterations, different coding rates and
modulation formats. Four decoding algorithms are compared with each other: (i) PW linear approximation; (ii) LUT approximation; (iii) EX method (i.e. ideal
performance) and (iv) min-sum algorithm.

on finding the minimum as shown in (5), but the former makes

use of a constant normalization factor

:

(or equivalently the LUT size) was done in order to have a similar degree of discrimination to the LUT used in Log-MAP decoding of turbo codes, which makes use of eight stored values [24].
In order to compare the two approximations, i.e. PW linear

and LUT, in terms of computational time savings, various com-

puter simulation experiments were run assuming the DVB-S2

LDPC code with different codeword sizes, coding rates and (6) modulation formats. In this respect, Fig. 2 illustrates the nor-

whereas the latter makes use of a subtraction with a positive constant value :

malized computational time obtained for the following scenario: short DVB-S2 LDPC codeword of 16200 bits, coding rate equal to 2/3, 8-PSK modulation, AWGN channel, and a maximum of 70 decoding iterations. For comparison purposes, the

computational time provided by the optimal Jacobian approach

and the sub-optimal min-sum algorithm are also depicted. The

curves shown in Fig. 2 have been normalized to the reference

(7)
IV. CHECK NODE UPDATE APPROXIMATIONS FOR DVB-S2 LDPC DECODING

case, that is the EX method with a maximum of 70 decoding iterations. It can be seen that with respect to the EX method, the PW linear approximation is about 26% faster, whereas the LUT approximation is about 40% faster, respectively. In addition, the computational time of the Jacobian approach is about 12% lower as compared to LUT approximation, whereas the min-sum is the fastest algorithm, e.g. about 20% faster than the

For the case of pseudo-random based LDPC codes, the ef-

fect on the BER performance when approximating the check

node update computation from (1) with different methods was

investigated in [22]. In particular, two different approaches were

considered to compute the

function and its inverse: (i)

PW linear function with seven regions, and (ii) LUT with eight

values. These two approximations of the

function (e.g.

Jacobian approach. However, as it will be shown in the next Section, there is a small BER performance degradation associated with the min-sum algorithm. As expected, the simulation time increases linearly with the number of decoding iterations. Based on our experiments it is important to note that the computational time savings are not influenced significantly by the selection of LDPC codeword size, coding rate and modulation format.

see Tables I and II) together with the exact expression (EX) are illustrated in Fig. 1. The adopted approximations provide com-

V. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION RESULTS

putational complexity savings with respect to the corresponding In order to assess the performance of the two SPA approxima-

EX expressions. The PW linear approximation requires only tions, the LDPC code considered in the DVB-S2 standard was one multiplication and one addition, whereas the LUT approx- adopted. Thus, following [8] an outer BCH code is assumed, imation requires no operations at all, apart from extra memory which can detect and successfully correct up to 12 erroneous

storage of eight values. The selection of the number of regions bits. The user packet length is 1504 bits (i.e. MPEG format),

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

124

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

N Fig. 4. BER performance of DVB-S2 LDPC code, = 16200 bits. Other system parameters are the same as in Fig. 3.

N Fig. 5. PER performance of DVB-S2 LDPC code, = 64800 bits. Other system parameters are the same as in Fig. 3.

whereas both short (i.e. 16200 bits) and long (i.e. 64800 bits) The two considered approximations are labeled as PW and LUT

LDPC codewords are selected. In the various performance eval- curves and they are shown in dashed lines. Also, min-sum algo-

uation results, which have been obtained by means of computer rithm performance is shown in solid lines, but with some per-

simulations, the coding rate varies from 1/2, 2/3 to 3/4 and the modulation format is based on either -ary PSK or -ary APSK, e.g. QPSK, 8-PSK, 16-APSK and 32-APSK, respectively. Consistent with the previous analysis, an AWGN channel is considered with a double-sided power spectral density

formance degradation compared to EX method (e.g. maximum 0.8 dB at PER of , depending on the simulation parameters scenario). It can be seen that for a target PER (or BER) of approximately (or ) the loss of LUT with respect to EX method is less than 0.2 dB, whereas the loss of PW with re-

and a maximum of 70 decoding iterations are performed at the spect to EX method is less than 0.1 dB, respectively. Overall, the

decoder.

performance evaluation results obtained have shown that such

Performance evaluation results obtained in terms of PER and behavior is independent of the code rate selection, modulation

BER are illustrated in Figs. 3 and 4 for the short LDPC code- format and codeword size. Such observations clearly verify the

word and in Figs. 5 and 6 for the long LDPC codeword, re- robustness of the adopted approximations.
spectively. In all curves denoting the optimum SPA algorithm, In order to have a better view on the performance of different which uses (1), is labeled as EX and is shown in solid lines. check node update algorithms, Table III depicts the required bit

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

125

N Fig. 6. BER performance of DVB-S2 LDPC code, = 64800 bits. Other system parameters are the same as in Fig. 3.
TABLE III PERFORMANCE COMPARISON AMONG DIFFERENT DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR THE DVB-S2 LDPC CODE, IN TERMS OF REQUIRED E =N AT PER (OR BER)
OF APPROXIMATELY 10 (OR 10 ). SHORT CODEWORD OF N = 16200 bits, AWGN CHANNEL AND A MAXIMUM OF 70 DECODING ITERATIONS

energy to noise power spectral density ratio

at PER (or

VI. CONCLUSION

BER) of approximately (or ). In this table, the short LDPC codeword is considered together with different modulation and coding parameters. It can be observed that: (i) the Jacobian approach performs similarly with the EX method; (ii)

The aim of this paper was to study and compare, in a systematic manner, different check node update approximation methods used to decode LDPC codes specified by the DVB-S2 standard. Various results have shown small performance degra-

the NMS algorithm performs similarly or slightly better than

the PW approximation, except for the last case (i.e.

,

8-PSK) in which a very small degradation is noticed and (iii)

the OMS algorithm has very small degradation compared to the

LUT approximation.

Note that all performance evaluation results are comparable

with those from [10], although 50 decoding iterations were used

in this reference. By increasing the number of iterations to 70,

only small performance improvement of less than 0.05 dB was

dation compared to the optimal SPA but significant reduction in computational complexity was achieved. The different check node update approximations were shown to have robust performance, i.e. they were independent of the selection of DVB-S2 modulation and coding parameters. The observed performance/complexity trade-off can be useful in future applications of DVB-S2 systems, for instance when introducing mobility aspects, in which computational complexity savings could be of significant interest.

observed. In all performance evaluation results a normalization

approach to the

function was considered, in order to ap-

proximate the approach to infinity and prevent decoding over-

flow [22]. This normalization was based upon the use of clipping

when the input argument was greater than a predefined max-

imum value (e.g. 10), and explains the error floor removal to

lower values in the corresponding PER/BER curves.

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, 1981.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 399–431, 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

126

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 54, NO. 1, MARCH 2008

[4] M. G. Luby, A. M. Shokrolloahi, M. Mizenmacher, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and belief propagation,” in IEEE Inter. Symp. on Inform. Theory, Cambridge, USA, Aug. 1998, p. 117.
[5] N. Wiberg, “Codes and Decoding on General Graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. of Linkoping, Linkoping, Oct. 1996.
[6] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, 2001.
[7] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, 2001.
[8] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Second generation framing structure, channel coding and modulation systems for broadcasting, interactive services, news gathering and other broadband satellite applications, ETSI Std. EN 302.307, June 2004.
[9] E. Casini, R. D. Gaudenzi, and A. Ginesi, “DVB-S2 modem algorithms design and performance over typical satellite channel,” Inter. Journ. Satel. Commun. and Netw. (IJSCN), vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 281–318, May/ June 2004.
[10] A. Morello and V. Mignone, “DVB-S2: The second generation standard for satellite broad-band services,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 94, no. 1, pp. 210–227, Jan. 2006.
[11] IEEE Trans. Broadcast., Special issue on Mobile Multimedia Broadcasting, vol. 53, no. 1, Mar. 2007.
[12] J. Song, Z. Yang, L. Yang, K. Gong, C. Pan, J. Wang, and Y. Wu, “Technical review on Chinese digital terrestrial television broadcasting standard and measurements on some working modes,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 1–7, Mar. 2007.
[13] W. Zhang, Y. Guan, W. Liang, D. He, F. Ju, and J. Sun, “An introduction of the Chinese DTTB standard and analysis of the PN595 working modes,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 8–13, Mar. 2007.
[14] S. Scalise, G. E. Corazza, C. P. Niebla, P. Chan, G. Giambene, F. Hu, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and M. A. Vázquez-Castro, “Towards the revision of DVB-S2/RCS standard for the full support of mobility,” IEEE Commun. Society, SSC Newsletter, vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 6–8, Nov. 2006.

[15] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[16] E. A. Choi, D. I. Chang, D. G. Oh, and J. W. Jung, “Low computational complexity algorithms of LDPC decoder for DVB-S2 systems,” in IEEE Vehic. Techn. Conf. (VTC-Fall), Dallas, USA, Sept. 2005, pp. 536–539.
[17] F. Kienle, T. Brack, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core for DVB-S2 LDPC code decoding,” in IEEE Design, Automation and Test in Europe (DATE), Munich, Germany, Mar. 2005, pp. 100–105.
[18] P. Urard, E. Yeo, L. Paumier, P. Georgelin, T. Michel, V. Lebars, E. Lantreibecq, and B. Gupta, “A 135 Mb/s DVB-S2 compliant codec based on 64800b LDPC and BCH codes,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circ. Conf. (ISSCC), San Francisco, USA, Feb. 2005, pp. 446–609.
[19] J. Dielissen, A. Hekstra, and V. Berg, “Low cost LDPC decoder for DVB-S2,” in IEEE Design, Automation and Test in Europe (DATE), Munich, Germany, Mar. 2006, pp. 1–6.
[20] T. Yokokawa, M. Nakane, and M. Kan, “A low complexity and programmable encoder architecture of the LDPC codes for DVB-S2,” in 3rd Turbo Coding Conference, Munich, Germany, Apr. 2006.
[21] G. Albertazzi, S. Cioni, G. E. Corazza, M. Neri, R. Pedone, P. Salmi, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and M. Villanti, “On the adaptive DVB-S2 physical layer: Design and performance,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 62–68, 2005.
[22] S. Papaharalabos, P. Sweeney, B. G. Evans, P. T. Mathiopoulos, G. Albertazzi, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, “Modified sum-product algorithms for decoding low-density parity-check codes,” IET Proc. Commun., vol. 1, no. 3, pp. 294–300, June 2007.
[23] M. Eroz, F.-W. Sun, and L.-N. Lee, “DVB-S2 low density parity check codes with near Shannon limit performance,” Inter. Journ. Satel. Commun. and Netw. (IJSCN), vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 269–279, May/June 2004.
[24] P. Robertson, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and sub-optimal MAP decoding algorithms operating in the log domain,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Seattle, USA, June 1995, pp. 1009–1013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

