684

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

An LDPC Decoder Chip Based on Self-Routing Network for IEEE 802.16e Applications
Chih-Hao Liu, Shau-Wei Yen, Chih-Lung Chen, Hsie-Chia Chang, Chen-Yi Lee, Member, IEEE, Yar-Sun Hsu, and Shyh-Jye Jou

Abstract—An LDPC decoder chip fully compliant to IEEE 802.16e applications is presented. Since the parity check matrix can be decomposed into sub-matrices which are either a zero-matrix or a cyclic shifted matrix, a phase-overlapping message passing scheme is applied to update messages immediately, leading to enhance decoding throughput. With only one shifter-based permutation structure, a self-routing switch network is proposed to merge 19 different sub-matrix sizes as defined in IEEE 802.16e and enable parallel message to be routed without congestion. Fabricated in the 90 nm 1P9M CMOS process, this chip achieves 105 Mb/s at 20 iterations while decoding the rate-5/6 2304-bit code at 150 MHz operation frequency. To meet the maximum data rate in IEEE 802.16e, this chip operates at 109 MHz frequency and dissipates 186 mW at 1.0 V supply.
Index Terms—Decoder architectures, IEEE 802.16, iterative decoders, LDPC codes, phase-overlapping, self-routing, WiMax.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) code, a linear block code defined by a very sparse parity-check matrix, was firstly introduced by Gallager [1]. The LDPC code has been proved to approximate the Shannon limit based on the iterative sum-product algorithm (SPA) and is capable of parallel implementation for higher decoding speed. Newly high-speed communication systems such as IEEE 802.11n, UWB [2], DVB-S2 [3], and IEEE 802.16e [4], [5] have considered employing LDPC codes to enhance their performance. LDPC code can be described by a bipartite graph, in which the bit nodes and the check nodes represent the information bits and the parity check equations respectively. Gallager’s two-phase message passing algorithm [1] decodes a codeword by updating the messages between check nodes and bit nodes iteratively. Since the data dependency between check nodes and bit nodes, results in a limited decoding throughput. Turbo-decoding message-passing (TDMP) based on the soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoder was proposed in [6] to allow updating both check node and bit node concurrently. The trellis-based TDMP algorithm was applied for the specific 2048-bit, (3,6)-regular architecture-aware LDPC (AA-LDPC) [7], [8]. However, the
Manuscript received April 17, 2007; revised October 17, 2007. C.-H. Liu and Y.-S. Hsu are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan 30013, R.O.C. (e-mail: jrhaulu@gmail.com). S.-W. Yen, C.-L. Chen, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, and S.-J. Jou are with the Department of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao-Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C. (e-mail: cylee@faculty.nctu.edu.tw). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2007.916610

complexity for transforming parity check matrix to trellis will be enhanced in an irregular LDPC code. In the IEEE 802.16e system [9], an irregular parity check matrix can be decomposed into several cyclic-shifted identity or zero matrices. We propose a phase-overlapping message passing algorithm for the LDPC decoder in this paper. The phase dependence between nodes in different rows (or sub-matrices) during decoding operation can be decoupled. As a result, the messages generated by check nodes in the pervious row can be passed to bit nodes immediately. Throughput can be improved by increasing the processing elements of the sub-matrix or the row.
Signal routing congestion is another challenge in implementing the message passing circuits of LDPC decoders. Fully parallel LDPC decoder for 1024-bit, rate-1/2 LDPC code with specified physical routing algorithm has been proposed in [10]. Partial-parallel LDPC decoders have been reported to reduce connections among edge nodes [11]–[13]. Bi-directional crossbar switch was exploited for regular LDPC decoders by fixed size forward and backward switch networks [8]. Note that signal routing congestion may constrain the crossbar switch size due to routing path conflict. The applied parity check matrix is irregular, and includes variable sizes of sub-matrices and code rates. Matrix permutation is also applied to transform the original parity check matrix into the architecture-aware structure [14]. The decoding process for multi-rates and multi-sizes LDPC codes in IEEE 802.16e is irregular and difficult to support all code rates under variable matrix sizes [4]. Flexible barrel shifter is applied to switch variable size messages for IEEE 802.16e LDPC decoders [5]. With only one 96-size permutation network, we propose a self-routing switch network that can merge 19 different sub-matrices sizes as defined in IEEE 802.16e [15].
The phase-overlapping message passing algorithm is proposed to decouple the architecture dependence among nodes of different rows, leading to improve overall decoding throughput. Moreover, a self-routing mechanism is developed to resolve the inherent blocking issue in switch network, where source messages are combined with routing information during permutation. As a result, signal routing congestion in the variable size switch network can be reduced significantly with only one permutation network (the size is 96) that provides 19 different switch network sizes.
The remainder of this paper is as follows. Section II introduces IEEE 802.16e LDPC code structure and the phase-overlapping message-passing algorithm. The corresponding architecture and memory structure are presented in Section III. Section IV describes the proposed architecture of self-routing

0018-9200/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: AN LDPC DECODER CHIP BASED ON SELF-ROUTING NETWORK FOR IEEE 802.16e APPLICATIONS

685

Fig. 1. Structure of the parity check matrix for a rate 1/2 IEEE 802.16e LDPC code.

switch network which can cover all sizes of sub-matrix as defined in IEEE 802.16e. Finally, the measurement results of LDPC decoder chip are shown in Section V and the final conclusion is presented in Section VI.

II. LDPC CODES AND DECODING ALGORITHM

A. Code Structure of 802.16e

In the IEEE 802.16e system, the sub-matrix size is defined

by the expansion factor . The parity-check matrix can be

decomposed into several

sub-matrices, and each one is

either the zero matrix or the cyclic-shifted identity matrix [9].

The parity check matrix size is based on both of the code rate

and . The 19 variable expansion factors defined in the IEEE

802.16e specification [9] range from 24 to 96 with an increment

of four. Note that the size of matrix is

where is

the number of parity check equations, and is the code length.

Moreover, there is a

base matrix with

and

, where and are the sub-matrix number

in a column and row respectively. The code rate is determined

by the value of

, where the maximum value of and

the constant value of defined in the IEEE 802.16e system are

12 and 24 respectively. The is extended from the base matrix

by replacing each 1 in with a

circular right

shifted identity matrix and each 0 in with a

zero

matrix. A structure for rate-1/2 parity check matrix is shown

in Fig. 1. Note that can be partitioned into two parts: and

, where is the information nodes and is the parity

check nodes. can also be partitioned into two parts: and

, where has a dual-diagonal structure.

be the event that the parity check equation for the check node

is satisfied. In each decoding iteration, the check node up-

dates its outgoing message by the probability

,

for all

and

. After the bit node n re-

ceives all the messages from the check nodes in

, the bit

node updates its message according to the probability

, where

, and is the value received

from the channel. Each bit node can accumulate more reliable

information from the others by exchanging information between

the bit nodes and the check nodes iteratively. The iterative de-

coding process operates until a valid codeword is found or the

decoding iteration exceeds a predefined number. If the proba-

bilistic messages are represented by log-likelihood ratios (LLR),

the belief-propagation (BP) decoding can be described as fol-

lows:

1) Initialization:

Under the assumption of equal priori probability,

the decoder calculates, the intrinsic

information of the bit node , by

(1)

The message from bit node to check node , denoted by

, is initialized by

, while the message from

check node to bit node , denoted by , is set to zero.

2) Iterative Decoding:

(a) Bit node updating:

Bit node updates the message to check node by

(2)

B. Min Sum Decoding Algorithm

where the set

contains all elements in

The belief-propagation (BP) algorithm [1], [16] provides an

excluding . Meanwhile the decoder can make

efficient and powerful approach to decode LDPC codes. Let

a hard decision that the th bit by

if

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

686

and

other-

wise. The decoding process stops when a valid code-

word

is found while

, otherwise, the decoding moves toward the

phase of check node updating. If the iteration number

exceeds a predefined value, the decoder claims a de-

coding failure and terminates the decoding procedure.

(b) Check node updating:

The check node updates , the message to the

bit node , according to the messages received from

in which is excluding.

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

(3)

Fig. 2. Phase-overlapping message passing flow.
(4)

The nonlinear function increases the complexity for hard implementation. Some approximation schemes had been proposed to simplify the hardware implementation for the check node operation. The min-sum algorithm [17] discards the smaller terms in the summation of (2) to approximate the check node updating by

passing scheme that leads to a higher decoding speed is applied to the LDPC decoder. Because the parity check matrix has been decomposed into sub-matrices, both of the first and the second phase can be overlapped. As a result, the new messages from the check nodes can be passed to the corresponding bit nodes immediately.

As shown in Fig. 2, the check nodes and the bit nodes are (5) operated in horizontal and vertical direction respectively. In the

first decoding iteration, the input messages of the check nodes

However, there exists a performance loss between the min-sum algorithm and the BP algorithm since the min-sum algorithm always over-estimates the check node output magnitude. Several low-complexity approximations using a correction factor have then been introduced to compensate the performance loss. Moreover, in order to achieve a better performance, a normalized factor can be applied to compensate the approximation error [17]:

are initiated as the probability ratio of the corresponding bits.

The input messages of the bit nodes at the th and the

th

rows which are derived from the previous check node opera-

tions are accumulated. When the bit node phase reaches the th

and the

th rows, the check node phase can deal with the

th and the

th rows. At the end of this iteration,

the accumulated sums are used to update the input messages of

the check nodes for the next iteration. The iterative decoding

stops when either a valid codeword is found by hard-decision

result of the accumulated sums when the iteration exceeds a

predefined maximum number. Comparing with SPA algorithm

(6) without layer decoding, two sub-matrices in adjacent rows can be operated simultaneously, resulting in 50% improvement in

C. Phase-Overlapping Message Passing
The parity check matrix in IEEE 802.16e system can be decomposed into at most 12 rows. Each row comprises 24

decoding throughput. After the completion of each row, the decoder accumulates the partial sum to perform the bit node operations.

cyclic-shifted sub-matrices with 19 different sizes. Within each

row, the sub-matrices are processed serially. Therefore, the throughput can be enhanced by increasing the parallelism in

III. PROPOSED DECODER ARCHITECTURE

the computation of rows and sub-matrices.

The architecture of the phase-overlapping message passing

In the SPA algorithm [1], both of the first and the second LDPC decoder is shown in Fig. 3. It mainly contains two edge

phase are initiated by the check node and the bit node respec- node processor clusters in Fig. 3. The first one is the check node

tively. After the check node operation, the messages will be de- processor (CNP) which is used in the first phase, and the second

livered to the bit nodes, and then, the bit nodes accumulate the one is the bit-node processor (BNP) which generates the sum of

corresponding messages received from the check nodes. Thus, messages in the second phase. The number of processing cells

the decoding speed is restricted due to the data dependency. in each cluster is 96 which can completely fulfill the maximum

Layer decoding has been proposed to decouple the data de- size of sub-matrices. Moreover, the messages are routed by a re-

pendency and improves the decoding speed [18]. A message configurable core network consisting of two self-routing switch

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: AN LDPC DECODER CHIP BASED ON SELF-ROUTING NETWORK FOR IEEE 802.16e APPLICATIONS

687

Fig. 3. Architecture of the LDPC decoder chip.

networks. The memory buffers retain all of the exchanged mes- is the channel value memory that keeps the 6-bit channel proba-

sages and the received channel values used by each node pro- bilistic information. A buffer management unit is also allocated

cessor. The shift size of each sub-matrix at different code rates to control the channel value memory whose word length is equal

is stored in two ROMs.

to the sub-matrix size.

Fig. 4 presents the memory structure containing four func- The phase-overlapping message passing scheduler combined

tional blocks. The first one is the bit node sum memory, which with the buffer management unit arranges hardware resources

is for storing and updating the partial sum messages generated of each iteration and controls the order of message passing be-

from bit node processor. The second one is the check node sum tween memories and node processors. During the decoding it-

memory which is used for retaining the final messages sum gen- eration, the configurable core network routes two 96 96 mes-

erated during the previous iteration and will be adopted by the sages in parallel from memories to the node processors through

check node processor during the next iteration. Note that the two 96 96 self-routing switch networks.

messages in the bit node sum memory and the check node sum memory will be updated by the bit node updating engine. The A. Message Scheduling With Buffer Management

third one is the minimum message memory group that stores the The phase-overlapping message passing scheduler manages

minimum messages correspondingly, and will be updated based the message passing and controls the message transfer sequence.

on the output messages of check node processors. In the min- The decoding message will strictly follow the instruction of each

imum message memory group, the first three memories are used permutation matrix according to the phase-overlapping message

to store the minimum messages, the second minimum messages, passing algorithm. Moreover, memory access conflict can be

and the minimum index information respectively. The rest 24 avoided to reduce idle time effectively. Not only the memory

memories are reserved for the minimum sign messages derived access bandwidth, but also the core network utilization needs

from different columns of the parity check matrix. The last one to be managed in the decoding operation. The switch network

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

688

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

Fig. 4. Memory data structure of the proposed decoder.

Fig. 5. The scheduling flow for message passing in the decoding process.

bandwidth can be shared by both of the check node and bit node sign magnitude transfer, incoming messages switching, and

processors. Hence, the central scheduler and the buffer manage- out-going message updating. The memory pre-fetch process

ment unit are applied to control the regular operation at the dif- will generate the memory read address. The sign magnitude

ferent rows. Two sub-matrices at adjacent rows can be operated transfer converts the message from the sign magnitude (SM)

simultaneously.

notation to the 2’s complement (TC). The incoming message

Fig. 5 shows the scheduling flow for message passing in switching process receives the messages after the format trans-

the decoding process. This decoding process is specifically formation, and switches the received messages to the node

regularized and separated into four stages: memory pre-fetch, processors through the switch network. The out-going message

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: AN LDPC DECODER CHIP BASED ON SELF-ROUTING NETWORK FOR IEEE 802.16e APPLICATIONS

689

Fig. 6. Cell structure of the proposed check node.

Fig. 7. Cell structure of the proposed bit node.

updating process controls the memory write address. Finally, element) and the new magnitude (which is either “min” or “2nd

the output messages after the computation in the edge node min” of the sorter).

processors will be simultaneously updated and transferred to Fig. 7 shows the block diagram of the bit node cell. The bit

the message memory.

node cell receives the the probability ratio of the corresponding

B. Node Processing Cell

bits and the message linked to the same bit node. All inputs with the sign magnitude (SM) notation are firstly converted to

The check node cell can be implemented by a sorter that the 2’s complement (TC) representation and then summed up

searches the minimum magnitude. The sorter can be further to perform the updating. The summed values are also clipped to

modified to enhance the decoding speed by simultaneously up- avoid the overflow.

dating all edges in connection with the same check node. Fig. 6

illustrates the proposed check node cell with the sign magni-

IV. MESSAGE PASSING SWITCH NETWORK

tude notation of 6-bit input. The check node can be divided into two parts: one is 1-bit sign-multiplication and the other is 5-bit A. Variable Size Switch Network

sorter (that searches for the minimum value and the second min- Basically, the parity check matrix size is determined based

imum value from the inputs). The new messages generated by on the code rate and the expansion factor of sub-matrix. The

check nodes will be delivered to the corresponding bit nodes. 19 variable expansion factors in the IEEE 802.16e specifica-

The output messages of each check node are the combination of tion [9] range from 24 to 96 with an increment of four, and the

the sign bit (which is generated by the minimum sign processing variety causes the difficulty in applying the fixed size crossbar

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

690

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

Fig. 8. Structure of the self-routing switch network.

switches, such as Banyan networks [19], Benes networks [20] that the size of sub-matrix is . The message exchange opera-

and 64 64 dual bi-directional networks [8]. Multiple switches tions in the four stages are as follows: the first stage is the combi-

with different expansion factors lead to the signal routing con- nation of source messages with the self-routing bits, the second

gestion as well as the lower chip density [19]. The flexible barrel stage is the coarse permutation, the third stage is the fine per-

shifter with multi-stage multiplexers was applied to switch vari- mutation, and the fourth stage is the routing lookup scheme.

able size messages for IEEE 802.16e LDPC decoders, and this The 96 self-routing bits embedded in the routing messages

will increase the signal congestion and the area of the switch net- are determined at the first stage, and are inserted into the cor-

work [5]. The routing decision mechanism in traditional switch responding source messages as shown in Fig. 8. Among the 96

network, preventing path conflict and blocking, controls both source messages, the first th message are meaningful and the

forward and backward routing paths of switch networks. But others are dummy. The messages with self-routing bit equal to

this will increase the signal routing complexity. Thus, a new one means meaningful. At the second and the third stage, the 96

shifter-based structure with only one permutation network [15] data, including the self-routing bits and the messages (or dummy

is proposed to complete the message routing for all code rates messages), are permuted together according to the 7-bit shift

and code lengths. Each self-routing switch network is config- size. Note that the most significant five bits are used to perform

urable for different expansion factors and shift size. Moreover, the coarse permutation by the scale of four at the second stage,

the blocking issue can be resolved by embedding self-routing and the last two significant bits are reserved to perform the fine

information into the routing path.

permutation at the third stage. At the fourth stage, we have to

choose data from the 96 routed data based on the self-routing

B. Self-Routing With Embedded Routing Information

bits after the permutation. Fig. 9(a) shows that the first routing

decision data constructed from the 96th to the

th

A self-routing switch network is proposed to enable parallel routed data and the second routing decision data constructed

message to be routed without congestion. Fig. 8 illustrates the from the th to the first routed data. Fig. 9(b) illustrates the

switch network architecture, where 96 messages are routed in 96 lookup engines and compares the corresponding self-routing

parallel through the proposed four-stage switch network. Note bits in parallel according to the expansion factor and shift size.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: AN LDPC DECODER CHIP BASED ON SELF-ROUTING NETWORK FOR IEEE 802.16e APPLICATIONS

691

Fig. 9. Block diagram of the lookup engine: (a) the first routing decision data and the second routing decision data; (b) selection of the output messages from routing decision data using 96 look up engines.

Ninety-six out messages will be selected from the first routing

V. CHIP MEASUREMENT

decision data and the second routing decision data. The 96th

routed message will be selected as the th output message when Fig. 10 presents the fixed-point simulation results with

the 96th routed self-routing bit is available (self-routing bit

different decoding iterations for the rate-1/2 and 2304-bit

implies the available condition) and the th routed self-routing code. Note that the iteration number can be set according to

bit is unavailable. The operation of the lookup engine will de- the channel condition, and the chip throughput will be varied

termine the expected messages based on the shift size and the by means of controlling the iteration number. The maximum

expansion factor when both of the 96th routed self-routing bit iteration number is set to 20 because of the trade-off between

and the th routed self-routing bit are available.

throughput and BER performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

692

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

Fig. 12. Shmoo plot of chip testing.
Fig. 10. Performance of fixed point simulation at rate-1/2 2304-bits code word.
Fig. 13. Decoding throughput for different code rates from two to 20 iterations at operation frequency 150 MHz.
TABLE I FEATURES OF THE LDPC DECODER IN IEEE 802.16e
Fig. 11. Die photo of the LDPC decoder chip.
As shown in the micrograph (see Fig. 11), the decoder chip was implemented in a 90 nm 1P9M CMOS process, and its operation is programmable according to four parameters: code rate, expansion factor, sub-matrix shift size, and iteration number. Fig. 12 is the shmoo plot that indicates the maximum measured operation frequency at 1.0 V is 150 MHz. Under such operating frequency, we illustrate the chip throughput, ranging from 1.23 Gb/s to 0.105 Gb/s, for the 2304 bits code length in Fig. 13.
In IEEE 802.16e [21], the chip operating at frequency 109 MHz achieves the maximum 63.36 Mb/s data rate within 20 iterations and dissipates 186 mW at 1.0 V supply. The decoder chip occupies 6.25 mm area. 380 k logic gates and 89 k bits memory with a 14 k bits dual-port SRAM for auto-check module are integrated together in this specific area. Note that derived as follows: the built-in auto-check module will compare the decoding result with the expected codewords stored in the memory. The chip parameters are listed in Table I, and the comparison with other decoders is shown in Table II, the energy efficiency is
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: AN LDPC DECODER CHIP BASED ON SELF-ROUTING NETWORK FOR IEEE 802.16e APPLICATIONS

693

TABLE II OVERALL COMPARISON BETWEEN THE PROPOSED IEEE 802.16e LDPC DECODER AND THE EXISTING LDPC DECODERS

VI. CONCLUSION
With the self-routing switch network, a 6.25 mm LDPC decoder chip fully compliant to IEEE 802.16e applications is presented. This chip dissipates 264 mW power when decoding a rate-5/6 2304-bit LDPC code at 150 MHz and 1.0 V supply voltage; the throughput can achieve 105 Mb/s in 20 iterations. Additionally, the self-routing switch network enables to support the permutation function that can fulfill the requirement of different sub-matrix sizes. Signal routing congestion in the variable size switch network can be reduced significantly with only one permutation network that provides 19 different switch network sizes. Moreover, the phase-overlapping message passing algorithm is implemented to achieve the high throughput as specified in IEEE 802.16e with low hardware cost.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Dr. Chien-Ching Lin and Yen-Chin Liao for layout assistance and comments for paper writing, and the National Chip Implementation Center for chip measurement assistance.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] C.-C. Lin, K.-L. Lin, C.-C. Chung, and C.-Y. Lee, “A 3.33 Gb/s (1200, 720) low-density parity check code decoder,” in Proc. ESSCIRC, 2005, pp. 211–214.
[3] P. Urard, E. Yeo, L. Paumier, P. Georgelin, T. Michel, V. Lebars, E. Lantreibecq, and B. Gupta, “A 135 Mb/s DVB-S2 compliant codec based on 64800b LDPC and BCH codes,” in IEEE ISSCC Dig. Tech. Papers, 2005, pp. 446–447.

[4] X.-Y. Shi, “VLSI designs of LDPC codec for IEEE 802.16e system,” Masters thesis, National Taiwan Univ., Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., 2006.
[5] T. Brack, M. Alles, F. Kienle, and N. When, “A synthesizable IP core for WIMAX 802.16E LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. IEEE 17th Int. Symp. Personal, Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications, Sep. 2006, pp. 1–5.
[6] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr.(VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[7] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Design methodology for highthroughput memory-efficient programmable decoder cores for architecture-aware low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Process. Syst (SiPS’03), Seoul, Korea, Aug. 2003, pp. 159–164.
[8] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 3, pp. 634–698, Mar. 2006.
[9] Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems Amendment for Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands, IEEE P802.16e-2005, 2005.
[10] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690 mW 1 Gb/s 1024b rate 1/2 low density parity check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[11] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, “On finite precision implementation of low density parity check codes decoder,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, Sydney, Australia, May 2001, vol. 4, pp. 202–205.
[12] S. Kim, G. E. Sobelman, and J. Moon, “Parallel VLSI architectures for a class of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, Phoenix-Scottsdale, AZ, May 2002, vol. 2, pp. 93–96.
[13] H. Chen, “A FPGA and ASIC implementation of rate 1/2, 8088-b irregular low density parity check decoder,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2003, vol. 1, pp. 113–117.
[14] S.-H. Kang and I.-C. Park, “Loosely coupled memory-based decoding architecture for low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1045–1056, May 2006.
[15] C.-H. Liu, C.-C. Lin, H.-C. Chang, C.-Y. Lee, and Y.-S. Hsu, “Method and apparatus for switching data in communication systems,” Taiwan and US patent pending.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

694

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

[16] J. L. Fan, Constrained Coding and Soft Iterative Decoding. Boston: Kluwer Academic, 2001.
[17] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of lower-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[18] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems, Austin, TX, Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[19] F. Quaglio, F. Vacca, C. Castellano, A. Tarable, and G. Masera, “Interconnection framework for high-throughput, flexible LDPC decoders,” in Proc. Design Automation and Test in Europe, Mar. 2006, vol. 2, pp. 6–10.
[20] J. Tang, T. Bhatt, V. Sundaramurthy, and K. K. Parhi, “Reconfigurable shuffle network design in LDPC decoders,” in Proc. Application-Specific Systems, Architecture and Processors, 2006 (ASAP’06), Steamboat Springs, CO, Sep. 2006, pp. 81–86.
[21] “Mobile WiMAX—Part I: A technical overview and performance evaluation,” WiMAX Forum, Aug. 2006.
Chih-Hao Liu received the B.S. and Masters degrees from the Department of Power Mechanical Engineering, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1998 and 2000, respectively. From January 2001 to August 2006, he was with Industrial Technology Research Institute, as an engineer for switch network and WiMax integration circuit design. He is currently working toward the Ph.D degree in the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing-Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. His research interests include switch network architecture design, communication integration circuit design, coding theory and digital communication.
Shao-Wei Yen received the B.S. and Masters degrees from the Department of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2004 and 2006, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D degree in the Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao Tung Univerisity. His research interests include digital communication, coding theory, and VLSI signal processing.
Chih-Lung Chen received the B.E. and M.S. degrees from the Department of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao-Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 2004 and 2006, respectively. He is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in electronics engineering at National Chiao-Tung University. His general research interests include VLSI implementation of error control codes and wireless communication systems.
Hsie-Chia Chang was born in Keelung, Taiwan. He received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees in electronics engineering from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1995, 1997, and 2002, respectively.
From 2002 to 2003, he was with OSP/DE1 in MediaTek Inc., working in the area of decoding architectures for Combo SoC. In February 2003, he joined the faculty of the Department of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, as an Assistant Professor. His current research interests include algorithms and circuit architectures in signal processing, especially for channel coding and crypto-systems, and joint source/channel coding for crosslayer communications.

Chen-Yi Lee (M’01) received the B.S. degree from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1982, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Katholieke University Leuven (KUL), Belgium, in 1986 and 1990, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
From 1986 to 1990, he was with IMEC/VSDM, working in the area of architecture synthesis for DSP. In February 1991, he joined the faculty of the Electronics Engineering Department, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, where he is currently a Professor and Dean of Research and Development Office. His research interests mainly include VLSI algorithms and architectures for high-throughput DSP applications. He is also active in various aspects of high-speed networking, system-on-chip design technology, very low power designs, and multimedia signal processing. In these areas, he has published more than 150 papers and holds decades of patents.
 Dr. Lee served as the Director of Chip Implementation Center (CIC), an or-
ganization for IC design promotion in Taiwan (2000/8 2003/12), and the
 microelectronics program coordinator of Engineering Division under National
Science Council of Taiwan (2003/1 2005/12). He was the former IEEE CAS Taipei Chapter Chair and is currently a member of IEEE.
Yar-Sun Hsu received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronics engineering from National Chiao Tung University, Taiwan, R.O.C., and the Ph.D. degree from Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY.
He joined IBM T. J. Watson Research Center, Yorktown Heights, NY, in 1982 after working for General Electric Company in New York for three years. Since then, he has been involved in the research of scalable parallel cluster system, multiprocessor system, switching interconnection network, VLSI technology, and CMOS chip design. In 1988 he became the manager of a system department working on the design of IBM Scalable Power Parallel System, cache coherence protocol for multiprocessor systems, performance evaluation and visualization, and scalable parallel I/O. In 2002, he joined the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Taiwan, as a Professor. Dr. Hsu received one IBM Outstanding Technical Achievement Award, three IBM invention plateau awards, two IBM supplemental invention awards, and three IBM Research Division technical achievement awards. He has also received the best system paper award from the ACM SIGMETRICS Conference in 2000, the best paper award from International Computer Symposium in 2004, and the outstanding teaching award from National Tsing Hua University in 2006. His current interests include MPSoC architecture, on-chip interconnection network, cluster system, parallel I/O, and SoC design.
Shyh-Jye Jou was born in Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1960. He received the B. S. degree in electrical engineering from National Chen Kung University in 1982, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electronics from National Chiao Tung University in 1984 and 1988, respectively.
He was with the Electrical Engineering Department of National Central University, Chung-Li, Taiwan, from 1990 to 2004 and became a Professor in 1997. Since 2004, he has been a Professor of the Electronics Engineering Department of National Chiao Tung University, and became the Chairman from 2006. He was a Visiting Research Associate Professor in the Coordinated Science Laboratory at University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign during the 1993–1994 academic years. In the summer of 2001, he was a Visiting Research Consultant in the Communication Circuits and Systems Research Laboratory of Agere Systems, USA. His research interests include design and analysis of high-speed, low-power digital integrated circuits, and communication integrated circuits and systems. Dr. Jou has served on the technical program committees in several international conferences including Custom Integrated Circuits Conference (CICC1994–1996) and Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference (A-SSCC) 2005 to 2007.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:45:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

