IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

359

Constructing LDPC Codes by Error Minimization Progressive Edge Growth
Eran Sharon, Student Member, IEEE, and Simon Litsyn, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A novel approach to constructing Tanner graphs using progressive edge growth (PEG) is introduced. It yields LDPC codes providing minimized block error probability in Binary Erasure Channels (BEC). The constructed codes exhibit superior performance over codes generated by previously known algorithms, both for BEC and AWGN channels. Furthermore, an upper bound on the expected block error probability in the error floor region of the generated codes is derived. This allows analytical prediction of the codes’ error floor performance. Finally, the method is generalized for generating simple in implementation LDPC codes based on lifted graphs.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, progressive edge growth (PEG), error floor, stopping sets, trapping sets, lifted graphs.
I. INTRODUCTION
E FFICIENT capacity approaching irregular LDPC codes can be designed using density evolution analysis [17], [2]. This approach is based on an asymptotically (in the length of the code) valid assumption that the code’s underlying graph is cycle-free. Unfortunately, the asymptotic analysis provides a rather poor prediction for the performance of short and moderate length codes. The performance under iterative decoding of a finite length LDPC code is governed by specific combinatorial configurations appearing in the underlying graph. For the Binary Erasure Channel (BEC) iterative decoding fails if the erasures encompass a subset of the variable nodes forming a stopping set [3]. For other channels the concept of stopping sets is replaced by trapping sets [16] or pseudo-codewords [4], [22], [7]. In [3],[14],[11],[1] a finite length analysis of LDPC code ensembles over the BEC has been done by computing the expected stopping set distribution in the ensemble.
The conventional approach to constructing LDPC codes from a given ensemble is based on a random generation of the bipartite graph. In order to improve the finite length performance and reduce the error floor of the codes, it is customary to use a girth conditioning in the random construction process for eliminating short cycles. A simple greedy algorithm for generation graphs with large girth is the Progressive Edge Growth (PEG) algorithm [6], [23]. Since every stopping set constitutes a cycle in the graph, eliminating short cycles reduces the probability of small stopping and trapping sets. Heuristic conditioning algorithms attempting elimination of stopping sets in the graph are described in [21], [15]. These
Paper approved by F. Fekri, the Editor for LDPC Codes and Applications of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received December 27, 2005; revised February 28, 2007.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering-Systems, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, 69978 Israel (e-mail: {litsyn, eransh}@eng.tau.ac.il).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2008.050658.

algorithms avoid short cycles with low Approximate Cycle Extrinsic-Message-Degree (ACE) which are more susceptible to produce small stopping and trapping sets.
Lately, there has been an increasing interest in structured or semi-structured constructions of LDPC codes. There are two main incentives for this. First, non-random constructions can provide better finite length performance and lower error floors. Second, they facilitate low-complexity implementation of LDPC codes. Various structured LDPC constructions are summarized in [12]. However these constructions are relevant mostly for regular LDPC codes and are limited to specific code lengths and rates. A semi-structured construction of LDPC codes which is based on random lifts of bipartite graphs has been the subject of much interest recently. Such codes are making their way into many new evolving communication standards. In this construction, a small base graph, called a protograph, serves as a blueprint for constructing an LDPC code of arbitrary length via a graph lifting technique. The protograph actually defines an LDPC code ensemble, whose asymptotic performance can be predicted by analyzing the base graph [20], [19]. This construction is particulary interesting since it significantly simplifies the hardware implementation of the code’s encoder and decoder. Various decoder architectures which utilize this structure have been suggested [10], [13].
In this paper we propose an improved Error Minimization Progressive Edge Growth (EMPEG) algorithm for constructing codes with good finite length performance and low error-floors over BEC. The suggested algorithm is a greedy PEG type algorithm which generates the edges in the graph one by one. Unlike previously known code constructing algorithms which optimize parameters such as the girth or ACE influencing the code’s performance indirectly, the proposed algorithm directly optimizes the code’s block error probability over BEC. We identify combinatorial structures in the code’s graph, named minimal cycle sets, which on one hand are easily enumerated and on the other hand can be used for determining the code’s expected block error probability over BEC. The edges generated by EMPEG algorithm are chosen such that their contribution to the expected block error probability is minimized. The expected contribution of an edge to the block error probability is computed based on enumeration of all the minimal cycle sets that are formed if the edge is added to the graph. The proposed algorithm is also described for lifted graphs. Moreover, we derive an upper bound on the expected block error probability of the constructed codes based on its cycle sets’ spectrum. This upper bound can be used for choosing the best code from a set of generated codes without

0090-6778/08$25.00 c 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:46:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

360

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

resorting to long Monte-Carlo simulations.

code’s performance over BEC, under belief propagation (BP)

The EMPEG algorithm described in this paper generates decoding, is determined by combinatorial configurations in its

codes with optimized error floor performance. A variant of underlying graph called stopping sets:

this algorithm, which allows trading-off the code’s error floor Definition 2.4 (Stopping Set): A stopping set S is a subset

and waterfall threshold performance is described in [19].

of the set of variable nodes V , such that no extrinsic check

The paper is organized as follows. Background and basic nodes are connected to S.

definitions are given in Section II. An analysis of the expected The residual set of bits that remain erased after decoding contribution of a cycle set to the code’s block error probability is exactly the maximal size stopping set included in the set

is given in Section III. An upper bound on the expected block of erased bits before decoding. Thus, in order to generate a error probability of optimized graph ensembles is derived in code with good finite length performance over BEC, small

Section IV. The EMPEG algorithm is described in Section V. stopping sets should be eliminated from the code’s underlying It is generalized for constructing codes based on lifted graphs graph. Unfortunately, this is an intractable problem. A much in Section VI. Simulation results are given in Section VII. easier task is eliminating short cycles from the graph [6].

Since the induced graph of a stopping set always contains

II. BACKGROUND AND BASIC DEFINITIONS

An LDPC code is defined by a sparse bipartite undirected

graph constructed from its parity-check matrix. The graph

consists of two types, variable and check, of nodes. We denote

the sets of variable nodes, check nodes and graph edges by

V , C and E respectively. The cardinalities of V and C are N

and M respectively. A variable node, denoted by v, represents

a bit in the transmitted codeword and a check node, denoted

by c, represents a parity check constraint. Each check node is

connected by an edge to the variable nodes it checks.

An irregular LDPC code is defined by an irregular bipartite

graph, where the degrees of variable nodes and check nodes

may differ. The ensemble of irregular LDPC codes, or the

ensemble of their corresponding irregular bipartite graphs,

is defined by the variable nodes’ and check nodes’ degree

distributions. Let Λ(x) =

dv i=2

Λixi

and

P (x)

=

dc i=2

Pixi

be the generating functions of the degree distributions for the

variable and check nodes respectively, where Λi is the number of degree-i variable nodes, Pi is the number of degree-i check nodes and dv and dc are the maximal variable and check node degrees, respectively. We denote the ensemble of irregular

(Λ(x), P (x))-bipartite graphs with N = Λ(1) variable nodes and M = P (1) check nodes by G(Λ(x),P (x)).

Next we provide some basic definitions of the combinatorial

structures in a code’s graph that are responsible for block

errors over BEC.

Definition 2.1 (Extrinsic Check Node): An extrinsic check

node to a set of variable nodes is a check node which is singly

connected to the set.

Definition 2.2 (Intrinsic Check Node): An intrinsic check

node to a set of variable nodes is a check node which is

connected to the set at least twice.

Definition 2.3 (Extrinsic Message Degree (EMD)): EMD

of a set of variable nodes is the number of extrinsic check

nodes connected to the set.

We say that a set of variable nodes forms a cycle if there

exists a path passing through all variable nodes in the set, and

no other, that connects every node in the set to itself without

traversing an edge twice. EMD of a path is EMD of the set of

cycles (assuming no degree one variable nodes in the graph), eliminating short cycles also eliminates small stopping sets. However, not all short cycles are equally harmful. Tian et al. [21] noticed that short cycles having small EMD are more prone to induce small stopping sets. We quantify this observation in the next section. Since EMD of a cycle is hard to track, it was suggested to use an Approximate Cycle EMD (ACE) as the graph conditioning measure, neglecting check node sharing. ACE can be easily computed by vi(dvi − 2) where dvi is the degree of the i’th variable node in the cycle. The computation assumes there are no variable nodes in the cycle that are connected to common check nodes outside of the cycle. Algorithms for generating LDPC codes with good finite length performance by eliminating short cycles with small ACE were suggested in [21], [15], [23].
The EMPEG algorithm, described in this paper, directly minimizes the expected block error probability of the generated code. This is done by choosing the graph edges such that combinatorial graph configurations with high contribution to the expected block error probability are avoided. The graph configurations we look for, called cycle sets, are defined as follows:
Definition 2.5 (Minimal Cycle): A set of variable nodes forms a minimal cycle if: 1) it forms a cycle 2) no subset of the variable nodes forms a cycle.
Definition 2.6 (Cycle Set): A (d, ω, τ ) cycle set is a set of the d variable nodes which forms a minimal cycle and has ω intrinsic check nodes and τ extrinsic check nodes.
Based on its definition, a cycle set has the following properties:
1) Every intrinsic check node of the set is connected to the set exactly twice.
2) Any variable node in the cycle set is connected to exactly two intrinsic check nodes.
3) The number of extrinsic check nodes of the cycle set is equal to vi (dvi − 2) where dvi is the degree of the i’th variable node in the cycle set, i.e. for the induced cycle of a cycle set, EM D = ACE.
4) The number of intrinsic check nodes of a size d cycle set is always ω = d.

variable nodes that forms the path. EMD of a cycle is EMD The first two properties hold since otherwise the cycle formed

of the set of variable nodes that forms the cycle.

by the set is not minimal. The third and fourth properties hold

We consider a codeword transmitted over BEC to be erro- due to the second property. Due to the fourth property of a

neous if there is a residual set of bits that remain erased after cycle set we can parameterize it using only two parameters,

decoding has been performed. Di et al. [3] showed that the thus a (d, d, τ )-cycle set will be denoted as a (d, τ )-cycle set.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:46:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON and LITSYN: CONSTRUCTING LDPC CODES BY ERROR MINIMIZATION PROGRESSIVE EDGE GROWTH

361

As part of the EMPEG algorithm we enumerate cycle sets assuming a given channel erasure probability which has that are formed as a result of connecting a given edge e, higher contribution to the block error probability. In order to

referred to as e-cycle sets. Their definition is slightly different: identify e-cycle sets which are more harmful than other eDefinition 2.7 (Minimal Cycle with respect to the edge e): cycle sets for any erasure probability we define a partial order

A set of variable nodes forms a minimal cycle with respect to the edge e if: 1) it forms a cycle that contains e 2) no subset of the variable nodes forms a cycle that contains e.
Definition 2.8 (e-Cycle Set): A (d, ω, τ ) e-cycle set is a set of d variable nodes, which forms a minimal cycle with respect to e and has ω intrinsic check nodes and τ extrinsic check nodes. The properties of an e-cycle set are slightly different:

relation over e-cycle sets:
(d , τ ) < (d, τ ) iff (d , τ ) = (d, τ ) and d ≤ d, τ ≤ τ (1)
Based on this we define: Definition 2.9 (Minimal e-Cycle Set):
A (d, τ ) minimal e-cycle set is an e-cycle set, such that there is no other (d , τ ) e-cycle set for which (d , τ ) < (d, τ ).

1) Every intrinsic check node of the set is connected to the

set exactly twice. 2) Intrinsic checks are always connected between consec-
utive variable nodes in the minimal cycle formed by the e-cycle set. 3) The number of extrinsic check nodes of the cycle set is equal to vi (dvi − |Si|) where vi is the i’th variable node in the set, dvi is its degree and Si is the set of check nodes that it shares with adjacent variable nodes in the minimal cycle formed by the set.
Note that two variable nodes in an e-cycle set can share more than one intrinsic check node only through a length 4 cycle (i.e. only if they are adjacent in the cycle formed by the set). Thus if we do not allow cycles of length 4 in the graph, then we have only simple (d, d, τ ) e-cycle sets, for which cycle EMD = ACE. Figure 1 shows an example of an e-cycle set.

III. EXPECTED CONTRIBUTION OF A CYCLE SET TO THE BLOCK ERROR PROBABILITY
We define the expected contribution of a given cycle set to the code’s block error probability as the probability of all erasure patterns which belief propagation decoding fails to correct and whose support set covers the e-cycle set. The expectation is taken over the ensemble G(Λ(x),P (x)). For the sake of simplicity, we will consider right regular ensembles G(Λ(x),Mxdc ). We consider the ensemble definition as suggested by Richardson and Urbanke [17], in which a random permutation on the M dc check node sockets, chosen uniformly over all (M dc)! permutations, defines a graph from the ensemble by defining how the edges connect the variable and check node sockets. We use this ensemble definition since it is easier for analysis. However, under this ensemble defini-

tion multiple edges are allowed between two nodes. Assuming

that the decoding algorithm does not treat multiple edges differently than regular edges, this ensemble includes “bad”

graphs representing codes with high error floors over BEC. For

example, a degree two variable node which is connected by a

double edge to some check node can never be recovered if it is

erased and this can occur with a finite probability. In practice,

double edges are avoided, hence analyzing the expected block error probability of the ensemble G(Λ(x),Mxdc ) provides an

upper bound on the expected block error probability of the

Fig. 1. a) (4, 5, 6) e-cycle set. The 6 extrinsic check nodes are shaded. b) Example of a set which is not an e-cycle set since it does not form a minimal cycle with respect to e. However, the subset containing the three upper variable nodes, is a (3, 3, 6) e-cycle set

expurgated ensemble without double edges.
Let PCS(d, τ ) and PCS (d, ω, τ ) denote an upper bound on the expected contribution to the block error probability of a given (d, τ ) cycle set and (d, ω, τ ) e-cycle set over BEC with

A key component of the EMPEG algorithm is enumeration of e-cycle sets. Unfortunately, such enumeration incurs high complexity. However enumeration of a reduced list of “bad” e-cycle sets, referred to as minimal e-cycle sets, which provide

erasure probability , respectively. We compute PCS using the union bound. A similar technique was used in [3], [14] for
computing the expected stopping set distribution of a given
graph ensemble.

the highest contribution to the block error probability can be

N

done using a simple tree spanning algorithm, as described in Section V and in Appendix A. As will be shown in the fol-

PCS(d, ω, τ ) =

Ns(d, ω, τ ) s

(2)

s=d

lowing section, a (d, ω, τ ) e-cycle set has higher contribution

PCS(d, τ ) = PCS (d, d, τ )

(3)

to the block error probability as d and τ decrease and as ω increases. Actually, the effect of ω is very small. Hence, for the sake of simplicity, the exact number of intrinsic check nodes in an e-cycle set can be ignored and assumed to be d.

Here, Ns(d, ω, τ ) is the expected number of stopping sets of size s which contain the given (d, ω, τ )-cycle set. We compute
Ns(d, ω, τ ) using the following equation:

We will refer to a (d, d, τ ) e-cycle set by the descriptor (d, τ ). For (d, τ ) and (d , τ ) e-cycle sets for which d > d but τ < τ we cannot say in advance without performing computation

M dc−2ω−τ

Ns(d, ω, τ ) =

A(s − d, ) · B( , ω, τ ) (4)

=τ

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:46:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

362

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

where, A(s−d, ) is the number of subsets of variable nodes of size s −d emanating edges and B( , ω, τ ) is the probability that edges form a stopping set over the set of M check nodes from which ω check nodes are the intrinsic check nodes of the given cycle set and τ check nodes are the extrinsic check nodes of the given cycle set. The computation of Ns is illustrated in Fig. 2.

check node, it is given by:

β(j, ω) =

(dc −2)ω j

(8)

The term γ(M−ω−τ, −i−j) provides the number of possibilities for connecting the remaining − i − j edges to the remaining M − τ − ω check nodes such that a check node is either unconnected, or connected at least twice. It can be computed
using the following generator polynomial:

γ(M, ) = coeff ((1 + x)dc − dcx)M , x

(9)

In the following sections we describe algorithms that require computation of PCS(d, ω, τ ) for various values of (d, ω, τ ). Hence, we need to compute α(i, τ ) and γ(M, ) for many
values of i, τ , M and . In order to allow efficient computation
we use the following recursions to generate pre-computed tables of α(i, τ ) and γ(M, ) for all values of i, τ, M and
:

min{i,dc −1}
α(i, τ ) =

dc − 1 j

α(i − j, τ − 1)

(10)

j=1

where,

α(i, 0) = 1 α(i, 0) = 0

if i = 0 otherwise

and

min{dc, }

γ(M, ) = γ(M − 1, ) +

γ(M − 1, − j)

j=2

dc j
(11)

Fig. 2. Illustration of Ns computation based on (4)-(9).

where,

γ(0, ) = 1

if = 0

The term A(s − d, ) can be computed using the following

γ(0, ) = 0 otherwise

generator polynomial:

IV. EXPECTED BLOCK ERROR PROBABILITY OF AN

A(s − d, ) = coeff

(1 + yxi)Λi , ys−dx

(5)

i

According to the definition of a cycle set its induced cycle cannot include multiple edges and every one of its ω intrinsic check nodes is connected to it exactly twice, otherwise the

OPTIMIZED LDPC ENSENBLE
Let W = {∀(d, τ ) : W(d,τ)} denote the spectrum of cycle sets of a graph, where W(d,τ) is the number of (d, τ )-cycle sets in the graph. We denote by G(Λ(x),Mxdc ,W ) the expurgated ensemble of the ensemble G(Λ(x),Mxdc ), containing all graphs with cycle sets spectrum W . We say that G(Λ(x),Mxdc ,W ) is

induced cycle is not minimal. Thus, the term B( , ω, τ ) is an optimized ensemble if

given by: B( , ω, τ) =

∀(d, τ ) : Ns|W (d, d, τ ) ≤ Ns(d, d, τ )

(12)

min{ ,τ(dc−1)} i=τ

Here Ns|W (d, d, τ ) is the expected number of stopping sets

min{ j=0

−i,ω(dc−2)}α(i,τ

)β

(j,ω)γ

(M

−

ω

−

τ

,

−i−j) of size s that include a (d, τ )-cycle set given that the graph

M dc − 2ω − τ

has a cycle set spectrum W . The computation of (4) assumes no graph conditioning, i.e. we assume that the edges that are

(6) The term α(i, τ ) is the number of possibilities for connecting i edges to the τ extrinsic check nodes such that each extrinsic check node is connected at least once. It can be computed using the following generating function:

not connected to the cycle set are chosen randomly (without any optimization). If graph conditioning is used to optimize the graph then (12) should hold.
In this section we derive an upper bound on the expected block error probability of optimized ensembles. The upper bound is based on the observation that the support set of every

α(i, τ ) = coeff ((1 + x)dc−1 − 1)τ , xi

(7) erasures pattern leading to a block error includes a stopping set which includes a cycle set. Thus, if for each cycle set, we

The term β(j, ω) gives the number of possibilities for con- sum the probabilities of all the erasure patterns with support

necting j edges to the ω intrinsic check nodes. Since there is set including the cycle set, we take into account every error

no limitation on the number of connected edges to an intrinsic pattern at least once. This leads to the following upper bound:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:46:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON and LITSYN: CONSTRUCTING LDPC CODES BY ERROR MINIMIZATION PROGRESSIVE EDGE GROWTH

363

Theorem 4.1: The expected block error probability over
BEC with erasure probability of the optimized ensemble G(Λ(x),Mxdc ,W ) is upper bounded by:

N

E [P (G, G(Λ(x),Mxdc ,W) B )] ≤

W(d,τ ) Ns|W (d, d, τ ) s

(d,τ )

s=d

N

≤

W(d,τ ) Ns(d, d, τ ) s

(d,τ )

s=d

=

W(d,τ )PCS (d, τ )

(13)

(d,τ )

where, PB(G, ) denotes the block error probability of an LDPC code represented by graph G ∈ G(Λ(x),Mxdc ,W ) over BEC with erasure probability .

The derived upper bound becomes tighter when the graph conditioning is weaker (i.e. when the code is less optimized) and as the BEC erasure probability decreases. Thus it tightly predicts the error floor performance of non-optimized ensembles as can be seen in Section VII. Unfortunately, for highly optimized graphs Ns|W (d, d, τ ) Ns(d, d, τ ) the bound (13) is quite loose. However, it is still useful as an upper bound on the expected block error probability in the error floor region. Furthermore, it can be used for determining which graph is expected to have the best performance among a set of graphs, without resorting to long simulations. Indeed, the upper bound can also serve as a tool for predicting the performance of a specific code from G(Λ(x),Mxdc ) with cycle set spectrum W , based on the ensemble’s concentration. We conjecture that optimized ensembles are concentrated exponentially in the code length. The simulation results in Section VII support this assumption.

b) Compute an estimate PB(G, e, ) of the expected contribution of e = (vi, cj) to the block error probability of the code over a BEC with erasure probability .
2) Choose an edge, randomly, from the set of edges for which PB is minimal. Connect the chosen edge in the graph G.
The cycle sets enumeration in step 1, can be done simultaneously for all possible edges, based on a single tree spanning procedure. Enumerating all e-cycle sets requires high memory complexity, since many e-cycle sets should be tracked. However, enumerating only the minimal e-cycle sets, which provide the most essential contribution to the block error probability, can be done very efficiently using the algorithm described in Appendix A. In general, when generating an edge incident to variable node vi, we span the current graph as a tree originating from vi and store the depth, EMD and multiplicity of all paths from vi to every check node cj that can result in a minimal e-cycle set. A path from variable node vi to node n can lead to a minimal e-cycle set if there is no path from vi to n of shorter length with smaller or equal EMD. We refer to such a path as a minimal path. As the depth of the spanned tree increases the number of minimal paths that are tracked decreases fast. Minimal paths of increasing depth and decreasing EMD become more and more scarce. Once all minimal paths are exposed we can stop spanning the tree. Note that computing the EMD of a minimal path (or the EMD of the resulting minimal e-cycle set) is simple according to the properties of an e-cycle set, as discussed in Section II.
Once the enumeration step is complete, we can compute for every possible edge e = (vi, cj) an estimate PB(G, e, ) of its contribution to the block error probability using the following equation:

V. EMPEG ALGORITHM

PB(G, e, ) =

W(ed,τ )PCS (d, τ )

(d,τ )

Previously known graph generation algorithms try to produce codes with good finite length performance by conditioning the girth [6], or the ACE [21], [15], [23] in the graph.

=

W(vdi

→cj ,τ )

PC

S

((d

+ 1)/2, τ

− 2),

(d ,τ )

Both these criteria do not always provide the best choice with respect to the expected block error probability. Unlike these approaches the suggested algorithm directly minimizes the expected block error probability. The EMPEG algorithm is a greedy progressive edge growth algorithm which generates the graph edges one by one, each time choosing the edge with the smallest contribution to the expected block error probability. More specifically, the EMPEG algorithm generates a graph G = (V, C, E) from a given ensemble ensemble G(Λ(x),P (x)). The ensemble parameters can be optimized via standard asymptotic analysis and design tools [2]. The algorithm is initialized with an unconnected graph G, where V and C are assigned with edge sockets according to Λ(x) and P (x) respectively and E = ∅. The graph edges are then generated according to the following algorithm: While there exists a variable node vi ∈ V with unconnected sockets do:
1) For every check node cj with an unconnected socket:

where, W(ed,τ) is the number of (d, τ ) minimal e-cycle sets

and

W(vdi

→cj ,τ )

,

which

is

computed

in

the

enumeration

step,

is

the number of minimal paths from vi to cj of length d and

EMD τ (leading to minimal ((d + 1)/2, τ − 2) e-cycle sets).

Due to the progressive edge growth construction nature of

the algorithm, it is easy to impose various structural limitations

on the generated graph, such as right regularity or amenability

to simple linear encoding [6]. Moreover, various non-greedy

variants of the EMPEG algorithm can be implemented. For

example, at each step, instead of selecting the edge with

minimal PB, we can randomly select an edge whose PB is

smaller than some predefined value [19].

We close this section with a short discussion regarding the

EMPEG’s complexity. Assuming that a precomputed table

containing PCS(d, τ ) for every possible (d, τ ) pair is available, the algorithm’s complexity is similar to the PEG’s com-

plexity. The EMPEG graph generation consists of |E| = N ·dv

edge generation steps, where dv is the average variable node

a) Enumerate (minimal) e-cycle sets that will be degree. Each step requires running the e-cycle sets enumera-

formed if the edge e = (vi, cj) is connected.

tion procedure, which involves tree spanning for tracking all

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:46:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

364

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

minimal paths. During tree spanning every edge in the current

graph can be traversed at most once. Hence the EMPEG

requires O(N 2)

at most operations.

|E| i=1

i

The

=

(|E|2+|E|) 2

=

(|N ·dv|2+|N ·dv|) 2

=

space complexity required for the

enumeration step is O(N · log(N )) (see Appendix A).

VI. EMPEG ALGORITHM FOR LIFTED GRAPHS

In this section we generalize the EMPEG algorithm for

generating good LDPC codes which are based on lifted graphs

with cyclic permutations. Such codes have become very pop-

ular in recent years, especially in practical applications, since

they simplify the hardware implementation of high throughput

encoders and decoders.

Graph lifting is defined as follows: Definition 6.1 (Graph Lift): Let the protograph Gˆ =
(Vˆ , Cˆ, Eˆ) be a bipartite graph, consisting of a set of variable nodes Vˆ , a set of check nodes Cˆ and a set of edges Eˆ ∈ Vˆ ×Cˆ. Each edge e = (vi, cj) ∈ Eˆ connects a variable node vi ∈ Vˆ to a check node cj ∈ Cˆ. Let Z be any positive integer and for each e ∈ Eˆ, let πe be any arbitrary permutation of {1, 2, . . . , Z}. A random Z-lift of the protograph Gˆ is a graph G = (V, C, E), where V = Vˆ × {1, 2, . . . , Z}, C = Cˆ × {1, 2, . . . , Z}, E = Eˆ × {1, 2, . . . , Z}, and an

Fig. 3. Example of a lifted graph

edge (e, q) ∈ E connects the variable node (vi, q) ∈ V to the check node (cj, πe(q)) ∈ C.

In practice, it is common to limit the permutations in the lifted

graph to cyclic permutations. This simplifies encoder and de-

coder implementation, enabling simple routing from memory

to processing units and efficient storage of the code’s parity-

check matrix due to its concise description [10], [13]. Figure

3 shows a lifted graph based on cyclic permutations and its

corresponding protograph. We denote by v(i,q) variable node i at layer q of the graph lift and by c(j,p) check node j at layer Fig. 4. Example of e-cycle sets enumeration in a lifted graph
p of the graph lift. We will call Z cyclically permuted edges,

corresponding to an edge in the protograph, a Z-edge and distinguish it from a regular edge by a superscript indicating its permutation. For example, a Z-edge corresponding to the edge e = (vi, cj) in the protograph and representing a cyclic right shift by p will be denoted by ep = (vi, cj, p).
In the EMPEG algorithm for lifted graphs we cannot generate the graph edges one by one. Instead, we add a Z-edge at every step, i.e., we add Z cyclically permuted edges each time, corresponding to an edge in the protograph.

the enumeration procedure for the edge e0 = (v(i,0), c(j,1))

would provide PB(G, e0, v(i,0) and c(j,1) resulting

) in

= 0 since no path exists between

W v(i,0) →c(j,1)
(d,τ )

=

0

for

all

(d, τ ).

However this is incorrect since adding the Z-edge ep means

that besides the edge e0 between v(i,0) and c(j,1) we also automatically add the edges e1, e2 and e3. As a result, an ecycle set of size g ·(d + 1)/2 and EMD g ·(τ − 2) is formed,

where g = Z/GCD(q − p, Z) = 4/GCD(0 − 1, 4) = 4 is the

As a result, we need to enumerate the minimal e-cycle sets number of layers that are traversed by the induced cycle.

that will be formed by all the edges included in the Z- A simple solution to this problem would be to connect every

edge. Note that due to the symmetry of all edges included possible Z-edge in the graph and then perform the e-cycle

in the Z-edge the spectrum of minimal e-cycle set of every set enumeration with all the edges corresponding to the Z-

edge is identical. Hence, one might be tempted to use the edge present in the graph. However, this requires running the

standard enumeration algorithm by considering connection expensive enumeration step many times (equal to the number

of a single edge among the edges that belong to the Z- of unconnected check node sockets) for every generated Z-

edge (for example the edge incident to v(i,0)) and counting edge, instead of once. This makes the EMPEG algorithm too every minimal e-cycle set found Z times. Unfortunately, this complex. A better solution is based on the observation that we

will not work since minimal e-cycle sets can pass through can easily count many (though not all) of the minimal e-cycle

several edges included in the Z-edge. This is best explained sets that will be formed as a result of connecting every Z-edge,

through an example. Assume that we consider adding the Zedge ep = (vi, cj, p = 1) to the lifted graph as shown in Figure 4. Further assume that there exists a path between
v(i,0) and c(j,q=0) of length d and EMD τ . Then, applying

using a single enumeration step. This is done by taking into
account all the minimal e-cycle sets that are created by adding the Z-edge ep = (vi, cj, p) due to existing paths from v(i,0) to c(j,q) for q = 0, . . . , Z − 1. Since we cannot ensure that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:46:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON and LITSYN: CONSTRUCTING LDPC CODES BY ERROR MINIMIZATION PROGRESSIVE EDGE GROWTH

365

all minimal e-cycle sets are enumerated, this only provides a

10 1

lower bound PBLB(G, ep, ) on PB(G, ep, ), given by:

10 0

PBLB(G, ep = (vi, cj, p), ) =

(14)

10 −1

Z·

Z−1 q=0

W P v(i,0)→c(j,q)

(d,τ ) (d,τ)

CS

(d+1)Z 2GC D(q−p,Z )

,

(τ−2)Z GC D(q−p,Z )

10 −2

10 −3

BLER

Note that for the sake of simplicity we use PCS defined in

10 −4

(2) which assumes a standard graph ensemble (as defined

in Section III) and does not take into account the lifting 10−5

structure of the graph.
Hence, based on a single enumeration step, we can compute PBLB for every possible Z-edge and sort them according to it. We then choose the first Z-edge in the list, which has the smallest PBLB and connect it to the graph. We perform an additional enumeration step in order to enumerate all its
minimal e-cycle sets and compute its accurate PB. If it is lower than PBLB of the next Z-edge in the list then we are done. Otherwise, we disconnect the current Z-edge, connect
the next Z-edge on the list and perform an enumeration step

10 −6

Non conditioned with multiple edges −UB Non conditioned with multiple edges −MC

Non conditioned −UB

Non conditioned − MC

10 −7

PEG conditioned −UB

PEG conditioned −MC

ACE conditioned −UB

10 −8

ACE conditioned −MC

EMPEG conditioned −UB

EMPEG conditioned −MC

10 −9

0.1

0.15

0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

0.4

0.45

0.5

Channel erasure probability − ε

Fig. 5. Upper bounds and Monte-Carlo simulations of irregular LDPC codes over the BEC generated from the ensemble (Λ(x) = 224x2 + 192x3 + 96x8, P (x) = 256x7) using various conditioning algorithms

in order to compute its PB. We repeat this procedure until we find a Z-edge for which PB is lower than PBLB of the next Z-edge in the list. When this happens we know that
the remaining Z-edges in the list are irrelevant since they
have higher PB than the ones that were already examined. Finally, we choose the Z-edge with the smallest PB among the examined Z-edges and connect it to the graph. In practice,
generation of every Z-edge requires very few enumeration
steps (usually two). Hence, generation of a lifted graph has
lower complexity compared to generation of a standard graph by a factor of approximately Z/2.

6) Graphs conditioned using the proposed EMPEG algorithm, optimized with erasure probability = 0.2. We observed that there is very small sensitivity to the actual value used for optimization.
As expected, we found that the upper bound (13) is tight only for non-conditioned graphs and very loose for optimized graphs. However, there is a strong correlation between the performance predicted by the analytical upper bound and by the simulation. When comparing two codes, the upper bound and the simulation results concur on which is better.

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS
This section includes simulation results of irregular LDPC codes generated using various optimization algorithms. Simulations were done over the BEC and AWGN channel using BP decoding with 50 iterations. For each simulated point at least 50 block errors are counted. Figure 5 shows MonteCarlo simulation results of various standard (non-lifted) length 512 irregular codes from the ensemble (Λ(x) = 224x2 + 192x3 + 96x8, P (x) = 256x7), together with their upper bounds computed using (13). For each conditioning technique, we generated 4 graphs and averaged their block error rate performance. We noticed that the code performance is highly concentrated when optimization is applied and all graphs generated by a certain conditioning technique showed almost identical performance. We compared the following graph generation techniques:

As can be seen on Figure 5, the codes generated using the EMPEG algorithm provide better performance compared to previously known code generation algorithms.
In order to further verify the effectiveness of the EMPEG algorithm, we also consider the best known rate 1/2 length 504 code, according to [9]. This is a PEG generated code from the ensemble (Λ(x) = 241x2 + 141x3 + 18x4 + 49x5 + 4x7 + x14 + 50x15, P (x) = 2x7 + 250x8). We compare this code to an EMPEG generated code from the same ensemble. Simulation results of the two codes over BEC are shown in Figure 6. It is interesting to examine the spectrum of cycle sets in both the PEG and EMPEG codes. Figure 7 shows the existing cycle set types (up to size d = 16) in each code and the expected block error probability contribution of each type (at = 0.2). Based on this information it is easy to understand why the EMPEG code is expected to exhibit lower error floor. Note that while the PEG graph does not contain

1) Non-conditioned graphs with multiple edges allowed. length 4 cycles, the EMPEG graph contain many length 4

2) Non-conditioned graphs with multiple edges removed. cycles. Hence, the common belief that the length 4 cycles

3) Graphs conditioned using the PEG algorithm [6].

are harmful and should be removed from the code’s graph is

4) Graphs conditioned using the ACE minimization algo- not always true. In order to see the effect of the cycle sets rithm [21] with parameters (dcyc, dACE, η) = (2, 6, 3) spectrum on the stopping sets spectrum, we used an algorithm which provided the best performance among various based on the error impulse method, described in [18], for

parameters that we were able to apply to the ensemble. finding small stopping sets and low weight codeword in both

5) Graphs conditioned using the improved PEG algorithm the PEG and EMPEG codes. Table I shows the number of

suggested in [23] - these graphs are not shown in Figure weight d codewords and size d stopping sets as a function of

5 since they result in similar performance to the graphs d, denoted as Wdcw and Wdss, respectively. As expected, the

generated using ACE minimization.

EMPEG code has a better stopping sets spectrum than the PEG

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:46:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

366

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

TABLE I HAMMING WEIGHT AND STOPPING SET WEIGHT DISTRIBUTIONS OF THE RATE 1/2 LENGTH 504 PEG AND EMPEG CODES

d

0 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24

WWWWddcswsddcsws--

- PEG EMPEG - PEG EMPEG

1 1 1 1

1 0 2 0

1 0 1 0

5 11 16 28 60 106 182 224 312 324 2 4 10 36 47 69 135 185 243 319 5 13 31 52 124 272 573 1065 1869 2850 2 6 16 42 69 128 284 543 942 1648

10 0

10 0

10 −1

10 −1

BLER

10 −2 10 −3 10 −4 10 −5 10 −6 10 −7 10 −8 10 −9
0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

Channel erasure probability − ε

PEG code −UB PEG −MC EMPEG −UB EMPEG −MC
0.4

BLER

10 −2 10 −3 10 −4 10 −5 10 −6 10 −7 10 −8
0.2

0.25

0.3

0.35

Channel erasure probability − ε

802.16e code −UB 802.16e code −MC EMPEG code −UB EMPEG code −MC
0.4

Fig. 6. Upper bounds and Monte-Carlo simulations of the best known rate 1/2 length 504, PEG generated, LDPC code and an EMPEG generated code from the same ensemble

Fig. 8. Upper bounds and Monte-Carlo simulations over BEC of irregular LDPC codes based on lifted graphs with lifting factor Z = 24 generated from the ensemble (Λ(x) = 264x2 + 192x3 + 120x6, P (x) = 192x6 + 96x7).

18 16

PEG code

10 0

14

τ

12 10

log
10

(W

(d,

P
τ)

0.2 CS

(d,

τ))

8

6 4

10 −1

2

0

−2

−4 −6

10 −2

−8

−10

−12

−14

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

10 −3

d

EMPEG code − MC 802.16e code − MC

BLER

18 16

EMPEG code

14

τ

12 10

log
10

(W

(d,

τ)P

0.2 CS

(d,

τ))

8

6

4

2

0

−2

−4

−6

−8

−10

−12

−14

2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16

d

10 −4

10 −5

10 −6

10 −7

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

Eb/No [dB]

Fig. 7. Cycle set distribution of the rate 1/2 length 504 PEG and EMPEG codes. For sake of easy comparison, two horizontal lines are drawn, one at τ = 1 and the other at W(d,τ)PC0.S2(d, τ ) = 10−6

Fig. 9. Monte-Carlo simulations over AWGN of irregular LDPC codes based on lifted graphs with lifting factor Z = 24 generated from the ensemble (Λ(x) = 264x2 + 192x3 + 120x6, P (x) = 192x6 + 96x7).

code. The minimum Hamming distance and stopping distance of the PEG code and EMPEG codes is 13 and 15, respectively.
Figures 8 and 9 show Monte-Carlo simulations results over BEC and AWGN channel respectively, of irregular LDPC codes based on lifted graphs with lifting factor Z = 24 generated from the ensemble (Λ(x) = 264x2 + 192x3 + 120x6, P (x) = 192x6 + 96x7). We compare two codes from this ensemble:
1) The [N = 576, M = 288, Z = 24] highly optimized

code used in the IEEE802.16e industry standard [24]. 2) A [N = 576, M = 288, Z = 24] code generated using
the EMPEG algorithm for lifted graphs, described in Section VI.
The simulation results show that the EMPEG algorithm can generate better codes based on lifted graphs, compared to other optimization techniques, especially if a low error floor is required. For example if a smaller than 10−7 block error rate is required, the EMPEG code can work over BEC with erasure

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:46:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHARON and LITSYN: CONSTRUCTING LDPC CODES BY ERROR MINIMIZATION PROGRESSIVE EDGE GROWTH

367

probability higher by more than 30% or provide coding gain higher by more than 0.5dB over the AWGN channel compared to the IEEE802.16e code. Even though the EMPEG algorithm minimizes the code’s block error probability over BEC, the generated codes work well in other channels as well.

TABLE II ENUMERATION ALGORITHM FOR MINIMAL e-CYCLE SETS

VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper we described EMPEG algorithm for generating LDPC codes with minimized block error probability.

W = CycleSetEnumerator(G, i, dv) % span a tree from vi until there are no active variable nodes % and for each visited check log the depth, EMD and
% multiplicity of all paths leading to a minimal e-cycle set:

The simulations indicate that the algorithm generates better codes compared to the previously known algorithms. We also described an EMPEG algorithm for generating codes based on lifted graphs. These codes enable an efficient hardware implementation of the code’s encoder and decoder, especially for applications requiring high throughput.
Moreover, we derived an upper bound on the expected block error probability of optimized ensembles. This can be used for predicting, with high probability, an upper bound on the error floor performance over BEC of a specific code based on its minimal cycle set spectrum, which can be easily calculated. Furthermore it can be used for choosing the best code among a set of generated codes without resorting to simulations.
APPENDIX A
In this appendix we provide a detailed description of an algorithm for enumerating the minimal e-cycle sets that will be formed by connecting various possible edges to a given variable node vi. The algorithm’s inputs are: 1) the graph G; 2) the variable node’s index i; 3) a vector of variable node degrees dv, corresponding to the degrees spectrum Λ(x); The algorithm’s output is a data structure W containing for every possible check node cj, the spectrum of minimal paths from vi to cj, denoted as W (cj ). We use the following data structures and functions in the algorithm:
• D - stores the depth of the graph spanned from vi. • Tv and Tc - store the tiers of active variable and check
nodes at depth D respectively. An active node n is a node for which the path from vi to n may lead to a minimal e-cycle set. We also use Tvaprx as a temporary storage in the process of generating Tv. • Emd(n) and EmdD−2(n)- stores the minimal EMD of a path from vi to node n among all paths from vi to n up to tiers D and D − 2 respectively. • M ult(vi ) and M ult(vi )D−2- store the multiplicity of the minimal paths from vi to variable node vi at tiers D and D − 2 respectively. • P arent(n) - stores the parents of a node n in tier D along the minimal paths from vi to n. For a set of nodes P we denote by P arent(P ) the union set of all the parents of nodes in P . • W (cj) - stores a set of triplets of the form (d, τ, m) for logging the depth, EMD and multiplicity of minimal paths from vi to check node cj, i.e. paths that may lead to a minimal e-cycle set of the edge e = (vi, cj). The triplet (d, τ, m) means that there are m paths from vi to cj with depth d and EMD τ . Note that W (cj) can hold only a single triplet with a given depth d and only

% initialization:
Emd(vi) ← dvi ; M ult(vi) ← 1; P arent(vi) ← ∅; ∀i = i ∈ {1, . . . , N } Emd(vi ) ← ∞; ∀j ∈ {1, . . . , M } Emd(cj ) ← ∞; W (cj ) ← ∅; D ← 0; Tv ← {vi};

While (|Tv| = 0) D ← D + 1;

% Expand tier D of check nodes:

Tc ← ∅;
for all vi ∈ Tv for all cj ∈ N eighbor(vi , G) \ P arent(vi ) if (Emd(vi ) < Emd(cj ))
% First length D minimal path from vi to cj found Emd(cj ) ← Emd(vi ); P arent(cj ) ← {vi }; W(cj ) ← W(cj ) (D, Emd(cj ), M ult(vi )); Tc ← Tc {cj }; else if (Emd(vi ) = Emd(cj )) & (cj ∈ Tc) % Another length D minimal path from vi to cj found P arent(cj ) ← P arent(cj ) {vi }; (D, τ, m) ← {(d, τ, m) ∈ W(cj )|d = D}; W(cj ) ← W(cj ) (D, τ, m + M ult(vi ));
end

end

end

D ← D + 1;

% Expand tier D of variable nodes:

TvAprx ← ∅; Tv ← ∅; ∀i ∈ {1,. . .,N} :

P arent(vi) ← ∅

EmdD−2(vi ) ← Emd(vi );

MultD−2(vi ) ← Mult(vi ); Mult(vi ) ← 0;

% Generate a list of possible active variable nodes in tier D:

for all cj ∈ Tc for all vi ∈ N eighbor(cj , G) \ P arent(cj ) P arent(vi ) ← P arent(vi ) {cj }; TvAprx ← TvAprx {vi }; end

end

% Filter the list leaving only true active variable nodes:

for all vi ∈ TvAprx

P ← P arent(vi );

for all vi ∈ P arent(P )

S ← P N eighbor(vi , G);

if (EmdD−2(vi ) + dvi − 2|S| < Emd(vi ))

% First length D minimal path from vi to vi found

Emd(vi M ult(vi

) )

← ←

EmdD−2(vi ) M ultD−2(vi

+ );

dvi

− 2|S|;

P arent(vi ) ← S;

Tv ← Tv {vi };

else if (EmdD−2(vi )+dvi − 2|S| = Emd(vi )) & (vi ∈ Tv)

% Another length D minimal path from vi to vi found

M ult(vi ) ← M ult(vi ) + M ultD−2(vi );

P arent(vi ) ← P arent(vi ) S;

end

end

end

end

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:46:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 56, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

a single triplet with a given EMD τ , since it holds only paths that can lead to minimal e-cycle sets. We use the notation W (cj) ← W (cj) (d, τ, m) to indicate that the triplet (d, τ, m) replaces a triplet with depth d in W (cj) if such a triplet exists, or added to W (cj) otherwise. • N eighbor(vi, G) and N eighbor(cj, G) - enumerate the neighboring nodes of the variable node vi and the check node cj in the graph G.
The enumeration algorithm is described in Table II. The enumeration procedure requires at most |E| = N ·
dv = O(N ) operations, since every edge is traversed at most once during the tree spanning. The storage space complexity of the algorithm is O(N log(N )) since the length of the list W (cj) for some check node cj is bounded by the EMD of the shortest minimal path from vi to cj whose expected value grows logarithmically with the code length N .
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We are grateful to the anonymous referees for their constructive comments and suggestions.
REFERENCES
[1] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration methods for analyzing LDPC codes, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1115-1131, 2004.
[2] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, 2001.
[3] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low- density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570-1579, 2002.
[4] B. J. Frey, R. Koeter, and A. Vardy, “Signal-space characterization of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 766780, 2001.
[5] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press 1963.
[6] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386-398, 2005.
[7] C. Kelley and D. Sridhara, “Pseudocodewords of Tanner graphs,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Apr. 2005.
[8] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmather, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Analysis of low-density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585-598, 2001.
[9] D. MacKay, “Repository of LDPC codes,” see: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html
[10] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration Systems, vol. 11, pp. 976–995, 2003.
[11] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39-55, 2007.
[12] J. M. F. Moura, J. Lu, and H. Zhang, “Structured low-density paritycheck codes,” IEEE Signal Processing Mag., vol. 4, pp. 42-54, 2004.
[13] V. Novichkov, H. Jin, and T. Richardson, “Programmable vector processor for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. 38th Annu. Conf. on Info. Sciences and Systems, Hawaii, March, 2004.

[14] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 929-953, 2005.
[15] A. Ramamoorthy and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of short block length irregular low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. on Comm. (ICC), pp. 410-414, Paris, June 2004.
[16] T. Richardson, “Error-floors in LDPC codes,” in Proc. of the 41st Allerton Conf. on Communication, Control and Computing, pp. 14261435, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2003.
[17] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, 2001.
[18] G. Richter, “Finding small stopping sets in the Tanner graphs of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Turbo-Coding 2006 Conf., Munich, April 2006.
[19] E. Sharon and S. Litsyn, “Generating good finite length LDPC codes based on lifted graphs,” invited paper, in Proc. of the 44’th Allerton Conf. on Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Sept. 2006.
[20] J. Thorpe, K. Andrews, and S. Dolinar, “Methodologies for designing LDPC codes using protographs and circulants,” in Proc. Int. Symp on Info. Theory (ISIT), Chicago, IL, p. 238, June 2004.
[21] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wessel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Intl. Conf. Commun. 2003, pp. 3125-3129, 2003.
[22] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “Graph-cover decoding and finitelength analysis of message-passing iterative decoding of LDPC codes,” submitted to IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Dec. 2005.
[23] H. Xiao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Improved progressive-edge-growth (PEG) construction of irregular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 12, pp. 715-717, 2004.
[24] Draft IEEE standard for local and metropolitan area networks–IEEE P802.16e/D9, June 2005.
Eran Sharon was born in Israel, in 1976. He received the B.Sc degree in electrical engineering and computer science in 2001 from Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree. His research interests include coding and information theory.
Simon Litsyn (M’94-SM’99) was born in Khar’kov, U.S.S.R., in 1957. He received the M.Sc. degree from Perm Polytechnical Institute, Perm, U.S.S.R., in 1979, and the Ph.D. degree from Leningrad Electrotechnical Institute, Leningrad, U.S.S.R., in 1982, both in electrical engineering.
Since 1991, he has been with the Department of Electrical Engineering - Systems, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, where he is a Professor. His research interests include coding and information theory, communications, and applications of discrete mathematics. He authored Covering Codes (Elsevier, 1997) and Peak Power Control in Multicarrier Communications (Cambridge University Press, 2007). Dr. Litsyn received the Guastallo Fellowship in 1992. In 2000-2003, he served as an Associate Editor for Coding Theory for the IEEE Transactions on Information Theory. Since 2006 he is an Associate Editor of Advances of Mathematics in Communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:46:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

