672

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

An 8.29 mm2 52 mW Multi-Mode LDPC Decoder
Design for Mobile WiMAX System in 0.13 m
CMOS Process
Xin-Yu Shih, Cheng-Zhou Zhan, Cheng-Hung Lin, and An-Yeu (Andy) Wu

Abstract—This paper presents a multi-mode decoder design for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes for Mobile WiMAX system. This chip can be operated in 19 kinds of modes specified in Mobile WiMAX system, including block sizes of 576, . . ., 2304. There are four proposed design techniques: reordering of the base matrix, overlapped operations of main computational units, early termination strategy and multi-mode design strategy. Based on overlapped decoding mechanism, the decoding latency can be reduced to 68.75% of nonoverlapped method, and the hardware utilization ratio can be enhanced from 50% to 75%. Besides, the proposed early termination strategy can dynamically adjust the number of iterations when dealing with communication channels of different SNR values. The proposed multi-mode LDPC decoder design is implemented and fabricated in TSMC 0.13 m 1.2 V 1P8M CMOS technology. The maximum operating frequency is measured 83.3 MHz and the corresponding power dissipation is 52 mW. The core size is 4.45 mm2 and the die area only occupies 8.29 mm2.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, low power and early termination, mobile WiMAX, multi-mode design.
I. INTRODUCTION
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes, which are one kind of linear block codes, were first introduced by Gallager in 1962 [1] and were verified to possess superior error-correcting capabilities. In 1996, LDPC codes were rediscovered and simulated by MacKay [2]. With the advanced technology, the interests in LDPC codes have been dramatically increased because their excellent error-correcting performance is much closer to the Shannon limit. Hence, LDPC codes have widely adopted by most advanced wire-line and wireless communication systems, such as IEEE 802.3an, 802.11n, and 802.16e systems. Recently, there are many interesting research works on LDPC codes and LDPC decoder architecture, including fully parallel method [3], partially parallel method [4], grouped sequentially method [5], and completely sequentially method [6]. From these state-of-arts, parallelism provides the design trade-off between the hardware cost and the system throughput. However, there still exist many challenges, such as
Manuscript received February 5, 2007; revised September 13, 2007. This work was supported by the National Science Council of Taiwan under Grant NSC 94-2220-E-002-025 and the Ph.D. fellowship program of MediaTeK Education Foundation. Chip fabrication was supported by Chip Implementation Center (CIC). Part of the material in this paper has been presented at the IEEE Symposium on VLSI Circuits, Japan, June, 2007.
The authors are with the Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering and Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan 10617, R.O.C. (e-mail: genius@access.ee.ntu.edu.tw; andywu@cc.ee.ntu.ac.tw).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JSSC.2008.916606

TABLE I 19 MODES FOR LDPC DECODER DESIGN

multi-mode design, high routing complexity, large chip area, and high power consumption. As shown in Table I, this paper presents the design and implementation of the 19-mode LDPC decoder for Mobile WiMAX, IEEE 802.16e system [7], [8].
In this paper, we propose four design techniques for LDPC codes in Mobile WiMAX system: 1) reordering of the base matrix and 2) overlapped operations of computational units for increasing hardware utilization ratio; 3) early termination strategy for flexible decoding throughput and low power consumption; 4) reconfigurable architecture for multi-mode design. Besides, in order to reduce routing complexity and power consumption, we propose an efficient checkerboard layout scheme in chip implementation. Using TSMC 0.13 m CMOS technology, the core area of this 19-mode decoder chip is only 4.45 mm with die size of 8.29 mm . It can be measured at 83.3 MHz with only 52 mW power consumption.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we introduce low-density parity-check codes and two popular decoding algorithms, Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) and Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA). In Sections III and IV, respectively, the proposed design techniques and VLSI architecture for 19-mode LDPC decoder design are demonstrated. The chip implementation via TSMC 0.13 m CMOS technology is shown in Section V. Conclusions are presented in Section VI.

II. LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) CODES

A. Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

The

LDPC codes are one kind of block codes, where

and represent the number of information bit and codeword,

0018-9200/$25.00 © 2008 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHIH et al.: AN 8.29 mm 52 mW MULTI-MODE LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR MOBILE WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 m CMOS PROCESS

673

H Fig. 1. (16, 8) LDPC codes (a) parity check matrix

, and (b) Bipartite graph.

Fig. 2. Decoding flowchart of belief propagation decoding algorithm.

respectively. LDPC codes are defined by a very sparse parity

check matrix , which the most elements are 0’s and only sev-

eral elements are 1’s. The parity check matrix

of

LDPC codes has

rows and columns and the

corresponding code rate is defined as . Fig. 1(a) shows

that the parity check matrix

of (16,8) LDPC codes with

code rate of 1/2 has 8 rows and 16 columns.

In the decoding aspect, a parity check matrix can be mapped

into a bipartite graph [9] or a factor graph [10], as illustrated Fig. 3. (a) Check node updates, and (b) bit node updates. in Fig. 1(b). Rows and columns of the parity check matrix

can be mapped to check node units (CNUs) and bit node units

(BNUs), respectively. Based on the location of the elements of Fig. 3(b), the updated message from the check node to the

‘1’ in the parity check matrix , it is very straightforward to bit node is related to the message from the bit nodes , ,

make the straight connection between corresponding CNU and and . After one round of check node and bit node updates, the

BNU. The direct connection can represent the mutual informa- termination condition should be checked. If the termination cri-

tion transmission among CNUs and BNUs.

terion is satisfied, the block of codeword is decoded completely.

For code construction, there are various ways to construct Otherwise, the decoding operations would be performed itera-

the parity check matrix . Although the decoding perfor- tively until the termination criterion is met.

mance of any structured LDPC codes [11] is worse than that Generally specking, there are two prevalent decoding al-

of random ones [12], the benefit of structured method is to gorithms for LDPC codes, including Sum-Product Algorithm

make the designers much easier to handle the location of 1’s (SPA) and Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA) [14]. The benefits of

in the parity check matrix . In addition, the regularity in the former are high-precision message passing and excellent

structure-based method can provide more help on the decoder error-correcting performance. Although it possesses the out-

design. Among many structured LDPC code construction standing correcting ability, it is not suitable for the VLSI design

methods, Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes [13] become the most due to more complex mathematical computation and higher

popular in the modern advanced communication systems, such hardware complexity. However, the latter has lower computa-

as Mobile WiMAX system.

tion complexity with little performance scarification. Thus, the

B. Decoding Algorithm

MSA is a better candidate for hardware implementation.

It is very popular to use belief propagation decoding algorithm [14] for the LDPC decoder. The decoding flowchart of be-

III. PROPOSED DESIGN TECHNIQUES FOR LDPC DECODER DESIGN

lief propagation decoding algorithm can be illustrated in Fig. 2. In this section, we propose four design techniques, including

First, the message is initialized as the received data from com- reordering of the base matrix, overlapped operations of BNUs

munication channel. Second, the check nodes perform updating and CNUs, early termination strategy, and multi-mode design

by collecting the message from connected bit nodes. As shown strategy.

in Fig. 3(a), the updated message from the check node to the bit node is related to the message from the bit nodes , A. Reordering of the Base Matrix

, and . Similarly, the bit nodes perform updating by col- Fig. 4 shows the base parity check matrix with code rate of

lecting the message from connected check nodes. As shown in 1/2 defined in Mobile WiMAX system. The base matrix with

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

674

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

H Fig. 4. Base parity check matrix with code rate of 1/2 in Mobile WiMAX system [7].

Fig. 5. Relationship of parity check matrix and codeword.

elements of blank, zero and non-zero integer has 12 rows and not keep the quasi-cyclic characteristics and the code is not

24 columns. The element of blank can be expanded as a

Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes any more. The location of 1’s would

zero matrix. The element of zero can be expanded as a

lose the regularity and the reordered parity check matrix is close

identity matrix. The element of non-zero integer,

, can be to the random construction. Furthermore, since the non-zero

expanded as a cyclic-shifted matrix with shifted value of sub-matrixes in reordered parity check matrix are not cyclic-

, which can be calculated by

shifted matrixes, it is impossible to directly map each non-zero

sub-matrix into the individual memory bank in hardware archi-

(1) tecture. The difficulty of corresponding hardware design would

become more complicated. That is, this method influences not

where the expanding factor can be 24, 28, , 92 and 96. If

is chosen as 96,

is the same as

.

By inspecting (1), the elements in the lower-left or upper-

right parts are not all blank, i.e., zero matrixes. The bit node op-

eration of first column needs to wait until the completion of the

check node operations. On the other hand, the check node op-

eration of first row needs to wait until the completion of the bit

node operations. In order to reduce the idle time among check

node and bit node operation, it is easy to improve the situation

by reordering the rows and columns of [15]. Reordering the

rows and columns does not make any influence on the error-cor-

recting performance. As shown in Fig. 5, the row reordering

makes no change on codeword and the column reordering only

makes the bit-level re-permutation in one codeword. In other

words, the relationship of original codeword and reordered

codeword can be directly obtained according to the column

reordering. There are four advantages in this reordering tech-

only the code property but also hardware complexity. Instead, we only reorder the base matrix by the algorithm in
[15] and new reordered parity check matrix would be shown in Fig. 6. The relationship of new and original row index can be obtained as the most left side in Fig. 6. And the relationship of new and original column index can be obtained as the most upper side in Fig. 6. In this way, not only the elements in the lower-left and upper-right parts of are all zero matrixes, but also the characteristic of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes for Mobile WiMAX system can be maintained. In hardware implementation, the reordering algorithm only changes the control signals in the control unit without any penalty for extra hardware cost or executed clock cycles. The modification for collecting the channel values in the beginning is to rearrange the index of input buffers and message-passing memory banks on the timing diagram. In the following decoding state, the memory access is also arranged by the modified control signals.

nique: (1) convenience of overlapped check node and bit node updates; (2) preservation of data locality; (3) no penalty for the B. Overlapped Operations of BNUs and CNUs

extra hardware cost or executed clock cycles; (4) no decoding In order to reduce the hardware cost, we can use the partially-

performance degradation.

parallel method [16] to realize the LDPC decoder. But the scarifi-

In [15], the reordering steps are performed on the whole parity cations are the reduction of throughput and increase of decoding

check matrix . The benefits are that the idle time can be re- latency.Take(2304, 1152) LDPC codes forexample. Ifwe choose

duced to minimum and the overlapped period can be maxi- the folding factor as 96 3 in Table II, it not only achieves the min-

mized. Unfortunately, the reordered parity check matrix would imum throughput requirement for Mobile WiMAX system, but

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHIH et al.: AN 8.29 mm 52 mW MULTI-MODE LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR MOBILE WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 m CMOS PROCESS

675

H Fig. 6. Reordered parity check matrix with folding factor of 288.
TABLE II COMPARISON OF HARDWARE UTILIZATION AND DECODING LATENCY

also performs overlapped operations of BNUs and CNUs [17], information is ready without affected by the bit node operations

[18] by previous reordering scheme. Hence, there are three bene- of the last 8 block columns. By applying this technique, the de-

fits in this technique, including idle time reduction of CNUs and coding latency can be reduced as illustrated in Fig. 7(b).

BNUs, enhancement of hardware utilization ratio, and reduction In mathematical analysis, we assume that the predefined max-

of decoding latency.

imum number of the iterations is . Non-overlapped and

In Fig. 6, the bold horizontal and vertical lines illustrate the overlapped method need

and

folding boundary for row and column operations, respectively. clock cycles, respectively. The reduced ratio of executed clock

Since the folding factor is chosen as 288, there are only four CNUs cycles increases as the number of iterations increases. If

and eight BNUs in hardware implementation. For simplicity, we equals to 8, the reduced ratio is 31.25% and the decoding la-

assume that one block row and one block column consist of 96 tency shrinks to 68.75% of non-overlapped method. Besides, the

rows and 96 columns, respectively. In the check node operations, hardware of CNUs or BNUs is in the idle mode of one-fourth de-

four rows can be concurrently performed in one clock cycle. It coding latency in average. In the proposed overlapped method,

needs 96 clock cycles to complete the check node operations of 4 the idle time can be reduced by 66% and the hardware utiliza-

block rows. Totally, it needs 288 clock cycles to complete all the tion ratio can be enhanced from 50% to 75%.

row operations. On the other hand, for the bit node operations, eight columns can be concurrently performed in one clock cycle. C. Early Termination Strategy

It also needs 96 clock cycles to complete the bit node operations Traditionally, there are two common methods to determine

of 8 block columns. Similarly, it also needs 288 clock cycles to the decoding terminations of one pattern of codeword. The two

complete all the column operations.

inefficient methods without dynamic adjustment would lead to

In Fig. 7(a), the BNUs and CNUs work alternatively and the longer decoding latency, lower decoding throughput, and larger

property of non-overlapped operations would result in lower power consumption. One is to check the valid codeword with

hardware utilization ratio equaling to 50% and longer decoding the equations

. This method would take much hard-

latency. Since lower-left parts in Fig. 6 are all zero matrixes, the ware cost for the checked equations depended on the number

bit node operations of the first 8 block columns can be early per- of rows in . The other is to only set maximum number of de-

formed after the check node operations of the first 8 block rows. coding iterations. Although the method is very simple and quite

The reason is that the needed exchanged information has been easy to implement, it is very inefficient and inflexible to take

updated without affected by the check node operations of the last the same decoding iterations for different communication en-

4 block rows. On the other hard, the check node operations of the vironment, especially for the high SNR channels or less-noise

first 4 block rows can be early performed after the bit node oper- wire-line environment.

ations of the first 16 block columns since upper-right parts are all In addition to the conventional methods, there are lots of

zero matrixes. Similarly, the reason is that the needed exchanged research works in the literature about early termination recently

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

676

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

Fig. 7. Timing diagram: (a) non-overlapped method, and (b) overlapped method.

Fig. 8. Hardware design of the proposed early termination strategy (ET).

Fig. 9. Block diagram of multi-mode LDPC decoder design.

[19], [20]. In [19], the decoding blocks are divided into two groups, such as decodable and undecodable blocks. For decodable blocks, the first common method as previously mentioned can be performed. For undecodable blocks, the stopping criteria are relative to the variable node reliability and the decoding threshold. Moreover, in [20], the early termination criteria are based on the convergence of the mean magnitude (CMM) with two parameters, magnitude threshold and depth factor. Although these two methods have no decoding performance degradation, they need the mass mathematical operations and statistical properties of all the decoded messages. Unfortunately, it is not suitable for the hardware realization and chip implementation. Instead, we propose a more robust and flexible early termination strategy in accordance with the hard-decision-aided (HDA) stopping criteria [21] for Turbo decoding. The early termination strategy can not only dynamically adjust the number of iterations when dealing with communication channels of different SNR, but also be very adequate for the low-cost and low-power hardware implementation.
The early termination strategy is to store the hard-decision

the way, it does not take extra executed clock cycles to apply the checked mechanism. Since LDPC codes defined in Mobile WiMAX system are systematic codes, which the information bits directly exist in the codeword, it is more efficient to only check the information bits. For (2304, 1152) LDPC codes, we only need to check the 1152 information bits instead of the total 2304 bits.
In hardware implementation, each checked bit is easily implemented by one D flip-flop and one XOR logic-gate as illustrated in Fig. 8. The flag signal is used to check the equality of decoded bits in the two successive iterations. If flag is true, the decoded results in two successive iterations are different. Otherwise, the decoded bits in two successive iterations are identical. Therefore, the termination criterion can be specified as follows,
1) Flag is false. 2) Flag is true and the predefined maximum number of itera-
tions is met. Once the terminated condition is met, the decoder would output the hard-decision values in original sequence. Thus, one pattern of codeword is decoded completely.

values by observing the sign values of Log-Likelihood Ratio (LLR) and compare the decoded results in two successive it- D. Multi-Mode Design Strategy

erations. If all the decoded bits of this iteration are the same as In order to achieve the multi-mode design, we propose the

those of previous iteration, the decoder is informed to terminate reconfigure architecture as shown in Fig. 9. Since we find

operations. Otherwise, the mechanism would check whether the out the relationship of 19 parity check matrices in Mobile

predefined maximum number of iterations is met or not. By WiMAX system, the multi-mode design can be performed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHIH et al.: AN 8.29 mm 52 mW MULTI-MODE LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR MOBILE WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 m CMOS PROCESS

677

Fig. 10. AGU design: (a) architecture, (b) control signals, and (c) look-up table.

by Address Generation Unit (AGU) without modifying any and the SNR are 3.5 and 4.5 dB. The determination procedure

storage elements and computational units. According to the can be divided into two steps.

counter signals from Counter Unit (CU), it is easy for AGU Step 1) First, we choose the fractional part as 4 bits. The in-

to generate the necessary address for Single/Two-port Register teger part would be chosen as 1 6 bits. As shown in Fig. 12(a),

Files, Output Buffer, and Early Termination Unit (ETU). As the the bit error rate (BER) is almost saturated when the overall

hardware architecture demonstrated in Fig. 10(a), the address word-length is 8-bit, including 4-bit integer part and 4-bit frac-

for the Two-port Register Files have three choices, such as ‘0’, tional part. Second, we adjust the bit number of the fractional

Counter, and . In the different states, the address is deter- part. The simulation results also have the similar saturation phe-

mined by the control signal as shown in Fig. 10(b). Especially nomenon when the integer part is chosen as 4 bits. In other

in the CNU state, the candidate address is generated by adding words, the BER would be saturated with the increase of the in-

Counter and

. The corresponding value of

teger part no matter what the bit number of the fractional part is.

would be decided by Mode and

as the Look-up Table The only difference is that the saturated BER would be higher

in Fig. 10(c). Based on (1), we can easily built the Look-up as the bit number of the fractional part decreases.

Table for

. Instead of directly implementing the di- Step 2) After the integer part is determined as 4 bits, the frac-

vider circuit, the Look-up Table can save more combinational tional part would be chosen as 2 7 bits. In Fig. 12(b), BER

circuit area for the low-cost design. Besides the address for is almost saturated when the overall word-length is 8-bit, in-

the Two-port Register Files, the address for the other modules cluding 4-bit fractional part and 4-bit integer part. Therefore,

is simply determined as ‘0’ or counter by the corresponding we choose 8-bit fixed-point representation as wordlength for the

control signals.

exchanged information between CNUs and BNUs in hardware

Fig. 11(a), (b) shows the memory access and counter range implementation.

for different block sizes of LDPC codes. For (576, 288) LDPC After performing the fixed-point analysis, we can construct

codes, the number of used memory entries is only 24, which is the needed computation units, such as CNUs and BNUs, with

one-fourth of memory size. The corresponding counter in CU single-port and two-port register files.

counts from 0 to 23. Similarly, the ratio of used memory entries and the counter range increase as block size increases. Thus, A. Architecture for CNU Design

as regards (2304, 1152) LDPC codes, all of the entries in the To perform the check node updating equations in Min-Sum

memory banks are fully used and the counter circularly counts Algorithm, we should first search for the minimum and

from 0 to 95.

second minimum among the received data. As demonstrated

IV. PROPOSED DECODER ARCHITECTURE

in Fig. 13(a), the common part design of 2-input CNU, , is implemented with one adder and one

In order to determine wordlength for mutual information, we multiplexer. If

is larger than

,

and

perform six simulation cases for different block sizes with dif- are

and

, respectively. Otherwise, we can just

ferent SNR. The block sizes are chosen as 576, 1440, and 2304 exchange the two received data to and . For common

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

678

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

Fig. 11. Multi-mode design: (a) memory access, and (b) counter range.

Fig. 12. BER versus word-length: (a) the fractional part is 4-bit, and (b) the integer part is 4-bit.

part design of 3-input CNU,

, the design can in Fig. 13(d). Once the common part designs are completed,

be implemented with three adders, five multiplexers and several we can make good use of them and build needed architecture

simple logical gates, as shown in Fig. 13(b).

in the CNU design. Owing to the analysis demonstrated in

Based on the construction of

and Section III-B, we only need four CNUs, including two 6-input

, the design which compares more than and two 7-input processing elements. Owing to the similar

three input data can be easily realized in hierarchal methods. design methodology, we only show the architecture of the

As shown in Fig. 13(c), the common part design of 6-input 7-input CNU, as illustrated in Fig. 14.

CNU,

, is realized with two blocks of In the overall hardware implementation, both two kinds of

in the first stage and three blocks of CNUs need the calculation of the absolute values for all input

in the following two stages. Similarly, data by the block of in the beginning. The second step is to

the common part design of 7-input CNU,

, pass all absolute values to common part design. Then, the block

is realized with four blocks of

as shown of compare and select is to compare and

with the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHIH et al.: AN 8.29 mm 52 mW MULTI-MODE LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR MOBILE WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 m CMOS PROCESS

679

Fig. 13. Common part design: (a) 2-input, (b) 3-input, (c) 6-input, and (d) 7-input CNU.

Fig. 14. Architecture of 7-input CNU.

according absolute values and choose the wanted values,

Fig. 15(a), (b), the common part designs of 3-input and 4-input

or . Finally, the block of

is to adjust the sign of the BNUs,

and

, are imple-

target values and generate the accurate results.

mented with one 3-input and three 2-input adders, respectively.

B. Architecture for BNU Design

Similarly,

is implemented with two 2-input

and two 3-input adders, as shown in Fig. 15(c). Once the

For the bit node updating equations in Min-Sum Algorithm, common part designs are constructed, we can take them as

we should first calculate the summation of the received data, the kernel and build needed architecture in the BNU design.

including the mutual information and the channel values. In Owing to the analysis demonstrated in Section III-B, we only

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

680

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

Fig. 15. Common part design (a) 3-input, (b) 4-input, and (c) 7-input BNU.

By activating the necessary memory banks, the operating fre-

quency for system specification could be lower with respect to

central main memory. Moreover, based on the divided memory

scheme, the power consumption is reduced for the mobile

application.

Fig. 9 also shows the block diagram of the LDPC decoder

design. The 8-bit input data, which consists of 4-bit integer

part and 4-bit fractional part, is sequentially stored in the cor-

responding input buffers and message-passing memory banks

when the ‘Input enable’ signal is asserted. After collecting all

the channel values within one codeword, the overlapped oper-

ations of BNUs and CNUs are performed. Due to the folding

property of BNUs, the unused input of BNU is fed as zero value

to produce the correct calculated data when the number of input

Fig. 16. Architecture of 7-input BNU.

data is less than the hardware input ports at certain moment. The same situation would occur in CNUs but the fed value is

different from that in BNUs. The unused input of CNU is fed

need eight BNUs, including three 3-input, three 4-input and

two 7-input processing elements. Owing to the similar design

methodology, we only show the architecture of the 7-input

BNU, as demonstrated in Fig. 16.

In the overall hardware implementation, all of three kinds of

BNUs need the calculation of the summation of all input data

first. Then, the block of sub and clipping is to subtract according

values from the summation, perform clipping and generate the

accurate results. In addition, the

of the summation is

taken as the hard-decision value for the decoded result.

as the maximum value in fixed-point representation to produce the correct calculated data when the number of input data is less than the hardware input ports at certain moment.
In the decoding state, the ‘Early’ signal is asserted to represent the actual number of decoding iterations is less than predefined number when termination criterion is met. Therefore, the system can be early terminated with less decoding iterations and the decoding latency is reduced. However, the terminated condition is satisfied and the decoded information bits can be available. The decoded information bits, hardware-decision values of
, are stored in the output buffers, which are directly imple-

C. Block Diagram for LDPC Decoder

mented by 12 96 D flip-flops. In the output state, the ‘Output

In order to enhance the data access parallelism, the storage elements can be implemented by 100 memory banks, which consist of 24 single-port and 76 two-port register files, instead

enable’ signal is asserted and the information bits are grouped into 24-bit output data. After previous described procedure, the decoding of the block of pattern is accomplished.

of a central main memory. The input buffers, which store channel values for BNUs, are implemented by 24 single-port

V. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS AND CHIP IMPLEMENTATION

register files. The message-passing memory banks, which For Mobile WiMAX system, we have implemented

store exchanged information among CNUs and BNUs, are multi-mode LDPC decoder design, which can perform 19

implemented by 76 two-port register files. Each of the memory kinds of operating modes, including block sizes of 576, ,

banks has 96 entries, which one entry consists of 8-bit data. 2304, as shown in Table I. The chip design is fabricated in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHIH et al.: AN 8.29 mm 52 mW MULTI-MODE LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR MOBILE WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 m CMOS PROCESS

681

TABLE III CHIP SUMMARY

0 Fig. 17. Die photo of multi-mode LDPC decoder design. ( represents single+ port register files and represents two-port register files).

Fig. 19. Measured frequency and power of the chip design. (Under minimum sustainable supply voltage (0.85 V), the decoder chip can deliver 30 Mb/s as required in Mobile WiMAX system.)

and the die size is only 2.88 mm 2.88 mm giving a total area

of 8.29 mm . The maximum operating frequency is measured

83.3 MHz and the total power consumption is measured 52 mW

Fig. 18. Performance comparison.

for 19-mode LDPC decoder design. In the decoder design with

early termination, the actual number of decoding iterations is at

least two no matter how higher SNR is due to equality-checking

TSMC 0.13 m 1.2 V 1P8M CMOS technology and measured of hard-decision values in the two successive iterations. As a re-

with Tektronix pattern generator TLA715 and logic analyzer sult, the flexible throughput can be varied from 60.6 Mb/s (@

TLA 5203. For lower routing complexity, we propose an 8 iterations) to 222.2 Mb/s (@2 iterations) by dynamic adjust-

efficient checkerboard layout scheme to arrange 100 memory ment. The throughput for different iteration numbers is higher

banks in 10 10 2-D arrays as shown in Fig. 17. Compared than the specification of Mobile WiMAX system (30 Mb/s).

with other types of arrangement, the method of the uniformly Therefore, the decoding strategy provides the flexible and ef-

distributed memory banks is suitable for LDPC chip imple- ficient mechanism.

mentation. The benefits are chip area reduction and low power In order to simultaneously consider reduction of power

dissipation. Moreover, Fig. 18 shows the performance of the consumption and minimum throughput requirement for Mobile

proposed decoding strategy with ET. Take the smallest and WiMAX system, we can reduce the core supply voltage to 0.85

largest block sizes of LDPC codes for examples. The mea- V as shown in Fig. 19. The corresponding maximum operating

surement results of (576, 288) and (2304, 1152) LDPC codes frequency and power consumption are 41.67 MHz and 16

are exactly equivalent to the software simulation results of the mW, respectively. In summary, the multi-mode decoder design

fixed-point (4, 4) MSA without ET case.

is compared with other chip designs as shown in Table IV.

The chip feature is summarized in Table III. The core size is Among the five chip designs, the code construction, block

2.11 mm 2.11 mm. The number of total gate counts is 420 K size specification, and process technology are very different.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

682

IEEE JOURNAL OF SOLID-STATE CIRCUITS, VOL. 43, NO. 3, MARCH 2008

TABLE IV COMPARISON TABLE

Obviously, the chip size of the multi-mode decoder design is smaller than other arts. Up to now, the decoder design with smaller die size is the most competing design compared with existing LDPC designs presented in the literature. In addition, by applying proposed design techniques and efficient layout scheme, the power consumption is also much smaller than other works. Most important of all, the outperformance of low-cost design and low power dissipation is the urgent and necessary requirement for the Mobile WiMAX system.
VI. CONCLUSION
We propose an efficient and effective IC design strategy, which not only for Mobile WiMAX system but also for any Quasi-Cyclic LDPC codes. The 19-mode decoder design using TSMC 0.13 m technology is measured at 83.3 MHz with power consumption of 52 mW. In summary, the LDPC decoder design features smaller chip area, higher hardware utilization, lower decoding latency, flexible decoding throughput, and lower power consumption.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 7, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 399–431, Jan. 1999.
[3] C. J. Howland and A. J. Blanksby, “Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2001, vol. 4, pp. 742–745.
[4] Z. Cui and Z. Wang, “Area-efficient parallel decoder architecture for high rate QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2006, pp. 5107–5110.
[5] M. Cocco, J. Dielissen, M. Heijligers, A. Hekstra, and J. Huisken, “A scalable architecture for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Conf. Design Automation and Test in Europe (DATE), Feb. 2004, vol. 3, pp. 88–93.
[6] E. Yeo, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “Architectures and implementations of low-density parity-check decoding algorithms,” in Proc. Midwest Symp. Circuits and Systems, Aug. 2002, vol. 3, pp. 437–440.
[7] IEEE 802.16e. [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.org/16/tge/ [8] WiMAX Forum. [Online]. Available: http://www.wimaxforum.org/
home [9] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE
Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 399–431, Sep. 1981.

[10] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[11] J. M. F. Moura, J. Lu, and H. Zhang, “Structured low-density paritycheck codes,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, no. 1, pp. 42–55, Jan. 2004.
[12] E. Yeo, B. Nikolic, and V. Anantharam, “Iterative decoder architectures,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 41, pp. 132–140, Aug. 2003.
[13] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Design of VLSI implementation-oriented LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE 58th Vehicular Technology Conf., Oct. 2003, vol. 1, pp. 670–673.
[14] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications, 2nd ed. New York: Pearson/Prentice Hall, 2004.
[15] I. C. Park and S. H. Kang, “Scheduling algorithm for partially parallel architecture of LDPC decoder by matrix permutation,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2005, pp. 5778–5781.
[16] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “VLSI Implementation-oriented (3,k)-regular low-density parity-check codes,” in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS), Sep. 2001, pp. 25–36.
[17] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst., vol. 51, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.
[18] S. Kim and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped decoding for a class of quasicyclic codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS), Oct. 2004, pp. 113–117.
[19] J. Li, X. H. You, and J. Li, “Early stopping for LDPC decoding: Convergence of Mean Magnitude (CMM),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 9, pp. 667–669, Sep. 2006.
[20] F. Kienle and N. Wehn, “Low complexity stopping criterion for LDPC code decoders,” in Proc. 2005 IEEE Vehicular Technology Conf., May 2005, vol. 1, pp. 606–609.
[21] R. Y. Shao, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Two simple stopping criteria for turbo decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 8, pp. 1117–1120, Oct. 2002.
[22] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[23] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Multi-Gbit/sec low density parity check decoders with reduced interconnect complexity,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, May 2005, vol. 5, pp. 5194–5197.
[24] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “A 640-Mb/s 2048-bit programmable LDPC decoder chip,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, pp. 684–698, Mar. 2006.
[25] S. H. Kang and I. C. Park, “Loosely coupled memory-based decoding architecture for low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, vol. 53, no. 5, pp. 1045–1056, May 2006.
[26] X. Y. Shih, C. Z. Zhan, C. H. Lin, and A. Y. Wu, “A 19-mode 8.29 mm 52-mW LDPC decoder chip for IEEE 802.16e system,” in Proc. Int. Symp. VLSI Circuits and VLSI Technology (SOVC-2007), Kyoto, Japan, Jun. 2007, pp. 16–17.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SHIH et al.: AN 8.29 mm 52 mW MULTI-MODE LDPC DECODER DESIGN FOR MOBILE WIMAX SYSTEM IN 0.13 m CMOS PROCESS

683

Xin-Yu Shih was born in ChangHua, Taiwan, in 1982. He received the B.S. degree from National Tsing Hua University in electrical engineering in 2004 and the M.S. degree from National Taiwan University in electronics engineering in 2006. He is now working toward the Ph. D degree in National Taiwan University.
His research interests include VLSI hardware design, digital signal processing, channel coding, and communication ICs. He is currently working on Lowdensity Parity-check decoder designs for advanced wire-line and wireless communication systems.
Cheng-Zhou Zhan received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2005. He received the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan in 2007. He is working toward the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering at National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
His research interests are designs of very largescale integration architectures and circuits for digital signal processing and communication systems.

An-Yeu (Andy) Wu (S’91-M’96) received the B.S. degree from National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, R.O.C., in 1987, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Maryland, College Park, in 1992 and 1995, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
From August 1995 to July 1996, he was a Member of the Technical Staff at AT&T Bell Laboratories, Murray Hill, NJ, working on high-speed transmission IC designs. From 1996 to July 2000, he was with the Electrical Engineering Department of National Central University, Taiwan. In August 2000, he joined the faculty of the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Graduate Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Taiwan University, where he is currently a Professor. His research interests include low-power/high-performance VLSI architectures for DSP and communication applications, adaptive/multirate signal processing, reconfigurable broadband access systems and architectures, and SoC platform for software/hardware co-design. Dr. Wu was a four-time recipient of the A-Class Research Award from the National Science Council between 1997–2000. In 2004, he received the Distinguished Young Engineer Award from The Chinese Institute of Engineers (CIE), Taiwan. In 2005, he received two research awards, the Ta-you Award (Young Scholar Award) and the President Fu Si-nien Award, from the National Science Council and National Taiwan University, respectively, for his research works in VLSI system designs.

Cheng-Hung Lin received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering from Fu Jen Catholic University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2002. He received the M.S. degree in electrical engineering from National Central University, Taoyuan, Taiwan in 2004. He is working toward the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering at National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
His research interests include the design of very large-scale integration architectures and circuits for digital signal processing and communication systems. He is currently working on the hardware design for coding systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 04:44:42 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

