Effective Puncturing Schemes for Block-type Low-Density Parity-Check Codes

Sunghoon Choi, Youchul Shin, Jun Heo, Member, IEEE, Kihyoung Cho and Minseok Oh

Abstract—In this paper, a puncturing method for block-type rate-compatible Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes with ‘good’ performance is proposed. Puncturing is a scheme to obtain a series of higher rate codes from a low rate mother code. It is widely used in channel coding but it causes performance loss compared with non-punctured error correcting codes at the same rate. There have been many researches about puncturing to reduce the performance loss. However, these researches are not optimized for specific types such as block-type LDPC (B-LDPC) codes adopted in IEEE 802.16e standards. B-LDPC codes are constructed as irregular quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes for reduced required memory size and efficient encoding. In this paper, we suggest a modified puncturing scheme which is optimized for B-LDPC codes and compare the performance with previous scheme.
Index Terms—B-grouping/sorting, grouping, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, puncturing, rate-compatible, sorting

such as performance loss. To reduce the performance loss, it is important to find optimal puncturing patterns. An effective puncturing method using grouping and sorting was introduced in [3].
In this paper, we propose a new puncturing method for B-LDPC codes. We use the same ideas of grouping and sorting algorithms in [3] and optimize it for B-LDPC codes. Using a proposed method, we can reduce much memory by means of ‘block-unit’ puncturing. This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we review B-LDPC codes. In Section III, we discuss an effect of puncturing in LDPC codes and briefly explain grouping and sorting algorithms. New method is discussed in Section IV. Also, Section V analyzes the performance of new method using B-LDPC codes in IEEE 802.16e standards. Finally, the paper concludes in Section VI.
II. BLOCK-TYPE LDPC CODES

I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes - first discovered by Gallager [1] - are kinds of linear block codes available to use iterative decoding and in the limelight with turbo codes since their performances approach the Shannon’s limit. LDPC codes possess many advantages including parallelizable decoding and self-detection capability by syndrome check. However, LDPC codes have some disadvantages compared with other codes such as an encoding complexity and much needed memory. Recently, many people have tried to solve them in some structured forms such as a lower triangular shape and in new code types such as quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes. Actually, block-type LDPC (B-LDPC) code - a kind of QC-LDPC codes - was adopted in IEEE 802.16e standards.
A typical method for achieving rate-compatibility is ‘puncturing’ [2] which does not send the coded symbols corresponding to specific positions which results in a increased code rate. Puncturing has an advantage of simple implementation of rate-compatibility but has a disadvantage

This work was supported by LG Electronics, Inc. and by the MIC(Ministry

of Information and Communication), Korea, under the ITRC(Information

Technology Research Center) support program supervised by the

IITA(Institute

of

Information

Technology

Assessment)

(IITA-2005-C1090-0501-0018).

S. H. Choi, Y. C. Shin and J. Heo are with the Department of Electronic

Engineering, Konkuk University, Seoul, Korea (e-mail:

monodt@konkuk.ac.kr; ycshin@konkuk.ac.kr; junheo@konkuk.ac.kr).

K. Y. Cho and M. S. Oh are with Mobile Communication R&D Center, LG

Electronics, Inc., Korea (e-mail: kihyoung@lge.com; minoh@lge.com)

A. Parity-check Matrices of QC-LDPC Codes

We can describe the parity-check matrix of QC LDPC codes as shown in Fig. 1.

 P0,0

 

P1,0

H = 

P2,0

 ...

Pmb −1,0

P0,1 P1,1 P2,1 ... Pmb −1,1

P0,2 P1,2 P2,2 ... Pmb −1,2

... P0,nb −2 ... P1,nb −2 ... P2,nb −2 ... ... ... Pmb −1,nb −2

Fig. 1. The parity-check matrix of QC-LDPC codes.

P0,nb −1 

P1,nb −1

 

P2,nb −1

 

... 

Pmb −1,nb −1 

Note that Pi, j is the circulant permutation matrix which
shifts the identity matrix to the right or is a zero matrix, where 0 ≤ i ≤ mb −1 and 0 ≤ j ≤ nb −1. We define the size of Pi, j as z × z , with an integer z ≥ 1 . If Pi, j is a permutation matrix, it is shifted by q times for any integer q, 0 ≤ q < z . In Fig. 1, parity-check matrix H consists of mb ⋅ nb permutation matrices and zero matrices. Let n be the codeword size, k be the information bit size and m be the parity bit size. Then, the size of matrix H is denoted by m × n , where m = mb ⋅ z and n = nb ⋅ z .
The matrix H is expanded from a binary base matrix H b of size mb × nb , where z=1. In the base matrix H b , each element (H b )i, j is represented by ‘1’ or ‘0’ regardless of factor q.
Although base matrix offers us information about basic pattern of expanded parity-check matrix, it does not show the forms of

1550-2252/$A2u5th.0o0riz©ed2l0ic0e7nsIeEdEuEse limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u8n4e123,2026 at 19:31:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

right-shifted permutation matrices. On the contrary, a model matrix, denoted by H bm , shows not only the information offered by a base matrix but also the right-shifted value. In the model matrix, the shifted number is shown in the location of a permutation matrix and a negative number or blank is used in a zero matrix location.
B. Block-type LDPC codes
B-LDPC codes are kinds of QC-LDPC codes of which degree distributions are irregular for fast encoding. We can divide the base matrix of B-LDPC codes into two parts, where the systematic part H b1 and the parity part H b2 , such that

H b = [(H b1 ) mb ×kb | (H b2 )mb×mb ]

(1)

In (1), kb means the size of systematic part in base matrix. B-type LDPC codes have specific structures in the parity part H b2 as shown in Fig. 2.

101010110000

010101011000

011010101100

100011000110

010101000011

101100100001

hb

H b′ 2

H b1

H b2

Fig. 2. The structure of the base matrix for block-type LDPC codes

H b2 is partitioned into two parts. One is a column vector hb of which column weight is ‘3’ and the other is a matrix Hb′2 which
has dual diagonal structure. A vector hb is inserted to prevent that the right-margin of Hb′2 has column weight ‘1’.
There are many advantages using B-LDPC codes. First, it is possible to a block-unit operation when encoding and decoding processes, that is, a system needs not know entire information of parity-check matrix, only needs the information of model matrix. In that case, it is available to operate whole information using shift registers. Actually, we can reduce much memory by factor of 1/z. Second, codeword of various sizes are easily encoded using only one model matrix with various sizes of z. Third, fast and simple encoding is available based on the Richardson-Urbanke encoding method instead of Gaussian elimination to make a generate matrix because of the structure of parity part H b2 which is a dual diagonal type [4].

III. PUNCTURING
A. An Effect of Puncturing in BP Algorithm Generally, LDPC codes are iteratively decoded by belief-propagation (BP) algorithm. It is the decoding method using iterative exchanges and spreads of probability information, named log-likelihood ratio (LLR) through edges between variable nodes and check nodes. In decoding process, LLR operations of variable nodes and check nodes are defined as

variable nodes:

dv

∑ Lvi = Lch +

Lc j ,

j =1, j≠i

i = 1,2,....., dv (2)

check nodes:

tanh( Lci ) =

dc
∏

tanh( Lvj ),

i = 1,2,....., dc

(3)

2

j =1, j≠i

2

where Lvi is the LLR value through edge i from a variable node
to a check node and Lci is the LLR value through edge i from a check node to a variable node. Also, Lch means the LLR value
from a channel, each d v and d c means the degree of variable node v and check node c respectively.
Let N v and N c be the neighboring check node set of variable node v and the neighboring variable node set of check node c respectively. In (2), Lch of punctured variable node is ‘0’ because channel information is not received, that is, p( y | x = 0) and p( y | x = 1) are same, where x means
transmitted information and y means received information. Therefore, punctured variable nodes v delivers value ‘0’ to check nodes in N v during first iteration. Then check nodes c delivers zero LLR values to neighboring unpunctured nodes in N c by (3). In this equation, the value of left side is always ‘0’ when any j corresponding to Lv j = 0 in a right side exists. That
is, unpunctured nodes receive zero LLR values and punctured nodes receive non-zero LLR values.
When a check node c has two or more punctured variable nodes which are neighboring, variable nodes in N c always receive zero LLR values through connected edges. This means that any information is not transferred during decoding process. To prevent this problem, a punctured variable node must be offered non-zero information through other check nodes.
B. A Puncturing method to reduce performance loss
To reduce the performance loss, punctured node v must have non-zero LLR value after the minimal iterations. It is said to be recovered [3]. To be recovered after first iteration, the check node c where the elements in Nc \ {v} are all unpunctured
nodes must exist. In this case, these check nodes are named survived check nodes and punctured node v is called one-step recoverable (1-SR) node. Dead check nodes are the nodes which do not help punctured nodes recover. Generally, we can define the l-SR node. This means that a punctured node recovered after l-th iterations. If a punctured node v becomes a l-SR node, the set Nc \ {v} (excluding a node v from a set
Nc ) corresponding to a survived check node c contains at least one (l-1)-SR node while the others are l ′ -SR, where 0 ≤ l′ ≤ l −1 . Also one l-SR node must have at least one guaranteed survived check node. We can show the structure using l-SR nodes and their guaranteed survived check nodes as hierarchy named recovery tree. There is the recovery tree of a 3-SR node v in Fig. 3.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u8n4e223,2026 at 19:31:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 3. The recovery tree of 3-SR node v. (filled circles : unpunctured nodes, unfilled circles : punctured nodes) [3].
In AWGN channel, assuming the i.i.d. and symmetry conditions, the error probability of node v is given by

Pe (v) = Q 

mu (v) σ 2 (v)

  

=

Q

mu (v) 2

 

,

σ 2 (v) = 2mu (v)

(4)

where mu (v) and σ 2 (v) are the average and variance of LLR
value from check nodes to variable node v. Let S(v) be the number of unpunctured nodes in recovery tree of v. By the Density Evolution using Gaussian Approximation [5] about recovery tree, mu (v) can be simply represented by

[ ] mu (v) = φ −1 1 − (1 − φ (mu0 )) S(v)

(5)

where 0 ≤ i < n among the candidate (be not selected as

survived check node yet) check nodes. 3) Let the cardinalities of lower l-SR groups maximize. For
this rule, we choose the variable nodes which have minimal neighboring candidate check nodes as a set V = {v0 , v1 ,..., v j} , where 0 ≤ j < m among the

non-grouped nodes neighboring the elements of a set C. 4) All nodes in V neighbor nodes in C. We form a subset of

C as C ∗ = {c0∗ , c1∗ ,..., ci∗'} , 0 ≤ i'≤ i about the check nodes

neighboring nodes in V and randomly choose only one

node in V at every nodes in C ∗ . The selected variable

node group is defined as V ∗ = {v0∗ , v1∗ ,..., vi∗'} . Then we can

form

a

set

of pairs

Φ

=

{(

v0∗

,

c

∗ 0

),

(v1∗

,

c1∗

),...,

(vi∗'

,

ci∗'

)}

.

5) Select one pair (v ∗ , c ∗ ) which has minimal S (v∗ ) among

the pairs in P. If there are more pairs, choose one randomly. 6) v∗ and c∗ become a l-SR node and a survived check node

of it. The variable nodes in N c∗ /{v∗} must be 0-SR nodes and the check nodes in N v∗ /{c∗} must be eliminated in candidate check nodes. After grouping, the actually punctured nodes are selected according to a desired code rate effectively. For this purpose, A

sorting algorithm is used. Let np j be the number of punctured

node to make a desired code rate R j , where R0 ≤ R j ≤ Rmax

and R0 is the rate of mother code. Then np j is given by

where φ(⋅) is given by

.

∫ φ(x) = 1−

1 4πx

R

tanh

u 2

exp −

(u

− x)2 4x

du

(6)

It was noted in [3] that increment of S(v) causes increment of Pe (v) according to (4) and (5).
In conclusion, punctured nodes must be recovered at minimal iterations and have a minimal S(v) value. Grouping and sorting algorithms are the method to find the puncturing pattern corresponding to these conditions.
All variable nodes can be divided into l-SR, (l=0,1,2,…,L) node group Gl using grouping . In this case, G0 is a group of
unpunctured nodes. First, we select variable nodes in group G1 until the number of neighboring check nodes is equal to the number of all check nodes. Then, variable nodes of next group are selected. For the parity-check matrix of which size is m × n , grouping algorithm divides all nodes according to these rules. 1) All punctured variable nodes have one guaranteed survived
check node. 2) To reduce error probability, we preferentially select a
variable node having minimal S(⋅) . To satisfy this rule, we
choose the check nodes which have minimal neighboring non-grouped variable nodes as a set C = {c0 , c1,..., ci } ,

np j

=

n(Rj −

 

Rj

R0 )   

(7)

To satisfy np j , the punctured nodes are selected through
following rules. 1) We first choose the nodes in G1 . Then, all nodes in G1 are
chosen, we choose the nodes in G2 until we have np j
nodes. 2) In a same group, we first choose the node which has
maximal neighboring survived check nodes and minimal dead check nodes. 3) For the rate-compatibility, selected punctured nodes of lower-rate must be included at higher-rate.

IV. PUNCTURING FOR B-TYPE LDPC CODES

Grouping/sorting algorithm proposed in [3] is good for

performance of all kinds of LDPC codes. However, in

B-LDPC codes, it is effective to puncture the nodes on a

block-unit. Hence, we propose the Block-type grouping/sorting

(B-grouping/sorting) algorithm optimized for B-LDPC codes.

Let

V j = {vγj : 0 ≤ γ < z}

and

Ci

=

{c

i ρ

:0≤

ρ

<

z}

be

variable node block and check node block of the parity-check

matrix H , of which size is mb ⋅ z × nb ⋅ z , where i and j are the

row (check node) and column (variable node) index of block

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u8n4e323,2026 at 19:31:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

respectively. In the base matrix, where z=1, the cardinality of V j and C i is 1 and we can denote each element as vbj and cbi .

We assume that each permutation matrix Pi, j has shifting value qi, j .

Lemma 1: In any permutation matrix Pi, j , relationship
between V j and C i is one-to-one correspondence regardless of factor z.
Proof: Let the index γ ρ and ργ be the column index of ‘1’ at each row ρ and the row index of ‘1’ at each column γ in

Pi, j . If a shifting value qi, j = 0 , connections of elements

between

Vj

and

Ci

become

c0i

↔ v0j , c1i

↔

v1j

,...,

c

i z

−1

↔

v

j z −1

and

if

qi, j

=1,

connections

are c0i ↔ v1j , c1i ↔ v2j ,..., czi −1 ↔ v0j , that is,

c

i ρ

↔

vj γρ

,

γρ

=

ρ ρ

+ qi, j , + qi, j − z,

if ρ + qi, j < z if ρ + qi, j ≥ z

(8)

and

vγj

↔

ci ργ

,

ργ

=

γ γ

− qi, j , − qi, j + z,

if γ − qi, j ≥ 0 if γ − qi, j < 0

(9)

where 0 ≤ ρ, ργ ,γ ,γ ρ < z . In (8) and (9), we know that each
check (variable) node is connected with only one variable (check) node according to its index ρ (γ ) regardless of factor

z. Therefore, relation between V j and C i is one-to-one

correspondence.

□

Theorem 1: At any l-SR node in H b , where l ≥ 0 , all

corresponding variable nodes in H are l-SR nodes. And at its

survived (dead) check nodes in H b , all corresponding check

nodes in H are survived (dead) check nodes of l-SR node

block.

Proof: Let the column j* and row i* in H b be the l-SR

node and its survived check node. Then, the connections of

each node become

Nv j∗ b

= {cbi∗ } ∪{cbi : ∀i such that (H b )i, j∗

= 1}

and

N ci∗ b

= {vbj∗ } ∪ {vbj

: ∀j such that (H b )i∗ , j

= 1} ,

where

all

c bi

are survived check nodes or dead check nodes and all vbj are

l ′ -SR nodes ( 0 ≤ l′ ≤ l −1 ). Expanding H b into H , due to

Lemma 1, we can represent the connections as

Nv j∗ γ

=

{ci∗ ργ

}

∪

{ciργ

: ∀i such that (Hb )i, j∗

= 1}

and

N ci∗ ρ

=

{v j∗ γρ

}

∪

{vγjρ

: ∀j such that (H b )i∗ , j

= 1}

(10) (11)

In (10) and (11), we know that each element in V j∗ neighbors each element in C i∗ respectively and connecting structures are all identical in comparison with them of H b , that is, any l-SR node and each check node in H b can be expanded into l-SR

node block and check node block in H by factor z .

□

Based on Theorem 1, we can simply optimize the

grouping/sorting algorithm for B-LDPC codes. We can apply

this algorithm to a base matrix H b instead of an expanded

parity-check matrix H . If the node vbj in H b is a punctured

node, all nodes in V j are punctured in H . This method still

holds the original grouping/sorting conditions according to

Theorem 1.

When using proposed method named B-grouping/sorting, we

can have some advantages as follows:

1) Simpler block-unit puncturing is available during encoding

and decoding process.

2) The memory for storing puncturing patterns can be

reduced by factor of 1/z.

3) Punctured nodes can be selected regardless of block length

only using one puncturing pattern about a base matrix.

V. SIMULATIONS
In this Section, we analysis the performance between a conventional puncturing method and a proposed puncturing method (B-grouping/sorting) using the B-LDPC codes with rate 1/2 and information size 480 and 1080 presented in IEEE 802.16e standards [6]. Table I shows the result of grouping.

l-SR group

TABLE I

THE NUMBER OF VARIABLE NODES IN EACH SR GROUP

Num. of nodes

Conventional grouping

B-grouping

k=480

k=1080

(base matrix)

G0

613

1363

16

G1

295

677

7

G2

49

106

1

G3

3

14

0

Total

960

2160

24

When using B-grouping, we can expand the number of nodes in each group according to the size of permutation matrix z.

By puncturing nodes, we generate the codes with rates 2/3 and 3/4 using a mother code with rate 1/2. In Table II, we represent the number of actually punctured nodes at each rate.

TABLE II

THE NUMBER OF PUNCTURED NODES

The number of punctured nodes

k

2/3

3/4

480

240 (6)

320 (8)

1080

540 (6)

720 (8)

Figures in parentheses mean the number of punctured blocks in a base matrix.

We compare the performance of codes using random puncturing and B-grouping/sorting as shown in Fig. 4. For this simulation, two different puncturing patterns are compared about grouping. Then, we make the code of rate 2/3 using rate 1/2 mother code of which k is 480 and assume a BPSK modulation and an AWGN channel. To decode this code, a fifty iteration-layered decoding method based on log-MAP is used [7]. In the comparison, the performance of B-grouping/sorting is better than the performance of random puncturing. At a FER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u8n4e423,2026 at 19:31:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of 10−3 , there is a gap between them about 0.6dB Eb/No.

grouping/sorting algorithm and B-grouping/sorting algorithm show almost the same performance, although performance cannot exactly be compared because the punctured nodes are different. As a result, B-LDPC codes have reduced decoding complexity and required memory size without performance loss.

Fig. 4. The FER performance according to puncturing applying the method of B-grouping/sorting and selecting randomly.

VI. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a good puncturing method optimized for B-LDPC codes. Although the puncturing is an effective method to obtain rate-compatible codes, performance loss occurs. Grouping and sorting algorithms are good for such problem in general LDPC codes. As a modified method, we can reduce required memory size to save the information of puncturing positions by block-unit puncturing. Also, it is available to puncture the codeword regardless of its size using only one puncturing pattern based on the base matrix. Hence, the puncturing method we propose, named B-grouping/sorting, will effectively be used in wireless communication systems needed rate-compatibility such as hybrid automatic repeat request (ARQ) and adaptive modulation and coding (AMC).

Fig. 5. The FER performance for LDPC codes with rates 2/3,3/4 and information length 480 according to puncturing applying conventional grouping/sorting and B-grouping/sorting using mother code with rate 1/2.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes,” Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes) and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 36, pp. 389-400, Apr. 1988.
[3] J. Ha, J. Kim, D. Klinc and S. W. MacLaughlin, “Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check codes with short block lengths,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 728-738, Feb. 2006.
[4] S. H. Myung, K. C. Yang and J. Y. Kim, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, Aug. 2005.
[5] S.Y. Chung, T. J. Richadson and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, Feb. 2001.
[6] IEEE 802.16 Working Group, “Part 16: Air interface for fixed and mobile broadband wireless access systems,” IEEE P802.16e/D9, June 2005.
[7] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Workshop on SIPS ’04, pp. 107-112, 2004.
[8] D. Klinc, J. Ha, J. Kim and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check codes for ultra wide band systems,” IEEE GLOBECOM ’05, vol. 6, pp. 3856-3860, Nov. 2005.
[9] Y. C. Shin, S. H. Choi and J. Heo, “On construction of block type rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” ITC-CSCC ’06, vol. 3, pp. 17-19, July 2006.
[10] J. Zhang and M. P. Fossorier, “Shuffled Iterative Decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209-213, Feb. 2005.
[11] J. Li and K. Narayanan, “Rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes for capacity-approaching ARQ scheme in packet data communications,” presented at the Int. Conf. on Comm., Internet, and Info. Tech. (CIIT), Nov. 2002.

Fig. 6. The FER performance for LDPC codes with rates 2/3,3/4 and information length 1080 according to puncturing applying conventional grouping/sorting and block-type grouping/sorting using mother code with rate 1/2.
Next, we compare the performance between conventional grouping/sorting and B-grouping/sorting. Simulation conditions are the same as which we use above. Fig. 5 and Fig. 6 are the performance curves with rates 2/3, 3/4 when k=480 and k=1080. According to Fig. 5 and 6, it is noted that both conventional

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u8n4e523,2026 at 19:31:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

