IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

483

[2] M. Wieckowski and M. Margala, “A 32 Kb SRAM cache using current mode operation and asynchronous wave-pipelined decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. SOC Conf., 2004, pp. 251–254.
[3] F. Cavalli, R. Cucchiara, M. Piccardi, and A. Prati, “Performance analysis of MPEG-4 decoder and encoder,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Video/Image Process. Multimedia Commun., 2002, pp. 227–231.
[4] R. Lin and M. Margala, “Novel design and verification of a 16 16-b self-repairable reconfigurable inner product processors,” in Proc. 12th ACM Great Lakes Symp. VLSI, 2002, pp. 172–177.
[5] Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX, “TI TMS320VC5509 fixed-point DSP,” (2002). [Online]. Available: http://www.focus.ti.com/docs/ prod/folders/print/tms320vc5509.html
[6] Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX, TI TMS320VC5509 revision D power consumption,” Measurements, 2002.
[7] Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX, “TI TMS320C55x hardware extensions for image/video applications programmer’s reference,” SPRU098, (2002). [Online]. Available: http://www.focus.ti.com/lit/ug/spru098/ spru098.pdf
[8] S. K. Hsu, S. K. Mathew, M. A. Anders, B. R. Zeydel, V. G. Oklobdzija, R. K. Krishnamurthy, and S. Y. Borkar, “A 110 GOPS/W 16-bit multiplier and reconfigurable PLA loop in 90-nm CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 41, no. 1, pp. 256–264, Jan. 2006.
[9] M. Bolotski, T. Simon, C. Vieri, R. Amirtharajah, and T. F. Knight, Jr., “Abacus: A 1024 processor 8 ns SIMD array,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Adv. Res. VLSI, 1995, pp. 28–40.
[10] D. G. Elliott, M. Stumm, W. M. Shelgrove, C. Cojocaru, and R. McKenzie, “Computational RAM: Implementing processors in memory,” IEEE Des. Test Comput., no. 1, pp. 32–41, Jan.–Mar. 1999.
[11] J. C. Gealow and C. G. Sodini, “A pixel-parallel image processor using logic pitch-matched to dynamic memory,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 34, no. 6, pp. 831–839, Jun. 1999.
[12] B. S.-H. Kwan, B. F. Cockburn, and D. G. Elliott, “Implementation of DSP-RAM: An architecture for parallel digital signal processing in memory,” in Proc. IEEE Can. Conf. Electr. Comput. Eng., 2001, vol. 1, pp. 341–345.
[13] N. Yamashita, T. Kimmura, Y. Fujita, Y. Aimoto, T. Manabe, S. Okazaki, K. Nakamura, and M. Yamashina, “A 3.84 GIPS integrated memory array processor with 64 processing elements and 2-Mb RAM,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 1336–1343, Nov. 1994.
[14] D. Gong, Y. He, and Z. Cao, “New cost-effective VLSI implementation of a 2-D discrete cosine transform and its inverse,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 405–415, Apr. 2004.
[15] K.-H. Cheng, C.-S. Huang, and C.-P. Lin, “The design and implementation of DCT/IDCT chip with novel architecture,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Circuits Syst., 2000, pp. IV-741–IV-744.
[16] G. A. Ruiz, J. A. Michell, and A. M. Buron, “Parallel-pipeline 8 8 forward 2-D ICT processor chip for image coding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 714–723, Feb. 2005.
[17] T. Xanthopoulos and A. P. Chandrakasan, “A low-power DCT core using adaptive bitwidth and arithmetic activity exploiting signal correlations and quantization,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 35, no. 5, pp. 740–750, May 2000.
[18] P. McCanny, S. Masud, and J. McCanny, “Design and implementation of the symmetrically extended 2-D wavelet transform,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process., 2002, pp. III-3108–III3111.
[19] P.-C. Wu and L.-G. Chen, “An efficient architecture for two-dimensional discrete wavelet transform,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. Video Technol., vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 536–545, Apr. 2001.
[20] P. P. Dang and P. M. Chau, “Integer fast wavelet transform and its VLSI implementation for low power applications,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., 2002, pp. 93–98.
[21] C.-Y. Chen, Z.-L. Yang, T.-C. Wang, and L.-G. Chen, “A programmable VLSI architecture for 2-D discrete wavelet transform,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., 2000, pp. I-619–I-622.

A Memory Efficient Partially Parallel Decoder Architecture for Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes
Zhongfeng Wang and Zhiqiang Cui

Abstract—This paper presents a memory efficient partially parallel decoder architecture suited for high rate quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes using (modified) min-sum algorithm for decoding. In general, over 30% of memory can be saved over conventional partially parallel decoder architectures. Efficient techniques have been developed to reduce the computation delay of the node processing units and to minimize hardware overhead for parallel processing. The proposed decoder architecture can linearly increase the decoding throughput with a small percentage of extra hardware. Consequently, it facilitates the applications of LDPC codes in area/power sensitive high-speed communication systems.
Index Terms—Architecture, error correction codes, low-density parity check (LDPC), memory efficient, quasi-cyclic (QC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

Recently, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] have attracted

considerable attention due to their near Shannon limit performance and

inherently parallelizable decoding scheme. Quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-

LDPC) codes, being a special class of LDPC codes, are well-suited for

hardware implementation for the regularity of their parity check ma-

trices. Most recently, several classes of QC-LDPC codes [2]–[5] have

been proposed that can achieve comparable performance with com-

puter generated random LDPC codes. Among various LDPC codes

decoding algorithms, the sum product algorithm (SPA) has the best

decoding performance. The modified min-sum algorithm (MSA) [6],

which does not require any knowledge about the channel parameters

and offers comparable decoding performance to SPA, is preferred in

practical implementation. The other benefits of (modified) MSA over

SPA include less sensitivity to quantization noise and lower computa-

tion complexity in check node processing.

In general, LDPC codes achieve outstanding performance only with

N  large code word lengths (e.g.,

1000 bits). Thus, the memory

part normally dominates the overall hardware of an LDPC codec. A

memory efficient serial decoder was presented in [7]. The decoding

throughput of each tile is less than 5.5 Mb/s. Partially parallel decoder

architectures, which can achieve a good tradeoff between hardware

complexity and decoding throughput, are more appropriate for prac-

tical applications. In this paper, a memory efficient partially parallel

decoder architecture for high rate QC-LDPC codes is proposed, which

exploits the data redundancy of soft messages in the min-sum decoding

algorithm. In general, over 30% memory can be saved. In addition,

the proposed architecture can be extended to other block-based

LDPC codes, e.g., (general) permutation matrix-based LDPC codes.

To reduce the complexity of check-node unit (CNU), an optimized

pseudo-rank order filter (PROF) is proposed. A low complexity data

scheduling structure is presented to enable parallel processing.

The structure of this paper is as follows. In Section II, the rearranged

min-sum decoding procedure is discussed. Section III presents the par-

tially parallel decoder architecture. Various optimizations to further re-

Manuscript received January 18, 2006; revised September 11, 2006. The authors are with the School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR 97331 USA (e-mail: zwang@eecs. oregonstate.edu; cuizh@eecs.oregonstate.edu). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TED.2007.895247
1063-8210/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

484

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

duce the hardware complexity are addressed in Section IV. The conclusions are drawn in Section V.

II. REARRANGED DECODING PROCEDURE OF (MODIFIED) MSA

In the modified min-sum decoding algorithm [6], two classes of computation units, the variables nodes and the check nodes, iteratively exchange soft messages with each other through the edges in the Tanner graph. In the check-to-variable message updating phase, each check
cv node c computes the check-to-variable messages R with variable-tocheck messages Lcv as follows:

Rc(kv) =  2 n2N(c)nv sgn Lc(kn01) 2 n2mN(inc)nv Lc(kn01)

(1)

where  is a scaling factor. The superscript (k) is used to indicate that the data is generated in the kth iteration.

In the variable-to-check message updating phase, each variable node
v computes the Lcv messages using the Rcv messages and the intrinsic v messages I using the following equation:

Lc(kv) = m2M v( ) Rm(kv) 0 Rc(kv) + Iv:

(2)

Fig. 1. Partially parallel decoder architecture for weight-1 and possible zero submatrices.

matrix containing

In the regular decoding procedure, two classes of extrinsic messages in the individual form are involved. On the other hand, it can be ob-
cv served from (1) that the magnitudes of the R messages corresponding
to one row of H matrix have only two possible values. By extending
the idea presented in [9] and [15], a rearranged decoding procedure of the MSA is developed to reduce the memory requirement for extrinsic messages. The new decoding procedure is expressed as follows:

Rc(1v) =  2 n2N(c)nv n sgn(I ) 2 n2mN(inc)nv jInj

Rc(kv) =  2 n2N(c)nv sgn Sn(k01) 0 Rc(kn01)

2 m2mNi(nc)nv Sn(k01) 0 Rc(kn01)

(3)

Sv(k) = Iv + m2M v( ) Rm(kv) :

(4)

In the Rc(kv) message updating phase, the required inputs Lc(kn01),

2 n 0 nk ckn n
are

M (v) c, are not computed using S(

d0ir1e)ctly

Rre(tri0e1v)edasfrsohmowmnemino(r3y)..InTshteearde,gtuhleayr

variable-to-check message updating phase is replaced by the column
v sum updating phase. The column sum S is calculated using (4) and

stored in memory. Based on the new decoding procedure, optimized

low complexity decoding architectures are proposed in Section III.

III. MEMORY EFFICIENT DECODER ARCHITECTURE
cv In the proposed design, the check-to-variable messages R and the column sum Sv are stored in separated memories. All the Rcv mes-
sages corresponding to one row of H matrix are stored in a compressed

A. Parallel Decoder Architecture for H Matrix Consisting of
Weight-1 Circulant and Possible Zero Submatrices

Fig. 1 shows the decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes with H

matrix consisting of weight-1 circulant matrices and possible zero ma-
cv trices. The R-memory module is used to store the R messages. The
messages corresponding to one row of H matrix are stored into one entry of R-memory in a compressed form with four elements, i.e., 1) the smallest magnitude m1; 2) the second smallest magnitude m2;

3) the index of the second smallest magnitude index; and 4) the signs
cv of all soft messages of the row. To recover the individual R mes-

sages from their compressed forms, the data distributor is introduced.
Each S-memory and I-memory modules are used to, respectively, store
v v the column sum S and the intrinsic messages I corresponding to a
block column of the H matrix. The CNU performs the computation

expressed in (3) in the check-to-variable message updating phase. The

nk 0 ckn ckv tvhaericaobmlep-nuotadteiounnSit((V0N1)U)

Rwo( r0ks1)ininbtohteh

decoding phases. It performs
R( ) message updating phase

vk and performs (4) in the column sum S( ) updating phase. The column

v sum S is accumulated for each column of H matrix. The decision

and parity equation check unit are introduced for tentative decision and

parity check computation.
To facilitate multiple data accesses per clock cycle in a p-parallel (p > 1) architecture, the data in p adjacent rows or columns are stored into one memory entry. In the R-memory, check-to-variable messages
cv R in p adjacent rows are stored in one R-memory entry. Similarly, v in one S-memory (I-memory) entry, column sums S (intrinsic mesv sages I ) in p adjacent columns are stored in one memory entry. Be-
cause the data stored in the R-memory are in the row order while the data stored in the S-memory are in the column order, data scheduling

and reverse scheduling units are introduced to resolve the data access

conflicts. In general, they can be implemented using barrel shifter and

form to significantly reduce memory requirement. In general, the parity
check matrices H of QC-LDPC codes contain cyclically shifted iden-
tity submatrices, zero submatrices, and compound circulant subma-

buffer. An optimized data scheduling (reverse scheduling) unit is pro-
posed in Section IV-B. In Fig. 1, for clarity, we use one symbol (e.g.,
adder, MUX, and data distributor) to represent p components for par-

trices. Each of the compound matrices consists of two superimposed cyclically shifted identity matrices. In this paper, for simplicity, the cyclically shifted identity matrix and the compound circulant matrix

allel processing case.
2 Assuming that the H matrix is a J K block matrix, each subma2 trix is a t t weight-1 circulant matrix, and p-parallel processing is

are called the weight-1 and weight-2 circulant matrix, respectively. We adopted, the message updating procedure is as follows. In initializa-

will deal with various cases in the following.

tion, the intrinsic messages in I-memory are dumped into S-memory

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

485

TABLE I MEMORY NEEDED BY THE PROPOSED ARCHITECTURE

Fig. 2. Structure of data distributor.

d e for iterative decoding. It takes t=p clock cycles. In the kth iteration,

TABLE II MEMORY NEEDED BY THE TRADITIONAL APPROACHES [10]–[14]

the following two phases of decoding are performed.

2 •

Iknincdhseockf -mtoe-svsaargiaebslRe mc(kve0s1s)aganedupSdv(akt0in1g),

phase, where

for v

each row c, N (c), are

two sent

to K Then,

VNUs all of

tvhieainthteermpaetdhiaintedirceastueldtsbLyc(ktvh0e1)dacsahlceudlalitneed

in by

Fig. the

1. K

VNUs are sent to a CNU. Finally, the compressed Rc(kv) messages

are generated and stored into one entry of the R-memory. It takes
2 d e J ( t=p + 1) clock cycles.
• In the column sum updating phase, the summation of Iv and Rc(kv)

messages for each column v of H matrix is accumulated. For each row c, the compressed Rc(kv) messages are read out from R-memory module. Next, the individual Rc(kv) messages recovered by the data distributor are sent to K VNUs for accumulating Sv(k)

messages via the path indicated by the solid line. If c is in the first

block row, Iv and Rcv are added together and stored in S-memory.

When c is in other block rows, Rcv is accumulated to Sv. At the end of this phase, the final column sum Sv(k) corresponding to all

columns of the H matrix are accumulated in the K S-memory
2 d e modules. J ( t=p + 1) clock cycles are needed for this phase. d e If the maximum iteration number is set to n, totally, it takes t=p + 2 2 2 d e n 2 J ( t=p + 1) clock cycles to complete the decoding for

Fig. 3. Structure of single-port memory supporting simultaneous READ and WRITE operation.

one code block. If H matrix contains zero submatrices, data received by the CNU and

VNUs corresponding to zero submatrices must be filtered out. There- of messages in their true values are alternately stored into the common

fore, additional data path for zero matrices are introduced as the following. When computing Rcv messages, the largest positive value M determined by the word length of soft message is sent to the CNU from the inserted MUXs. According to (3), the value M has no effect on the

extrinsic memory modules. Assuming that 6-bit quantization is used, the required memories are summarized in Tables I and II. It can be seen that the total memory for R-memory, S-memory, I-memory, and estimated codeword is 163 kbits with the proposed approaches. The total

computation in the check-to-variable message updating phase. When accumulating column sum Sv, to avoid adding an undesired data to the summation, the write enable signal w en for the associated S-memory must be disabled. Apparently, if the H matrix only consists of weight-1
circulant matrices, all the MUXs connected to the CNU can be re-

required memory for the extrinsic messages, intrinsic messages, and estimated codeword is 258 kbits using conventional approaches. Thus, nearly 37% of memory is reduced in this case. If the code rate is not so high, the memory savings in percentage would be relatively smaller. In general, for high rate LDPC codes, e.g., rate>2/3, more than 30% of

moved.

memory reduction can be achieved with the proposed architecture.

Fig. 2 shows the structure of data distributor which is introduced to convert the Rcv messages corresponding to a row of H matrix into their true values. The data read from an R-memory entry is composed

In the previous discussion, dual-port memories are used to support simultaneous memory READ and WRITE operations for each memory bank. Because adjacent memory entries are sequentially accessed (for

of four elements as mentioned before. On the output side, the relative READ or WRITE operation), we can also use a single-port memory and location of m2 is determined by the index decoder. m1 is distributed two buffers, as shown in Fig. 3, to support simultaneous two memory

to other locations. Because the order of the sign bits in signs part is the same as that of the Rcv messages corresponding to a row of H matrix, the sign bits can be simply distributed. It is convenient to use two’s complement data representation in column sum computation. Therefore, sign-magnitude to two’s-complement conversion unit is needed at input of VNU.
For a quantitative comparison of the memory size between the pro-

accesses. The data width of the single-port memory needs to be doubled
compared to that of the ReadData port. The memory access data flow is as the follows. At cycle ck, both port ReadData and buffer D1 get data from the same entry of the single-port memory. In the same time, data is written from port WriteData to buffer D2. At the next cycle ck+1, port ReadData gets data from buffer D1. Simultaneously, data from port WriteData and buffer D2 are written back into the same entry of

posed architecture and the conventional approaches [10]–[14], let us the single-port memory. This procedure is repeated in the following

consider a (4608, 4096) (4, 36) rate 8/9 regular QC-LDPC code de- cycles. In this way, the needed hardware size for a memory bank is

signed for read channel. In the traditional approaches, the two classes significantly reduced compared to that of using dual-port memories.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

486

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

Fig. 5. Structure of PROF.

fore, for S-memory, either two-port memory with the technique dis-

cussed in Section III-A or register array is required to support two READ

Fig. 4. Decoder architecture for matrix containing weight-2 circulant ma- and two WRITE operations in the same clock cycle. On the other hand,

trices.

if most of block columns of the H matrix containing weight-2 circu-

lant matrices, the approach presented in this paper is not suited in the

sense of area efficiency. Instead, the architecture present in [8] can be

B. Architecture for H Matrices With Weight-1, Weight-2 Circulant Matrices, and Zero Matrices

employed. There is a special case for the p-parallel processing. For a weight-2
circulant matrix, if the difference between the two cyclic shifting off-

We next discuss a more general case in which H matrix may also
contain a small portion of weight-2 submatrices. Similar to the method illustrated before, for p-parallel processing, messages corresponding to p adjacent rows (columns) are stored in one memory entry. For each

sets is less than p=2, the two Rcv message corresponding to two 1-entries in one column may need to be added together and accumulated into the summation in one clock cycle. Thus, a multiplex network is needed to select different structures of VNU.

weight-2 circulant matrix, 2p messages stored in both S-memory and

R-memory are accessed at each clock cycle in both decoding phases. The tricky issue of partially parallel processing is how to schedule the data order for the 2p messages. Each weight-2 circulant matrix can be

IV. OPTIMIZATION ON THE PARTIALLY PARALLEL DECODER ARCHITECTURE

decomposed into two weight-1 submatrices. Consequently, the parallel A. Optimized CNU processing techniques discussed Section III-B can be utilized.

The decoder architecture for LDPC codes with H matrices con- The critical task of CNU is to find the two smallest magnitudes from

taining weight-1, weight-2 circulant matrices, and zero matrices is all input data and identify the relative position of the input data with
2 shown in Fig. 4. Because the matrix decomposition method is used, a the smallest magnitude. In this section, an optimized 2 2 PROF is

new block row with zero submatrices and a small portion of weight-1 proposed. Then, an efficient CNU based on the PROF is presented to

circulant submatrices is introduced for each original block row in the minimize hardware complexity.

H matrix. Thus, to generate check-to-variable messages Rcv from

2 The 2 2 PROF sorts two presorted sequences and decides which

the data corresponding to the two decomposed rows, an additional sequence containing the smallest data with respect to their magnitudes.

processing unit CNUb is needed for the new block row. For the Only the smallest and the second smallest magnitudes are sent out.

considered H matrix, the number of the block columns containing Fig. 5 shows the architecture of the PROF. Input [a2 a1] and [b2 b1] are
  weight-2 circulant matrices is small. By block column permutation, two presorted sequences such that a2 a1 and b2 b1. All elements

these block columns can be arranged together. In this way, the size in the two-input sequences are nonnegative numbers. On the output

of CNUb is much smaller than CNUa. The final compressed Rcv side, m1 and m2 stand for the smallest and the second smallest input messages corresponding to one row of H matrix are assembled by data, respectively, index is used to indicate which group contains the

the merge unit using the outputs from the two CNUs. To facilitate smallest input data. Its value is 0 if the smallest input is in the group

distributing the Rcv messages from the compressed form to two de- [a2 a1], otherwise, it is 1. It can be observed that the smallest mag-

composed rows, six elements in the compressed message for one row nitude must be either a1 or b1. The second smallest magnitude can

are needed, i.e., 1) the smallest magnitude m1; 2) the second smallest be selected from a2, b2, and the intermediate comparison result of a1

magnitudes m2; 3) and 4) the index of the second smallest magnitude and b1. Therefore, only one stage compare-and-swap unit plus a very

for the two decomposed row I a and I b ; and 5) and 6) the sign simple combinational logic is used to perform the task of the PROF.

bits for the two decomposed row sgn a and sgn b. The second data The architecture of a CNU with eight inputs is shown in Fig. 6. Input

distributor is introduced to distribute Rcv message onto the shorter data are variable-to check messages and represented in sign-magnitude

decomposed block rows. If the index of the second smallest magnitude format. On the output side, the scaled smallest and second smallest

for a decomposed row is set to an invalid value by the merge unit, only magnitude, the relative position of the second smallest magnitude, and

the smallest magnitude can be distributed to that row.

the signs of all data computed in (3) are denoted as m1, m2, index, and

For a block column containing weight-2 circulant matrix, to recover signs, respectively. In Fig. 6, the part above the dash-dotted line per-

the two variable-to-check messages Lcv at each clock cycle, two VNUs forms the data sorting task. The compare-and-swap unit is used to com-

are needed. Similarly, two message accumulation operations are per- pare two-input data. If the larger magnitude is in the upper position, the

formed at each clock cycle in the Sv message updating phase. There- comparison result indicated by the dashed line is 1, otherwise, it is 0. In

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

487

Fig. 7. Data scheduling unit. (a) Structure. (b) Data flow.

Fig. 6. Architecture of the optimized CNU.
the same time, the larger magnitude is placed at upper output position. In the optimized CNU, the bits of index are aggregated stage-by-stage. To illustrate the aggregation procedure, let us assume that the input data with the smallest magnitude has an index of 101. In the first stage, the comparison result of the third compare-and-swap unit (from top to bottom) is 1. In the second stage, the index bit of the second PROF is 0. In the same time, it is used to select the index bit generated by the previous stages. Therefore, the aggregation result after the second stage is “10.” In the final stage, the index bit of the PROF is 1. This index bit is used to select the “10” generated from the previous stages. In this
R way, the final value of index is “101.” The part below the dash-dotted
line is for computing the sign bit of each cv message as in the conventional approaches. The relative position of each computed sign bit is not changed when they are grouped together. To reduce the critical path of CNU, pipeline stages are inserted as indicated by the vertical dashed lines.

and 11 can be outputted. At cycle 2, the outputted message is for the last column 12. The other three values are discarded. Other entries in the figure can be read in a similar way. It can be seen that the input messages are from four adjacent rows and the output messages are for four adjacent columns. The scheduling unit introduces one clock cycle delay from input to output. The data reverse scheduling unit can be designed in a similar way. In the proposed decoder architecture, the two message updating phases are not overlapped. Due to the similarity in the structure of data scheduling and reverse scheduling units, the two components can be combined into one unit. It works alternately in the two message updating phases.
It should be mentioned that overlapping the two decoding phases will nearly double the decoding throughput while introducing some extra hardware. In addition, the proposed architecture can be extended to other block-based LDPC codes such as general permutation matrix-based LDPC codes. The details, however, are not discussed in this paper.
V. CONCLUSION

B. Optimized Data Scheduling Unit
The data scheduling (reverse scheduling) unit plays the key role in the partially parallel processing architecture. In [12], a component performing a similar task was implemented with a combination of data concatenation unit and cyclic shifter, which significantly increases the hardware cost and computation latency. In this paper, an efficient data scheduling unit is proposed by exploiting the structure of LDPC codes.
H For QC-LDPC codes, the number of non-zero matrices in one block
column of matrix is very limited, typically around four. It implies that the number of cyclic shift patterns in a block column is limited.

In this paper, a memory efficient partially parallel decoder architecture suited for (modified) min-sum decoding algorithm for QC-LDPC codes is proposed. By rearranging the decoding procedure of the MSA and exploiting the data redundancy of extrinsic messages, generally over 30% memory reduction can be achieved over traditional designs. To minimize the computation delay, a low complexity CNU is developed. To facilitate parallel processing, an efficient data scheduling structure is proposed. The approach discussed in this paper facilitates the applications of high variable degree and/or high rate LDPC codes in area/power sensitive high speed communication systems.

Hence, a very simple switching block can be employed to resolve the
W data access conflict for each circulant matrix. If there are nonH W zero matrices in a block column of matrix, switching blocks are W needed for the block column. Thus, a : 1 multiplexer is used to se-
lect a switching block for a circulant permutation matrix.
2 To illustrate the design of data scheduling unit, let us use a 13 13
circulant matrix with shift offset 7 without loss of generality. Fig. 7(a) shows the structure of data scheduling unit for four-parallel processing. It has four inputs indicated by I1,. . .,I4 and four outputs indicated by O1,. . .,O4. The corresponding data flow is shown in Fig. 7(b). At clock cycle 0, 4 messages corresponding to row 0, 1, 2, and 3 are sent to the input of the switch block. Their column indices are 7, 8, 9, and 10. At cycle 1, messages corresponding to rows 4, 5, 6, and 7 are sent to the input. Their column indices are 11, 12, 0, and 1. The control signal for MUX array is set to “00.” The messages with column indices 8, 9, 10,

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments which have improved the presentation of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic, low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[3] Z. Li and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A class of good quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes based on progressive edge growth graph,” in Proc. 38th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., 2004, pp. 1990–1994.
[4] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-limit quasicyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

488

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VERY LARGE SCALE INTEGRATION (VLSI) SYSTEMS, VOL. 15, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

[5] “LDPC Coding for OFDMA PHY”, 802.16, 2004. [Online]. Available: http://www.ieee802.org/16/tge
[6] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[7] M. Cocco, J. Dielissen, M. Heijligers, A. Hekstra, and J. Huisken, “A scalable architecture for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. Autom. Test Eur. Conf. Exhibition, 2004, pp. 88–93.
[8] Z. Wang, Y. Tan, and Y. Wang, “Low hardware complexity parallel turbo decoder architecture,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, 2003, pp. II-53–II-56.
[9] Y. Chen and D. Hocevar, “A FPGA and ASIC implementation of rate-1/2, 8088-b irregular low density parity check decoder,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 2003, pp. 113–117.
[10] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “Joint (3,k)-Regular LDPC Code and Decoder/Encoder Design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 530–542, May 2003.
[11] Z. Wang and Q. Jia, “Low complexity, high speed decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE ISCAS, 2005, pp. 5786–5789.
[12] M. Karkooti and J. R. Cavallaro, “Semi-parallel reconfigurable architectures for real-time LDPC decoding,” in Proc. ITCC, 2004, pp. 579–585.
[13] Y. Li, M. Elassal, and M. Bayoumi, “Power efficient architecture for (3,6)-regular low-density parity-check code decoder,” in Proc. ISCAS, 2004, pp. 81–84.
[14] F. Kienle, T. Brack, and N. Wehn, “A synthesizable IP core for DVB-S2 LDPC code decoding,” in Proc. Des., Autom. Test Eur., 2005, pp. 100–105.
[15] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 11, no. 12, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
A Methodology for Transistor-Efficient Supergate Design
Dimitri Kagaris and Themistoklis Haniotakis
Abstract—The number of transistors required for the implementation of a logic function is a fundamental consideration in digital VLSI design. While the determination of a series-parallel implementation can be straightforward once a simplified Boolean expression of the function is available, this may not be an optimum solution. In this paper, a methodology is developed for minimizing the number of transistors that starts from a sum-of-products expression and utilizes non-series-parallel structures. Experimental results demonstrate the efficiency of the approach.
Index Terms—Automatic synthesis, switching functions, transistors, VLSI.
I. INTRODUCTION
Optimizing the performance of a circuit with respect to implementation cost, operational speed, and power requirements is the fundamental problem in digital electronic design. In the custom design approach, a transistor-level implementation for the required functions is selected and an appropriate physical layout is made. For most commercial applications, the required effort for transistor-level implementations may
Manuscript received March 3, 2006; revised July 9, 2006 and November 27, 2006.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Southern Illinois University, Carbondale, IL 62901-6603 USA (kagaris@engr. siu.edu; haniotak@siu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVLSI.2007.895248

be prohibitive, in which case standard cell libraries are used. In the standard-cell-library approach, the main effort is the technology mapping between alternative implementations of the design and the preexisting elements of the library. Such an approach may be beneficial for reducing the design effort, but may not be able to achieve a desired level of performance. If high performance is required, the custom design approach has to be followed at least for the critical parts of the circuit (see, e.g., [11]). In such performance-critical cases, selecting the appropriate transistor-level implementation for complex gates (supergates) is not trivial and the use of suitable computer-aided design (CAD) methods is needed. This is the context of this work.
In the open literature there are two main approaches for minimizing the number of transistors. The first approach is factorization (see, e.g., [1] and [2]), but it is typically limited to series-parallel implementations. Methods based on binary decision diagrams (BDDs) have also appeared in the literature (see, as a sample, [3] [5], [8], and [10]). However, some of these approaches (such as [5] and [8]) are limited to series-parallel implementations [note also that [8] cannot generate transistor diagrams from all BDD representations (for example, the BDD for function f = ab + ac has three nodes, whereas the pull-up (or pull-down) network of the corresponding gate requires four transitors], while other approaches (such as [3] and [10]) can work with any BDD but do not fully utilize the bridging potential as they impose forbidden directions on any formed bridges.
In order to be able to find solutions that use bridging configurations and produce non-series-parallel networks, graph-oriented methods have been proposed (see, e.g., [4], , [7], [13], [14], [15]). [Approaches of cataloging non-series-parallel implementations of n-input functions also exist (see, e.g., [9] for n = 4), but these are impractical even for moderate values of n > 4.] In the proposed method (a preliminary version of which appears in [6]), the transistor network is built explicitly by computing the most economical placement for the next product term of the function in the currently constructed transistor network. The most economical placement is chosen each time among several alternatives, one of which is bridging. Experimental results indicate that the proposed approach is particularly efficient and practical.
II. SYNTHESIS METHODOLOGY
The proposed synthesis methodology accepts a sum-of-products ex-
1 1 1 pression P1 + P2 + + Pm that may have been simplified by any of
the traditional approaches. It obtains from that an efficient (in terms of transistor-count) network, which, in general, is not series-parallel.
Some definitions needed for the description of the proposed methodology are given as follows: A serial connection of transistors will be referred to as a spine [see Fig. 1(a)]. The source/drain nodes at the two ends of a spine will be referred to as endpoints. The set of transistors on a spine will be referred to as spine set. Given a spine s, its spine set will also be denoted by s, while its endpoints will be denoted by s1 and s2 [see Fig. 1(a)]. A sequence of spines will be referred to as a path. The set of transistors on the path will also be referred to as “path.”
A set of spines p, q, s, r, and t with s1 = p2 = q1 and s2 = r2 = t1, will be referred to as a bridge [see Fig. 1(b)]. Given a spine s and a transistor set  , splicing is the operation of replacing s with three other spines p, q, and r, such that r1 is connected directly to a terminal
\ 0 0 (indicated in the following by TRM1 or TRM2), q2 has outlet to the
opposite terminal than r1, and q =  s, p = s q, r =  q, p1 = s1, p2 = q1 = r2, q2 = s2 [see Fig. 1(c)].
The fundamental part of the methodology is, given a partial transistor diagram S (i.e., a set of spines implementing a subset of the given product terms) and a product term  [represented as a set of literals (transistors)] to be placed next, to find the most economical placement

1063-8210/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:29:55 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

