830

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

Performance of Optimum and Suboptimum Combining Diversity Reception for Binary and Quadrature DPSK Over Independent, Nonidentical Rayleigh Fading Channels
Hua Fu and Pooi Yuen Kam
Abstract—dThis paper is concerned with the error-performance analysis of binary and quadrature differential phase-shift keying with differential detection over the nonselective, Rayleigh fading channel with combining diversity reception. The diversity channels are independent, but have nonidentical statistics. The fading process in each channel is assumed to have an arbitrary Doppler spectrum with arbitrary Doppler bandwidth. Both optimum diversity reception and suboptimum diversity reception are considered. Results available previously apply only to the case of second-order diversity and require numerical integration for their actual evaluation. Our results are more general in that the order of diversity is arbitrary. Moreover, the bit-error probability (BEP) result is obtained in an exact, closed-form expression which shows the behavior of the BEP as an explicit function of the one-symbol-interval fading correlation coefficient at the matched-filter output, the mean received signal-to-noise ratio per symbol per channel, and the order of diveristy.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.894081
On the Teletraffic Capacity of Optical CDMA
Sharon Goldberg and Paul R. Prucnal
Abstract—The capacity of an optical CDMA (OCDMA) network has traditionally been defined as the number of continuously transmitting circuits supported by the network. In this paper, we use teletraffic models to determine the teletraffic capacity of a circuit-switched OCDMA network where circuits carry bursty traffic. Our analysis is independent of the OCDMA implementation or spreading code. In conventional networks, e.g., a wavelength-routed-network (WRN), new circuits are blocked when all wavelengths are occupied. In OCDMA, when the number of codewords exceeds the number of network subscribers, new circuits need not be blocked. Instead, capacity is limited by multiple-access interference: when the number of actively transmitting circuits becomes excessive, the bit-error rate of all circuits on the network degrades, causing an outage. We find that through statistical multiplexing, the capacity of OCDMA exceeds that of a WRN, except when circuit activity is very high, while the constraints on outages are more stringent than those blocking. In such cases, we show how OCDMA with call admission control can be used to match or exceed the capacity of a WRN. Overall, our analysis shows that OCDMA is well suited to applications when conventional blocking is undesirable, and/or circuits carry bursty traffic.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, NJ 08544 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.894087
High-Performance Cooperative Demodulation With Decode-and-Forward Relays
Tairan Wang, Alfonso Cano, Georgios B. Giannakis, and J. Nicholas Laneman
Abstract—Cooperative communication systems using various relay strategies can achieve spatial diversity gains, enhance coverage, and potentially increase capacity. For the practically attractive decode-and-forward (DF) relay strategy, we derive a high-performance, low-complexity coherent demodulator at the destination in the form of a weighted combiner. The weights are selected adaptively to account for the quality of both

source-relay-destination and source-destination links. Analysis proves that the novel coherent demodulator can achieve the maximum possible diversity, regardless of the underlying constellations. Its error performance tightly bounds that of maximum-likelihood (ML) demodulation which probably quantifies the diversity gain of ML detection with DF relaying. Simulations corroborate the analysis and compare performance of the novel decoder with existing diversity-achieving strategies, including analog amplify-and-forward and selective relaying.
T. Wang and G. B. Giannakis are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA.
A. Cano is with TSC Area, Rey Juan Carlos University, 28943 Fuenlabrada (Madrid), Spain.
J. N. Laneman is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.894083
Performance Analysis for LDPC-Coded Modulation in MIMO Multiple-Access Systems
Jianming Wu and Heung-No Lee
Abstract—We consider a low-density parity-check (LDPC)-coded modulation scheme in multi-input multi-output (MIMO) multiple-access systems. The receiver can be regarded as a serially concatenated iterative detection and decoding scheme, where the LDPC decoders perform the role of outer decoder and the multiuser demapper does that of the inner decoder. In this paper, we investigate the performance of the scheme with simulation results and bounds. Union upper bounds are derived, which can be used as additional means to evaluate the performance of the MIMO multiple access system.
The authors are with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh PA 15261 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.894085
Design of Rate-Compatible Irregular Repeat-Accumulate Codes
Guosen Yue, Xiaodong Wang, and Mohammand Madihian
Abstract—We consider the design of efficient rate-compatible (RC) irregular repeat-accumulate (IRA) codes over a wide code-rate range. The goal is to provide a family of RC codes to achieve high throughput in hybrid automatic repeat request (ARQ) scheme for highspeed data packet wireless systems. As a subclass of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, IRA codes have an extremely simple encoder and a low-complexity decoder, while providing capacity-approaching performance. We focus on a hybrid design method which employs both puncturing and extending. We propose a simple puncturing method based on minimizing the maximal recoverable step of the punctured nodes. We also propose a new extending scheme for IRA codes by introducing the degree-1 parity bits for the lower rate codes, and obtaining the optimal proportions of extended nodes through density evolution analysis. The throughput performance of the designed RC-IRA codes in hybrid ARQ is evaluated for both additive white Gaussian noise and block fading channels. Simulation results demonstrate that on designed RC codes offer good error-correction performance over a wide rate range and provide high throughput, especially in the high and low signal-to-noise ratio regions.
G. Yue and M. Madihian are with NEC Laboratories America, Princeton, NJ 08540 USA.
X. Wang is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.894086

0090-6778/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 01:47:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

