1510

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

[2] ——, “On the Voronoi neighbors ratio for binary linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 3064–3072, Nov. 1998.
[3] A. Ashikmin and A. Barg, “Minimal vectors in linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 7, pp. 2010–2017, Nov. 1998.
[4] E. R. Berlekamp, “The technology of error correction codes,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 564–593, May 1980.
[5] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding,” in Proc. 1993 IEEE Int. Conf. Communications (ICC’93), Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[6] D. Divsalar, A simple tight bound on error probablity of block codes with applications to turbo codes NASA, JPL, Pasadena, CA, USA, TMO Progr. Rep. 42–139, Nov. 1999.
[7] T. M. Duman and M. Salehi, “New performance bounds for turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 717–723, Jun. 1998.
[8] T. M. Duman, “Turbo codes and turbo coded modulation systems: Analysis and performance bounds,” Ph.D. dissertation, Elect. Comput. Eng. Dept., Northeastern Univ., Boston, MA, May 1998.
[9] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[10] ——, “A simple derivation of the coding theorem and some applications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-11, no. 1, pp. 3–18, Jan. 1965.
[11] H. Herzberg and G. Poltyrev, “Techniques of bounding the probability of decoding error for block modulation structures,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
M Theory, vol. 40, no. 3, pp. 903–911, May 1994.
[12] ——, “The error probability of -ary PSK block coded modulation schemes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 4, pp. 427–433, Apr. 1996.
[13] C. H. Hsu and A. Anastasopoulos, “Capacity-achieving codes with bounded graphical complexity on noisy channels,” in Proce. 43rd Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Sep. 2005, pp. 1825–1834.
[14] G. Miller and D. Burshtein, “Bounds on the ML decoding error probability of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2696–2710, Nov. 2001.
[15] G. Poltyrev, “Bounds on the decoding error probability of linear binary codes via their spectra,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 1284–1292, Jul. 1994.
[16] I. Sason and S. Shamai (Shitz), “Improved upper bounds on the ML decoding error probability of parallel and serial concatenated turbo codes via their ensemble distance spectrum,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 46, no. 1, pp. 24–47, Jan. 2000.
[17] ——, “On improved bounds on decoding error probability of block codes over interleaved fading channels, with applications to turbo-like codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 2275–2299, Sep. 2001.
[18] ——, “Bounds on the error probability of ML decoding for block and turbo-block codes,” Ann. Telecommun., vol. 54, no. 3–4, pp. 183–200, Mar./Apr. 1999.
[19] I. Sason and R. Urbanke, “Parity-check density versus performance of binary linear block codes over memoryless symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 1611–1635, Jul. 2003.
[20] I. Sason and S. Shamai (Shitz), “Performance analysis of linear codes under maximum-likelihood decoding: A tutorial,” in Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory. Delft, The Netherlands: NOW, Jul. 2006, vol. 3, no. 1–2, pp. 1–225.
[21] N. Shulman and M. Feder, “Random coding techniques for nonrandom codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2101–2104, Sep. 1999.
[22] S. Shamai (Shitz) and I. Sason, “Variations on the Gallager bounds, connections, and applications,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 12, pp. 3029–3051, Dec. 2002.
[23] E. Soljanin and R. Urbanke, On the Performance of Recursive Decoding Schemes, Bell Labs., 1996, Tech. Rep.
[24] M. Twitto and I. Sason, “On the error exponents of some improved tangential-sphere bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 3, pp. 1196–1210, Mar. 2007.
[25] K. Yasunaga and T. Fujiwara, “Determination of the local weight distribution of binary linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 10, pp. 4444–4454, Oct. 2006.

Results on the Improved Decoding Algorithm for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Over the Binary Erasure Channel
Badri N. Vellambi, Student Member, IEEE, and Faramarz Fekri, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—In this correspondence, we first investigate some analytical aspects of the recently proposed improved decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over the binary erasure channel (BEC). We derive a necessary and sufficient condition for the improved decoding algorithm to successfully complete decoding when the decoder is initialized to guess a predetermined number of guesses after the standard message-passing terminates at a stopping set. Furthermore, we present improved bounds on the number of bits to be guessed for successful completion of the decoding process when a stopping set is encountered. Under suitable conditions, we derive a lower bound on the number of iterations to be performed for complete decoding of the stopping set. We then present a superior, novel improved decoding algorithm for LDPC codes over the binary erasure channel (BEC). The proposed algorithm combines the observation that a considerable fraction of unsatisfied check nodes in the neighborhood of a stopping set are of degree two, and the concept of guessing bits to perform simple and intuitive graph-theoretic manipulations on the Tanner graph. The proposed decoding algorithm has a complexity similar to previous improved decoding algorithms. Finally, we present simulation results of short-length codes over BEC that demonstrate the superiority of our algorithm over previous improved decoding algorithms for a wide range of bit error rates.
Index Terms—Connected component, depth-first search, graph contraction, improved decoding algorithm, induced subgraph, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, message passing decoder, valency.
I. INTRODUCTION
The decoding of LDPC codes over BEC using the iterative Message Passing (MP) algorithm has been studied extensively [1]–[6]. It is well known that an maximum likelihood-decodable (ML-decodable) received word may not be MP-decodable due to the presence of stopping sets. This makes the MP decoder suboptimal and inferior to the ML decoder. The difference in the performances of the ML and MP decoders is pronounced for finite-length codes whereas in the asymptotic case, the question of existence of capacity-achieving sequences even under MP decoding has been answered in the affirmative [3]. Combinatorial analysis of the MP decoder for finite-length LDPC codes and the design of finite-length codes were introduced by Di et al. [4]. Alternative approaches of improving decoding algorithms for various memoryless input–output symmetric channels have also been studied [7]–[11].
In this correspondence, we study some theoretical aspects of stopping sets to gain insight into the improved decoding algorithm proposed by Hossein et al. [7]. We use the fact that for every stopping set, there exists a minimal subset of vertices with the knowledge of which, the
Manuscript received May 19, 2005; revised August 5, 2006. The material is in this correspondence was presented in part at the Forty-Second Annual Allerton Conference on Communications and Control, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2004. This material was based upon the work supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-0430964.
The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0250 USA (e-mail: vrbadri@ece.gatech.edu).
Communicated by Ø. Ytrehus, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of Figures 3, 4, 6, and 7 are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2007.892812

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:33:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

1511

TABLE I NOTATION OF ENSEMBLES USED IN THIS PAPER

form the intuitive foundation of our proposed algorithm. We then introduce the algorithm and make an assessment of the running time of the same. In Section IV, we present results of our simulations and compare our results with existing results of relevance. In Section V, we conclude our correspondence.

II. IMPROVED DECODING AND STOPPING SETS

A. Improved Decoding

The iterative MP algorithm of LDPC codes over BEC reduces simply

to the following. Each bit node sends on each of its incident edge, its

bit value or an erasure, as the case may be. On receipt of these mes-

decoding can be completed to derive a necessary and sufficient condition for the improved decoding to complete decoding successfully. Using this condition, we obtain a structural categorization of the stop-

sages, each check node c sends back on each of its incident edges e,
the XOR-ed value of the message4s received4on all edges incident on c
other than e (using the rule  + 0 = ;  + 1 = ). If any of those values

ping sets that can be decoded successfully (by the improved decoding is an erasure, using the aforementioned rule, an erasure is reported on

algorithm) based on the size of the aforementioned minimal subset. Fi- the edge by the check node. When a neighboring check node replies to

nally, we provide upper and lower bounds for the size of this minimal a node with a binary value, the bit node updates its bit value to the same.

subset.

These iterations continue until all the check nodes know the values of

The improved decoding algorithm introduced in [7] uses all its neighboring bit nodes or if the set of unknown bits is a stopping

bit-guessing combined with message passing to greatly improve set, in which case the decoder reaches a deadlock. This stopping set

the performance of codes by several orders of magnitude. However, was shown to be the unique maximal stopping set contained in the set

the improvement in performance by using the improved decoding of erasures in the received codeword [4].

algorithm in [7] for certain ensembles such as the regular and near-reg- In the first half of this paper, we will be concerned with the former

ular ones (ensembles where the two bit nodes or two check nodes have of the two improved decoding algorithms (Algorithm A) proposed in

degrees differing by at most one) is not much. This could possibly be [7]. Algorithm A uses random bit-guessing after the message passing

attributed to the naïve criteria employed for guessing bits. Later in this fails to decode the received codeword to improve the performance.

correspondence, we fuse certain concepts of their algorithm with our Algorithm A is the same as MP decoding when the maximal stop-

observations to derive a new rule for guessing bits and to introduce a ping set contained in the set of erasures is, trivially, the empty set.

novel improved decoding algorithm that outperforms their algorithm When that is not the case, the MP decoder terminates at the maximal

even with a smaller number of guesses.

stopping set whereas decoding continues therefrom when Algorithm

2 f g Throughout
nologies. First,

this for

paper, z,

we we

use the let (z)+

f=o4llomwaixngzn;o0ta.tiBonysaagnrdapther,mwie-

mean a simple graph (i.e., a multigraph with no self-loops and no par-

 allel edges). For a subset A of the vertex set V (G); NG(A) is the set of
all neighbors of A in G. For a graph G; A V (G); G[A] represents

the subgraph of G that is induced by the vertices of A (i.e., the graph

2 2 \ wvGi[tAh]Vvies(rGstea0xi)d;s@teoG t bAe(vag)nedniseertdhagteeeddsebegytre(AAe.oFfovrAai)nsuthbEegrg)a.rpaAhplhsGoG0, os0u.f cGh

a sub-graph and a vertex

For a Tanner graph G with bit and check vertex sets V and C, re-

spectively, we define C2(G) to be the set of bivalent check nodes (i.e.,

check nodes of degree 2) in G and denote dc and dv to be the

maximum degree of a check node and bit node in G, respectively. By

f g contraction of a
the operation of

pair of vertices deriving a graph

Gu;0vbyocfoallagprsaipnhg

G(V; E), we mean the pair of vertices

into one single vertex and deleting any parallel pair of edges formed

thereby. A contraction of a bigger subset of vertices is defined induc-

tively. For a stopping set S (see [4] for a definition) of a code with

A chooses an unknown variable node at random and guesses its value
f g randomly and equiprobably from GF(2)(= 0; 1 ). It then restarts the
message-passing with the new guessed value until it either completes or stagnates at a smaller stopping set or reaches a contradiction. If it stagnates with no contradictions, then a new bit node is picked and its value is then guessed and the message passing is recommenced. If the decoder finds a check node that cannot be satisfied (i.e., the check node is contradicted), then the value of the guessed bit is flipped and the procedure of message-passing is restarted. This whole process of guessing and message-passing is continued until a pre-determined g bits are guessed and no check node is contradicted or if the decoding is completed. We declare a decoding failure if we guess g bits and reach no contradiction but have bits whose values are yet unknown. After g guesses, if we reach a contradiction, then we try a different pattern for the chosen g bits and start the message-passing afresh. In this paper, we are primarily interested in characterizing the stopping sets based on the number of guessed bits and in deriving bounds for the minimum number of guesses to be made to complete the decoding process.

parity-check matrix H, we denote HS to be the parity-check matrix formed by the columns of H corresponding to the elements of S in the B. Existence of Subsets of Stopping Sets That Complete Decoding

same order as in H.
2 We let 1l(n ;n ) to be the n1 n2 matrix with all-one entries. We 2 denote 0n2m and 0n to be all-zero matrices of dimensions n m and 2 2 n n, respectively. Also, In denotes the n n identity matrix. For  matrices A; B, we notate A B if A is a row and/or a column permu-

The expected complexity of Algorithm A can be seen to grow exponentially with the maximum number of guesses (O(2gn)) when the length of the code n is kept fixed. Therefore, it is mandatory that we keep g as small as possible. With this as our main incentive, we investigate the problem of characterizing stopping sets that can be completely

f g tation of B. We let n to be the set of all permutations of the elements decoded with the knowledge of g bits. Without loss of generality, we
of the set 1; 2; . . . ; n . Finally, the codes used in this correspondence may also assume, henceforth, that by a stopping set we mean an ML-de-

are notated as in Table I. The organization of this correspondence is as follows. In the fol-
lowing section, we analyze the improved decoding algorithm [9] and provide a characterization of the stopping sets that can be decoded

codable stopping set.
6 ;  otifteIstigzcreaanpnhb3eGe>)a,sti0hlyesrsuehcoehxwtinhstastthaathtmefoiMnriemPvuearmlygosnrtuoitmphpmbienrdginss3seotalSvned=sa(dsee(tcoofBda3ebs)iptahSre-

using this algorithm. In Section III, we describe our observations that stopping set in finite number of iterations. Therefore, every stopping

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:33:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

Fig. 1. A simple example to illustrate the concept of free set and free number.
F F set S has a minimum number S and a set BS of size S such that
the knowledge of the bits in BS is sufficient to complete the process
of decoding. We shall term this minimum number of bits as the “free
F F number” ( S) of S and any set of cardinality S whose knowledge
completes decoding to be a “free set.” Alternatively, we say that a stop-
F  ping set S is “g-solvable” if S g. Similarly, if for a parity equation
of a check node c involving variables u1; . . . ; un, all but one variable uj are known then we can find the value of uj from this check node. When such is the case, we say that the check node c “frees” variable
f g uj (or equivalently, we also say uj is “freed” by c).
As an example, let in the graph given in Fig. 1, S = 2; 3; 4; 5 , be the set of positions of erased bits. Also, let the bits at positions 1; 6 be b1 = b6 = 0. It can be noted that S is a stopping set in G.
F With a little bit of calculation, it can be seen that S = 1 and that f g f g f g BS = 3 or 4 or 5 . This can be mathematically verified in the
following way.

where each submatrix represented by Xi; i = 0; 1; 2; . . . ; t is an arbi-
trary binary matrix of the appropriate size. Proof: Refer to Appendix 1.
Corollary 1: A stopping set S is g-solvable if and only if

HS 

X((n1)0nR0jSj+g)2jSj U(jSj0g)2(jSj0g) X((j2S)j0g)2g

where U is
agonal, and

athneumppaetrrictreisandgeunloatredmbatyriXx w(i)it;hi

an
=

all-one
1; 2 are

(principal) dialmost “don’t

care” binary matrices (i.e., have no algebraic constraints on their struc-

ture except that they must have at least one nonzero entry in each row).
Additionally, if g is the smallest such number, then the bits indexed by the last g columns is a free set.

Also, we see that (2) agrees with the structure prescribed by The-
f g orem 1 and that the stopping set S is indeed 1-solvable and that 5 is

f g a free set of
parameters

tSa.nTdheosriemit=11 .dHoeoswneovtegr ufoarraenatcehe

explicit uniqueness of free set, we can make

the the

characterization canonical by picking the parameters with the property

described in the proof. With the same notations as in (3), one can show
2 f g that in a canonical representation, the submatrix of Xj corresponding
to columns of Is has no all-zero rows whenever j 1; . . . ; t . A similar constraint can be shown to exist for Xt. In such a representation, one can note that the parameter t represents the number of itera-

tions taken to completely recover all the bits of the stopping set when

the bits of the corresponding free set are guessed. The following lemma

makes use of the representation of Theorem 1 to derive a lower bound

on the number of iterations required for complete decoding of stopping

sets.

Since the last two equations are of weight 2 and since they share a vari-
able b5, guessing any one of b3; b4; or b5 renders the vector MP-de-
codable. Hence, we note this stopping set has many free sets. In fact,
it can be easily shown that for a stopping set with free number g, there are at least g + 1 free sets.

F Lemma 1:
polynomial is

Consider
(x) =

anid=L2DPCi

xeni0se1mwbilteh

whose
dv

edge distribution
> 1. Let S be a

stopping set of a code of length n from this ensemble with S = g.

Then the number of iterations t needed to complete the decoding when

the g bits of a free set of S are guessed is at least

C. Matrix Characterization of g-Solvable Stopping Sets

A stopping set S is successfully decoded by the ML decoder if and only if the “residual parity-check matrix” HS (submatrix of H that contains only those columns which correspond to bits of S) has fullrank. We prove an analogous statement for characterizing g-solvability, the only difference being that the condition for g-solvability is much
stronger than that of ML decoding. In this section, we prove the result
that MP decoding completes after g guesses if and only if there exist permutation of rows and columns that endow HS an upper diagonal
structure. The following theorem mathematically characterizes the cri-
teria of g-solvability [12].

Theorem 1: (Matrix characterization theorem for g-solvability)

 Let E be the set of erased bits and S

E be a stopping set

in
9t

a code of length n and
2 2 and s1; . . . ; st

rate R. Then,
s.t. s1 + 1 1 1 +

FS
st =

 jS

j

g if
0g

and and

only

if

t=

j j0 S g dd log(

)+log( log(

jSjg0g

0 0 d 1) log( 01)

) if dv > 2 if dv = 2

j j Proof: Let S0 be a free set of S. Then, S0 = g. From The-

orem 1, we see that there exists an ordering of bit and check nodes that

endows HS the canonical structure described above. As in the proof

of Theorem 1, let us denote the set of bits freed in the ith iteration as

j j Si and denote Si = si. Then by definition, for every bit node in Sj

2 f g with j [ the bit

as

a

1; . . . ;
linear

t , there is a check node that expresses the
combination of the values of bits in the set

vjka0=lu10eSokf.

j j  There are in total at most gdv equations involving bits of S0. Hence,
S1 gdv . For a bit in Sk; k > 1, the aforementioned linear com-

0 bination must involve at least one bit from the set Sk01 else its value
can be found at the end of (k 1)th iteration or earlier contradicting its

placement in Sk. After the kth iteration, the number of equations that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:33:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

1513

 0 involve bits of Sk01 is bounded above by sk01(dv

sk sk01(dv

1). Thus one sees that

0 1). Hence

t

j j 0  S

g=

i v s

gd

i=1

t01 (dv
i=0

0 1)i:

Estimation of t from the above equation then completes the proof.

D. Bounds on the Free Number of Stopping Sets

In this section, we derive a lower and upper bound for the free number of a stopping set of an LDPC Code.
F Lemma 2: (Lower bound for S ) Let S be a stopping set. Then

F  f 2 g [ S G S N S G (1 + ) min @ [

( )](c):c N (S) :

2 Proof: If we are to free the check node c NG(S), then we must

know at least all but one of the neighbors of c that are yet unknown.

f g But the number of unknown neighbors of c is given by @G[S[N S( )](c).
This guarantees the freedom of the nodes in NG( c ) but not neces-

sarily all bits of S. Therefore, to free an unknown bit of S we must
f 2 g0 necessarily know/guess at least min @G[S[N S( )](c):c G N (S) 1

bits which will free an unknown variable via a check node of minimum

[ degree ; yield a

in G[S smaller

stoNpGpi(nSg)s].etFS ur0thsuerchitethraattions

of
S

0messSag. eT-hpearsesfionrge,mtahye

claim follows.

F Lemma 3: (Upper bound for S) Let S be a stopping set from a

code of length n and rate R. Let Z be the number of check nodes c
f g \ ;    1 1 1  G such that N ( c ) S = . Let 0 < w1 w2 w3

f 2 j jg F  j j 0 0 w[n(10R)0Z]
Let l = max

be
i

an

o:rdejir=in1gwojf

the
<

degrees of S . Then

check
S

nodes
S

of
l

G N (S).
1.

Proof: First, we can arrange the rows of HS such that the de-

gree of the check nodes (equivalently, the row sum) decreases as the
row-index increases. We can then group all the all-zero rows of HS at

the top by a simple cyclic permutation. To get an upper bound on the

free number of S, we must ensure that there is a permutation of rows

and a permutation for columns that will guarantee an all-zero triangular

area below a diagonal of HS (Corollary 1). Since the last row of HS

has weight w1, we can find a permutation of columns of HS that clus-

j j 0 ters all the ones to the last w1 columns on the right bottom corner and
therefore we are guaranteed to have a block of S w1 zeros at the

left bottom corner. By a similar argument, we can find a permutation
j j 0 of the first S w1 columns that group all the ones of the penultimate

row to the right. After such a permutation, we are guaranteed that at
j j 0 0 least the first S w1 w2 columns are zeros at this row. Proceeding

similarly, we see that we can order exactly l rows in this fashion. Since

 0 0 each wi
gular block

1; i
of

= 1; . .
at least

.l(;l+[2n1()1zeroRs)cornZe]rewdeastetehethlaetftthbeorettoisma

trianof the

matrix. Finally, a simple permutation of the columns then renders HS

the structure defined in Theorem 1, which then guarantees that S is
j j 0 0 ( S l 1)-solvable.

Fig. 2. A simple example to illustrate the proof of the upper bound on free number.
that we get a triangular area of zeros at the bottom left corner. Then a rearrangement of the columns is done to ensure that the structure is as prescribed in Theorem 1. For this example, we see from Lemma 3 that
F  0 0 l = 2 and S 6 2 1 = 3. Actually, we find that the free number f g of this stopping set is 2 and 3; 6 is a free set.
The upper bounds presented here are superior to that presented in [7], since the latter only uses the information of check nodes with degree 2. Hence, in the case of absence of bivalent check node, the upper bound of [7] equals the size of the stopping set itself. Our bound, on the other hand, can be clearly seen to be superior in such cases. Another important feature of these bounds are that they can be easily computed for any particular stopping set.
 Our bounds seem reasonably tight for codes of small length (n
100). As length increases, we note by simulations that the discrepancy between the actual free number and the bounds seems to increase. The discrepancy between the former upper bound and the actual value of the free number is due to the fact that the proof of Lemma 3 assumes that the position of ones in any two rows from the set of l rows of least weight are pairwise disjoint, which may not be the case in general. In fact, the proof assumes the worst-case scenario. Similar is the case with the proof of the latter upper bound.
III. IMPROVED ALGORITHM
A. Background Facts and Observations
Before we propose our improved algorithm, we discuss two basic observations and related facts associated with MP decoder and LDPC codes that form the basis for our improved decoding algorithm elaborated in the next section.

F Lemma 4: (Upper bound for S) Let S be a stopping set from a

   1 1 1  code of length n and rate R. Let 0 < w1 w2

f 2 be 0 g F  j j 0 0 :

an

oij=rd1ew rinj g<ofnt(h1e

degrees R) .

of variable
Then S

nodes
S

of 0S l

.

w3
Let 1.

0
l

=

wjSj
max i

Proof: The proof is on similar lines as that of Lemma 3.

To illustrate the idea in the proof of Lemma 3, consider HS as given

below in Fig. 2 where w1 = w2 = w3 = 2; w4 = 3; w5 = 4; w6 =

6. The proof of the lemma can be broken down exactly into three

0!  andLefm:2mVa 5:

For2aV

code of size n, represent the

let V represent the set mapping of each A

of

bit
V

nodes to the

unique maximal stopping set contained in it (assuming that the bits

N f  j j 6 ;g   coirr=4espoSndingV

to nodes in A are
: S = i; f (S) =

erased). Let . Then

for

each

0

i

n;

Z 2N

j ji f (Z ) jNij


Z

2N

j j 0i f (Z 1) jNi01j

8 2 f g i 2; . . . ; n : (4)

steps that are outlined in the Fig. 2. First, the rows are arranged in de-

Proof: Refer to Appendix II

creasing order of weights, which can be done in multiple ways. Then The first observation that we would like to highlight is given by Ob-

the columns are clustered one by one from the last to the first row so servation 1 as follows.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:33:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1514

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

Fig. 3. The variation of expected size of stopping sets given that the stopping
set is nonempty, as a function of the channel erasure probability for codes from several ensembles, each of length 1000.

Fig. 4. Discretized probability distribution of the fraction of check nodes that
are bivalent for a code of length 1000 from ensemble C1 at a bit error rate of 10 .

Observation 1: Consider a code C of length n. Let this code be used over a BEC of erasure probability . Let S be the random variable representing the stopping set after decoding the random received words using MP decoder. Then

TABLE II RATIO OF BIVALENT CHECK NODES TO UNSATISFIED CHECK NODES FOR
VARIOUS ENSEMBLES

j jjj j g() = E[ S S > 0]

2 is a nondecreasing function of  (0; 1). S Proof: Let f be as defined in Lemma 5. Also, let denote the
set of stopping sets of the code and let X be the random variable rep-
resenting the set of erasures in the word received at the output of the
j j BEC with erasure probability . Also, let k = minS2S S . Then one
can show that

j jj 6 ; g() = E[ f (X) f (X) = ]

= =

j j 0 S2Snf;g S 0 S2Snf;g 0 i k Mii(1 0 i k mii(1

T2T))f2nn0f0ii(S=()S)jTjjTii(j1(kk1M mii)hhn)ii0n((j0T))jjT j

the MP decoder does not complete decoding, as a function of channel erasure probabilities for codes of length 1000 from ensembles C1, C2, and C3. At probability of 0.37, C3 exhibits very little number of erasures after decoding in comparison to ensemble C1 and C2. Thus we

0 where
hi ()

=4forei(a1ch

i

= k; .
)n0i

. . ; n; Mi;
appears in

mi
the

are the number numerator and

of times the term denominator, re-

spectively. Then, one sees that

g0() =

  0 M
n i>j k m

M m

mimj hi()hj()

0 (1 )

2
i k mihi()

(5)

 Finally, one   n i > j

can use the k to show

einxepqliucailtiltyythfraotmthLe edmermivaat5ivtehgat0

M m

M m

for

is nonnegative

can conclude that, unlike ensembles C1 and C2, there are not very many “small” stopping sets in the distribution of stopping sets of ensemble C3. Another important observation of stopping sets of MP decoding on LDPC ensembles is the following.

rateOsbosfearbvaotuito1n020:1

In or

a typical stopping set of LDPC codes at bit smaller, bivalent check nodes (C2(NG(S))

error form

a considerable fraction of the unsatisfied check nodes (NG(S)).

Fig. 4 illustrates the distribution of the fraction of bivalent check nodes for a code of length 1000 from ensemble C1 when the channel

in (0; 1). Intuitively, Observation 1 reveals that, on the average, the probability
of incomplete decoding and the sizes of the stopping sets when the de-

aerbasituererrporrorbaatebioliftyappr=ox0im:4a2te. lAy t100=3,

0:38, where the code the expected fraction

exhibits of biva-

lent check nodes increases to about 0:61 (with 2 = 0:003). Table II

coder cannot decode the received word both decrease as the channel provides the ratio of bivalent check nodes to the number of unsatis-

erasure probability is decreased. However, it tive information regarding the distribution of

tihsepsotsospibpliengtosegtestfqroumaligta0-,

fied check nodes for various ensembles at different bit error rates. A qualitative explanation to the above observation, at least for regular en-

the derivative of the function g defined in Lemma 1. As an illustration, sembles, can be given thus. The combinatorial problem of estimating

Fig. 3 gives the variation of the expected size of stopping sets given that the number of binary matrices with a given row and column sums was

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:33:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

1515

( ) studied in [13]–[15]. In [14], it was shown that the number M r; c of = ( . . . ) 2 m n binary matrices with row sum vector r r1; r2; ; rm and = ( . . . ) column sum vector c c1; c2; ; cn is given by

Maximize

id=1

~(ri)

log(

dc i

)

subject

to

the

following:

M(r; c) 

mi=1

rmki=! 1

rk !
jn=1

cj

!

e01

where

A: B: C: D:

0i~ii~(r~~1(r)i(r(r)ii=))==011d;c i = 0; 2; . . . ; dc

(11)

1=2

im=1 r2i
im=1 ri

nj=1 c2j
jn=1 cj

:

Consider a regular ensemble of LDPC codes of length n and rate R

whose degree distributions are such that parity-check matrices of codes

from this ensemble have a row sum vector r (unique up to a permu-

= 1l tation) = 1l = r dc

and a column sum
(1;(10R)n)) where

dvcec4tor1cd0R

.

dv (1;n)
Consider

(and a row-sum of a code from this en-

semble. Suppose that after decoding a codeword from this code, one

arrives at a stopping set of size n. By regularity, one can assume that

the stopping set corresponds to the first n vertices. Then one sees that

P[row sum of HS = r0jjSj = n]

/ M r0; dv1l(1;n)) M dc1l(1;(10R)n)

0r0; dv1(1l;n0n)

 / /

[[dvn!]ed0vn]1!e00i11ri0! [dv[!(](1100)n)ndjv(]d!ec001rj0 )!

i(ri0)!(dc 0 ri0)!

i

dric0

=
i=0;2;...d

dc (10R)n~ i

(6) (7) (8)

~ The optimal node degree distribution polynomial r can be shown
to be the following:

~r (x) =

x1b0c[2d+e +2

x2
(de

0

)x]

20+2 x + 102(31x0R+)2nx

iiff(2jn2dv)&( < 2)
otherwise

= where we have  4 dc. Moreover, it can also be shown that for any

~ or0t0he(ur nnioqduee

degree distribution r
up to a permutation)

corresponding to a row-sum vector

P [row P [row

sum sum

of of

HS HS

= r00jjSj = r03jjSj

= n] = n]



0n

~ 0~

2 (0 1) ~ ~ where 
cient of xi

in

;
the

depends only on dc and (ri); (ri) denote the
respective node degree distributions. In other

(12) coeffiwords,

~ row-sum vectors that are very different from r become rarer as n be-

~ comes large since they have a probability that is exponentially smaller
than that of r .

One notes from Observation 1 that as channel erasure probability

( [ = ]) j 6 ; dEecrjeSnajseSs, = [ 2] = [ ] b c creases, 

the expectation of the fractional size of the stopping

4

jSj
n

decreases. Equivalently,
decreases and hence P

as the channel erasure
10dR < P  <

set de-
2
d

increases. When this probability becomes reasonably high, it can be

0 2 . . . = 1 2 . . . = ~ f g 2 twhhe;efrre;actthieo;ndccoolfufrmoornwisveinctoHr;Sr;0thiast;shRuabvnjeeacant drtoowt-hiserui0mconeqsturaanlidntvtos

aitn.hdaAtlsr(roii0),

is in

/ the above equations, we have used to denote the term on the left is

directly proportional to tion being independent

tohfero0n. eHoenret,hwe reigwhot uwldithlitkheetcoornesittaenrattoeftphraotpoour-r

( ) definition of an LDPC ensemble described by a pair of degree distribu-
tion ;  differs from that of [1] in that we consider only the simple

graphs visible

from from

the (6)

seinnsceemwbeleucseonthsterupcrotebdabbiylitthyees0o1ckwethtiecchhrneipqruees.eTnthsisthies

probability that a random code from the standard LDPC ensemble has

a Tanner graph that is simple, i.e., no parallel edges between nodes.

Also, the approximation simplifying (7) to (8), although, is not strictly

10val3id),

but is since

acceptable

for

codes

of

moderate

lengths

(of

the

order

of

max 0; dc20 1  11  (dv 0 1)2(dc 0 1) (9)

seen from the optimal solution of (11) and from (12) that a linear fraction of bivalent check nodes can be expected. Thus, at lower bit error rates bivalent check nodes start to appear and become more predominant in the stopping sets. In Section III-B, we will see that this guaranteed presence of bivalent check nodes will be exploited in our proposed algorithm to attain huge improvement over MP algorithm.
For irregular ensembles, we expect a similar but more detailed argument justifying the observation. This above explanation for finitelength codes can be extended to the asymptotic case, using techniques developed in [16], [17] to quantify the asymptotic existence of bivalent check nodes in stopping sets for regular and left-regular ensembles.
( ) Theorem 2: Consider the dv; dc regular LDPC ensemble. For a
stopping set S, let TS denote the ratio of number of bivalent check
((0 1 ( () )) ) (0 )(0 1 ) f 2g j 0 j 2 2 0 \ gnron3adkpehsko2fC; th2seuNccddhoGdtheSaa.ntTdfhoaertnsaot,nrtfiyhcoetrlyneauincmhcbree;arsoi3nfg;chs;eeqckueenqcddueaotifopnossi,inttihvtheeerienTteaexnginesertssr

and

kl!im1 P[TS  jjSj = nk] = 0

max 0; (1 0 2)dc 0 1

 12  (dv 0 1)2(dc 0 1): (10)

Moreover, the rate of convergence of the above probability to zero is exponential in the size of the code.

The approximation simplifies (7) to a mathematically tractable term in (8) from which qualitative inferences can be drawn. To find the most likely row-sum vector given the stopping set size, one has to maximize the term in (8) over all valid row-sums, yielding following optimization problem.

Proof: Refer to Appendix III.

( ) = xd

T0h1eoarnedmd3e:siCgnonrasitdeeRr .thFeolreaft-srteogpuplianrgLsDetPSC,

ensemble with  x let TS denote the ratio

(j ( ( ))j) of number of bivalent check nodes C2 NG S to the number of

2 check equations in the Tanner graph of the code. Then, for each 

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:33:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

0 \ 2 0 (0; 1 R) , there exists 3 f g 2 sequence of positive integers nk

(0; k2

1

R) and a strictly such that for any 

inc(r0e;asi3n)g

or more) by their representative bits and accordingly changing the constant that the check variables add up to. What this replacement amounts

kl!im1 P [TS  jjSj = nk] = 0

to is the parallel contraction of bit nodes of each connected component
[ [ of G[S C2(G[S NG(S)])] to its corresponding representative to  construct the graph G= . As mentioned above, while effecting the
contraction, care must be taken for each check node to update the con-

Moreover, the rate of convergence of the above probability to zero is exponential in the size of the code.
Proof: The proof is an obvious generalization of that of Theorem 2 (refer to Appendix III) using ideas for irregular ensembles presented in [17].
In other words, for codes of long lengths, almost all stopping sets of size linear in the codelength have a sizeable fraction of bivalent unsatisfied check nodes after the termination of message-passing.

stants that the equation adds up to. Moreover, by definition of contrac-

tion, we delete all pairs of edges between a pair of nodes in the con-

tracted graph which ensures that at the end of contraction, the degrees

of the check nodes that remain are smaller than or equal to their respec-

tive degrees before contraction. In the example of Fig. 5, it can be seen

that the stopping set of eight bits is reduced to a Tanner graph of three

bit and check nodes.

The advantage recovers few bits.

of this graph For example,

contraction at a BER of

1is00th2a,to, naltmheosatvearlwagaey,s8,

one and

B. The Proposed Algorithm

15 representative bits get recovered (by just contraction and without any guessing) for codes of length 1000 from ensembles C1 and C3,

In Section III-A, we noted that the average size of stopping sets ob- respectively. Here, it should be noted that the actual number of bits

tained when the message passing decoder fails decreases monotoni- that are released are much more. The strength of the algorithm lies in

cally with the channel erasure probability. We also noted by simula- the contraction stage which effects the recovery of certain bits. These

tions erate

that typical stopping sets of bit error rates of smaller than

1L0D0P1Ccoenntsaeinmabrleesasoobntaabinlyedhiagthmfroadc--

tion of bivalent check nodes (Observation 2). Combining these two ob-

recovered bits can then be used to carry out another series of mes-
sage passing. This process of graph contraction, bit recovery and mes-
sage-passing can be repeated a predetermined number (J) of times to

servations, we note that at lower channel erasure probabilities, typical achieve a suitable gain margin in the performance. In the example of
stopping sets have a sizeable fraction of bivalent check nodes among Fig. 5, it can be seen that after contraction, one recovers the bit br the unsatisfied ones. Since for a bivalent check node, the knowledge to be 0 from the check node e. Further iterations of message-passing

of one node implies the knowledge of the other, it is possible to just using this recovered bit results in complete decoding of this stopping

keep one of the two and replace the other completely by the former bit set. The values of all the bits found thereby is given in the last graph of

variable. This possibility of bit replacement is taken full advantage of Fig. 5.

in the proposed algorithm.

However, at high BERs, the number of recovered bits rapidly de-

Since the neighborhood of a typical stopping set after message-passing contains a considerable fraction of bivalent unsatisfied
 check nodes, one can make use of the equivalence relation on the
set of bit nodes in the stopping set S defined as follows:
v1  v2 () v1; v2 belong to the same component of G[S [ C2(G[S [ NG(S)])]:
The rationale behind using this equivalence is the following. Any two nodes in an equivalence class is connected by a path wherein each check

crease. This being detrimental to the performance of the decoder, one
can resort to guessing a modest number N (say, 1 or 2) of bits just at
the first round of contraction to start the recovery process. The bits can
be chosen to be those corresponding to the N largest components in
[ [ G[S C2(G[S NG(S)])]. Thus, the role of contraction is two-
fold—first to release some bit nodes and next to provide a suitable rule
for guessing bits. Also, this bit-guessing can be efficiently implemented
by maintaining a binary N -tuple for each bit node which represents the relationship between the bit node and the N chosen bits and proceeding
in lines similar to Algorithm C described in [7].

node that the path traverses through is bivalent. Thus, it follows that the knowledge of a bit in an equivalence class implies the knowledge Algorithm 1: Contraction-Based Message Passing (CMP) Algorithm

of all the bits in the equivalence class after a series of message-passing.
E E This enables the decoder to pick a representative bit node rE from each
equivalence class and represent every other bit node in the class as
8 8 either rE 1 or rE 0 as the case may be. As an example, consider

Require: Tanner Graph G Number of Contractions J

the stopping set presented in Fig. 5. The dotted lines tagged to each
check node represents the value to which the neighbors of the check
[ [ nodes add up. The second graph G[S C2(G[S NG(S)])] is the
induced subgraph generated by the stopping set and all neighboring
bivalent check nodes. This induced subgraph has three components and
the representative for each component is denoted by the emboldened
variables br ; i = 1; 2; 3. As mentioned before, the values of every

Number of initial guesses to start initial commencement N

1: Input: received word c. 2: Decode: c using MP decoder to obtain the stopping set S.
3: if jSj = 0 then

4:

Output the decoded word and go to 30.

other bit (with respect to the representative bit) in the stopping set is
determined by the relation defined by the check nodes lying in a path
between the two nodes in their corresponding component.
[ [ Ascertaining the components of G[S C2(G[S NG(S)])], choos-
ing a representative for each component and finding the size of each

[ [ 5:
6:

end if Construct graph

G0

=

G[S

C2(G[S

NG(S)])] from the

7:

residual Perform

Tanner a DFS

graph. algorithm

on

G0

to extract components (and their

sizes), representative of each component and dependency of

component can be all achieved in a parallel fashion by employing a

every node on the representative of the component that it lies in.

depth-first search (DFS) algorithm [18] on the Tanner graph generated by the stopping set and its neighboring bivalent check nodes. Such a representation for all bits in terms of their representatives is lossless and hence one can replace the bits in every check equation (of weight 3

8: 9:

PrCoefiopcGnrket0rNsaeacnntbtdaitthttihenvaoebtdinateorsnedooendfsoeGttso0uo0onftbihvrtaeaatslieinrdenuGpt ari0eln0 s.geGrna0tp0 .thheprleasrgerevsitnNg

only the components

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:33:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

1517

Fig. 5. Example illustrating the proposed improved decoding algorithm.

10: 11:

Guess if Guess

=1,2RNouthnedn

J.

auxiliary matrix or adding only check nodes whose degree is bounded above by a fixed integer. Finally, this auxiliary matrix can be appended

12:

go to 29.

to the original parity check matrix to reduce further the stopping set

13: end if

and to increase the number of bivalent check nodes. The proposed al-

14: Guess for each of the chosen N bits, a binary pattern (that is not

+1 previously guessed) and Guess Guess .

01 15:
16:

Round Perform

Round message

. passing

on

00
G

.

gorithm with two parameters denoted by J; N in the discussion above is presented in Algorithm 1.
We would like to mention that although our observations hold true for regular and irregular ensembles alike, all our analytical claims have

17: if a contradiction is reached then

18:

J Round and go to 11.

been shown only for regular ensembles. We hope their extension to all LDPC ensembles will hold in a similar fashion. Finally, we would like

j j = 0 19:
20: 21:

end if
iOf bS ta0in

smaller stopping then

set

S0.

to add that based on our observations, we have altered the messagepassing decoder to perform intuitively obvious modifications (such as graph contraction) to enhance the performance of the decoder. Since

22: go to 28.

most of the steps are heuristic, this algorithm has a lot of scope for

23: end if
24: if Round = 0 then

minor modifications that can be specifically tailored to specific codes before implementation.

25:

go to 11.

26: end if 27: Set S

0
S

and

do

steps

3

through

6

and

go

to

15.

28: Decode the nonrepresentative bits from their respective

representatives by using the stored dependencies and output the

decoded word and go to 30.

29: output “Decoding Faliure”.

30: Stop.

C. Running Time Estimate of the CMP Algorithm
Let S denote the stopping set output by the MP decoder. Then with the help of the DFS algorithm, one can identify the components, choose the component representatives, identify the dependency of each bit nodes to its component’s representative, and identify the sizes of com-
ponents in  (2dv + 3)jSj operations. The operation of contrac-
tion can be done by contracting the neighbors of each check node

Furthermore, the improvement can be increased by appending to the parity-check an auxiliary parity check matrix whose rows are equa-
4 tions generated by the sum of check nodes of cycles of length and 6 in the original Tanner graph. In some ensembles (e.g., C3), the av6 erage number of cycles of length may be large. In such cases, one

with same representative, one after another. This can be achieved in

dc
( ) nR

operations. The message passing at each step can be done

2( 2 (j j + )) in Lmax S nR computations when we restrict the maximum

2 number of
bits before

decoder iterations graph contraction

to Lmax. Finally, will take, on the

an initial average,

gNu0es1s

of N guess

may choose to consider either fixing an upper bound on the size of the patterns before the stopping set will be decoded and J iterations of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:33:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1518

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

recovery, contraction and MP stages further result in a J -fold increase

in the number of computations. Collectively, we note that the average

estimated running time for a stopping set of size jSj is of the order of

J2N01 (2dv

+ 3) + 2dc jSj nR

+ ( + ) Lmax jSj nR

:

Furthermore, the exponential dependence on N can be reduced to a

quadratic dependence by the same idea as that proposed in [7]. How-

ever, as our results in the next section show, very small values of J; N
3 2 such as , , respectively, suffice to outperform the results of [7]. On

2(2 ) the other
rithm [7]

hwainthd,Nth0egcuoemsspelsexisity

of

Nthe0p1rLevmiaoxujsSijm.pArosvwede

decoding algoshall be seeing

in the next section, our algorithm has an average running time similar

to that of the improved decoding algorithm since for similar perfor-

mances, our algorithm needs fewer guesses. In other words, we obtain

much gain in performance by guessing fewer bits and substituting the

computations taken up by few guesses by those of contraction and re-

covery stages. In fact, by compressing the Tanner graph, one recovers

not only some bits, but also gains insight as to which bits when guessed

dissolves the stopping set faster.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS Firstly, we would like to mention that all decoding algorithms,

Fig. 6. The performance of a code of length 1000 from ensemble C1 under message passing algorithm, CMP algorithm with J = 3; N = 2 and improved decoding algorithm [7] with g = 6.

whose results we provide in this section were simulated using the

extended parity-check matrix that was formed after appending the

auxiliary parity-check equations (as described in Section III-B) to

the original parity-check matrix. This greatly increases the amount

10 oCf1caotnatrBacEtiRonofduri0n2g

the first stage. For example, for the ensemble under MP decoding, using this auxiliary matrix

30 we generate an additional bivalent check nodes, which in turn

9 35 increases the average number of recovered bits from to about . In

case of ensemble C3 at the same BER, appending auxiliary matrix has

the effect of increasing the number of recovered bits from an average
from 12 to 55.

Although the CMP algorithm is defined for all pairs of integers J; N ,

= 3 in practice, a reasonable choice for these parameters is J

and

= 2 1000 N

when codes of length

are used. For this choice of pa-

10 rameters,
a BER of

the

0im2,poleumr eanlgtaotriiothnmis

very efficient and takes about 42%,

fast. 33%

For example at more time, on

the average, than the standard message passing algorithm for decoding

1000 codewords of length

from ensembles C1, C3, respectively. The

above choice of parameters are also sufficient to provide improvement

of several orders of magnitude as is shown in the following figures.

1000 Fig. 6 provides the performance of a code of length

from

(3 6) the regular ; ensemble under three algorithms: standard MP

algorithm, the improved decoding algorithm (Algorithm C) using six

= 3 guesses [7], and our proposed algorithm with parameters J

;

= 2 N

. All the algorithms were simulated using the parity check

matrix appended with the auxiliary parity check matrix formed with
4 6 equations of check nodes in cycles of length and . Clearly, our

10 10 patroapoBsEedRalogforith0m1.pArotvaideBsEaRn iOmfprov0em4,eonut rofaalgnoorridthemr opf rmovagidneistuadne

improvement of more than two orders of magnitude over the standard

message-passing decoder, an order of magnitude more than Algorithm

C proposed by Hossein et al. Moreover, the expected running time of
= 6 our proposed algorithm and Algorithm C (with gmax ) are almost

the same.
1000 Fig. 7 shows the performance of a code of length from the ir-

Fig. 7. The performance of a code of length 1000 from ensemble C3 under message passing algorithm, CMP algorithm with J = 3; N = 2 and Algorithm C [7] with g = 6.
decoder). Although the performance for this code under our algorithm provides marginal gain over the performance of Algorithm C, it should be noted that our algorithm makes one-third the number of guesses as the other. Also to be noted is the fact that our algorithm performs much
0 05 better than Algorithm C even at bit error rates as high as : showing
the superiority of our algorithm over almost all bit error rates of interest.
V. CONCLUSION
We have successfully analyzed the improved decoding algorithm

regular ensemble C3 under the standard MP decoder, Algorithm C and proposed by Hossein et al. to derive necessary and sufficient condi-

our proposed decoding
10 order of magnitude of 10 about three magnitudes

siomcfhpiemrmopvere.omOveeumnrtaealngttoaartiBtahEBmREpRorofovfide0s02m4ao(nardlel

than one provides compar-

tions for g-solvability of stopping sets. Then, lower and upper bounds on the minimum number of guesses required to completely decode a (ML-decodable) stopping set were presented. Specifically, the upper

isons are made with the performance of the standard message-passing bound was noted to be superior to that given by Hossein et al.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:33:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

1519

We then presented some observations regarding the structure of stopping sets that were justified qualitatively and verified by simulations. These observations were exploited to develop a fast improved decoding algorithm over the binary erasure channel that is easily applicable to
acbodleesBEofRasllofleanbgotuhts.1W00e2d, efomrosnusittraabtleedcbhyoicsiemouflpatairoanms etthearts,aot urreaaslgoon--
rithm had an average running time of no more than twice that of the standard MP decoder. We established by simulations that at lower bit error rates, we obtain about three orders of magnitude improvement in certain ensembles. It was also shown by simulations that our proposed algorithm outperforms the present improved decoding algorithm by almost an order of magnitude for regular ensembles even though we use significantly smaller number of guesses. It was verified that in almost all ensembles, our algorithm outperforms that of Hossein et al. even at very high BER’s. Lastly, we would like to add that since the design of finite-length LDPC codes is still an open problem, our proposed algorithm provides an alternative approach to improve the performance of these codes over BEC.
APPENDIX I PROOF OF THEOREM 1
9 2 Let e1; e2; . . . ; ejSj represent the values of the erased bits. Suppose
that HS satisfies the similarity condition. Then  jSj such that

Suppose that we correctly guess the value of the g bits e(jSj0g+1); . . . ; e(jSj) that correspond to the columns of X0.

Then, at the end of the first iteration, we will recover bits indexed

by the columns of Is namely e(jSj0g0s +1); . . . ; e(jSj0g). In

the next iteration, we will identify bits, e(jSj0g0s 0s +1); . . . ;

e(jSj0s 0g). Inductively at the ith iteration we will identify the bits

e(jSj0g0

s

;
+1)

...;

e(jSj0g0

s

;
)

and

all

the

bits

will

be identified in exactly t iterations over and above the iterations of the

standard MP decoder.
Now suppose that the stopping set is g-solvable. Then there exists a free set of size g. Let t denote the number of iterations taken to completely dissolve S. Denote for each i = 1; . . . ; t; Si to be the set of bit nodes that are freed at the completion of the ith iteration. Also, denote S0 to be the set of bit nodes that are guessed. Using an appropriate

column permutation, one can group the bit nodes of each set together

such that the index of a bit freed at a later iteration is lower than that

of one freed in an earlier iteration. Finally, a suitable row permutation

then renders the matrix in the described form.

tvThhr2eeesNestei0tosf1f;ew(dngse2;snNEvGi)b:gvi.nN2thoeNtediti0hre1acgtt;hefde(rgenrwwap;ehnutiss)et:htheweunn2oiotNantiiobogfn;thtfhe(anftoval;lnonwewdi)ngge:

e = (v; w) starts from v and ends in w. Define a capacity function

0! C:EG

over the set of edges which takes on values as defined by

C(e) =

1jN; j jN j
1;

if e = (ns; y) and y 2 VG

if e = (x; nt) and x 2 VG if e = (nv; nw); nv 2 Ni01 and v

w

:

0;

otherwise

From the celebrated Max-Flow Min-Cut theorem [19], we see that there
jN j exists a flow g of value i01 satisfying

g(nv; nw) = 1 8v 2 Ni01

w2N

v2N

g(nv ; 01

nw )

=

jNi01j jNibj

8w 2 Nib

Therefore, one sees that

jf (v)j v2N jNi01j = v2N

g(nv; nw) w2N

jf (v)j jNi01j

=

v

2

Ni01

g(nv; nw)jf (v)j jNi01j

w 2 Nib



v

2

Ni01

g(nv; nw)jf (w)j jNi01j

w 2 Nib

=

g(nv; nw)

w2N v2N


w2N

jf (w)j jNij

:

jf (w)j jNi01j

In the case that jNi01j > jNibj, use the same graph with directions
reversed on all the edges. Defining suitably a new capacity function
jN j (such that the minimum nsnt-cut capacity to be ib ) on this direction-
reversed graph, one can construct a flow that can be used similarly to

show that the claim holds even in this case.

APPENDIX III

PROOF OF THEOREM 2

danisdFciuArsssti=4loent.fuLxsedt2eBnBot:=4ejfRifx:=x2i1

0 R, where R is f0; 2; . . . ; dcgRn = 2gj  Rng.

the rate of the code in
and i xi = dvng
Then, from (8), it fol-

lows as shown in (13) at the top of the next page, where we have used
coef(p(x); xi) to denote the coefficient of xi in the polynomial p(x).

For our convenience, let us define

APPENDIX II PROOF OF LEMMA 5

Ln

NibPa=rtitNioinnNNi iain.tNo otwteothNatiaea=chfww

2 2

NNiia:vsatisfiwes)f(fw()v)==w;. gThaunsd,

we see that

w2N

jf (w)j jNij =

ijNiaj + jNiaj

w2N jf + jNibj

(w)j



w2N jf jNibj

(w)j

:

Mn

m

max

c3; . . . ; cd ; m 0 k>2 ck

m0

2 d dc c
j=3 j

(14)

max

c2; . . . ; cd ; m0 0 k>1 ck

WaGnedwdNitihvibia.dFveeitrrhsttee,xpsusreoptopVfoGsinet=tohatfwtnjoNv:civa0s21ejsNbai0jsNe1dgib[oj.nfCntohwne:swctraur2dctinNaadilbiigtrie[ecsfteondfsgN; rnait0pgh1.

2 d dc c
j=2 j

(15)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:33:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1520

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

pn; =4 P [TS  jjSj = n] = 2

r 2A i drci0 r 2B i dric0

=2

Rn Rn k=0 k

dc
2

k
coef

(

i=6 1;2

dc i

xi)Rn0k; xnd 02k

coef ((1 + x)d 0 dcx)Rn; xnd

(13)

where m = (1 0 )Rn; m0 = Rn. Here, it must be noted that (14) is suitably defined only for  2 f 2 \ [0; ]:Rn 2 g. Since every
term in the numerator of (13) is exponential in n and since the number of terms in the numerator is polynomial in n, the term with the fastest exponential growth will dominate the sum for very large n. Therefore,
one sees that

nl!im1

log pn;
n



2su[0p;]

h() + R log

dc
2

+nl!im1

log Ln
n

0

log Mn
n

:

(16)

In the preceding equation and those henceforth, we interpret the cor-
responding limits to be evaluated over only those indices n for which Ln and Mn, respectively, are defined. Using Lagrange multipliers for
(14), we can show that

nl!im1

log Ln
m

=

h

t33; . . . td3 ; 1 0 tk3
k>2

+ tj3 log
j>2

dc j

(17)

where

ti3 = 1 +

dc i

xi0

dc k>2 k

xk0

i = 3; . . . ; dc

(18)

and x0 is the unique solution to

x((1 + x)d (1 + x)d

01 0 1 0 0 dcx 0

(dc 0
dc
2

1)x)
x2

=

dv 0 2R (1 0 )Rdc

:

Lagrange multipliers for (15) yields

nl!im1 logmM0 n = h

t20 ; . . . td0 ; 1 0 tk0
k>1

+ tj0 log
j>1

dc j

(19)

where

ti0 = 1 +

dc i

xi1

dc k>1 k

xk1

i = 2; . . . ; dc

(20)

and x1 is the unique solution to

x((1 + x)d (1 + x)d

01 0 1) 0 dcx

=

dv Rdc

:

= 0 = At  , one sees that m m0. One then finds the limiting ex-

( 0 1) ponent of the denominator to be the maximum of a dc

-variate

( . . . ) t2; ; td strictly concave function and the limiting exponent of the

numerator to be the maximum of the same concave function when the
0 variable t2 is set to . Hence

nl!im1

log Ln0
m

0

nl!im1

logmM0 n

<

0

)

nl!im1

log pn;0
n

<

0:

(21)

lim Equations (16)–(21) imply the continuity of
function of  thereby completing the claim.

n!1

log p n

as a

REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[2] P. Oswald and M. A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 3017–3028, Dec. 2002.
[3] M. A. Shokrollahi, “New sequences of linear time erasure codes approaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. AAECC-13, 1999, pp. 65–76, Lecture Notes in Compute Science 1719.
[4] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[5] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[6] M. A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences,” Math. Appl., vol. 123, pp. 153–166, 2000.
[7] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 439–454, Mar. 2004.
[8] N. Varnica and M. Fossorier, “Belief-propagation with information correction: Improved near maximum-likelihood decoding for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2004 IEEE Symp. Inf. Theory, Chicago, IL, Jun. 2004.
[9] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. 37th Annual Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst., Mar. 2003.
[10] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “Improved decoding algorithms for lowdensity parity-check codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Rel. Topics, Brest, France.
[11] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “An efficient maximum-likelihood decoding of LDPC codes over the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 2837–2844, Nov. 2004.
[12] B. N. V. Ravisankar and F. Fekri, “On stopping sets and an improved decoding algorithm for low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. Forty-Second Annual Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr. Comput., Monticello, Oct. 2004.
[13] B. D. McKay, “Asymptotics for 0–1 matrices with prescribed line sums,” in Enumeration and Design. New York: Academic, 1984, pp. 225–238.
[14] A. Békéssy, P. Békéssy, and J. Kolmós, “Asymptotic enumeration of regular matrices,” Studia Scientiarum Mathematicarum Hungarica, vol. 7, pp. 343–353, 1972.
[15] B. D. McKay, “Asymptotics for symmetric 0–1 matrices with prescribed row sums,” Ars Combinatoria, vol. 19A, pp. 15–26, 1985.
[16] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration methods for analyzing LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 1115–1131, Jun. 2004.
[17] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 929–953, Mar. 2005.
[18] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserson, R. L. Rivest, and C. Stein, Introduction to Algorithms, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2001.
[19] B. Bollobás, Modern Graph Theory, 1st ed. New York: SpringerVerlag, 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:33:07 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

