A Stopping Criterion for Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Donghyuk Shin, Kyoungwoo Heo, Sangbong Oh and Jeongseok Ha School of Electrical and Computer Engineering
Information and Communications University (ICU) 119, Munjiro, Daejeon, 305-732, Korea
Email: shin23, hkw06, osb0918 and jsha@icu.ac.kr

Abstract— Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have an inherent stopping criterion, parity-check constraints (equations). By testing the parity-check constraints, an LDPC decoder can detect successful decoding and stop their decoding, which is, however, not possible with Turbo codes. In this paper, we propose a stopping criterion to predict decoding failure of LDPC codes, instead of detecting successful decoding. If the decoder predicts the decoding failure in advance, the receiver can more rapidly response to the transmitter and request for additional parity bits with an Automatic Repeat reQuest (ARQ) protocol, which reduces overall system latency. The receiver can also save power consumption by avoiding unnecessary decoder iterations. The proposed stopping criterion makes use of the variations of the number of satisfied parity-check constraints in the Belief-Propagation (BP) decoding which is always tested in the conventional BP decoding to detect successful decoding. Thus, the proposed stopping criterion does not require any additional complexity. The counting of satisfied parity-check constraints shows behaviors of the BP decoding, which comes, otherwise, from the observations of changes of log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values in multi-bit resolution with additional complexity.
I. INTRODUCTION
Although Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes were first invented by Gallager in 1963 [1] they had been forgotten for about 30 years due to the decoding complexity. LDPC codes were rediscovered [2] in late 1990s and have been extensively studied by many researchers. The Belief-Propagation (BP) decoding algorithm provides Maximum Likelihood (ML) decoding results at infinite block lengths [3] but only suboptimal results at finite block lengths. However, in most practical cases, LDPC codes with the BP decoding provide much powerful error correcting capability. The powerful errorcorrecting capability makes LDPC codes considered as not only theoretical research topics but also practical error-control systems in the next generation wireless communication systems such as DVB-S2, IEEE 802.16e, IEEE 802.11n, etc. For LDPC codes to be a viable solution in practical systems, besides the performance, there are a few additional issues to be solved such as decoding complexity and decoding latency.
Since the BP decoding is an iterative algorithm, in practical systems, a maximum number of iterations is preset, and the decoder iterates until it reaches the maximum number of iterations, which is also true for Turbo codes [4]. At each iteration, the BP decoder for LDPC codes detects successful decoding by testing parity-check constraints. If all parity-

check constraints are satisfied, the decoder stops and declares its decoding result as the correct (transmitted) codeword. On the other hand, the decoder for Turbo codes does not know whether it achieves the correct codeword or not. Thus, the decoder for Turbo codes must always iterate for the maximum number of iterations. Such unnecessary iterations after having the correct codeword result in more power consumption and longer decoding latency.
Much work [5]–[7] has been devoted to devising efficient stopping criteria for Turbo codes which decide the successful decoding before reaching a maximum number of iterations. This approach significantly reduces the average number of iterations especially at high SNR regions where most of successful decodings are achieved in the first a few iterations. However, in the case of LDPC codes, as aforementioned, the detection of successful decoding is inherently provided and little attention has been paid to the topic.
Recently, rate-compatible LDPC codes [8]–[10] are introduced and there have been many attempts to incorporate the rate-compatible LDPC codes into the type-II Automatic Repeat reQuest (ARQ) protocol [11]. In such attempts, the decoding latency of iterative decoders becomes, in some cases, prohibitively longer since the decoder iterates for a maximum number of iterations. Such a practical issue motivates us to propose a stopping criterion for LDPC codes which predicts decoding failure instead of detecting successful decoding. If the decoder for LDPC codes predicts the decoding failure before reaching the maximum number of iterations, the receiver can more rapidly response to the transmitter and request for additional parity bits with the type-II ARQ protocol. Together with the better efficiency of the ARQ protocol, the receiver can save power consumption by avoiding the unnecessary iterations.
We find that there is a previous work [12] on the prediction of decoding failure which consists of two key elements: 1) a measure of decoding behavior and 2) a decision rule. The measure of decoding behavior is the changes of log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values during iterations. However, the previous work requires additional complexity since the LLR values are in a form of floating point or multi-bit resolution. Thus, in some cases, the power consumption due to the additional complexity for the prediction may offset the power saving from the early termination. The decision rule also needs

1550-2252A/u$t2ho5r.i0ze0d©lic2e0n0s7edIuEsEe Elimited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u5n2e923,2026 at 19:32:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

channel dependent parameter. In this paper, we propose a simple stopping criterion to
predict the decoding failure without additional complexity or a minimized computational cost. The proposed algorithm takes advantage of the result from the conventional BP decoding which is the number of satisfied parity-check constraints. In the conventional BP decoding, the parity-check constraints are always tested and the result of each parity-check test is a single bit, i.e., “success” or “failure”. In addition to the computational advantage, the proposed decision rule is channel independent and provides a better prediction performance than that of the previous work. The counting of satisfied paritycheck constraints also shows behaviors of the BP decoding, which comes, otherwise, from the observations of the changes of log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values in multi-bit resolution with additional complexity.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides an introduction to LDPC codes together with some mathematical notations used throughout this paper. In Section III, we compare the previous work with our proposed stopping criterion. Simulation results and conclusions are presented in Section IV and Section V, respectively.

II. BACKGROUND
A. LDPC Codes
A binary LDPC code is a linear block code defined by a parity-check matrix H which consists of m rows and n columns. An element of H at the i-th column and the j-th row, Hi,j is in {0, 1} and the fraction of 1 in H is very small as compared to the size of the matrix (m × n). The numbers of 1’s in a row and a column are called the weights of the row and the column, respectively.
Each row of a parity-check matrix represents an even paritycheck constraint, and a valid codeword must satisfy all the parity check constraints. That is,

Hc = S = 0,

(1)

where c = [c1 c2 . . . , cn]T , S = [s1 s2 . . . , sm]T , and
n
s = H ,k · ck ≡ 0 mod 2 for 1 ≤ ≤ m. (2)
k=1
An LDPC code is equivalently expressed with a bipartite graph called Tanner graph [13]. In Fig. 1, we juxtapose a parity-check matrix and the corresponding Tanner graph where the squares and the circles indicate the rows and columns of the parity-check matrix, and the edges are nonzero terms in the matrix. The squares and circles are called check and variable nodes, respectively. The nodes directly connected through edges are called neighbors.
The BP decoding is an iterative decoding algorithm exchanging messages between variable nodes and check nodes at each iteration. In the BP decoding, the decoder tests paritycheck constraints at the end of each iteration and terminates the decoding whenever all the parity-check constraints are satisfied. That is, for LLR values of variable nodes qi( )’s at the

101010

H=

010011 100101

011100

check node

edge

variable node

Fig. 1. H matrix and its graphical representation

-th iterations, the binary coded bit values cˆ(i )’s are estimated

as

cˆ(i ) =

1 0

if qi( ) < 0 and otherwise

where cˆ( ) = (cˆ1( ), cˆ2( ), . . . , cˆ(n )). If Hcˆ( ) = 0, the decoder declares that cˆ( ) is the transmitted codeword.
We define a function which tells the number of satisfied parity-check constraints as

m

Ns(pc) = m − 1T Hcˆ( ) = m − si,

(3)

i=1

where 1 is the all-one column vector of length m. Ns(pc) is acquired at the parity-check constraints test in the BP decoding without any additional cost.

III. STOPPING CRITERIA FOR LDPC CODES
A. The Behaviors of the BP Decoders at Finite Lengths
The behaviors of the BP decoding can be categorized into three different types in terms of the evolutions of LLR values at the variable nodes during iterations: 1) convergence, 2) stuck, and 3) oscillation. In the case of the convergence, the average magnitude of LLR values of coded bits is ever increasing at each iteration, and the decoder eventually has a valid codeword which is not necessarily to be the transmitted codeword. However, in the stuck case, the average magnitude of LLR values is stuck to a fixed value after a certain number of iterations, and the decoder does not have a valid codeword. In the last case, the average magnitude of LLR values commutes between an increasing and a decreasing phases. Thus, the decoder cannot have a valid codeword at any iterations. The first two behaviors, the convergence and the stuck are numerically predicted and analyzed by the density evolution technique [14] and EXIT chart [15]. To our best knowledge, however, the cause of the oscillation has not been well understood. The oscillation is only known to be caused by nonlinear behaviors of the BP decoding and short block lengths of LDPC codes. The decoders for Turbo codes have the same behaviors which are reported in [16], [17]. In some cases, the decoding behavior changes from the oscillation to the convergence. That is, the decoding starts with the oscillation and later turns into the convergence. We call such a case slow convergence to tell it from the convergence. However,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u5n3e023,2026 at 19:32:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 2. The evolutions of average LLR values and Nspc in the decoding of an irregular LDPC code of rate 0.5 and length 2016 proposed by ZTE to 3GPP-
LTE [18]. Four lines at the lower part and four lines at the upper part represent the evolutions of average LLR values and those of Nspc, respectively.

the slow convergence is categorized into the oscillation if the oscillation phase lasts longer than a preset maximum number of iterations, and the decoding ends before the phase changes to the convergence. Thus, the decision of the slow convergences also depends on the maximum number of iterations. Our idea is about predicting the stuck and the oscillation in as a small number of iterations as possible. However, the slow convergence behavior makes it very hard to decide the decoding behavior in the early stage of the decoding due to the unpredictable phase change after many iterations.
We demonstrate the evolutions of the average magnitude of LLR values at the variable nodes during decoding an LDPC code of length 2016 and code rate 0.5 [18] proposed by ZTE to 3GPP-LTE (The 3rd Generation Partnership Project, Long-Term Evolution) in the lower part of Fig. 2 where the four different types of the behaviors are clearly depicted. Especially, the slow convergence would have been categorized into the oscillation if the maximum iteration were set to less than 40. It is well known [16], [17] that the stuck usually happens in low SNR regions but the oscillation is in high SNR regions.

B. Previous Work
To our best knowledge, there has been only one literature [12] about the prediction of the decoding failure of LDPC decoding. We briefly introduce the previous work which is compared with our proposed criterion in the sequel subsection. The stopping criterion in [12] is based on the observation of the variable node reliability (VNR) which is defined as

n

V N R( ) = |qi( )|,

(4)

k=1

where 1 ≤ k ≤ n, 1 ≤ ≤ Nmax, Nmax is a maximum number of iterations, |qi( )| is the magnitude of the LLR values of the i-th variable node at the -th iteration obtained in

Vertical Step [19] of the BP decoding.

At each iteration, the decoder decides the decoding failure
based on the following decision rule:
S1 If the V N R( ) does not change or decreases within
two successive decoding iterations, then stop the decoding process. That is, V N R( −1) ≥ V N R( ) for > 1. S2 But, if V N R( ) exceeds a threshold (V N Roff ), S1 has to be switched off and a decoder proceeds to the
next iteration. V N Roff is defined as

V N Roff = M B × n

where n is the number of variable nodes, M B stands

for “mean bound” defined as

MB

≈

4×

(

Eb N0

)W

R

and

(

Eb N0

)W

R

is

a

SNR

point

around

the

waterfall

region

in a bit-error rate (BER) curve.

This decision rule is based on the fact that V N R( −1) ≥ V N R( ) indicates the stuck and oscillation. Even if the

inequality holds, in S2, it assumes the slow convergence when V N R( ) ≥ V N Roff . We believe that the idea presented in
[12] well utilizes the features of the decoding behaviors.

C. Proposed Stopping Criterion
Although the stopping criterion presented in [12] is well devised, we realize that there are something to be more elaborated. Especially, the measure of the decoding behavior V N R( ) in (4) is acquired from the summation of LLR values in a form of floating point or multi-bit resolution, which needs additional complexity. In this paper, we use a simpler measure, the number of satisfied parity-check constraints Nspc in (3). The proposed measure is a simple summation of the parity-check results in binary. Moreover, there is no additional complexity in computing Nspc since the parity-check test is inherently provided from Stopping Criterion Test [19] in the BP decoding.
To see that Nspc is an effective measure of the decoding behavior, we compare the evolutions of Nspc’s during iterations with those of LLR values in Fig. 2 where the evolutions of Nspc’s exactly match with those of LLR values and show the same decoding behaviors, the (slow) convergence, the stuck, and the oscillation. In addition, Nspc needs a smaller number of additions than V N R( ) does since m < n, which becomes more distinctive at higher rates.
We also realize that the threshold V N Roff = n×M B must be avoided since V N Roff is channel dependent. That is, for an LDPC code M B comes from the evaluation of the required Eb/N0 around the waterfall region in the BER curve on a channel. When the LDPC code is working on different types of channels, the decision rule needs different M B’s which may not be possible in some applications.
The proposed stopping criterion consists of the simple measure (Nspc) of the decoding behaviors and a channel independent decision rule. The decision rule is as follows:
S0 If = 1, initialize cd to zero (cd ← 0).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u5n3e123,2026 at 19:32:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

log10 (FAR) ANI

S1 Wait for the test of the parity-check constraints (Hcˆ = S) at the -th iteration of the BP decoding.
S2 Compute Ns(pc) with S. S3 If > 1, compute ds(pc) = Ns(pc) − Ns(pc−1). Otherwise,
go to S1. S4 If ds(pc) ≤ θd, increase cd by 1 (cd ← cd + 1).
Otherwise, reset cd to zero (cd ← 0) and go to S1. S5 If cd < θmax, go to S1. S6 If Ns(pc) ≤ θspc, STOP the decoding. Otherwise, reset
cd to zero, cd ← 0 and go to S1.
The decision rule is placed right after the test of parity-check constraints, Hcˆ = S in Stopping Criterion Test [19] of the BP decoding and utilizes the test results si’s. In S3, the proposed decision rule watches the increment (ds(pc)) of the number of satisfied parity-check constraints at each iteration. In S4, if the increment is less than a threshold θd > 0, it counts (cd) how long the small/negative increment successively persists. If cd becomes bigger than a threshold (θmax), it stops the decoding when Ns(pc) is less than a threshold (θspc). If Ns(pc) is bigger than θspc, it assumes the slow convergence and wait for the change of the decoding behavior from the oscillation to the convergence. In S4, cd ≥ θmax is a sign for the stuck or the downfall of the average magnitude of LLR values in the oscillation. Although different choices of the thresholds (θd, θmax, and θspc) will give us different prediction performances, once a good choice of the threshold is selected, it will be channel independent.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In [12], the performance of the stopping criterion is evaluated in terms of frame-error rate (FER) and average number of iterations (ANI). Although the two performance measures are undoubtedly important, we believe that false-alarm rate (FAR) is more important. The FAR is defined as the rate of terminated decodings which would have been successfully decoded if a stopping criterion were not applied. Actually, ANI can be made arbitrary small, if a stopping criterion terminates all suspicious decodings at an early stage of the iterations, which however, results in unnecessary retransmissions in typeII hybrid ARQ protocols. Thus, we evaluate the performances of FAR and ANI at the same time and find that the two performance measures are complementary. That is, if we set a required FAR low, then ANI becomes higher and vice versa.
To compare performances of the proposed and previous stopping criteria, we design an LDPC code of length 2016 and rate 0.5 which was proposed to 3GPP-LTE by ZTE [18]. The designed LDPC code is evaluated on an AWGN channel where the stopping criteria are incorporated into the decoding and the maximum number of iterations (Nmax) is set to 50. In this experiment, we evaluate ANIs and FARs at different Eb/N0 points, and the results are depicted in Fig. 3.
The simulation results clearly show that the FARs with the proposed criterion outperform those with the previous work. However, in the case of ANI, it seems that the previous work shows better performance, which may mislead readers

-0.5

60

-1.0

-1.5

Previous work (MB=4.0)

θd=8, θmax=6, θspc=875

-2.0

θd=6, θmax=4, θspc=875 Without early termination

50
FAR
40
30

-2.5

20

ANI

-3.0

10

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2 1.4

Eb/N0 [dB]

Fig. 3. False alarm rate (FAR) and Average number of iterations (ANI).

into believing better performance of the previous work. As aforementioned, the smaller ANIs with the previous work is due to higher FARs. In the comparison between the decoding with/without the proposed stopping criterion, we can conclude that the proposed stopping criterion saves significant amount of iterations as compared to the conventional decoding algorithm together with lower FARs than those of the previous work.
Since the performances of the proposed and previous criteria depend on the choices of parameters, we are interested in the variations of FARs and ANIs with different choices of parameters. In this experiment, we try to find the best choice of parameters for each ANI which minimizes FAR. We depict the simulation results in Fig. 4. In the case of the proposed work the first 5 points from the highest FAR in the decreasing order are the results with θd = 10, θmax = 4, and θspc = 925:25:825 and the rest 7 points in the decreasing order are with θd = 8, θmax = 6, and θspc = 900:-25:750, where a : b : c indicates a range of numbers from a to c by a step b. We also find the best choice of parameters for the previous work where for the first 4 points from the highest FAR in the decreasing order are with MB = 0.48 : −0.4 : 0.36 and the rest of 8 points are with MB = 0.34 : −0.1 : 0.28. In the simulations, Eb/N0 is set to 0.5dB.
Again, we can see the complementary behavior of ANI and FAR in Fig. 4. That is, if we decrease FAR, ANI becomes bigger. However, the proposed stopping criterion shows better performances when the FAR is less than 10−1.
We claimed that the proposed stopping criterion is channel independent since it makes use of the behaviors of the BP decoding. However, the previous stopping criterion needs a parameter which is only possible from BER simulations on an actual channel. To substantiate our claim we apply the proposed and previous stopping criteria to the decoding of the LDPC codes on a fading channel where all coded symbols have independent channel gains which follow a Rayleigh distribution with unit power gain. In Fig. 5, we compare the ANIs of the BP decoding with the proposed and previous stopping criteria on the AWGN and fading channel. The comparisons show that the proposed stopping criterion is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u5n3e223,2026 at 19:32:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

amount of information to the decision rule as the one from the measure in the previous work. In addition to the computational advantage of the proposed measure, the proposed decision rule is channel independent which is very important in practical situations. Since the proposed decision rule only categorizes the behaviors of decoding, it does not need any channel dependent parameters. Thus, we claim that once we have a good choice of parameters in the proposed decision rule, they are good over different types of channels, which is confirmed. In performance comparisons we show that the proposed stopping criterion significantly lowers the average number of iterations as compared to the conventional BP decoding together with better FARs than those of the previous work. Such lower FARs and smaller number of iterations provide better efficiency of type-II ARQ protocols.

Fig. 4. Performance of the proposed and previous stopping criteria with different choices of parameters.
Fig. 5. Average number of iterations (ANIs) over an AWGN and a fading channels.
channel independent. However, the results from the previous stopping criterion have much variations which is due to the channel dependent parameter, MB.
We also evaluate frame-error rates (FERs) with/without the stopping criteria in the BP decoding, which shows better performance of the proposed stopping criterion than that of the previous one. However, due to the limited space, we can not include such results in this paper.
V. CONCLUSION We propose a stopping criterion made up of a simple measure of decoding behaviors and a channel independent decision rule to predict decoding failure of LDPC codes. Since the measure of decoding behaviors is provided by an inherent part of the BP decoding, the counting of satisfied parity-check constraints, it has no additional computational cost. Although the proposed measure needs no additional or minimized computational cost, we show that it gives the same

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[4] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near shannon limit errorcorrecting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[5] R. Y. Shao, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Two simple stopping criteria for Turbo decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 1117 – 1120, Aug. 1999.
[6] A. Shibutani, H. Suda, , and F. Adachi, “Reducing average number of Turbo decoding iterations,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 701 – 702, Apr. 1999.
[7] Y. Wu, B. D. Woerner, and W. J. Ebel, “A simple stopping criterion for Turbo decoding,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 4, no. 8, pp. 258 – 260, Aug. 2000.
[8] J. Ha, J. Kim, D. Klinc, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check codes with short block lengths,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-52, pp. 728 – 738, Feb. 2006.
[9] M. R.Yazdani and A. H. Banihashemi, “On construction of ratecompatible low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 159–161, Mar. 2004.
[10] D. Klinc, J. Ha, J. Kim, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Rate-compatible punctured low-density parity-check codes for Ultra Wide Band systems,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, St. Louis, U.S.A., Nov. 2005, pp. 3856 – 3860.
[11] S. B. Wicker, Error Control Systems for Digital Communications and Storage. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458: Prentice Hall, 1995.
[12] F. Kienle and N. Wehn, “Low complexity stopping criterion for LDPC code decoders,” in Proc. IEEE VTC 2005-Spring, Stockholm, Sweden, June 2005, pp. 606 – 609.
[13] M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[14] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[15] S. Brink, “Convergence of iterative decoding,” Electron. Lett., vol. 35, pp. 806 – 808, May 1999.
[16] A. C. Reid, T. A. Gulliver, and D. P. Taylor, “Convergence and errors in Turbo-decoding,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 49, no. 12, pp. 2045 – 2051, Dec. 2001.
[17] F. Zhai and I. J. Fair, “Techniques for early stopping and error detection in Turbo decoding,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 1617 – 1623, Oct. 2003.
[18] 3GPP, R1-061019, ZTE, “Structured LDPC coding with rate matching,” in TSG RAN1#44bis, Mar. 2006.
[19] J. Chen and M. P. C. Possorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 406 – 414, Mar. 2002.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on J1u5n3e323,2026 at 19:32:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

