692

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

Accumulate-Repeat-Accumulate Codes
Aliazam Abbasfar, Member, IEEE, Dariush Divsalar, Fellow, IEEE, and Kung Yao, Life Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we propose an innovative channel coding scheme called accumulate-repeat-accumulate (ARA) codes. This class of codes can be viewed as serial turbo-like codes or as a subclass of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes, and they have a projected graph or protograph representation; this allows for high-speed iterative decoding implementation using belief propagation. An ARA code can be viewed as precoded repeat accumulate (RA) code with puncturing or as precoded irregular repeat accumulate (IRA) code, where simply an accumulator is chosen as the precoder. The amount of performance improvement due to the precoder will be called precoding gain. Using density evolution on their associated protographs, we find some rate-1/2 ARA codes, with a maximum variable node degree of 5 for which a minimum bit SNR as low as 0.08 dB from channel capacity threshold is achieved as the block size goes to infinity. Such a low threshold cannot be achieved by RA, IRA, or unstructured irregular LDPC codes with the same constraint on the maximum variable node degree. Furthermore, by puncturing the inner accumulator, we can construct families of higher rate ARA codes with thresholds that stay close to their respective channel capacity thresholds uniformly. Iterative decoding simulation results are provided and compared with turbo codes. In addition to iterative decoding analysis, we analyzed the performance of ARA codes with maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding. By obtaining the weight distribution of these codes and through existing tightest bounds we have shown that the ML SNR threshold of ARA codes also approaches very closely to that of random codes. These codes have better interleaving gain than turbo codes.
Index Terms—Error bounds, graphs, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, thresholds, turbo-like codes, weight distribution.
I. INTRODUCTION AND MOTIVATION OF THE STUDY
LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were proposed by Gallager [1] in 1962. After the introduction of turbo codes by Berrou et al. [2] in 1993, researchers revisited the LDPC codes and extended the work of Gallager. During 1962 to 1993, only a few people, notably Tanner in 1981 [3], paid attention to the work of Gallager and made some contributions. After 1993, over 500 contributions have been made to LDPC codes; for example, see [5], [12], [13], [16], [19], and [20], and references therein.
Paper approved by A. H. Banihashemi, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received March 29, 2004; revised November 15, 2005 and August 7, 2006. The work of D. Divsalar was supported by a contract from NASA. The work of K. Yao was supported by a contract from the Jet Propulsion Laboratory. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2004, and in part at IEEE Globecom, 2004 .
A. Abbasfar is with Rambus Inc., Los Altos CA 94022 USA (e-mail: aliazam@rambus.com).
D. Divsalar is with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109 USA (e-mail: Dariush.Divsalar@jpl.nasa.gov).
K. Yao is with the Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1594 USA (e-mail: yao@ee.ucla.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2007.894109

Recently, repeat accumulate (RA) and irregular repeat accu-

mulate (IRA) codes, as simple subclasses of LDPC codes with

fast encoder structure, were proposed [6], [7]. RA and IRA

codes can also be considered as serial concatenated codes [22].

In addition to simplicity, RA codes have fairly good perfor-

mance. For rates less than or equal to 1/3, their thresholds with

iterative decoding are within 1 dB of the capacity. RA codes

use fixed repetition for input bits. On the contrary, IRA codes

inspired by RA and irregular LDPC [4] codes have irregular rep-

etition for input bits. In fact, node degree distribution can be op-

timized to achieve low threshold performance. To achieve very

low threshold for IRA, as for LDPC codes, maximum repetition

for some portion of input bits can be very high.

These recent results for RA and IRA codes motivated us to

find very simple codes with enhanced performance. Researchers

in [9] tried to improve the input–output extrinsic signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR) behavior of the outer convolutional codes in se-

rial concatenation in low extrinsic SNR region to lower SNR

threshold of serial concatenation by using repetition of certain

bits of the outer code. On the other hand, if a repetition code is

used as an outer code, e.g., as in RA codes, one should try to im-

prove the input–output extrinsic SNR behavior at high extrinsic

SNR region, since the input–output extrinsic SNR behavior of

repetition codes are excellent in the low extrinsic SNR region.

We discovered that an accumulator as a rate-1 precoder applied

before the repetition code will improve the performance.

Before elaborating on the role of accumulator as a precoder

for RA codes and graph representation of ARA codes, we use

the definition of protograph introduced by Thorpe in [8]. A

similar definition called projected graph was introduced by

Richardson et al. in [10] for implementation of the decoder

for LDPC codes. They show that, if an LDPC code can be

represented by the smallest base-graph or projected graph, then

high-speed implementation of the decoder will be more fea-

sible. Protograph definition also facilitates the minimal graph

representation for the overall graph of an LDPC code. We will

show that ARA codes have such a protograph or projected

graph representation, which is another advantage. Projected

graph definition also has been extended to turbo-like codes in

[18].

A protograph [8] is a Tanner graph with a relatively small

number of nodes. A protograph

consists of a set

of variable nodes , a set of check nodes , and a set of edges

. Each edge

connects a variable node

to a

check node

. Parallel edges are permitted, so the mapping

is not necessarily 1:1. As a simple ex-

ample, we consider the protograph shown in Fig. 1. This graph

consists of

variable nodes and

check nodes,

connected by

edges. The four variable nodes in the pro-

tograph are denoted by “0,1,2,3” and the three check nodes by

“0,1,2.” By itself, this graph may be recognized as the Tanner

0090-6778/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:32:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABBASFAR et al.: ACCUMULATE-REPEAT-ACCUMULATE CODES

693

Fig. 1. Rate–1/3 RA code with repetition 3, multi-edge, and protograph versions.

graph of an LDPC code with (

,

). In Fig. 1, the

variable nodes connected to the channel are shown with dark

circles i.e., transmitted nodes. Blank circles are those variable

nodes not transmitted through the channel, i.e., punctured nodes.

Check nodes are circles with plus sign inside. Under certain

conditions on the corresponding parity check matrix, i.e., full

rank, the code rate for the protograph code can be defined as

, where represent a set of transmitted

nodes in the protograph. There are

types of edges in the

protograph representation of RA code. In fact, the protograph

LDPC codes are subclass of multi-edge-type LDPC codes intro-

duced in [11]. In multi-edge-type LDPC code, a group of edges

may represent a type, where in the protograph LDPC codes each

edge is a type. For a given protograph, we can obtain a larger graph by a
copy-and-permute operation. For more details on protographs,

Fig. 2. Systematic RA code. (a) Encoder for multi-edge-type using puncturing. (b) Equivalent encoder using SPC. (c) Rate-1/2 protograph of systematic RA.

see [8]. The resulting larger graph is called the derived graph

and the corresponding LDPC code is a protograph code. In general, we can apply the copy-and-permute operation to any protograph to obtain derived graphs of different sizes. This operation consists of first making copies of the protograph and then permuting the endpoints of each edge among the variable and check nodes connected to the set of edges copied from the same edge in the protograph. Equivalently, the derived graph can be viewed as a multi-edge-type LDPC code in which each edge in the protograph is a distinct type. Thus, the derived graph can be obtained by replacing each edge of the protograph with a permutation of size . In other words, LDPC codes with a protograph are multi-edge codes with an equal number ( ) of edges for each type. In our examples, we will consider both multi-edge-type LDPC codes and protograph LDPC codes. The difference is mainly in the use of permutation on multiple edges or on single edges. Multi-edge-type LDPC codes with rational degree distribution can also have a projected graph description. In Fig. 1(a), the encoder with single permutation (interleaver) may represent a multi-edge-type RA code. As follows we assume tail biting is used for accumulators. In Fig. 1(b), proto-

use repetition 3 or higher, provided that the systematic bits are

transmitted through the channel, i.e., systematic punctured RA

codes. Instead of puncturing, equivalently, we can use a single

parity check (

) which adds input bits and outputs

one parity, followed by an accumulator without puncturing.

Based on the equivalent graph of a punctured accumulator,

we obtain the protograph of a systematic punctured RA code.

The iterative decoding threshold for this code with protograph

representation is 1.116 dB, which is an improvement of close

to 2 dB. The systematic punctured multi-edge-type RA code is

shown in Fig. 2(a), and the protograph RA is shown in Fig. 2(b).

An irregular punctured RA code (which also can be viewed

as IRA code) can be constructed by using irregular repetition.

Referring to Fig. 2, if 2/3 of the input nodes use repetition 3,

and 1/3 use repetition 4, then the corresponding protograph

will be the same as in the figure except for additional edge

from variable node 1 to check node 1. The iterative decoding

threshold for this rate-1/2 irregular punctured protograph RA

code is 0.990 dB.

graph-based RA code is shown. In the figure, the minimum iterative decoding threshold of protograph RA code is
also shown.

III. ACCUMULATE-REPEAT-ACCUMULATE CODES
Let us consider a rate-1/3 serial concatenated code where the outer code is a repetition 3 code. Assume that the systematic

II. PUNCTURED RA CODES

bits are transmitted to the channel. Alternatively consider the same outer code but the repetition 3 is precoded by an accumu-

Classical rate-1/2 RA code, with repetition 2, has a high lator. Let us compare the extrinsic SNR behavior of these two

threshold of 3.01 dB. Rate-1/2 RA code with lower threshold outer codes using Gaussian density evolution as shown in Fig. 3.

can be obtained by puncturing the lower rate RA codes that As the Gaussian density evolution analysis shows, the use of a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:32:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

694

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

Fig. 3. Gaussian density evolution for rate-1/3 ARA and RA codes showing the improvement due to the precoder.

rate-1 accumulator dramatically improves the extrinsic SNR be- threshold are shown in Fig. 4 when

. We also propose

havior of repetition 3 at a high extrinsic SNR region. However, a constructive method to design codes with higher rates from

it slightly deteriorates the behavior of repetition 3 code at a very a rate-1/2 ARA code and its protograph by further puncturing

low extrinsic SNR region.

of the rate-1/2 ARA code. additional variable nodes each

Now let us use a punctured accumulator as the inner code. The with degree 3 are added to the protograph. This is like adding

periodic puncturing pattern in this example is X0X, where 0’s

repeat 3 RA codes to a single rate-1/2 ARA code. In this

indicate the puncturing positions. Since the serial concatenation case, the addition is done at the inner check nodes of rate-1/2

consists of outer accumulator, middle repetition, and inner ac- ARA, and one common inner accumulator is used. Similar high

cumulator, we call it Accumulate-Repeat- Accumulate (ARA) rate codes can be obtained using the protograph of the other

code. The rate-1/3 ARA code, the corresponding protograph, rate-1/2 ARA codes that will be discussed in this paper. One

and the extrinsic input–output SNR curves using Gaussian den- example of such a family of ARA codes for various code rates

sity evolution are shown in Fig. 3. Except for this example in is shown in Fig. 4. For single decoder implementation that can

which we used Gaussian density evolution to show the advan- handle various code rates, one should consider the protograph

tage of precoding, in this paper, actual density evolution on pro- for the highest desired code rate. For encoding of lower rates,

tographs will be used. Using density evolution, we obtain the one should insert zeros for those input variable node bits that

exact iterative decoding threshold of

dB for the proto- corresponds to the higher code rate generation (see variable

graph shown in Fig. 3. If we remove the precoder and transmit nodes marked with letter A in Fig. 4). These bits should not be

node 1 in Fig. 3, the threshold will be 0.73 dB. Thus, the pre- sent to the channel, i.e., to be punctured. Thus, this method can

coder improves the iterative decoding threshold by 0.7 dB. We be considered a solution to the problem of decoding various

call such performance improvement due to the use of a precoder code rates using a single protograph.

as “ Precoding gain.”

Another simple example of a rate-1/2 ARA code with regular

These comparisons are fair if we fix the maximum variable repetition is the precoded version of the punctured RA code

node degree. Shortly, we will show such comparisons with in Fig. 2. The precoded version is shown in Fig. 5. This code

rate-1/2 unstructured irregular LDPC codes. In a similar way, has a threshold of 0.400 dB, compared with 1.116 dB for the

we can construct rate-1/2 ARA codes. However, due to more systematic punctured RA code in Fig. 2. Thus, there is a 0.7-dB

puncturing of the inner accumulator, some portion of the input precoding gain due to the use of a rate-1 accumulator precoder.

bits should not be passed through the precoder in order to allow Fig. 5 shows an alternative implementation of an encoder using

the iterative decoding to start, i.e., “ Doping ” [29] is required a differentiator that has the same protograph. In this case,

for the iterative decoder to start. An example of a simple we call the coding scheme Differentiate-Repeat-Accumulate

rate-1/2 ARA code, its protograph, and the corresponding (DRA) code, which is a nonsystematic code. We can also use

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:32:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABBASFAR et al.: ACCUMULATE-REPEAT-ACCUMULATE CODES

695

Fig. 4. ARA code family for rates 1/2 to 7/8, encoder for multi-edge-type , protographs, and protograph thresholds in decibels.

Fig. 6. Rate-1/2 low-threshold ARA protograph.

Fig. 5. Rate-1/2 ARA, DRA, and the corresponding protograph representation.

a threshold of 0.364 dB. A family of higher rate ARA codes

can be obtained simply by puncturing the ARA code or IARA

irregular repetition instead of regular repetition in ARA codes, code in the previous two examples. A low-threshold (0.264 dB)

which results in irregular ARA (IARA) codes.

rate-1/2 ARA code is shown in Fig. 6. The protograph has a

A simple example of a rate-1/2 IARA code is the precoded maximum degree of 5. The best rate-1/2 unstructured irregular

version of the IRA example discussed previously. The threshold LDPC code with a maximum degree of 5 in [4] has a threshold

for that IRA example was 0.990 dB. The precoded version has of 0.72 dB. There are few reasons for such difference. In [4], the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:32:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

696

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

Fig. 7. Simulation results for few examples of rate-1/2 ARAs, and the rate-1/2 wireless standard turbo code.

degree of variable nodes are greater or equal to 2, and punctured per each edge of protograph are shown in Fig. 7 for three ex-

variable nodes were not allowed. If we look at the protographs of amples of rate-1/2 ARA codes with a protograph structure and

ARA codes, they contain degree-1 variable nodes and punctured compared with a rate-1/2 turbo code with well-optimized spread

variable nodes. In fact, later, Richardson and Urbanke [11], [13] interleaver. Use of circulant permutations instead of random

mentioned that the degree-1 variable nodes and punctured vari- permutations is preferred for implementation of an encoder and

able nodes also can be used in the multi-edge-type LDPC code decoder. For decoding ARA codes, the message passing algo-

design. As we mentioned earlier, protograph-based ARA codes rithm was used. For iterative decoding of turbo code the standard

use permutations per each edge of protograph. When we have BCJR algorithm is used. For performance simulation results of

accumulators, a protograph-based ARA can be constructed if protograph ARA codes for various code rates, see [23] and [24].

the structure of the interleaver in ARA codes is based on edge For encoders for protograph-based ARA codes with circulant

connections in the ARA protograph between middle variable permutations, see [27].

nodes and inner check nodes (right most check nodes), i.e., between repetition and accumulator. However a multi-edge-type ARA code can be defined when permutations are used per group

IV. MAXIMUM-LIKELIHOOD (ML) DECODING ANALYSIS OF ARA CODES

of edges, e.g., a single random permutation is used for repetition. Here, we intend to prove that the ensemble weight distribu-

Consider the rate-1/2 ARA code with threshold 0.516 dB that tion of RA codes can be improved by using precoding. Also, if

was shown in Fig. 4, for

(also shown in Fig. 7). For this ML decoding is used, there will be roughly the same amount of

example, we can use six interleavers each of size , where precoding gain as in the iterative decoding. First, we analyze

is the input block size. Each interleaver corresponds to one of the ML decoding performance of multi-edge-type RA codes

the six edges between the repetition 3 and the punctured accu- with single random permutation and with regular puncturing.

mulator; i.e., the edges between variable nodes “1,2” and check We show that, with puncturing, we can construct better codes as

nodes “1,2” in the ARA protograph in Fig. 7. Simulation re- far as the performance is concerned. Then, we extend the results

sults for random type interleavers and circulant permutations to multi-edge-type ARA codes with single random permutation.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:32:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABBASFAR et al.: ACCUMULATE-REPEAT-ACCUMULATE CODES

697

Since there is no practical ML decoding algorithm available

for block codes with large block size, we use the performance

bounds to obtain some insight on codes’ behavior. In [14], Di-

vsalar provides a tight upper bound on frame (word) error rate

(FER) and bit error rate (BER) for a

linear block code

with code rate

and distance spectrum (number

of codewords with weight ), decoded by ML criterion over an

additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. It also pro-

vides a minimum

threshold with closed-form expres-

sion. We use this bound throughout the paper. Defining normal-

ized distance as

and normalized distance spectrum as

, the FER bound in [14] or [15] can be expressed

as

Fig. 8. Accumulator with period p = 3 puncturing 00X and its equivalent graph.
where is Kronecker delta function. The IOWE of the accumulator is

(1)

(6)

where
(2) and

(3)

where

, and

. When

, the bound reduces to union bound. To compute the BER

bound, replace with

in the FER bound,

where is the number of codewords with input weight and

output weight . An important result of this bound is the tightest

minimum

that can be written in closed form as

(4)

The threshold will be the minimum

when

, thus

we need to obtain the asymptotic distance spectrum, i.e.,

as

.

RA codes are usually nonsystematic codes, i.e., the informa-

tion block is not sent along with the output of the accumulator.

However, the RA codes with puncturing should be systematic

in order to be decodable by iterative decoding. To compute the

IOWE of the RA codes with puncturing, we use the equiva-

lent graph depicted in Fig. 8 instead of the accumulator with

puncturing. Puncturing uses a periodic pattern

with pe-

riod , where zeros indicate the puncturing positions. For com-

putation of IOWE, the equivalent code is a concatenated code

of a regular check code (a rate code with inputs and one

parity check as output), and an accumulator. Since the check

code is regular and memoryless, the presence of any interleaver

between two codes does not change the IOWE of the overall

code. This is a key observation in obtaining the IOWE. In order

to compute the IOWE for this code, we insert a uniform in-

terleaver between two codes. The next step is to compute the

IOWE of the check code. The IOWE of the check code can be

expressed by a simple closed-form formula if we use the two-di-

mensional (2-D) -transform of IOWE denoted by

.

The inverse -transform results in . Starting with

,

i.e., one check code with inputs and one output,

the

of check code can be expressed as

(7)

A. Weight Distribution of Ensemble of RA Codes With

where

Puncturing

, and

RA codes are the simplest codes among turbo-like codes, which make them very attractive for analysis. In an RA code, an information block of length is repeated times and in-

. Since there are independent check nodes in the code the IOWE can be written in -transform as

terleaved to make a block of size , and then followed by a

rate-1 accumulator (see Fig. 1 for

). We use the concept

of uniform interleaver [21] to compute the overall input–output

weight enumerator (IOWE). The final derived IOWE should

(8)

be considered as the averaged IOWE over all interleavers between repetition code and the inner accumulator with puncturing. Therefore, we need to compute the IOWE of both repetition code and the accumulator. For repetition code, it is [6]

The IOWE is obtained by taking the inverse -transform. The

closed-form expression for for arbitrary can be derived,

but the expression is complicated. Instead, in this paper, we de-

rive the IOWE for

, 3, and 4, which are practically most

(5)

useful for the codes that we already discussed in previous sections.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:32:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

698

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

1) Case we have

: Using the general formula in -transform, Using the result for , we obtain

This can be expanded as Therefore, the IOWE can be expressed as

(9)
(17) This method can be applied for any that can be decomposed into two smaller numbers. Having computed the IOWE of the (10) check code, we can use the uniform interleaver formula to compute the IOWE of the accumulator with puncturing as

(11)

(18)

2) Case

: Starting from the general formula in the

-transform, we have

Thus, for

(12) This can be expanded as

, and

, we obtain

(19)

(13)

Letting

, we then have

Therefore, the IOWE is

(20)
It should be noted that, despite the fact that we used a uniform interleaver to obtain the IOWE, we come up with the exact (not averaged) IOWE for accumulator with puncturing. The next step is to find the IOWE of the systematic RA code with puncturing, which is derived in case of a uniform interleaver after repetition (14) as
(21)

For systematic punctured RA ( ,

(15) denoted by RA(3,3), we get

3) Case : The check code for this case can be viewed as

a concatenation of two check codes each with

. Because

the check code is regular and memoryless, we can put any in-

terleaver between the check codes without changing the IOWE

of the overall check code with . By using a uniform inter-

leaver and the results found for case

, the IOWE can be

written as

), which will be (22)

Now, we obtain the asymptotic expression of for RA(3,3)

as the block size goes to infinity. To do so, we sum (22) over

(16) to get

, and use

,

where

is the binary (natural) entropy function,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:32:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABBASFAR et al.: ACCUMULATE-REPEAT-ACCUMULATE CODES

699

for with

. Let

for

,

for

, and

for

, to yield

, ,
Fig. 9. Block diagram of the ARA code.

Using (23) in (4), we can obtain the minimum

for RA(3,3).

For systematic punctured RA with (

,

will be denoted by RA(4,4), we have

(23) threshold

bits are passed through without any change and the remaining - bits go through an accumulator. The overall output bits
are applied to the punctured RA code. The use of these bits is essential for the iterative decoding to start the message-passing algorithm. is considered a parameter in code design. The effect of this parameter is studied in ML decoding. Fig. 9 shows the ARA code and the block diagram of the precoder.
In order to find the performance of the code, we need to compute the IOWE of the precoder. It is computed using the IOWE of the accumulator code as follows:

), which (26)

Therefore, the IOWE of the overall systematic ARA ( , ) code can be written as

For systematic punctured ARA with ( , (24) will be denoted by ARA(3,3), we obtain

Now, we obtain the asymptotic expression of

for

RA(4,4), after summing (24) over . Let

for

,

for

,

for

, and

for

,

with

, to yield

(27) ), which

Using (25) in (4), we can obtain the minimum for RA(4,4).

(28)

Now, we obtain the asymptotic expression of

for

ARA(3,3) using (28). Let

for

;

for

,

for

,

for

,

for

,

for

, and

for

to yield

(25)

threshold

B. Weight Distribution of Ensemble of ARA Codes
Here, we obtain the ML performance of ARA codes, as a precoded RA code with puncturing, using an accumulator as a precoder. As we have seen, in ARA codes, that a portion of the information block goes to the accumulator. In other words,
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:32:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

700

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

(29)

Using (29) in (4), we can obtain the minimum

threshold for ARA(3,3).

For systematic punctured ARA with ( ,

), which

will be denoted by ARA(4,4), we obtain

Fig. 10. BER bounds for RA(3,3), RA(4,4), ARA(3,3), ARA(4,4), and random codes for input blocksize of 4000 b.

At this point, we obtain the asymptotic expression of

ARA(4,4), using (30). Let

for

for

,

for

,

for

,

for

for

, and

, to yield

Using (31) in (4), we can obtain the minimum

threshold

for ARA(4,4).

To compare the asymptotic thresholds of RA codes with

puncturing and ARA codes with classical RA codes and random

codes, we need to know the asymptotic weight distribution of

these codes. The asymptotic expression of for RA code

with repetition is [6]

(30)

for
; and the asymptotic expression of

(32) for random codes with

, code rate is (see, for example, [15])

for

(33)

C. ML Performance and ML Thresholds of Ensemble of RA Codes With Puncturing and ARA Codes

Using the derived weight distributions in Section IV-A, the

BER performance for rate-1/2 RA(3,3), and RA(4,4) using

the bound in (1) are shown in Fig. 10 for input block size

of 4000 bi. Similarly, using the derived weight distributions

in Section IV-B, the BER performance bound for rate-1/2

ARA(3,3) and ARA(4,4) for different ’s are compared with

that of random code for the same input block size (4000) in

Fig. 10. In the ARA case, it is observed that the larger the

number of input bits that pass through the accumulator in

the precoder, the better the performance becomes. However,

the improvement diminishes past a certain point, which is

for ARA(3,3) and

for ARA(4,4).

When

, the codes turn into RA with puncturing. It is

very interesting that the performance of the ARA(4,4) very

closely approaches that of random codes for the same block

size in low

region.

The

thresholds of these rate-1/2 codes for infi-

(31)

nite block lengths using the derived asymptotic

from

Sections IV-A, and IV-B and applying to (4) are computed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:32:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ABBASFAR et al.: ACCUMULATE-REPEAT-ACCUMULATE CODES

701

as: 1.497 dB for RA(3,3), 0.871 dB for RA(4,4), 0.51 dB we have shown the ML performance of ARA codes approaches

for ARA(3,3), 0.31 dB for ARA(4,4), 0.308 dB for random very closely to the performance of random codes.

codes, and 3.364 dB for RA code with

. Discrepancy

between random code threshold and the Shannon limit is due to the upper bound which is slightly loose for rate-1/2. In the

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

ARA case, we minimized the threshold expression in (4) with

respect to . It is easy to show that the second derivative of the

threshold with respect to is always negative. Thus, for ML

decoding, the minimum threshold is achieved when

.

However, for all values of

in case of ARA(3,3),

The authors would like to thank J. Thorpe and S. Dolinar of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory for their comments and C. Jones and K. Andrews for providing simulation results for two ARA codes.

and

in case of ARA(4,4), very small change

in threshold was observed. As we expected, based on the BER performance bound for input block of 4000, the

REFERENCES

threshold of ARA(4,4) for infinite block is also extremely close

to the threshold of random codes, based on the same bound.

To obtain the interleaving gain as defined in [21] and [22],

we can use the method in [22] to find the maximum exponent

of in the weight distribution. However, an easier way is to

view the ARA codes as serial concatenated codes, where the

combined version of outer accumulator (precoder) and repeti-

tion 3 or 4 code can be considered as an outer code with a min-

imum distance of 3 or 4, respectively. The inner code then is

the inner accumulator (as a recursive convolutional code) with

puncturing. Then, we can use the theorems in [28] to obtain

interleaving gains. Note that the ARA codes are systematic;

thus, when the output weight of accumulator with puncturing

is zero for a nonzero input weight, the ARA codeword weight

is nonzero. Then, the interleaving gain for the ARA codes with

repetition 3 or 4 for FER is and for BER is

i.e., av-

eraged word error rate

, and averaged bit error

rate

. Thus, precoder improves the SNR threshold

but the interleaving gain remains unchanged with respect to

RA(3,3) or RA(4,4). The ensemble weight distribution of pro-

tograph based ARA codes can be obtained using the method

proposed in [25] and [26].

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a new channel coding scheme called Accumulate Repeat Accumulate codes (ARA). This class of codes can be viewed as a subclass of LDPC codes with fast encoder structure, and they have a projected graph or protograph representation, which allows for high-speed iterative decoding implementation using belief propagation. Based on density evolution for protograph-based ARA codes, we have shown that, for maximum variable node degree 5, a minimum bit SNR as low as 0.08 dB from channel capacity for rate-1/2 can be achieved as the block size goes to infinity. Such a low iterative decoding threshold cannot be achieved by RA, IRA, or unstructured irregular LDPC codes with the same constraint on the maximum variable node degree. We constructed families of higher rate both multi-edge-type and protograph-based ARA codes with iterative decoding thresholds that stay close to their respective channel capacity thresholds uniformly. Iterative decoding simulation results for ARA are provided and compared with turbo codes. The weight distribution of some simple multi edge type ARA codes is obtained, and through existing tightest bounds

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[3] M. R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[4] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[5] S.-Y. Chung, D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity- check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 58–60, Jan. 2001.
[6] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. McEliece, “Coding theorems for turbo-like codes,” in Proc. Allerton Conf., 1998, pp. 201–210.
[7] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, 2000, pp. 1–8.
[8] J. Thorpe, Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes Constructed from Protographs JPL INP, 2003, Progress Rep. 42-154.
[9] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Iterative turbo decoder analysis based on density evolution,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 891–907, May 2001.
[10] Richardson , “Methods and Apparatus for Decoding LDPC Codes,” U.S. Patent 6 633 856, Oct. 14, 2003.
[11] T. Richardson, “Multi-edge type LDPC codes,” in Workshop Honoring Prof. Bob McEliece, Pasadena, CA, May 24–25, 2002.
[12] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, p. 1645, Aug. 1996.
[13] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The renaissance of Gallager’s lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Mag., pp. 126–131, Aug. 2003.
[14] D. Divsalar, A Simple Tight Bound on Error Probability of Block Codes with Application to Turbo Codes Jet Propulsion Laboratory, CA, 1999, JPL TMO Progress Rep. 42-139.
[15] D. Divsalar and E. Biglieri, “Upper bounds to error probabilities of coded systems beyond the cutoff rate,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 12, pp. 2011–2018, Dec. 2003.
[16] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Analysis of low density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[17] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message- passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[18] A. Abbasfar, D. Divsalar, and K. Yao, “A class of turbo-like codes with efficient and practical high-speed decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Military Commun. Conf., Oct.-Nov. 2004, pp. 245–250.
[19] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[20] F. R. Kschischang, “Codes defined on graphs,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 118–125, Aug. 2003.
[21] S. Bennedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling turbo codes: Some results on parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 409–428, Mar. 1996.
[22] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Serial concatenation of interleaved codes: Performance analysis, design, and iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 909–926, May 1998.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:32:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

702

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 4, APRIL 2007

[23] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, J. Thorpe, and C. Jones, “Constructing LDPC codes from simple loop-free encoding modules,” in Proc. IEEE ICC, Seoul, Korea, May 2005, pp. 658–662.
[24] ——, “Low-rate LDPC codes with simple protograph structure,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 1622–1626.
[25] D. Divsalar, “Finite length weight enumerators for protograph based LDPC code ensembles,” presented at the IEEE Commun. Theory Workshop, Park City, UT, Jun. 2005.
[26] D. Divsalar, “Ensemble weight enumerators for protograph LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1554–1558.
[27] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Encoders for block-circulant LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, Australia, Sep. 2005, pp. 2300–2304.
[28] H. Jin and R. J. McEliece, “Coding theorems for turbo code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1451–1461, Jun. 2002.
[29] S. ten Brink, “Code doping for triggering iterative decoding convergence,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jul. 2001, p. 235.

Dariush Divsalar (S’76–M’78–SM’90–F’97) received the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), in 1978.
Since then, he has been with the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL), California Institute of Technology (Caltech), Pasadena, where he is a Principal Scientist. At JPL, he has been involved with developing state-of-the-art technology for advanced deep space communications systems and future NASA space exploration and Mobile and Satellite Communications. Since 1986, he has taught graduate courses in digital communications, spread spectrum communications, and coding at UCLA and Caltech. He has published more than 150 papers, coauthored a book entitled An Introduction to Trellis Coded Modulation with Applications (New York: MacMillan, 1991), contributed to two other books, and holds ten U.S. patents in the above areas. Dr. Divsalar was the corecipient of the 1986 Prize Paper Award in Communications for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY. Recently, one of his papers was selected as one of the key research papers published by the IEEE Communications Society during the past five decades. He has received over 30 NASA Tech Brief awards and a NASA Exceptional Engineering Achievement Medal in 1996. He served as Editor and Area Editor in Coding and Communication Theory for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 1989 to 1996. He became a Fellow of IEEE in 1997 for contributions to the analysis and design of coding and modulation techniques for satellite, mobile, and deep-space communication systems.

Aliazam Abbasfar (S’01–M’05) received the B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1992 and 1995, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA), in 2005, all in electrical engineering.
From 1992 to 1994, he was with the Iran Telecommunication Research Center (ITRC), where he was involved with switching networks for data communications. Between 2001 and 2004, he held positions as a Senior Design Engineer in the areas of communication system design and digital VLSI ASIC design with Innovics Inc., Sequoia Communications, and Jaalaa Inc. Upon graduation from UCLA, he joined Rambus Inc., Los Altos, CA, where he is involved with high-speed data communications on wireline backplane links. His main research interests include wireless communications, equalization, error correcting codes, and VLSI ASICs for digital data communications.

Kung Yao (S’59–M’65–SM’91–F’94–LF’04) received the B.S.E. (Highest Honors), M.A., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering all from Princeton University, Princeton, NJ.
He was a NAS-NRC Post-Doctoral Research Fellow with the University of California, Berkeley. Presently, he is a Professor with the Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). In 1969, he was a Visiting Assistant Professor with the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambirdge. From 1985 to 1988, he served as an Assistant Dean of the School of Engineering and Applied Science at UCLA. His research interests include sensor array system, digital communication theory, wireless radio system, chaos communications, digital and array processing, systolic and VLSI algorithms, and simulation. He has published over 250 journal and conference papers. He was the coeditor of a two-volume series of an IEEE Reprint Book on High Performance VLSI Signal Processing (IEEE Press, 1997). Dr. Yao was the recipient of the IEEE Signal Processing Society’s 1993 Senior Award in VLSI Signal Processing. He has served as Associate Editors for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, and IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, and as a Guest Editors of numerous Special Issues.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:32:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

