A Low Complexity Decoding Algorithm Design Based on Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes

Cai Honghao Department of Information Engineering
Engineering University of PAP Xi’an, China
723717131@qq.com

Yang Yingkun Department of Information Engineering
Engineering University of PAP Xi’an, China
yyk199612@163.com

Qu Yi Department of Information Engineering
Engineering University of PAP Xi’an, China
wjquyi@sina.com

Abstract—Entering the 5G era, the hardware design of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes under the new standard has increasingly higher requirements on throughput. According to the geometric characteristics of the check matrices of the quasicyclic (QC) LDCP codes under the CCSDS standard, this paper designs a layered dynamic normalized minimum sum algorithm(LDNMSA) under the pre-termination decoding based on de-layering scheme. The check matrix structure of this code is easy for hardware design and the storage resource consumption is low. The approximate replacement of the minimum sum algorithm(MSA) reduces the computational complexity of the check node update process. The determination of correction factors and inter-layer deletion thresholds through computer simulation improves the decoding performance and the speed of a single iteration, and adopt the layered scheduling scheme with optimized update order reduces the number of iterations required for decoding. Experimental results show that when the bit error rate(BER) is 10-5, the designed algorithm has a gain of approximately 0.5 dB compared to the MSA. The speed and calculation amounts to a single iteration are much lower than the log-likelihood-ratio(LLR) belief propagation(BP) algorithm and the performance is only less than 0.1dB.
Keywords—quasi-cyclic LDPC codes, de-layering scheme, dynamic normalized minimum sum algorithm, optimized update order.
I. INTRODUCTION
In 1948, Shannon's formula stated that as long as the transmission rate of the message in the channel is not higher than the channel capacity, the error codes caused by the channel noise can be reduced to an arbitrarily small amount through some error control coding. The advent of this formula has led many scholars to constantly explore and find good codes that can approach Shannon's limits. Shannon's coding theorem states that such good codes need to be based on three criteria: 1. The code length L needs to be long enough; 2. The random coding method is used for encoding; 3. The decoding method should use maximum likelihood decoding[1].
In 1962, D. Gallager discovered and proposed a lowdensity parity check(LDPC) codes, The number of non-zero elements in the check matrix of the codes is far less than the number of 0 and is randomly distributed. It has good sparsity and randomness. When the code length L becomes longer, its coding and decoding complexity is also increasing significantly and difficult to implement in engineering[2]. In terms of decoding, D. Gallager proposed that maximum likelihood decoding has excellent error correction performance, but limited to its higher decoding complexity and computer performance at that time, LDPC codes failed to attract people's attention. Until 1981, D. Tanner visually reflected the transmission of messages between check nodes

and variable nodes through a bipartite graph (Tanner graph) during the decoding process. On this basis, D. Mackay adopted the belief propagation(BP) decoding algorithm[3], prove that the LDPC code has superior performance closer to the Shannon limit than the Turbo code.
LDPC codes are a class of excellent linear block codes whose performance can approach Shannon limit and have good error correction performance under continuous burst noise channels[4].The cost of high error-resistance performance is to bring a lot of coding and decoding complexity. In the field of wireless communication that requires higher and higher throughput rates, it is of great significance to research a decoding algorithm with low complexity, low hardware resource consumption, and high throughput rate. This paper analyzes the check matrix and generator matrix structure of the quasi-cyclic(QC) LDCP codes recommended by the CCSDS standard, and uses its special geometric structure to design a layered dynamic normalized minimum sum algorithm(LDNMSA) under the pre-termination decoding based on de-layering scheme. Based on the minimum sum algorithm (MSA) decoding, a dynamic
correction factor α , β are added to compensate for the loss
of decoding performance. The layered scheduling scheme with optimized update order and the de-layering scheme are
combined. The dynamic correction factor α , β and the delete threshold parameter th are determined through
computer simulation. The experimental results in this paper show that the designed improved algorithm has fast decoding convergence speed, low operation complexity, simple parallel decoder design, and excellent error correction performance.
II. INTRODUCTION TO (2560,1024) LDPC CODES
A. Check Matrix Construction The construction of the check matrix of the LDPC codes
is mainly divided into a random construction method and a geometric construction method. The progressive edge growth(PEG) algorithm is the mainstream algorithm in the random construction method. Using the greedy algorithm, on the premise of making the check matrix girth as large as possible, the edges of the check node and variable node are set on the Tanner graph by computer search [5], The check matrix constructed by the PEG algorithm has excellent performance, but the randomly distributed elements in the matrix are not conducive to hardware storage, and the hardware design of the decoding module is complicated. The check matrix constructed by the geometric construction method has good geometric characteristics. For example, the check matrix has a cyclic structure of QC LDPC codes. The check matrix can be divided into multiple cyclic sub-matrices of the same size,

978-1-7281-6330-7/20/$31.00 ©2020 IEEE

45

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

and each sub-matrix can be obtained by cyclically shifting the first row (column) to the right (down) [6]. The QC LDPC
check matrix H can be expressed by equation (1).

 h h h  h  s11

s12

s13

s1C

H

=

 

h

s21



h s22 

h s23



h s2 C

 

  

(1)

 

h

sK

1

hsK 2

hsK 3



 sKC h  KM ×CM

The check matrix H consists of K × C cyclic submatrices h , which is a square matrix of size M × M . When Sij = ∞ , it means that hsij is an all-zero matrix; when

Sij = l , it means that each row (column) in the hsij matrix is cyclically shifted by l units to the right (down), and a K × C

-sized matrix composed of Sij called the base matrix [7].
Therefore, in hardware storage, only the base matrix and the cyclic unit sub-matrix need to be stored, which saves more hardware resources, the coding process can be implemented using a simple shift register, and the geometric check matrix has a certain simplification in the hardware structure and decoding process, which is easy to implement in hardware. This also makes QC LDPC codes the preferred encoding method for today's LDPC hardware design.

The low-complexity decoding algorithm studied in this paper is based on (2048,1024) LDPC codes with a code rate
of 1 / 2 after puncturing recommended by the CCSDS
standard, it is derived from (2560,1024) LDPC codes, the size
of its check matrix is 1536× 2560 , which can be divided into 3× 5 sub-matrices of size 512×512 , as expressed in
equation (2).

0

0

I

0

I ⊕ ∏1 

H1/2 = I

I

0

I

∏

2

⊕

∏3

⊕

∏

4

 

(2)

I ∏5 ⊕ ∏6 0 ∏7 ⊕ ∏8

I



Where 0 is an all-zero matrix of 512×512 size, and I is an identity matrix of 512×512 size. ∏1 ~ ∏8 is the
permutation square matrix, which can be obtained through the standard look-up table provided by CCSDS[8]. The check matrix is shown in Fig. 1.

Fig.1 (2560,1024) LDPC check matrix

B. Generator Matrix Construction The generation matrix of (2560, 1024) LDPC codes
recommended by the CCSDS standard can be obtained by
check matrix block multiplication [9]: H = [Q, P] , where Q is a matrix of size 1536×1024 , P is a square matrix of size 1536×1536 ; W = [P−1Q]T ; Finally, G = [I ,W ] , where I is a identity matrix of size 1024×1024 , and the
matrix operation is based on the modulo-two. It can be seen
that the size of the generator matrix is 1024× 2560 , and the
last 521 columns of the matrix need to be punctured to obtain
an LDPC code with a code rate of 1 / 2 . The generator matrix is shown in Fig. 2. W is a dense cyclic matrix with block
cyclic characteristics, which is easy to implement in hardware by cyclic shift register.
Fig.2 (2560,1024) LDPC generator matrix
III. THE LAYERED DYNAMIC NORMALIZED MINIMUM SUM ALGORITHM
A. MSA Decoding Process The LNMSA decoding designed in this paper is a
combination of normalized minimum sum algorithm(NMSA) and layered decoding. MSA is a low-complexity decoding algorithm that performs simplified approximation on loglikelihood-ratio(LLR) BP in the update of check nodes [10]. LLR BP decoding algorithm is a maximum likelihood decoding algorithm with excellent decoding performance. In the iterative decoding process, there are a lot of non-linear operations of hyperbolic functions and hyperbolic inverse functions in the update step of check nodes, and the hardware implementation is too complicated. Therefore, through approximate substitution, MSA reduces the nonlinear equations in the operation to comparison and summation operations, which can ignore the noise variance factor in the equation and greatly reduce the amount of calculation. As
shown in equation (3), it represents the soft information rij passed by the check node c j to the variable node vi during the n th iteration. Where C j represents the set of all variable nodes connected to the check node c j in the Tanner graph, and C j\i represents that the set C j with the variable node vi
removed.

46
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

∏ min L(n) (rij ) =

sign(L(n−1) ( pi' j )) •

i'∈C j\i

i'∈C j\i

| L(n−1) ( p ) | i' j

(3)

Let yi = xi + ui , xi be the sending sequence, yi be the
receiving sequence, and ui be the channel noise. The MSA
decoding iteration process is as follows:

Step 1 initialization;

L(0) ( pij ) = L(0) ( pi ) = yi

(4)

L( pi )

=

ln

pi (1) pi (0)

=

ln

P{xi = 1| yi} P{xi = −1| yi}

(5)

pij represents the soft information passed by the variable node vi to the check node c j .

Step 2 Check nodes update is the same as equation (3);

Step 3 Variable nodes update;

 L(n) ( pij ) = L(0) ( pi ) +

L(n) (rij' )

(6)

j'∈Vi\ j

Vi represents the set of all check nodes connected to the

variable node

vi

in the Tanner graph, and V i\ j

represents the

set Vi with the check node c j removed.

Step 4 Decision decoding;

 L(n) ( pi ) = L(0) ( pi ) + L(n) (rij )

(7)

j ∈Vi

B. NMSA Factor Selection

NMSA corrects the confidence amplitude of MSA, and improves decoding performance by multiplying a correction

factor α (0 < α < 1) before L(rij ) . Combining density

evolution (DE) theory [11], α can be approximated as

α

≈

E (| E (|

LLLR LNM

|) |)

. Under a

certain

signal-to-noise ratio, it can

be seen that as the iteration progresses, the error code is

continuously corrected, and α continuously converges to 1.

Therefore, the appropriate α value is selected by the

weighted average method to make it suitable for the entire
iteration process. The optimal value of α is determined by
computer simulation. The simulations in this paper are based on AWGN channel and BPSK modulation. The maximum
number of iterations T in the simulation, T = 20 , as shown
in Fig. 3, (2560,1024) LDPC codes are transmitted under the condition of SNR = 1.6dB, and the excellent decoding
performance is achieved when the value of α is between 0.6
and 0.7. In this paper, a dynamic correction factor is proposed,

let α(n) = α(n−1) + β ( β > 0 ). Combining with the change

of L(rij ) in the decoding process, we use a small additive
constant to increase the gain brought by the correction factor. For this improved algorithm, the paper named it Dynamic NMS. in Fig. 4, it can be seen that when

α(0) = 0.6,β = 0.015 , DNMSA has a certain optimization
in performance at high SNR compared to the NMSA.

Fig.3

α Bit error rate(BER) under different correction factor

Fig.4 Bit error rate(BER) under different dynamic correction factor
C. Layered Scheduling Scheme The MSA decoding process above uses a flooding
scheduling scheme. In the iteration of this scheme, check nodes and variable nodes are processed in parallel. The processing of all variable nodes needs to wait for the end of all check nodes update and the processing of all check nodes needs to wait for the completion of the soft information update of all variable nodes in the previous iteration[12]. This traditional scheduling scheme will lead to a reduction in the convergence speed. In hardware implementation, there will always be a group of processing units that are idle, making it difficult to increase the throughput rate. Under the layered scheduling scheme, check nodes and variable nodes are processed in series. The principle is to divide the check matrix into several layers according to rows (columns). In the check matrix, the information between check nodes and variable nodes is transferred between each layer in order to update the soft information. The next layer can directly read the soft information of the variable node of the previous layer in this iteration as the initial value of the variable node of this layer. The next iteration starts after all layers have been updated. Under the same decoding performance, the layered scheduling scheme needs fewer iterations than the flooding scheduling scheme.

47
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig.5 (2560,1024) LDPC check matrix layered by rows

In Fig.5, the (2560,1024) LDPC code check matrix is divided into 12 layers by rows, each layer contains 128 rows. Within each layer, the row weight is 3, 6 and the column weight is not greater than 1. That is, at any layer, each variable node participates at most in a check equation (connected to a check node). Combined with the DNMSA, the iterative
decoding process of the k th layer is as follows:

Step 1 initialization;

L(0) ( pi ) = yi , L(0) (rij ) = 0

(8)

Step 2 Variable nodes update;

L(n,k ) ( pij ) = L(n,k −1) ( pi ) − L(n−1) (rij )

(9)

Step 3 Check nodes update;

∏ min L(n) (rij ) = α(n) •

sign( L(n,k ) ( pi' j )) •

i'∈C j\i

i'∈C j\i

| L(n,k ) ( p ) | i' j

(10 )

Step 4 Decision decoding;

L(n,k ) ( pi ) = L(n,k ) ( pij ) + Ll (rij )

(11)

For irregular LDPC codes, the degree is an important factor to determine whether a node is reliable. The larger the column weight of the variable node, the more external information it receives, and the higher the reliability. The smaller the row weight of the check node, the more intuitive the information it provides to adjacent variable nodes. Therefore, in the decoding process, the paper preferentially updates the layer where the node with the smaller row weight and the larger column weight is located. Through calculation, the update order of each layer is determined and fixed before decoding, basic matrix rearranged by layers does not add additional hardware complexity and improve performance
（ Fig. 6 ） . In this simulation, the maximum number of
iterations T is set to 10. It can be seen that the optimized
scheduling sequence has better performance and lower error floor.

Fig.6 Comparison of BER with different update order

LDNMSA based on (2560, 1024) LDPC codes has several advantages in hardware implementation. According to the characteristics of the layered scheduling scheme, 128 check nodes in the same layer can be processed in parallel and simultaneously update the soft information of related variable nodes, the information between layers is updated serially in order, and the throughput rate is considerable. As shown in equation (9), the variable nodes update process of this algorithm involves only a simple subtraction operation, so the variable nodes update module can be omitted in the hardware design, which reduces the consumption of hardware resources. In addition, the check matrix is composed of
12 × 20 sub-matrices of size 128×128 . These sub-
matrices parts are all-zero matrices or are obtained by cyclic shift of the identity matrix, which is very conducive to hardware storage.

IV. THE PRE-TERMINATION DECODING BASED ON DELAYERING SCHEME

There are two commonly used termination decoding methods for LDPC decoding: One is to set the maximum number of iterations, when the number is reached, the iteration is terminated immediately, and the judgment is output. This method cannot be flexibly adjusted according to the channel SNR and the current decoding situation of each group of codewords, and the efficiency is not high. The second is parity check equation (PCE) verification. After each iteration, the soft information is judged to verify whether it meets its check matrix [13-14]. This method has high decoding delay and high hardware resource consumption. It can be seen from the iterative process of LDNMSA that as the iteration continues, the soft information modulus of the variable node is also continuously improved and gradually becomes credible. When the credibility of the soft information is large enough, the subsequent iterative update has little effect on its decision.
Therefore, a threshold value th can be set, and when all the

variable node soft information L( pi ) of a layer is updated,
its modulus value is compared with th , If the L( pi ) of this
layer are all greater than the threshold value, this layer is considered credible, and the layer can be skipped in the next iteration calculation, otherwise, the layer will still participate in the next iteration process. That is

L( n , k

)

(

pi

)

=

  

L(n−1,k −1) ( pi ), L(n−1,k ) ( pi ),|

| L(n−1,k L(n−1,k )

) ( pi ) |> th ( pi ) |≤ th

.

When

the

48

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

iterative decoding process is carried out to a certain number of times, if all layers are trusted layers, the iteration is ended, and the decision output is performed.

V. THE SIMULATION RESULT Finally, the paper compares the decoding performance of LLR BP decoding, MSA, DNMSA and de-layering LDNMSA through simulation, and proves the advantages of de-layering LDNMSA in terms of computational complexity, convergence speed and decoding performance.

Fig.7

Comparison of BER with different deletion threshold th

Fig.8

th The number of iterations under different deletion thresholds

Set the maximum number of iterations T = 10 , the
(2560, 1024) LDPC code adopts LDNMSA decoding,. Through simulation, the decoding performance under different deletion thresholds can be observed (Fig. 7). When the SNR is low, the soft information of the variable nodes in de-layering scheme is difficult to reach the threshold, and the codeword after the decision in the PCE scheme is also difficult to meet the check equation, so the performance is equivalent; When the SNR is high, if the threshold value in de-layering scheme is too low, the verification layer is deleted before it is sufficiently credible, resulting in an increase in the BER. It can
be seen from Fig. 8 that the higher the th value in decoding,
the more the number of iterations required. Subsequent
simulation in this paper selects th = 2 , and its decoding
performance is similar to PCE scheme. Although the required number of iterations is slightly more than that of the LDNMSA using the PCE scheme, de-layering scheme improves the rate of iterations by deleting the trusted layer and does not need to verify the check matrix after the decision, so the decoding convergence speed is faster.

Fig.9 Comparison of BER of multiple decoding algorithms at each iteration
According to Fig. 9, it can be seen that when the BER is 10-5, the performance of de-layering LDNMSA is improved by 0.5dB compared with MSA, and is only 0.1dB worse than LLR BP decoding, which is close to the DNMSA decoding performance. Its maximum number of decoding iterations is only half of the remaining algorithms, So it can converge faster. The de-layering scheme makes it have a higher iteration speed, and the decoding calculation process only includes comparison and summation operations, so that the calculation amount of a single iteration is much lower than the LLR BP algorithm. It can be seen that while de-layering LDNMSA has excellent decoding performance, the decoding complexity is lower. Combining the (2560,1024) QC LDPC code in the paper can improve the throughput rate and reduce the consumption of hardware resources in hardware implementation.
REFERENCES
[1] C. E. Shannon, “ A Mathematical Theory of Communication,” in IEEE Bell System Technical Journal, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 623-656, October 1948, doi:10.1002/j.1538-7305.1948.tb00917.x.
[2] R. Gallager, “ Low-density parity-check codes,” in IRE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21-28, January 1962, doi: 10.1109/TIT.1962.1057683.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “ Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices (vol 45, pg 339, 1999),” in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 2101-2101, July 2001, doi:10.1109/tit.2001.930952.
[4] I. Matveeva, V. Kalmychkov, and A. Dorokhov, “ Model Design of Quantum Logic Circuits Based on Reed-Muller Expressions.” in IEEE 2018 International Russian Automation Conference (RusAutoCon), pp. 1-6, September 2018.
[5] H. Xiao-Yu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. Arnold, “ Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs.” in IEEE Global Telecommunications Conferencepp. vol. 2, pp. 995-1001, November 2001.
[6] X. Xiao, B. Vasic, S. Lin, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, W. E. Ryan, and Ieee, “ Girth-Eight Reed-Solomon Based QC-LDPC Codes,” Proceedings of 2018 IEEE 10th International Symposium on Turbo Codes & Iterative Information Processing, pp. 1-7, 2018.
[7] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “ Memory System Optimization for FPGA-Based Implementation of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes Decoders,” in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I-

49

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Regular Papers, vol. 58, no. 1, pp. 98-111, January 2011, doi:10.1109/tcsi.2010.2055250.
[8] CCSDS 130.0-G-3, “ Overview of space communications protocols,” Washington,D.C, USA: CCSDS, pp. 7-9, December 2007.
[9] CCSDS 131.1-O-2, “ Low Density Parity Check Codes for Use in Near-Earth and Deep Space Applications,” Washington D.C, USA: CCSDS, pp. 11-37, April 2008.
[10] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “ Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673-680, 1999.
[11] M. K. Roberts, and M. Falaq, “ A low-complex Min-Sum decoding algorithm for irregular LDPC codes,” in IEEE International Conference on Wireless Communications, Signal Processing and Networking, pp. 269-271, March 2018.

[12] Z. W. Li, L. Chen, L. Q. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. H. Fong, “ Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71-81, January 2006, doi:10.1109/tcomm.2005.861667.
[13] Z. Wang, and Z. Cui, “ Low-complexity high-speed decoder design for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (Vlsi) Systems, vol. 15, no. 1, pp. 104-114, January 2007, doi:10.1109/tvlsi.2007.891098.
[14] J. Sha, J. Lin, Z. Wang, L. Li, and M. Gao, “ Decoder Design for RSBased LDPC Codes,” in IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems IiExpress Briefs, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 724-728, September 2009, doi:10.1109/tcsii.2009.2027945.

50
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:10:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

