Layered Normalized Min-Sum Decoding with Bit Flipping for FDPC Codes
Niloufar Hosseinzadeh , Mohsen Moradi , and Hessam Mahdavifar Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Northeastern University, Boston, MA 02115, USA
Email: hz93niloufar@gmail.com, {m.moradi, h.mahdavifar}@northeastern.edu

arXiv:2510.01019v1 [cs.IT] 1 Oct 2025

Abstract—Fair-density parity-check (FDPC) codes have been recently introduced demonstrating improved performance compared to low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes standardized in 5G systems particularly in high-rate regimes. In this paper, we introduce a layered normalized min-sum (LNMS) messagepassing decoding algorithm for the FDPC codes. We also introduce a syndrome-guided bit flipping (SGBF) method to enhance the error-correction performance of our proposed decoder. The LNMS decoder leverages conflict graph coloring for efficient layered scheduling, enabling faster convergence by grouping nonconflicting check nodes and updating variable nodes immediately after each layer. In the event of decoding failure, the SGBF method is activated, utilizing a novel reliability metric that combines log-likelihood ratio (LLR) magnitudes and syndromederived error counts to identify the least reliable bits. A set of candidate sequences is then generated by performing singlebit flips at these positions, with each candidate re-decoded via LNMS. The optimal candidate is selected based on the minimum syndrome weight. Extensive simulation results demonstrate the superiority of the proposed decoder. Numerical simulations on FDPC(256, 192) code with a bit-flipping set size of T = 128 and a maximum of 5 iterations demonstrate that the proposed decoder achieves approximately a 0.5 dB coding gain over standalone LNMS decoding at a frame error rate (FER) of 10−3, while providing coding gains of 0.75 − 1.5 dB over other state-of-theart codes including polar codes and 5G-LDPC codes at the same length and rate and also under belief propagation decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2] have become a key error-correction mechanism in communication systems offering near-capacity performance through iterative message-passing decoding algorithms such as belief propagation (BP) and its low-complexity approximations, including the normalized min-sum (NMS) algorithm. These codes are particularly well-suited for high-throughput applications and have been integrated into standards such as in 5G for data channels [3] and 802.11 Wi-Fi [4], with ongoing consideration for 6G systems [5].
Recently, fair-density parity-check (FDPC) codes were introduced and have demonstrated superior error-correction performance compared to 5G-LDPC codes in high-rate regimes and various short-to-medium block lengths [6]. They are also shown to achieve coding gains even with a small number of decoding iterations [6], [7]. Furthermore, FDPC codes provide a mechanism to characterize the minimum distance and weight distribution of the codes [6], thereby enabling

analytical characterization of the error floor regions, which are often very difficult to obtain for LDPC codes.
The promising performance of FDPC codes has been shown under BP decoding with flooding scheduling, in which all check nodes update messages concurrently before variable nodes are updated. This approach, while straightforward, may result in slower convergence due to the delayed propagation of information. To mitigate this issue in classical LDPC codes, layered scheduling has emerged as an effective alternative, partitioning check nodes into non-conflicting layers, for example, by using graph coloring techniques on the conflict graph [8]. By updating variable nodes immediately after each layer, layered scheduling accelerates convergence. The integration of NMS into layered frameworks makes the overall decoding scheme suitable for practical implementations [9].
A main optimization problem in layered decoding is to optimize the decoding schedule. Recently, reinforcement learning (RL) techniques have been utilized to address this problem for LDPC codes [10], [11], as well as for polar codes [12]. These learning-based methods demonstrate the potential of adaptive scheduling but often require significant training overhead and may not generalize across all code families. Also, BP decoders can still fail primarily due to trapping sets or residual errors [13]. To address these shortcomings, post-processing techniques can be used, including bit-flipping algorithms that leverage syndrome information and reliability metrics to identify and correct erroneous bits [14]. List-based approaches extend this by generating multiple candidates and selecting the best based on criteria like minimum syndrome weight, thereby improving reliability without excessive complexity [6].
Motivated by the aforementioned advances in BP decoding and building on the promising strengths of FDPC codes, in this paper, we propose and analyze a novel message-passing algorithm for FDPC codes. We introduce a hybrid decoder that combines layered normalized min-sum (LNMS) decoding with syndrome-guided bit-flipping (SGBF) list correction. The LNMS phase employs conflict graph coloring for efficient layered scheduling, resulting in fast convergence. In cases of decoding failure, the SGBF phase is activated, utilizing a novel reliability metric that integrates log-likelihood ratio (LLR) magnitudes with error counts derived from the syndrome, i.e., how many unsatisfied parity checks each bit is involved in. Then the bits deemed unreliable are identified and flipped. A set of candidates is generated by single-bit flips on the

unreliable positions, each re-decoded via LNMS, and the optimal candidate is chosen based on syndrome weight. This hybrid strategy enhances error correction while maintaining manageable complexity.
Extensive simulation results are provided for various shortto-medium block length FDPC codes. For instance, simulations on the FDPC(256, 192) code over the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BI-AWGN) channel demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed decoding algorithm. With a bit-flipping set size of 128 and only 5 iterations of the LNMS message-passing algorithm, the proposed decoder achieves approximately a 0.5 dB coding gain over the standalone LNMS at a frame error rate (FER) of 10−3. The overall scheme, i.e., FDPC code together with the proposed decoding algorithm, provides coding gains of 0.75 − 1.5 dB over other stateof-the-art codes including polar codes and 5G-LDPC codes at the same length and rate and also under BP decoding. Similar performance gains are observed for FDPC(256, 164) and FDPC(1024, 844) codes.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides preliminaries on FDPC codes. Section III presents the proposed decoder, detailing layered scheduling, LNMS decoding, and SGBF correction. Section IV discusses numerical results, and Section V concludes the paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES
Notation convention. Throughout the paper, vectors and matrices are denoted in bold, and all operations are carried out over the binary field. FDPC codes. These codes have been recently introduced in [6] targeting high-rate applications. In the√original construction, the base parity-check matrix Hb is a 2 N × N matrix, where N is the code block length and N = t2 for some even integer t ≥ 2. Each column of Hb has weight 2, and each row has weight t. The matrix Hb consists of all binary column-vectors of length 2t and Hamming weight 2, with the indices of the two non-zero entries differing by an odd number. The rank of Hb is 2t − 1, and the minimum distance of the code defined by Hb is 4. The order-s FDPC code, for s ≥ 2, is constructed by applying s − 1 distinct permutations (e.g., random permutations) to the columns of Hb and stacking them on top of each o√ther, resulting in a parity-check matrix H of dime√nsion 2s N × N . The code dimension is at least N − 2s N + s. FDPC codes with efficient encoders. In [7], a slightly modified construction of FDPC codes is proposed to enable lowcomplexity encoding, while preserving the desirable properties of the original codes. For a given t, the columns of the base matrix Hb are rearranged to form Hbase−(t,1) where again each column has exactly two ones. The rearrangement is done by grouping columns such that the first 2t − 1 columns have consecutive ones, the next 2t − 3 columns have two zeros between the ones, and so on, until the last column has 2t − 2 zeros between the ones in the first and last rows. To facilitate systematic encoding, the first 2t columns are modified to form

a bidiagonal square matrix A of size 2t × 2t, resulting in the

modified base matrix Hmbase−(t,1) = [A|B].

A certain form of order-3 FDPC codes is also introduced

in

[7]

with

Hbase−(t,2),

a

2t

×

t(t+1) 2

matrix

aiming

for

a minimum distance of 6, by carefully choosing the gaps

between the two ones in each column. The base matrix is

generated using Algorithm 2 in [7], which iteratively places

ones with increasing gaps and optionally removes columns

to achieve the desired minimum distance. The full parity-

check matrix H is then constructed using Algorithm 1 in

[7], which applies a specified number of random column

permutations denoted as num per to the submatrix starting

from column msize + 1 (where msize = 2t × (num per + 1)), stacks them, and optionally punctures columns to achieve the desired N ≤ t2. The first msize columns are set to a bidiagonal form for encoding. The parity-check matrix H used in this

paper follows this structure with the following form [7]:

1 0 0 · · · 0

C

1 1 0 · · · 0



H = 0 1 1 · · · 0

  

...

...

...

...

...

π1(C) 

...



 

,

...

  

0 0 0 · · · 1 πnum per(C)

where C is the submatrix of the base matrix consisting of

columns from msize + 1 to the end, and πi(C) denotes the i-th random column permutation of C. If N < t2, columns are

punctured from the data part (after column msize) to achieve

the desired block length.

Encoding process. For the systematic FDPC code [7] with

a code block length of N and a data length of K, the

parity vector p of length M = N − K is derived from the

message vector m, and the codeword is given by c = [p, m].

Specifically, the parity bits are computed from the data bits

using si =

K j=1

mj Hi,M+j ,

and

obtained

as

pi =

s1, si + pi−1,

i = 1, i > 1.

(1)

III. PROPOSED DECODER

Our proposed decoder consists of an LNMS decoding algorithm, followed by an SGBF operation. In the following, we explain our algorithm in detail.

A. Layered Scheduling via Conflict Graph Coloring
In the conventional BP decoding algorithm, all check nodes process messages simultaneously (flooding), and due to the presence of short cycles, this can result in slower convergence. In contrast, the LNMS message-passing algorithm groups the check nodes into layers by leveraging graph coloring on a conflict graph. In a conflict graph, two check nodes are considered adjacent if they share a variable node. Each layer consists of non-conflicting check nodes that can be processed in parallel. Variable nodes are updated immediately after processing each layer, which enables faster information propagation across iterations.

The M × N parity-check matrix H defines a bipartite graph with M check nodes and N variable nodes. The conflict graph G = (V, E) models conflicts among check nodes. The vertices are indexed by V = {1, 2, . . . , M } (one for each check node). The edges are defined as (m1, m2) ∈ E if checks m1 and m2 share a variable, i.e., there exist a j such that Hm1,j = Hm2,j = 1. Mathematically, the adjacency matrix is

A = HHT − diag(HHT ),

(2)

where HHT counts shared variables per pair, and the diagonal is zeroed to exclude self-loops. The adjacency matrix A is used to determine conflicts for graph coloring: During greedy coloring, neighbors are identified as rows where Am,k > 0, to avoid assigning the same color.
Graph coloring assigns colors c : V → {1, 2, . . . , χ}, where χ is the chromatic number (i.e., the minimum number of required colors), such that no two adjacent vertices share the same color: c(m1) ≠ c(m2) if (m1, m2) ∈ E. We employ a greedy coloring strategy. The check nodes are ordered as m = 1, . . . , M . For each check node m, we determine the set of colors already assigned to its neighbors:

Um = {c(k) | (m, k) ∈ E, c(k) assigned},
and then assign c(m) = min{k ∈ N | k ∈/ Um}. Based on the assigned colors, we define the layers as Lk = {m | c(m) = k} for k = 1, . . . , χ. Since no two nodes within a layer are connected, each layer represents a non-conflicting group. In the layered scheduling framework, these layers are processed sequentially in each decoding iteration, and variable nodes are updated immediately after each layer is processed, enabling faster convergence and improved decoding efficiency [8].

B. LNMS Message Passing Algorithm

The LNMS algorithm is an iterative message-passing de-

coder that combines layered scheduling with the NMS ap-

proximation. Decoding proceeds over a maximum of max iter

iterations, indexed by t = 1, 2, . . . , max iter. In each iteration,

the layers Lk for k = 1, . . . , χ, determined by the conflict graph coloring, are processed sequentially. Let L(ci) denote the received channel LLR corresponding to bit i. At each

iteration t, the variable-to-check node LLR from variable node i to check node j is denoted by L qi(→ t) j , while the

corresponding check-to-variable node LLR from check node j to variable node i is denoted by L ri(← t) j . These LLRs are

updated iteratively according to the following steps.

Step 1. The algorithm begins with standard initialization which

we include here for the sake of completeness. The code bit

ci ∈ {0, 1} is mapped to a binary phase-shift keying (BPSK)

symbol xi = 1 − 2ci. The received signal is yi = xi + ni,

where ni is additive white Gaussian noise with zero mean

and variance σ2. The initial LLRs are L(qi(0)) = L(ci) =

2yi σ2

,

for

all

variable

nodes

i

=

1,

.

.

.

,

N.

All

check-to-variable

messages are initialized to zero as L ri(← 0)j = 0 for all edges

connecting check node j and variable node i. The variable q

denotes the LLR associated with a variable node, whereas the variable r denotes the LLR associated with a check node. Step 2. For each layer Lk, the check nodes in Lk are processed in parallel. For a given check node j ∈ Lk, let Vj = {i : Hj,i = 1} be the set of connected variable nodes, with degree dj = |Vj|. The variable-to-check messages are computed as

L qi(→ t) j = L(qi(t−1)) − L ri(← t−j1) , i ∈ Vj .

(3)

Step 3. Next, the check-to-variable messages are approximated using the NMS rule. The updated check-to-variable message is given by

L(ri(← t) j ) = α ×

sgn(L(qi(′t→ ) j )) ·

min
̸=i

,

(4)

i′∈Vj \i

where α < 1 is a normalization factor to compensate for the
min-sum overestimation, Vj\i represents Vj excluding variable node i, and min≠ i denotes the minimum magnitude excluding the message from each neighbor i.
The vector of updated check-to-variable messages for check node j at iteration t is defined as L(r(jt)) = {L(ri(← t) j) : i ∈ Vj}. The delta updates are computed as

∆ = L(r(jt)) − L(rj(t−1)).

(5)

The a posteriori LLRs are immediately updated:

L(qi(t)) = L(qi(t−1)) + ∆i, i ∈ Vj .

(6)

This immediate update after each layer accelerates information propagation compared to flooding scheduling. Steps 2 and 3 are repeated for all layers in an iteration, after which the algorithm proceeds to Step 4. Step 4. After processing all layers in the iteration, hard decisions are made:

cˆk = I(L(qk(t)) < 0),

(7)

where I is the indicator function (1 if true, 0 otherwise). The syndrome is computed as

s = HˆcT .

(8)

If s = 0, decoding succeeds, and the algorithm terminates early. Otherwise, the next iteration begins by repeating Steps 2 and 3 for all layers, followed by Step 4. This early termination reduces unnecessary computations [9].

C. SGBF Method

If the LNMS algorithm fails to produce a zero syndrome

after the maximum iterations, the SGBF method is activated

as a post-processing step to correct residual errors.

The SGBF method identifies unreliable bits using a re-

liability metric that combines a posteriori LLR magnitudes

with syndrome information. First, the per-bit failure count is

computed:

ei =

sj

(9)

j :Hj,i =1

where sj is the j-th element of the syndrome s. The quantity ei

represents the number of unsatisfied check equations involving

the variable node i.

Our proposed reliability measure of the i-th bit is then

defined as

reli

:=

|L(qi(max iter))| . 1 + max(ei, 1)

(10)

Roughly speaking, this proposed measure penalizes bits with
low LLR confidence or high involvement in unsatisfied checks while the use of max(ei, 1) ensures a minimum penalty.
The top T unreliable bits (i.e., those with the lowest reliability metrics) are selected: {i1, . . . , iT }, where T is the bit-flipping set size [14]. For each t = 1 to T , a candidate channel LLR vector L(c)t is generated by flipping the sign of the LLR at position it:

L(c)t =

−L(ci), L(ci),

i = it, i ̸= it.

(11)

This flip emulates correcting a potential bit error at that
position.
Each candidate L(c)t is re-decoded using the LNMS algorithm with the same max iter, producing updated a posteriori
LLRs L(q)t, hard decisions ˆct, and syndrome st. The syndrome weight for each candidate is computed:

N −K

wt =

sti.

(12)

i=1

The candidate with the minimum weight is selected: t∗ =

arg mint wt. If wt∗ = 0, a valid codeword has been found,
and the final output is set to L(q) = L(q)t∗ and ˆc = ˆct∗ . Otherwise, the original LNMS output is retained.

This approach, with size T , uses single-bit flips guided

by the syndrome-weighted reliability metric to enhance error

correction without excessive computational overhead.

The overall proposed decoding algorithm is summarized in

Algorithm 1. The inputs are the received LLRs L(c), the

parity-check matrix H, the maximum number of iterations

max iter, and the bit-flipping set size T . The output is the

estimated codeword ˆc.

Graph coloring is performed on the conflict graph to deter-

mine the layers in line 1. Initialization is carried out in line 2.

The LNMS iterations are implemented in lines 3–15: for each

iteration, the layers are processed sequentially in lines 4–9,

with variable-to-check messages, check-to-variable messages,

and a posteriori LLR updates computed in parallel for check

nodes within each layer in lines 6–8. After all layers, hard

decisions are made in line 11 and the syndrome is computed

in line 12. If the syndrome is zero in line 13, the estimated

codeword is output and decoding stops in line 14.

If decoding fails after the maximum iterations, the SGBF

phase is activated in lines 17–31: per-bit failure counts and

reliabilities are computed in lines 18–19, the top T unreli-

able bits are selected in line 20, candidate LLR vectors are

generated by flipping the least reliable bits and re-decoded

Algorithm 1: The proposed decoder

Input: the received LLRs L(c), parity-check matrix H,

maximum iterations max iter, bit-flipping set size T

Output: the estimated codeword ˆc

1: Perform graph coloring on the conflict graph G to deter-

mine the layers L1, . . . , Lχ. 2: Initialization: Set L(qi(0)) = L(ci) for all i = 1, . . . , N ,
and L(ri(← 0)j) = 0 for all edges.
3: for iter = 1 : max iter do

4: for k = 1 : χ do

5:

for each check node j ∈ Lk in parallel do

6:

Compute variable-to-check messages using (3)

7:

Compute check-to-variable messages using (4)

8:

Update the a posteriori LLRs using (6)

9:

end for

10: end for

11: Make hard decisions using (7)

12: Compute the syndrome using (8)

13: if s = 0 then

14:

Output ˆc and stop.

15: end if

16: end for

17: if decoding failed (non-zero syndrome) then

18: Compute per-bit failure counts ei using (9) for all i.

19: Compute reliabilities reli using (10) for all i.

20: The top T unreliable bits are selected: {i1, . . . , iT }.

21: for t = 1 : T do

22:

Create candidate L(c)t by flipping L(cit ) using

(11).

23:

Re-run LNMS decoding on L(c)t to obtain L(q)t,

ˆct, and st.

24:

Compute the syndrome weight using (12).

25: end for

26: Find t∗ = arg mint wt.

27: if wt∗ = 0 then

28:

Set final L(q) = L(q)∗t and ˆc = ˆct∗.

29: else

30:

Retain original L(q) and ˆc.

31: end if

32: end if

33: Output ˆc.

using LNMS in lines 21–23, syndrome weights are computed in line 24, the candidate with the minimum syndrome weight is selected in line 26, and if it yields a zero syndrome in line 27, the corresponding a posteriori LLRs and codeword are adopted in line 28; otherwise, the original outputs are retained in line 30. The estimated codeword is output in line 33.
IV. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we present simulation results obtained over the BI-AWGN channel using BPSK modulation. For polar codes, we adopt the scaled min-sum decoding algorithm, using a scaling factor of 0.9375 as suggested in [15]. The frame

100

100

10-1

10-1

FER

10-2

10-3 5GLDPC, 50-Iter

Polar-5Iter

10-4

Polar-50Iter

LNMS, 5-Iter

LNMS-SGBF-5Iter

10-5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5

FER

10-2 5GLDPC, 50-Iter

5GLDPC, 200-Iter

10-3

Polar-5Iter

Polar-50Iter

LNMS, 5-Iter

10-4

LNMS, 50-Iter

LNMS-SGBF-5Iter

LNMS-SGBF-50Iter

10-5 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5

Fig. 1: FER performance of the FDPC(128, 80) codes with Fig. 3: FER performance of the FDPC(256, 192) codes with

LNMS decoding and LNMS with SGBF list correction, com- LNMS decoding and LNMS with SGBF list correction, com-

pared with the corresponding 5G-LDPC and polar codes.

pared with the corresponding 5G-LDPC and polar codes.

FER

100

100

10-1 10-1
10-2 10-2
10-3

FER

10-4

5GLDPC, 50-Iter

10-3 5GLDPC, 12-Iter

Polar-5Iter

5GLDPC, 50-Iter

Polar-50Iter

10-5

LNMS, 5-Iter

10-4

5G-Polar-L8

LNMS, 5-Iter

LNMS-SGBF-5Iter

LNMS-SGBF-5Iter

10-6 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5

10-5 3

3.25

3.5

3.75

4

4.25

4.5

Fig. 2: FER performance of the FDPC(256, 164) codes with Fig. 4: FER performance of the FDPC(1024, 844) codes

LNMS decoding and LNMS with SGBF list correction, com- with LNMS decoding and LNMS with SGBF list correction,

pared with the corresponding 5G-LDPC and polar codes.

compared with the corresponding 5G-LDPC and polar codes.

error rate (FER) is considered as the primary measure of error-correction performance. The parity-check matrices are obtained using Algorithm 2 from [7]. The 5G-LDPC codes are implemented using the MATLAB 5G Toolbox, with a scaling factor of 0.75 and the NMS decoding algorithm. The normalization factor α used in our proposed decoding algorithm is also set to 0.75.
A. Performance Comparison with Standalone LNMS
Fig. 1 shows the error-correction performance of our LNMS decoding algorithm in terms of FER versus energy per bit to noise power Eb/N0, and compares it with the proposed improved LNMS incorporating SGBF (with T = 128) for the FDPC(128, 80) code under 5 iterations. As shown in the plots, the use of SGBF provides nearly a 0.5 dB coding gain.
We have repeated similar experiments at other block lengths and rates. In particular, Fig. 2 compares the error-correction performance of our LNMS decoding algorithm with the proposed improved LNMS incorporating SGBF (with T = 128)

for the FDPC(256, 164) code. Furthermore, Fig. 3 compares the error-correction performance of our LNMS decoding algorithm with the proposed improved LNMS incorporating SGBF (with T = 128) for the FDPC(256, 192) code.
The above scenarios demonstrate the advantages of the proposed decoder in the short block length regime (this regime is typically considered to be for block lengths up to a few hundreds). We have also conducted a similar experiment for a medium block length scenario (typically a few hundred to a few thousand bits). In particular, Fig. 4 compares the errorcorrection performance of our LNMS decoding algorithm with the proposed improved LNMS incorporating SGBF (with T = 128) for the FDPC(1024, 844) code. The number of layers in the proposed LNMS decoder is set to 4 in all of our experiments.
For reference, in all plots, we also include results for the NMS decoding of 5G-LDPC codes and the normalized BP decoding of polar codes, both with the same code length

FER

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

T=4

10-4

T=8

T = 16

T = 32

T = 64

T = 128

10-6 0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5

Fig. 5: FER performance of the FDPC(256, 192) codes with LNMS with SGBF list correction for different bit-flipping set sizes.
and data length. For the length 1024, we consider polar list decoding with list size 8. The results show consistent gains of FDPC codes with our proposed decoder compared to these other state-of-the-art codes.
B. Impact of Bit-Flipping Set Size on Decoding Performance
We further investigate the impact of the flipping set size T in the SGBF phase on decoding performance. Simulations are conducted for the FDPC(256, 192) code with 5 iterations. Fig. 5 shows the FER performance for T = 4, 8, 16, 32, 64, and 128. As T increases, the FER performance improves, with larger values of T providing stronger error-correction capability by considering more candidate bit flips in the postprocessing phase. In particular, the improvement in the coding gain is more significant for smaller increases in T (e.g., from 4 to 32), but diminishes for larger values (e.g., from 64 to 128), indicating a trade-off between performance and computational complexity, which scales linearly with T . Hence, T = 128 represents a practical choice that achieves notable gains while maintaining manageable complexity.
C. Decoding Complexity
The complexity of the proposed LNMS decoder is comparable to that of the NMS decoder for 5G-LDPC codes, with per-iteration complexity proportional to the number of edges in the Tanner graph, similar for both FDPC and 5G-LDPC codes at the considered parameters. Layered scheduling in LNMS maintains computational complexity while accelerating convergence and potentially reducing average iterations via early termination.
The SGBF method adds complexity only upon LNMS failure, requiring T additional LNMS runs. The average increase is Pfail×T ×CLNMS, where Pfail is the LNMS failure probability which is equivalent to its FER and CLNMS is the complexity of one LNMS run. Failures are rare at high SNR, making the average additional decoding complexity negligible in highreliability scenarios. However, for fair comparison, we adjust 5G-LDPC iterations to match the proposed decoder’s average

complexity. Simulations show the FDPC code with the new decoder outperforms 5G-LDPC codes by 0.5–1.0 dB at FER= 10−3 under these conditions, highlighting its superiority.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed an LNMS message-passing
decoding algorithm and an SGBF list correction method to
enhance the error-correction performance of FDPC codes. By
employing conflict graph coloring for layered scheduling, the
proposed decoder achieves faster convergence compared to
traditional flooding schedules. The SGBF method effectively
addresses decoding failures by flipping the least reliable bits
based on a syndrome-weighted reliability metric, generating a
set of candidates and selecting the ones with the minimum
syndrome weights. Simulation results demonstrate that the
proposed decoder outperforms the standalone LNMS decoder.
The numerical results highlight the effectiveness of both our
proposed decoder and the bit-flipping method.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Transactions on information theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] D. J. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, 1999.
[3] 3GPP, “NR; multiplexing and channel coding,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Tech. Rep. TS 38.212, Rel. 15, Jun. 2018, [Online]. Available: https://www.3gpp.org/DynaReport/38-series.htm.
[4] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “A reconfigurable LDPC decoder optimized for 802.11 n/ac applications,” IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 26, no. 1, pp. 182–195, 2017.
[5] C.-X. Wang, X. You, X. Gao, X. Zhu, Z. Li, C. Zhang, H. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Chen, H. Haas, J. S. Thompson, E. G. Larsson, M. D. Renzo, W. Tong, P. Zhu, X. Shen, H. V. Poor, and L. Hanzo, “On the road to 6G: Visions, requirements, key technologies, and testbeds,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 905–974, 2023.
[6] H. Mahdavifar, “High-rate fair-density parity-check codes,” in ICC 2024 - IEEE International Conference on Communications, 2024, pp. 2809– 2814.
[7] M. Moradi, S. Rabeti, and H. Mahdavifar, “On the high-rate fdpc codes: Construction, encoding, and a generalization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.11345, 2025.
[8] G. Raeisi and M. Gholami, “Edge coloring of graphs with applications in coding theory,” China Communications, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 181–195, 2021.
[9] B. A. Jayawickrama and Y. He, “Improved layered normalized min-sum algorithm for 5G NR LDPC,” IEEE Wireless Communications Letters, vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 2015–2018, 2022.
[10] S. Habib, A. Beemer, and J. Kliewer, “Decoding of moderate length LDPC codes via learned clustered check node scheduling,” in 2021 17th International Symposium on Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), 2021, pp. 1–6.
[11] S. Habib and D. G. M. Mitchell, “Reinforcement learning for sequential decoding of generalized LDPC codes,” in 2023 12th International Symposium on Topics in Coding (ISTC), 2023, pp. 1–5.
[12] M. Moradi, S. Habib, and D. G. M. Mitchell, “Enhancing belief propagation decoding of polar codes: A reinforcement learning approach,” IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1285–1289, 2025.
[13] A. R. Rigby, J. C. Olivier, H. C. Myburgh, C. Xiao, and B. P. Salmon, “Augmented decoders for LDPC codes,” EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking, vol. 2018, no. 1, p. 189, 2018.
[14] C.-Y. Chang, Y. T. Su, Y.-L. Chen, and Y.-C. Liu, “Check reliability based bit-flipping decoding algorithms for LDPC codes,” 2010. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1001.2503
[15] B. Yuan and K. K. Parhi, “Early stopping criteria for energy-efficient low-latency belief-propagation polar code decoders,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing, vol. 62, no. 24, pp. 6496–6506, 2014.

