IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

303

LDPC Codes Based on Latin Squares: Cycle Structure, Stopping Set, and Trapping Set Analysis
Stefan Laendner and Olgica Milenkovic

Abstract—It is well known that certain combinatorial structures in the Tanner graph of a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code exhibit a strong influence on its performance under iterative decoding. These structures include cycles, stopping/trapping sets, and parameters such as the diameter of the code. In general, it is very hard to find a complete characterization of such configurations in an arbitrary code, and even harder to understand the intricate relationships that exist between these entities. It is, therefore, of interest to identify a simple setting in which all the described combinatorial structures can be enumerated and studied within a joint framework. One such setting is developed in this paper, for the purpose of analyzing the distribution of short cycles and the structure of stopping and trapping sets in Tanner graphs of LDPC codes based on idempotent and symmetric Latin squares. The parity-check matrices of LDPC codes based on Latin squares have a special form that allows for connecting combinatorial parameters of the codes with the number of certain subrectangles in the Latin squares. Subrectangles of interest can be easily identified, and in certain instances, completely enumerated. This study can be extended in several different directions, one of which is concerned with modifying the code design process in order to eliminate or reduce the number of configurations bearing a negative influence on the performance of the code. Another application of the results includes determining to which extent a configuration governs the behavior of the bit-error rate curve in the waterfall and error-floor regions.
Index Terms—Cayley Latin squares, design theory, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, stopping sets, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
BY NOW, IT IS WELL known that long random-like lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes used for signaling over discrete input memoryless channels have capacity-approaching performance under iterative decoding [12]. Nevertheless, there still exist many open questions regarding the exact degree of influence that specific parameters of a code exhibit on its overall performance when used for finite-length data transmission [20].
Paper approved by A. H. Banihashemi, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received Spetember 21, 2004; revised February 3, 2006; April 28, 2006; May 1, 2006; and June 26, 2006. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCF-0514921. The work of S. Laendner was supported by a fellowship awarded by the Institute for Information Transmission (LIT) at the University of Erlangen-Nuremberg, Germany. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Conference on Communications, Paris, France, 2004.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80309 USA (e-mail: Stefan.Laendner@Colorado.edu; Olgica.Milenkovic@Colorado.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.888633

The best studied class of code parameters include the girth of a code [3], [4], [6], [7], [9], [18] and the size of the smallest stopping set in the code graph [2], [15], but very few results are available regarding trapping sets [13], [16] and pseudocodewords [8]. Each of these entities can be used individually in order to explain some phenomena underlying the behavior of the bit-error rate (BER) curve of a code under a given decoding strategy. For certain channels, like the binary erasure channel, exact analytic characterizations of BER curves are possible in terms of the distribution of stopping-set sizes [2], [15]. What remains unknown is the exact nature of the relationship that exists between all the aforementioned parameters and a study of their joint influence on the performance of LDPC codes in channels like the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel.
The goal of this paper is to provide a comprehensive analysis of three different combinatorial parameters of a new class of LDPC codes based on idempotent and symmetric Latin squares. Such an analysis is of importance in two different settings: in the first case, it allows for constructing large families of highrate codes with good performance under iterative decoding. In the second case, it can be used as a starting point for investigating the influence of different classes of code parameters on the overall performance of an LDPC code. The features analyzed include the structure and number of short cycles in the Tanner graph and the size of the smallest stopping and trapping sets in the code graph. Although stopping sets are primarily used for estimating the performance of LDPC codes over the binary erasure channel, they are closely related to pseudocodewords of many other channels [8], and are, therefore, of interest when analyzing the performance of LDPC codes over the AWGN channel.
The codes described in this paper are closely related to several other classes of LDPC codes based on combinatorial designs. For a comprehensive treatment of the subject of LDPC code construction based on design theory, the interested reader is referred to [6], [17]–[19], and the references therein. The parity-check matrices of LDPC codes based on constrained Latin squares have a block structure consisting of all-zero matrices and permutation matrices that are placed according to the entries in the Latin square. If the squares are properly chosen, the resulting Tanner graphs of the codes have both girth and minimum distance equal to six. The number of six-cycles and other short cycles in their Tanner graph, as well as their stopping number and trapping set structures, can be determined in a straightforward manner. This is due to the fact that the existence of stopping sets and trapping sets of a prescribed size

0090-6778/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

304

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

can be linked to the existence of subrectangles in the underlying Latin square. The study of cycles, stopping and trapping sets reveals that most of these entities are related: for example, the vertices corresponding to small stopping and trapping sets usually also belong to one or more short cycles.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section II we introduce Latin squares, combinatorial designs, and one-configurations (OCs) [11]. We also describe several choices for Latin squares that result in LDPC codes with good performance under iterative decoding. Section III is devoted to establishing a relationship between stopping sets in LDPC codes and partial subrectangles of their corresponding Latin squares. Section IV contains a partial classification of elementary trapping sets in LDPC codes based on symmetric, idempotent Latin squares, while Section V provides a count of the number of six-cycles in the codes. Section VI describes how some of the results in Section V can be used to improve the performance of the codes in terms of a structured shortening procedure that reduces the number of six-cycles in the code graph. Simulation results are given in Section VII.

II. LATIN SQUARES, DESIGNS, AND ONE-CONFIGURATIONS

LDPC codes based on Latin squares were first described in

[18], where Latin squares were first used to construct Steiner

triple systems (STSs) and OCs. Such systems were subsequently

used for characterizing the parity-check matrix of LDPC codes.

We start this section by providing the necessary background

needed for extending and generalizing this technique.

Definition 2.1: A Steiner 2-design is an ordered pair

,

where is a set with elements and is a collection of

subsets of size over , called blocks. Every element of is

contained in exactly

blocks, and every 2-subset of is

contained in exactly one block. A Steiner 2-design for which

is referred to as an STS. If the constraint of a 2-design is

relaxed so that each pair of elements in is required to belong to

at most one block, the resulting combinatorial structure is called

an OC.

An STS or OC can be used to define the parity-check matrix

of an LDPC code in a standard way: the variables of the code

correspond to blocks, while the parity checks correspond to the

points of the system. In this case, represents the point-block

incidence matrix of the given combinatorial objects [18].

We will find the following definitions useful.

Definition 2.2: A Latin square of order is an

array such that each row and column contains every symbol in

exactly once. More generally, a Latin rectangle is

an

matrix of entries with no symbol appearing

more than once in each row and column. A Latin square is idem-

potent if the cell indexed by ,

, contains the

symbol , and symmetric if cells and

, contain the same symbol.

Definition 2.3: If in a Latin square of order , there exist

cells with rows and columns that form a Latin square of

order and over an alphabet of size , then these cells are said

to form a subsquare of order . Similarly, a subrectangle of the

Latin square is a subarray of the square, which is itself a Latin

rectangle. A Latin square of size

is an

square if

it does not contain subsquares of order two (of any order ).

Of special interest for the derivations to follow are Cayley

Latin squares, for which the entries are determined by the

Cayley table of the cyclic group of order over the alphabet

. More specifically, the entry at position

in

such a square is given by

.1 Equivalent to a

Cayley Latin square of odd order under rearrangement of

the rows, rearrangement of the columns, or renaming of the

symbols (i.e., isotopic to it) is a Latin square defined by the

equation

. Cayley Latin squares of prime

order and Latin squares isotopic to them are examples of

squares [1]. Throughout the rest of the paper, we focus our

attention on Latin squares with odd order

.

Definition 2.4: Let be an idempotent and symmetric

Latin square of order

, let

and

. Define a collection of blocks that

contains:

1) all triples of the form

, where

(type 1 triplet);

2) all triples of the form

, where

, and

denotes the entry of the Latin square in row and

column (type 2 triplet).

It is straightforward to see that

is an STS with

points [11]. We will refer to such an object as a Bose system.

Observe that the symmetry of the underlying Latin squares leads

to the property that no two elements in row and column of

that Latin square are the same, provided that the positions are

restricted to the “upper right triangle” of the square. Assume to

the contrary that

.

Then there would exist two blocks in the Bose system of the

form

and

,

containing the same pair of points, and hence, violating the

defining properties of an STS. If the square is symmetric, then

, and

, so that

.

Claim 2.1: Let

be a symmetric and idempotent

Latin square of order

not divisible by seven,

with an entry in row and column chosen according to

. The STS arising from

does not contain a set of four blocks with six different points,

i.e., a Pasch configuration. LDPC codes derived from STSs

free of Pasch configurations have minimum distance at least six

[18].

Proof: In order to prove the claim, consider the following

two properties of the square : there are no Latin subsquares

of order two contained within (property P1), and there do

not exist two different integers such that

(property P2). The presence of a subsquare of order two implies

the existence of integers and

such that

and

. Since the order of the square is odd, this is

impossible for the given construction, since it leads to and

. The second property can be easily shown to be true by

observing that for the given construction,

is equivalent to

, i.e., to

, which

contradicts the starting assumptions regarding the order of the

Latin square.

1Here and throughout the rest of paper, we use the somewhat nonstandard
Mmodulo function, which assumes that the symbol 0 is replaced by the symbol .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAENDNER AND MILENKOVIC: LDPC CODES BASED ON LATIN SQUARES

305

We classify next the possible ways in which Pasch configura-

tions resulting from types 1 and 2 triplets may arise, and show

that a necessary condition for their existence is that either prop-

erty P1 or property P2 holds. Since neither of the two properties

is satisfied for the described Latin squares, it will follow that the

STS based on is Pasch-free.

1) A Pasch configuration cannot consist of more than one

type 1 triplet; if there were at least two type 1 triplets, say

, then

these two triplets would contain six different points, and it

m would be impossible to add one more triplet.
2) A Pasch configuration formed from type 2 triplets only

Fig. 1. Structure of the parity-check matrix of an OC Bose-type code with = 2.

may have blocks of the form

3, the parity-check matrix of the corresponding LDPC codes can

be decomposed into highly structured blocks of size three. This

can be rigorously demonstrated as follows. Let us label the points

with

, and

; this is

equivalent to property P1.

3) A Pasch configuration formed from type 1 and type 2

triplets has to be of the form

of the Bose STS and OC by

the integers

. Additionally, let us index the blocks

in such a way that type 1 triplets are numbered according to the

value of the first coordinate of their points, and index the type 2

triplets lexicographically, but with all their shifts in consecutive

order. In this setting, type 1 triplets introduce

columns

in the parity-check matrix . These columns contain three

consecutive ones in the vertical direction, as shown in Fig. 1(a) for

This implies that

, i.e.,

, and is equivalent to property P2.

Codes based on the described STS and codes based on an

OC consisting of type 2 triplets only will be referred to as STS

LDPC and OC LDPC codes, respectively. For a Latin square of

order

, the number of parity checks for both STS and

OC codes is

, while the number of variables in the

first case is

, and in the second

case

. The girth of the code graph is

guaranteed to be six, since by the very definition of an STS (an

OC) system, every pair of points belongs to exactly (at most)

one block. Since the STS and OC systems described above are

Pasch-free, it follows that the resulting codes have minimum

distance at least six. An STS code has minimum distance exactly

equal to six. This can be seen by considering the following set

of six blocks from the STS, three of which are of type 1 and

three of which are of type 2:

. Similarly, the submatrix of the parity-check matrix

corresponding to type 2 triplets has a regular structure, with

blocks of size three per column and

blocks of

size three per row. By using the standard notation for the all-zero

matrix , identity matrix , and the basic circular permutation

matrix , the section of for

takes the form shown

in Fig. 1(b).

Let a column of blocks (matrices of size three) in be called

a block-column, and name the same structure corresponding to

rows a block-row. For example, in Fig. 1(b), the stacked col-

lection of blocks

represents a block-column. It is

straightforward to see that can be partitioned into sub-

matrices

, where submatrix

,

contains exactly

block-columns. The structure of a

submatrix can be described as follows: the th block-row of

consists entirely of matrices. Additionally, matrices within

appear along the block-diagonal

. The po-

sitions of the permutation matrices can be determined from

the description of the Cayley Latin square: in block-column of

the submatrix

is in block-row

if is even, and in block-row

if is odd. It suffices to construct only : can be obtained

where , and are pairwise distinct, and such that

. These six blocks correspond to six variables, and the points

and

, correspond to nine different

checks repeated exactly two times.

from by retaining only the first

block-columns,

and cyclically shifting the block-rows. Similarly, can be ob-

tained from by taking the first

block-columns

of and shifting the block-rows cyclically by positions.

The matrix is regular in the sense that there are exactly two

A. Parity-Check Matrices of Codes Based on Cayley Latin Squares

matrices and one matrix per block-column. Furthermore,

the number of and matrices in

per block-row is

and , respectively.

Since for every type 2 triplet

in an Throughout the rest of the paper, we focus our atten-

STS or OC based on Latin squares there also exist two “shifted” tion on analyzing OC LDPC codes and their corresponding

blocks

and

parity-check matrices. A similar study can be conducted for

with the values

taken modulo STS LDPC codes, and for generalizations of OC codes resulting

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

306

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

in LDPC codes of column weight four. These results will be presented elsewhere.
III. LATIN SQUARES FREE OF SUBSQUARES AND STOPPING SETS IN LDPC CODES

subrectangles. Therefore, for

, assume without loss of

generality that the partial subrectangle of interest is in one of

the two staggered forms or , with entries

or

, as shown below

Based on the constructions outlined in the previous sections,

(1)

it is straightforward to see that the presence or absence of cer-

tain subconfigurations in the Latin square influences the charac-

teristics of the Tanner graph of the resulting code. For example, The defining equations for Pasch-free OCs based on Cayley Latin squares produce codes of

in the structure read as

column-weight three with minimum distance at least six. Pasch

configurations represent a special case of a stopping set [2], [15].

A stopping set of a code is a set of variables such that all

checks connected to are connected to at least two different

nodes in that set. The size of the smallest nonempty stopping

set of a parity-check matrix is called the stopping number of

, and it represents a lower bound for the minimum distance

of the code. The next results show that for OC LDPC codes,

there exists a more general relationship between stopping sets

and configurations in the underlying Latin squares.

Definition 3.1: A partial subrectangle of a Latin square is a

partially or completely filled

subarray of not necessarily

adjacent entries, where each column and row contain at least

two elements and each entry appears at least twice in the array.

(2)

where

, the values , and are pairwise distinct,

and the same is true of , and . A suitable addition and

subtraction of the six equations in (2) shows that the values of

the parameters and have to satisfy

. But this

is impossible, since both and are bounded from above by

and by assumption

. It is straightforward to see that every

Cayley Latin rectangle must contain a partial subrectangle of

the form . An example for

is shown below

The number of filled positions in a partial subrectangle is called

the size of the partial subrectangle and denoted by . Clearly,

. For completely filled subsquares and subrectangles,

one has

, and

.

It is straightforward to see that a partial subrectangle gives

(3)

rise to a stopping set of size in an OC code. Furthermore,

every stopping set corresponds to a partial subrectangle.

Lemma 3.1: An OC LDPC code constructed from a Latin

square of order

has no stopping sets of size four if

, where is defined as in Definition 2.3. Lemma 3.2: If the Latin square contains a partial subrectangle of order , where , then the resulting OC LDPC code contains at least three stopping sets of size .
Proof: A subrectangle of size leads to a set of blocks

Codes based on Cayley Latin squares also contain stopping

sets of size seven. This can be seen based on the two possible

structures2 for partial rectangles of the forms

shown

below

of cardinality , with each point contained in the blocks ap-

pearing at least twice.

Theorem 3.3: If a Latin square of order

, used to

construct an OC LDPC code according to the Bose method, does

not contain partial subrectangles of size , then the stopping

number of the code’s (incidence) parity-check matrix is at

least

.

Proof: The proof is a straightforward consequence of the

previously described results.

It is known that Cayley Latin squares of odd prime order

and squares isotopic to them have no proper Latin subrectangles

[21]. Therefore,

, since there do not exist partial rectan-

gles with

.

Theorem 3.4: Cayley Latin squares of prime order

and squares defined by

(which are isotopic to

Cayley Latin squares) have point-block parity-check matrices

with stopping number

.

Proof: First, recall that Cayley Latin squares are

It is straightforward to see that type partial rectangles exist

in Cayley Latin squares. Type partial rectangles with

are also present in Cayley

Latin squares, which is a simple consequence of the defining

equation for these Latin squares.

The structures of the stopping sets corresponding to subrect-

angles of the form

and

are shown in Fig. 2.

The stopping sets induced by subrectangles define a code-

word, while those induced by and do not correspond

to codewords. Furthermore, each of the stopping sets shown in

Fig. 2 contain short cycles: the structure contains both an

eight- and a twelve-cycle, while both

and

contain

exactly six six-cycles.

squares, so they do not contain proper Latin subsquares or 2or a transpose/symbol permutation/symbol reassignment thereof

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAENDNER AND MILENKOVIC: LDPC CODES BASED ON LATIN SQUARES

307

small values of . The parameter of the trapping sets de-

pends on the relationship between the values of the elements

in

.

Subsquares of the form induce the following set of three

blocks in the corresponding OC:

Fig. 2. Three types of stopping sets in OC-LDPC codes.
IV. SUBSQUARES OF LATIN SQUARES AND TRAPPING SETS IN OC LDPC CODES

For

the resulting configuration represents a (3,5) trap-

ping set, shown in Fig. 3(a). Otherwise, it represents a (3,3) trap-

ping set, since in this case, two rows of weight one in a (3,5)

trapping set have to be merged into a row of weight two. Ob-

serve also that since it must hold that

and

, no (3,2)

elementary trapping sets can arise from a subrectangle of type

. This is due to the fact that the three points

and

all appear exactly once in the blocks.

Partial subsquares of the form result in the following set

of four blocks:

We discuss next the relationship between the structure of trap-

ping sets [13], [16] in the code graph of an OC LDPC code and

partial subrectangles in the corresponding Latin square. We re-

strict our interest to elementary trapping sets, which are defined

as subsets of variable nodes of the code graph with the property

that their induced subgraph contains check nodes of degree one

and two only [10]. If an elementary trapping set contains vari-

ables and check nodes of degree one, then it is said to have

parameters

. Certain classes of elementary trapping sets

are known to contribute to the emergence of high error floors in

BER curves of codes used over the AWGN channel [13], [16].

For OC LDPC codes, the constraint on the structure of an ele-

mentary trapping set translates to the requirement that in a sub-

rectangle of the underlying Latin square each symbol appears

at most twice, and that each row in the partial rectangle con-

tains at most two entries. Equivalently, any collection of type 2

triplets containing the same point at most twice corresponds to

an elementary trapping set. It is straightforward to see that OC

LDPC codes contain (2,5) and (2,6) trapping sets. We focus on

trapping sets for which

. There exist many possible struc-

tures for partial rectangles satisfying the previously described

constraints, five of which are shown below

This set of blocks represents a

elementary trapping set

shown in Fig. 3(b), provided that

and

. If either

or

, but not both equalities are simultaneously

true, the resulting configuration is a (4,2) elementary trapping

set. It is straightforward to see that type subrectangles with

both sets of parameters described above exist in a Cayley Latin

square. On the other hand, subrectangles with

and

do not exist in Cayley Latin squares. Consequently, OC LDPC

codes based on Cayley Latin squares contain (4,2) and (4,4)

elementary trapping sets, but they do not contain (4,0) trapping

sets, i.e., they do not contain codewords of weight four.

Partial subrectangles of type produce the following four

blocks:

Provided that

, and

, the resulting config-

uration is a (4,6) elementary trapping set shown in Fig. 3(c). If

or , but not both equalities are simultaneously true,

the subrectangle induces a (4,4) trapping set. Finally, if

and

the OC LDPC code contains (4,2) trapping sets.

Partial subrectangles of type produce the following four

blocks:

Provided that the parameters

take distinct values, the

resulting configuration reduces to a (4,8) elementary trapping

set shown in Fig. 3(d). If

and

, the resulting

configuration corresponds to a (4,6) elementary trapping set. For

The subrectangles

involve a small

and

, a (4,4) trapping set is introduced into the code

number of variables and hence correspond to trapping sets with graph.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

308

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

Fig. 3. Elementary trapping sets in OC LDPC codes.

Partial subrectangles of the form set of six blocks:

induce the following

Provided that

, and

,

the configuration of blocks described above produces a (6,6)

elementary trapping set shown in Fig. 3(e). If exactly one of the

equalities

and

is satisfied, the configuration induces a (6,4) elementary

trapping set. If

, then one parity check in the induced

graph has degree three, and consequently, the configuration does

not correspond to an elementary trapping set. If

, and in

addition, one of the equalities

, or

is true,

then the resulting configuration corresponds to a (6,2) trapping

set. By setting

, and

, one obtains a stopping

set corresponding to a codeword of weight six.

Similar to stopping sets, the trapping sets described above

also contain embedded cycles. For example, a type set with

contains an eight-cycle involving all checks of

degree two, as can be seen from Fig. 3(b). For the case that

or

, but not both are simultaneously true, the

resulting trapping set contains a six-cycle. Similarly, for type

sets, either a six-cycle, eight-cycle, or 12-cycle are present

in the code graph, depending on the relationship between the

entries in the corresponding subrectangle of the Latin square.

Definition 5.1: Let an LDPC code be defined by a parity-

check matrix consisting of glued permutation blocks of

order , for some set of nonnegative integers. The Fan

sum is defined as

,

where

denote the cyclic offsets of the permu-

tation matrices encountered in a closed path of length within

the parity-check matrix.

Lemma 5.1: The parity-check matrix of an LDPC code con-

sisting of glued permutation blocks of order , for some set

of nonnegative integers contains cycles of length , pro-

vided that there exist nonnegative integers

such that

their Fan sum is identically equal to zero.

A block-cycle can now be defined as a closed path involving

nonzero blocks in the parity-check matrix for which the corre-

sponding Fan sum equals zero. A block-cycle with exactly six

blocks will be denoted by .

Consider an OC LDPC code involving type 2 triplets only. In

this case, a cycle can occur for the patterns of and ma-

trices listed below. Note that whenever allowed by the structure,

block-rows and block-columns can be arbitrarily permuted.

Class (a): Only matrices participate in the formation

of a block-cycle [Fig. 4(a)]. In order to construct a six-cycle

including only matrices, one needs two pairs of matrices

from two different block-columns of one submatrix , and

one block-column from a submatrix

. Since the

block-column from is uniquely determined by the choice of

the first two block-columns, one has exactly

possible

cycles for a pair of columns chosen from the matrix .

The total number of block-cycles of this type is equal to

V. CLASSIFICATION OF SIX-CYCLES

We conduct next a classification of six-cycles in OC LDPC

codes. It suffices to first identify all block-cycles, representing Observe that the largest number of block-cycles of this form is

special closed paths formed by the size-three and matrices. contained in .

To make the notion of a block-cycle more rigorous, we need the Class (b): Two matrices within the same block-row par-

following lemma from [4].

ticipate in the formation of a six-cycle [Fig. 4(b)]. For each pair

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAENDNER AND MILENKOVIC: LDPC CODES BASED ON LATIN SQUARES

309

cycles of this type is the same for all choices of matrices. Hence
and

m  Fig. 4. Classification of six-cycles in the parity-check matrix of an OC Bose-

type code with

2.

since it is not possible to determine exactly if one or two choices for the second matrix are possible.
The count above shows that the number of cycles of an OC LDPC code is at least

of matrices in one block-row, there are exactly four possible i.e.,

. The actual number of cycles in the bipartite graph

cycles, since for every there are two choices for the can be obtained by multiplying the total number of cycles

matrix in the same block-column. Hence, since there are ma- by three.

trices per row, one has from. This results in

pairs of matrices to choose

VI. APPLICATIONS OF CYCLE-ENUMERATION TECHNIQUES

The results of the analysis presented in Sections III–V can be

used to modify the OC LDPC code design process in order to

eliminate some undesired cycles, stopping, or trapping sets. Due

cycles of the above-described form. Class (c): Two matrices in two different block-rows, connected through a pair of matrices, are part of this type of cycle [see Fig. 4(c)]. Note that in order to close the cycle, one must also include two matrices. A cycle consisting of two

to space limitations, we will focus only on methods aimed at decreasing the number of six-cycles. Two such methods, described in Sections VI-1 and VI-2, were that the parity-check matrix of an OC code is restructured in terms of increasing the size of its permutation blocks or deleting some of its block-columns.

matrices connected by a pair of matrices can be formed

by starting from any matrix, and then choosing one out of

exactly two matrices within the same block-column. After

that, there are

choices for another matrix within the

same block-row. The -matrix in the corresponding column

is unique, as well as the “closing path” of the cycle by a

pair of matrices (having the same row indices as the two

matrices). In this way, each cycle is counted exactly twice.

Therefore

A. Modifications of the Parity-Check Matrix of OC LDPC Codes
Based on the classification of cycles described in Section V, we show next how to eliminate the class (d) cycles by simply increasing the dimension of the permutation blocks and allzero matrices. Increasing the dimension will result in the same number of block-cycles, but more cycles of classes (a), (b), and (c) will emerge. The increase in the number of class (a), (b), and (c) cycles will be compensated by the decrease in type (d) cy-

cles.

Lemma 6.1: Assume that the parity-check matrix of an OC

Class (d): Exactly one matrix per block-row and per LDPC code is modified by changing the order of all its sub-

block-column participates in the cycle [see Fig. 4(d)]. For each matrices from three to five. Then the OC LDPC code contains

matrix, one can form a cycle of this type from three no block-cycles of type (d), and no additional block-cy-

and three matrices. Starting from any matrix, one can cles nor block-cycles of length four are introduced into the code

choose one out of two matrices in the same block-column graph.

for the second point in the block-cycle. Afterwards, one can

Proof: For the case of classes (a), (b), and (c) cycles,

choose freely any of the

-matrices in the corresponding the Fan sum is identically equal to zero, since all positive terms

block-row. Finally, there is at least one, and at most two, in the sum are cancelled out. Only for the class (d) block-cycles

choices for the next matrix. This is due to the following does the Fan sum equal

. If one increases the

fact. The two matrices and the unique matrix in block size of the blocks in the parity-check matrix of such codes to

and within block-column are in block-rows

and

, the Fan sum cannot take the values 5 or 5, since

, respectively. Once three of the all its summands are even. Hence, the sum must have absolute

matrices are fixed as described above, there is a unique choice value equal to 10. This implies that at least five matrices are

for a pair of block-columns with the specified coordinates. But encountered on such a path, which is impossible, based on the

the second chosen matrix may belong to the same block-row fact that every block-column of the parity-check matrix contains

as the initially chosen matrix, in which case, no cycle at most one matrix. Furthermore, the increase of the block-

can be completed. If a cycle can be completed, the last matrix in size to

does not introduce a block-cycle of length four,

the block-cycle is uniquely determined by the previous choices. since the maximum Fan sum for a block-cycle of length four has

Due to the regularity of the construction, the number of

to have absolute value 8. This completes the proof.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

310

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

We will refer to the technique described in Lemma 6.1 as the order-modification method. It can be easily shown that an OC LDPC code constructed according to the order-modification method, for sufficiently large , has a 12 times smaller number of cycles of length six than a code of the same length constructed according to the standard Bose method.

B. Structured Removal of Six-Cycles

We show next how to shorten OC LDPC codes so as to de-

crease the total number of six-cycles in their Tanner graphs.

An analysis similar to the one described below can also be per-

formed for other cycle lengths.

It is straightforward to see that removing the first

block-column in block of the parity-check matrix elimi-

nates at least:

•

class (a) block-cycles of length six that contain the

first block-column;

•

block-cycles of length six formed by the

matrix in the removed block-column and another ma-

trix within the same block-row;

•

block-cycles of length six formed by the

matrix in the removed block-column and an additional

matrix, connected through a pair of matrices;

•

block-cycles of length six formed by the matrix

within the removed block-column and two other ma-

trices within two different block-columns.

Let us assume that we removed

block-columns from

, starting from the leftmost position. Removing the th left-

most block-column results in breaking up

block-cycles of class (a). The number of block-cycles of class

(b), (c), (d) that are broken by removing the th column de-

pends on how many and which columns are removed from other

blocks. One can observe that the number of class (a) cycles elim-

inated by the procedure described above depends only on the

sum of the block index and the index of the block-column

within its corresponding submatrix. This, of course, is true

only if the first

block-columns in were already re-

moved. Consequently, the removal of the th block-column in

breaks as many class (a) block-cycles as the removal of the

th block-column from the submatrix . One way to

perform structured removal of block-columns is to delete the

first block-columns from block , the first

block-

columns from block

and one block-column from ,

for some fixed value . This process results in the most simple

parity-check matrix structure, and it leads to shortened codes

with very good performance. The integer value can be chosen

in such a way as to achieve a desired rate for the code.

Theorem 6.2: Let

be an even integer. Then the

number of class (a) and (b) block-cycles after the removal of the

first block-columns from , the first

from

, the first block-column from

block-columns , equals

and

respectively.

Proof: In order to find the number of block-cycles of a

given class after block-column removal, one has to first count

how many and how many matrices are erased from each

of the block-rows. It is straightforward to see that identity ma-

trices are removed from each block-row indexed by , where

. Since the position of a matrix within the th

block-column is uniquely determined, one can obtain the distri-

bution shown at the bottom of the page for deleted blocks,

which holds for

. The notation is reserved for the

index of the block-row, and for the number of deleted ma-

trices. For block-row indices not listed below, the number

of deleted matrices is zero. This shows that the number of

class (a) block-cycles after block-column removal equals

By replacing

, the above expression reduces to the re-

sult claimed in the statement of the theorem. One can also show

that the number of class (b) block-cycles after block-column re-

moval equals

The last expression is a consequence of the fact that in ex-

actly four block-rows we erased permutation matrices , for

, and in exactly three block-rows we erased

permutation matrices . No matrices are erased in the

remaining

block-rows. Substituting

gives the desired result.

Remark 6.3: Note that there does not seem to be a simple

method for counting the number of class and block-cy-

cles after structured column removal of the form described in

Theorem 6.2.

VII. SIMULATION RESULTS
The performance of several high-rate STS and OC LDPC codes based on Cayley Latin squares used over the AWGN channel is shown in Figs. 5–7. Observe that the rate of a code is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LAENDNER AND MILENKOVIC: LDPC CODES BASED ON LATIN SQUARES

311

Fig. 5. BER versus E =N dB for different choices of code length approxi- Fig. 7. BER versus E =N dB for OC Bose-type codes (dim3) and order-mod-

mately 1000 with and without column removal.

ified codes (dim5).

Section II-1, and using only type 2 triplets. The resulting code

parameters are equal to

and

. Structured shortening is performed for the codes

by removing block-columns from their parity-check matrices

according to the strategy described in Section VI-2: the first

block-columns are removed from block , the first block-

columns from , etc., and the first block-column is removed

from block . Overall, the code is shortened by

columns and has length

and

dimension

.

Fig. 5 shows the performance of codes of length approxi-

mately 1000. The first curve corresponds to the (1053, 972)

OC LDPC code, constructed from a Cayley Latin square with

, rate

, and with no columns removed

. The (1026, 897) code with rate

is con-

structed from a Cayley Latin square with

and

,

Fig. 6. BER versus E =N dB for different choices of the code length approximately 4400 with and without column removal.

by removing exactly 1683 columns. Compared with MacKay’s

(999, 888) random code of rate

, the (1026, 897) code

shows almost no performance loss.

Fig. 6 shows a comparison of several codes of length around

denoted by , and that the parameters of the code are given in 4400. The code with parameters (4455, 4290) of rate

terms of , where denotes the length, and the dimension is generated from a Cayley Latin square with

, for which

of the code. The performance of codes obtained by structured one has

. The (4350, 4137) code of rate

is

shortening and codes derived from the order-modification generated from a Cayley Latin square with

and

method are evaluated as well. The plots are obtained by Monte , so that 3105 columns are removed from the original code.

Carlo simulations with 50 iterations of the message-passing The third code with dimensions (4455, 4032), generated from a

algorithm, and with 10 000–100 000 codeword blocks. All the Cayley Latin square with

and

, results in a rate

BER curves are compensated for their respective rate loss,

code. These codes are compared with MacKay’s

i.e., the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is computed according to (4376, 4095) random code of rate

. As can be seen,

SNR

from the the shortened codes show a competitive performance up to a

rate and the noise standard deviation of the AWGN channel. BER of .

As can be seen from Figs. 5 and 6, Cayley Latin square codes Fig. 7 shows the effect of modifications of the parity-check

have performance almost identical to that of random-like codes matrix of OC LDPC codes, namely, the order-modification

of comparable length and rate, constructed by MacKay (see method, described in Section VI-1. The figure shows Bose

http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/).

LDPC codes generated by STSs having submatrices of order

The OC LDPC codes in Figs. 5 and 6 are generated based on three, denoted by “dim3,” as well as their counterpart OC LDPC

the Bose construction method with parameter as described in codes of increased block-size

, denoted by “dim5.” The

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

312

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

increase in dimension is achieved by replacing all order-three

and matrices in the parity-check matrices of the Bose LDPC

codes [with the structure shown in Fig. 1(b)] by corresponding

and matrices of order five. No shortening of the original

parity-check matrix was performed for these test codes.

The (4134, 3975) dim3 code and the (6890, 6500) dim5 code,

both of rate

, are constructed from a Cayley Latin

square with parameter

. The (2709, 2580) dim3 and

the (4515, 4200) dim5 code of rate

are generated

from a Cayley Latin square with

. Furthermore, the

(759, 690) dim3 code and the (1265, 1100) dim5 code have rate

and are generated from a Cayley Latin square with

parameter

. The plot shows the effect of the increased

order of the submatrix reducing the number of block cycles of

type (d) (see Section VI-1) without introducing shorter length

cycles. For

5.5 dB, it can be seen that the dim5 codes

clearly outperform their dim3 counterparts.

Additionally, Monte Carlo simulations performed on the

(1053, 972) OC LDPC code with parameter

revealed

that for high SNR values, most error patterns not corrected after

200 iterations of belief propagation correspond to elementary

trapping sets. An analysis of error-frames at 6.5 dB for the

decoder implementation described in [10] showed that sets

of variables corresponding to (3,5) trappings sets of type

were frequently in error. The channel outputs for the three

variables in the trapping sets were strongly biased towards the

wrong decision, and an interesting “oscillation phenomena”

was detected. At every even iteration, the set of variable nodes

in error corresponded to a (3,5) trapping set, while the set

of variables in error at odd iterations usually included more

than 200 variable nodes. Other types of elementary trapping

sets detected during decoding include the configuration

corresponding to a (4,8) trapping set.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors are grateful to the anonymous reviewers for very helpful and insightful comments that largely improved the presentation of the results in the paper and the quality of the exposition.

REFERENCES
[1] J. Denes and A. Keedwell, “Latin squares: New developments in the theory and applications,” in Annals of Discrete Mathematics. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North Holland, 1991, vol. 46, ch. 4 by K. Heinrich.
[2] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 6, pp. 1570–1579, Jun. 2002.
[3] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of lowdensity parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[4] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2000, pp. 553–556.

[5] F. Lazebnik and V. Ustimenko, “Explicit construction of graphs with arbitrary large girth and of large size,” Discr. Appl. Math., vol. 60, pp. 275–284, 1997.
[6] S. J. Johnson and S. R. Weller, “Regular low-density parity-check codes from combinatorial designs,” in Proc. IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop, Sydney, Australia, 2001, pp. 90–92.
[7] J. L. Kim, U. Peled, I. Perepelitsa, V. Pless, and S. Friedland, “Explicit construction of families of LDPC codes with no 4-cycles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2378–2388, Oct. 2004.
[8] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph covers and iterative decoding of finite-length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes, Related Topics, Brest, France, Sep. 2003, pp. 75–82.
[9] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[10] S. Laendner and O. Milenkovic, “Algorithmic and combinatorial analysis of trapping sets in structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Wireless Netw., Commun., Mobile Comput., Maui, HI, Jun. 2005, vol. 1, pp. 630–635.
[11] C. C. Lindner and C. A. Rodger, Design Theory. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 1997.
[12] D. MacKay, Gallager code resources [Online]. Available: http://www. inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/CodesFiles.html
[13] D. MacKay and M. Postol, “Weaknesses of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Notes Theoret. Comput. Sci. vol. 74, 2003 [Online]. Available: http://www.elsevier.nl/locate/entcs/volume74.html
[14] O. Milenkovic and S. Laendner, “Analysis of the cycle structure of LDPC codes based on Latin squares,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Paris, France, Jun. 2004, vol. 2, pp. 777–781.
[15] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, Jun./Jul. 2002, p. 2.
[16] T. Richardson, “Error-floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Sep. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[17] B. Vasic, E. Kurtas, A. Kuznetsov, and O. Milenkovic, Structured LowDensity Parity-Check Codes in Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems, B. Vasic and E. Kurtas, Eds. Boca Raton, FL: CRC, 2005.
[18] B. Vasic and O. Milenkovic, “Combinatorial constructions of low-density parity-check codes for iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1156–1177, Jun. 2004.
[19] B. Vasic, E. Kurtas, and A. Kuznetsov, “LDPC codes based on mutually orthogonal Latin rectangles and their applications in perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 5, pt. 1, pp. 2346–2348, Sep. 2002.
[20] P. O. Vontobel and R. Koetter, “On the relationship between linear programming decoding and min-sum algorithm decoding,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory Appl., Parma, Italy, Oct. 2004, pp. 991–996.
[21] I. M. Wanless, “Perfect factorizations of bipartite graphs and Latin squares without proper subrectangles,” Electron. J. Combin., vol. 6, no. R9, p. 16, 1999.
Stefan Laendner received the M.S. degree and the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Colorado, Boulder, CO, in 2003 and the Friedrich-Alexander University Erlangen-Nuremberg, Erlangen, Germany, in 2004. He is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree at the University of Colorado.
His research interests include information theory, error-control coding, iterative decoding algorithms, and low-density parity-check codes.
Olgica Milenkovic received the M.S. degree in mathematics and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, in 2002.
She is currently with the University of Colorado, Boulder. Her research interests include the theory of algorithms, bioinformatics, constrained coding, discrete mathematics, error-control coding, and probability theory.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:27 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

