FLEXIBLE HARDWARE ENCODING SCHEMES FOR EXTENDED QUASI-CYCLIC LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

Liang Chen, Shijun Yan, Xiumin Shi†, Ziyu Wu, Baiyu Wang, Wenjun Zhang, Yunfeng Guan
Department of Electronic Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China † Department of Electronic Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China

ABSTRACT
In this paper, extending technique is employed to quasicyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes to construct lower-rate codes from a higher-rate mother code since quasi-cyclic codes can be encoded with simple shift registers, with linear complexity based on their generators. We also present the fitting flexible hardware encoding schemes designed for extended QC-LDPC codes. In the serial-input case and parallel-input parallel-output case, the required maximum encoding circuits which are demanded at the lowest rate are adopted as practical encoder implementation for all of the extended QC-LDPC codes in a sequence and part of hardware units is disabled during higher-rate encoding to reduce power consumption, whereas the hardware circuits are the simplest and totally invariable for a sequence of extended QC-LDPC codes in the parallelinput serial-output case.
1. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check (LDPC) codes, first discovered in early 1960's by Gallager [1], were rediscovered in late 1990's and shown to form a class of Shannon limit approaching codes [2]–[5]. Ever since their rediscovery, performance analysis, design, construction, decoding, efficient encoding, and applications of these codes in digital communication and storage systems have become the focal points of research. In [6], Li and Narayanan present the extending technique to construct lower-rate LDPC codes from a higher-rate mother code.
Although iterative decoding of long LDPC codes can be practically implemented, encoding of these codes is rather complex, since most of these codes, especially computer-generated random codes, do not have sufficient structure to allow simple encoding. One class of structured LDPC codes that allows low-complexity encoding is the class of quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC codes. It is known in coding theory that QC codes can be encoded with simple shift registers, with linear complexity based on their generators (or generator matrices). Well-designed QC-LDPC codes have been shown to perform as well as computer-generated random LDPC codes, regular or irregular [4, 5], in terms of bit-

error performance, block-error performance, and error floor, collectively. Therefore, in practical applications, they are strong competitors to the random codes, due to their simple encoding and low error floors. QC-LDPC codes also have advantages in integrated circuit (IC) decoder implementations due to their cyclic symmetry, which results in simple regular wiring and modular structure.
In this paper, we employ the extending technique to QC-LDPC codes and present the fitting flexible hardware encoding schemes designed for extended QC-LDPC codes. The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 gives a brief introduction of QC-LDPC codes. In Section 3 extending technique are employed to QC-LDPC codes while in Section 4 flexible hardware encoding schemes are presented for extended QC-LDPC codes. Section 5 concludes this paper.
2. QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES
A circulant is a square matrix for which every row is the cyclic-shift (one place to the right) of the row above it and the first row is the cyclic-shift of the last row. For such a matrix, every column is the downward cyclic-shift of the column on its left and the first column is the downward cyclic-shift of the last column. The set of columns (reading from top down) is the same as the set of rows (reading from right to left). A QC-LDPC code q is given by the null space of an array HQC of sparse circulants of the same size. If no two rows (or two columns) of HQC have more than one 1-component in common, then the Tanner graph of q is free of cycles of length 4, and hence, has girth at least 6 [4]. Such a constraint on rows and columns is called the row-column (RC) constraint. If all the columns of HQC have constant weight and all the rows have constant weight, then q is said to be regular; otherwise, it is said to be irregular.
Consider a c × c circulant C with column (or row) weight w0. Since the column and row weights of a circulant are the same, for simplicity, we say that C has weight w0. C can be decomposed into an array of c × c circulants. For 1 ≤ n ≤ w, let w1, w2, ..., wn be a set of positive integers such that w1 + w2 + ... + wn = w0. Let c be the first column of C. Split c into n columns of the same length c, c1, c2, ..., cn, with the 1-components of c distributed among these new columns, such that for 1 ≤ i ≤ n, the ith wi 1-components of c are put in ci. For each new column ci, form a c × c circulant Ci by cyclically shifting ci downward c times. This process results in n c

1-4244-0779-6/07/$20.00 ©2007 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

× c circulants, C1, C2, ..., Cn, with weights w1, w2, ..., wn, respectively. These circulants are called the descendants
of C. We readily see that two corresponding columns in
two descendants Ci and Cj do not have any 1-component in common and C = C1 + C2 + ... + Cn. The above decomposition, called column decomposition of C,
results in a c × nc matrix M = [C1 C2 ... Cn]. The parameter n is called the column splitting factor. It is
clear that we can decompose C by splitting the first row
of C into multiple rows in the same manner as we split
the first column of C and cyclically shifting each new
row to the right c times. Let 1 ≤ m ≤ max {wj : 1 ≤ j ≤ n}. For 1 ≤ j ≤ n, let w1,j,
w2,j, ..., wm,j, be a set of nonnegative integers such that and w1,j + w2,j + ... + wm,j = wj. Each descendant Cj in M can be decomposed into m second-generation descendant circulants with weights w1,j, w2,j, ..., wm,j, respectively, by splitting its first row rj into m rows of length c, denoted r1,j, r2,j, ..., rm,j, where rk,j contains the kth wk,j 1-components of rj. Cyclically shifting each new row rk,j, for 1 ≤ k ≤ m, to the right c times, we obtain m c × c circulants C1,j, C2,j, ..., Cm,j, which are descendants of Cj. Decomposition of Cj results in a mc × c matrix Nj with C1,j, C2,j, ..., Cm,j as submatrices arranged in a column. We call Nj the rowdecompostion of Cj and m is called the row splitting factor. In row splitting, we allow wk,j = 0. If wk,j = 0, Ck,j is an c × c zero matrix regarded as a circulant. If each circulant Cj in M is replaced by its decomposition Nj, we obtain the following mc × nc matrix:

⎡ ⎤ C 1,1

C 1,2

"C 1,n

H QC

= [N 1

N

"

N

]=

⎢ ⎢

C

2

,1

2

n ⎢#

C 2,2 #

"

C 2,n

⎥ ⎥

% #⎥

⎢ ⎥ C C " C

⎣ ⎦ m,1

m,2

m,n

which is called an array decomposition of C, consisting of a m × n array of c × c circulants which are descendants of C.
In decomposing C, the 1-entries of are distributed among the circulants in HQC. If C is a sparse circulant, HQC is a sparser matrix, since it is larger than C. If C satisfies the RC constraint, we can readily see that HQC also satisfies the RC constraint. In this case, the null space of HQC gives a QC-LDPC code q of length N = nc whose Tanner graph is free of cycles of length 4, and hence, has girth at least 6. The rate of q is at least (n − m) / n. If all the circulants in HQC have the same weight w, then the row and column weights of are nw and mw, respectively. In this case, q is a regular QC-LDPC code with minimum distance at least mw + 1 [4]. If decomposition of C results in an array HQC with multiple column weights or multiple row weights, then the null space of HQC gives an irregular QC-LDPC code.
It is noted that we can construct QC-LDPC codes by decomposing any circulant C, but not every QC-LDPC code has a mother circulant. By constructing particularly designed circulants, we can derive near Shannon limit QC-LDPC codes from decomposition of these designed circulant matrices [5].

Fig. 1. Structure of extended parity check matrix.

Fig. 2. Encoder structure for extended LDPC codes.

3. EXTENDING FOR QC-LDPC CODES

Extending technique allows parity bits to be generated

only as needed, thus avoiding unnecessary computations

at the encoder and the decoder. Fig. 1 presents the

structure of extended parity check matrix. The parity

check matrix of the highest rate code has M0 rows and N0 columns and the parity check matrix of each lower rate

code is constructed by padding Ml rows and Ml columns,

L

∑ until finally reaching a ( N + M , N − M ) code after

0

l

0

0

l =1

L levels of padding. To embed higher rate codewords in

lower rate codewords, the upper-right part of each

padding must be "0"s as shown. The squares in the

bottom-right part (see Fig. 1) are added first to ensure the

resulting parity check matrices have requisite column

weight. The bottom-left area is then made reasonably

sparse to ease the construction and to save the decoding

complexity, but at least one "1" is needed for each row in

order to build sufficient dependencies between the code

bits of the mother code and the newly added parity bits.

The encoder structure for extended regular LDPC

codes is shown in Fig. 2. Like a conventional LDPC code,

Gaussian elimination is used to derive generator matrix

from the parity check matrix. It is easy to see that the

generator matrices corresponding to the initial and

subsequent extending take the form:

[I G (0) ], [I G (0) G (1) ], " , [I G (0) G (1) " G ( L) ]

where I is the identity matrix of size N0 − M0, and G(l) has dimensionality (N0 − M0) × Ml. This is important since this means that groups of parity bits can be generated

independently and parity bits from the lth group is not

required to decode in any previous case.

For a QC-LDPC code q, the desired generator matrix

of q has the following form:

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

⎡I 0 " 0

G 1,1

G QC

=

⎢⎢0 ⎢#

I #

" %

0 #

G 2 ,1 #

G 1,2

"

⎤ G 1, m

G 2,2

"

G 2,m

⎥ ⎥

# % #⎥

⎢⎣ ⎦⎥ 0 0 " I G n−m,1 G n−m,2 " G n−m,m

= [ I(n - m)c G(0) ] where I is a c × c identity matrix, 0 is a c × c zero matrix,

and Gi,j for 1 ≤ i ≤ n − m and 1 ≤ j ≤ m is a c × c circulant.
The necessary and sufficient condition for GQC to be a generator matrix of q is that HQCGQCT = [O], where [O]
is a nc × (n − m)c zero matrix. For 1 ≤ i ≤ n − m and 1 ≤ j

≤ m, let gi,j be the first row of the Gi,j, and hi,j be the first
column of Gi,j. Once we know gi,j's or hi,j's, we can form
all the circulants Gi,j's of GQC. In coding theory, GQC is known as being in systematic form, and the right part G(0)

of GQC corresponds to the parity-check section of a
codeword in systematic form. We say that GQC is in systematic-circulant (SC) form, because its matrix G(0) is

an array of circulants. The SC form allows us to encode a

QC-LDPC code with simple shift registers.

When extending technique is employed to the QC-

LDPC codes, the squares of the size Ml = mlc in the bottom-right part in Fig. 1 are also added first to ensure

the resulting parity check matrices have requisite column

weight, and then the bottom-left area is padded in a

reasonably sparse form. In contrast to prior extending

approach, sparse circulants are filled in the appropriate positions. The corresponding matrices G(1), G(2), ..., G(L)

is in SC form as well so that we can use flexible

hardware encoding schemes for all of the extended QC-

LDPC codes in a sequence.

4. ENCODING SCHEMES FOR EXTENDED QCLDPC CODES

A circulant is completely characterized by its first row (or
first column) which is called the generator of the
circulant. GQC is completely characterized by a set of m(n − m) circulant generators gi,j's (or hi,j's), which are called the generators of q.
An encoding circuit for q can be devised based on the generators of the circulants in the G(0) matrix of GQC. Let s = (s1, s2, ..., s(n-m)c) be the information sequence of (n − m)c bits to be encoded. Divide this sequence into (n − m) sections of equal length, s = (s1, s2, ..., sn-m), where for 1 ≤ i ≤ n − m, the ith section si consists of c consecutive information bits, si = (s(i−1)c+1, s(i−1)c+2, ..., sic). Then the codeword for the information sequence s is v = sGQC, which has the following systematic form: v = (s, p1, p2, ..., pm), where for 1 ≤ j ≤ m, pj = (pj,1, pj,2, . . . , pj,c) is a section of c parity-check bits. It follows from v = sGQC that

pj = s1G1,j + s2G2,j + . . . + sn-mGn−m,j

(1)

for 1 ≤ j ≤ m. For 0 ≤ r ≤ c, let gi,j(r) be the rth (right) cyclic shift of the generator gi,j, with gi,j(0) = gi,j(c) = gi,j.
Then for 1 ≤ i ≤ n − m, siGi,j = s(i−1)c+1gi,j(0) + s(i−1)c+2gi,j(1) + . . . + sicgi,j(c-1) (2)

It follows from (1) and (2) that the jth parity check

section pj can be computed, step by step, as the information sequence s is shifted into the encoder. For 1

≤ k < n − m, at the kth step, the accumulated sum, sk,j = s1G1,j + s2G2,j + … + skGk,j is formed and stored in a register. At the (k + 1)th step, the partial sum sk+1Gk+1,j is computed from (2) and added to sk,j to form the next accumulated sum sk+1,j. At the end of (n − m)th step, the accumulated sum sn-m,j gives the jth parity section pj.
Based on the above encoding process and the

expression given by (2), the jth parity check section pj can be formed with a shift-register-adder-accumulator

(SRAA)-circuit as shown in Fig. 3. At the beginning of the first step, g1,j(0) = g1,j is stored in the feedback shift-
register B and the content of register A (accumulator) is

set to zero. When the information bit s1 is shifted into the encoder and the channel, the product s1g1,j(0) is formed at
the outputs of the AND-gates and is added to the content

stored in the register A (zero at this time). The sum is

then stored in the register A. The feedback register B is shifted once to the right. The new content in B is g1,j(1).
When the next information bit s2 is shifted into the encoder, the product s2g1,j(1) is formed at the outputs of
the AND-gates. This product is then added to the sum s1g1,j(0) in the accumulator register A. The sum s1g1,j(0) + s2g1,j(1) is then stored in A. The above shift-add-store
process continues. When the information bit sc has been
shifted into the encoder, register A stores the partial sum

s1G1,j, which is the contribution to the parity section pj from the information section s1. At this time, the generator g2,j of the circulant G2,j is loaded into B. The shift-add-store process repeats. When the information

section s2 has been completely shifted into the encoder, register A contains the accumulated sum s1G1,j + s2G2,j, which is the contribution to the parity section pj from the first two information sections, s1 and s2. The above process repeats until the entire information sequence s

has been shifted into the encoder. At this time, register A

contains the parity section pj. To form m parity sections, we need m SRAA-circuits, one for computing each parity

section. For extended QC-LDPC codes, ml more SRAA circuits are required and the structure of encoder fully

retains. The information sequence is encoded serially. All

the parity sections are formed at the same time in parallel,

and they are then shifted into the channel serially.

The encoding circuit consists of a total of

L

L

∑ ∑ 2(m + m )c flip-flops, (m + m )c AND-gates, and

l

l

l =1

l =1

L
∑ (m + m )c two-input XOR-gates. The encoding is l
l =1

accomplished in linear time with complexity linearly

proportional to the number of parity check bits,

L
∑ (m + m )c , of the code. The encoding is accomplished l
l =1

with (n − m)c clock cycles where (n − m)c is the length of

the information sequence.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

An encoder that completes encoding in mc clock
cycles can be implemented with n − m feedback shift-
registers, each with c flip-flops as shown in Fig. 4. All of
the (n − m)c information bits are applied to the encoder in parallel. For 0 ≤ r ≤ c, let hi,j(r) denote the rth downword cyclic shift of hi,j. It is clear that hi,j (0) = hi,j (c) = hi,j. Then for 1 ≤ r ≤ c, the rth parity check bit pj,r of the jth parity section pj is given by

pj,r = s1h1,j(r-1) + s2h2,j(r-1) + . . . + sn-mhn−m,j(r-1)

(3)

From this expression, we see that pj,r can be formed with (n − m)c two-input AND-gates and (n − m)c − 1 two-

input XOR-gates. The parity-check bits are generated

serially, bit by bit, and one section at a time. For 1 ≤ j ≤

m, to form the c parity bits of the jth parity section pj, the columns h1,j, …, hn−m,j, are loaded into the n − m feedback shift-registers in parallel and the first parity-

check bit pj,1 of pj is formed. Then cyclically shift these feedback shift-registers c − 1 times to generate the other c

− 1 bits of pj. With this implementation, encoding is completed in mc clock cycles.

If all the parity sections are generated in parallel at the

same time, a circuit that completes encoding in c clock

cycles can be implemented. In this case,

L
∑ (m + m )(n − m) feedback shift registers are needed. l l =1
To start the encoding, all the first columns hi,j's of the

L

∑ (m +

m )(n − m) l

circulants in GQC

are

loaded

into the

l =1

feedback shift-registers in one clock cycle and the first

L

∑ bits, p1,1, p2,1, …, p L

, of all the (m +

m ) parity l

∑ m+ m ,1 l

l =1

l =1

sections are formed. Then by cyclically shifting all the

feedback registers c − 1 times in parallel, the other

L
∑ (m + m )(c − 1) parity bits are generated. In this way, l
l =1

the encoding is completed in c clock cycles, but is subject

to the number of newly added columns and rows during

extending. This implementation requires a total of

L

L

∑ ∑ (m + m )(n − m)c flip-flops, (m + m )[(n − m)c −1]

l

l

l =1

l =1

L
∑ XOR-gates and (m + m )(n − m)c AND-gates. The l
l =1

structure of encoder fully retains as well except that more

hardware units are required.

5. CONCLUSION

This paper presents the flexible hardware encoding schemes designed for extended QC-LDPC codes. In three proposed encoding schemes, the corresponding maximum encoding circuits, which are required at the lowest rate, are employed for practical implementation and part of hardware units is disabled during higher-rate

Fig. 3. SRAA serial-input encoder circuit.
Fig. 4. SRAA-based parallel-input encoder circuit.
encoding to reduce power consumption in the serial-input case and parallel-input parallel-output case, whereas the hardware circuits are the simplest and constant in the parallel-input serial-output case. It should be noted that the extending technique presented in [6] is only applicable to regular LDPC codes due to its particular encoder structure, but our schemes are also applied to irregular QC-LDPC codes despite more complexity since the values of the generators can be easy to load to registers for encoding. For regular QC-LDPC codes, only mlc new parity bits that corresponds to G(l) need be generated every time based on prior encoding.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes, ” Electronics Letters, vol. 32, No. 18, pp 1645-1646, 1996
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inormf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 3, pp. 399–432, Mar. 1999.
[4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: a rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711-2736, Nov. 2001.
[5] L. Chen, J. Xu, I. Djurdjevic, and S. Lin, “Near-Shannon-limit quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 7, pp. 1038–1042, Jul. 2004.
[6] J. Li and K. Narayanan, “Rate-Compatible Low Density Parity Check Codes for Capacity-Approaching ARQ Scheme in Packet Data Communications,” in Proc. IASTED Int. Conf. Commun., Internet, and Inform. Tech. (CIIT), St. Thomas, Virgin Islands, USA, Nov. 2002, pp. 201–206.
[7] Z.W. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71-81, Jan. 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:33 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

