Implementation of Multi-Rate Quasi-Cyclic
Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Liang Chen, Shijun Yan, Ziyu Wu, Jingyi Xuet, Yinying Xu, Wenjun Zhang, Yunfeng Guan Institute of Image Communication and Information Processing, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China t Fudan University, Shanghai, China

Abstract - This paper investigates the implementation of multi-rate low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) codes. We propose a novel scheme to construct multi-rate QC-LDPC codes from the regular mother codes. These QC-LDPC codes can share a single particular decoder which is designed for the regular QC-LDPC code previously in spite of either irregularity or regularity. Based on this construction, encoding of the multi-rate QC-LDPC codes also can be implemented by a single particular encoder with simple shift registers at encoding speeds linearly proportional to the number of parity-check bits of a code for parallel encoding and to the length of information sequence of a code for serial encoding. The QC-LDPC codes at various rates possess different encoding speeds in a given hardware complexity which is determined by the mother code for parallel encoding and by the lowest-rate code for serial encoding.
Keywords - quasi-cyclic (QC), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, encoder, decoder
1. Introduction
Quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have an encoding advantage over other types of LDPC codes. They can be efficiently encoded by using simple shiftregisters with complexity linearly proportional to the number of parity bits for serial encoding, and to the code length for parallel encoding [1]. Well-designed QC-LDPC codes perform as well as computer-generated random LDPC codes, in terms of bit-error performance, word-error performance, and error floor, collectively.
From a practical perspective as well, some efficient decoding schemes like partially parallel decoder architecture for QC-LDPC codes have been presented. However, these schemes are usually only useful to regular QC-LDPC codes. This paper presents an effective approach to generate multi-rate QC-LDPC codes from a regular QC-LDPC one, which could share a single decoder designed for the regular QC-LDPC code previously regardless of the regularity.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 gives a brief introduction of QC-LDPC codes, including some important definitions and notations. Section 3 introduces some efficient decoding schemes designed for regular QC-LDPC codes and presents an innovative notion to design multi-rate QC-LDPC codes based on a regular one so as to utilize the particular decoder of the mother code. In Section 4, we propose the construction algorithm to generate multi-rate codes with both efficient encoding and decoding. Section 5 presents the

encoding schemes for multi-rate QC-LDPC codes by using a single encoder and Section 6 concludes this paper.

2. Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes

A circulant is a square matrix in which each row is the cyclic shift (one place to the right) of the row above it and the first row is the cyclic shift ofthe last row. For such a circulant, each column is the downward cyclic shift of the column on its left and the first column is the cyclic shift of the last column. The row and column weights of a circulant are the same, say w. For simplicity, we say that the circulant has weight w. A circulant is completely characterized by its first row (or first column) which is called the generator of the circulant. For a cxc circulant C over GF(2), if its rank is c, then all its rows (or columns) are linearly independent.
For two positive integers m and n with m<n, consider the following mxn array of cxc circulants over GF(2):

Cll C12

1,n

HQC= C21 22

2n

C1 C2

m, n_

which has the following structural properties: (1) the weight of

each circulant Cij is small compared to its size c; and (2) no

two rows (or two columns) of HQC have more than one

1-component in common, called row-column (RC)-constraint.

Property (1) simply implies that each circulant in HQC is a

sparse circulant and hence HQC is a sparse matrix. Then the

null space of HQC gives a QC-LDPC code q. The

RC-constraint on the rows and columns of HQC, ensures that

the Tanner graph [2] of q is free of cycles of length 4 [3] and

hence has a girth of at least 6. If all the circulants in HQC have

the same weight w, then HQC has constant column weight mw

and constant row weight mw. In this case, q is a regular

QC-LDPC code. If the weight distribution of the circulants in

HQC results in multiple column weights or multiple row

weights in HQC, then q is an irregular QC-LDPC code.

The structure of a QC-LDPC code can be viewed from its

parity-check matrix in circulant form. Based on this form,

every codeword v in q can be divided into n sections, v = (v1,

V2, ..., vA), each section vj consists of c consecutive
components of v. For 1$<n, the c components of the jth

section vj correspond to the c columns of the jth column of
circulants of HQC.

12-14, ISBN 978-89-5519-131-8 93560

- 1066 -

Feb.

2007 ICACT2007

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3. Decoding Scheme for Multi-Rate QC-LDPC

Codes

,IL

Lt2-A
Belief propagation (BP) algorithm is usually used for the LDPC codes decoding, where two types of messages are LL3V exchanged iteratively along the corresponding Tanner graph, namely, the variable-to-check messages updated by the variable node functional units (VNFU) and the IA5 -check-to-variable messages updated by the check node functional units (CNFU). In terms of the complexity of the decoder architectures, partially parallel decoder [4] is more practical compared to fully parallel design [5] as it significantly reduces the decoder complexity. Partially parallel decoding architecture is applicable to regular QC-LDPC codes, but it is difficult to apply to irregular ones. Consider the (3, 5) regular quasi-cyclic LDPC code as an example. In terms of partially decoder architecture, one straightforward approach is to use three 5-input CNFUs, five 3-input VNFUs
and 15 message memories m,, with each memory containing
c memory words as shown in Figure 1.

(a)
swgn(L ;)
L,c1I

(b) Figure 2. Original architectures for CNFU and VNFU.

LC
LX3

.X

Figure 1. Partially parallel decoder for (3,5) quasi-cyclic LDPC code.

LX5-

The architectures of the CNFU and VNFU are shown in Figure 2 (a), (b) respectively. The input signal z, stands for the intrinsic information. Obviously, CNFUs are more
complicated than VNFUs. In [6], a new scheme is proposed to
re-map the CNFUs and VNFUs for the partially parallel decoder into the same hardware by making use of similarity between the two stages of BP algorithm to reduce the overall complexity. The architectures of CNFUs and VNFUs are modified as Figure 3 (a), (b). Using this remapping approach, the area of logic core is decreased without introducing any performance degradation. The similar architectures can be combined in our decoding scheme.
Our scheme is to append new rows to the original parity-check matrix of the mother code to form new matrices corresponding to lower-rate codes. The new matrices HQC' enlarge the mother matrix HQC longitudinally and retain the whole original rows as the part of new matrices, which correspond to check equations. Therefore, any codeword v' at lower rates which satisfy
VWQC =
must naturally satisfy
VWQC =
so that v' can be decoded by the decoder of the mother code.

RLv

-sgn(Lv)

Re

REA
(b) Figure 3. Optimal architecture for CNFU and VNFU.
The multi-rate QC-LDPC codes generated by new parity-check matrices do not require regularity, and furthermore all effective decoding techniques that have been only used for regular QC-LDPC codes before could be employed to them.

12-14, ISBN 978-89-5519-131-8 93560

- 1067 -

Feb.

2007 ICACT2007

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

4. Construction of Multi-Rate QC-LDPC Codes
We employ a regular QC-LDPC code as the mother code to generate multi-rate QC-LDPC codes for effective decoding. Since the weight of any row of regular codes is equal, it is natural to consider whether the weights ofnew rows should be allocated the original row weight p when we append rows to form new matrices.
The theorems on stability condition in [7-9] imply that the selection of a uniform (or nearly uniform) check node degree results in good threshold performance. Let
25n
1*
f(j -j)Pj
j=2
if )2 < )2*, then the mean of the output message at the Ith
iteration mj(' will converge to infinity as I tends to infinity if
mu(° is large enough. If)2 > X2*, then m(/) cannot converge to
infinity regardless of its initial value. From Mean Inequality,
we know that 2< attains the minimum value if and only if allpi
are equal, so we conclude that the selection of a uniform row weights yields good threshold performance. Therefore, when rows are appended, we allocate the row weights equal to the original weight p.
In order to obtain a simple encoding scheme, we impose a constraint on the newly generated matrix, which must have a full row rank and whose column rank must be no less than its row rank. This constraint guarantees that the QC-LDPC codes corresponding to this new matrix can be encoded by a simple QC-LDPC encoder.
The rank r of HQC, the parity-check matrix of the mother code is equal to mc, the number of rows of HQC. The columns of circulants of HQC are arranged in such a way that the rank of the following mxm subarray of HQC (the m rightmost columns of circulants of HQC)

n-m-i circulants Cm,it,, Cm+i,2, C,. m+inmn-mi are added at the
bottom of the preceding parity matrix to obtain lower rate QC-LDPC codes.
In our construction algorithm, we also need to ensure that the row rank ofthe matrix keeps full and the RC-constraint always holds not to produce a girth of 4. Our construction algorithm randomly generates a certain number of new QC-LDPC codes at a lower rate. Then we select one code with good performance by rank check, girth average comparison and computer simulations.
Figure 4 presents the bit error rate (BER) results for additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels of a set of QC-LDPC codes. It is an example of codes with approximate rates 8/16, 8/17, 8/18, 8/19 generated by our construction algorithm. The results demonstrate that the multi-rate codes based on our construction approach keep a good performance.

1.E-01 -

1. E-02 -

1. E-03

1. E-04
Gm L(Um 1.E-05
1 .E-06 -

- (9216, 4606) +-- (9216, 4880)
(9216,5148)

1. E-07

(21(62, 653o288l))~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~i
I26a38 I_____ I_____ I_____ I__

1. E-081

12

14

1.6

1.8

Es No (dB)

Figure 4. ES/No simulation results for AWGN channels.

5. Encoding Scheme for Multi-Rate QC-LDPC Codes

l,-m+l

l,-m+2 K

n

F = 2,n-m+l C2,n-i+2 *

2,n

LCn,n-m+l Cm,n-m+2

mC,n

is mc, the same as the rank r of HQC while the first (m - n)c

columns of HQC correspond to the (m - n)c information bits.

We append the rows to the new matrix HQC' as the following

form, thus ensuring F' having full ranks all along.

F 1,2C1,1

Cl,n-m C1,n- Cl,n-2 I,n

C2,1 C2,2

C2,- CC2,n-ml C2,n-m2 *-- C

H' C." C.
C.,-, C.

C

C

C

C

0

Cm+ 0--l 0

C
0

We find schemes to encode a set of QC-LDPC codes at diverse rates by using a single encoder.
The generator matrix of QC-LDPC codes has the following form:

I O O ...

G12 Gll

...

G

I'm

oI
G QC =

G21 G22

...

G 2,m

0 0O. I G

G

...

G

2

-i

= [ I(n - m)c P ]

where I is a cxc identity matrix, 0 is a cxc zero matrix, and Gij

for l<i<n-m and l<j<m is a cxc circulant. Let gij be the

generator of the Gij, and hij be the first column of Gij. Once

we know gij's or hij's, we can form all the circulants Gij 's of

GQC. We say that GQC is in systematic-circulant (SC) form,

because its matrix P is an array of circulants. The SC form

allows us to encode a QC-LDPC code with simple shift

registers.

12-14, ISBN 978-89-5519-131-8 93560

- 1068 -

Feb.

2007 ICACT2007

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

An encoding circuit for q can be devised based on the
generators of the circulants in the P matrix of GQC. Let s = (s1, S2, ...-, Snm) be the information sequence of (n-m)c bits to be encoded, then the codeword for the information sequence s is v
= (S,pI,P2, * . . ,Pm), where for l<j<m,pj= (Pj,i, Pj,2, ***, Pj,c) is a
section of c parity-check bits. p1 can be formed with a shift-register-adder-accumulator (SRAA) circuit [1] as shown
in Figure 5. At the beginning of the encoding, glj is stored in
the feedback shift-register B and the content of register A (accumulator) is set to zero. It is noted that once new parity-check matrix is generated by appending rows, we need
to update the initial value ofglj in the registers for encoding.
To form m parity sections, we need m SRAA circuits, one for computing each parity section. If new rows are appended, more SRAA circuits are required. A block diagram for the entire encoder is shown in Figure 6. The information sequence s is encoded serially. All the parity sections are formed at the same time in parallel, and they are then shifted into the channel serially. Let mo be the number of rows of the mother code, m the number of the lowest-rate code in multi-rate QC-LDPC
codes. The encoding circuit consists of a total of 2m*c flip-flops, m*c AND-gates, and m*c two-input XOR-gates. The
encoding is accomplished in linear time with complexity linearly proportional to the number ofparity check bits, mc, of the code. The encoding is accomplished with (n-m)c clock cycles where (n-m)c is the length ofthe information sequence.

flip-flops as shown in Figure 7. (n-m)c two-input AND-gates and (n-m)c - 1 two-input XOR-gates are also required. All of the (n-m)c information bits are applied to the encoder in parallel. If all the parity sections are generated in parallel at the same time as well, a circuit that completes encoding in c clock cycles can be implemented. The structure of encoder fully retains except that more hardware units are required. In this
case, the circuit requires a total of m*(n-mo)c flip-flops, m*[(n-mo)c- l] XOR-gates and m*(n-mo)c AND-gates. When new rows are appended, the initial value ofthe columns, h1j, ..., hn-mj, are needed to reload into the n-m shift-registers in
parallel for encoding and less registers are required since the number of the information bits reduces so that we could disable some of them.
n-m JC XOR

Figure 7. SRAA-based parallel QC-LDPC encoder.

Input S

AN

.ID

,N

--* 1[!|

IXO

l

Pi

1

XO>R

OR-

XOR

1=

c-Ibit register

2

3|

..

C-1

Figure 5. SRAA encoder circuit.

l
1C

Input S

P
SRAA

P2
SRAA

A two-stage encoder can also be implemented as shown in Figure 8. This two-stage encoder circuit completes the encoding of (n-m)c information bits in 2c clock cycles, and
requires a total of nc flip-flops and a total of O(m*2cl2)+ (n-
mo)c-1 XOR-gates. For high-speed encoding, the complexity of the two-stage encoding is linearly proportional to the code length nc.

Sl
c-bits shift > register array

S2)
c-bits shift register array

St, ,,}

...

c=bits shift

register array

XOR

c-bits shift

XOR

Iregister array

PM
RAA
Figure 6. SRAA-based serial QC-LDPC encoder.
An encoder that completes encoding in mc clock cycles can be implemented with n-m feedback shift-registers, each with c

4 ,--,---o, r... , -
Pl,f
Figure 8. Two-stage QC-LDPC encoder.

12-14, ISBN 978-89-5519-131-8 93560

- 1069 -

Feb.

2007 ICACT2007

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table 1 gives the speeds and complexities of various encoding circuits. It indicates that we have to make tradeoffs between speed and complexity.

Table 1. Comparison of various encoding schemes

Encoding speed (clock Flip- Two-input Two-input

scheme cycles)

flop XOR-gates AND-gates

serial

(n-m)c 2m*c

m*c

m*c

parallel

mc

(n-mo) (n-mo)c- 1 (n-mo)c

stwage

c

nc O(m*2C)

0

6. Conclusion
This paper presents a novel scheme to generate multi-rate QC-LDPC codes from a mother code of regular QC-LDPC codes. They can be decoded by a single particular decoder designed for the mother code. The hardware complexity is determined by the mother code for parallel encoding and by the lowest-rate code for serial encoding. Other encoding circuits also can be implemented to choose various tradeoffs between speed and complexity.
REFERENCES
[1] Z.W. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, "Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71-81, Jan. 2006.
[2] R. Tanner, "A recursive approach to low complexity codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 27, pp. 533-547, Sep. 1981
[3] K. Yu, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, "Low density parity check codes based on finite geometries: a discovery and new results," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711-2736, Nov. 2001.
[4] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, "A 54 MBPS (3, 6)-regular FPGA LDPC decoder," in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Processing Systems (SIPS), San Diego, CA, USA, Oct. 2002, pp. 127-132.
[5] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, "A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity- check code decoder," IEEE J Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404-412, 2002.
[6] Z. Wang, Y Chen, and K Parhi, "Area-efficient quasi-cyclic LDPC code decoder architecture," in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Montreal, Canada, May 2004, pp. 49-52.
[7] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, "Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619-637, Feb. 2001.
[8] T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, "Fixed Points and Stability of Density Evolution," Commun. Inform. Syst., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 103-116, Sep. 2004.
[9] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, "Analysis of sumproduct decoding oflow-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation," IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657-670, Feb. 2001.

12-14, ISBN 978-89-5519-131-8 93560

- 1070 -

Feb.

2007 ICACT2007

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:21:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

