A HIGH-PERFORMANCE ARCHITECTURE FOR IRREGULAR LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM USING INPUT-MULTIPLEXING METHOD

O. Sarbishei† and V. Mohtashami‡ † Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Iran, om_sa69@stu-mail.um.ac.ir ‡ Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, mohtashami@ee.sharif.ir

ABSTRACT
A new high-performance architecture for decoding the irregular Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes with respect to the iterative message-passing decoding algorithm is explored. The proposed method is based on reducing the logic delays in the iterative processing of the bit nodes and check nodes leading to the increment of maximum possible frequency. The simulations show the efficiency of the proposed method in low/high-complexity graph matrices, though it is more effective in highcomplexity ones. About 28% reduction of the combinational delay in the bit/check processors is explored without much impacting the area consumption.
1. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes were introduced by Gallager in early 1960s [l]. After being overlooked for more than three decades, they were rediscovered right after the invention of turbo codes [2-4] and developed due to their excellent error-correcting performance and the availability of a simple iterative decoder [5]. They emerged as one of the best-known coding techniques for approaching the channel capacity on binary symmetric and additive white Gaussian noise channels [6]. The irregular LDPC codes, however, with sufficiently long block lengths and a careful choice of degree distribution along bit/check nodes, provide virtually error-free transmission at rates extremely close to the Shannon limit in AWGN channels [2]. The decoding of an LDPC code allows a high degree of parallelism, which makes it suitable to high data rate applications, such as wide-band wireless multimedia communications and magnetic storage systems [7]. The iterative decoding algorithm for LDPC codes can be described by “message-passing” on the Tanner graph (TG) of the code [8]. Depending on the decoding algorithm and the type of messages, certain computations are performed at the bit nodes and the check nodes of the TG. The algorithm is executed by exchanging messages iteratively between bit and check nodes through the edges of the graph in both directions. Decoding complexity is low, because of the sparseness of the graph [8].
The VLSI implementation of the LDPC decoder/encoder is quite challenging, due to the random nature of these codes. Current focus of VLSI design is on

nonsystematic decoders. A straightforward way to implement LDPC decoding in parallel is to directly map the nodes of the bipartite graph of the code onto VLSI processing units and the edges onto physical interconnects. Although this structure can achieve very high decoding throughput, low latency, and low power dissipation, it is not configurable, i.e., it cannot support multiple block sizes and code rates on the same core [9]. It is also not scalable due to the chip area consumption of the complex interconnection fabric. Another way to increase throughput is to pipeline the serial processing of bit and check nodes [9]. Although this approach increases throughput, it does so at the cost of increased decoding latency. The staggered schedule and à posteriori probability decoding proposed in [9] also lead to early saturation in the decoding performance within a few iterations, which may be undesirable in some applications. Another approach named as pipelineparallel implementation discussed in [2][10-13] is based on grouping bit nodes into n 1groups, where n 1is the parallelization factor. Then, each group will be assigned to a bit processor. Similarly, check nodes are grouped in n 1groups, and each group is assigned to a check processor. In this approach, n 1processors work in parallel, each with 1 / n 1of the total computational load. Therefore, this approach decreases the decoding latency and simultaneously increases the throughput.
This paper introduces a new high-performance architecture for the bit/check processors in the iterative probabilistic decoding of irregular LDPC codes, based on a fair distribution of the Look-Up Tables (LUTs) in the middle of a First-In First-Out (FIFO) delay-line leading to an increase in maximum achievable frequency. This approach will be more effective in large diversity of degrees of the bit/check nodes, as it is the case in LDPC codes with long block lengths.
2. REGULAR AND IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
An LDPC code can be represented by a bipartite graph called “factor graph” [14] or “normal graph” [15] that has H as its adjacency matrix. It consists of N bit nodes, denoted by bi, corresponding to the columns of H , and M check nodes, denoted by cj, corresponding to the rows of H . There exists an edge eij between bi and cj corresponding to each non-zero hji entry in H . This graphical representation completely describes the structure of the code and can be used for decoding using

1-4244-0779-6/07/$20.00 ©2007 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:24:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the message-passing algorithm. The performance of the LDPC codes depends on the degree distribution of the bit nodes and check nodes, and correspondingly the number of ones in the columns and rows of the parity-check matrix [16]. When nodes of the same type have the same degree, the code is called regular; otherwise, it is called irregular [1].

3. THE ITERATIVE PROBABILISTIC LDPC DECODING ALGORITHM

3.1. Decoding Algorithm

LDPC codes can be efficiently decoded by a suboptimal iterative message-passing algorithm, which was first introduced by Gallager [1]. As described by the bipartite graph of the code, the global structure of an LDPC code is decomposed into simple local structures called bit nodes and check nodes with edges between them determined by the parity-check matrix of the code. Using the message-passing algorithm, the code can then be decoded by iteratively exchanging extrinsic probabilistic messages between these nodes. The iterative LDPC decoder proceeds in the following steps based on the loglikelihood ratio (LLR) domain to provide less complexity as explored in [2].
1) Initialize by calculating the à priori LLR for each bit node in the LDPC codeword as follows:

LLR prior (bi )

=

An

P prior (bi P prior (bi

= 1) = 0)

(1)

where P prior (bi = ζ ),ζ = 0,1, is determined by the

transmission channel characteristics.

2) Compute bit-to-check messages for each edge in

the graph of the code. The extrinsic message from bit node bi to check node cj in the kth iteration is

given by

∑ LLR(k)(qij ) =

(k−1)
LLR

(rij′

)+

LLR(

prior)

(bi

)

(2)

c j′∈Nbr(bi )\ c j

where Nbr(bi) is the set of check nodes that are neighbors of bi, LLR(0)(rij)=0 and \cj means

excluding cj . Thus, |Nbr(bi)| = deg(bi), i.e., the

degree of node bi.

3) Compute check-to-bit messages for each edge in

the graph of the code. The extrinsic message from

check node cj to bit node bi is given by

∏ LLR (k)

(rij

)

=

(−1)

Nbr (c j )

 

bi′∈Nbr

(c

sgn
j )\bi

( LLR ( k )

(qi′j

))

 

×

∑ φ

 

φ(

LLR (k )

(qi′j

)

 )

(3)

 bi′∈Nbr (c j )\bi



where Nbr(cj) is the set of bit nodes that are
neighbors of cj , and \bi means excluding bi. The
function φ is defined as:

φ

(x)

=

−An  tanh 

( x ) 2

= An

ex ex

+1 −1

(4)

4) Repeat steps 2 and 3 until a stopping criterion,

such as satisfying all parity checks or reaching a

maximum number of iterations, is met. Then go to

step 5.

5) Compute à posteriori output:

∑ LLR( post)(bi ) =

LLR(rij ) + LLR( prior) (bi )

(5)

c j ∈Nbr (bi )

If LLR( post) (bi)>0, conclude that bi is “1”, else bi is “0”.

3.2. Implementation of Regular Codes

The bit processor for the regular codes as shown in Figure 1(a) is to realize the second step of the decoding algorithm. It uses the pipeline architecture to provide a high-performance operation with two cycles of adding and subtracting. This architecture needs 2L clocks (L=deg(bi), i=1,2,…,N) to realize all the essential outputs for a bit node named as, LLR(qij ) . These outputs will be stored in a memory bank and used for the check processors in the next step. The same procedure will be executed for the check nodes in the check processor to realize the third step. The outputs of the check processor, named as LLR(rij ) , will also be stored in another memory bank in order to be used for the next iteration in the bit processor. Figures 1(b) and 1(c) show the realization of the absolute and sign bit of LLR(rij ) , respectively.

(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1. (a) Regular bit processor. (b) Absolute-bit calculation in the check processor. (c) Sign-bit calculation in the check processor.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:24:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The processing of multiple bit nodes can easily be pipelined on this architecture. However, once the bit processor starts processing a bit node, it has to finish reading all of its edge data before it can start processing another node [2].

3.3. The conventional output-multiplexing method for irregular LDPC codes

Since each node may have a different degree in irregular

codes, the FIFO delay-line in Figure 1 must have a

variable length with a maximum delay equals to degmax,

where degmax is the maximum degree of nodes processed

by a specific bit/check processor. The output

multiplexing as explored in [2][3] is based on adding

multiplexers (LUTs) to the output of FIFO, in order to

select the appropriate output register.

The structure needs a Dx1 k-bit multiplexer, where D

is the number of different degrees in the bit/check nodes

processed by a bit/check processor and k is the word

length of LLR(qij ) / LLR(rij ) . This approach as shown in Figure 2(a) may lead to the reduction of the maximum

possible frequency in large diversity of degrees in

irregular LDPC codes. In other words, the serial

connection between the large output LUT and the

subtractor limits the maximum possible frequency:

TCOMB=TSUB+TMUX

(6)

where TCOMB, TSUB, and TMUX are the propagation

delays of a bit/check processor, subtractor and

multiplexer, respectively.

3.4. The proposed input-multiplexing method for irregular LDPC codes

The proposed method takes advantage of distributing kbit 2x1 multiplexers to the input of D registers of the FIFO as shown in Figure 2(b). In order to realize the selection bits of these multiplexers, a pre-defined D-bit circular shift-register is used, which is initialized by “100…0”. After finalizing the processing of a bit/check node, the shift-register operates and transmits the only “1” to the next multiplexer so that the FIFO delay-line could be updated for the next bit/check node. These 2x1 multiplexers determine which individual register of FIFO must be updated by the input LLR(qij ) , while the other registers operate in the normal pipeline architecture. The timing line control signal for the shift-register will be realized by a degree-counter.
This approach eliminates the effect of the additional multiplexers in the irregular codes, with improving the combinational delay (maximum frequency). In this way no serial connection between the subtractor and multiplexers is needed. This architecture will be more effective in large diversity of degrees (D), in which the multiplexer is more effective in impacting the maximum frequency, and the total combinational delay almost equals the subtractor delay:

TCOMB ≈ TSUB

(7)

The next section explores the simulation results for a common graph matrix with low-diversity of degrees (D=4) and a complex one based on the degree distribution in [16] (D=9) for large diversity of degrees, which leads to less propagation delay, and increases the maximum achievable frequency.
4. SIMULATION RESULTS
This section discusses the improvements of the proposed input-multiplexing method in a bit/check processor in comparison with the conventional output-multiplexing architecture. The system was described in Active-HDL6.2, and synthesized in Xilinx-ISE-6 on Virtex 2 with the speed optimization grade of “-6”. Usually, a 4- to 6-bit resolution is sufficient to represent the messages LLR(rij ) and LLR(qij ) [17]. Thus, depending on degmax, the required bit-width of the accumulator and subtractor is around 8 to 10 bits, suggesting that the computational complexity of the iterative LDPC decoding algorithm is relatively small. However, the complex degree distributions in [16] for irregular LDPC codes could improve the performance of the code. A 9-bit
accumulator/subtractor and 5-bit LLR(qij ) / LLR(rij )
with D=4 were used to cover a low-diversity of degrees for the bit/check nodes. A 17-bit accumulator/subtractor and 5-bit LLR(qij ) / LLR(rij ) with D=9, is also used to cover a complex degree distribution based on the graph matrix in [16] with a good improvement in logic path delays. Tables 1 and 2 summarize the final results for a sample bit processor based on the low- and highcomplexity graph matrices respectively.
(a)
(b)
Figure 2. (a) The conventional output-multiplexing method including a Dx1 multiplexer (D=3). (b) The
proposed input-multiplexing method with a fair distribution of three 2x1 multiplexers (D=3) among the
specific registers in the FIFO delay-line.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:24:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table 1. Simulation results of a sample bit-processor

with low-diversity of degrees (D=4) on Virtex 2

Parameter

Input-

Output-

multiplexing multiplexing

(proposed)

(conventional)

Slice

54

57

4-input LUT

50

49

Slice Flip-flop

88

84

Maximum Output 6.65

8.4

Path Delay (ns)

(21% reduced)

Maximum Possible 150.4

119

Frequency (MHZ)

Table 2. Simulation results of a sample bit-processor

with high-diversity of degrees (D=9) on Virtex 2

Parameter

Input-

Output-

multiplexing

multiplexing

(proposed)

(conventional)

Slice

66

79

4-input LUT

89

86

Slice Flip-flop

107

98

Maximum Output 6.95

9.62

Path Delay (ns)

(27.8% reduced)

Maximum Possible 143.8

103.9

Frequency (MHZ)

As we see in the above tables, the circular pre-defined shift-register and the fair distribution of LUTs leads to an increment in the number of slice flip-flops and LUTs in the proposed method, though it could be neglected. However, the maximum combinational delay based on the path between the FIFO and LLR(qij ) was widely reduced in the proposed architecture, specially, in highcomplexity graph matrices. The proposed method for irregular codes can be generalized to the serial and pipeline-parallel implementations of the LDPC decoder, which were explored in [2].
5. CONCLUSION
A new “input-multiplexing” technique to improve the performance of an irregular LDPC decoder based on the probabilistic iterative algorithm was described. The architecture included a fair distribution of LUTs and a pre-defined circular shift-register to control the length of the FIFO and the multiplexer selection lines. The proposed architecture could be more efficient in wider distribution of degrees due to the drawback of the big LUT in the output of the FIFO delay-line. The approach led to about 28% reduction of the combinational delay in a sample bit processor based on the complex graph matrix explored in [16].
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors thank Mr. R. Talebian for his constructive suggestions in describing and synthesizing the system.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. IT-8, PP. 21-28, 1962. [2] G. A. Al-Rawi, “Iterative processing: from applications to parallel implementations”, Ph.D. thesis, Dept. of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, USA, 189 P., May. 2003. [3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 45, PP. 399-431, 1999. [4] D. J. C. MacKay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes”, IEEE Electronic Letters., Vol. 33, PP. 457-458, 1997. [5] Y. Pei, L. Yin, and J. Lu, “Design of Irregular LDPC Codes on a Single Chip FPGA”, IEEE 6th CAS Symp. on Emerging Technologies: Mobile and Wireless, PP. 221-224, June 2004. [6] A. Blad, “Efficient Decoding Algorithms for low density parity check codes”, M.S. thesis in electronic systems, Linkoping University, Feb. 2005. [7] L. Yin, J. Lu, and Y. Wu, “Combined Hidden Markov Source Estimation and Low-Density Parity-Check Coding: A Novel Joint Source-Channel Coding Scheme for Multimedia Communications”, Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing, Vol. 2, Issue 6, PP. 643-650, Sep. 2002. [8] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes”, IEEE Transactions on communications, Vol. 53, No. 4, 2005. [9] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder”, IEEE J. Solid State Circ., Vol. 37, PP. 404-412, 2002. [10] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “VLSI implementation-oriented (3, k)-regular low-density parity-check code”, IEEE Workshop on signal processing systems (Sips), Sep. 2001. [11] F. Verdier and D. Declerq, “A LDPC parity-check matrix construction for parallel hardware decoding”, Proceeding of 3rd International Symposium on Turbo-Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, PP. 235-238, Sep. 2003. [12] H. Zhong and T. Zhang, “Design of VLSI implementation-oriented LDPC codes”, IEEE Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC). Oct. 2003. [13] D. E. Hocevar, “LDPC code construction with flexible hardware implementation”, IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC), Vol. 4, PP. 2708 -2712, 2003. [14] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 47, PP. 498-519, 2001. [15] J. G. D. Forney, “Codes on graphs: normal realizations”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 47, PP. 520-548, 2001. [16] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density paritycheck codes”, IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, Vol. 47, No. 2, PP. 619-637, 2001. [17] T. Zhang, Z. Wang and K. Parhi, “On finite precision implementation of low-density parity-check codes decoder”, International Symposium on Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), Vol. 4, PP 202-205, May. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:24:12 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

