IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

599

Results on Punctured Low-Density Parity-Check Codes and Improved Iterative Decoding Techniques
Hossein Pishro-Nik, Member, IEEE, and Faramarz Fekri, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper first introduces an improved decoding al-

gorithm for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over binary-

input–output-symmetric memoryless channels. Then some funda-

mental properties of punctured LDPC codes are presented. It is

proved that for any ensemble of LDPC codes, there exists a punc-

R R turing threshold. It is then proved that for any rates 1 and 2

< R < R < satisfying 0

1

2 1, there exists an ensemble of LDPC

codes with the following property. The ensemble can be punctured

R R from rate 1 to 2 resulting in asymptotically good codes for all

R  R  R rates 1

2. Specifically, this implies that rates arbi-

trarily close to one are achievable via puncturing. Bounds on the

performance of punctured LDPC codes are also presented. It is also

R < R < shown that punctured LDPC codes are as good as ordinary LDPC
codes. For BEC and arbitrary positive numbers 1 2 1, the

R  R  R existence of the sequences of punctured LDPC codes that are ca-

pacity-achieving for all rates 1

2 is shown. Based on the

above observations, a method is proposed to design good punctured

LDPC codes over a broad range of rates. Finally, it is shown that

the results of this paper may be used for the proof of the existence

of the capacity-achieving LDPC codes over binary-input–output-

symmetric memoryless channels.

Index Terms—Bipartite graphs, capacity-achieving codes, erasure channel, improved decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, iterative decoding, punctured codes, rate-adaptive codes, rate-compatible codes, symmetric channels.

I. INTRODUCTION
WE study some coding schemes using low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. We specifically concentrate on improved decoding methods and rate-compatible LDPC codes. One of the most important problems in LDPC coding is the analysis and design of finite-length codes. Although there has been some results on finite-length analysis of LDPC codes over the binary erasure channel (BEC) [1], design of good finite-length LDPC codes is still a research problem. An alternative way to compensate for this problem is to improve the decoding of these codes. Some previous work on improved decoding algorithms can be found in [2] and [3]. In [4] we introduced an improved decoding algorithm for LDPC codes over the BEC. We showed that the proposed decoding
Manuscript received August 6, 2003; revised February 23, 2005. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grants ANI-0117840 and CCF-0430964. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE Information Theory Workshop, San Antonio, TX, October 2004.
H. Pishro-Nik is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, MA 01003-9292 USA (e-mail: pishro@ecs.umass.edu).
F. Fekri is with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332-0250 USA (e-mail: fekri@ece.gatech.edu).
Communicated by R. Urbanke, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2006.889701

method can decrease the error rate of the code by several

orders of magnitude on BEC with very little extra complexity.

In this paper, we generalize the algorithm for arbitrary bi-

nary-input–output-symmetric memoryless (BIOSM) channels.

For the binary input additive white Gaussian noise channel

and an LDPC code of length 1000, we show that the algorithm

results in.5 dB gain with respect to the belief propagation. We

also show that the proposed method can be made more effective

on nonuniform channels.

We then study punctured LDPC codes and show some fun-

damental properties of these codes. We prove that punctured

LDPC codes have a threshold effect and compute the threshold

for different methods of puncturing. We specifically show that

arbitrary rates are achievable via puncturing. We then discuss

the optimality of punctured LDPC codes. Much stronger results

can be showed for the BEC. For example, using only one en-

coder and decoder we can achieve the capacity of BEC on arbi-

trary set of rates. We discuss design of good puncturing schemes

for LDPC codes and we propose a simple rule for constructing

rate-compatible LDPC codes. The proposed method prevents

the performance degradation for the high rates that was previ-

ously observed in [5]. It is also applicable to finite-length LDPC

codes. Finally we consider capacity achieving sequences for

general BIOSM channels. We prove that if capacity achieving

sequences of LDPC codes exist when the rate of the codes ap-

proaches zero, then capacity achieving LDPC codes exist for all

rates.

Throughout the paper we adopt the following terminology.

By a graph we mean a simple graph, i.e., a graph with no loops

(edges joining a vertex to itself) and no multiple edges (several

edges joining the same two vertices). Let be a subset of the

vertices in the graph .

shows the set of neigh-

bors of in . More generally, for

,

is the set of

vertices in from which there is path of length to a vertex in .

Let be a subgraph of such that its vertex set is . We say

is induced by if contains all edges of that join two vertices

in . For a graph ,

is the degree of in . If is the

set of vertices in and

, then

is the number of

neighbors of in . For a random variable , we show its distri-

bution by

. If the random variable has a well-defined den-

sity function, we represent the density function by

. Sim-

ilar to [6], we define

.

II. IMPROVED DECODING ALGORITHMS FOR FINITE-LENGTH LDPC CODES
The iterative decoding of LDPC codes is very fast especially for the BEC. Our aim in this section is to improve the error performance of iterative decoding algorithm while keeping the

0018-9448/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

decoding fast. We use the message passing algorithm with some

modifications. Let

be the average time required for the

standard iterative decoding (Algorithm A) of an LDPC code of

length when it is used over a BIOSM channel. Let be an

improved decoding method for the same code when used over

the same channel. Let

be the time that Algorithm

needs to decode a received word and let

be the average

time of the decoding of the code using Algorithm . We want

to have

(1) (2)

where is a small constant close to zero and is a sufficiently

small constant. For the BEC, our simulations show that the algo-

rithm we propose (Algorithm C) achieves the above inequalities

for

and

when the length of the code is several

thousands

. For the general BIOSM channels, the

proposed algorithm (Algorithm D) satisfies the above inequali-

ties for

and

. Thus, for the BEC both average

and maximum running time are small enough. For other BIOSM

channels the average running time is still almost the same as

the iterative decoding but the maximum running time can be 40

times the average running time of the standard decoding. How-

ever, for both channels, the proposed algorithms result in con-

siderable reduction of the bit error rate with respect to the stan-

dard iterative decoding. For convenience, we first briefly review

the proposed method for BEC.

A. Binary Erasure Channel (BEC)
In this section we briefly review the improved decoding algorithm for LDPC codes over the BEC [4]. The key idea can be summarized by the following observation. Consider a BEC with an erasure probability and an LDPC code of length that has small enough error probability. If the message passing decoder fails to decode a received word completely, then there exists a very small number (usually less than or equal to 3 bits) of undecoded bits that by knowing their values, the decoder can finish the decoding successfully.
The message passing decoding of LDPC codes over the BEC can be described as follows [7].
• For all unlabeled check nodes do the following. If the values of all but one of the variable nodes connected to the check node are known, set the missing variable bit to the XOR of the other variable nodes and label that check node “finished.” If all the variable nodes that are connected to the check node are known label the check node as finished.
• Continue the above procedure until all check nodes are labeled as finished or the decoding cannot continue further.
We call the above decoding method Algorithm A. We also call the first improvement to A as Algorithm B. For the erasure patterns that Algorithm A finishes the decoding successfully, both algorithms are the same. The difference between the two algorithms is when Algorithm A fails to complete the decoding of a received codeword. In this case Algorithm B chooses one of the undecoded variable nodes and guesses its value (for example by setting its value to zero). Then it continues as following.

• For all unlabeled check nodes do the following. If the values of all but one of the variable nodes connected to the check node are known, set the missing variable bit equal to the XOR of the other variable nodes and label it as a finished check node. If all the variable nodes connected to the check node are known then if the check node is satisfied label that check node “finished.” Otherwise label it as “contradicted.”
• Continue the above procedure until all check nodes are labeled or the decoding cannot continue further.
Once the above procedure is finished, if all of the check nodes are labeled and none of them is labeled contradicted, the decoder outputs the resulting word as the decoded word. If all of the check nodes are labeled but some of them are labeled contradicted, then it changes the value of , the guessed variable node, and repeats the decoding from there. This time the decoding finishes successfully because we have found the actual value of . But if the decoding stops again (i.e., some of the check nodes are not labeled) we have to choose another unknown variable node and guess its value. Again, if some check nodes are labeled as contradicted, we have to go back and try other values for and . Algorithm B is efficient only if the number of guesses is very small. Fortunately, simulation results show that even if we limit the number of guesses to a very small number, we can decrease the error rate considerably. Thus, in practice we limit the number of guesses to a maximum value and we claim a decoding failure if the decoder requires more guesses. In fact, simulations show that with the right choices of the variable nodes to guess, usually the decoding finishes successfully by one or two guesses. Note that the above algorithm does not need any computations other than repeating the iterative decoding. Thus the decoding is very fast.
Algorithm B has two problems. First, the complexity of the algorithm grows exponentially with the number of guesses. Although the number of guesses is very small, this is undesirable. In fact, if the complexity of the algorithm increased linearly with the number of guesses we could increase and decrease the error probability substantially. Second, it is possible that the algorithm declares a wrong word as the output of the decoding. However, this can happen only if the maximum-likelihood (ML) decoder cannot decode the corresponding codeword. Since the ML decoder has a very low error probability, this happens with a very small probability.
As it is shown in [4] this algorithm can be significantly improved to get a new algorithm that we called Algorithm C. In Algorithm C, instead of trying different values for the guessed variable nodes, we can find these values efficiently. We showed that Algorithm C has very low complexity and it avoids the undetected errors. It is also shown in [4] that both Algorithms B and C result in considerable improvement upon the standard iterative decoding. It is also shown in [4] that using two-edge-connected components in the Tanner graph we can decrease the number of guesses in Algorithms B and C.
In Section II-B, we can generalize Algorithm B for other BIOSM channels. It seems that generalizing Algorithm C for other channels is impossible, because Algorithm C takes advantage of the special structure of the BEC. In fact, this explains the efficiency of Algorithm C.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: RESULTS ON PUNCTURED LDPC CODES AND IMPROVED ITERATIVE DECODING TECHNIQUES

601

B. BIOSM Channels

In this section, we generalize the improved decoding algo-

rithms [4] for other BIOSM channels. Suppose that an LDPC

code is used for error correction over a BIOSM channel.

Let

and

be the sets of variable and check nodes in the

Tanner graph of the code, respectively. Moreover, suppose we

use the standard iterative decoding (Algorithm A) to decode the

received words. Assume that Algorithm A has small enough

error probability (for example less than ). The iterative

decoder is initialized by the log likelihood ratio (LLR) of the

variable nodes based on the observation of the channel output.

As we discussed Algorithms B and C in the previous section

were based on the following observation. When the iterative de-

coding fails, knowing the values of a few bits in the stopping set

is sufficient to finish the decoding successfully. We first extend

this observation to arbitrary BIOSM channels.

Suppose a codeword

is transmitted

over the channel, where is the code length. We define a func-

tion

as

if

(3)

if

.

Let

be the (LLR) of the corresponding

variable nodes

based on the observation of the

channel output. Suppose the iterative decoder fails to decode a

received word. In other words, after the maximum number of

iterations, there are still unsatisfied check nodes in the graph. In

this case there exists a set

with a very

small cardinality (usually

) that has the following

property.

Define

as

the number of guesses, it is important to have as few guesses as

possible. Note that a variable node that we choose to guess may

have the correct value at the end of the iterative decoding. How-

ever, it is connected to several unsatisfied check nodes. Since we

set the LLR of the guessed variable node to or , this can

help the iterative decoder to correct the values of the other bits

connected to the check nodes. Again, we need to choose a max-

imum value for the number of guesses. Empirical observations

show that choosing the maximum number of guesses as five can

reduce the bit error rate considerably. Note that, similar to the

case of the binary erasure channel (Algorithms B and C), the av-

erage running time of Algorithm D,

, is almost the same

as Algorithm A (the standard iterative decoding). However, to

maintain the maximum running time small enough we need to

choose a small value for the maximum number of guesses.

We summarize Algorithm D as follows. For any received

codeword we perform the standard iterative decoding. If all

check nodes are satisfied at the end of decoding, we are done.

Otherwise, we find variable nodes that are connected to

highest number of unsatisfied check nodes at the end of the

decoding and guess their values. We repeat the standard de-

coding but this time we initiate the algorithm with the new

LLRs for the guessed bits ( or ). For other bits, we

use the LLRs found by the channel observation. We repeat the

above procedure until either the decoding finishes successfully

or all values for the guessed variable nodes are tried.

To evaluate the performance of Algorithm D we chose an

LDPC code of length with the following degree distribu-

tion:

(5)

if if .

We used the expurgated ensemble. That is, we generate a code (4) from the ensemble, and if the minimum distance of the code is
small, we do not use the code and pick another code at random.

Now, if we initialize the iterative decoder with , it can decode Since the ensemble has asymptotically linear minimum distance

the received word correctly. We do not have proof for this state- [8], [9], after a few tries we will find a code with large minimum

ment. However, the decoding algorithm that we will introduce distance. We obtained the bit error rate performance for both Al-

works well in practice.

gorithms A (the standard iterative decoding) and D. For Algo-

Based on the above development, we design a decoding algo- rithm D, we chose the number of guesses

. Fig. 1 shows

rithm similar to Algorithm B that was presented for the BEC [4]. the performance of the decoders. We observe that Algorithm D

We call it Algorithm D. Recall that in Algorithm B, we chose has 35 dB gain with respect to Algorithm A at the bit error rate

the bits to be guessed from the stopping set after the decoding of . The gain increases to.5 dB at the bit error rate of .

failure. For the general case of BIOSM channels, we need to The figure also shows the performance of a randomly chosen

find a method to choose the variable nodes whose values must code of length 1000 from the ensemble of

regular codes,

be guessed.

which is known to have the best performance among the regular

We observed that the following simple method works very LDPC code ensembles. We observe that using Algorithm D for

well in practice for choosing the variable nodes to be guessed. decoding the above irregular code results in 1 dB gain over the

Let be the number of unsatisfied check nodes that are adja-

regular code in low bit error rates.

cent to when the iterative decoding fails. We choose the vari- Now we present some experimental results concerning the

able nodes that have the highest ’s. Intuitively, by this method running time of Algorithm D. We give the results for the code

we find the locations of the graph for which there is a lack of in- of length 1000 from the ensemble

. We decoded

formation. Choosing variable nodes with high , reduces the bits over the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (BI-

number of guesses required for successful decoding. In fact, if AWGN) channel and measured the average and the maximum

we just select the guessed nodes randomly, some of the guesses running time for the decoding of received blocks. Let

will not be necessary for successful decoding. Since the com- and

show the average time of decoding of the LDPC

plexity of the algorithm increases exponentially with respect to code of length from the given ensemble using Algorithms

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

Fig. 1. Comparisons of the bit error rates of Algorithms A and D for an irregular code of length n = 10 and the (3; 6) regular code decoded by Algorithm A over the BIAWGN channel.

A and D, respectively. Our simulations suggest that the esti-

mate of

is equal to . This implies that the average

running time of Algorithms A and D are almost the same. Re-

call that we defined

as the time that Algorithm

needs to decode a received word . Let

denote the max-

imum value of

over all the received blocks. We define

. Our simulations show that

,

approximately. In other words, in the worst case the time that Fig. 2. Several parallel channels. Algorithm D needs to decode a received word can be 38.4 times

the average running time of Algorithm A. In [4] we have esti-

mated that length .

, for the BEC and a half-rate code with different bits in a codeword may be transmitted over different subchannels. Some practical examples of nonuniform channels

III. NON-UNIFORM CHANNELS

are volume holographic memory (VHM) systems, orthogonal division frequency multiplexing (OFDM) systems, and multi-

In [10] and [11] we investigated the application of LDPC level coding.

codes for nonuniform channels. We introduced a scheme for In VHM systems, the information is recorded and retrieved in

designing LDPC codes over these channels. We also showed the form of two-dimensional data pages, i.e., two-dimensional

that the punctured codes can be viewed as a special case of patterns of bits. These bits are subject to different sources of

nonuniform channels. In this section we study some properties noise. The SNR decreases as we move from the center to the

of LDPC codes on nonuniform channels and show that the im- corner of the page. Typically, raw bit error rate might vary by

proved decoding algorithm proposed in this paper is more effec- two or three orders of magnitude over a page. As we explained

tive on these channels if used properly. Specifically, we study in [11] we can divide a VHM page to regions such that bits

the effect of the algorithm on punctured LDPC codes.

of the same region have almost the same raw error probability.

A nonuniform channel can be considered as several parallel Any region in the page corresponds to one of the subchannels in

independent subchannels as it is shown in Fig. 2. We assume Fig. 2. A similar situation exists in OFDM systems that consist

that we use one LDPC code over the set of subchannels. Thus, of several parallel channels with different SNRs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: RESULTS ON PUNCTURED LDPC CODES AND IMPROVED ITERATIVE DECODING TECHNIQUES

603

Suppose we use a code of length . We transmit every code-

word such that bits from each codeword are transmitted

over the th channel. In [11] we defined an ensemble

of LDPC codes. We showed that they have some good proper-

ties. For convenience, we repeat the definition of the ensemble

here. The main point is that in the ensemble

, bits of dif-

ferent types may have different degree distributions. Formally,

let

be a codeword. Let also

be the set of

bits from the codeword that are transmitted over the th channel

(type j bits). Thus we have

, where denotes the

cardinality of the set. For example, in the VHM system, is

the set of bits in the th region (i.e.,

).

Now we define the ensemble

of bipartite graphs that we

propose for nonuniform error protection. Let be the set of

edges in the graph and let be the set of edges that are inci-

dent with a variable node of type . Also let be the set of

edges adjacent to the variable nodes of type and degree . We

define

(6)

Theorem 1: If

and

, then for any

we have

.

Proof: This theorem can be proved using similar discus-

sions as in [12]. Let be a variable node of type in the Tanner

graph of the code. Thus, receives observation from the output

of the channel . Let

(8)

be the neighborhood of of depth . Let be the graph in-

duced by the vertices in . In the graph , the variable node

receives information from the channel , and other variable

nodes receive observation from possibly different channels. Let

be the observation of and let be the set of observations

of the other variable nodes in . Now, assuming that is a

tree,

is the error probability of the ML decoder based

on the observations of the variable nodes in (i.e.,

).

Now, in the above graph, if we just replace the variable node

with the variable node that receives observation from the

where

channel , again

is the error probability of the ML

decoder based on the observations of the variable nodes in

(i.e.,

). Since is physically degraded with respect

to , we can consider as the result of passing through (7) another channel . Since given , the observation is in-

Let

. Let also

be as defined in [6]. We define the ensemble

as the en-

semble of bipartite graphs with the degree distributions given by

and .

Now we give some properties of the densities of the messages

in the belief propagation algorithms on the ensemble

.

These properties are specifically useful for applying the im-

dependent of the value of the transmitted bit,

is the

error probability of the ML decoder based on the observations

. Thus

for the given

. Since

, any structure of the neighborhood

(the graph and the channels from which the bits receive in-

formation) has the same probability of occurrence for and .

Thus we conclude that

.

proved decoding algorithm. Let

denote the message that

is sent from a variable node of type (i.e.,

) to its in-

cident check node in the ’th iteration of the message passing

algorithm. Let also denote the message that the check node

sends to its incident variable node. Let and denote the

average asymptotic distributions of random variables

and , respectively.

Consider a BIOSM channel with parameter , where

and

. For example,

for the BIAWGN channel, can be considered as the variance

of the noise. Let be a class of channels with parameter . Thus,

any channel in in is uniquely determined by its variable .

A channel in with parameter is called . The capacity

of the channel is shown by . Similar to [12], we con-

sider physically degraded channels. For clarity of exposition we

assume that if

, then is physically degraded with

respect to .

Consider the case that in Fig. 2 all subchannels are the same

type but have different channel parameter. Moreover, all sub-

channels belong to a class of physically degraded channels as

explained above. Suppose we use an LDPC code from the en-

semble

over these channels. Assume the variable nodes

of type are transmitted through the channel . Then we have

the following theorem:

Theorem 1 states that, under certain conditions, the bits that have higher error probability before the decoding, have higher error probability after the decoding as well. We have the following corollary.

Corollary 1: In a regular ensemble, the variable nodes that receive information from channels with lower capacity, have higher error probability after the decoding.

In the following, we study applications of improved decoding

(Algorithm D) on nonuniform channels. In the guessing process

we choose a variable node to be guessed. As we mentioned, it is

better to choose the variable node from the parts in the graph that

there is a lack of information. Since the likelihood of the error

for the nodes that receive information from the channels with

smaller capacity is higher, one simple method in the guessing

process is to give priority to these nodes. Fortunately, our simu-

lations show that this simple method works very well and con-

siderably improves the decoding performance.

Punctured codes can be considered as a special case of

nonuniform channels in which the punctured bits are trans-

mitted through a channel with zero capacity. In Section V we

study this special case of nonuniform channels in greater detail.

To observe the performance of Algorithm D on nonuniform

channels, we chose a

regular LDPC code of length .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

604

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

Fig. 3. Comparisons of the bit error rates of Algorithms A and D for the (3; 6)-regular LDPC code over the BIAWGN channel.

We randomly chose 37.5% of the variable nodes (i.e., vari-

contains exactly one vertex for all for which

able nodes) and designate them as punctured variable nodes.

.

Thus the resulting code has the rate . We then evaluate the performance of Algorithms A and D for this code. As discussed above, in choosing the variable nodes to guess, the punctured bits were given priority. Fig. 3 shows the performance of the algorithms. We observe that improvements close to 1 dB is gained at low bit error rates using Algorithm D.

In simple terms, the graph is obtained by replicating every

vertex in

times and introducing edges so that the local

adjacency relationships between replicated nodes are preserved.

Let be a Tanner graph of an LDPC code . Let also

and

be the sets of variable and check nodes in the Tanner graph of

the code, respectively. For simplicity, suppose we use the code

IV. APPLICATION OF PSEUDO-CODEWORDS TO THE ANALYSIS OF ALGORITHM D

Simulation results given in previous sections suggest that

we can considerably improve the performance of LDPC codes

using Algorithm D. However, so far our results are totally

based on simulations. In this section, we provide some dis-

cussions based on pseudocodewords [13], [14], [15] that help

us understand Algorithm D. We first briefly provide some

definitions and results from [15]. For more details, readers are

referred to [15]. Let

be a graph with vertex set

and edge set . Finite covers

are defined in [15] in the following way.

over a BIAWGN channel. Let be a finite cover of and

be the corresponding code. For any codeword

a vector

is defined in [15], which is called a pseudocodeword

of . The fundamental cone of the graph , denoted by ,

is defined in [15] and is related to the set of pseudocodewords

taken over all covers of of all degrees

.

Let

, be the set of received LLRs from

the channel. Assuming that all-one word was transmitted, it is

shown in [15] that the decoding is successful if and only if for

all

, we have

.

Using the concept of pseudocodewords we can deter-

mine a necessary and sufficient condition for the success of

Algorithm D. Assume

be the LLR vector

Definition 1: A finite degree cover of

is a received from a BIAWGN channel. Moreover, assume that the

graph with vertex set

, where each set

standard iterative decoding has failed. Define

contains vertices. The edge set of

(9)

is chosen as a subset of

such that for each vertex

, we have The following simple Lemmas give necessary and suf-

, and

. Moreover, ficient conditions for the success of Algorithm D. Let

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: RESULTS ON PUNCTURED LDPC CODES AND IMPROVED ITERATIVE DECODING TECHNIQUES

605

is guessed be the set of indices of the guessed of LDPC codes of rate , there exists a punctured LDPC code

variable nodes in Algorithm D. Let be the new LLRs imposed ensemble of an arbitrary rate

with the same threshold

by Algorithm D (i.e., by replacing the LLR of the guessed bits under the message passing decoding algorithms. We then show

by or ).

that for any rates and satisfying

,

Lemma 1: Algorithm succeeds only if for all

,

there exists , such that

.

Proof: Suppose there exists

, such that for all

, we have

. Then,

,

. Thus the

iterative decoding fails independent of the values of the guessed

bits.

there exists an LDPC code that can be punctured from rate

to such that the resulting code is asymptotically good for all

rates ,

. Specifically, this shows that rates arbi-

trarily close to one are achievable using puncturing. For BEC,

we show that using only one encoder and decoder and a proper

puncturing scheme, we can achieve the capacity for an arbitrary

set of positive rates. We then propose a method to design good

We now show that the condition of Lemma 2, is actually a punctured LDPC codes over a broad range of rates. The method

sufficient condition for Algorithm D to converge to the ML de- is very simple and does not need any optimization process. Ad-

coding.

ditionally, it avoids performance degradation at high rates. It is

Lemma 2: If for all

, there exists , such that

, then Algorithm D can find the ML decoded codeword.

Proof: Assume the all-one codeword is transmitted. Since

we check all possible values for the guessed bits, at some point

we will guess the correct value for all the guessed bits. That

is the LLRs for all the guessed bits become . Since for all

, there exists

, such that

, we conclude

that for all

,

. Thus the decoding is

successful.

Therefore, when the guesses are correct the decoding is suc-

cessful. On the other hand it is possible that the algorithm con-

verges to a wrong codeword for some other guessed values. In

fact, for good LDPC codes, this is very unlikely. However, in

these situations at the end of decoding we will have more than

one decoded valid codewords. Since the number of these code-

words is small a simple ML test will give us the result of ML

decoding.

also applicable to finite-length LDPC codes. Finally, we show

the possible application of punctured LDPC codes for proving

the existence of capacity achieving sequences for BIOSM chan-

nels.

We consider the following scheme. We take an LDPC code of

rate

, where and are the length of the information

blocks and the codewords, respectively. To generate a code with

a new rate, we puncture a subset of bits in the codeword and

send the unpunctured bits to the receiver. It is assumed that the

decoder knows the position of punctured bits in the codeword.

To start the decoding, we need to compute LLRs in the decoder.

The LLRs for the punctured bits are zero.

Ha and McLaughlin studied optimal puncturing of LDPC

codes [5]. They studied two methods for puncturing LDPC

codes. In the first method, the authors chose the punctured

bits randomly (i.e., if the puncturing fraction is , they chose

a subset of the bits in the codeword with cardinality at

random and puncture the bits in the subset). This method is

Using the above result one may try to analyze the perfor- called random puncturing. In the second method, the intentional

mance of Algorithm D. In fact, this is one of the future directions puncturing, they optimized the puncturing distribution. The

of our research.

authors set up the intentional puncturing as follows. First, vari-

able nodes of the bipartite graph were grouped in accordance

V. PUNCTURED LDPC CODES

with their degrees. Then, they randomly punctured a fraction

A. Introduction

of the nodes in , where is the set of variable nodes of degree .

In the previous section, we showed using the proposed decoding algorithm presented in this paper we can considerably improve the performance of punctured LDPC codes. In this section, we study some fundamental properties of punctured LDPC

As we mentioned, a punctured code can be modeled as a code that is used over two parallel channels as Fig. 2. In this model, punctured bits are transmitted over the second channel that has zero capacity. Let us define

codes. Puncturing is one of the most common methods to con-

struct rate-compatible codes. In this method, to change the rate

(10)

of a code to a higher rate, we puncture (delete) a subset of the

codeword bits. We first study the puncturing capacity of LDPC

code ensembles. Particularly, we prove that any LDPC code en-

semble has a puncturing threshold . If the puncturing frac-

tion is smaller than , then the punctured code is asymptot-

ically good. In other words, a code from the ensemble can be

used to achieve arbitrarily small error probability over a noisy

channel while the code rate is bounded away from zero. On the

other hand, if

, error probability is bounded away from

zero, independent of the communication channel. The punc-

turing thresholds can be easily computed for both randomly and

where is the fraction of degree- variable nodes in the graph.

Thus if we let

, an inten-

tional puncturing distribution for a code from

ensemble

can be represented by the pair

in which shows the punc-

turing fraction and determines the puncturing structure. A

valid puncturing pattern is obtained when we have

,

for

.

It is worth noting that asymptotically random puncturing is a

special case of intentional puncturing, as stated in the following.

intentionally punctured LDPC codes. We also show that punc- Fact 1: A randomly punctured ensemble of LDPC codes with

turing is a lossless process in the sense that for any ensemble a puncturing fraction has the same threshold as the intention-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

606

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

Fig. 4. Model that describes puncturing over a binary channel.

Equivalently we can say that as tends to , tends to in-

finity in probability [6] and thus the probability density function

of , , converges to [6], [12]. Furthermore, we may as-

sume that if

, then

. Note that almost

all practical MBIOS channels such as BIAWGN channel, BSC,

and BEC satisfy these properties.

We say an ensemble of LDPC codes of positive rate is

asymptotically good if there exists a

such that

and a randomly chosen code from the ensemble

can be used to achieve arbitrary small error rate over for all

. On the other hand, if we need

for

achieving arbitrarily small error rate, the ensemble is said to be

asymptotically bad. For a punctured ensemble

we

define

ally punctured code with puncturing distribution

, for

.

Proof: The proof is simple and can be done by evaluating

the density evolution formulas for the punctured codes given in

[11]. The proof alternatively follows from Strong Law of Large

Numbers (as

, both of the distributions become the

same almost surely), and using continuity of the density evo-

lution over space of distributions.

Fact 1 implies that any asymptotic result that is valid for intentionally punctured codes is usually valid for randomly punctured codes. Thus, whenever we are concerned with asymptotic properties, we only give the result for intentional puncturing. As we mentioned in [11] a punctured LDPC code can be modeled as Fig. 4. In this figure the punctured bits are transmitted through a channel with zero capacity. The actual channel, is a BIOSM channel with the parameter . When decreases, i.e., when the channel improves, we increase the puncturing fraction. Thus we can consider the puncturing process as a change in the channel not in the code rate.

(12)

We also define the following sequence: (13)

Theorem 2: (Puncturing threshold of LDPC codes) Consider

the ensemble of LDPC codes defined by the pair

that are

intentionally punctured by the puncturing pattern

. As-

sume a randomly chosen code from the punctured ensemble is

used over the channel , with

. Let be supremum

value of the puncturing fraction such that in (13), we have

(14)

If

, then the decoding error probability is bounded away

from zero independent of the communication channel. On the

other hand, if

, then there exists

such that if

the channel parameter is smaller than , then

B. Puncturing Threshold of LDPC Codes

(15)

In this section, we compute the puncturing threshold of

LDPC code ensembles. Consider an MBIOS channel with pa- The above result, proved in Appendix I, shows that is

rameter , where

and

the threshold of punctured LDPC codes. Using Theorem 2, we

. For example, for the BIAWGN channel, can can find the puncturing threshold of randomly and intentionally

be considered as the variance of the noise. Let be a class punctured LDPC code ensembles. The cutoff rate of the code

of channels with parameter . Thus, any channel in in is

is obtained by

uniquely determined by its variable . A channel in with pa-

rameter is called . The capacity of the channel is

(16)

shown by . For simplicity, we assume that is a continuous

function of . Similar to [12], we consider physically degraded

channels. For clarity of exposition we assume that if

,

then is physically degraded with respect to . For the

channel assuming the all-one code word has been sent, we

define the random variable as

where is the rate of the parent code. For example, since

the

regular ensemble has puncturing threshold (for reg-

ular codes the random and intentional puncturing are the same)

, it has the cut off rate

. Thus using the

regular ensemble as the parent code ensemble, we cannot

obtain the rates higher than

.

(11)

C. Achieving Arbitrary Rates Via Puncturing

where and are the input and output of the channel, respec-

tively. Assume that if

, then is physically degraded

with respect to . For simplicity, we assume that

is

a continuous function of and we have

.

In [5], authors evaluated the performance of several punctured LDPC codes and optimized the puncturing pattern to get the best performance. However, their simulations show that for high rates the performance of LDPC codes degrades and we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: RESULTS ON PUNCTURED LDPC CODES AND IMPROVED ITERATIVE DECODING TECHNIQUES

607

TABLE I THE CUTOFF RATES OF SOME LDPC CODE ENSEMBLES (RANDOM
PUNCTURING)

there exists an ensemble

of LDPC codes with the fol-

lowing properties. The ensemble can be punctured in a rate-

compatible way to produce all rates

. Moreover,

for all

it can be used to reliably transmit data over

satisfying

(17)

need to pay a big penalty for using punctured codes. This phenomenon can be completely explained by the threshold effect of punctured codes discussed in the previous section.
In [5], authors used three ensembles of LDPC codes for puncturing. These ensembles are

where is defined by (11). Note that for any fixed rate, we can conclude the existence of
an ordinary LDPC code ensemble that satisfies the above lower bound from [19]; however, the importance of Theorem 4 is in the fact that we can have only one code that simultaneously satisfies the bound for all rates.
Proof: Choose an LDPC code or rate whose threshold over the BEC, , satisfies

(18)

We use this code as parent code and use random puncturing to

obtain all rates ,

. Now if

, using Fig. 4, we can assume we still have a code of rate

, because as it was mentioned previously, puncturing can be

considered as a change in the channel instead of the code rate.

Now if we apply [19, Theorem 4.2] to this system, we conclude

the following. If

The cut off rates of these ensembles are shown in Table I. From Table I, we can easily explain the degradation in the per-
formance of the above ensembles at high rates. By examining the simulation results in [5], we observe that all of the above ensembles show considerable degradation for the rates above . The degradation seems to have a very high slope for the rates above . This is because at these rates we are approaching the cut off rate.
Using the results of the previous section, by suitably choosing the ensemble, rates arbitrarily close to 1 can be obtained via puncturing. In fact, this is achieved by using good codes for the BEC as the parent code and randomly puncturing them (off course intentional puncturing works, as well). Since capacity achieving sequences of LDPC codes over the BEC are known [7], [16], [17] and [18], we can find codes with cut off rates arbitrarily close to 1. Moreover, the parent code can have any rate. Thus we have the following theorem.

Theorem 3: For any rates and that

there exists an ensemble of LDPC codes with the following

property. The ensemble can be punctured from rate to re-

sulting in asymptotically good codes for all rates

.

Theorem 3 assures that we can have a punctured LDPC codes that is asymptotically good (in the sense defined in this paper) on arbitrary set of rates; However, it does not give any clue how close to capacity the performance of such code will be. Here we give a lower bound on the achievable rates as the channel parameter changes.

Theorem 4: For any terized by

and MBIOS channel parame-

, and

,

,

(19)
then the threshold of the punctured code, satisfies . Thus the punctured code can be used for reliable commu-
nication over . However using [18], [19], and we conclude
(20)

Fig. 5 shows the ratio of the achievable rate and the channel capacity for BSC. Fig. 6 shows the gap from the capacity for BIAWGN channel. As we see the gap is always less than 1.6 dB. The bound of Theorem 4 is interesting because it gives an analytical result; however, in practice we can find punctured LDPC codes that have better performance.

D. Optimality of Punctured LDPC Codes

In this section we show that by using punctured codes we

do not lose performance. In other words, we show that for any

LDPC ensemble of rate

and any number satisfying

, there exists an ensemble of punctured LDPC

code of rate and parent rate with the same performance.

We also propose a method to construct the punctured code with

the same performance as a given code. Although these punc-

tured codes have the same asymptotic performance as the un-

punctured ones, they can have better finite-length performance.

Consider the parity check equation

(21)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

608

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

Fig. 5. The ratio of the achievable rate and the capacity for an ensemble of punctured LDPC codes over BSC.

Fig. 6. The gap from the capacity for an ensemble of punctured LDPC codes over BIAWGN channel. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: RESULTS ON PUNCTURED LDPC CODES AND IMPROVED ITERATIVE DECODING TECHNIQUES

609

be respectively the sets of check nodes and variable nodes

in the neighborhood of that affect . Define the sets

and accordingly.

As it is shown in [12], with high probability the neighbor-

hood of (of constant depth) is tree-like. Therefore, is

equal to the error probability of the ML estimation of given

the check nodes in and initial LLRs of the variable nodes

in . It is easy to show that the neighborhood of in

Fig. 7. Splitting a parity check equation.

is tree-like as well. Choose and

large enough such that . Therefore,

is equivalent to the error probability of the ML-estimator of

By splitting the above parity-check equation, we get

given more information than what is provided by and .

Hence,

. Thus, if the average error probability

under the message passing decoding on the graph tends to

zero as goes to infinity, the same thing should be true for . (22) Conversely, it can be shown that if the average error probability

where we refer to as an augmented variable node. Fig. 7 shows the effect of the parity-check splitting on the Tanner graph of the code. Note that this is different from the splitting operation introduced in [20]. Now consider an LDPC code in which some of the parity-check nodes have been split. This code can be con-

under the message passing decoding on the graph tends to zero as goes to infinity, the same thing should happen for . Thus, we conclude that the thresholds of the two ensembles are the same.
An immediate result of Lemma 3 is the following theorem.

sidered as a punctured code. For example, the variable node is

a punctured variable node in Fig. 7. By splitting, we can make a

graph correspond to a lower-rate code. When we puncture this

code, we get a code with the same rate as the original code. Note

that the splitting can be performed repeatedly and a check node

that is obtained by splitting can itself be split into more check

nodes. Therefore, we can have arbitrarily small rates. However,

we assume that any check node is split only a finite number of

times.

Consider an ensemble

of LDPC codes of rate . Let

be the ensemble of codes obtained by splitting some

of the check nodes of a code from the ensemble

such that

the rate of the code is decreased to . Note that is the rate

of the unpunctured codes. Obviously, puncturing the augmented

variable nodes from a code in the ensemble

results

a code of rate . For a graph in the ensemble

, we

define the graph to be the corresponding graph in

.

For a check node in a graph from the ensemble

, we

define

as follows. If is not split in then

.

Theorem 5: For any ensemble

of LDPC codes of rate

, and any number satisfying

, there ex-

ists an ensemble of punctured LDPC code of rate with parent

rate having the same threshold under the belief propagation

algorithm.

Theorem 5 implies that if we design the codes properly, punctured codes are as good as ordinary LDPC codes. It also shows how to construct a punctured code with the same performance as the unpunctured code.
It is worth noting that although Lemma 3 states that the graphs and have the same asymptotic thresholds, the two codes can have different finite-length performance. In fact, by a suitable choice of the punctured variable nodes, we may be able to alleviate the destructive effect of short cycles in the Tanner graph. When the code length is short, the short cycles of the graph deteriorate the performance. Using splitting, we can increase the cycle lengths and this can improve the performance of the finite-length codes.

Otherwise

is defined to be the set of check nodes in

obtained by splitting . For instance, in the above example we E. Puncturing Over the Binary Erasure Channel

have we define

. Similarly, for a set of check nodes , For the erasure channel stronger results can be obtained. For example, using only one encoder and decoder we can achieve

(23) the capacity of BEC on arbitrary set of rates. As another example, a stronger result than Lemma 3 is valid. Note that Lemma

3 holds only for the asymptotic threshold of the codes. We now

Lemma 3: If we puncture all the augmented bits from the

ensemble

, then the resulting ensemble has the same

threshold as the ensemble

under message passing de-

coding algorithm.

Proof: Let be a variable node in a graph from the en-

semble . Let also be the probability that the estimate

of the variable node in the ’th iteration of the message passing

show that for any graph , the error probability of the codes corresponding to and are the same even for finite-length codes. Let us define the merging of two check nodes that are connected to a punctured node of degree two as the reverse operation of splitting. For instance, in the above example if we replace the two check nodes and by and delete the vertex
from the graph, we say we have merged and .

algorithm be wrong. Define

to be the corresponding prob- Lemma 4: Let be a bipartite graph with bipartition

ability when the decoding is performed on . Let and and , the set of variable nodes and check nodes, respec-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

610

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

tively. Let also be a bipartite graph obtained by splitting where

is the rate of the ensemble

. Let be

some check nodes in . Define

as the set of variable the average bit error rate of a randomly chosen code from the

nodes in . We write

, where

ensemble

over a BEC with erasure probability . Then

and is the set of augmented variable nodes. A set

we have

is a stopping set in if and only if there exists a set

such that

is a stopping set in .

Proof: Let

be a stopping set in . Let

be

(25) Proof: This lemma is a special case of [11, Th. 3].

the set of neighbors of in (i.e., the set of parity-check nodes

in that are connected to some variable nodes in ). If for

any

we have

then is a stopping set

in , as well. Otherwise, there exists a parity-check equation

with

. Since is a stopping set in ,

must have been split from a check node in . Suppose has

It is also easy to show that the bit error rate of a randomly

chosen code from the ensemble

is highly concentrated

about the average value using the same arguments as in [7] and

[12]. Now we can state the following theorem.

Theorem 7: Let

with

and be any pos-

been split to

. Since is a stopping set in , at least

one of the check nodes

has a neighbor in . Suppose

is connected to the variable node in . Thus, there is a path

in which

are augmented nodes of degree two. Thus

itive constant. Then, there exists an ensemble

of LDPC

codes with the following property. The ensemble

can be

punctured randomly to get an ensemble of the arbitrary rate

such that

is a stopping set in .

(26)

Now suppose the sets

and

be such

that the set

is a stopping set in . Let be the set of

check nodes in

that have a neighbor in . We merge

these check nodes to the original check nodes in . For instance,

Here,

and

is the threshold of the punc-

tured ensemble of rate under the standard iterative decoding.

Proof: Let

and let

be a sequence

suppose we merge the check nodes

to get a new

check node . We now show that has at least two neighbors

in . Let be the graph induced by the nodes in

and

their neighbors in . Since had been split to the check nodes

of capacity achieving degree distributions of rate [17] and [18]. Choose large enough such that
. Since

[7], [16],

, there is a path

in where

are the augmented nodes of degree

two. However, the degrees of ’s are at least two in the graph . Therefore, both and must have neighbors in . Thus,
the check node must have at least two neighbors in . Thus we conclude that is a stopping set in .
The immediate result of Lemma 4 is the following theorem.

for all

, by Lemma 5 we conclude the proof.

In other words, when we have a capacity achieving sequence of LDPC codes of rate , the ensemble remains capacity achieving when it is punctured to a higher rate. Thus, we can design only one encoder and decoder and obtain arbitrary

Theorem 6: Let be a bipartite graph and be a bipartite many rates. Moreover, the code is capacity achieving for all the graph obtained by splitting some check nodes in . Now suppose desired rates over the BEC.

we puncture all the augmented variable nodes from the graph . The resulting code has the same bit error probability as F. Design of Good Punctured LDPC Codes

the code that corresponds to over the erasure channel under In this section we discuss the design of good rate-compatible

standard iterative decoding. The bit error rate is assumed to be LDPC codes using puncturing. As it was shown in the previous

calculated for only unpunctured bits.

section, design of punctured LDPC codes over the BEC is very

In the previous section, we stated a general result regarding

puncturing in Theorem 3. Here, we show stronger results for

the BEC. For example, random puncturing of a code over BEC

results in no performance loss. Using this fact we can show that

for any ,

, it is possible to design a code of rate

with the following property. The code is capacity achieving if it

is randomly punctured to any rate

.

Lemma 5: Let be an LDPC code of rate and length

. Let be the bit error rate of the standard iterative decoding

of the code when used over a BEC with erasure probability .

Consider the ensemble

of LDPC codes that is obtained

by randomly puncturing the code with puncturing fraction

. Choose such that

simple. We just need to use a good degree distribution for the parent code and the punctured code performs very well for all higher rates. On the other hand, it is not obvious how to design good puncturing schemes for other channels.
We first note that if the desired range of rates is short, then we can choose a good code for the smallest rate and randomly puncture it to get codes of higher rates. Simulations shows that this simple structure is practically efficient. Our experience shows that increasing the code rate by an amount less than forty percent is usually obtained by a very small performance loss. As an example, the diagrams in [5], suggest that when the rate increase is less than forty percent, the performance loss is less than 0.2 dB for the BIAWGN channel. This is true even when we are using random puncturing. Thus we may focus on the cases that

a broad range of rates is needed, specifically when rates close to (24) are needed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: RESULTS ON PUNCTURED LDPC CODES AND IMPROVED ITERATIVE DECODING TECHNIQUES

611

Fig. 8. The gap from capacity for a randomly punctured LDPC code of length 10 chosen from the ensemble ( ;  ) at the bit error rate of 10 .

A necessary condition is to choose a code with high enough puncturing threshold. That is, if and are the highest desired rate and the parent code rate, respectively, and is the puncturing threshold of the parent code, we must have
. Here we propose a technique that works well in practice.
As we mentioned previously a punctured code can be viewed as Fig. 4. Hence, we can consider the puncturing process as a variation in the channel not a variation in the code rate. From the previous section we know that the highest rate that we need plays an important role in the performance of the punctured code. When the puncturing fraction is maximum, the channel is close to a BEC. For the random puncturing, the resulting binary erasure channel is assumed to be uniform but for the intentional puncturing, the BEC is assumed to be nonuniform. A simple method is to choose the parent code to be a good code for BEC. By this choice, we expect to get good performance at the highest rates. However, as it is discussed in [21], with a little care, the code that is optimized over BEC is also optimal over other BIOSM channels. Thus we expect to get good performance even at very low rates. In fact, our experience shows that the most destructive problem of the punctured codes is the threshold effect. If the gap between the highest rate and the cut off rate is not enough, large performance degradation occurs at high rates. In order to examine the above methodology we chose a good ensemble of half-rate LDPC codes in [22] with the following degree distribution:

The ensemble has the cut off rate of

. We generate

an LDPC code of length from this ensemble. To compare

our results with [5], we measured the gap to Shannon limit of

this code at the bit error rate of . Fig. 8 shows the simulation

results for this code when it is randomly punctured to generate

the rates at the range of to . We note that for all rates

the gap from the capacity is less than 0.7 dB. To compare the

performance of this code to the codes given in [5], we examine

the performance of two half-rates codes in [5] that are punctured

to higher rates. We note that both codes show about 1.8 dB gap

to the capacity at rate . Even with optimized intentional

puncturing the codes have 1 dB gap to capacity at this rate. We

also note that our code has a smaller length than those in [5].

It is worth noting that random puncturing is more suitable

than intentional puncturing for rate-compatible coding. This is

because we choose a fraction of the variable nodes at random

for the first rate. For the next rate, we choose more bits at random

from the unpunctured bits and so on. Thus, we do not need opti-

mization for puncturing, reduce the degradation at higher rates,

and do the puncturing in a rate-compatible way.

An important property of the above scheme is that it is ex-

tendable to finite-length codes. Using recent breakthrough in the

design and analysis of finite-length LDPC codes over the BEC

[1], [23], and [24] we can find good LDPC codes over the BEC

and design efficient punctured LDPC codes.

VI. CAPACITY ACHIEVING SEQUENCES FOR BIOSM CHANNELS USING PUNCTURED CODES

It has been conjectured that for any BIOSM channel there ex(27) ists a sequence of capacity achieving LDPC codes with iterative
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

612

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

decoding, see for example [6]. Although this has been one of This implies that the punctured code with rate

the most important open problems in coding theory, it has been can be used for reliable communication over .

proven only for the BEC. In this section we show that punctured Note that Theorem 8 is quite general and can be applied to any

LDPC codes may be helpful to verify the conjecture. We show code ensemble. In fact, the proof does not require to consider

that if the conjecture is proved for the rates approaching zero, LDPC codes.

then it will be valid for all rates.

Consider the class of BIOSM channels parameterized by a

parameter with capacity . If the threshold of an ensemble of

codes under the message passing decoding is , we say that

the capacity of the ensemble is . We say that a sequence

of degree distributions

with rate is capacity

achieving if for any positive constant , there exists an integer

such that if

, then

. Here

is the capacity of the ensemble

. We now suggest the

following research problem.

Research Problem 1: For any class of BIOSM channels, there

exists a sequence of degree distributions

such that

VII. CONCLUSION
We first presented improved decoding algorithms for LDPC codes over BIOSM channels. The algorithms have a considerably smaller bit error rate than the standard iterative decoding algorithm. For the BEC, both the average running time and the maximum running time of the proposed algorithm (Algorithm C) are small. For other BIOSM channels, the average running time of the proposed algorithm (Algorithm D) is almost the same as the standard iterative decoder. However, the maximum running time of the algorithm can be as large as 40 times the average running time of the iterative decoder. We showed that if the algorithm applied properly, it can be more effective on

nonuniform channels. (28) We then studied some fundamental properties of punctured

LDPC codes. The threshold effect and the optimality of punc-

where

, and

is the capacity of the

ensemble

.

We now show that if the above research problem is proved,

then capacity achieving LDPC codes of all rates exist. The im-

portant point is that it might be easier to prove the existence

of the capacity achieving sequences for the case where the rate

of the code is approaching zero. This is because, for this case,

the channel is approaching a channel with zero capacity and all

different BIOSM channels may become somewhat similar. For

example, one approach to solving the research problem could

be using the capacity achieving sequences for the BEC as their

rates approach zero.

Theorem 8: If the statement of Research Problem 1 is true, then there exists a capacity achieving sequence of LDPC codes for any BIOSM channel.
Proof: Let be a BIOSM channel with capacity and let

tured LDPC codes were discussed. We showed that for any ensemble of LDPC codes, there exists a cut off rate which is the maximum achievable rate using puncturing. We proved the existence of asymptotically good punctured LDPC codes for an arbitrary range of rates. For the binary erasure channel, we find that using only one encoder and decoder, we can achieve the capacity of the channel over an arbitrary set of rates. We also proposed a simple method for designing rate-compatible LDPC codes that has several advantages over the previous methods. First, it reduces the performance degradation at high rates. Second, it is applicable to finite-length codes. Third, there is no need for optimizing the puncturing pattern. Fourth, the puncturing can be done in a rate-compatible way. Finally, we showed that punctured LDPC codes might be useful in solving an important open research problem on the capacity-achieving LDPC codes over BIOSM channels.

be any positive constant. Consider the channel in Fig. 4.

The capacity of is equal to

, where is the

puncturing fraction. Suppose we are using random puncturing.

The channel

can be considered as a BIOSM channel

with the parameter . When approaches one the capacity of

tends to zero. Thus, by Research Problem 1, there exists

a sequence of degree distributions

such

that

APPENDIX PROOF OF THEOREM 2

For simplicity we prove the theorem for random puncturing.

The random puncturing scheme can be modeled as transmitting

over a channel as shown in Fig. 4 with the following de-

scription. Assume a bit is transmitted through . Then, with

probability , this bit will be transmitted over a channel with

zero capacity and with probability

it will be transmitted

over the channel . Now, using similar discussion to the proof (29) of Theorem 1, we can show that if in the above model we replace

with the channel , which is a channel of capacity one,

This code can be used for reliable communication over

.

Thus for large enough and , we have an ensemble of LDPC

codes of rate

. This ensemble can be con-

sidered as a punctured ensemble with effective rate

. Therefore, we have

the overall error probability decreases. On the other hand, re-

placing with the channel

in Fig. 4, the channel be-

comes equivalent to a BEC with erasure probability . This

is because every bit is either transmitted through the channel

with zero capacity (with probability ) or through the noise-

less channel

. This proves a lower bound on the error

probability that results in the upper bound on the puncturing (30) threshold.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: RESULTS ON PUNCTURED LDPC CODES AND IMPROVED ITERATIVE DECODING TECHNIQUES

613

Examining the above discussion indicates that the theorem

applies when the error rate is averaged over all bits, i.e., both

punctured and unpunctured bits. A more realistic case is to con-

sider the error rate of only unpunctured bits. By a similar ar-

gument to [11, Lemma 1], for

, if the error rate of

punctured bits is bounded away from zero, then the error rate of

unpunctured bits is bounded away from zero as well. This im-

plies the following corollary.

Now we show under the conditions of Lemma 6, there exists

a

such that if the channel parameter is smaller than

, then

(34)

For the given ensemble, the probability density function can be written as

Corollary 2: Consider the ensemble of LDPC codes de-

fined by the pair . Let

be the ensemble of LDPC

codes that are generated by randomly puncturing of the en-

semble

by the puncturing fraction . Assume a randomly

chosen code from the ensemble

is used over the channel

, with

. Let be the threshold of the ensemble

for BEC under the iterative decoding. If

, then

the error probability of decoding the punctured code is bounded

away from zero independent of the communication channel.

The above discussion gives upper bounds on the puncturing fraction of LDPC codes. We will now show that these upper bounds are actually the puncturing threshold of LDPC codes in the sense that if the puncturing fraction is less than the upper bounds then the punctured LDPC code is an asymptotically good code. We first prove a lemma.

Lemma 6: Consider the ensemble of LDPC codes defined

by the pair

that are randomly punctured by the puncturing

fraction

where

is the upper bound given

by Corollary 2. Then there exists a

such that if the

channel parameter is smaller than , then the punctured en-

semble satisfies the stability condition.

Proof: By the assumption of the lemma, a randomly chosen

code from the ensemble

can be used to obtain arbitrarily

small bit error rate over a BEC with erasure probability

.

Thus, using the stability condition [6], we have

(35) where satisfies

(36) By the conditions of the theorem
(37)

Moreover, for a fix value of , we have (38)

Now, by Lemma 6, the stability condition is satisfied, for

. Thus, by the stability theorem in [6], there exists a constant

such that if

, for some

, then

converges to zero as tends to infinity. Choose large enough

such that

. Now fix and choose

such

that

. Thus for

, the stability

condition is satisfied and we have

(39)

Therefore,

converges to zero as tends to infinity.

(31)

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Now consider the ensemble of LDPC codes defined by that are randomly punctured by a puncturing fraction . Suppose a code from the punctured ensemble is used over a channel with the parameter . Then, assuming the all-one codeword has been sent, the density of the LLRs from the channel is equal to

The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions. The authors are also grateful to Rudiger Urbanke, the Associate Editor, for handling the review.
REFERENCES

We need to show that for suitably chosen

(32) we have

(33)

Since as goes to ,

converges to

(in the

sense defined in [6]). By choosing

small we can make

the integral

arbitrarily small. Thus,

using (31) and (32) we conclude that there exists a

for

which we have

for

.

[1] C. Di, D. Proietti, I. E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, 2002.
[2] Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi, “A new schedule for decoding low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), 2001, vol. 2, pp. 1007–1010.
[3] A. Nouh and A. Banihashemi, “Bootstrap decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, pp. 391–393, 2002.
[4] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “On decoding of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 439–454, 2004.
[5] J. Ha and S. McLaughlin, “Optimal puncturing of low-density paritycheck codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2003.
[6] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, 2001.
[7] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 569–584, 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

614

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 53, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

[8] C. Di, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Weight distributions: How deviant can you be?,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2001.
[9] A. Orlitsky, K. Viswanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping set distribution of LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, pp. 929–953, 2005.
[10] H. Pishro-Nik, N. Rahnavard, and F. Fekri, “Nonuniform error correction using low-density parity check codes,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf., Urbana-Champaign, IL, Oct. 2002.
[11] ——, “Non-uniform error correction using low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 7, pp. 2702–2714, Jul. 2005.
[12] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, 2001.
[13] G. D. Forney, R. Koetter, F. Kschischang, and A. Reznik, “On effective weights of pseudocodewords for codes defined on graphs with cycles,” Proc. IMA, 1999.
[14] B. J. Frey, R. Koetter, and A. Vardy, “Signal-space characterization of iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 766–781, 2001.
[15] R. Koetter and P. O. Vontobel, “Graph-covers and iterative decoding of finite length codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Rel. Topics, Sep. 2003.

[16] M. A. Shokrollahi, “New sequences of linear time erasure codes approaching the channel capacity,” in Proc. 13th Int. Symp. Appl. Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error-Correcting Codes, 1999, pp. 65–76.
[17] ——, “Capacity-achieving sequences,” IMA Volumes in Mathematics and Its Applications, vol. 123, pp. 153–166, 2000.
[18] P. Oswald and M. A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 3017–3028, 2002.
[19] A. Khandekar, “Graph-Based Codes and Iterative Decoding,” Ph.D. dissertation, California Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, 2002.
[20] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, 2001.
[21] S. Y. Chung, “On the Construction of Some Capacity-Approaching Coding Schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 2000.
[22] [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/research/ldpcopt/ [23] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis
of low-density parity-check ensembles for the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2002. [24] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, Finite-Length Density Evolution and the Distribution of the Number of Iterations for the Binary Erasure Channel [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww.epfl.ch/research/ldpcopt/

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

