292

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

Hybrid Hard-Decision Iterative Decoding of Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Pirouz Zarrinkhat, Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Time-invariant hybrid

decoding of irregular

low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes is studied. Focusing

on

algorithms with majority-based (MB) binary mes-

sage-passing constituents, we use density evolution (DE) and

finite-length simulation to analyze the performance and the

convergence properties of these algorithms over (memoryless)

binary symmetric channels. To apply DE, we generalize degree

distributions to have the irregularity of both the code and the

decoding algorithm embedded in them. A tight upper bound on

the threshold of MB algorithms is derived, and it is proven

that the asymptotic error probability for these algorithms tends

to zero, at least exponentially, with the number of iterations. We

devise optimal MB

algorithms for irregular LDPC codes,

and show that these algorithms outperform Gallager’s algorithm

A applied to optimized irregular LDPC codes. We also show that

compared to switch-type algorithms, such as Gallager’s algorithm

B, where a comparable improvement is obtained by switching

between different MB algorithms, MB algorithms are more

robust and can better cope with unknown channel conditions, and

thus can be practically more attractive.

Index Terms—Density evolution (DE), hybrid decoding, irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, iterative coding schemes, message-passing decoding algorithms.

I. INTRODUCTION

HYBRID ALGORITHMS combine existing iterative decoding algorithms to achieve a better error-rate perfor-

mance or a shorter decoding latency (faster convergence) [13],

[14]. There are two important categories of hybrid algorithms:

switch-type and time-invariant. Switch-type hybrid

algo-

rithms switch between different algorithms throughout the itera-

tion process. algorithms were first introduced by Gallager

in the construction of Gallager’s decoding algorithm B

Paper approved by K. R. Narayanan, the Editor for Communication Theory and Coding of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received February 4, 2005; revised January 19, 2006 and March 28, 2006. This work was supported in part by an Ontario Graduate Scholarship (OGS). This paper was presented in part at the 42nd Annual Allerton Conference on Communications, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, September/October 2004, in part at the 9th Canadian Workshop on Information Theory, Montréal, QC, Canada, June 2005, and in part at the 2005 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Adelaide, Australia, September 2005.
P. Zarrinkhat was with Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre, Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada. He is now with Airvana Inc., Chelmsford, MA 01824 USA (e-mail: pzarrinkhat@airvana.com).
A. H. Banihashemi is with Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre, Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2006.888584

[5, p. 49] for regular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,

and have been since revisited in literature such as [1], [6], and

[8]. In [8], was generalized to work with irregular codes. In

[6], another instance of algorithms was introduced, where

after several iterations of the sum-product algorithm, the de-

coder continued with a binary message-passing algorithm to in-

crease the convergence speed. In [1], a detailed study of the de-

coding latency showed that for a given channel and a given code,

the decoding algorithm which resulted in minimum latency and

could be obtained through dynamic programming was an ,

or as termed by the authors, a gear-shift algorithm.

In [13] and [14], restricting our attention to regular LDPC

codes and majority-based (MB) algorithms [15],1 we proposed

time-invariant hybrid

algorithms for binary symmetric

channels (BSCs). These algorithms use a specific blend of

different MB algorithms in each iteration. The blend, however,

does not change by iteration, hence, the name “time-invariant.”

In the most noteworthy variant of

algorithms, different

nodes in the code’s Tanner graph [11] would use different

update rules, but for a given node, the update rule is fixed

throughout the iterations. We also demonstrated in [13] and

[14] that for regular LDPC codes, MB

algorithms are

much more robust against the changes of the channel param-

eter, compared with , which is, in fact, the optimal

algorithm, in both performance and convergence speed, with

MB constituents, when the channel parameter is perfectly

known [2].

Due to the fact that irregular LDPC codes outperform reg-

ular ones, it is desirable to study the performance of MB

algorithms in decoding irregular codes. In this paper, we first ex-

tend the application of MB algorithms to irregular LDPC

codes. For this, we generalize the degree distributions to convey

the irregularity of both the code and the decoding algorithm.

We then find optimal degree distributions for irregular LDPC

codes decoded by MB algorithms. As part of this process,

for each variable-node degree, we obtain optimal partitioning

of variable nodes of that degree according to MB algorithms of

different orders associated with that degree. Finally, we com-

pare MB algorithms with Gallager’s algorithm A [3]

and , applied to optimized irregular LDPC codes. Our results

demonstrate the superiority of MB algorithms over in

terms of noise threshold. We also show that in the absence of

the perfect knowledge of the channel, MB algorithms can

beat in terms of convergence speed. Moreover, our study in-

dicates that, unlike the case for , the optimal design of MB

1Simple implementation of MB algorithms, which constitute an important category of binary message-passing decoding algorithms [9], makes them potentially attractive for high-rate communication applications.

0090-6778/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZARRINKHAT AND BANIHASHEMI: HYBRID HARD-DECISION ITERATIVE DECODING OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

293

algorithms is universal, in the sense that the algorithm designed for optimal threshold also performs very well in terms of convergence speed over a wide range of channel parameters. Throughout the paper, we follow [8] and [10] for basic definitions.

the corresponding channel messages, in which case the negative of those (channel) messages are passed. For check nodes and variable nodes of degrees and , respectively, we then have

mm

m

m and

II. MB

ALGORITHMS FOR DECODING

IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

It is well known that the error-rate performance of LDPC codes can be improved by introducing irregularity into the structure of codes [7]–[10]. For instance, under , the best (reported) irregular rate- LDPC code ensemble outperforms the best regular one by more than 0.5 dB [8]. On the other hand,

mmm

m

m if

m

m

m otherwise

correspondingly. Defining

, it can be

shown that for a given channel crossover probability and under

MB , the recursion

MB algorithms have been shown to achieve improved per-

formances over their constituents for regular LDPC codes, and

to be more robust against changes in the channel conditions [13],

(1)

[14]. Putting these facts together, we are naturally motivated to where

extend the application of MB algorithms to irregular LDPC

codes, in a quest for further improvement in performance.

The rest of this section is organized as follows. Using density

evolution (DE), we first analyze MB algorithms applied to

irregular LDPC code ensembles. We then provide characteriza-

(2)

tions for, and give a tight upper bound on, the thresholds of MB

algorithms. At the end, we investigate the speed of conver- describes the evolution of the average fraction of erroneous

gence of (irregular LDPC code ensembles’) error probability to (variable to check) messages with iteration number for

zero, under MB algorithms.

, if initiated by

[8]. This recursion can be

A. Density Evolution

represented by the curve

An irregular LDPC code is generally characterized by a de-

(3)

gree distribution vector pair

, where the th elements of (Refer to Appendix I.) By an argument similar to that in [15],

and denote the fractions of edges in the code’s Tanner graph where

is dealt with, it can be proven that the curve

that are adjacent to the degree- variable nodes and check nodes, respectively [8], [10].2 Following the common practice in the lit-

is increasing in both and . In [3], the performance of code ensembles with nonconcen-

erature on LDPC codes, we also consider ensembles of codes, trated variable-node degree distributions under is investirather than single instances of codes, throughout this paper. We gated. For , the variable nodes of degree operate solely

denote by

the ensemble of irregular LDPC codes of under MB

. Here, we study a more general case, where

length associated with .

different variable nodes of the same degree are allowed to op-

For a fixed check-node degree distribution vector and a erate under different orders of MB algorithms in a time-invariant

given concentrated variable-node degree distribution vector hybrid framework [13], [14]. Consider variable nodes of degree

(whose th element is 1), there exist

different MB algo-

, to which a fraction of edges are connected. Suppose

rithms which can be used to decode

over a BSC [15]. that a fraction

of these degree- nodes process their

In particular, MB , the MB algorithm of order

, operating on

, is specified as follows. All

the messages passed under MB have an alphabet space of

. In iteration zero, check nodes are inactive

messages according to MB

. Define

as the ordered sequence of values in , where for each

sweeps values between 0 and

.3 This vector, together

with , not only characterizes the corresponding irregular code

ensemble, but also has the corresponding decoding algorithm

embedded in it.

and variable nodes pass their channel messages

Example 1: Vectors

and

specify an irregular code with degree-3 and -4 vari-

able nodes and degree-5 check nodes. On the variable side of

mm

this code’s Tanner graph, 60% of the edges are adjacent to the

In iteration

, check nodes pass the product of their ex-

trinsic incoming messages in iteration , and variable nodes

pass their channel messages unless at least one-half plus of

their extrinsic incoming messages in iteration disagree with

2We assume that the first element of both vectors equals zero, i.e.,  =  = 0.

degree-3 nodes, and the remaining 40%

to the

 3Note that 3~ (1) = 0, and for l 2; 3~ (l) denotes the fraction of edges that
are adjacent to those degree-j(l) variable nodes which process the messages in accordance with the MB algorithm of order !(l), where j(l) is the minimum be-

0 0 0b 0 tween the smallest even and odd integers whose squares
to 4l 4 and 4l 3, respectively, and !(l) = l (j

a1r)e=g2rce1adte(rjt0ha1n)o=r2eeq0ua2l

(e.g., for l = 2; 3; 4; 5, we obtain (j; !) = (2; 0); (3; 0); (4; 0); (4; 1), respec-

tively).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

294

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

degree-4 nodes. Also specified by and , is an MB algo-

rithm under which 100%

of the degree-3 variable

nodes process their messages according to MB , and from

degree-4 variable nodes, 25%

process

their messages in accordance with MB and the remaining

75%

, in accordance with MB .

One can see that for a given channel crossover probability

and under the MB algorithm specified by and , the

recursion

(4)

gives the expected fraction of incorrect messages with iterations

for

, if initiated by

. Recursion (4) can be

represented by the curve

(5)

which is a linear combination of

curves given in (3),

and thus is increasing in both and .

Arguments similar to those in [15] can be used to prove that

the sequence ß

is strictly decreasing, constant, or

strictly increasing if and only if (iff)

is less than, equal

to, or greater than , respectively. Furthermore, it can be shown

that ß converges to the first encountered crossing point of the

curve

and the line

. Crossing points are, in

fact, fixed points of recursion (4). As

,

“zero” is a fixed point for the algorithm, and we can conclude

that ß is a decreasing sequence which converges to the fixed-

point zero iff

.

Theorem 1 (Upper Bound on Threshold):

(8)

In the following example, we show that this bound, which is similar to the bound derived in [3] for the special case of
, is tight. Example 2: For the rate- ensemble specified by
, and , we have . As we will later see in Example 3, these degree distributions correspond to an optimal MB algorithm.

C. Asymptotic Speed of Convergence

In [15], it is shown that under MB , the asymptotic (as

) convergence of

’s probability of error to

zero for a channel parameter

is exponential or

superexponential in , for

or

,

respectively. It is not difficult to see that this result is extendable

to code ensembles with concentrated variable-node and noncon-

centrated check-node degree distributions. In fact, by consid-

ering

and taking into account only the most domi-

nant term in the expansion of (3) for sufficiently small values of

, it can be shown that

(9)

where the parameter is defined by , if

or is odd;

and , otherwise. One can then deduce from the application

of

, recursively, with the initial

condition

, that for sufficiently small values of , and

with defined as

B. Threshold Characterization and Upper Bound on the Threshold

Using the fact that

in (5) is increasing in both and

, we can show that the convergence of an MB algorithm’s

error probability to zero for a channel parameter implies its

convergence to zero for every channel parameter

. (Refer

to Appendix II.) For a given pair

, the threshold

is defined as the supremum of all values of for which the se-

quence ß converges to zero [10], or equivalently

is

, if

; and

, if

; as

. In other words,

reduces exponentially, or superexponentially with param-

eter

, in , if

, or

, respec-

tively. This is, of course, with the conditions that is less than

and is also small enough to satisfy

. The latter condition, however, can be relaxed by noticing the

fact that

, which implies

that if is large enough, we will be in a close enough vicinity of

(6)

In Appendix III, we show that the supremum value of satis-

fying the inequality

, which is, in fact, the

stability condition for the fixed point zero, is given by

on the

curve such that the probability of error goes

to zero with the same exponents as mentioned earlier.4 These

results are summarized in the following theorem.

Theorem 2: Under MB operating on

, the

asymptotic convergence of to zero is exponential or su-

perexponential, in , for

or

,

(7) respectively, provided that

.

These results can be extended to MB algorithms. In fact,

where is the unit ramp function, defined by

, for it is not difficult to infer from (5) that the convergence of error

; and , otherwise. Using this result, and letting

probability to zero for an MB algorithm is at least as fast

denote the smallest root of deduce the following.

in

, we can

4Note that " (~ ; 0; ~) = 0. Under MB , therefore, the error probability

does not converge to zero for " > 0.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZARRINKHAT AND BANIHASHEMI: HYBRID HARD-DECISION ITERATIVE DECODING OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

295

as that of its slowest converging constituent algorithm. The next

proposition, therefore, immediately follows.

Proposition 1: The asymptotic convergence of error proba-

bility to zero for the MB algorithm operating on

is at least exponential in , provided that

.

More precisely, to see how fast the convergence of the MB

algorithm associated with

is, assuming that

, one shall first compute

(10)

The convergence of to zero is then at least exponential in , if ; and at least superexponential with parameter in , if
.

III. OPTIMAL DEGREE DISTRIBUTION PAIRS

For a given distribution pair

, the fraction of edges that

are adjacent to variable nodes of degree is

. The de-

sign rate associated with

is then [7]

TABLE I

H MAXIMUM ACHIEVABLE RATES AND CORRESPONDING DEGREE

DISTRIBUTION PAIRS UNDER MB

ALGORITHMS

(11)

Notice that (12)

(13)

are the average variable-node and check-node degrees, respectively. Since different degree distributions result in different rates and thresholds, it is natural to search for those that maximize the threshold for a given rate [8], [10], or maximize the rate for a given channel parameter [4], under the condition that average error probability tends to zero asymptotically. We take the second approach in this paper. Letting the maximum variable-node and check-node degrees be denoted by and
, respectively, the search can be formulated as the following optimization problem:
• minimize

Table I provides maximum achievable rates under MB

algorithms for several channel parameters, restricting the search

to concentrated check-node degree distributions (i.e.,

).

Better results may be obtained by lifting this restriction and in-

creasing the values of and . It should be noted, however,

that increasing or by 1, increases the search space di-

mension by

or 1, respectively.

IV. COMPARISONS WITH OPTIMIZED AND

In [13] and [14], the superiority of MB algorithms over

simple MB algorithms (e.g., ) and MB

algorithms

• subject to 1) 2)

, and

, and

(e.g., ), in terms of error performance and robustness against channel variations, respectively, is shown. In both papers, the focus is on regular LDPC codes. In this paper, we show that MB
algorithms posses similar advantages for irregular codes:

they can outperform (applied to optimally designed irreg-

3)

. ular LDPC codes), and can outpace (optimally designed for

There are many methods for solving such optimization prob- irregular LDPC codes) when no perfect a priori knowledge of

lems. In this paper, we have simply used fseminf M-file of the channel condition is in hand.

MATLAB’s Optimization Toolbox. (This M-file finds the global In this section, we demonstrate the strength of MB al-

minimum of a constrained multivariable nonlinear scalar func- gorithms by providing two examples. In the first example, we

tion.)

obtain a pair of degree distributions whose threshold under MB

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

296

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

algorithms is greater than the best achievable threshold

under for the same rate.5 In the second example, which is

more elaborate, we investigate how the lack of perfect knowl-

edge of the channel affects the performance of MB algo-

rithms compared with MB algorithms (in particular, com-

pared with ), and examine the pros and cons of each cate-

gory of algorithms. In both examples, the codes are of rate .

Results and trends similar to those reported in this section are

observed for other code rates, as well.

Example 3: It is shown in [3] that among rate-

LDPC codes, the best performance under belongs to

, where

and

. For this ensemble, we

have

, and

. Using

MB algorithms, however, better rates with asymptotical

zero error probability can be achieved for

. (We

can, e.g., attain a rate of

with the ensemble

specified by

,

and

.) This is a clear indication of the possibility

of improving the threshold for rate- codes under MB

algorithms. To find the optimal threshold based on our

optimization tool for the rate, we do as follows. We choose

a channel parameter slightly greater than

, for

which we maximize the rate. If the new rate is still greater

than , we (incrementally) increase and repeat the rate

maximization step. Otherwise, is (incrementally) decreased

and rate is maximized. By iterating this rather naïve procedure,

we will finally end up with a rate- pair of distributions

whose threshold is greater than

.

Using the above-described method under the constraints of

and

, we find that the best rate- ensemble

is specified by

, and

. For this ensemble,

we have

, and

. Notice that the average variable-node and check-node

degrees are slightly greater than, but still comparable to, those

of

, which implies that the complexity per itera-

tion of the two cases are almost the same.

Before starting the second example, the reader should be re-

minded of the following facts about .

is a special case of MB algorithms. The switching

strategy for is such that it guarantees the best threshold

and the fastest convergence of error probability to zero

(among MB hybrid algorithms), provided that the exact

value of the channel parameter is known [2]. This

(switching) strategy, which was first derived in [5] for

regular codes and was later generalized to irregular codes

in [8], is specified as follows. In iteration

, and for

degree- variable nodes, the smallest integer satis-

fying

is the order of the MB algorithm which is selected for the

nodes’ operation. (Should the value of be greater than

, the nodes will send their channel messages.)

Notice that this strategy is, in fact, equivalent to switching

in each iteration to the MB algorithm that provides the

greatest reduction in probability of error. It is worth men-

tioning that the switching sequence

is only

a function of

, as

in the exponent of

(14) is equal to 0 or 1 for even or odd values of , respec-

tively [2]. Also mention-worthy is the fact that is a de-

creasing sequence which eventually settles down to zero,

i.e.,

, and for sufficiently large.

It can be seen that when

is decoded by over

a channel with parameter , the curve

(15)

where

represents the

recursion describing the evolution of average error proba-

bility [2]. Based on (14), we can easily obtain the itera-

tions where variable nodes of a particular degree switch the

order of the algorithm according to which they operate: the

switching point corresponding to a change of order from

to is given by

(16)

where

, for even-degree variable nodes,

and

, for odd-degree variable nodes.

Let the switching points for even-degree and odd-degree

variable nodes be denoted by and , respectively.

One can see from (16) that

for

[2].

Similar to the case for MB

algorithms, it can be

proven that the asymptotic convergence of error proba-

bility to zero for is exponential or superexponential in

. More precisely, with defined as

,

it can be shown that as

reduces exponentially

in , if

(i.e.,

or

); and superexponen-

tially in , with parameter , if

.

As (16) indicates, under , the availability of perfect knowl-

edge of the channel plays a crucial role in determining the op-

timum switching strategy. In the following example, we com-

pare an optimized with the optimal MB algorithm given

in Example 3, and show that the latter can better cope with un-

known channel conditions.

Example 4: Consider

, the rate- ensemble

optimized for MB algorithms in Example 3, and assume

that

. Fig. 1(a) depicts the curve

(14)
G H 5Notice that this result is not surprising, as is a special case of MB
algorithms where degree-j variable nodes operate solely under the MB algo-
b c 0 H rithm of order j=2 1. For instance, the MB algorithms specified by G the last two degree distribution pairs in Table I, are, in fact, optimized with
the constraint of concentrated check-node degree distribution.

, which represents the evolution of expected

fraction of errors when the above ensemble is decoded by

the corresponding MB

algorithm. As can be seen in

the figure, the average probability of error approaches zero

throughout the iteration process, with slower convergence in the

vicinity of

and

. Depicted in Fig. 1(a) are

also the curves

, and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZARRINKHAT AND BANIHASHEMI: HYBRID HARD-DECISION ITERATIVE DECODING OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

297

among ensembles with

and

[8]. Using (14),

it can be seen that this threshold is achieved as follows.

• For degree-16 variable nodes, we start with MB

and switch to MB

and MB

in iterations 5

and 102, respectively.

• For degree-4 variable nodes, we keep passing the channel

messages until iteration 5, when we switch to MB

.

We later switch to MB

in iteration 102.

• For degree-3 variable nodes, we start with passing the

channel messages until iteration 43, when we switch to

MB

.

Assume now that

. Por-

trayed in Fig. 1(b) are the curves

, and

, which rep-

resent the evolution of expected error probability under for

the ensembles

,

and

, respectively. Note that

The figure shows that the average error probability ap-

proaches zero as the number of iterations goes to infinity. The

convergence (of average error probability to zero), however, is

slower in the vicinity of switching points, which are:

•

, where even-degree variable nodes

switch the order of their algorithms from 2 to 1;

•

, where odd-degree variable nodes switch

the order from 1 to 0;

•

, where even-degree variable nodes

switch the order from 1 to 0.6

(As mentioned before, degree- variable nodes operating

under MB will pass their channel messages should

exceed

.)

Fig. 1(b) also portrays the curves

, and

, which pro-

vide graphical representations of DE for

,

assuming that even-degree and odd-degree variable nodes are

operating according to MB algorithms of orders 2 and 1, 1

and 1, 1 and 0, and 0 and 0, respectively. From the maximum

threshold achieving strategy mentioned earlier, it is easy to

see that

H Fig. 1. Graphical representation of DE. (a) For C (3~ ; ~ ), decoded by the
MB algorithm given in Example 3, assuming " = " (3~ ; ~ ) = 0:0525.

if

(b) For C (~ ; ~ ), decoded by G , assuming " = " (~ ; ~ ) =

if

0:0577. (See Example 4.)

if

if

, which represent DE for the (left) concen- Note that can alternatively be written as

trated ensembles under MB MB that

, and MB

, and

,

, respectively. Note

Consider, in addition,

, where

, and

This rate- ensemble for which we have

, and

, has been optimized for

It is worth mentioning that this alternative form, which takes into

account all potentially useful (order) combinations of even-de-

gree and odd-degree variable nodes for

, also

.

gives the curve corresponding to the switching sequence that is

optimal in terms of convergence speed for

.

6Switching points are obtained using (16).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

298

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

fast convergence. One can see in Fig. 2(a) that the convergence

tunnel between the curve

and the line

is wide

open over, roughly speaking, the entire interval

, and

therefore, the probability of error approaches zero rapidly. (The

tunnel is only narrow in close proximity of

, resulting in

a relatively slow convergence in the vicinity of

.) For the

, on the other hand, the convergence changes pace abruptly,

and is generally slower. As portrayed in Fig. 2(b), the conver-

gence tunnel for the is wide open over some subintervals

of

, and almost closed over some others. This results in

a slow convergence, on average, compared with the MB

algorithm.7 This is, of course, for the simple reason that the

strategy optimized for

is highly suboptimal

for

, and switching to the right constituent algorithms

fails to happen at the right iterations: even-degree (respectively,

odd-degree) variable nodes switch their order from 2 to 1 to 0

(respectively, 1 to 0) in iterations 4 and 102 (respectively, it-

eration 43), instead of iterations 2 and 10 (respectively, itera-

tion 4).8 Graphically speaking, while the optimum convergence

tunnel (for

) is specified by the line

and the curve

obtained according to , the actual one is bordered

by

and

obtained according to . Note that

’s sensitivity to the availability of an accurate knowledge of

the channel parameter is in sharp contrast to the capability of

MB algorithms to adapt to the channel condition. This uni-

versality is a major advantage of MB algorithms over

for applications where the channel condition may vary and/or a

perfect knowledge of the channel is not available at the receiver.

To make our point more clear, we consider the situation where

the channel parameter is unknown, and the main concern is

to ensure the convergence of MB

algorithm or for

aswide a range of channel parameters as possible. In this sit-

uation, we have to set both algorithms to achieve their max-

imum thresholds.9 Fig. 3(a) depicts error-rate curves versus iter-

ation number for the two algorithms, and for channel parameters

. The figure shows

that although the convergence of the is faster than that of

the MB algorithm when the channel parameter is close to

, the latter can outpace the former for a wide range

of target error probabilities, and for a wide range of channel pa-

rameters less than

(in fact, for about

).

H Fig. 2. Graphical representation of DE. (a) For C (3~ ; ~ ), decoded by the

MB

algorithm given in Example 3. (b) For C (~ ; ~ ), decoded by

the G optimized for " = " (~ ; ~ ) = 0:0577. For both cases, we as-

sume " = (3=4) 1 " (~ ; ~ ) = 0:043275. (See Example 4.)

It may justly be argued that the previous setting favors the MB algorithm, whose maximum threshold is smaller, in terms of convergence speed. In fact, the advantage of the MB
algorithm in convergence speed is partly counterbalanced by the wider range of convergence for the . It will be more

fair, therefore, to compare the algorithms’ speed of convergence

Now suppose that we would like to decode

and while the convergence ranges are the same.

over a channel with actual parameter

For this, we opt to set for the fastest convergence over a

, using the aforesaid MB

channel with

. This is done by proper switch-

algorithm and , respectively. Under these algorithms, as can ings in iterations 3, 8, and 21. The “new” only converges to

be seen in Fig. 2(a) and (b), the probability of error for both en- zero error probability for

,

sembles still converges to zero, which is not unexpected. In fact, which is roughly the same as the convergence range for the MB

according to Appendix II, by setting an MB algorithm to achieve its maximum threshold, its convergence for all channel parameters below the maximum threshold is secured. This is also true for . Having said these, it is observed in the figures that the convergence behavior in the two cases are very different. On the one hand, the MB algorithm exhibits a smooth and

7The two algorithms achieve an error fraction of 10 in iterations 59 and
30, respectively.
8By proper switching in iterations 2, 4, and 10, an error fraction of 10 is
achieved in iteration 13.
9The code ensembles of interest are C (3~ ; ~ ) and C (~ ; ~ ), cor-
respondingly.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZARRINKHAT AND BANIHASHEMI: HYBRID HARD-DECISION ITERATIVE DECODING OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

299

Fig. 4. BER curves for the MB H algorithm given in Example 3 and the
G ’s of Example 4, for ` = 10; 20; 50; 500.

This is particularly important, as the maximum number of iterations is always limited in realistic situations. In the following section, assuming that the channel parameter is unknown, we present some finite-length simulation results that compare the performance of MB algorithms and for several choices of maximum number of iterations.

V. FINITE-LENGTH SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, some finite-length simulation results, com-

paring the performance of the optimized MB algorithm of

Example 3 and the optimized ’s of Example 4, are presented.

These algorithms have been used to decode two randomly con-

H Fig. 3. Comparison between the convergence speed of the MB
algorithm given in Example 3 and G over C (~ ; ~ ). (a) For " = 
 1 " (~ ; ~ ), with G optimized for " (~ ; ~ ). (b) For " = 
 1 " (3~ ; ~ ), with G optimized for " (3~ ; ~ ). For both cases, we have 
 = 0:1; 0:2; . . . ; 1:0 from left to right. (See Example 4.)

structed codes belonging to

and

,

correspondingly. The codes are of length

, with no cycle

of length 4 in their graph representations. Using the Monte Carlo

method, we have obtained the performance of the algorithms for

maximum number of iterations

, and for

a wide range of channel parameters. For each reported point,

enough codewords have been simulated to generate 100 code-

algorithm. (This is due to the fact that is very sensitive word errors.

to underestimating the channel parameter.) Now let us see how Fig. 4 depicts the bit-error rate (BER) curves for the three al-

the two algorithms compare in the new situation. Fig. 3(b) por- gorithms. As can be seen in the figure, for

, where all

trays the fraction of errors versus iteration number for the two the algorithms have sufficient time to converge, optimized

algorithms, and for

. for

has the best performance at low BERs,

One can see in the figure that similar to the previous situation, (closely) followed by the optimized for

.

the MB algorithm outspeeds the (new) for a wide range This order, however, changes at higher BERs or when de-

of target error probabilities, and for a wide range of channel pa- creases. In fact, for

, the MB algorithm

rameters less than

(in fact, for about

).10 comfortably outperforms the first . The MB algorithm

Expectedly, however, the difference between the speeds is not also easily beats the second for

, and manages to

as dramatic as before.

maintain a small lead over it for

, over a wide range of

It should be clear to the reader from the provided examples channel parameters. Both the MB algorithm and the second

that MB algorithms, which are generalization of , can

reach their full potential with

: the performance

be more attractive than , in terms of speed of convergence, for

is almost identical to that of

. This

in practice, where the channel condition is not perfectly known. is while for the first , there is a large gap between the perfor-

10In Fig. 3, the depicted error fractions are greater than or equal to 10 ,
which may not seem particularly low. However, it can be seen that this range
translates to a bit-error rate (BER) of at least 10 .

mance of

and that of

.

It is worth mentioning that a careful inspection of simulation

data shows that for smaller values of , the number of bit er-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

300

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

H Fig. 5. WER curves for the MB algorithm given in Example 3 and the
G ’s of Example 4, for ` = 10; 20; 50; 500.

rors for each codeword error is (typically) very small for the

MB algorithm, and as such, its performance in the high

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region can be greatly improved by

properly using an extremely high-rate outer (channel) code ca-

pable of removing very small fractions of random errors. For

, however, this is not the case, especially for smaller values

of , i.e., when a codeword is in error, many of its bits are

also in error. As an example, for the last points on the perfor-

mance curves for

(corresponding to

), we

have an average of 2.38, 29.99, and 225.13 bit errors per word

error for the MB algorithm, the second , and the first

, respectively.

Note that the above results are in general agreement with our

discussions in the previous section and show that in practical

situations, when the maximum number of iterations is limited,

MB algorithms can be more attractive compared with MB

algorithms.

It is also worthy of note that similar results are obtained when

comparing word-error rate (WER) curves. Fig. 5 depicts the

WER curves corresponding to the BER curves of Fig. 4. As can

be seen, the WER results follow the same general trends as the

BER results do.

VI. CONCLUSION

Fig. 6. Illustration of DE’s graphical representation.
performance and convergence speed. Our results indicated that although switch-type algorithms outperformed MB algorithms when the channel parameter was perfectly known, the trend changed when such a knowledge was not available. For such cases, MB algorithms demonstrated great robustness in preserving their (near) optimality. Our theoretical results were also confirmed by finite-length simulations.

APPENDIX I GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION OF DE

Exact or approximate graphical representations of DE, and re-

lated concepts, are widely used to visualize the behavior of iter-

ative decoding algorithms [1], [2], [12]–[15]. This approach, in-

troduced originally by Gallager [5, p. 48], is particularly helpful

in investigating iterative algorithms’ threshold values and con-

vergence speeds.

Consider a one-variable recursion of the general form

, initiated by

. It is easy to see that for

, where the symbol denotes the

Majority-based time-invariant hybrid (MB ) algorithms for decoding irregular LDPC codes over BSCs were introduced. We analyzed the performance and the convergence speed of these algorithms using a generalization of the concept of degree distribution together with DE. A tight upper bound on threshold was derived, and it was shown that the asymptotic convergence speed of MB algorithms could be superexponential, and

composition of two functions. As illustrated in Fig. 6, this can

be represented by successive horizontal and vertical projections

between the curve

and the line

. Clearly, the

properties of the function and its relative location with respect

to the line

determine the convergence behavior of this

recursion.

was at least exponential, in the number of iterations. We jointly optimized the degree distributions of LDPC codes and the time-invariant assignment for MB algorithms, and showed the improvement in threshold that MB algorithms could

APPENDIX II

MONOTONICITY OF BSCS WITH RESPECT

TO MB

ALGORITHMS

provide compared with the optimized Gallager’s algorithm In this appendix, we prove that the convergence of error prob-

A. We also compared MB

algorithms with optimized ability of an MB algorithm to zero for a channel param-

switch-type algorithms (Gallager’s algorithm B) in terms of eter implies its convergence to zero for every channel param-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZARRINKHAT AND BANIHASHEMI: HYBRID HARD-DECISION ITERATIVE DECODING OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

301

eter

. Consider the ensemble associated with the distri-

bution pair

, and suppose that this ensemble is decoded

by the corresponding MB algorithm over two BSCs with

crossover probabilities and

. Consider further ß and

ß , the sequences of expected fraction of incorrect messages

with iteration number for channel parameters and , respec-

tively, and also assume that in a given iteration

.

Then

and thus

(III.4)

This, together with

, results in (7).

It is worth mentioning that the condition we just derived is ba-

sically the same as the one derived in [3] for . The reason is

the fact that MB is unconditionally stable at fixed point zero

for all values of other than

. (See (III.2).) Equally

mention-worthy is the close relation between the condition de-

rived above and the one derived in [2] for . We know that

under , as iterations proceed, all the variable nodes eventu-

ally switch to MB , which is unconditionally stable for every

variable-node degree . (See (III.2).) Consequently, (III.4)

reduces to

where equalities and follow from (5), and inequalities

and are based on the fact that

is increasing in

and , respectively. As, by assumption,

,

we can use finite induction to deduce that

,

and subsequently conclude that

is implied by

.

APPENDIX III STABILITY CONDITION OF THE FIXED-POINT AT ZERO

which is the generalized stability condition for over .
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Mr. H. Xiao for preparing the simulation results. The authors also wish to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments which improved the presentation of the paper.

In this appendix, we derive the stability condition of the fixed

point located at zero by calculating the supremum value of

satisfying the inequality

.

Defining

and

, it is not difficult to see from (3) that

Using (III.1), it can be seen that

if

if

and

otherwise.

Therefore, it follows from (5) that

(III.1) (III.2)

(III.3)

REFERENCES
[1] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “Gear-shift decoding for algorithms with varying complexity,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Seoul, South Korea, May 2005, vol. 1, pp. 500–504.
[2] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “Properties of optimum binary message-passing decoders,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 10, pp. 3658–3665, Oct. 2005.
[3] L. Bazzi, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Exact thresholds and optimal codes for the binary-symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algorithm A,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 9, pp. 2010–2021, Sep. 2004.
[4] S.-Y. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Mass. Inst. Technol., Cambridge, 2000.
[5] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[6] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 11, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[7] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Efficient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001.
[8] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[9] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[10] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[11] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep. 1981.
[12] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 10, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

302

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 55, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

[13] P. Zarrinkhat and A. H. Banihashemi, “Hybrid hard-decision iterative decoding of regular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 250–252, Apr. 2004.
[14] P. Zarrinkhat, A. H. Banihashemi, and H. Xiao, “Time-invariant and switch-type hybrid iterative decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” Ann. Télécommun./Ann. Telecommun., vol. 60, no. 1–2, pp. 103–131, Jan.–Feb. 2005.
[15] P. Zarrinkhat and A. H. Banihashemi, “Threshold values and convergence properties of majority-based algorithms for decoding regular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, no. 12, pp. 2087–2097, Dec. 2004.
Pirouz Zarrinkhat (S’01–M’06) was born in Esfahan, Iran, in 1971. He received the B.A.Sc. degree from Isfahan University of Technology, Esfahan, Iran, in 1994, the M.A.Sc. degree from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 1997, and the Ph.D. degree from Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 2005, all in electrical engineering.
He spent one year as a Canadian Government Laboratory Visiting Fellow at the Canadian Space Agency, Saint-Hubert, QC, Canada. He is currently with Airvana Inc., Chelmsford, MA. His research interests include modern coding theory, wired and wireless communications, and quantum computing.

Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03–SM’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, Iran, in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communication engineering from Tehran University, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1997.
From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, IUT. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, where he was a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering at Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 1998, where currently, he is an Associate Professor in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications and theory, and implementation of communications algorithms. He has published more than 90 papers in refereed journals and conferences. Dr. Banihashemi has served as an Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS since May 2003. He has been involved in many international conferences as Chair, Member of Technical Program Committee, and Member of Organizing Committee. These include Co-Chair of Communication Theory Symposium-Globecom’07, TPC Co-Chair of Information Theory Workshop (ITW) 2007, Member of Organizing Committee for International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT) 2008, and Co-Chair of Canadian Workshop on Information Theory (CWIT) 2009. He is also a member of the Board of Directors for the Canadian Society of Information Theory (CSIT) and the Director of Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre at Carleton University. He is a registered Professional Engineer in the province of Ontario, Canada. He held two Ontario Graduate Scholarships for international students in 1995 and 1996, while working toward the Ph.D. degree. He is also a recipient of Carleton’s Research Achievement Award in 2006.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:23:09 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

