IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

727

Evaluation of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes on Perpendicular Magnetic Recording Model
Xinde Hu and B. V. K Vijaya Kumar
Data Storage Systems Center, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA

Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have shown superior error-correcting performance in a variety of data storage system studies, including traditional longitudinal magnetic recording systems. However, perpendicular magnetic recording systems (of increasing interest) exhibit impairments different from longitudinal magnetic recording systems, and thus present new challenges for error-correcting codes. In this effort, we evaluate a structured LDPC code using a perpendicular magnetic recording channel model that includes impairments such as transition noise, nonlinear transition shift, transition percolation, and baseline wander (BLW). The channel model, as well as the LDPC encoder and the decoder are implemented in field-programmable gate array (FPGA) hardware. The LDPC coded system
+ is evaluated down to bit error rate (BER) of 10 12 and frame error rate (FER) of 10 8. The impact of individual impairments on coding
performance is studied separately. The soft output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) LDPC system maintains its superior error-correcting performance under the perpendicular recording channel.
Index Terms—Baseline wander (BLW), EPR4, field-programmable gate array (FPGA), low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, magnetic recording, nonlinear transition shift, partial erasure, perpendicular magnetic recording, transition percolation.

I. INTRODUCTION
Areal densities of hard disk drives have increased significantly during the past decades. However, longitudinal magnetic recording, which most hard disk drives have been using, is expected to reach density limits due to the superparamagnetic effect [1]. This has spurred the research and development efforts in perpendicular magnetic recording. Both theoretical analyses and lab demonstrations indicate that the perpendicular recording can achieve about four to five times higher density than longitudinal recording [2]–[5]. Although perpendicular recording technology has recently been successfully commercialized, the challenge to achieve its highest potential density is formidable.
In addition to efforts to increase the areal density through improving the head and media technology, effort is also directed to improved coding and signal processing. Recent developments in error-correcting codes (ECC) such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes enable data storage systems to tolerate low signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs), and thus to enable higher recording densities. In addition, perpendicular magnetic recording introduces new impairments such as baseline wander (BLW) and signal nonlinearities. In order to investigate the effectiveness the new ECC concepts for perpendicular recording, we need to use a detailed channel model that includes different impairments present in a perpendicular recording system.
Interleaved byte-oriented Reed–Solomon (RS) code [6] is currently the standard ECC used in recording channel. However, LDPC codes have shown advantage in error-correcting
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2006.888370
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.org.

capacity over the traditional hard decoding RS code [7], [8]. Hard disk drives require very high (1 Gb/s and faster) data rates and this suggests the use of LDPC codes with hardware-friendly structure and with small column weight (i.e., the number of ones in each column of the parity-check matrix). Vasic et al. [9] introduced LDPC codes (designed using Kirkman systems) that exhibit simple encoding and decoding structures. Kurtas et al. [10] investigated the performance of latest LDPC codes such as the irregular repeat accumulate (IRA) codes and finite geometry codes from a complete system perspective. Song et al. [11] proposed a novel approach to construct low column weight quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes free of six cycles in the Tanner graph; eliminating short cycles increases the effectiveness of the iterations during the decoding process. In order to take advantage of the iterative soft decoding of LDPC codes, a soft-output equalizer is required for partial response (PR) channel, commonly used in magnetic recording systems. Sun et al. [12] implemented a soft output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) on a field-programmable gate array (FPGA). Moreover, channel iterations between the LDPC decoder and the SOVA are employed to take advantage of the soft information.
Due to the reliability requirements of most data storage systems, it is necessary to investigate the LDPC coded system performance to bit error rates (BER) under 10 and frame error rates (FER) under 10 . Such low error rate is beyond the reach of software Monte Carlo simulation. In this effort, we implemented the perpendicular recording readback signal simulator and the LDPC SOVA system on the FPGA hardware are able to reliably estimate BERs down to 10 . Although it is desirable to reach even lower BERs, the observed performance offers much insight about error-correcting performance of LDPC codes under realistic channel model at low BER and FER level that is not possible with software simulations; it also reveals important trends such as the presence of an error floor above the 10 BER level. Effects of different channel impairments such

0018-9464/$25.00 © 2007 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

728

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

as transition noise, transition percolation, nonlinear transition shift (NLTS), and BLW on code performance are investigated. The perpendicular recording channel exhibits impairments different from longitudinal recording channel, but the LDPC SOVA system shows great robustness against transition noise, media nonlinearities, and effectiveness in limiting the negative impact of the BLW effect.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the perpendicular recording channel model and Section III describes the nonlinearities included in the readback channel. Section IV describes the system setup and implementation issues. Section V shows the FPGA hardware simulation results and discussion. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. PERPENDICULAR MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNEL

Fig. 1. NLTS in longitudinal recording. The bit cell in the middle is shortened by the NLTS effect.
density, as shown in (4). Similar to Oenning and Moon’s [15] model, the noise including both AWGN and transition jitter noise is measured by equivalent white noise spectrum height

A. Isolated Channel Response In perpendicular recording channel, the read head produces
an output signal in regions of constant magnetic polarity, and ideally, a zero output at magnetic transitions. An isolated magnetization transition response can be modeled as an error function, i.e.,
(1)

SNR

(4)

where is the energy of AWGN and is the variance of transition jitter noise. Typically, media noise is the dominant part of the noise with AWGN having roughly 20% of the noise power [15]. Note that this SNR definition does not include media nonlinearities such as transition percolation and NLTS.

The

is defined as

is the width of the derivative of

is the energy of the derivative of

not have a finite energy.

B. Random Noise

and at half its maximum. , since the does

III. NONLINEARITIES IN READBACK CHANNEL
In addition to transition noise and AWGN, nonlinearities appearing in the readback signal mainly include media nonlinearities (transition percolation and NLTS) and BLW. We will discuss these nonlinearities in this section.

For a given nonreturn-to-zero (NRZ) binary user data se-

quence (i.e.,

, ), the readback signal is the superpo-

sition of the transition responses corresponding to the transition

sequence

. The readback signal is corrupted

by transition noise as well as additive white Gaussian noise

(AWGN) [13], [14]. Equation (2) shows the readback signal

model with these impairments, but not the media nonlin-

earities, which will be discussed in Section III

A. Media Nonlinearities
Transition percolation, also know as partial erasure due to the effect of back-to-back transitions, results in a reduction on the signal amplitude [16], [17]. This effect is very similar to partial erasure in longitudinal recording. The amplitude loss is controlled by the saturation ratio of the recorded media. Note that the loss happens only when back-to-back transitions appear. Typical saturation ratio in perpendicular recording is between

0.7 and 0.9, meaning the amplitude loss is 10%–30%, and (2) when no transitions appear at adjacent boundaries.

During the writing process, the magnetic field generated by

Transition noise (mainly transition jitter noise) refers to the

transition location shift caused by the zigzag boundary of the

transition. The amount of location shift

is modeled as a

truncated Gaussian random variable. AWGN is denoted by

and the recording bit interval is denoted by . The normalized

linear channel density is defined as

previous written bit cells will interfere with the writing field if the orientation is opposite. Thus, the location of transition is altered. This effect is called NLTS. Although the causes of NLTS for perpendicular and longitudinal recording are the same, the effects are opposite [18], as shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
When back-to-back transitions occur, in the longitudinal recording channel, the bit interval in the middle is shortened

(3) by the NLTS effect. Thus, the intersymbol interference (ISI)

between two transition responses increases. In contrast, in per-

Typical normalized linear density in our simulations is be- pendicular recording, as shown in Fig. 2, the bit cell between

tween 2 and 3.

the two transitions is extended. Therefore, the ISI effect is

C. SNR

relatively lower. In addition, longer interval between two transitions makes the signal less vulnerable to transition noise and

In our channel model, the SNR is defined as the ratio of the percolation. Figs. 3 and 4 show the difference of NLTS effect on

power of a single pulse to the height of noise power spectral impulse response (transition shift level of ). In longitudinal

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU AND KUMAR: EVALUATION OF LDPC CODES ON PERPENDICULAR MAGNETIC RECORDING MODEL

729

Note that the percolation is measured by the saturation ratio and the NLTS is determined by the shift level . In this
model, only first-order interference is assumed for the NLTS effect.

Fig. 2. NLTS in perpendicular recording. The neighboring transitions are pushed apart by the NLTS effect.

B. BLW

The preamplifiers used in read channels are alternating cur-

rent (ac) coupled, and thus act as high-pass filters. Compared

with the longitudinal recording channel, the readback signal

in a perpendicular channel has a very narrow direct current

(dc) notch. Subsequently, as the signal passes through the

preamplifiers, the pulse response in the time domain results in

a long narrow tail, especially when is high. The variation of

the baseline causes low-frequency distortion called BLW effect

[19]. The BLW can be modeled by a steep high-pass filter. If

the cutoff frequency of the filter is excessively high, the BLW

effect could be the major source of errors. Patapoutian et al.

[19] proposed a BLW compensator using Kalman filtering.

Ergen et al. [20] introduce a decision feedback-based algorithm

to compensate the BLW effect. Jin et al. [21] use the per-sur-

vivor-processing in the Viterbi detector to reduce its undesired

impact. In this effort, we investigate the direct impact of BLW

on coding performance without an additional compensator.

A first-order high-pass filter

is used to simulate the ef-

fect of the ac-coupled preamplifiers

Fig. 3. Effect of NLTS on readback signal (longitudinal recording). The amplitude of the signal is degraded by the NLTS effect.

(6)

Here, is a number very close to 1. The impulse response of

the filter is

, where is the step function.

IV. IMPLEMENTATION ISSUES

A. Perpendicular Recording Channel

The perpendicular magnetic recording channel model in-

cluding error function transition response, AWGN, transition

noise, percolation, NLTS, and BLW, is implemented in FPGA

hardware, as shown in Fig. 5. The readback signal is imple-

mented as a 64 oversampled discrete-time signal to model

the transition location error (jitter and NLTS). An additional

gain factor is used to simulate the effect of transition perco-

lation. After the channel, a high-pass filter with certain cutoff

Fig. 4. Effect of NLTS on readback signal (perpendicular recording). The am- frequency is used to simulate the effect of preamplifiers.

plitude benefits from the increased distance between bit cells.

As key parts of the simulation, additive and transition noise

are both Gaussianly distributed random numbers. We use the

Box–Muller method [22] to generate the basic Gaussian random recording, the signal amplitude is degraded by the increased numbers with 10-b precision. With simple modification, we ob-

ISI. A precompensator is typically required if the NLTS effect tain the transition noise from a truncated Gaussian distribution.

is severe. In perpendicular recording, the amplitude benefits Two separate Gaussian random numbers generators are used in

from the increased distance between the transitions. Thus, FPGA hardware in order to generate the additive noise and tran-

the damage is less significant in perpendicular recording. The sition noise independently.

simulation results in Section V also confirm this conclusion.

The hardware recording channel model is implemented in a

Including the percolation and NLTS, the channel model can first-in–first-out structure. A string of binary bits generated by

be rewritten as follows:

the LDPC encoder is transmitted into the channel. The percola-

tion and NLTS effects are determined based on the data pattern

(5) of these bits. Then, the bit string passes through the channel response (error function) filter with certain transition factors (satu-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

730

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

Fig. 5. Hardware system structure. The frame highlights the perpendicular recording channel.

ration ratio and NLTS level). Then, AWGN is added to the signal sequence. After the high-pass filter simulating the BLW effect, an equalizer filters the soft data into the targeted PR target. The output data is sent to the SOVA and the LDPC decoder. Fig. 5 shows the structure of the system. The channel part is highlighted in the top box.

TABLE I SYSTEM PARAMETERS

B. SOVA LDPC System

The overall system including the SOVA LDPC scheme

and the channel model (shown in Fig. 5) is implemented in a

Xilinx FPGA chip. The QC LDPC code with column weight 3

is chosen to be the ECC for evaluation and EPR4 is selected to

be the PR target for SOVA. Previous simulation for the SOVA

LDPC system under idealized PR channel (only additive noise,

assuming perfect equalization) shows near Shannon-limit error-

correcting performance [12] and clear advantage over RS codes.

In addition, the parallel structure of the LDPC decoder further simplifies the system and improves the processing speed.
In our model, we assume no gain error, timing error, or dropout. Therefore, the timing recovery unit and gain control is not necessary. The 21-tap equalizer implemented as finite-impulse response (FIR) filter is nonadaptive and the coefficients are generated by software.

error rates in different inner iterations inside the LDPC decoder while all in the first channel iteration. The bottom curves show the error rates during the second channel iteration. The noise is a combination of 80% transition noise and 20% AWGN.
At a normalized recording density of 2, the BER reaches 10 for SNR of 21.5 dB. Similar to the case under longitudinal recording channel, the coding gain is over 20 dB (BER for

V. SIMULATION RESULTS AND DISCUSSION

uncoded sequence reaches 10 at SNR of 36 dB). The FER is based on the sector size of one codeword (4923 b), which is

In this section, we will focus on the results and the hardware able to reach 10 at SNR of 21.5 dB. Compared to the BERs

simulation.

and FERs for the ideal cases (AWGN only and idealized PR),

In the real perpendicular recording channel, all impairments the general trend of the LDPC codes remains the same. The

occur together causing errors or data loss. In this effort, we in- error floor starts to appear when BER reaches 10 . Compared

vestigate the impact of individual impairments on the error-cor- to the large column weight LDPC codes, the codes evaluated

recting performance of a certain SOVA LDPC system. For (of column weight 3) typically have better BER performance in

NLTS and BLW, the direct impact on error-correcting perfor- the low SNR region but have high error floors [24]. For LDPC

mance can help evaluate the tradeoff of using a precompensator Codes with high error floors (10 or higher), the use of a

to cancel these effects. Table I shows the system parameters. simple outer code can further ensure that BER reaches 10

First, we investigate the error-correcting performance of the at very low SNR.

system under different noise levels. Figs. 6 and 7 show the BER Unlike random noise, the nonlinearities are predictable and

and FER at different SNR levels with other impairments at de- the system can use an extra unit to cancel their effect (e.g., pre-

fault values (Table I). Different lines show error rates at dif- compensator for NLTS). The direct impact of nonlinearities can

ferent iterations (25 iterations inside the LDPC decoder and two indicate whether it is necessary to employ an extra compensator

channel iterations). The top four curves in each figure show the or not.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HU AND KUMAR: EVALUATION OF LDPC CODES ON PERPENDICULAR MAGNETIC RECORDING MODEL

731

Fig. 6. BER performance. Each curve represents the intermediate error rate from the LDPC decoder. The top four curves are BER during the first channel iteration. The bottom four curves are BER during the second channel iteration.

Fig. 8. Effect of NLTS on BER performance. Compared with the NLTS effect in longitudinal recording, the loss is much lower.

Fig. 7. FER performance. Each curve represents the intermediate error rate from the LDPC decoder.

Fig. 9. Effect of BLW on raw data (uncoded sequences) error rate. The loss is
significant when  is less than 0.98.

Although not shown here, the effect of transition percola-

tion on BER is similar to the partial erasure (PE) effect on the

longitudinal recording channel [23]. When the saturation factor

reaches below 0.85, the degradation in error rate is significant.

Fig. 8 shows the impact of NLTS on BER performance.

When the NLTS level is under 15%, the loss in BER is less than

0.2 dB. Even when the NLTS level reaches 25%, the differ-

ence is still less than 1 dB. Compared with that of longitudinal

recording channel (the same coding system becomes ineffective

when NLTS level reaches 20% [24]), the damage is much less.

This result confirms the analysis we described in Section III. By

measurements, the NLTS transition shift in most perpendicular

recording systems is less than 10% [25]; and, therefore, the

precompensator is typically not necessary.Figs. 9 and 10 show the effect of BLW and the impact on coding performance at different cutoff frequency levels (measured by ). With raw

+ Fig. 10. Effect of BLW on coded sequences. The LDPC SOVA system re-
duces the loss in BER due to BLW.

data (Fig. 9, undecoded sequence), the loss in error rate is more

than 5 dB when is lower than 0.98. When using the LDPC code, the gap is reduced to less than 1 dB. In both cases, when

VI. CONCLUSION

the cutoff frequency is relatively small

, the loss We have investigated the effect of different types of impair-

is insignificant. When the cutoff frequency is large

, ments in perpendicular magnetic recording channel. A realistic

the LDPC coding is ineffective.

channel model including transition noise, AWGN, transition

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

732

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 43, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2007

percolation, NLTS, and BLW is setup and an efficient LDPC SOVA system is evaluated using this channel model.
The system is implemented in FPGA hardware. We are able to investigate the system performance at low BER (10 ) and FER (10 ). Hardware simulation results show that the LDPC
SOVA system is able to offer larger than 20-dB coding gain in the presence of these impairments in perpendicular recording channel compared to uncoded sequences. The error-correcting performance is similar to the case under the longitudinal recording channel.
The impact of individual impairments on error-correcting performance is also studied in this paper. The amount of loss due to certain impairment (e.g., percolation, NLTS) indicates whether an additional compensator is required. As the analysis predicted, the NLTS effect has less effect in perpendicular recording than in longitudinal recording. For the BLW effect, simulation shows that the loss in performance is very small when the cutoff frequency is relatively low. Moreover, the LDPC code is able to further reduce the loss due to BLW compared to raw data case.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank Dr. S. Mao for kind help, and the anonymous reviewers for valuable comments. This work was supported in part by a Grant from Information Storage Industry Consortium (INSIC) Extremely High Density Recording (EHDR) program and by National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) under the MTS Advanced Technology Program.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Iwasaki and Y. Nakamura, “An analysis for the magnetization mode for high density magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. MAG-13, no. 5, pp. 1272–1277, Sep. 1977.
[2] H. Takano et al., in Abstracts of 8th Joint MMM-Intermag Conf., San Antonio, TX, 2001.
[3] H. N. Bertram and M. Williams, “SNR and density limit estimates: A comparison of longitudinal and perpendicular recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 4–9, Jan. 2000.
[4] R. D. Cideciyan, E. Eleftherion, and T. Mittelholzer, “Perpendicular and longitudinal recording: A signal-processing and coding perspective,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 4, pt. 1, pp. 1698–1704, Jul. 2002.
[5] R. Wood, “The feasibility of magnetic recording at 1 terabit per square inch,” IEEE Trans. Magn, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 36–42, Jan. 2000.
[6] X. W. Shan and M. T. Alexander, Magnetic Information Storage Technology IBM. San Jose, CA: Academic, 1998.
[7] B. V. K. V. Kumar, “LDPC coder for data storage channels,” in Proc. Conf. Inf. Sci. Syst. (CISS) Presentation, Mar. 2004, pp. 1135–1140.

[8] H. Song, “Iterative soft detection and decoding for data storage channels,” Ph.D. dissertation, Elect. Comput. Eng. Dept., Carnegie Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, PA, 2002.
[9] B. Vasic, E. M. Kurtas, and A. V. Kuznetsov, “Kirkman systems and their application in perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1705–1710, Jul. 2002.
[10] E. M. Kurtas, A. V. Kuznetsov, and I. Djurdjevic, “System perspectives for the application of structured LDPC codes to data storage devices,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 200–207, Feb. 2006.
[11] H. Song, J. Liu, and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “Low complexity LDPC codes for partial response channels,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov. 2002, vol. 2, pp. 17–21.
[12] L. Sun, T. Horigome, and B. V. K. V. Kumar, “A high-throughput, field programmable gate array implementation of soft output Viterbi algorithm for magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 3081–3083, Jul. 2004.
[13] T. Oenning and J. Moon, “Modeling the Lorentzian magnetic recording channels with transition noise,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 37, no. 1, pp. 583–591, Jan. 2001.
[14] J. W. M. Bergmans, Digital Baseband Transmission and Recording. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer, 1996.
[15] J. Moon and J. Park, “Detection of prescribed error events: Application to perpendicular recording,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), May 2005, vol. 3, pp. 2057–2062.
[16] X. Che, “Nonlinearity measurements and write precompensation studies for a PRML recording channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 31, no. 6, pp. 3021–3026, Nov. 1995.
[17] M. Hashimoto, K. Miura, H. Muraoka, H. Aoi, and Y. Nakamura, “Influence of transition percolation on media noise in perpendicular double layered media,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 2624–2626, Sep. 2003.
[18] B. A. Wilson, “Signal processing for perpendicular recording,” in Joint North Amer. Perpendicular Magn. Recording Conf. (NAPMRC), Dig. Tech. Papers, Jan. 2003, pp. 9–9.
[19] A. Patapoutian, “Baseline wander compensation for the perpendicular magnetic recording channel,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 1, pp. 235–240, Jan. 2004.
[20] M. F. Erden and E. M. Kurtas, “Baseline wander compensation for perpendicular recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn, vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 3114–3116, Jul. 2004.
[21] J. Xie, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and X. Hu, “Baseline wander compensation by per-survivor processing,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2609–2611, Oct. 2006.
[22] A. Ghazel, E. Boutillon, J.-L. Danger, G. Gulak, and H. Laamari, “Design and performance analysis of a high speed AWGN communication channel emulator,” in Proc. 7th IEEE Int. Conf. Electron., Circuits Syst., Dec. 2000, vol. 1, pp. 366–369.
[23] X. Hu, B. V. K. V. Kumar, L. Sun, and J. Xie, “Decoding behavior study of LDPC codes under a realistic magnetic recording channel model,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 42, no. 10, pp. 2606–2608, Oct. 2006.
[24] L. Sun, H. Song, B. V. K. V. Kumar, and Z. Keirn, “Field- programmable gate-array-based investigation of the error floor of low-density parity check codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 41, no. 10, pp. 2983–2985, Oct. 2005.
[25] H. Muraoka, R. Wood, and Y. Nakamura, “Nonlinear transition shift measurement in perpendicular magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 32, no. 5, pt. 1, pp. 3926–3928, 1996.
Manuscript received July 7, 2006 (e-mail: xindeh@andrew.cmu.edu).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 19:22:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

