2356

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2017

Low-Complexity Early Termination Method for Rateless Soft Decoder
Cenk Albayrak, Cemaleddin Simsek, and Kadir Turk

Abstract— We propose a new early termination method (ETM) with low computational complexity for Luby transform belief propagation (BP) decoder. The proposed method, which we call least reliable messages (LRM) ETM, observes only sign alterations of a small cluster in log-likelihood ratio messages passing between nodes in BP decoder. Simulation results and complexity analyzes show that LRM ETM has quite low computational complexity and small average iteration amounts without any performance degradation compared with conventional ETMs in literature. The method can be applied to code families which can be decoded by BP such as low density parity check codes, polar codes, and Raptor codes.
Index Terms— Belief propagation, early termination, rateless codes, reduced complexity decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L UBY transform (LT) and Raptor codes are members of rateless codes family which are originally designed for reliable transmission over the binary erasure channel (BEC) [1]–[3]. However, there has been a particular interest in using these codes over noisy channels due to their capacity-approaching and unique rateless properties [4]–[6]. A rateless encoder can generate an arbitrary number of encoded symbols as needed until an acknowledgment is received from the decoder after successful decoding. Thus, rateless codes can automatically adapt to the channel conditions and avoid the need for a channel state information (CSI) [1]–[7]. The code rate adaptation of rateless codes on-the-fly also makes them an attractive solution for broadcast communication systems with a single transmitter and multiple receivers [7]. Raptor codes have already been included in several standards related to broadcast/multicast applications such as 3GPP [8] and DVB [9].
Message-passing algorithms such as belief propagation (BP) are used for decoding of rateless codes. BP iterative decoder uses a pre-set fixed iteration number in order to stop decoding [4]–[6]. However, BP mostly converges to original data at an early stage of decoding. Since the decoding continues up to pre-set fixed iteration number, decoder performs redundant processes which cause high computational complexity, decoding latency and energy dissipation. To avoid the mentioned

negations, decoder should be supported by an early termination mechanism to detect convergence and stop decoding.
In literature, there are some early termination methods (ETMs) based on check-sum satisfaction ratio (CSR) for rateless codes [10]–[13]. CSR is a common success criterion for BP decoding algorithm to observe whether message estimation satisfies constraints imposed by check nodes. Iterative BP decoding algorithm is performed through log-likelihood ratio (LLR) message-passing between nodes. At the end of each iteration, CSR decides output bits, re-encodes them and compare with input bits to determine successful convergence.
In this letter, we propose a completely new ETM for LT BP decoder. This ETM provides lower complexity and average iteration amounts compared to previous counterparts in literature. The basic idea of the proposed ETM is that if the decoder converges to original data, estimated bits will be stable during remaining iterations. Since the sign parts of the LLR values are utilized for hard-decision [4]–[6], stability of estimated bits can be detected by observing only sign alterations of LLR messages at variable nodes of BP decoder which provides very low computational complexity. But, some LLR values at variable nodes change slower. To avoid wrong convergence detection, ETM must wait for a few successive iterations to stop decoding which causes redundant iterations. Therefore, our proposed ETM observes sign alterations of LLR messages passing from variable nodes to check nodes which compose LLR messages at variable nodes. In addition, to reduce the computational complexity further proposed ETM observes only small cluster of LLR messages whose absolute values are the smallest. These messages are the least reliable messages (LRM) in whole packet and they have the highest probability of sign change [5]. We call our proposed method as LRM ETM. Results show that proposed LRM ETM has quite low computational complexity and small average iteration amounts without any performance degradation compared to conventional CSR ETM.
Remainder of this letter; Section II introduces LT soft decoder, conventional CSR ETM, proposed LRM ETM, and their complexity analyzes. Section III illustrates the simulation results and finally conclusion is drawn in Section IV.

Manuscript received June 26, 2017; accepted August 8, 2017. Date of publication August 15, 2017; date of current version November 9, 2017. This work was supported by the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) Project Number 215E308. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Z. Ma. (Corresponding author: Kadir Turk.)
C. Albayrak and K. Turk are with the Department of Electrical Electronics Engineering, Karadeniz Technical University, 61080 Trabzon, Turkey (e-mail: albayrak.cenk@ktu.edu.tr; kadir@ktu.edu.tr).
C. Simsek is with the Department of Electrical Electronics Engineering, Gumushane University, 29100 Gumushane, Turkey (e-mail: csimsek@gumushane.edu.tr).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2017.2740207

II. LT SOFT DECODER WITH EARLY TERMINATION METHODS
A. BP Decoder for LT Codes
Tanner graph representation of LT codes contains two types of nodes named as check-node (CN) and variablenode (VN). BP decoding algorithm is performed through LLR message-passing between these CNs and VNs iteratively. After running LT decoder for a pre-set fixed iteration amount, decision process is done and decoding is completed [4]–[6].

1558-2558 © 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:41:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALBAYRAK et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY ETM FOR RATELESS SOFT DECODER

2357

The updating equations of CN and VN in LT BP decoder are

given in Eqn. (1) and (2) [5], respectively. In these equations,

mc stands for LLR values of the codewords come from

channel and is directly sent to corresponding CN c, mc→v and mv→c represent the outgoing LLR messages from the CN c to VN v and vice versa. tanh(·) and tanh−1(·) represent

hyperbolic tangent and inverse hyperbolic tangent operations,

respectively. And, iteration index is denoted by superscript l.

⎛

⎞

m

(l) c→v

=

sign ⎝mc

m

(l) v →c

⎠

v =v

× 2tanh−1 tanh |mc| 2

m

(l+1) v →c

=

m

(l) c →v

c =c

tanh
v =v

|m v(l )→c | 2
(1) (2)

Hard-decision process of BP decoder is given as follows,

mv = mc(l→) v + mv(l→+1c),

mˆ v =

1, 0,

mv ≥ 0 mv < 0

(3)

where, mˆ v represents hard decided value for corresponding VN v [5]. LT BP decoding algorithm without any ETMs is
presented in Algorithm 1.

μC S R ≥ C S R is correct, where C S R is a user-defined threshold. This method is known as CSR ETM. LT BP decoder with CSR is presented in Algorithm 2. In the algorithm, the difference between CSR values of two consecutive iterations denoted as CSR. If CSR has a value of ”0” for LC amount of consecutive iterations, decoding is terminated [12]. LC is a user-defined integer value.

Algorithm 2 LT BP Decoder With CSR Method

1: Initialization

2: 3:

Calculate

Set

m

(0) c→v

mc; and

m

(0) v →c

messages

to

zero;

4: l = 0, LC = 0;

5: end Initialization

6: while (l < max _i ter ) and ( LC i s not sati s f i ed) do

7: CN update();

Eqn. (1) is performed.

8: VN update();

Eqn. (2) is performed.

9: Decision();

Eqn. (3) is performed.

10: Calculate μC S R and CSR; 11: if ( CSR = 0) then LC + +; 12: else LC = 0; 13: end if

14: l + +;

Next iteration.

15: end while

Algorithm 1 LT BP Decoder

1: Initialization

2: Calculate mc; 3: Set mc(0→) v and mv(0→) c messages to zero; 4: l = 0;

5: end Initialization 6: while (l < max_i ter ) do

7: CN update();

Eqn. (1) is performed.

8: VN update(); 9: l + +;

Eqn. (2) is performed. Next iteration.

10: end while

11: Decision();

Eqn. (3) is performed.

B. CSR Early Termination Method
A common criterion for early termination of rateless decoding is observing if the estimated messages mˆ v satisfy the constraints imposed by CNs [10], [11]. The criterion controls whether Eqn. (4) is equal to zero for all CNs,

mˆ c ⊕

mˆ v

(4)

v

where mˆ c stands for hard decision of mc messages, ⊕ represents modulo-2 addition and denotes the summa-

tion operator for modulo-2 addition. In Eqn. (4) parentheti-

cal expression represents re-encoding process and rest of it

represents compare process. After performing the equation, CSR test is calculated by μC S R = s(l)/NC N , where s(l) is
number of satisfied CNs at decoding iteration l and NC N is
total number of CNs. The test is satisfied when inequality

C. Proposed LRM Early Termination Method
Proposed method can be summarized with its three characteristics; 1) it observes only sign alterations of LLR messages, 2) it observes mv→c messages passing from variable nodes to check nodes instead of mv at the output of decoder and 3) it observes a small cluster of mv→c messages whose absolute values are the smallest in overall mv→c messages.
Whole LLR messages in BP decoder inherently converge to a value over iterations if the receiver collects enough data for successful decoding. Therefore, LRM ETM is assumed that decoder successfully converged if the estimated bits stop changing for a number of consecutive iterations ( LC ). Since, sign parts of mv messages are utilized for hard-decision in BP decoder [4]–[6], observing only sign alterations of the messages during successive iterations can be used to determine whether estimated bits change. This observing process has very low computational complexity because it uses only sign bits of messages. But, some mv messages converge slower. That’s why, their sign bits may be stable for several iteration and after that start changing again. This case may cause wrong detection of decoder convergence. To avoid the wrong detection, ETM can wait for more successive iterations to stop decoding which causes redundant iterations and so computational complexity. Hence, instead of mv messages, proposed method observes sign alterations of mv→c messages which compose mv to avoid the aforementioned redundant iterations and wrong detection.
In order to reduce computational complexity further LRM ETM observes sign alterations of the least reliable messages (LRM) which is a small cluster of mv→c messages. LRM are the messages whose absolute values are the smallest.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:41:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2358

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2017

They are less reliable among entire mv→c messages [5] and they converge later than mv→c messages with higher absolute LLR values. In other words, LRM in whole mv→c packet have the highest probability of sign change.
Since LT BP decoder typically needs a few iterations to propagate initial channel LLR values, LRM are determined after running decoder for a few iterations. When iteration number increases, better propagation occurs and probability of determining accurate LRM also increases. Therefore, at the beginning of LT BP decoding a small cluster is randomly chosen among mv→c messages called randomly chosen messages (RCM) whose amount is the same with LRM cluster. Sign alterations of RCM are observed until they become stable. When RCM are stable the method determines LRM only one time among mv→c messages whose absolute values are the smallest. To determine LRM cluster, we use quickselect algorithm which has very low computational complexity [14]. After this determination, sign alterations of LRM cluster are observed for remaining iterations until they become stable. If the signs of LRM don’t change for a specific iteration number ( LC ), the method assumes that decoder successfully converged. To be able to get lowest average iteration amounts,
LC value should be as low as possible. LT BP decoding process with LRM method is presented in Algorithm 3.

Algorithm 3 LT BP Decoder With LRM Method

1: Initialization

2: 3:

Calculate Set mc(0→) v

mc; and

m(v0→) c

messages

to

zero;

4: l = 0, f lag = RCM, LC = 0;

5: Determine RCM; Randomly choose the messages

6: end Initialization

7: while (l < max _i ter ) and ( LC i s not sati s f i ed) do 8: CN update();

9: VN update();

10: if ( f lag = RCM) and (RCM ar e stable) then

11:

Quickselect();

LRM are determined.

12:

f lag = LRM;

13: end if

14: if ( f lag = LRM) and (LRM ar e stable) then

15:

LC + +;

16: else LC = 0;

17: end if

18: l + +;

Next iteration.

19: end while

20: Decision();

Eqn. (3) is performed.

D. Complexity Analyzes

In this section, we analyze the computational complexi-

ties of BP decoder, CSR ETM and proposed LRM ETM.

VN update equation of LT BP decoder consists of addition

operations. Number of addition at each VN update can be

calculated by dv (dv − 2), where dv represents VN degree.

Thus, total addition for a single iteration can be calculated by

K

dvmax dv =2

dv (dv

− 2)λdv ,

where

K

is

uncoded

packet

length,

λdv is the fraction of VNs of degree dv and dvmax is maximum

TABLE I COMPLEXITIES OF LT BP DECODER AND ETMs FOR SINGLE ITERATION

VN degree [6]. According to this, we count up computational

complexities of BP and considered ETMs for single iteration

and illustrate the results in Table I. We assume abs, sign

and X O R operations have same complexities to simplify the

comparison.

In the table, NB symbolizes number of LRM determined by
NB = B ∗ Nmv→c , where B is the percentage to determine the
amount of LRM, Nmv→c is number of all mv→c messages and calculated by Nmv→c = N (1). N is coded packet length and (1) is average degree of degree distribution chosen

for LT code [3]. As we mentioned above, LRM method per-

forms quickselect algorithm only one time for whole decoding

process to determine least reliable messages. The quickselect

uses less than 2Nmv→c compare operations to find the smallest NB items of an array with length Nmv→c [14]. We add the average effect of quickselect to computational complexities

for each iteration by 2Nmv→c /lavg comparisons in the table,

where lavg is average iteration number. For ease of notation,

we denote C1 = N

dcmax dc =1

dcρdc ,

C2

=

N

dcmax dc =1

dc2ρdc ,

C3 = K

dvmax dv =2

dv (dv

−

2)λdv

and C4

=

K (1 − λ1),

where

dc is CN degree, ρdc is the fraction of CNs of degree dc and

dcmax is maximum CN degree [6]. Although the results given

in Table I are calculated theoretically, average complexities

of different generator matrices produced from same degree

distribution approach to the values presented in Table I.

III. NUMERICAL RESULTS
In this section, we evaluate the bit error rate (BER) performances of LT BP decoder with and without ETMs over binary–input additive white Gaussian noise channel by simulation works. Also, computational complexities of ETMs and average iteration amounts of BP algorithm with LRM and CSR ETMs are compared. For all simulation works and complexity analyzes, we consider the following degree distribution,
(x) = 0.008x + 0.494x2 + 0.166x3 + 0.073x4 + 0.083x5 + 0.056x 8 +0.037x 9 +0.056x 19 +0.025x 65 +0.003x 66 as in [3], code rate of 1/2, data packet length of 4000 bits and fixed iteration number of 100.
Fig. 1 (a) and (d) illustrate BER curves of LT BP decoder with proposed LRM and CSR ETMs, respectively. We also provide BER curve for LT BP with 100 fixed iteration number without ETM as a benchmark. This benchmark shows the best BER values that decoder can reach. Differences between benchmark and other BER values indicate that ETMs stop decoding before decoder converges which causes performance degradation. Main purpose of an ETM is to reduce total

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:41:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ALBAYRAK et al.: LOW-COMPLEXITY ETM FOR RATELESS SOFT DECODER

2359

TABLE II
AVERAGE ITERATION AMOUNTS OF LT BP DECODER WITH ETMs, LT BP DECODER SUCCESSFULLY CONVERGED AND AVERAGE COMPUTATION TIMES OF LT BP DECODER WITH AND WITHOUT EMTs FOR DECODING A CODE BLOCK

CSR method. All timing data are gathered from a regular computer which is dedicated to only simulation work.

Fig. 1. BER curves of LT BP decoder with and without ETMs for various LC , (a) LT BP decoder with proposed LRM ETM for B = %0.6 (NB ≈ 280), (b) sign alterations of mv messages are observed, (c) sign alterations of only RCM (without LRM) are observed, (d) LT BP decoder with CSR ETM.
decoding complexity without causing any BER performace degradations. As it can be seen in the figure, LRM method for LC ≥ 1 and CSR method for LC ≥ 5 don’t cause BER performance degradations. Since higher LC leads to larger average iteration amounts we choose LC = 1 and B = %0.6 (NB ≈ 280) for proposed LRM method and compare it to CSR with LC = 5. Fig. 1 (b) illustrates the results when sign alterations of mv messages are observed, where Fig. 1 (c) illustares the results when sign alterations of only RCM (without LRM) are observed. According to these results, if only RCM or mv messages are used to determine successful convergence, required average iteration amounts are higher than proposed LRM method.
Table II compares LRM and CSR ETMs including LT BP decoder from various aspects with selected simulation parameters (CSR with LC = 5 and LRM with LC = 1, B = %0.6). Second column in the table named ”Decoder Convergence” is considered as benchmark for iteration amounts. LRM ETM has smaller average iteration amounts than CSR but it has slightly higher than benchmark values. Table II also illustrates average computation times of total decoding process and only ETM sections for decoding a code block. Results show that LRM significantly reduces the required computation time for ETM section (up to %92.44 @ 2.5dB) as well as entire decoding process (up to %13.07 @ 2.5dB) compared to

IV. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we developed a new early termination method for LT BP decoder to avoid redundant processes which cause high computational complexity, decoding latency and energy dissipation. The proposed LRM ETM observes only sign alterations of a small cluster in LLR messages passing between nodes in BP decoder. Simulation results and complexity analyzes show that LRM ETM has quite low computational complexity, computation time and small average iteration amounts without any performance degradation compared to CSR. The method can be applied to code families which can be decoded by BP decoder such as low density parity check (LDPC) codes, Raptor codes and polar codes. A better comparison can be done by hardware implementation.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Luby, “LT codes,” in Proc. 43rd. Annu. IEEE Symp. Found. Comput. Sci, 2002, pp. 271–280.
[2] A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 6, pp. 2551–2567, Jun. 2006.
[3] O. Etesami and A. Shokrollahi, “Raptor codes on binary memoryless symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 5, pp. 2033–2051, May 2006.
[4] B. Sivasubramanian and H. Leib, “Fixed-rate raptor codes over Rician fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 3905–3911, Nov. 2008.
[5] K. Turk and P. Fan, “Adaptive demodulation using rateless codes based on maximum a posteriori probability,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1284–1287, Aug. 2012.
[6] M. Shirvanimoghaddam and S. Johnson, “Raptor codes in the low SNR regime,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 64, no. 11, pp. 4449–4460, Nov. 2016.
[7] P. Wang, G. Mao, Z. Lin, X. Ge, and B. D. O. Anderson, “Network coding based wireless broadcast with performance guarantee,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 532–544, Jan. 2015.
[8] Multimedia Broadcasting/Multicast Service (MBMS), Protocols Ans Codecs Ver. 6.3.0, document 3GPP TS 26.346, Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS), Dec. 2006.
[9] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB): IP-Datacast over DVB-H, Content Delivery Protocols V1.2.1, document ETSI TS 102 472, 2006.
[10] A. Abdulhussein, A. Oka, and L. Lampe, “Decoding with early termination for rateless (Luby transform) codes,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Apr. 2008, pp. 249–254.
[11] A. Abdulhussein, A. Oka, and L. Lampe, “Decoding with early termination for raptor codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 6, pp. 444–446, Jun. 2008.
[12] V. L. Orozco and S. Yousefi, “Trapping sets of fountain codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 8, pp. 755–757, Aug. 2010.
[13] Y.-M. Chen, H.-C. Lee, Y.-L. Ueng, and C.-Y. Yeh, “Flooding-assisted informed dynamic scheduling for rateless codes,” in Proc. IEEE Wireless Commun. Netw. Conf. (WCNC), Apr. 2012, pp. 173–177.
[14] R. Sedgewick and K. Wayne, Algorithms, 4th ed. Princeton, NJ, USA: Princeton Univ. Press, 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:41:40 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

