2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

Density Evolution on a Class of Smeared Random Graphs

Kabir Chandrasekher, Orhan Ocal, and Kannan Ramchandran Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Sciences, University of California, Berkeley
{kabirc, ocal, kannanr}@berkeley.edu

Abstract—We introduce a new ensemble of random bipartite graphs, which we term the ‘smearing ensemble’, where each left node is connected to some number of consecutive right nodes. Such graphs arise naturally in recovering sparse wavelet coefficients when signal acquisition is in the Fourier domain, such as in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Graphs from this ensemble exhibit small, structured cycles with high probability, rendering current techniques for determining iterative decoding thresholds inapplicable. In this paper, we develop a theoretical platform to analyze and evaluate the power of smearing-based structure. Despite the existence of these small cycles, we derive exact density evolution recurrences for iterative decoding on graphs with smear-length two. Furthermore, we give lower bounds on the performance of a much larger class from the smearing ensemble, and provide numerical experiments showing tight agreement between empirical thresholds and those determined by our bounds. We additionally detail a system architecture to recover sparse wavelet representations in the MRI setting, and show that K-sparse 1-stage Haar wavelet coefficients of an ndimensional signal can be recovered using 2.63K Fourier domain samples asymptotically using O(K log K) operations.
I. INTRODUCTION
We explain our problem through an intriguing balls-andbins game. There are n distinct colors, d balls of each color and M bins. You know beforehand that only K n of the colors, which are selected uniformly at random from the n possible colors, will be ‘active’, but you do not know which ones they are. You have to throw all the (dn) balls into the (M ) bins. The rules of the game are as follows:
R1) For each color c, you choose a subset (possibly using a randomized strategy) Bc ⊂ {0, · · · , M − 1} of size d. Then, the system throws the balls of that color c into bins {b + bc : b ∈ Bc} modulo M where bc is sampled uniformly at random from {0, · · · , M − 1}1.
R2) If a bin contains a single active ball, then all d balls having the same color as that ball can be removed.
R3) The process continues iteratively until either (a) all active balls have been removed or (b) there is no bin having a single active ball.
The goal of the game is to remove all active balls using the minimum number of bins. We focus on the regime in which (n, K, M ) → ∞, d = O(1) and ask the following questions:
1) What is the optimal design policy of where to dispatch the d balls? (That is, what is the optimal strategy for designing the subsets in rule R1?)
This work was supported in part by NSF grant 1527767. 1The only effect of this is to randomly offset the bins for each color.

2) Given (n, K, d), what is the minimum number of bins (M ) necessary?

While this is an intriguing game in its own right, more impor-

tantly, it has connections to the design of Low Density Parity

Check (LDPC) codes and peeling decoding. Surprisingly, and

more relevant here, it is also intimately related to the recovery

of sparse wavelet representations from Fourier domain samples

(see Section III).

To illustrate, suppose that d = 3, then the best known

strategy is to throw each ball at a bin selected uniformly at

random. It has been demonstrated that we need asymptotically

M 1.222K bins as K grows. This can be shown through

density evolution methods, introduced by Richardson and

Urbanke in [1], which have proven powerful in analyzing the

performance of sparse-graph codes. Now suppose that d = 6.

The natural strategy is to again throw each ball at a bin selected

uniformly at random. Surprisingly, this strategy is not optimal.

To see this, we give a brief introduction to the smearing

ensemble. Consider a g dimensional vector s = [s1, s2, . . . , sg]

where

g i=1

si

=

d

that

describes

a

partitioning

of

d

balls

into g groups. The ensemble is such that g bins are selected at

random, and for the ith bin, the immediately following si − 1 bins are deterministically selected2; this is what we term the

smearing ensemble. Fig. 1 shows an example illustration for

s = [2, 2], and we formally define the smearing ensemble in

Section II. Examining Table 1, one can see that many simple

smearing strategies outperform the fully random ensemble. In

this paper, we do not claim to design an optimal strategy for

this game; rather, we provide a theoretical platform to analyze

these structure-exploiting policies.

Table 1: Thresholds (M/K) for d = 6. Note that this table contains a strict subset of all possible strategies.

Regime

1,

1,

1,

1,

1,

1 1,

1,

1,

1,

2

1, 1, 1, 3

1, 1, 4

1, 1, 2, 2 1, 2, 3

2, 2, 2

M/K 1.570 1.533 1.489 1.518 1.533 1.542 1.547

Our balls-and-bins game is motivated by an extension of the recently proposed FFAST (Fast Fourier Aliasing-based Sparse Transform) algorithm [2] to the case where sparsity is with
2For example, if si = 2 (we henceforth refer to this as the smear-length), then bins bi and bi +1 (modulo M ) are selected, where bi is chosen uniformly at random on {0, 1, . . . , M − 1}. See Fig. 1 for an illustration.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-5090-4096-4/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE

2915

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

d balls

K active colors

bin: 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14
Fig. 1: Graph showing the connections between active balls and bins for an instance of s = [2, 2]. Here, the number of active colors K = 4, number of bins M = 15 and number of balls per active color d = 4. Each color is partitioned into g = 2 groups and the number of balls per group is 2. The game proceeds by following the rules R2-R3. We want to recover all active colors using the minimum number of bins.
respect to some wavelet basis. In this setting, we consider the balls to be wavelet coefficients and the balls to be samples. Wavelets are universally recognized to be an efficient sparse representation for the class of piecewise smooth signals having a relatively small number of discontinuities, a very good model for many real-world signals such as natural images [3]. In particular, we note that in MRI, images are observed to be sparse with respect to a wavelet basis, and acquisition is in the Fourier domain [4]. The computational bottleneck in recovering these images has been observed to be the multiple FFT’s taken. Our extension of the FFAST algorithm attacks this problem head on, see Sec. III for details.
A. Related Works
Density evolution methods have proven powerful in analyzing the performance of LDPC codes and their extensions [1], [5]. Unfortunately, the well-known density evolution equations apply only for sparse random graphs that are locally tree-like. This is not the case for all ball-throwing strategies in the game we outlined above, e.g. the [2, 2, 2] scheme. Recently Donoho et. al. have introduced approximate message passing (AMP) techniques to extend the message passing paradigm to the case when the underlying factor graph is dense [6]. These techniques were rigorously analyzed by Bayati and Montanari in [7]. Although AMP has been successfully applied to many problem domains, e.g., [8], it imposes a dense structure on the factor graph. Additionally, Kudekar et. al have been able to show the benefit of structure in convolutional LDPC codes through the spatial coupling effect [9], [10]. However, if the bipartite graph is sparse, but contains small, structured cycles, it may not be necessary to invoke such methods.
B. Main Results and Organization of the Paper
The main results of this paper are the derivation of exact thresholds for random graphs with smear-length 2, and bounds for higher smear-length which are empirically shown to be very tight. We additionally detail an application to fast recovery of sparse wavelet representations when acquisition is in

the Fourier domain. In particular, given a signal with ambient dimension n which is K-sparse with respect to the 1-stage Haar wavelet, our analysis shows that 2.63K Fourier domain samples are needed to recover the signal in O(K log K) time.
The organization of this paper is as follows. In Section II-A, we derive sharp thresholds for the specific case of 2-smearing. In Section II-B, we derive lower bounds for the probability of recovery in the case of arbitrary smearing. We outline the connection between the ball coloring game and the recovery of sparse wavelet representations in Section III. We conclude with Section IV by summarizing some interesting open problems and conjectures that have resulted from this work in.
II. MAIN RESULTS
In this section, we introduce a new random graph ensemble, termed the ‘smearing ensemble’, and show how to derive density evolution recursions for graphs from this ensemble. We detail the derivation of density evolution for smearing with smear-length 2, and we give lower bounds for smear-length L.
We now formally define the smearing ensemble.
Definition 1. Let G(K, M, s) denote the ‘smearing graph ensemble’ with K left nodes and M right nodes. The vector s = [s1, s2, . . . , sg] characterizes the connections between left and right nodes according to the following the algorithm:
for each left node: for j in [1, ..., g]: connect left node to a right node chosen uniformly at random and its s_j-1 following neighbors
We begin by deriving the density evolution recurrence for smearing ensembles with the maximum smearing length of 2.3 Then, we provide lower bounds for the general smearing case.
A. Density Evolution on 2-smear Graphs (s = [2, 2, 2])
In our ball-coloring game, we noted that threshold for the setting [2, 2, 2] outperforms that for the setting [1, 1, 1, 1, 1, 1]. In this section, we give exact analysis for these thresholds4. First, we define our notation in Table 2 and illustrate it on the neighborhood of a reference node in Fig. 2.
Table 2: Notation for density evolution with smear-length 2
xt : Probability that a random node is not removed at iteration t qt : Probability that neither bin in a smeared pair is removed at
iteration t dt : Probability that all nodes in the same stream as the node of
reference are removed at time t st : Probability that all nodes in a stream which intersects, but
does not fully overlap, with the reference stream are removed at time t
Unlike as in conventional density evolution methods in the LDPC literature which are based on an edge perspective, we
3We note that the full version of this work, explicit derivation of thresholds for smearing ensembles with smear-length 3 is given, but for the sake of brevity it is omitted here.
4Although thresholds can be derived for the other elements in the table, we give the [2, 2, 2] derivation for clarity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2916

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

Fig. 2: Depth 2 neighborhood of a ball in a graph with [2, 2, 2] smearing (see Definition 1). The bins and balls are grouped by their colors with respect to distance from the root.

take a node perspective here because dependencies between edges in the smearing setting complicate the analysis. Our goal is to derive recurrences for the quantities given in Table 2. In this case, the equations for xt and qt are clear:

xt = qt3,

(1)

qt = 1 − dt(1 − (1 − st)2).

(2)

In order to see this, note that for a node to be removed,

at least one of the bins to which it is connected must be removed. Thus, xt only occurs when none of the pairs of smeared bins to which it is connected are removed. On the other hand, for a bin to be removed, all of its connected nodes

must be removed. Thus, all of the balls in the same stream

as the reference ball must be removed, which happens with
probability dt. Additionally, at least one of the two streams that do not fully overlap with the reference ball must be removed, which happens with probability (1−(1−st)2). Now, note that in Fig. 2, the recurring structures are those with probabilities
st, dt, qt. We first calculate dt. Each of the balls in this stream act
independently of each other, and each of the balls in this
stream must be removed in another stage. Let D1 denote the number of balls in this stream other than the reference
ball we are looking at. It follows that D1 is distributed as Binomial(3(K − 1), 1/M ), which can be approximated well for large K and M by Poisson(λ), where λ = 3K/M . It

follows that:

∞

dt = P (D1 = i)(1 − qt2−1)i

i=0

=

∞

e−λ

λi i!

(1

−

qt2−1)i

=

e−λqt2−1 .

(3)

i=0

Now, we tackle st. Note that intuitively, st ≥ dt because each ball in a stream tracked by st gets the same independent help from other stages. However, there is additionally a shared

bin between all these balls. This shared bin is able to aid in the removal of the stream tracked by st when exactly one ball

is left in the stream, and the bin has no contributions from elsewhere. Letting D2 be the number of balls in this stream, we precisely characterize this as follows:

∞

st = P (D2 = i) (1 − qt2−1)i + ist−1qt2−1(1 − qt2−2)i−1

i=0

= e−λqt2−1 + λst−1qt2−1e−λqt2−2 .

(4)

Note that the first term in this recursion is exactly dt. The second term describes the help received from the shared bin. In order to properly characterize this term, it is necessary to introduce the notion of memory (term involving time t − 2): the shared bin can help if it has all contributions removed except for one by time t. Unlike when the neighborhood is tree-like and contains no cycles, branches of the tree become independent [11], when cycles are introduced, dependence between branches is introduced. The introduced memory captures exactly this dependence.
We summarize the results of this section with the following lemma:

Lemma 1. Consider a random graph from the ensemble G(K, M, [2, 2, 2]). Then, for M ≥ 1.547, recovery using the peeling decoder will succeed with high probability.

Proof. Follows from the density evolution derived above.

This style of thinking leads to the principles of generalization listed in below.

Generalizing to L-smearing
1) In a stage with L smearing, there will be L − 1 steps of memory necessary in order to properly capture the smearing structure
2) In a stage with L smearing, the number of recurring structures will be L
3) Shared bins can be used through the introduction of memory in the recursion

In the extended version of this work [12], we derive explicit recursions for the ensembles with s = [1, 1, 3] (smearing of order 3), but omit it here for the sake of clarity. In the following section, we will use these principles to derive simple, but effective, lower bounds for L-smearing5.

B. Lower Bound on L-smearing

For clarity, we will consider the ensembles with s = [L, L, L]. Along with xt, qt, dt as described in Table 2, we define quantity s(ti) in Table 3.

Table 3: Notation for density evolution with smear-length L

s(ti) :

Probability that all nodes in the streams which does not intersect with the reference stream in j bins where 1 ≤ j ≤ i bins are removed at time t

As described in the principles of generalization, there will be L recursions, and up to L − 1 memory. The probability dt
5Although it is possible to derive exact recurrences in such a case, we pursue lower bounds for intellectual clarity.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2917

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

1

1 − x∞

4 empirical

4 bound

6 empirical

0.5

6 bound

8 empirical

8 bound

22 empirical

22 bound

Fig. 3: Depth 1 neighborhood of a ball under L-smearing. The quantities dt and {st(i)}Li=−11 are the recurrent structures, where st(i) tracks the joint probability that all the streams which intersect with the reference stream in {j}Lj=−L1−i bins are removed at time t.

is unaffected as it depends only on the other stages. All of the st(i), however, can have up to i memory (corresponding to the number of bins that do not overlap with the reference
ball). Thus, we take an approach much like a first-order approximation of a Taylor series, and allow each s(ti) to use only one step of memory. The following lemma characterizes
the critical quantity qt in terms of its component streams.

Lemma 2. In a stage with L-smearing,

L−1

L−1

1 − qt = dt 2st(L−1) +

st(i−1)s(tL−i) −

s(ti)st(L−1) .

i=2

i=1

Proof. See the appendix in the extended version [12].

The following lemma then establishes monotonicity of 1−qt with respect to dt, s(ti), which we may use to complete the bound.

Lemma 3. Let f (dt, s(t1), . . . st(L−1)) = 1 − qt, then f (dt, s(t1), . . . s(tL−1)) is non-decreasing in (dt, s(t1), . . . , st(L−1)).

Proof. See the appendix in the extended version [12].

We now bound dt, st(1), . . . , s(tL−1):

dt = e−λqt2−1 ,

(5)

s(ti) ≥ eiλqt2−1 + λqt2−1e−λqt2−2 rt(−i)1,

(6)

for i ∈ {1, . . . , L − 1}, where

ij

rt(i) =def

s(t−k)1e−(L−k−1)λqt2−2 e−(k−1)λqt2−1 .

(7)

j=1 k=1

There is a simple way to think about the problem so that these bounds appear. Consider the bound on s(ti). This tracks the joint probability that all the streams which intersect the reference stream in L − j bins where 1 ≤ j ≤ i are removed at time t. In order for all of these streams to be removed, there
are two cases:

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

M/K

Fig. 4: We plot our lower bounds against empirical simulations with settings s = [1, 1, L] for various L. The y-axis here denotes the probability that a random ball is removed when peeling stops (i.e., 1 − xt as t → ∞). We note that this ensemble is used as it is of the most relevant practical interest to recovery of sparse wavelet representations (see Section III).

1) Each stream was removed from another stage. This probability is tracked by the first term: eiλqt2−1 .
2) Exactly one ball remains among all the streams. This probability is tracked by the second term.
We focus on the second case. Suppose that the remaining ball is in the stream which intersects the reference stream in j bins. This implies that it is also contained in L − j shared bins that do not intersect the reference stream. It can be removed by any of these bins, as long as it is the only contribution. This help is tracked by the summation in the second term.
Corollary 1. The lower bounds given in equations (5) and (6) imply a lower bound on xt, the probability that a random node is removed at time t.
Proof. This follows directly from Lemma 2 and Lemma 3.
We experimentally find the thresholds for full recovery by sweeping λ, and compare them to the thresholds implied by the bounds. Fig. 4 shows these for filters with different lengths corroborating that the bounds in Corollary 1 capture the actual thresholds well.
III. CONNECTIONS TO RECOVERY OF SPARSE WAVELET REPRESENTATIONS
In MRI, one acquires samples of the Fourier transform of an input signal of interest. MRI speed is directly related to the number of samples acquired. An inverse transform is then used to recover the original signal. Mathematically, let x be an n-length signal, and X =def Fnx be its Fourier transform, where Fn is the Fourier matrix of size n × n. In MRI, the problem is to recover x from {Xi : i ∈ I} where the set I denotes the sampling locations, and this set is a design parameter.
We now present how the game of balls-and-bins and its analysis as described in Sections I and II relates to MRI. For ease of illustration we confine ourselves to the noiseless setting and exact sparsity, but these assumptions can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2918

2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT)

relaxed. If the signal x is K-sparse, one can use the FFAST algorithm to recover x from O(K) samples with O(K log K) computations [2], [13]. However, the images of interest in MRI are generally not sparse, but they do have sparse wavelet representations [4]. That is, we can express x = Wn−1α, where Wn−1 is an appropriate wavelet, and α is sparse. Under this signal model, the problem of recovering α can be transformed into the problem of decoding on an erasure channel using a sparse-graph code. In particular, the graph for the code is drawn from a smearing ensemble with smearing length L a function of the length of the underlying wavelet filter.
Furthermore, assume α is K-sparse and the length of x is of the form n = f1f2f3 where f1, f2 and f3 are co-prime. For m ∈ Z that divides n, let Dm,n be the regular downsampling matrix from length n to m, that is, Dm,n = [Im · · · Im] with Im is repeated n/m times. Let yf for ∈ {1, 2, 3} be the inverse Fourier transform of the downsampled X, that is, yf =def Ff−1Df ,nX. Using the properties of Fourier Transform, it follows that yf = Df ,nx = Df ,nWn−1α.
Now, for simplicity, assume that W is a block transform with block size L (eg., for 1 stage Haar wavelets L = 2), and the support of α is chosen uniformly random over the subsets of size K. Using the relations between yf1 , yf2 and yf3 and α, recovering α is equivalent to decoding on a random graph from G(K, M = f1 + f2 + f3, s = [L, L, L]).
We can actually ‘improve’ the induced graph if a factor of the signal length has L as a factor. Say that L divides f1, it follows that Af1,nWn−1 = [Wf−11 · · · Wf−11], where Wf−11 is repeated n/f1 times. It can be verified that yf1 =def Wf1 yf1 = Af1,na, hence it aliases the wavelet coefficients regularly without smearing. The relation between yf1 , yf2 and yf3 and α then induces a graph from G(K, M = f1 + f2 + f2, s = [1, L, L]), which gives raise to a better threshold.
To complete the equivalence to decoding a sparse-graph code on an erasure channel, we need a mechanism to check if there is a single component in a bin (a single color in a bin). This can be implemented by processing a shifted version of x (incurring an additional factor of 2 of oversampling). Due to space limitations, we defer the details to the extended version [12]. We end this section with the following lemma.
Lemma 4. Consider a signal α with ambient dimension n and sparsity K, and access to samples from FnWn−1α. Then, the subsampling scheme described above along with the peeling decoder is able to exactly recover the sparse signal α using 2.63K samples and time complexity O(K log K).
Proof. The threshold 2.63K follows from the density evolution derived in Section II. We refer the reader to the extended version [12] for complexity proof.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We have introduced a new random graph ensemble, termed the ‘smearing ensemble’ and devoloped a framework for deriving density evolution recurrences for random graphs from this ensemble. Recalling our balls-and-bins game, our results show that some amount of smearing can lead to a better

strategy than the full random case. A fascinating open question
arises here: what is the optimal ball-throwing strategy and
what are the density evolution recurrences for such a strategy?
In this paper, we have given the first steps in analyzing
this problem rigorously. To do this, we have leveraged the
existence of small, structured cycles and introduced the notion
of memory into our density evolution. We believe there to be
a deep connection between the introduction of memory in our
recurrences and the introduction of the ‘Onsager’ term in the
update equations of AMP [14]. We additionally believe the
gains seen in spatially coupled ensembles [10] are intimately
related to the structural gains of the smearing ensemble. An
extremely interesting open problem is to determine the nature
of these connections. We have additionally shown the practical
connection between the smearing ensemble and the recovery
of a sparse wavelet representation of a signal whose samples
are taken in the Fourier domain.
REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[2] S. Pawar and K. Ramchandran, “Computing a k-sparse n-length discrete fourier transform using at most 4k samples and O(klogk) complexity,” in IEEE Int. Symp. on Inf. Theory. IEEE, Jul. 2013, pp. 464–468.
[3] M. Vetterli and J. Kovacevic, “Wavelets and subband coding,” 1995. [4] M. Lustig, D. L. Donoho, J. M. Santos, and J. M. Pauly, “Compressed
sensing MRI,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 72–82, Mar. 2008. [5] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern coding theory. Cambridge University Press, 2008. [6] D. L. Donoho, A. Maleki, and A. Montanari, “Message-passing algorithms for compressed sensing,” Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, vol. 106, no. 45, pp. 18 914–18 919, Sep. 2009. [7] M. Bayati and A. Montanari, “The dynamics of message passing on dense graphs, with applications to compressed sensing,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 764–785, Jan. 2011. [8] J. Tan, Y. Ma, and D. Baron, “Compressive imaging via approximate message passing with image denoising,” IEEE Trans. Sig. Process., vol. 63, no. 8, pp. 2085–2092, Mar. 2015. [9] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Jan. 2011. [10] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Jan. 2013. [11] C. Ha¨ger, H. D. Pfister, F. Bra¨nnstro¨m et al., “Density evolution for deterministic generalized product codes on the binary erasure channel,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.00433, Dec. 2015. [12] K. Chandrasekher, O. Ocal, and K. Ramchandran, “Density evolution on a class of smeared random graphs: A theoretical framework for fast mri,” arXiv preprint, May 2017. [13] F. Ong, S. Pawar, and K. Ramchandran, “Fast and efficient sparse 2D Discrete Fourier Transform using sparse-graph codes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1509.05849, Sep. 2015. [14] D. L. Donoho, A. Maleki, and A. Montanari, “Message passing algorithms for compressed sensing: I. motivation and construction,” in IEEE Inf. Theory Workshop on Inf. Theory. IEEE, Jan. 2010, pp. 1–5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
2919

