5368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 65, NO. 20, OCTOBER 15, 2017

An Efficient Combined Bit-Flipping and Stochastic LDPC Decoder Using Improved Probability Tracers
Yeong-Luh Ueng, Senior Member, IEEE, Chun-Yi Wang, and Mao-Ruei Li, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents an efficient combined bit-flipping (BF) and stochastic low-density parity-check decoder, where a BF decoder is used to achieve a reduction in decoding cycles. A nodewise probability tracer is adopted at each variable node (VN) in order to achieve a BER performance comparable to the normalized min-sum algorithm, where check-to-variable (C2V) messages are used as inputs, rather than the variable-to-check (V2C) messages adopted in previous stochastic decoders. The complexity of the VN units is greatly reduced by sharing common units used in the generation of V2C messages together with a probability tracer. The C2V-based probability tracer enables the design of a decoder that provides a short critical path. The proposed methods are demonstrated by designing a (2048, 1723) decoder that is implemented in a 90 nm process. A total of 1460 K logic gates are integrated in a decoder that has an area of 4.12 mm2 and achieves a coded throughput of 39.3 Gb/s at a clock frequency of 749 MHz. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, the proposed decoder achieves the best normalized throughput-to-area ratio among the stochastic decoders reported in the open literatures.
Index Terms—Stochastic decoder, IEEE 802.3an standard, Lowdensity parity-check code, LDPC code, 10GBASE-T.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were introduced by Gallager in 1962 [1]. In recent years, LDPC codes have become widely recognized for their near-capacity performance. As a result, many communication standards, such as IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T) [2], IEEE 802.3ba [3], IEEE 802.16 (WiMAX) [4], IEEE 802.11 (WiFi) [5], and 5G [26] have adopted LDPC codes as part of the standard. An LDPC code can be represented by a Tanner graph, which is a bipartite graph consisting of variable nodes (VNs) and check nodes (CNs). Based on this graph representation, an LDPC code can be iteratively decoded by exchanging probabilistic beliefs using either the Sum-Product Algorithm (SPA) [1] or the Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA) [6].
Manuscript received January 23, 2017; revised May 25, 2017; accepted June 14, 2017. Date of publication July 11, 2017; date of current version August 8, 2017. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. Mats Bengtsson. This work was supported in part by the Ministry of Science and Technology, Taiwan, under Grant MOST 105-2218-E-007-010. (Corresponding author: Yeong-Luh Ueng.)
Y.-L. Ueng is with the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan (e-mail: ylueng@ee.nthu.edu.tw).
C.-Y. Wang and M.-R. Li are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan (e-mail: fxm30080@yahoo.com.tw; maoruei.li@gmail.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2017.2725221

For high-speed Ethernet or optical communications, highthroughput decoders are required for high-rate LDPC codes. For example, the rate-0.84 regular (2048, 1723) LDPC code, which is constructed based on a Reed-Solomon (RS) code [7], is adopted in the IEEE 802.3an standard [2]. In New Radio of 5G enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB), the target information throughput is 20 Gbps [26]. In [8]–[11], several partially-parallel MSA-based decoders were reported. In [31], [32], MSA-based decoders with low-complexity CN units (CNUs) were proposed. Although an adequate error-rate performance was attained, these decoders were only able to achieve a maximum throughput of about 10 Gbps. In order to provide a throughput of more than the 10 Gbps required for next-generation high-speed communications, fully-parallel decoders based on approximate MSAs or TD-processing were proposed in [12], [13], and [36], respectively. However, it was apparent that there was still room for improvement in the area efficiency.
To improve the area efficiency, a new approach called stochastic decoding was proposed. The basic of stochastic decoding originates from the concept of stochastic computation first proposed in 1969 [14]. In stochastic LDPC decoders, each message exchanged between VNs and CNs is converted into a Bernoulli stream, which represents probabilistic belief by the density of 1’s in the overall stream. Therefore, a stochastic decoder can be implemented using a bit-serial architecture, which simplifies the routing implementation. In [15]–[17], several pioneer stochastic LDPC decoders were proposed. However, the error-rate performance of these decoders was severely degraded owing to an issue with latching. In order to mitigate this, the authors of [18]–[20] proposed tracing each V2C (VN to CN) message using an Edge Memory (EM). In [20], an EM-based stochastic decoder was demonstrated for a (1056, 528) WiMAX LDPC code, and provided a satisfactory error-rate performance.
Since the EM occupies a significant percentage of the decoder area, it was replaced with a lower-complexity tracking forecast memory (TFM) in [21]. The resultant TFM-based decoder provided a similar error-rate performance and had a much lower hardware complexity compared to the EM-based decoder reported in [20]. In [21], each V2C message from a VN requires a TFM and, hence, a total of dv TFMs are required for a single degree-dv VN. In [22], the authors proposed using a nodewise probability tracer in place of the dv edge-wise probability tracers used in both [20] and [21], where only a single majoritybased tracking forecast memory (MTFM) is used for a single degree-dv VN, rather than dv TFMs. The MTFM-based decoder achieved the best bit-error-rate (BER) performance among the

1053-587X © 2017 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: EFFICIENT COMBINED BIT-FLIPPING AND STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER USING IMPROVED PROBABILITY TRACERS

5369

stochastic decoders reported to date, and requires less hardware compared to the decoders presented in [20] and [21]. The decoder proposed in [23] reduced the area required by the VN units (VNUs) by using a counter-based node-wise probability tracer and sharing the common VN subunits. To increase the BER convergence speed, bit-flipping (BF) decoding was used in [24] as a post processing technique. In order to reduce the area, the delayed stochastic decoder (DS) presented in [25] omitted the probability tracers and, hence, resulting in the smallest area so far reported among stochastic decoders, but suffered from a degradation in BER performance.
In the relaxed half-stochastic (RHS) algorithm proposed in [27], the VN computation is performed in the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) domain, while stochastic messages based on Bernoulli streams are exchanged between the CNs and the VNs. There are no latching issues related to the hold-state in the RHS-based decoder since LLR-based VNUs are used. Consequently, probability tracers are not required in order to mitigate any latching issues. In addition, stochastic messages from the CNUs are transferred to the LLR messages through the message estimator and the LLR-domain tracking filter in the VNU, hence introducing additional decoder area. As demonstrated in [33], the RHS decoder has a better BER performance, but has a larger decoder area compared to the MTFM-based decoder presented in [22]. In addition to binary codes, stochastic decoders have also been used for non-binary LDPC codes [28], [29]. A comprehensive list of stochastic decoding references can be found in [30].
In this paper, we propose using a single C2V-based (CN to VN) node-wise probability tracer for each VN. This design achieves a BER performance comparable to that of the normalized MSA (NMSA) and the RHS algorithm, and enables the design of a decoder with a shorter critical path. To improve the area efficiency, we propose a low-complexity VNU that is based on shared subunits and internal memory. The majority of the circuits required in the proposed probability tracer are also combined with the shared subunits and, hence, the overhead necessary for the proposed probability tracer is minimized. In addition, we use the original BF decoder [1] as an assistant decoder so as to reduce the number of decoding cycles (DCs). The proposed methods are demonstrated by designing a stochastic (2048, 1723) LDPC decoder that is implemented in a 90 nm process. A total of 1460 K logic gates are integrated in a decoder that has an area of 4.12 mm2 and achieves a coded throughput of 39.3 Gbps at a clock frequency of 749 MHz. To the best of the authors’ knowledge, the proposed decoder achieves the best normalized throughput-to-area ratio (TAR) among the stochastic decoders reported in the open literatures.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a brief background of stochastic decoding and the stochastic decoders presented in the previous literature. Section III illustrates the proposed stochastic decoding techniques and the corresponding architecture. Section IV describes the implementation of the decoder and a comparison of the results, while Section V concludes this paper.

II. REVIEW OF STOCHASTIC DECODING

A. SPA in the Probability Domain

Stochastic decoding is based on the sum-product algorithm (SPA) in the probability domain, where decoding is performed by iteratively exchanging messages between VNs and CNs. Each message represents the probability that the corresponding binary data is equal to 1. Let αm,n represent the V2C message from the nth VN to the mth CN, and let βm,n represent the C2V message from the mth CN to the nth VN. Let γn and θn be the channel message and the a posteriori message for the nth VN, respectively. Let M (n) denote the set of neighboring CNs to the nth VN, and let N (m) denote the set of neighboring VNs to the mth CN. The SPA in the probability domain is presented as follows:
1) Initialization: The channel log likelihood ratio (LLR) value for the nth VN, denoted as Ln , is transformed to γn according to:

eL n

γn = 1 + eLn .

(1)

2) VN computation: Using the C2V messages βm ,n received from its neighboring CNs m , where m ∈ M (n) \ m, and its own channel message γn , VN n produces the V2C message αm,n according to:

αm ,n = γn

m

βm ,n

γn m βm ,n + (1 − γn ) m

(1 − βm ,n ) .

(2)

3) CN computation: Using the received V2C messages

αm,n from its neighboring VNs n , where n ∈ N (m) \ n, CN m produces the C2V message βm,n

according to:

βm ,n

=

1 2

−

1 2

(1 − 2αm ,n ).

(3)

n

4) Posterior computation: For each VN n, the a posteriori message is calculated according to:

θn = γn

γn m βm ,n m βm ,n + (1 − γn ) m (1 − βm ,n )
(4)

where m ∈ M (n).

5) Early termination: If the decoded vector that can be

obtained from the hard decisions for the a posteriori

messages satisfies all the parity check constraints, de-

coding is terminated, even if the maximum number of

DCs does not reach the maximum allowable value.

B. Reviews of Stochastic Decoder Architectures
In stochastic decoding, all probabilistic messages are converted to Bernoulli streams. The ratio of 1 s in the stream represents the corresponding probability value, and the probability value is more precise when the stream is longer. Based on this transformation, a stochastic LDPC decoder can be considered a form of bit-serial decoder, and the VNs and CNs exchange messages in each DC bit by bit. Bit-serial decoding ensures that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5370

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 65, NO. 20, OCTOBER 15, 2017

Fig. 2. Architecture proposed in [19] for a degree-6 VN module based on an edge-wise probability tracer, where s is the state of the edge, and H is the bit generated by the edge-wise probability tracer.

Fig. 1. Stochastic computation architecture presented in [15]. (a) A degree-dc CNU; (b) A module for a degree-dv VNU.
TABLE I BEHAVIOR OF A DEGREE-2 VN MODULE
the computation units are simple. This subsection provides a review of the stochastic decoder architectures presented in the previous literature, where the regular (2048, 1723) LDPC code from the IEEE 802.3an standard is used as a demonstration. The degrees of VN and CN are 6 and 32, respectively.
Fig. 1(a) shows the architecture for the degree-dc CN unit (CNU) presented in [15], where a dc -input XOR gate is used to sum all the V2C inputs αm,n , and additional dc 2-input XOR gates are used to generate the C2V message βm,n for each neighboring VN. It has been shown in [15] that this architecture realizes the CN computation described in (3).
Fig. 1(b) shows the VN module proposed in [15] for generating a single V2C message. For a degree-dv VN, there are dv such modules. Table I shows the truth table for a degree-2 VN, where γni , αmi 1 ,n , βmi 2 ,n are the corresponding bits in the ith DC. As shown in Table I, if the inputs are the same, i.e., γni = βmi 2 ,n , the output of this module, i.e., αmi 1 ,n , matches the inputs. This situation is referred to as the non-hold state, and the output is designated the regenerative bit. Otherwise, αmi 1 ,n = αmi−11,n . This situation is referred to as the hold state, and the output is termed the conservative bit.
In Fig. 1(b), the inputs at the top AND gate are Bernoulli streams with probabilities, γn , βm 2 ,n , · · · , βm d v ,n , and the output is a Bernoulli stream with probability, pm 1 ,n = γn βm 2 ,n · · · βmd v ,n . The inputs of the other AND gate are Bernoulli streams with probabilities, (1 − γn ), (1 − βm2 ,n ), · · · , (1 − βmd v ,n ), and the output is a Bernoulli stream with probability, qm 1 ,n = (1 − γn )(1 − βm 2 ,n ) · · · (1 − βm d v ,n ). Based on the

mechanism of the JK flip-flop, the output is a Bernoulli stream with probability, αm 1 ,n = pm 1 ,n (1 − qm 1 ,n ) + αm 1 ,n (1 − pm 1 ,n )(1 − qm 1 ,n ) + (1 − αm 1 ,n )pm 1 ,n qm 1 ,n , if the probability, αm1 ,n , is stable [15]. This formula can be re-written as αm 1 ,n = pm 1 ,n /(pm 1 ,n + qm 1 ,n ), which matches the formula for the VN computation described in (2). However, at the beginning of the decoding process, the probability that the output bit is in the hold state is not as accurate as the probability that the bit is in the non-hold state, and, consequently, the V2C message does not precisely match the formula described in (2). This situation significantly affects the BER performance of the decoding process.
Stochastic decoding based on the architecture shown in Fig. 1(b) has a limited BER performance because it is easy for the decoding process to become locked into a fixed state, known as latching (lock-up) problem [18]. Latching degrades the switching activity, i.e., the bit transition of a Bernoulli stream. The latching situation often continues for several DCs and causes the VNU to pause at the same outputs. To mitigate this problem, the authors of [18]–[20] used an edge-wise probability tracer to trace the status of αm,n for each edge by recording the most recent regenerative bits, and outputting a randomly selected bit from the tracer if a hold state occurred. Fig. 2 shows the architecture for the degree-6 VN presented in [19]. For ease of presentation, the channel message, and the C2V and V2C messages for a degree-6 VN are substituted with γ, β1 ... β6 and α1 ... α6 , respectively. An additional OR gate is used to produce the state bit s. When s = 1, a non-hold state occurs and, hence, the output α1 matches the input. Otherwise, a hold state occurs and the random number, rng, is used to select a bit from the probability tracer. The architecture is similar to that when using a JK flip-flop. The difference is that different values are used by the architecture when a hold state occurs. If the probability tracer records only the latest regenerative bit, the output value illustrated in Fig. 2 is the same as that when a JK flip-flop is used.
If the VN degree is high, for example, six or more, there is a high probability that a hold state will occur in the architecture shown in Fig. 2, meaning that nothing will be recorded by the probability tracer. As a result, the authors of [20] proposed using degree-3 and degree-2 subunits to construct the complete VNU if the VN degree is greater than three. Consequently, the architecture illustrated in Fig. 2 is modified, and the revised architecture is shown in Fig. 3, where a 2-bit internal memory (IM) and a 64-bit EM are used as the probability tracers

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: EFFICIENT COMBINED BIT-FLIPPING AND STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER USING IMPROVED PROBABILITY TRACERS

5371

Fig. 5. MTFM-based node-wise probability tracer for a degree-6 VN, where S is the number of non-hold states, X is the number of regenerative bits that have a value of 1, and B is the majority result.

Fig. 3. Architecture proposed in [19] for a degree-6 VN module, where two degree-3 subunits and one degree-2 subunit are used.
Fig. 4. Degree-6 MTFM-based VNU proposed in [22].
in the front-end degree-3 subunit and the back-end degree-2 subunit, respectively. Although this architecture is effective in improving the BER performance, the complexity of the decoder is significantly increased since a 64-bit EM is used. To reduce the area overhead, the authors of [21] proposed implementing a method called tracking forecast memories (TFM). In this approach, instead of recording the latest bit generated in the non-hold state, the TFM method updates the V2C messages according to αi+1 = (1 − ε)αi + εbi, where i is the index of the DC and ε, 0 < ε < 1, is a relaxation coefficient. As a result, the area of the TFM is smaller compared to that of EM.
In order to further reduce area, a node-wise probability tracer based on the majority-based tracking forecast memory (MTFM) technique was proposed in [22]. In this approach, a single nodewise probability tracer is used to replace the six edge-wise probability tracers, i.e., six of the TFMs proposed in [21], which are used in a single degree-6 VNU. The complete MTFM-based degree-6 VNU is shown in Fig. 4, where the VN computation unit is the same as that shown in Fig. 3, except that the EM is removed and its outputs are the state bit s and result bit b of the degree-2 subunit. Fig. 5 shows the MTFM-based probability tracer for a degree-6 VN, where a 12-bit TFM is used. Since six V2C messages need to be traced, the MTFM method records the majority result from the six V2C messages in the non-hold state. The output S from the top adder represents the number of regenerative bits, and the output X from the left adder represents the number of 1s in the non-hold state. The majority result B is produced by comparing the output values from the two adders. The threshold, Tu , determines whether or not the majority result is recorded. If the threshold is higher, the recorded probability is more accurate. Even if only a single node-wise

probability tracer is used, an MTFM-based decoder is able to achieve an improved BER performance compared to that of a TFM-based decoder. However, for a 90 nm CMOS, a long path delay of 2 ns exists through the VN computation unit and the MTFM-based probability tracer for the MTFM-based decoder presented in [22].
Another node-wise probability tracer was proposed in [23], where an 8-bit up/down counter is used to record the probability value, rather than a 12-bit MTFM. The counter takes the state and result bits from each VN computation unit as the recorded criteria and recorded value, respectively. If the result bit is a regenerative bit, the counter will be enabled and begin counting the regenerative bits. The counter increases when the bit value is 1, and decreases when the bit value is 0. Although the area necessary for implementing this way is smaller, the counterbased probability tracer requires a longer critical path and results in a poor BER performance.
In [18], a saturated up/down counter was used to calculate the a posteriori message, and hence, its hard decision. V2C messages are passed to the saturated up/down counter during each DC. The counter, which ranges from −7 to 7, is increased when a value of 1 is received, and is decreased when a value of 0 is received. The sign bit is used as the hard decision result. In [22], the authors used a counter with six C2V messages as the inputs, and the majority result from the C2V messages in each DC is taken as the hard decision. In [23], the hard decision by the counter-based node-wise probability tracer is taken as the hard-decision result.
III. PROPOSED STOCHASTIC DECODER ARCHITECTURE
It should be noted that there is still room for improvement in the area efficiency, throughput, and BER performance for the stochastic decoders presented in [22] and [23], where the main consideration is the design of an effective probability tracer. In Section III-A, we propose a C2V-based node-wise probability tracer, and in Section III-B a low-complexity VNU based on shared common units is presented. In Section III-C, we illustrate a BF-assistant stochastic decoder that is designed to reduce the number of DCs required and hence improve the convergence speed. The overall decoder architecture is presented in Section III-D.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5372

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 65, NO. 20, OCTOBER 15, 2017

A. A C2V-Based Node-Wise Probability Tracer and a Posterior Tracer

The node-wise probability tracers proposed in [22] and [23] still occupy a significant percentage of the decoder area. In addition, this form of architecture will result in a long critical path since the probability tracer needs to wait for the VN computation units to complete the computation. Although the DS decoder, which does not employ a probability tracer, is able to surmount these problems, the BER performance can be improved.
To overcome the difficulties described above, we propose a C2V-based node-wise probability tracer, where the C2V messages are directly used to produce the recorded bits that will be utilized in the subsequent hold states. Using the C2V messages directly enables the probability tracer to operate in parallel with the VN computation units. As a result, the critical path can be shortened. In addition, the inputs for the probability tracer will be not affected by the hold states of the degree-3 and degree-2 subunits and, hence, it is possible to record an improved probability value. The node-wise probability tracer for VN n is proposed in order to trace the probability δn defined by

δn =

6 m

=1

βm

,n

6 m =1
+

βm ,n

6 m

=1 (1

−

βm

,n )

.

(5)

The formula in (5) is similar to the computation used for posterior message except that the channel term is not included. Omitting the channel term enables the probability tracer to be easily combined with other parts of the VNU. This approach will be described in Section IV-B. In addition, an improved errorrate performance can be achieved, which will also be discussed later.
Fig. 6(a) shows a baseline probability tracer that is implemented in order to realize (5). To reduce the area, a 7-bit up/down counter is used in the storage module rather than the 64-bit EM used in Fig. 3, as shown in Fig. 6(a), where the counter is initialized with the channel message. Hence, the degree-2 subunit does not require any storage elements. As with the counterbased probability tracer described in [23], a comparator is also needed in order to produce a value when a hold state occurs. The combination of two degree-3 subunits and one degree-2 subunit still ensures that the decoding successfully converges. However, this approach introduces a loss because the architecture only performs an approximate check for the equality of the C2V messages. For example, if the degree-2 subunit is in a non-hold state, it doesn’t mean that all C2V messages are equal.
To achieve a better performance, an inspection unit is introduced as shown in Fig. 6(b). The inspection unit uses the state bits for the two degree-3 subunits and the degree-2 subunit to produce a new state bit f , which is then utilized to control the up/down counter. If the degree-3 subunit is in the hold state, it means that the bit generated from the subunit is unreliable. This unreliable bit in turn causes the output of the degree-2 subunit to be unreliable, even if the degree-2 subunit is in the non-hold state. Fig. 6(c) illustrates a basic inspection unit which takes the output of the degree-2 subunit as a reliable bit when either of the degree-3 subunits is in the non-hold state. The “tight” inspection shown in Fig. 6(d) incorporates different checking criteria that

Fig. 6. The C2V-based node-wise probability tracers considered in this paper. (a) Baseline design; (b) Proposed design with an inspection unit; (C) Basic inspection unit; (d) Tight inspection unit; (e) Probability tracer with channel messages.
Fig. 7. BER performance for the proposed (2048, 1723) decoder when considering different probability tracers, where the maximum DC value is 500.
consider the output to be a reliable bit when both the degree-3 subunits are in the non-hold state.
Fig. 7 shows the BER performance for the (2048, 1723) code when using different probability tracers, and Fig. 8 shows the average number of DCs (ADCs). The “basic” inspection method produces the best BER performance, which is better than the baseline tracer by about half an order when the SNR is 4.5 dB. It is worth noting that the baseline tracer does not include an inspection unit. As shown in Fig. 8, the “basic” inspection method requires a similar number of ADCs as the baseline

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: EFFICIENT COMBINED BIT-FLIPPING AND STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER USING IMPROVED PROBABILITY TRACERS

5373

Fig. 8. ADC for the proposed (2048, 1723) decoder when considering different probability tracers, where the maximum DC value is 500.

Fig. 10. Extracted output probability for an incorrect VN, where two of the C2V messages and the channel message have a probability of 0.2, and the other four C2V messages have a probability of 0.8.

Fig. 9. Extracted output probability for a correct VN, where three of the C2V messages and the channel message have a probability of 0.8, and the other three C2V messages have a probability of 0.2.
tracer. The “tight” inspection method requires a greater number of ADCs since the checking criteria are too strict and, hence, it is less likely that the probability tracer will change values. Consequently, this approach restricts the switching activity for the VN, and results in a worse performance. Now we consider replacing the degree-2 subunit with a degree-3 subunit, where the additional input is from channel messages, i.e., γn , as shown in Fig. 6(e). It can also be observed that including the channel message γn in the basic inspection method is not able to improve the BER and ADC performance. As a result, the basic inspection technique that does not include γn is used for the proposed probability tracer.
Figs. 9 and 10 show the behaviors for a degree-6 VN module, where different probability tracers are considered. The value for the correct bit corresponding to this VN is assumed to be 1. Fig. 9 considers the condition where three C2V messages and the channel message have a probability of 0.8, and three C2V messages have a probability of 0.2. In this case, the hard decision for the channel message is correct. It can be observed that the “tight” inspection method produces the weakest output

probability compared to other methods. In Fig. 10, the condition where two C2V messages and the channel message have a probability of 0.2, and four C2V messages have a probability of 0.8 is considered. In this case, the hard decision for the channel message is incorrect. It can be observed that the “basic” inspection method produces a better performance compared to the baseline tracer. The output probability for both the “tight” inspection method and the “basic” inspection method that include a channel message is weak throughout the entire decoding processing.
For other LDPC codes, variable nodes having degrees lower and higher than 6 are possible. The proposed probability tracers for degree-2 and degree-3 VNs can be easily designed by adding a counter-based storage module to the degree-2 and degree-3 subunits shown in Fig. 3. It is worth noting that the 64-bit EM used in the degree-2 subunit is replaced with a 2-bit IM in the proposed degree-2 probability tracer. For VNs having degree higher than 3, the proposed probability tracers can be build in a manner similar to the degree-6 case shown in Fig. 6(b), where an inspection unit and several degree-2 and degree-3 subunits are used. For example, the proposed degree-7 probability tracer consists of a degree-3 subunit, a degree-4 subunit constructed using three degree-2 subunits, a degree-2 subunit used to check results from the degree-3 and degree-4 subunits, a counter-based storage module, and an inspection unit. Based on our investigation, the basic inspection method provides a better performance compared to other methods considered in this paper.
Although the C2V messages are also used in the LLR-domain tracking filter implemented in the RHS decoder presented in [27] and [33], there are several difference between this work and the previous RHS decoder. Firstly, the proposed C2V-based nodewise probability tracer is used to mitigate the issues related to the hold state encountered in stochastic decoders. In contrast, there are no hold-state issues encountered in the RHS decoder since its VNU is LLR based. The LLR-domain tracking filter is used to convert the stochastic messages to LLR messages that will be used in the LLR-based VNU. Secondly, the realizations of the proposed probability tracer and the LLR-domain tracking filter

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5374

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 65, NO. 20, OCTOBER 15, 2017
TABLE II AN OVERVIEW OF THE PROPOSED SHARED DEGREE-3 SUBUNITS

Fig. 11. The proposed C2V-based posterior tracer.

are totally different. Finally, the proposed probability tracer is node-based while the LLR-domain tracking filter is edge-based. This means that for a single degree-dv VN, dv LLR-domain tracking filters are required in the RHS decoder while only a single node-wise probability tracer is required for the proposed decoder.
In [20], the posterior tracer is implemented using a counter and is used to trace the a posteriori message using the sum of the V2C messages. The proposed posterior tracer records posterior information according to (5). Although both the proposed probability tracer and posterior tracer are designed based on (5), the implementation architecture is different. Fig. 11 depicts the proposed posterior tracer, where the hard-decision unit records the posterior result based on the state bit from the degree-2 subunit. Compared to the proposed probability tracer shown in Fig. 6(b), the proposed posterior tracer can be implemented using a lower-complexity architecture. The reason is that the values for the messages and the posterior information are more stable at the end of the decoding process. Consequently, a counter used in [20] is replaced with a Delay flip-flop (DFF) to record the posterior information. The reason for using the same formula (5) is that the proposed posterior tracer can be combined with the proposed probability tracer. The proposed posterior tracer has another advantage in that the speed of convergence is faster compared to that of a counter-based implementation. For example, if the correct value for a bit is 1, convergence occurs when the counter value of the last error bit changes from a negative number to a positive number. However, the counter-based implementation requires several DCs in order to achieve this. If a larger-sized counter is used, additional DCs will be required. This situation will not occur for the proposed posterior tracer.
B. Low-Complexity VNU Based on Shared Subunits and Memory
A degree-6 VNU is comprised of six VN computation units, a probability tracer and a posterior tracer and, hence, sixteen degree-3 subunits and eight degree-2 subunits are required. It can be observed from Table II that the inputs for several of the degree-3 subunits are the same. As a result, these sixteen degree3 subunits can be divided into eight groups based on the inputs. Therefore, the degree-3 subunits can be shared by the six VN computation units and the two tracers if the inputs are the same. Consequently, only eight degree-3 subunits are required for a degree-6 VN and, hence, the area can be significantly reduced. Fig. 12 shows the architecture for the proposed VNU.

Fig. 12. Block diagram for the proposed degree-6 VNU.
In addition to the shared degree-3 subunits, the proposed architecture also shares the IM. The degree-3 subunit 7 has the inputs β4 , β5 , β6 , and the IM of degree-3 subunit 7 can be thought as a subset of IMs in degree-3 subunits 4, 5 and 6. The reason is that the IMs of subunits 4, 5 and 6 are constructed using β4, β5, β6 and γ. Therefore, subunit 7 is able to use the result from the IMs of subunits 4, 5 and 6. In the implementation, degree-3 subunit 7 randomly selects a bit from the IMs of subunits 4, 5, 6 based on a random value, and the IM of degree-3 subunit 7 is replaced with two MUXs. The architecture for degree-3 subunit 8 is the same as that of degree-3 subunit 7.
The proposed sharing method is different from the method proposed in [23], in that the proposed architecture combines both the proposed probability tracer and posterior tracer with the VN computation units. These two tracers also introduce an area cost, but it should be minimal. Based on the proposed sharing method, the implementation of these tracers requires the addition of only an inspection unit, a hard-decision unit,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: EFFICIENT COMBINED BIT-FLIPPING AND STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER USING IMPROVED PROBABILITY TRACERS

5375

Fig. 14. BER performance when using the BF decoder for either the postprocessing tasks or as a parallel decoder, where the maximum DC value is 500 and tb = 3.

Fig. 13. The decoding flow for the proposed decoder.

and a storage module, as shown in Fig. 12. Consequently, the additional overhead is small compared to the entire VNU.

C. A Combined Stochastic Decoder With Improved Convergence Speed
Stochastic decoding requires additional DCs due to the characteristic of the Bernoulli streams, especially when the number of bit errors is less than a certain threshold. Therefore, the decoder latency is generally greater than that for an MSA-based decoder. The authors of [24] used the BF decoder presented in [1] as a post-processing technique, and the resultant decoder converges quickly. However, the BER performance is restricted by the performance of the BF decoding process. It can also be found that there is an error floor when using this method. In order to reduce the latency and improve the BER performance, we propose using the BF decoder in a different manner.
The proposed decoder contains two modes, the normal decoding mode and the parallel decoding mode. Initially, the stochastic decoder performs the decoding operations alone, which means that the normal decoding mode is in effect. The number of unsatisfied CNs denoted as Nu is calculated for each DC. Then Nu is used as an indicator to enable the BF decoder. Let T1 , T2 , T3 , · · · , where T1 > T2 > · · · , are the presetting thresholds. If Nu < T1 , then the decoding will be switched to the parallel decoding mode. This means that both the stochastic decoder and the BF decoder execute decoding operation in parallel in this mode. The BF decoder will be initialized using the hard-decision vector obtained from the stochastic decoder in the previous normal decoding mode and enabled for tb DCs. It is worth noting that the stochastic decoding process is continued while the hard-decision vector from the BF decoder is

Fig. 15. ADC performance when using the BF decoder for the post-processing tasks or as a parallel decoder, where the maximum DC value is 500 and tb = 3.
used as an early-termination check. If all the parity-check constraints are satisfied at any point during this mode, the decoding process will be terminated. Otherwise, the decoding results from the BF decoder are ignored and the BF decoding process is halted while the normal stochastic decoding process is continued. If Nu < T2 , then the decoding will be switched to the parallel decoding mode again and the BF decoder will be re-enabled for tb DCs. If all the parity-check constraints are satisfied at any point while this mode is in effect, the decoding process will be terminated. Otherwise, the normal stochastic decoding process is continued, while the BF decoding process is halted. The same procedure can be repeated L times. The decoding flow of the proposed combined decoder is shown in Fig. 13.
Fig. 14 shows the related BER performance. It is obvious that using the BF decoder as proposed is better compared to using it for the post-processing. The performance of the proposed BFassistant stochastic decoder is almost the same as that of the original stochastic decoder, which does not include the BF decoder. In addition, the performance when using L = 3 is similar

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5376

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 65, NO. 20, OCTOBER 15, 2017

Fig. 16. Block diagram for the proposed decoder architecture.

to the performance when using L = 1. Fig. 15 shows the associated ADC performance. When the SNR is 3.7 dB and L = 1, the proposed decoder requires 11% fewer ADCs than the decoder where BF-based post-processing is used. As expected, the proposed decoder where L = 1 requires slightly fewer ADCs compared to when L = 3. Consequently, L = 1 is adopted for the proposed decoder implementation.
D. Overall Decoder Architecture
Fig. 16 shows the architecture for the proposed decoder, where the scaling method proposed in [20] is used in order to enhance the switching activity. In the implementation, a look-up table (LUT) is used in order to realize the scaling method and the LLR-to-probability transformation. The scaled probabilities are stored in the channel probability registers. The size of the LUT is determined based on the number of quantization bits used for the channel values and the probabilities. The random number generator (RNG) is responsible for providing a random number for the channel bit generator and the VNUs, and the decoder contains 32 independent RNGs. Each RNG generates the required random numbers for a portion of the decoding Tanner graph and consists of only two 11-bit linear feedback shift registers (LFSRs). As used in [20], the channel bit generators can produce Bernoulli streams to the VNUs, where the channel probability is compared with the random number. Each VNU consists of a shared VN computation unit, a hard decision unit, a counter-based storage module, and six multiplexers. The CNU is the same as that shown in Fig. 1(a). In parallel decoding mode, both the stochastic and the BF decoder are operating, and the hard decision unit uses the results from the BF decoder. The BF decoder employs the original BF algorithm presented in [1] and consists of check-sum units and flipping units. The flipping units are used to determine the flipping locations and can be implemented using adders and comparators. A check-sum unit can be implemented using a single 32-input XOR gate. The outputs from the check-sum units are used to check both the termination criteria in the early termination unit and the flipping criteria

in the flipping units of the BF decoder. The early termination unit terminates the decoding process when there are no unsatisfied CNs, or when the decoding process reaches the maximum number of DCs. It is worth noting that the check-sum units are shared by both the BF decoder and the stochastic decoder, as shown in Fig. 16.
To attain a higher operating frequency, the stochastic decoders presented in [22] and [23] include pipelines between the VNUs and the CNUs. This approach can be implemented to enhance the throughput. Based on the stochastic properties of Bernoulli streams, the pipelined architecture produces a similar BER performance. As a result, the critical path in the MTFMbased decoder passes through the VN computation block and the MTFM-based probability tracer, resulting in a maximum clock frequency of 500 MHz. The critical path for the decoder proposed in [23] is quite long as it passes through both the shared VN computation unit and the 6-input counter computation unit. Compared to the VNUs proposed in [22] and [23], the critical path for the proposed decoder is shorter, and is 1.6 ns. To achieve an even shorter path, a pipeline is created in the proposed architecture between the shared VN computation unit and the storage module of the probability tracer as shown in Fig. 16. The hard-decision bit and the tracer recording bit are the same when degree-2 subunit 7 is in the non-hold state. The proposed pipelined architecture uses the hard-decision bit as the recorded bit and, hence, an additional pipeline register for the recorded bit is not required. This approach ensures that the proposed architecture only needs a single DFF in order to realize the pipeline register, meaning that the area cost is much less compared to other methods. With the pipeline between the VN computation unit and the probability tracer, about 12 additional registers are required in order to realize an MTFM-based decoder, because the recording mechanism needs information related to all of the states and the generated outputs, which is 12 bits. As a result, the frequency for the proposed architecture can be enhanced to 749 MHz, thereby providing a higher throughput compared to the MTFM method.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: EFFICIENT COMBINED BIT-FLIPPING AND STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER USING IMPROVED PROBABILITY TRACERS

5377

Fig. 17. BER performance for the proposed architecture using a different number of quantization bits, where the maximum DC value is 500.

Fig. 19. The chip layout.
TABLE III CHIP SUMMARY

Fig. 18. ADC for the proposed architecture using a different number of quantization bits, where the maximum DC value is 500.

IV. PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
A. Implementation Results
The proposed techniques are demonstrated by implementing a (2048, 1723) LDPC decoder. Fig. 17 shows the BER performance for the proposed stochastic decoder and the NMSA-based decoder based on a different number of quantization bits. It can be seen that the proposed decoder achieves a similar BER performance compared to the 6-bit fixed-point NMSA decoder. The BER performance for the 7-bit quantization scheme is a little better than for the 5-bit and 6-bit quantization schemes. In addition, the ADC performance is also better, as shown in Fig. 18. Because there is only a small cost due to the overhead introduced by the LUT, an increase in area of about 0.003%, the proposed decoder is implemented based on 7-bit quantized channel values.
The proposed decoder was synthesized using 90 nm technology. Based on the result of placement and routing using Cadence SOC Encounter tool, where a utilization of 95% was achieved.

A plot of the layout for the overall chip is shown in Fig. 19, and details of the decoder performance are summarized in Table III. A total of 1460 K logic gate are integrated in the proposed stochastic LDPC decoder in an area of 4.12 mm2 and achieves a coded throughput of 39.3 Gbps at a clock frequency of 749 MHz with a power consumption of 1340 mW.
Fig. 20 shows the progressive improvements in area and throughput-to-area ratio (TAR) performance for each of the proposed technologies, where the MTFM-based decoder is used as the base line. The use of the proposed probability tracer reduces the required area by about 25.5% and enables the critical path to be shortened by about 20%. As a result, the TAR is increased by about 67.6%. The shared method reduces the required area by about 14.5%. Because of the smaller area and the same throughput, the TAR is consequently increased by about 39.1%. To reduce the number of DCs, the proposed decoder uses the BF-based decoder as an assistant decoder, meaning that the area is increased by about 4.4%. However, thanks to the reduced ADC, the TAR can be increased by about 9%. As a result, the area required by the proposed decoder is reduced by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 65, NO. 20, OCTOBER 15, 2017

Fig. 20. Progressive improvements in area and TAR performance for each proposed technology, where the MTFM-based decoder is used as the base line.

Fig. 22. BER performance in the error-floor region for the proposed decoder in comparison with the BER performance reported for the other decoders.

Fig. 21. BER performance in the waterfall region for the proposed decoder in Fig. 23. ADC for the proposed decoder in comparison with the ADC recorded

comparison with the BER performance reported for the other decoders.

for the other decoders.

35.4% while increasing the TAR by 115.7% compared to the MTFM-based decoder.
B. Comparison
Fig. 21 shows the BER performance in the waterfall region for the proposed decoder, where the BER results for the decoders proposed in [13], [22]–[25], and [33] are also included for comparison. The error-rate performance for the proposed decoder is comparable to the MTFM-based decoder [22], the normalized probabilistic MSA (NPMSA) decoder [13] and the RHS decoder [33]. Compared to the decoder investigated in [24], the proposed decoder has a lower BER since it is less likely to become trapped in the BF decoder. Compared to the DS decoder, the performance of the proposed decoder is about two orders better, meaning that a stochastic decoder still requires probability tracers in order to achieve a better BER performance.
Now we consider the BER performance in the error-floor region. In [22], an MTFM-based decoder either with or without

post-processing was investigated. It can be seen from Fig. 22 that the error-floor performance for the MTFM-based decoder can be improved by using post-processing. The proposed decoder can achieve a BER of 4.97 × 10−11 . In a manner similar to that used in [22], the error-floor performance can be improved if either the post-processing technique presented in [11] or other errorfloor lowering techniques [34], [35] are used. Fig. 23 shows the ADC results for the proposed decoder and the other stochastic decoders. From the figure, it can be seen that the ADC results for the proposed architecture is similar to those of the decoder proposed in [24]. Compared to those of the MTFM- and DS-based decoders, the ADC results for the proposed decoder indicate a similar ADC performance in the high-SNR region and shows an improvement in the low SNR region.
Table IV shows a detailed comparison for the different decoder implementations. Considering the effect of technology, a normalized TAR is shown in the table. Compared to the MTFMbased decoder, the proposed decoder achieves a comparable BER performance and a much better TAR. Compared to the RHS-based decoder, the proposed decoder has a better TAR and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

UENG et al.: EFFICIENT COMBINED BIT-FLIPPING AND STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER USING IMPROVED PROBABILITY TRACERS
TABLE IV COMPARISON TABLE

5379

a similar BER performance. Compared to the DS decoder, the proposed decoder still achieves a better TAR and a much better BER performance. Compared to the NPMSA-based decoder, the proposed decoder achieves a similar BER performance and an improved TAR.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper has presented a stochastic LDPC decoder architecture that includes the proposed C2V-based node-wise probability tracer. The proposed probability tracer enables the decoder to achieve a better BER performance and a higher operating frequency. We have also presented a low-complexity VNU based on shared subunits and internal memory. With the assistance of a BF decoder, the proposed decoder is able to reduce the number of DCs. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed decoder achieves the best normalized TAR among the stochastic decoders reported in the open literature.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank National Chip Implementation Center (CIC), Taiwan, for technology support.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] IEEE Standard for Information Technology-Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems-Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Specific Requirements Part 3: Carrier Sense Multiple Access With Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications, IEEE Standard 802.3an-2006 (Amendment to IEEE Standard 802.3-2005), 2006, pp. 1–167.
[3] Draft Standard for Information Technology–Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems–Local and Metropolitan Area Networks–Specific Requirements Part 3: Carrier Sense Multiple Access With Collision Detection (CSMA/CD) Access Method and Physical Layer Specifications Amendment: Media Access Control Parameters, Physical Layers and Management Parameters for 40 Gb/s and 100 Gb/s Operation, IEEE Unapproved Draft Standard P802.3ba/D2.1, May 2009.

[4] IEEE Standard for Conformance to IEEE 802.16 – Part 1: Protocol Implementation Conformance Statement (PICS) Proforma for 10–66 GHz WirelessMAN-SC Air Interface, IEEE Standard 802.16/Conformance012003, Aug. 2003, pp. 1–148.
[5] IEEE Standard for Information Technology–Telecommunications and Information Exchange Between Systems-Local and Metropolitan Area Networks-Specific Requirements—Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Standard 802.11-1997, 1997, pp. 1–445.
[6] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved BPbased decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[7] I. Djurdjevic, J. Xu, K. Abdel-Ghaffar, and S. Lin, “A class of low-density parity-check codes constructed based on Reed-Solomon codes with two information symbols,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 7, pp. 317–319, Jul. 2003.
[8] L. Liu and C. J. R. Shi, “Sliced message passing: High throughput overlapped decoding of high-rate low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 55, no. 11, pp. 3697–3710, Dec. 2008.
[9] J. Sha, J. Lin, Z. Wang, L. Li, and M. Gao, “Decoder design for RS-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 56, no. 9, pp. 724–728, Sep. 2009.
[10] Y. L. Ueng, C. J. Yang, K. C. Wang, and C. J. Chen, “A multimode shuffled iterative decoder architecture for high-rate RS-LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2790–2803, Oct. 2010.
[11] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “An efficient 10GBASE-T Ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[12] T. Mohsenin, D. N. Truong, and B. M. Baas, “A low-complexity messagepassing algorithm for reduced routing congestion in LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1048–1061, May 2010.
[13] C. C. Cheng, J. D. Yang, H. C. Lee, C. H. Yang, and Y. L. Ueng, “A fully parallel LDPC decoder architecture using probabilistic min-sum algorithm for high-throughput applications,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 61, no. 9, pp. 2738–2746, Sep. 2014.
[14] B. Gaines, Advances in Information Systems Science. New York, NY, USA: Plenum, 1969, ch. 2, pp. 37–172.
[15] V. C. Gaudet and A. C. Rapley, “Iterative decoding using stochastic computation,” Electron. Lett., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 299–301, Feb. 2003.
[16] W. J. Gross, V. C. Gaudet, and A. Milner, “Stochastic implementation of LDPC decoders,” in Proc. Conf. Rec. 39th Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst. Comput., Oct. 2005, pp. 713–717.
[17] C. Winstead, V. C. Gaudet, A. Rapley, and C. Schlegel, “Stochastic iterative decoders,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Sep. 2005, pp. 1116–1120.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 65, NO. 20, OCTOBER 15, 2017

[18] S. S. Tehrani, W. J. Gross, and S. Mannor, “Stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 716–718, Oct. 2006.
[19] S. S. Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “An area-efficient FPGA-based architecture for fully-parallel stochastic LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Oct. 2007, pp. 255–260.
[20] S. S. Tehrani, W. J. Gross, and S. Mannor, “Fully parallel stochastic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 5692–5703, Nov. 2008.
[21] S. S. Tehrani, A. Naderi, G. A. Kamendje, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Tracking forecast memories in stochastic decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech Signal Process., Apr. 2009, pp. 561–564.
[22] S. S. Tehrani, A. Naderi, G. A. Kamendje, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Majority-based tracking forecast memories for stochastic LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 4883–4896, Sep. 2010.
[23] Q. Zhang, Y. Chen, D. Wu, X. Zeng, and Y. L. Ueng, “An area-efficient architecture for stochastic LDPC decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Digital Signal Process., Jul. 2015, pp. 244–247.
[24] D. Wu, Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, Y. L. Ueng, and X. Zeng, “Strategies for reducing decoding cycles in stochastic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 63, no. 9, pp. 873–877, Sep. 2016.
[25] A. Naderi, S. Mannor, M. Sawan, and W. J. Gross, “Delayed stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 5617–5626, Nov. 2011.
[26] 3GPP document, “LDPC codes for the enhanced mobile broadband (eMBB) data channel in the 3GPP 5G new radio.” [Online]. Available: http://www.3gpp.org/ftp/tsg_ran/WG1_RL1/TSGR1_88/Report/
[27] F. Leduc-Primeau, S. Hemati, Shie Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Relaxed half-stochastic belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 1648–1659, May 2013.
[28] G. Sarkis, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Stochastic decoding of LDPC codes over GF(q),” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 939–950, Mar. 2013.
[29] A. Ciobanu, S. Hemati, and W. J. Gross, “Adaptive multiset stochastic decoding of non-binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 61, no. 16, pp. 4100–4113, Aug. 2013.
[30] X. Zuo, I. Perez-Andrade, R. G. Maunder, B. M. Al-Hashimi, and L. Hanzo, “Improving the tolerance of stochastic LDPC decoders to overclocking-induced timing errors: A tutorial and a design example,” IEEE Access, vol. 4, pp. 1607–1629, 2016.
[31] K. Cushon, C. Leroux, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “A Min-Sum iterative decoder based on pulsewidth message encoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 893–897, Nov. 2010.
[32] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “Power reduction techniques for LDPC decoders,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 8, pp. 1835–1845, Aug. 2008.
[33] F. Leduc-Primeau, A. J. Raymond, P. Giard, K. Cushon, C. Thibeault, and W. J. Gross, “High-throughput LDPC decoding using the RHS algorithm,” in Proc. Conf. Design Arch. Signal Image Process., Karlsruhe, Germany, 2012, pp. 1–6.
[34] J. Kang, Q. Huang, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “An iterative decoding algorithm with backtracking to lower the error-floors of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 64–73, Jan. 2011.

[35] X. Chen, J. Kang, S. Lin, and V. Akella, “Hardware implementation of a backtracking-based reconfigurable decoder for lowering the error floor of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 2931–2943, Dec. 2011.
[36] M.-R. Li, C.-H. Yang, and Y.-L. Ueng, “A 5.28-Gb/s LDPC decoder with time-domain signal processing for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 592–604, Feb. 2017.
Yeong-Luh Ueng (M’05–SM’15) received the Ph.D. degree in communication engineering from the National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, in 2001. From 2001 to 2005, he was in the Private Communication Technology Company, where he focused on the design and development of various wireless chips. Since December 2005, he has been a member of the faculty at the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, where he is currently a Full Professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and the Institute of Communications Engineering. In 2016, he received the Wu Ta-You Memorial Award from the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST). His research interests include coding theory, wireless communications, and communication ICs.
Chun-Yi Wang received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2014 and 2016, respectively. He is currently a Research and Development (R&D) Engineer in Phison, Hsinchu, Taiwan. His research interests include channel coding and VLSI designs for channel coding.
Mao-Ruei Li (S’17) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2011 and 2013, respectively. He is currently working toward the Doctoral degree in the Department of Electrical Engineering, National Tsing Hua University. His research interests include channel coding, VLSI designs for channel coding, and mixed-signal VLSI design.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

