Scaling Deep Learning-based Decoding of Polar
Codes via Partitioning
Sebastian Cammerer∗, Tobias Gruber∗, Jakob Hoydis†, and Stephan ten Brink∗
∗Institute of Telecommunications, Pfaffenwaldring 47, University of Stuttgart, 70659 Stuttgart, Germany
{cammerer,gruber,tenbrink}@inue.uni-stuttgart.de
†Nokia Bell Labs, Route de Villejust, 91620 Nozay, France
jakob.hoydis@nokia-bell-labs.com
Abstract—The training complexity of deep learning-based
channel decoders scales exponentially with the codebook size
and therefore with the number of information bits. Thus, neural
network decoding (NND) is currently only feasible for very
short block lengths. In this work, we show that the conventional
iterative decoding algorithm for polar codes can be enhanced
when sub-blocks of the decoder are replaced by neural network
(NN) based components. Thus, we partition the encoding graph
into smaller sub-blocks and train them individually, closely
approaching maximum a posteriori (MAP) performance per
sub-block. These blocks are then connected via the remaining
conventional belief propagation decoding stage(s). The resulting
decoding algorithm is non-iterative and inherently enables a high-
level of parallelization, while showing a competitive bit error
rate (BER) performance. We examine the degradation through
partitioning and compare the resulting decoder to state-of-the-
art polar decoders such as successive cancellation list and belief
propagation decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
Non-iterative and consequently low-latency decoding toget-
her with close to maximum a posteriori (MAP) decoding per-
formance are two advantages of deep learning-based channel
decoding. However, this concept is mainly restricted by its
limited scalability in terms of the supported block lengths,
known as curse of dimensionality [1]. For 𝑘information bits,
the neural network (NN) needs to distinguish between 2𝑘
different codewords, which results in an exponential training
complexity in case that the full codebook needs to be learned.
In this work we focus on NN decoding of polar codes and
show that the scalability can be significantly improved towards
practical lengths when the NN only replaces sub-components
of the current decoding algorithm.
List decoding [2] with manageable list sizes and excellent
bit error rate (BER) performance for short block lengths makes
polar codes [3] a potential candidate for future communication
standards such as the upcoming 5G standard or internet
of things (IoT) applications. As polar codes are currently
proposed for the 5G control channel [4], decoding algorithms
for very short block lengths are of practical importance [5].
Besides that, the rate can be completely flexible adjusted
with a single-bit granularity. However, the price to pay is an
inherently serial decoding algorithm which is in general hard
to accelerate, e.g., through parallel processing [6]. This leads
to high decoding latency when compared to state-of-the-art
low density parity check (LDPC) codes/decoders [7]. Thus,
there is a demand for alternative decoding strategies. Besides
algorithmic optimizations [7] of the existing algorithms, mo-
difying the code structure [8] can be considered to overcome
this issue. However, once standardized, the encoder cannot be
changed. In this work, we propose an alternative approach by
applying machine learning techniques to find an alternative
decoding algorithm instead of changing the code structure.
Once trained, the final decoding algorithm (i.e., the weights
of a deep neural network) itself is static and can be efficiently
implemented and parallelized on a graphical processing unit
(GPU), field programmable gate array (FPGA), or application-
specific integrated circuit (ASIC).
A first investigation of the topic learning to decode was
already done in [1]. The authors showed that the main dif-
ficulty lies within the curse of dimensionality meaning that
for 𝑘information bits 2𝑘classes exist, leading to exponential
complexity during the training phase. In other applications,
such as computer vision, the number of possible output classes
is typically limited, e.g., to the number of different objects. In
contrast to many other machine learning fields, an unlimited
amount of labeled training data is available, since the encoding
function and the channel model are well known. Additionally,
a clear benchmark with existing decoders is possible. Although
very powerful machine learning libraries such as Theano [9]
and Tensorflow [10] are available nowadays and the computa-
tion power increased by order of magnitudes, the exponential
complexity still hinders straight-forward learning of practical
code lengths as shown in [11]. It was observed in [11], that
there is a certain generalization of NN decoding, meaning that
the NN can infer from certain codewords to others it has never
seen before. This is essential for learning longer codes and
gives hope that neural network decoding (NND) can be scaled
to longer codes. However, to the best of our knowledge, the
naive approach of learning to decode only works for rather
small block lengths.
The authors in [12] proposed the idea of using machine
learning techniques to train the weights of a belief propagation
factor graph in order to improve its decoding performance for
high density parity check (HDPC) codes. As the Tanner graph
is already given initially and only its weights are refined, their
approach scales very well for larger block lengths and does
not suffer from the curse of dimensionality. However, in this
case, the use of machine learning refines an existing solution.
978-1-5090-5019-2/17/$31.00 ©2017 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The decoding algorithm itself is not learned, since the iterative
nature of the BP algorithm is kept.
In our work, we tackle the problem of completely replacing
the polar code decoder by a machine learning approach. As
it turns out, only small codeword lengths can be trained
efficiently, and thus we divide the polar encoding graph
into several sub-graphs (cf. [13]). We learn sub-block wise
decoding and couple the components by conventional belief
propagation (BP) stages. This scales the results from [11]
towards practical block lengths.
II. POLAR CODES
An encoder for polar codes maps the 𝑘information bits
onto the 𝑘most reliable bit positions of the vector u of length
𝑁, denoted as information set 𝔸, while the remaining 𝑁−𝑘
positions are treated as frozen positions. These frozen positions
are denoted as ¯𝔸and must be known at the decoder side.
Now the input block u is encoded according to x = u ⋅G𝑁,
where G = F⊗𝑛is the generator matrix and F⊗𝑛denotes the
𝑛𝑡ℎKronecker power of the kernel F = [ 1 0
1 1 ]. The resulting
encoding circuit is depicted in Fig. 1 for 𝑁= 8, which also
defines the decoding graph. This factor graph consists of
𝑛+ 1 = log2(𝑁) + 1 stages, each consisting of 𝑁nodes.
The BER performance of a polar code highly depends on
the type of decoder used and has been one of the most exciting
and active areas of research related to polar coding. There are
two main algorithmic avenues to tackle the polar decoding
problem:
1) successive cancellation-based decoding, following a se-
rial “channel layer unwrapping” decoding strategy [3],
2) belief propagation-based decoding based on Gallager’s
BP iterative algorithm [14].
Throughout this work, we stick with the BP decoder as its
structure is a better match to neural networks and enables
parallel processing. For details about successive cancellation
(SC) decoding and its list extension called successive cancel-
lation list (SCL) decoding, we refer the interested reader to [2]
and [3]. The BP decoder describes an iterative message passing
algorithm with soft-values, i.e., log likelihood ratio (LLR)
values over the encoding graph. For the sake of simplicity,
we assume binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation and
an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. However,
other channels can be implemented straightforwardly. For a
received value 𝑦, it holds that
𝐿𝐿𝑅(𝑦) = ln
(𝑃(𝑥= 0∣𝑦)
𝑃(𝑥= 1∣𝑦)
)
= 2
𝜎2 𝑦
where 𝜎2 is the noise variance. There are two types of LLR
messages: the right-to-left messages (L-messages) and the left-
to-right messages (R-messages). One BP iteration consists of
two update propagations:
1) Left-to-right propagation: The R-messages are updated
starting from the leftmost stage (i.e., the stage of a priori
information) until reaching the rightmost stage.
𝑢6
𝑢7
𝑢4
𝑢5
u𝑁
x𝑁
𝑢2
𝑢3
𝑢0
𝑢1
𝑥4
𝑥0
𝑥5
𝑥1
𝑥6
𝑥2
𝑥7
𝑥3
Fig. 1: Polar Encoding circuit for 𝑁= 8; blue boxes indicate
the independent partitions of the code for 𝑀= 2 and green
boxes for 𝑀= 4.
2) Right-to-left propagation: The L-messages are updated
starting from the rightmost stage (i.e., the stage of
channel information) until reaching the leftmost stage.
The output from two nodes becomes the input to a specific
neighboring processing element (PE) (for more details we refer
to [15]). One PE updates the L- and R-messages as follows
[15]:
𝐿𝑜𝑢𝑡,1 =
𝑓(𝐿𝑖𝑛,1, 𝐿𝑖𝑛,2 + 𝑅𝑖𝑛,2)
𝑅𝑜𝑢𝑡,1 =
𝑓(𝑅𝑖𝑛,1, 𝐿𝑖𝑛,2 + 𝑅𝑖𝑛,2)
𝐿𝑜𝑢𝑡,2 =
𝑓(𝑅𝑖𝑛,1, 𝐿𝑖𝑛,1) + 𝐿𝑖𝑛,2
𝑅𝑜𝑢𝑡,2 =
𝑓(𝑅𝑖𝑛,1, 𝐿𝑖𝑛,1) + 𝑅𝑖𝑛,2
(1)
where
𝑓(𝑎, 𝑏) = ln
(1 + 𝑒𝑎+𝑏
𝑒𝑎+ 𝑒𝑏
)
.
For initialization, all messages are set to zero, except for the
first and last stage, where
𝐿𝑖,𝑛+1 = 𝐿𝑖,𝑐ℎ, and
𝑅𝑖,1 =
{
𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥
∀𝑖∈¯𝔸
0
else
(2)
with L𝑚𝑎𝑥denoting the clipping value of the decoder (in
theory: 𝐿𝑚𝑎𝑥→∞), as all values within the simulation
are clipped to be within (−L𝑚𝑎𝑥, L𝑚𝑎𝑥). This prevents from
experiencing numerical instabilities.
A. Partitionable Codes
As opposed to other random-like channel codes with close-
to-capacity performance, polar codes exhibit a very regu-
lar (algebraic) structure. It is instructive to realize that the
encoding graph, as visualized in Fig. 1 for 𝑁= 8, can
be partitioned into independent sub-graphs [13], [16], i.e.,
there is no interconnection in the first log2(𝑁𝑝) stages, where
𝑁𝑝denotes the number of bits per sub-block. We define a
partitionable code in a sense that each sub-block can be
decoded independently (i.e., no interconnections within the
same stage exist; leading to a tree like factor graph). This
algorithm can be adopted to all partitionable codes and is
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
not necessarily limited to polar codes. Each sub-graph (in
the following called sub-block) is now coupled with the other
sub-blocks only via the remaining polar stages as depicted in
Fig. 1. In order to simplify polar decoding, several sub-blocks
𝐵𝑖can now be decoded on a per-sub-block basis [13]. The
set of frozen bit positions ¯𝔸need to be split into sub-sets ¯𝔸𝑖
corresponding to the sub-blocks 𝐵𝑖(with information vector
u𝑖) and, thus, each sub-block might show a different code rate.
In a more abstract view, we follow the spirit of [17]. Their
simplified successive cancellation (SSC) algorithm partitions
the decoding tree into single-parity checks (SPC) and repeti-
tion codes (RC). This turns out to be a very efficient way
of improving the overall throughput, as the SPC and RC
sub-decoders can be efficiently implemented. Our approach
replaces these partitions by NNs.
B. Deep-Learning for Channel Coding
For the fundamentals of deep learning, we refer the reader
to [18]. However, for the sake of terminology, we provide
a brief overview on the topic of machine learning. For a
more detailed explanation how to train the sub-block NND we
refer to [11]. A comprehensive analysis of the corresponding
training complexity is given in [11]. Feedforward NNs consist
of many connected neurons which are arranged in 𝐿layers
without feedback connections. The output 𝑦of each neuron
depends on its weighted inputs 𝜃𝑖𝑥𝑖and its activation function
g, given by
𝑦= g
(∑
𝑖
𝜃𝑖𝑥𝑖+ 𝜃0
)
.
(3)
The whole network composes together many different functi-
ons f (𝑙) of each layer 𝑙and describes an input-output mapping
w = f (v; Θ) = f (𝐿−1) (
f (𝐿−2) (
. . .
(
f (0) (v)
)))
(4)
where v, w and Θ denote the input vector, output vector
and the weights of the NN, respectively. It was shown in
[19] that such a multi-layer NN with 𝐿= 2 and nonlinear
activation functions can theoretically approximate any conti-
nuous function on a bounded region arbitrarily closely—if the
number of neurons is large enough. A training set of known
input-output mappings is required in order to find the weights
Θ of the NN with gradient descent optimization methods and
the backpropagation algorithm [20]. After training, the NN is
able to find the right output even for unknown inputs which
is called generalization.
As described in [11], we use a feed-forward deep NN that
can learn to map a noisy version of the codeword to its
corresponding information bits. Each hidden layer employs
rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation functions and the final
stage is realized with a sigmoid activation function [18] in
order to obtain output values in between zero and one giving
the probability that the output bit is “1”. In order to keep the
training set small, we extend the decoder NN with additional
layers which model an abstract channel [11], i.e., a training set
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
# information bits 𝑘
gap to MAP perf. [dB]
𝑁= 32
𝑁= 64
Fig. 2: Scalability shown by the gap to MAP performance
in dB at BER = 0.01 for 32/64 bit-length polar codes with
different code rates for fixed learning epoches.
containing every codeword is sufficient to train with as much
training samples as desired.
It was shown in [11], that it is possible to decode polar
codes with MAP performance for small block lengths. The
BER performance gap between a NND and MAP decoding is
shown in Fig. 2. It illustrates that learning to decode is limited
through exponential complexity as the number of information
bits in the codewords increases.
III. PARTITIONED POLAR NEURAL NETWORK DECODING
Instead of using sequential SCL sub-block decoders as in
[13], we replace them by NN decoders. Every sub-block
NN𝑖covers 𝑘𝑖information bits. As the number of possible
encoder output states (i.e., different codewords) is 2𝑘𝑖, efficient
training is only possible for small sub-blocks, containing a
small amount of information bits 𝑘𝑖[11]. The advantage of
this concept is that each sub-block NN decoder can be trained
independently. However, each NN has its own corresponding
frozen bit positions 𝔸𝑖and a specific block lengths 𝑁𝑖. As we
deal with man made signals, the training and validation dataset
can be created by random input data, a conventional polar
encoder and a channel. Thus, an infinite amount of labeled
training data is available.
Now, the NN decoder can be efficiently trained offline to
MAP performance [11], since the effective block-size per sub-
block 𝑁𝑖reduces by the number of sub-blocks 𝑀. Each NN
decoder outputs the decoded codeword (and/or the extracted
information bits) either as soft-values, i.e., probabilities, or
after a hard-decision which might require re-encoding. These
bits are now treated as known values.
Our proposed decoder consists of two stages (see Fig. 1 and
Fig. 3):
1) 𝑀deep learning blocks, trained to decode the corre-
sponding sub-codeword with length 𝑁𝑖and frozen bit
position vector 𝔸𝑖
2) A conventional BP part, when the already decoded sub-
blocks are propagated via the coupling stages of the
remaining polar encoding graph.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Polar-like
structure
channel input (LLR)
NND2
(𝑁2, 𝑘2, 𝔸2)
ˆu2
NND1
(𝑁1, 𝑘1, 𝔸1)
ˆu1
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
decoded codeword
R
BP
L
ˆx1
ˆx2
Fig. 3: Partitioned neural network polar decoding structure.
After initializing the rightmost stages with the received
channel LLR-values, messages are propagated from stage to
stage according to the BP update rules in (1) until the first NN
decoder stage 𝑛NN (see Fig. 1). Then, the first NN decoder
estimates the received sub-block NN1. After having decoded
the first sub-block, the results are propagated via conventio-
nal BP decoding algorithms through the remaining coupling
stages (see Fig. 1 and 3). Thus, this algorithm is block-wise
sequential where 𝑀sub-blocks NN𝑖are sequentially decoded
from top to bottom. The detailed decoding process works as
follows:
1) Initialize stage 𝑛+ 1 with received channel LLR-values
2) Update stages 𝑛NN to 𝑛+ 1 according to BP algorithm
rules (propagate LLRs)
3) Decode next sub-block (top to bottom)
4) Re-encode results and treat results as perfectly known,
i.e., as frozen bits
5) If not all sub-blocks are decoded go to step 2
The interface between the NND and the BP stages depends
on the trained input format of the NN. Typically, the NN
prefers normalized input values between 0 and 1. Fortunately,
it was observed in [11] that the NN can handle both input
formats and effective training is possible.
In summary, the system itself can be modeled as one large
NN as well. Each BP update iterations defines additional
layers, which are deterministic and thus do not effect the
training complexity, similar to regularization layers [18]. This
finally leads to a pipelined structure as depicted in Fig. 4. As
each NN is only passed once and to emphasize the difference
compared to iterative decoding, we term this kind of decoding
as one-shot-decoding.
A. Further Optimizations
As it can be seen in Fig. 2, the limiting parameter is the
number of information bits per sub-block 𝑘𝑖, since it defines
BP
NN1
BP
NN2
BP
NN3
received
codeword 1
BP
NN1
BP
NN2
BP
received
codeword 2
BP
NN1
BP
received
codeword 3
. . .
. . .
...
...
𝑡
Fig. 4: Pipelined implementation of the proposed PNN deco-
der.
the number of possible estimates of the NND. One further im-
provement in terms of sub-block size can be done by merging
multiple equally-sized sub-blocks such that ∑
𝑖𝑘𝑖< 𝑘max,
leading to an unequal sub-block size. This helps to obtain as
few as possible sub-blocks. The results for 𝑀= 8 partitions
are shown in Fig. 5.
Additionally, finetuning-learning can be applied to the
overall network in order to adjust the independently trained
components to the overall system. This means that the whole
decoding setup is used to re-train the system such that the
conventional stages are taken into consideration for decoding.
This prevents from performance degradation due to potentially
non-Gaussian NN-input distributions, which was assumed
during the training. Such an effect can be observed whenever
clipping of the LLRs is involved. However, the basic structure
is already fixed and thus only a small amount of the 2𝑘possible
codewords is sufficient for good training results. The required
training set is created with the free-running decoder.
The coupling could be also done by an SC stage (as ori-
ginally proposed in [13]) without having additional iterations.
However, the BP structure suits better to the NN structure as
both algorithms can be efficiently described by a graph and
their corresponding edge weights. Thus, the BP algorithm is
preferred.
For cyclic redundancy check (CRC) aided decoding (a CRC
check over the whole codeword) the CRC check can be split
into smaller parts as in [13], where each CRC only protects
one sub-block, i.e., the CRC can be considered by the NN
decoders and thus straightforwardly learned. However, this
requires at least some larger NN-sub-blocks, otherwise the
rate-loss due to the CRC checks becomes prohibitive and is
thus not considered at the moment.
IV. COMPARISON WITH SCL/BP
In general, a fair comparison with existing solutions is
hard, as many possible optimizations need to be considered.
We see this idea as an alternative approach, for instance in
cases whenever low-latency is required. The BER results for
𝑁= 128 and different decoding algorithms are shown in
Fig. 5. As shown in Tab I, the size of the partitions is chosen
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
TABLE I: Number of information bits 𝑘𝑖for each sub-block
sub-block 𝑖
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
sub-block size 𝑁𝑖
32
16
16
16
16
8
8
16
information bits 𝑘𝑖
1
3
11
5
13
7
8
16
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
10−6
10−5
10−4
10−3
10−2
10−1
𝐸𝑏/𝑁0 [dB]
BER
SC
PSCL8 {32, 16, 16, 16, 16, 8, 8, 16}
PNN8 {32, 16, 16, 16, 16, 8, 8, 16}
BP
SCL (𝐿= 32)
Fig. 5: BER performance of the proposed partitioned NN
decoder for 𝑁= 128 and 𝑀= 8 partitions with variable size
in comparison to state-of-the-art SC, BP and SCL (𝐿= 32)
decoding.
such each partition does not contain more than 𝑘max = 12
information bits, which facilitates learning the sub-blocks. The
training time of each sub-block highly depends on how many
information bits the sub-block contains. Therefore, training
time varies from 30 minutes per sub-block up to one day on a
single GPU. If the sub-block does not contain any frozen bits,
a simple hard-decision decoder is used. Basically, the concept
of partitioning polar codes helps to scale NND to longer codes.
We denote a partitioned neural network (PNN) with 𝑀
partitions as PNN𝑀. Although each NN in the PNN can be
learned to approximately MAP performance, there is a loss 𝜆
between PNN decoding and conventional SCL decoding with
list size 𝐿. We limit ourselves in this work to 𝐿= 32. The
loss 𝜆can be explained by two main reasons:
1) Loss through partitioning 𝜆part as the concept only
applies sub-block MAP decoding.
2) Loss due to sub-optimality of the NND 𝜆NN, due to
insufficient training or non-Gaussian input distributions.1
For further analysis of this problem, we replace the NNDs
in each partition by SCL decoders with list size 𝐿= 32 as
in [13] and obtain a partitioned successive cancellation list
(PSCL) decoder. As before, PSCL𝑀terms a PSCL decoder
1We did not focus on how to find the best NN structure for each NN because
we want to introduce the concept of partitioned polar codes in order to scale
NND. We expect that for sufficient training and hyperparameter tuning [21]
this loss vanishes.
1
2
4
8
16
32
64
1
2
3
4
5
number of equally sized partitions
NEPSCL
𝑁= 64
𝑁= 128
𝑁= 256
𝑁= 512
𝑁= 1024
Fig. 6: Effect of the partitioning on the BER performance.
64bit
𝜆part
𝜆NN
128bit
𝜆part
𝜆NN
256bit
𝜆part
𝜆NN
512bit
𝜆part
𝜆NN
NE
1
2
3
4
5
Fig. 7: Normalized error NEPSCL due to 𝜆part (blue) and NEPNN
due to 𝜆NN (green) for fixed size of partitions 𝑁𝑖= 16.
with 𝑀partitions. This enables the investigation of larger
partition sizes and thus the effect of partitioning, which is
currently not possible with NNs due to the limited training
length. Since SCL decoding approximates MAP performance
for properly chosen parameters [2], the PSCL gives a lower
bound on the expected BER according to the actual number
of partitions. This enables to observe 𝜆part and 𝜆NN separately.
In order to quantify the loss, we introduce a similar concept
as in [11]: the normalized error (NE) for a decoding concept,
e.g., PNN, PSCL, which is given by
NE = 1
𝐷
𝐷
∑
𝑡=1
BER (𝜌𝑡)
BERSCL (𝜌𝑡)
(5)
where 𝜌𝑡is a certain signal to noise ratio (SNR) value,
BER (𝜌𝑡) denotes the decoders BER for this specific SNR and
BERSCL (𝜌𝑡) is the corresponding BER of the SCL decoder,
respectively. Thus, NE compares the decoding performance
over a range of 𝐷different SNR values 𝜌1, . . . , 𝜌𝑇.
It can be observed in Fig. 6, that NEPSCL increases with the
number of partitions, i.e., decreases with the partition sizes.
Fig. 7 relates the effect of 𝜆part and 𝜆NN. It can be observed
that the main error originates from partitioning and only a
small part from suboptimal NNs. The amount of sub-blocks
with larger 𝑘𝑖increases with larger codelength and at the
same time it is more difficult to achieve MAP performance
for these blocks [11]. Therefore, the loss 𝜆NN becomes more
important for longer codes. The training complexity limits the
feasible sub-block size of PNN decoding and thus long codes
require a lot of partitions. The larger the number of partitions,
the larger 𝜆part. However, the fast progress in the machine
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
100
200
300
400
500
0
1,000
2,000
3,000
𝑁
synchronization steps 𝑆
BP
SC(L)
MAP
PNN
Fig. 8: Comparison of required synchronization steps for
different polar decoding approaches.
learning domain might enable larger sub-blocks, which should
improve 𝜆part and therefore the overall performance of the
PNN concept.
In order to approximate the decoding latency in Fig. 8, we
count the number of synchronization steps as operations can
be done in parallel, but need to be synchronized after each
synchronization step. The latency of the SCL algorithm can
be described by 𝒪(𝑁log 𝑁) because it estimates each bit
sequentially. Thus, the number of required synchronization
steps is
𝑆SCL = 𝑁log 𝑁.
The BP algorithm scales much better with 𝒪(log 𝑁) because
synchronization is required after each BP stage but depends
on the number of iterations 𝐼, namely,
𝑆BP = 2𝐼log 𝑁.
The PNN decoder enforces less BP updates and the NNDs
itself only synchronize after each layer
𝑆PNN = 𝑁
𝑁𝑃
𝑁𝐻+ 𝑁
𝑁𝑃
2 log 𝑁
𝑁𝑃
where 𝑁𝑃and 𝑁𝐻respectively denote the size of each
partition and the number of hidden layers in the NN. Fig. 8
is given for 𝑁𝑃
= 16 and 𝑁𝐻
= 3. To sum up, our
approach enables latency reduction of BP decoding, while
being competitive with the SC and BP BER performance.
V. CONCLUSION
In this work, we have shown that one way to reach
scalability of deep-learning based channel decoding can be
described by replacing sub-components of an existing decoder
by NN-based components. This enables scalability in terms
of block length and number of information bits towards
practical lengths. Meanwhile, the length is still limited to short
codes as the degradation through partitioning limits the overall
performance of this concept. The BER performance of our
decoder turns out to be similar to the SC and BP perfor-
mance. However, the latency reduces a lot when the inherent
parallel structure of this algorithm is exploited, since one-
shot-decoding (i.e., non-iterative decoding) becomes possible.
We have shown that the performance degradation is mainly a
result of the small partitions, as the sub-block size is currently
strictly limited by the training. Nonetheless, the proposed setup
would scale very well for larger sub-blocks, therefore future
work needs to be done on potential improvements of the NN
structure such that larger components become available.
REFERENCES
[1] X.-A. Wang and S. B. Wicker, “An artificial neural net Viterbi decoder,”
IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 165–171, Feb. 1996.
[2] I. Tal and A. Vardy, “List decoding of polar codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.
Theory, vol. 61, no. 5, pp. 2213–2226, May 2015.
[3] E. Arkan, “Channel polarization: A method for constructing capacity-
achieving codes for symmetric binary-input memoryless channels,” IEEE
Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 55, no. 7, pp. 3051–3073, July 2009.
[4] “RAN1 meeting #87,” http://www.3gpp.org/DynaReport/TDocExMtg–
R1-87–31665.htm, accessed: 2017-01-09.
[5] G. Liva, L. Gaudio, T. Ninacs, and T. Jerkovits, “Code design for
short blocks: A survey,” CoRR, vol. abs/1610.00873, 2016. [Online].
Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.00873
[6] S. Cammerer, B. Leible, M. Stahl, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink,
“Combining belief propagation and successive cancellation list decoding
of polar codes on a GPU platform,” in accepted for 42th Int. Conf. on
Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2017.
[7] P. Giard, G. Sarkis, A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, Y. Fan, C. y. Tsui,
A. Burg, C. Thibeault, and W. J. Gross, “Hardware decoders for polar
codes: An overview,” in 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Circuits
and Systems (ISCAS), May 2016, pp. 149–152.
[8] J. Guo, M. Qin, A. G. i Fabregas, and P. H. Siegel, “Enhanced belief
propagation decoding of polar codes through concatenation,” in 2014
IEEE Internat. Symp. Inf. Theory, June 2014, pp. 2987–2991.
[9] R.
Al-Rfou,
G.
Alain,
A.
Almahairi,
and
et
al.,
“Theano:
A
python
framework
for
fast
computation
of
mathematical
expressions,” CoRR, vol. abs/1605.02688, 2016. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1605.02688
[10] M.
A.
et
al.,
“Tensorflow:
Large-scale
machine
learning
on
heterogeneous
distributed
systems,”
CoRR,
vol.
abs/1603.04467,
2016. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1603.04467
[11] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, “On deep learning-
based channel decoding,” in Proc. of CISS, March 2017.
[12] E. Nachmani, Y. Be’ery, and D. Burshtein, “Learning to decode linear
codes using deep learning,” Proc. of the Allerton Conf. on Commun.,
Control, and Computing, 2016.
[13] S. A. Hashemi, A. Balatsoukas-Stimming, P. Giard, C. Thibeault, and
W. J. Gross, “Partitioned successive-cancellation list decoding of polar
codes,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP), March 2016, pp. 957–960.
[14] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.
Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, January 1962.
[15] J. Xu, T. Che, and G. Choi, “XJ-BP: Express journey belief propagation
decoding for polar codes,” in IEEE Global Communications Conference
(GLOBECOM), Dec 2014, pp. 1–6.
[16] B.
Li,
H.
Shen,
and
D.
Tse,
“Parallel
decoders
of
polar
codes,”
CoRR,
vol.
abs/1309.1026,
2013.
[Online].
Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/1309.1026
[17] G. Sarkis, P. Giard, A. Vardy, C. Thibeault, and W. J. Gross, “Fast
list decoders for polar codes,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 318–328, Feb 2016.
[18] I.
Goodfellow,
Y.
Bengio,
and
A.
Courville,
“Deep
Learning,”
2016,
book
in
preparation
for
MIT
Press.
[Online].
Available:
http://www.deeplearningbook.org
[19] K. Hornik, M. Stinchcombe, and H. White, “Multilayer feedforward
networks are universal approximators,” Neural Networks, vol. 2, no. 5,
pp. 359–366, 1989.
[20] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams, “Parallel distri-
buted processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition, vol.
1.”
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1986, ch. Learning Internal
Representations by Error Propagation, pp. 318–362.
[21] J. S. Bergstra, R. Bardenet, Y. Bengio, and B. K´egl, “Algorithms
for hyper-parameter optimization,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 24.
Curran Associates, Inc., 2011, pp. 2546–2554.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:40:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
