32

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2017

Informed Fixed Scheduling for Faster Convergence of Shuffled Belief-Propagation Decoding
Chaudhry Adnan Aslam, Student Member, IEEE, Yong Liang Guan, Member, IEEE, Kui Cai, Senior Member, IEEE, and Guojun Han, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— A novel informed fixed scheduling (IFS) scheme for shuffled belief-propagation (BP) decoding of binary low-density parity-check (LDPC) code is introduced to improve the BP decoding convergence. The IFS finds an appropriate order of variable nodes in accordance with the number of updated neighbors in the code graph, ensuring that the maximum number of latest message updates is utilized within a single iteration. This allows the utilization of most reliable message updates in a timely manner, leading to faster error-rate convergence. Simulation results show that the proposed IFS scheme improves the convergence speed of BP decoder by up to 20% for regular LDPC codes and 45% for irregular LDPC codes, without affecting the errorrate performance, at medium-to-high signal-to-noise ratio over binary-input additive white Gaussian noise channel.
Index Terms— LDPC codes, scheduling scheme, beliefpropagation decoding, convergence speed, decoding complexity.
I. INTRODUCTION
L DPC codes are known for their capacity approaching performance under the sum-product belief-propagation (BP) decoding algorithm, in which message updates are iteratively exchanged between the variable and check nodes over the bi-partite code graph. A BP schedule defines the order of message-passing over this code graph. The flooding [1] schedule is the conventional scheduling method where all the variable-to-check (V2C) and check-to-variable (C2V) message updates are simultaneously exchanged. Instead of flooding, it is also possible to schedule the message-passing in fixed sequential order such that the message updates in the current iteration are produced using the latest available information. The shuffled [2] and layered [3] scheduling schemes are two commonly used sequential schedules, where variable or check nodes are serially processed according to a predetermined order. Compared to flooding, sequential processing over the code graph improves the convergence speed of BP algorithm. Analytical studies have shown that the sequential schedules converge twice as fast as that of the flooding schedule.

With regards to sequential schedule, it is very important to select a proper sequence of variable nodes, as it can influence the convergence-rate of BP decoder. In this direction, a maximum mutual-information based BP schedule, which predicts the next message update on the basis of mutualinformation increase, has been proposed in [4]. Again, this algorithm improves the convergence performance, however the resultant hardware implementation complexity and the storage requirement may be prohibitively large as it has to record the complete sequence of message updates. Recently, a column-weight (CW) based fixed scheduling scheme has been reported in [5], in which the variable nodes are sequentially updated following the high-to-low column weight order. By design, the CW based scheduling works very well on irregular LDPC codes, but has inconsequential effect on the convergence of regular LDPC codes. Thus, it is of great interest to devise a scheduling strategy for codes with either equal or unequal column-weight variable nodes. Such scheduling scheme will benefit both the regular and irregular LDPC codes.
In this direction, a novel informed fixed scheduling (IFS) scheme is proposed. The objective of the IFS scheme is to improve the BP decoding convergence, thereby saving the power consumption and increasing the decoding throughput. In this scheme, a fixed sequence of variable nodes is determined based on the information of latest message updates. The IFS ensures that the maximum number of such latest message updates are utilized within a single decoding iteration. This scheduled sequence is then serially decoded using the shuffled BP algorithm. It will be shown that the IFS based shuffled BP decoder attains faster error-rate convergence than the conventional shuffled BP decoder in the range of medium-to-high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), without incurring additional run-time computations or error-rate degradation.
II. PARALLEL VS. SEQUENTIAL BP SCHEDULING

Manuscript received July 30, 2016; revised September 20, 2016; accepted October 10, 2016. Date of publication October 13, 2016; date of current version January 6, 2017. This work was supported by the NTU Research Scholarship, in part by the SUTD-MIT International Design Center (IDC), and in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under grant number 61471131. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was C. Jego.
C. A. Aslam and Y. L. Guan are with the School of Electrical and Electronics Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 639798 Singapore (e-mail: ad0001ry@e.ntu.edu.sg; eylguan@ntu.edu.sg).
K. Cai is with the Department of Science, Singapore University of Technology and Design, 487372 Singapore (e-mail: cai_kui@sutd.edu.sg).
G. Han is with the Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, China (e-mail: gjhan@gdut.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2016.2617309

The variable-node based sequential BP schedules introduce
the problem of finding a suitable sequence of variable nodes.
In order to explain the proposed methodology, let us first
observe the difference between the shuffled and flooding BP schedules. Over a bi-partite (N, M) LDPC code graph with N variable nodes, vn for 1 ≤ n ≤ N, and M check nodes, cm for 1 ≤ m ≤ M, the BP algorithm iteratively computes and passes new message updates from variable node vn to check node cm, denoted by Vvn→cm , and from check node cm to variable node vn, denoted by Ccm→vn , along the edges of the code graph. These message updates can be

1558-2558 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASLAM et al.: IFS FOR FASTER CONVERGENCE OF SHUFFLED BP DECODING

33

computed as [1]

Vv(ni

) →cm

=

Lvn

+

Cc(ij)→vn

(1)

c j ∈⎛M (vn)\cm

⎞

Cc(mi)→vn = 2 tanh−1 ⎝

tanh

Vv(ij

−1) →cm

⎠

(2)

2

v j ∈N (cm )\vn

where i is the iteration count, Lvn is the intrinsic channel information for variable node vn, M (vn) \ cm is the set of neighbors of variable node vn except check node cm and N (cm) \ vn is the set of neighbors of check node cm except variable node vn.

Under the flooding schedule, the message propagation takes

place simultaneously. In contrast, the shuffled schedule updates

variable nodes serially. For better understanding, we split the

C2V update expression (2⎛) into two factors, given by

Cc(mi)→vn = 2 tanh−1 ⎜⎜⎜⎝

tanh

v j ∈N (cm )

[−2 pt ]v j <vn

Vv(ij

) →cm

·

2

⎞

tanh

Vv(ji

−1) →cm

2

⎟⎠⎟

(3)

v j ∈N (cm )

v j >vn

In this expression, the first term incorporates the V2C

messages computed in the current iteration i , while the second

one takes on the V2C messages computed in the previous

iteration i − 1. The shuffled decoder makes it possible to

access

the

latest

message

updates

Vv(ji

) →cm

for

vj

<

vn

via

check nodes cm for cm ∈ M (vn) while updating variable

node vn. This is how the shuffled BP decoder yields faster

convergence as compared to the flooding schedule. Therefore,

it makes sense to select a variable node such that its neigh-

bouring check nodes are connected with maximum number of

updated variable nodes. In this way, a large number of variable

nodes will receive the latest message updates within a single

decoding iteration, consequently reducing the iteration count

required for error-rate convergence. Thus, instead of arbitrary

variable node selection, scheduling based on the availability of

latest message updates is adopted in the proposed IFS scheme.

III. INFORMED FIXED SCHEDULING (IFS)
The proposed IFS scheme is an extension of the CW scheduling scheme of [5], hence it follows a high-to-low column-weight order for the variable nodes with unequal column weights. In addition, a new objective of the IFS scheme is to determine the scheduling order for the equal column-weight variable nodes, ensuring that each selected node receives maximum number of latest message updates from previously updated variable nodes. In other words, the variable nodes {v1, v2, . . . vN } are divided into different groups according to their column-weight. Thereafter, following the high-to-low column-weight order, the individual groups are scheduled using the IFS scheme. To achieve this, we define two set of counters, namely the check-counter (ζm) for 1 ≤ m ≤ M, and the var-counter (ηn) for 1 ≤ n ≤ N. Given the iteration count i , the value of ζm represents the number of already updated variable nodes connected with check

Algorithm 1 Informed Fixed Scheduling (IFS).

1 Initialize ηn = 0, ∀1 ≤ n ≤ N ⇒ variable-counter;

2 Initialize ζm = 0, ∀1 ≤ m ≤ M ⇒ check-counter;

3 while S ∈/ {v1, v2, . . . , vN } do

4 Find i = arg max {ηn};
n={1,2,..., N }

5 Select variable node vi and store into vector S;

6 Reset ηi = 0;

7 for every cm ∈ M (vi ) do

8

Increment check-counter: ζm = ζm + 1;

9

for every vn ∈ N (cm) \ vi do

10

Increment variable-counter: ηn = ηn + 1;

11 End

node cm , whereas the quantity ηn represents the cumulative sum of ζm for cm ∈ M (vn), as given by

ηn =

ζm

(4)

cm ∈M (vn )

In this perspective, the value of ηn reflects the total number of latest message updates accessible to variable node vn. Thus, the IFS scheme finds the sequence of variable nodes on the

basis of maximum value of ηn. To begin with, all ζm and ηn are initialized to zero. This is to
represent the starting point of a new decoding iteration. The

IFS scheme proceeds to select the variable node associated

with the largest ηn. In case of multiple variable nodes sharing the same maximum ηn, it randomly selects any one among them, say vi , and records the scheduling order into a first-infirst-out (FIFO) structure S. Then, the check-counter ζm for all cm ∈ M (vi ) are incremented and the relevant var-counter
are updated according to (4). This procedure is repeated until

all the variable nodes are scheduled. The detailed steps of IFS

scheme are outlined in Algorithm 1. Note that the IFS scheme

needs to be run only once in the off-line mode, and the stored

scheduling order is retrieved at the time of decoding, thereby

precluding additional run-time computations.

Example: To show the working of IFS scheme, we use

a simple code graph, as shown in Fig. 1. Since this is

an irregular code graph, column-weight 3 variable nodes

{v5, v6, v7} are scheduled first followed by column-weight 2 variable nodes {v1, v2, v3, v4}. In the first place, variable node v5 is selected as η5, η6 and η7 are all equal to 0. Then, the check-counter ζ1, ζ4 and ζ5 are incremented since c1, c4 and c5 are connected with v5, and the relevant var-counter values are
updated, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Among the remaining two

column-weight 3 variable nodes, v7 is selected next on the account of larger η7, and the respective check-counter and varcounter values are updated, as shown in Fig. 1(c). Similarly,

the waiting column-weight 3 variable node v6 is selected afterwards, as shown in Fig. 1(d). Likewise, the column-

weight 2 variable nodes are scheduled, as shown in Fig. 1(f).

The final sequence obtained in this example is given by

v5 ⇒ v7 ⇒ v6 ⇒ v3 ⇒ v1 ⇒ v2 ⇒ v4. In contrast, the conventional shuffled BP decoder will process variable nodes

according to v1 ⇒ v2 ⇒ v3 ⇒ v4 ⇒ v5 ⇒ v6 ⇒ v7,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

34

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 21, NO. 1, JANUARY 2017

Fig. 2. Reduction in average iterations employing the proposed IFS and CW [5] schemes compared to the conventional shuffled scheme [2], simulated at Imax = 10: using irregular LDPC codes [6]–[9].

Fig. 1. Variable node scheduling {v1, . . . , v7} using the proposed IFS scheme: scheduled order v5 ⇒ v7 ⇒ v6 ⇒ v3 ⇒ v1 ⇒ v2 ⇒ v4.

Fig. 3. Reduction in average iterations employing the proposed IFS and CW [5] schemes compared to the conventional shuffled scheme [2], simulated at Imax = 10: using regular LDPC codes [10]–[12].

whereas the CW scheduling will follow the sequence v7 ⇒ v6 ⇒ v5 ⇒ v4 ⇒ v3 ⇒ v2 ⇒ v1.

IV. IFS PERFORMANCE EVALUATION

A. Normalized Complexity and Error-Rate Performance

We perform Monte-Carlo simulations to plot the decoding

convergence and error-rate performance for different regu-

lar and irregular LDPC codes. We construct four irregular

quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes based on IEEE WIMAX [6],

IEEE WIFI [7], ETSI DVB-S2 [8] and CCSDS TM [9]

standards with block-length 1152, 1944, 16200 and 20480 bits,

and rate-1/2, rate-2/3, rate-11/15 and rate-4/5, respectively.

Additionally, we also create three regular column-weight 3

LDPC codes with block-length 1000, 816 and 755 bits,

and rate-1/2, rate-2/5 and rate-1/3, considering PEG [10],

Gallanger’s [11] and QC [12] code construction methods,

respectively.

To show the decoding convergence, we set the maximum

iteration number (Imax) to 10. We execute the shuffled BP

decoder employing both the conventional and IFS based

scheduling schemes and record the average number of iter-

ations required for error-rate convergence. We normalize the

average number of iterations with respect to the conventional

shuffled BP decoder. Specifically, the normalized average

iterations

represents

the

ratio

IIFS Iconv

,

where

IIFS

and

Iconv

denote

the average number of iterations used by the IFS and conven-

tional shuffled BP decoders, respectively. This normalization is

performed to manifest the relative improvement in the conver-

gence speed. For comparison, we also report the performance

curves

for

the

CW

scheduling

[5],

given

by

the

ratio

ICW Iconv

.

For irregular LDPC codes, the normalized convergence performance is shown in Fig. 2. Using the proposed IFS scheme, we notice an improvement by up to 45% at medium-to-high SNR. For the regular LDPC codes, faster convergence speed by up to 20% is realized, as shown in Fig. 3. To show the error-rate performance, we plot the frame-error-rate (FER) curves for the WIMAX [6] and WIFI [7] LDPC code under the BI-AWGN channel at Imax = 5 and Imax = 10, as shown in Fig. 4. It can be observed that the IFS scheme outperforms the conventional shuffled decoder at low iteration counts, and yet suffers no error-rate degradation at high iteration counts. Note that we have also performed simulations over Rayleigh fading channel and observed similar performance improvement.
B. Group-Shuffled BP Decoding
We further evaluate the performance of the proposed IFS scheme under the semi-serial group-shuffled BP decoding scheme for realizing a high throughput decoder implementation. The group-shuffled decoding scheme performs parallel sub-matrix processing in which, instead of single variable update, t variable nodes are simultaneously updated, where t is an arbitrary group size. To cater for group-shuffled decoding, the IFS algorithm should be modified according to the group size t, such that t maximum variable counters will be selected in Step 4 of Algorithm 1, and subsequently all the relevant variable and check counters will be incremented. In Fig. 5, we plot the normalized iterations for WIMAX [6] LDPC code for different values of t by employing the IFS scheme. Note that the curves in Fig. 5 are normalized w.r.t. the groupshuffled decoding by employing the conventional scheduling.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ASLAM et al.: IFS FOR FASTER CONVERGENCE OF SHUFFLED BP DECODING

35

into fixed-point data type with b bits of precision. Apart from that, in most real world implementations, the sumproduct BP decoder is replaced by a low-complexity min-sum BP decoder [13] at the expense of slight error-rate degradation. Using 8-bit fixed-point precision, with 5 bits for the integer part and 3 bits for the fractional part, we perform the min-sum shuffled BP decoding for irregular LDPC codes [6]–[9], and plot the normalized complexity in Fig. 6. This figure shows that the proposed IFS scheme yields similar performance improvement under the min-sum decoding with fixed-point simulation.

Fig. 4. FER performance employing the proposed IFS (solid curves) and conventional shuffled [2] (dotted curves) schemes, simulated at Imax = 5, 10: using WIMAX [6] and WIFI [7] LDPC codes.
Fig. 5. Reduction in average iterations employing the proposed IFS (solid curves) and CW [5] (dotted curves) schemes compared to the conventional shuffled scheme [2], simulated under the group-shuffled decoding with group size t: using WIMAX [6] LDPC code.
Fig. 6. Reduction in average iterations employing the proposed IFS scheme compared to the conventional shuffled scheme [2], simulated under the minsum approximation with 8-bit fixed-point precision.
These results again show that the IFS scheme provides significant complexity reduction under the group-shuffled decoding, specifically for smaller values of t. It is pertinent to mention that the variable node grouping can also be done based on the code structure, instead of random grouping with arbitrary size t, and similar performance improvement can be realized. C. Fixed-Point Precision With Min-Sum Approximation
For hardware implementation of BP decoder, the LLR values, and subsequently the reliability updates, are converted

V. CONCLUSION
An improved scheduling scheme for the beliefpropagation (BP) decoding of LDPC code is presented. In this scheme, a fixed sequence of variable nodes is determined based on the maximum number of newly available message updates. Since the variable nodes are scheduled only once in the off-line mode, the proposed scheduling scheme does not incur additional run-time computations. This sequence of variable nodes is then serially (or semi-serially) decoded under the sum-product or min-sum shuffled BP algorithms with floating-point or fixed-point precision. Simulation results show a significant improvement in the decoding convergence speed in the range of medium-to-high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Moreover, the error performance improves for the initial decoding iterations and remains comparable to the conventional shuffled BP decoding scheme for subsequent decoding iterations.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1963.
[2] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[3] D. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop. Signal Process. Syst., Oct. 2004, pp. 107–112.
[4] H.-C. Lee and Y.-L. Ueng, “LDPC decoding scheduling for faster convergence and lower error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3104–3113, Sep. 2014.
[5] C. A. Aslam, Y. L. Guan, and K. Cai, “Improving the belief-propagation convergence of irregular LDPC codes using column-weight based scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 8, pp. 1283–1286, Aug. 2015.
[6] LDPC Coding for OFDMA PHY, IEEE Standard C802.16e-05/066r3, Aug. 2005.
[7] Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications, IEEE Standard 802.11, 2012.
[8] DVB-S2 Adaptive Coding and Modulation for Broadband Hybrid Satellite Dialup Applications, document ETSI TS 102 441, 2005.
[9] TM Synchronization and Channel Coding, document CCSDS 131.0-B-2, 2011.
[10] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[11] D. J. C. Mackay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. Accessed on Oct. 1, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/ mackay/codes/data.html
[12] R. Tanner et al., “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[13] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 673–680, May 1999.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:37:57 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

