6112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

Throughput-Optimized Multi-Rate LDPC Codes for Satellite Communication Systems With Restricted Decoder Complexity
Xing Pan , Graduate Student Member, IEEE, Zhao Chen , Member, IEEE, Yukui Pei , Member, IEEE, and Liuguo Yin , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Multi-rate low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are widely used in satellite communication (SatCom) systems due to their outstanding performance and adaptable code rates. However, their hardware decoder implementations typically require high hardware resources and many decoding iterations, which pose challenges for high-throughput applications in resourceconstrained, high-data-rate SatCom scenarios. To this end, the design of throughput-optimized multi-rate LDPC codes is investigated, aiming to tackle the decoder implementation problem from the perspective of practical code design. Specifically, a multirate weighted normalized throughput metric is introduced, which considers two key factors, i.e., the number of non-zero elements in the parity-check matrix and the required decoding iterations. Then, the throughput-optimized multi-rate code design problem is formulated to maximize the proposed metric under given decoding threshold constraints, which is later solved using a protomatrix search method based on the differential evolution (DE) algorithm. Finally, three multi-rate LDPC codes are optimized for scenes with different code rate usage frequencies. Their performance is extensively evaluated both theoretically and numerically. Results demonstrate that the proposed codes outperform other similar LDPC codes in the literature, showing a throughput increase of 20% to 30% under the same hardware resource consumption.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, code design, throughput optimization, resource-constrained systems, decoding complexity, satellite communication.
I. INTRODUCTION
A. Motivations
W ITH the growing demand for high-speed, stable and seamless communication, high-data-rate satellite communication (SatCom) systems have aroused increasing attention in recent years. These systems are expected to complement
Received 4 July 2025; accepted 9 October 2025. Date of publication 13 October 2025; date of current version 20 April 2026. This work was supported in part by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant 62025110 and Grant 62101308 and in part by the Joint Fund of Ministry of Education for Equipment Pre-Research under Grant 8091B03032302. The review of this article was coordinated by Prof. Hsiao-Feng Lu. (Corresponding author: Zhao Chen.)
Xing Pan is with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: panx22@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn).
Zhao Chen, Yukui Pei, and Liuguo Yin are with the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China, and also with the State Key Laboratory of Space Network and Communications, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China (e-mail: zhao_chen@tsinghua.edu.cn; peiyk@tsinghua.edu.cn; yinlg@tsinghua.edu.cn).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TVT.2025.3620899

terrestrial communication networks by providing high-speed, low-latency services for a wide range of applications, including satellite broadband communication [1], [2], [3], [4], high-speed laser communication [5], [6], and high-resolution remote sensing data transmission [7], [8], [9]. Among these, LEO SatCom systems, in the form of mega-constellations such as Starlink, OneWeb, and Project Kuiper, have emerged as particularly promising technologies for providing broadband services, owing to their short propagation delay, low path loss and costeffectiveness [10], [11]. Meanwhile, MEO satellite constellations offer the benefits of larger coverage areas and enhanced link stability, playing a critical role in increasing capacity and data rates. To ensure reliable data transmission, channel coding techniques are essential in SatCom systems. Modern channel codes with high coding gains, such as low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [12] and Turbo codes [13], have been extensively studied and widely implemented in traditional SatCom systems. Among these, multi-rate LDPC codes [14], [15], [16] stand out for their capacity-approaching decoding performance, inherent parallelizability, and flexible code rates. These features make multi-rate LDPC codes highly competitive candidates for future SatCom systems, and they have been the focus of extensive research in recent studies [14], [15], [16].
Nevertheless, in the context of high-data-rate SatCom systems, the feasibility and effectiveness of existing multi-rate LDPC coding schemes must be re-evaluated. A critical consideration is hardware consumption. To reduce deployment costs, commercial satellites have increasingly been miniaturized in recent years [17], resulting in limited onboard hardware resources. However, LDPC decoders, which typically consume far more hardware resources than their encoder counterparts, require substantial computational resources. As a result, decoding complexity becomes a primary concern and the central focus of this work under these constraints. Another key challenge is achieving sufficient data throughput. As SatCom systems are expected to support high-throughput services [18], [19], LDPC codes, which rely on iterative decoding, typically require tens of iterations to achieve the optimal coding gain, thereby limiting data throughput. Although reducing the number of iterations can improve throughput, it often comes at the cost of degraded decoding performance. Therefore, it is essential to design LDPC codes that maintain high decoding performance while operating with a reduced number of iterations. In addition to these general

0018-9545 © 2025 IEEE. All rights reserved, including rights for text and data mining, and training of artificial intelligence and similar technologies. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAN et al.: THROUGHPUT-OPTIMIZED MULTI-RATE LDPC CODES FOR SATELLITE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

6113

challenges, the support for multiple LDPC code rates introduces further further design difficulties. Decoding multiple code rates requires additional hardware to support flexible code structures and scheduling, leading to increased resource consumption on constrained satellite platforms. Furthermore, optimizing performance and resource usage across multiple code rates simultaneously is nontrivial, as it is challenging to design a single parity-check matrix that performs well across all rates and aligns with the requirements of the intended application scenarios. Addressing these challenges underscores the need to explore hardware-efficient, high-throughput multi-rate LDPC coding solutions that can operate effectively within the constraints of both hardware resources and throughput requirements.
Most existing studies focus on developing low-complexity decoding algorithms or decoder architectures to achieve highthroughput LDPC decoders with minimal hardware resource consumption. However, recent research suggests that further optimization is possible at the code design stage [20], [21]. By establishing the relationship between resource consumption, decoding throughput, and the code matrix, it becomes possible to design LDPC codes that achieve both low hardware complexity and excellent performance with a small number of iterations. Moreover, these optimized codes can be effectively combined with low-complexity algorithms and decoder architectures to significantly reduce resource consumption while enhancing data throughput. Given the specific requirements of SatCom systems for channel coding schemes, this paper focuses on the design of high-throughput multi-rate LDPC codes with restricted decoder complexity to meet the hardware resource limitations and data throughput demands of high-data-rate SatCom systems.
B. Related Works
LDPC codes are commonly characterized by their paritycheck matrices (PCM), and the design of these matrices plays a central role in code optimization. Traditionally, most research has focused on threshold-optimized LDPC codes, where the objective is to minimize the decoding threshold to improve coding gain under iterative decoding. In this work, we focus on designing LDPC codes that minimize resource consumption and maximize decoding throughput while ensuring specific decoding performance requirements. Two key factors are critical in designing such codes, i.e., the number of non-zero entries in the LDPC parity-check matrix, which directly impacts hardware resource usage, and the number of decoding iterations, which affects decoding throughput.
Recent studies have started to explore LDPC code design from these perspectives. Their results have been shown to require fewer hardware resources or exhibit higher decoding throughput compared to traditional threshold-optimized LDPC codes while maintaining comparable decoding performance. For single-rate LDPC codes, Smith et al. [20] defined the product of the above two parameters as the decoding complexity metric to search for complexity-optimized irregular LDPC codes. Specifically, their approach fine-tunes existing threshold-optimized LDPC codes to derive those with lower decoding complexity. In [21], a low-complexity protograph LDPC (P-LDPC) code with a rate of

1/2 was constructed by manually limiting the sum of elements in the protomatrix and restricting the number of iterations to a small value. In [22], a convex optimization framework was formulated to design LDPC codes for the binary erasure channel (BEC) with fast convergence, minimizing the number of decoding iterations required to achieve a target residual erasure probability. For non-binary LDPC codes, [25], [26] focused on performance-complexity tradeoff by optimizing degree distributions to accelerate convergence, achieving approximately 30% reduction in decoding iterations compared to thresholdoptimized designs. Furthermore, [27] investigated the use of multilevel coding (MLC) and bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) schemes in conjunction with complexity-optimized LDPC inner codes, demonstrating near-capacity performance with manageable decoding complexity. For multi-rate codes, Barakatain et al. [28] recently proposed a rate- and channelconfigurable low-complexity concatenated coding scheme using complexity-optimized irregular LDPC codewords as the inner code. Additionally, a delay-limited multi-rate P-LDPC ensemble was designed by Nguyen et al. [24] with small decoding iterations for each code rate using a lengthening method. However, the fast decoding convergence comes at the cost of increased column weight in the parity-check matrix, leading to significantly higher hardware resource usage.
C. Contributions
Although previous studies have made significant progress in optimizing certain aspects of LDPC code construction, few have considered both resource consumption and decoding throughput, which could lead to higher throughput under limited resource consumption. Additionally, most of the existing research focuses primarily on single-rate codes, with limited analysis and optimization of the hardware complexity and decoding throughput for multi-rate LDPC codes. To the best of our knowledge, no research has specifically addressed the optimization and construction of multi-rate LDPC codes for high-data-rate SatCom scenarios with resource constraints.
In response to these limitations, this study focuses on designing throughput-optimized multi-rate LDPC codes that minimize hardware resources usage while maximizing decoding throughput. We aim to optimize normalized throughput, i.e., achievable throughput per unit of resource consumption, for multi-rate LDPC codes. A summary comparison of representative existing works and the proposed approach is provided in Table I, which highlights their differences in code structure, design objectives, and the consideration of decoding throughput and resource usage. A multi-rate weighted normalized decoding throughput metric is proposed, which considers both the number of non-zero entries in the entire parity-check matrix and the decoding iterations required for each code rate. Unlike the conventional rate-by-rate extension method for constructing multi-rate LDPC codes, the proposed search method involves a comprehensive search of the entire parity-check matrix to ensure maximum weighted normalized decoding throughput. To tackle the challenges posed by the large search space, a protomatrix search method based on the differential evolution (DE)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 4, APRIL 2026
TABLE I COMPARISON BETWEEN THIS WORK AND REPRESENTATIVE LDPC CODE DESIGN APPROACHES

algorithm [29] is proposed. Analytical and simulation results show that the proposed throughput-optimized multi-rate LDPC codes enhance the decoding throughput by approximately 20% to 30% compared to existing multi-rate LDPC codes, while maintaining similar decoding performance. The primary contributions of this work are outlined as follows:
1) We propose a multi-rate weighted normalized throughput metric for designing throughput-optimized multi-rate LDPC codes, which effectively reflects the achievable throughput of an LDPC decoder per unit of hardware resource consumption.
2) Based on the proposed metric, we formulate a constrained optimization problem for throughput-optimized LDPC code design. A practical search method based on the differential evolution algorithm is also presented to find optimal solutions efficiently.
3) Three multi-rate LDPC codes for scenes with different code rate usage frequencies are constructed using the proposed code design approach. Extensive analyses and comparisons with respect to decoding performance and throughput are presented, demonstrating that the proposed throughput-optimized multi-rate LDPC codes achieve higher decoding throughput in resource-constrained systems without significant performance loss.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II we provide a detailed analysis of the resource utilization and throughput of LDPC decoders, and present the proposed multi-rate weighted normalized decoding throughput metric. Section III formulates the constrained optimization problem and introduces the protomatrix search method. Section IV gives code design examples and presents theoretical analysis and performance comparisons. Section V presents the numerical results and comparisons based on Monte Carlo simulations. Section VI concludes the paper.
II. THROUGHPUT-OPTIMIZED LDPC CODES: KEY FACTORS AND WEIGHTED METRIC
In this section, we first analyze key factors involved in the design of throughput-optimized LDPC codes with limited decoder complexity and present the normalized throughput metric for single-rate LDPC codes. Additionally, for multi-rate LDPC codes, a multi-rate weighted normalized throughput metric is introduced and will be used for code optimization and performance evaluation.

A. Key Factors in Throughput-Optimized LDPC Design
In most LDPC coding schemes, achieving good decoding performance requires a decoder with relatively high hardware resource usage and multiple decoding iterations. A typical LDPC decoder [30], [31] demands substantial layout and routing resources to connect check node units (CNUs) and variable node units (VNUs), as well as considerable random access memory (RAM) resources to store extrinsic information during iterative decoding. Furthermore, they often require numerous iterations to achieve the desired decoding performance, which limits the decoder’s throughput and may result in high power consumption [32]. Rather than addressing these challenges by designing elaborate decoding algorithms or decoder architectures, this paper focuses on optimizing complexity and throughput at the initial code design stage, and proposes a class of LDPC codes, referred to as throughput-optimized LDPC codes, that aim to maximize throughput per unit of resource consumption.
In order to design throughput-optimized LDPC codes, as illustrated in Fig. 1, two key factors must be considered in the code construction stage, namely the number of non-zero elements in the parity-check matrix H as shown in Fig. 1(a) (denoted as E) and the number of decoding iterations as shown in Fig. 1(b) (denoted as I). The parameter E directly impacts the hardware resource consumption of the decoder. As demonstrated in [33], [34], the amount of RAM required to store extrinsic information and the number of interconnects between CNUs and VNUs increase with E. Additionally, in [35], LDPC decoders with different H density (defined as E divided by the total number of elements in H) were implemented on a Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA). The results indicate that the utilization of FPGA resources, including LUTs, FFs, and RAMs, shows a roughly linear relationship with E. Similarly, [21] suggests that the decoder complexity increases approximately linearly with the number of non-zero entries. Based on the analyses and experimental results reported in [21], [33], [34], [35], a rough estimate of the decoder’s hardware resource usage is adopted as

W = αE

(1)

where α is a constant related to the specific decoder implementation. Depending on implementation focus, W can be measured in terms of LUTs, FFs, RAMs, or their combination. On the other hand, for a single-rate LDPC code with an information block length of K, the throughput of LDPC decoders can be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAN et al.: THROUGHPUT-OPTIMIZED MULTI-RATE LDPC CODES FOR SATELLITE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

6115

Fig. 1. Illustration of the kwo key factors in throughput-optimized LDPC implementation. (a) Hardware resources usage affected by the number of non-zero elements in the parity-check matrix. (b) Decoding latency affected by the number of decoding iterations.

expressed as [36, Ch. 6]

T = Kf

(2)

IS

where f is the decoder clock frequency, I is the number of decoding iterations, and S is the number of clock cycles per iteration. In certain high-speed communication scenarios, multicore parallel decoders [37], [38] are often employed to achieve higher decoding throughput. Minimizing the resource usage of a single decoder allows for a greater number of parallel cores in a resource-limited system, and this can significantly enhance the normalized decoding throughput [35]. Therefore, it is essential to consider not only the throughput T of a single-core LDPC decoder but also its hardware resource usage W . Taking into account both hardware resource usage and decoding throughput, we define the normalized throughput as a performance metric that reflects the achievable throughput per unit of resource usage, which is formally given by

γ = T = 1 × Kf W αE IS

(3)

The unit of the normalized throughput γ is expressed as bps per unit resource.1 In (3), α and f are primarily related to the specific decoder architecture, while S is mainly determined by the used decoding algorithm. If the same decoding algorithm and decoder architecture are adopted, α, f and S remain approximately constant for LDPC codes with different parity-check matrices. This leads to a simplified measure of normalized

1Depending on the design needs, resource units may include LUTs, FFs, RAMs, etc.

throughput for single-rate LDPC as

γ˜ = 1 × K

(4)

EI

As shown in (4), the desired throughput-optimized LDPC codes should exhibit two key characteristics. First of all, they should demonstrate excellent decoding performance, requiring fewer iterations I to achieve a given error rate. Secondly, their parity-check matrices should be sufficiently sparse, characterized by a smaller E value, to reduce hardware resource consumption. While conventional threshold-optimized codes typically focus only on decoding performance, throughput-optimized codes introduce matrix sparsity as an additional optimization parameter, thereby increasing the complexity of the design and optimization process. The authors of [20] adopted a similar design strategy for single-rate irregular LDPC codes. The codes they designed show a significant reduction in decoding complexity compared to throughput-optimized codes, resulting in higher data throughput, while still maintaining excellent decoding performance. In the subsequent sections, we demonstrate that this design strategy is also effective for multi-rate LDPC codes.

B. Proposed Multi-Rate Weighted Normalized Throughput Metric for LDPC Codes
In satellite communication systems, channel coding schemes must support flexible code rates due to varying channel conditions and data rate requirements for different terminals. Therefore, this paper focuses on the design of multi-rate throughput-optimized LDPC codes, which is more challenging than single-rate code construction. In particular, multi-rate codes with a nested parity-check matrix structure are adopted, which allows multiple code rates to share a single decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6116

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

Fig. 2. Structure of nested multi-rate P-LDPC codes protomatrix obtained through lengthening.

We begin by presenting the multi-rate weighted normalized

throughput metric. Suppose the code ensemble C to be designed

has D code rates r1, . . ., rD. The corresponding parity-check
matrices are Hr1 , . . ., HrD in a nested structure, with the largest matrix denoted as H. We follow the same strategy as in (4) to

define the normalized throughput for multi-rate LDPC codes,

which is the ratio of decoding throughput to hardware resource

usage. However, the case is different for multi-rate codes, which

requires a more detailed discussion.

Firstly, for the resource factor, the parameter E in (4) is

replaced by Etotal, where Etotal represents the total number of non-zero elements in the entire parity-check matrix H. This

change is due to the fact that all code rates share the same decoder

in practical hardware implementations of LDPC codes with a

nested structure, and the resource consumption of the decoder

is proportional to Etotal. Secondly, for the throughput factor,

the K/I term is replaced by a weighted sum of the decoding

throughput at each code rate, represented as

D d=1

wd

Kd Id

,

where

wd is the weighting factor, which can be assigned as the usage

frequency of rate rd in practice. Here, Kd and Id denote the

information block length and the number of decoding iterations

for rate rd, respectively. Consequently, as an extension of the

single-rate normalized throughput metric, the weighted normal-

ized throughput metric for multi-rate LDPC codes is defined as

follows.

γ˜(C)

=

1 Etotal

×

D d=1

wd

Kd Id

(5)

The key idea of the proposed metric is to link the hardware resource consumption of the entire code ensemble through Etotal. Using the proposed metric as the optimization objective during the code construction ensures a lower overall hardware implementation complexity. Additionally, the decoding iterations for each code rate are incorporated into the metric through a weighted sum, allowing for the fulfillment of different code design requirements.
This paper primarily examines the multi-rate protograph LDPC (P-LDPC) codes obtained through lengthening with a protomatrix structure as depicted in Fig. 2. These codes are widely used in satellite communication scenarios, such as the accumulate-repeat-4-jagged-accumulate (AR4JA) codes [23] in the CCSDS standard. The rate-rd code has a protomatrix Brd of size m × nd (d ∈ {1, 2, . . . , D}), with elements that are non-negative integers, potentially greater than one. The latter protomatrix Brd+1 can be constructed by adding nd+1 − nd columns to Brd , keeping the same number of rows. The code rate

rd is computed as rd = 1 − m/nd. Let the largest protomatrix be denoted as B, where B = BrD = {bi,j }i=1,...,m,j=1,...,nD . Using the two-step lifting method [39] to construct the entire parity-check matrix H, B is first lifted by a small factor L1 to eliminate the multi-edges and obtain a base matrix containing
only 1 or 0 entries. This base matrix is then lifted by a factor
L2, replacing the 1’s with circulant permutation matrix (CPM) and 0’s with zero matrices to obtain the final parity-check matrix H. Consequently, it follows that Etotal = L1L2 × i,j bi,j and Kd = L1L2 × kd, where kd = nd − m. The metric in (5) for two-step-lifting multi-rate P-LDPC codes can be further ex-
pressed as follows.

γ˜(CB) =

1 i,j bi,j

×

D d=1

wd

kd Id

(6)

The proposed multi-rate weighted normalized throughput metric and optimization techniques in this paper are also applicable to other types of multi-rate P-LDPC codes, such as rate-compatible (RC) codes that feature a raptor-like protomatrix structure [40], [41]. Since we primarily focus on multi-rate LDPC codes constructed through lengthening, the optimization results for RC LDPC codes are not discussed in this paper.

III. DESIGN OF THROUGHPUT-OPTIMIZED MULTI-RATE LDPC CODES
In this section, we first introduce the protograph extrinsic information transfer (PEXIT) algorithm, which is used to estimate the required number of decoding iterations. Next, we formulate the optimization problem for constructing throughput-optimized multi-rate LDPC codes, using the proposed weighted normalized throughput metric as the optimization objective. Finally, a protomatrix search method based on the differential evolution (DE) algorithm is proposed to find the codes that maximize the multi-rate weighted normalized throughput.

A. PEXIT Analysis for Iteration Estimation

The PEXIT algorithm [42] is widely used for analyzing the
threshold performance of protograph-based LDPC due to its low
computational complexity and accurate threshold predictions.
In this work, the PEXIT algorithm is employed to estimate the
number of decoding iterations Id under a constrained decoding threshold. Specifically, for a given protomatrix B, the function fPEXIT(B, η∗) returns the required PEXIT iterations to achieve the target energy per bit to noise power spectral density ratio (Eb/N0) value η∗. The parameter Id for code rate rd is then determined as follows.

Id = fPEXIT(Brd , ηd∗), d = 1, . . . , D

(7)

where ηd∗ is the constrained decoding threshold for rate rd. For a protomatrix B = {bi,j }i=1,...,m,j=1,...,n with code rate
R = m/n, let Ci denote the i-th check node and Vj denote
the j-th variable node, corresponding to the i-th row and the j-th column of B, respectively. The steps of fPEXIT(B, η∗)
for computing the required iterations I under a constrained

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAN et al.: THROUGHPUT-OPTIMIZED MULTI-RATE LDPC CODES FOR SATELLITE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

6117

decoding threshold η∗ using the PEXIT algorithm are described as follows [42]:
1) Initialization: For j = 1, . . . , n, the channel mutual information (MI) is computed as:

+∞
Ich,j = 1 −
−∞

1

e−

(l−σ02 /2)2 2σ02

2πσ02

· log2(1 + e−l)dl

= J (σ0)

(8)

where the parameter σ0 is defined as:

σ0 = 8Rη∗

(9)

For i = 1, . . . , m and j = 1, . . . , n, the a priori MI from Ci to Vj is initialized as IAi→,Vj = 0. 2) Variable nodes to check nodes update: For i = 1, . . . , m and j = 1, . . . , n, the extrinsic MI from
Vj to Ci is computed as:

IEj→,Vi = J (bi,j − 1)[J −1(IAi→,Vj )]2 + [J −1(Ich,j )]2

+

bi ,j [J −1(IAi →,Vj )]2

i =i

(10)

and the a priori MI from Vj to Ci is updated as IAj→,Ci = IEj→,Vi . 3) Check nodes to variable nodes update:
For i = 1, . . . , m and j = 1, . . . , n, the extrinsic MI from
Ci to Vj is computed as:

IEi→,Cj = 1 − J (bi,j − 1)[J −1(1 − IAj→,Ci)]2

+

bi,j [J −1(1 − IAj ,→Ci)]2

(11)

j =j

and the a priori MI from Ci to Vj is updated as IAi→,Vj = IEi→,Cj . 4) APP-LLR MI update:
For j = 1, . . . , n, the MI between the log-likelihood ratio
and the codeword bit is computed as:

IAj P P

=J

bi,j [J −1(IAi→,Vj )]2 + [J −1(Ich,j )]2 (12)

i

5) Judgement:
a) If the number of iterations does not exceed the maximum allowed iterations and IAj P P = 1, ∀j, decoding under the constrained threshold η∗ is successfully com-
pleted, and the current PEXIT iterations number is
returned. Otherwise, the algorithm proceeds to step 2
for further iterations.
b) If the iteration count exceeds the maximum iterations and IAj P P = 1, ∃j, decoding fails under the constrained threshold η∗, and a predefined large integer is
returned.

In conventional threshold-optimized LDPC design, where the
number of PEXIT iterations is predetermined, a comprehensive search is performed to find the minimum value of η∗ that allows
the PEXIT algorithm to successfully converge, thereby deter-
mining the accurate decoding threshold. This process involves repeated evaluations of the function fPEXIT(B, η∗), resulting in relatively high complexity. In contrast, this work uses the function fPEXIT(B, η∗) only once to calculate the required PEXIT iterations for a constrained decoding threshold, thereby signifi-
cantly reducing the computational complexity.

B. Problem Formulation

By maximizing the multi-rate weighted normalized through-
put metric defined in (6), throughput-optimized multi-rate P-
LDPC codes with low hardware resource utilization and fast
decoding convergence can be obtained. To ensure the decoding
performance under low iterations, a relatively small upper limit, Imax, is imposed on Id, i.e., Id ≤ Imax, d = 1, . . . , D. Furthermore, as reported in [23], to guarantee the linear minimum
distance growth property of designed codes, the weights of the columns to be optimized in B are constrained to be at least dv,min = 3. Let these columns be denoted as vectors bu for u = 1, . . . , U . The column weight constraints can then be expressed by inequalities 1T bu − dv,min ≥ 0, u = 1, . . . , U .
In summary, suppose the columns to be optimized in B are bu, u = 1, . . . , U , the optimization problem is defined with the following inputs: the constrained decoding thresholds ηd∗ and weighting factors wd (for d = 1, . . . , D), the upper limit Imax on the number of iterations. The problem is formulated as follows.

max
B

γ˜(CB) =

1 i,j bi,j

×

D d=1

wd

kd Id

(13)

s.t. Id ≤ Imax,

d = 1, . . . , D

1T bu − dv,min ≥ 0, u = 1, . . . , U

(14)

where the required decoding iterations Id under the constrained threshold ηd∗ is calculated using the PEXIT algorithm according to (7).
Unlike previous studies, such as those by Tang et al. [21], which primarily concentrated on optimizing decoding thresholds while manually restricting E and I, the proposed optimization problem uses the multi-rate weighted normalized throughput as the objective. This allows the optimization to simultaneously target both high throughput and low resource consumption. Meanwhile, the decoding thresholds are treated as performance constraints in (7). Experimental results in Section IV and Section V show that this design strategy can effectively obtain throughput-optimized codes with minimal resource usage, while maintaining comparable decoding performance to conventional threshold-optimized methods.

C. Protomatrix Search Based on DE Algorithm
The optimization problem presented in Section IV-A is nonconvex and involves multiple discrete variables. The size of its search space grows exponentially with the number of variables, making a brute-force search infeasible. To address this, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6118

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

employ the differential evolution (DE) algorithm [29], a genetic algorithm that produces approximate optimal solutions through successive evolutionary steps. The DE algorithm is particularly effective for handling complex problems with many parameters, such as protomatrix optimization. During each evolutionary iteration, protomatrices with higher multi-rate weighted normalized throughput scores are selected, gradually leading to the development of throughput-optimized codes over multiple generations. The main steps of the proposed algorithm are outlined as follows.
GIVEN: the number of code rates D; the Q integer variables xq(q = 1, 2, . . . , Q) in the m × nD protomatrix B; the nonnegative minimum and maximum values of the variables xmin and xmax; the minimum column weight dv,min; the constrained decoding thresholds vector η∗ = (η1, . . . , ηD); the weighting factors wd for d = 1, . . . , D; the upper limit of PEXIT iterations Imax; the number of candidate matrices S and the number of generations G; the crossover probability pc.
1) Initialization: For s = 1, . . . , S, generate the initial candidate protomatrix B(s0) with the Q integer variables randomly chosen from [xmin, xmax].
2) Mutation: For s = 1, . . . , S, q = 1, . . . , Q, the q-th variable of the s-th mutation matrix M(sg) in generation g is defined by
Ms(g)(q) = Φ(B(t1g)(q) + 0.5(Bt(2g)(q) − B(t3g)(q))
where t1, t2, t3 are three different integers randomly chosen from [1, S]. The function Φ(x) replaces x with the closest integer in [xmin, xmax]. 3) Crossover: For s = 1, . . . , S, q = 1, . . . , Q, the q-th variable of the s-th new candidate matrix Ns(g) is generated by

Ns(g)(q) =

Ms(g)(q) B(sg)(q)

, with probability pc, , otherwise.

4) Selection: For s = 1, . . . , S, candidate protomatrices for the (g + 1)th generation are selected according to the rule:

B(sg+1)=

N(sg) Bs(g)

, if γ˜(CNs(g) )I(N(sg), B(sg)) ≥ γ˜(CBs(g) ), , otherwise.

where the indicator function I(N(sg), B(sg)) returns 1 if the number of satisfied inequality constraints in (14) of Ns(g) is not less than Bs(g) and otherwise returns 0. 5) Termination: Step 2-4 are executed for G generations and the candidate protomatrix in the G-th generation that satisfies all the constraints and gives the highest multi-rate weighted normalized throughput is selected as the final solution for B. Instead of lengthening the protomatrix rate-by-rate [24], [43], the proposed search algorithm optimizes the entire protomatrix directly to maximize the multi-rate weighted normalized throughput, leading to significant reductions in both decoding iterations and hardware resource consumption.

TABLE II CODE RATE EMPHASIS AND WEIGHTING FACTORS FOR DIFFERENT SCENES

IV. CODE DESIGN EXAMPLE AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION BASED ON PEXIT ANALYSIS
In this section, we present designing examples of specific fourrate throughput-optimized P-LDPC codes using the proposed code optimization method. Theoretical analyses and comparisons of the decoding performance and throughput based on the PEXIT algorithm are also provided.

A. Protomatrix Design

As a demonstration, we design multi-rate P-LDPC codes with

code rates 1/2, 2/3, 3/4 and 4/5, the same rate setting as the

AR4JA code in the CCSDS standard [44], following the code

structure illustrated in Fig. 2. Significantly, the non-punctured

code structure [43] is adopted which offers faster decoding

convergence than punctured codes. The optimization target B

has a size of 4 × 20. As suggested in [45], three columns of

the protomatrix are fixed as weight-2 columns for better per-

formance. To limit the search space, the maximum value of the

entries is set to 3. Thus, B has the form as

⎡

⎤

1 0 0 x1 x2 . . . x16 x17

B = ⎣⎢⎢00

1 0

0 1

x18 x35

x19 x36

... ...

x33 x50

x34 x51

⎥⎥⎦

(15)

1 1 1 x52 x53 . . . x67 x68

In (15), the optimization target B has 68 integer variables

xq, where q = 1, . . . , 68 and 0 ≤ xq ≤ 3. The minimum col-

umn weight constraints are expressed as

3 l=0

xu+17 l

≥

3

for

u = 1, 2, . . . , 17 with dv,min = 3. Optimization is carried out

with Imax = 25, η∗ = (1.25, 1.83, 2.27, 2.61) dB, pc = 0.3,

S = 700 and G = 200. The constrained threshold vector η∗

is selected based on the decoding thresholds of Nguyen’s

delay-limited code [24] under 20 decoding iterations. As a

threshold-optimized code, it exhibits low decoding thresholds

across all rates. This constrained threshold setting serves as a

well-performing baseline, while the relaxed iteration constraint

Imax = 25 leaves room to improve decoding throughput and

reduce resource usage during optimization.

With regard to the weighting factors wd, three scenes (Scene

A, B and C) with different weighting values are considered

in code design and performance evaluation to demonstrate the

applicability of our proposed method, as summarized in Table II.

Scene A assigns equal importance to all code rates, representing

a balanced usage case. Scene B reflects a low-rate dominant

setting, corresponding to small user terminals with limited power

and poor channel conditions. In contrast, Scene C emphasizes

high-rate usage, suited for scenarios with higher transmit power

and better channel conditions. The optimized multi-rate codes

for Scene A, B and C are denoted as CA, CB and CC , respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAN et al.: THROUGHPUT-OPTIMIZED MULTI-RATE LDPC CODES FOR SATELLITE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

6119

TABLE III MULTI-RATE WEIGHTED NORMALIZED THROUGHPUT γ˜ AND RESOURCE ESTIMATE ETOTAL COMPARISON WHEN ACHIEVING DIFFERENT PEXIT DECODING
THRESHOLDS1 FOR CODES WITH THE SAME LENGTH UNDER DIFFERENT SCENES2

The corresponding protomatrices BCA , BCB and BCC after an extensive search using the DE algorithm are given in (16), (17) and (18) shown at the bottom of this page. The protomatrix for code rate 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, 4/5 can be obtained by selecting the first 8, 12, 16, and 20 columns of the entire protomatrix, respectively.
We choose the AR4JA code [23] and Nguyen’s delay-limited code [24] as benchmark codes for comparison, since the former is a widely adopted standard design and the latter is specifically optimized for minimizing decoding iterations. For CA, CB, CC , the AR4JA code and Nguyen’s code, the hardware resource consumption estimates Etotal are 75L1L2, 72L1L2, 73L1L2, 78L1L2, 93L1L2, respectively. 2 This implies that all three of our designed codes exhibit lower decoder hardware usage than the benchmark codes. Specifically, Etotal is reduced by 19.4%–22.6% compared to Nguyen’s code and 3.8%–7.7% compared to the AR4JA code, with CB achieves the lowest usage. However, to achieve the same decoding thresholds, our codes generally require slightly more iterations than Nguyen’s code in exchange for improved weighted normalized throughput. The decoding threshold versus iteration performance and the normalized throughput comparison are presented in Fig. 3 and Table III, respectively. This trade-off is intentional and aligns with our

2The hardware resource consumption estimate Etotal is compared with the same transmitted code length for the three codes. Nguyen’s code and the
proposed codes are lifted by L1L2, while the AR4JA code is lifted by 2L1L2 to match the code lengths of the other two codes, as it uses a 3 × 11 protomatrix
with one column for puncturing.

⎡

320101001

BCA = ⎣⎢⎢33

3 3

0 1

2 1

0 0

0 0

1 0

0 1

0 1

012031111

⎡ 310201003

BCB = ⎣⎢⎢33

2 1

1 1

1 0

0 1

0 0

1 0

0 1

2 3

002121110

⎡ 302101003

BCC = ⎢⎢⎣01

1 0

0 2

3 1

0 1

0 0

1 0

0 1

2 1

020021110

primary objective of maximizing normalized throughput under constrained hardware resources.

B. Theoretical Performance Analysis Based on PEXIT

This section presents further theoretical analyses of the three
optimized codes based on PEXIT, including an evaluation
of multi-rate weighted normalized throughput under different
threshold performance requirements and a comparison of de-
coding thresholds under varying iterations.
A comparison of the multi-rate weighted normalized throughput γ˜ of the five codes is shown in Table III. The constrained threshold vector η∗ in Section IV-A is selected as the required threshold values. The highest γ˜ value for each scene is marked in bold. As shown in Table III, the proposed three
codes consistently outperform the two benchmark codes in terms of multi-rate weighted normalized throughput γ˜ in all scenes. While the total resource estimates Etotal for CA, CB, and CC remain at a similar and relatively low level, their required PEXIT iterations (I1, I2, I3, I4) vary noticeably, resulting in different throughput outcomes in the three scenes. Among them, CA maintains near-optimal iteration counts across all code rates,
which contributes to its generally favorable throughput performance in all scenes. Compared to Nguyen’s code, CA achieves γ˜ gains of 14.31% in Scene A, 16.22% in Scene B, and 13.30% in Scene C. In comparison with the AR4JA code, the corre-
sponding improvements rise to 38.31%, 35.71%, and 39.93%, respectively. In contrast, CB, which is particularly optimized for

⎤

22001211200

2 1

0 1

1 0

1 0

0 2

3 1

1 1

2 0

1 0

0 1

01⎥⎥⎦

(16)

00220000022

⎤

11010010002

1 1

1 0

0 0

0 1

0 1

1 0

1 1

0 2

2 0

0 1

00⎥⎥⎦

(17)

01322201121

⎤

00132011000

0 0

1 2

0 0

2 2

3 3

2 1

0 0

0 1

2 0

2 1

01⎦⎥⎥

(18)

30200021102

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6120

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

Fig. 3. Decoding thresholds comparison under different number of PEXIT iterations.

low-rate-dominated scenes, requires the fewest iterations at code rate 1/2 and 2/3. As a result, it achieves the highest normalized throughput in Scene B with γ˜ improvements of 21.01% over Nguyen’s code and 41.30% over the AR4JA code. Finally, CC achieves the highest normalized throughput in Scene C. It yields a 15.45% improvement over Nguyen’s code and a 42.58% gain compared to the AR4JA code. These results confirm that the proposed codes, each tailored to a specific scene, effectively achieve the highest multi-rate weighted normalized throughput in their respective target scenes.
In Fig. 3, a comparison of decoding thresholds is presented, with detailed views of iterations 15–20 in each subplot. Among all considered codes, Nguyen’s code still achieves the optimal decoding thresholds in most cases, whereas our codes require slightly more iterations to reach similar thresholds as a result of maximizing normalized throughput. CA maintains performance close to Nguyen’s across all rates, making it a strong generalpurpose choice. CB yields the lowest decoding thresholds among the three proposed codes under low code rates, even surpassing Nguyen’s code at rate-1/2. CC , on the other hand, performs best among the proposed codes at high code rates, approaching the optimal results. The observed performance trends confirm the effectiveness of the tailored design for different code rate usage distributions.
V. NUMERICAL SIMULATION AND PERFORMANCE COMPARISON
In this section, practical LDPC codes are constructed for numerical evaluation over different channel models. The proposed protomatrix, given in (16)–(18), is lifted with L1 = 4

to remove parallel edges using the progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm [46]. The resulting base matrix is then lifted with L2 = 256 using the simulated annealing method [47] to construct parity check matrices. For a fair comparison, both Nguyen’s delay-limited code and the AR4JA code are lifted using the same algorithms. Nguyen’s code is lifted with the same factors, while the AR4JA code is lifted with L1 = L1 = 4 and L2 = 2L2 = 512 to ensure equal information lengths and transmitted block lengths. The information lengths of rates 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, and 4/5 are 4096, 8192, 12288, and 16384, respectively.
A. Channel Assumptions and Parameters
Three types of satellite channels are considered in this article, i.e., the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, the Rician fading channel and the Doppler-affected channel with frequency offsets, with BPSK as the modulation scheme.
In particular, as discussed in detail in [48], [49], the partial Rician fading channel model for coded-interleaving systems is adopted. A segment length of s = 100 bits is used in the simulation, with each segment experiencing independent fading. The Rician K factor (defined as the power ratio between the line-of-sight component and the scattered components) is set to 5 dB to represent moderate fading conditions.
To evaluate the impact of Doppler effects in high-mobility satellite scenarios, we consider a normalized frequency offset (NFO) of ΔfdTs = 1 × 10−4, following the typical setting in [50], [51]. In simulation, the transmitted symbol x(n) is rotated by a phase term e−j2πnΔfdTs over a frame of 4096 symbols. The NFO is estimated and compensated before LDPC decoding using the widely adopted expectation-maximization (EM) algorithm tailored for iterative decoders [50].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAN et al.: THROUGHPUT-OPTIMIZED MULTI-RATE LDPC CODES FOR SATELLITE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

6121

Fig. 4. FER performance comparison over an AWGN channel with fixed Fig. 5. FER performance comparison over a partial Rician fading channel

iterations = 20.

(K = 5 dB) with fixed iterations = 20.

B. FER Performance Analysis
The frame error rate (FER) performance of the two benchmark codes and the three proposed codes is firstly evaluated. To ensure fairness, the number of decoding iterations is fixed as 20 in the simulation, as Nguyen’s delay-limited code is specifically optimized for this iteration count.
Fig. 4 shows the FER performance of the proposed codes and the two benchmark codes under belief-propagation (BP) [36] decoding. CA shows an improvement of approximately 0.2 dB over the AR4JA code across all four code rates at a target FER of 10−3 . Compared to Nguyen’s code, however, a performance gap of about 0.1 dB is observed at code rate 1/2 and 4/5. On the other hand, CB demonstrates near-optimal performance at low code rates. However, its performance degrades at higher rates, with gaps of 0.10 dB and 0.16 dB observed at rates 3/4 and 4/5, respectively. In contrast, CC exhibits a complementary trend, achieving FER performance within 0.05 dB of Nguyen’s code at high rates (3/4 and 4/5), but showing larger gaps at rates 1/2 and 2/3.
The FER performance over partial Rician channels with K = 5 dB is presented in Fig. 5. Compared to the AWGN case, the FER curves are noticeably flatter, which is consistent with the results reported for partial Rician fading channels in [49]. At a target FER of 10−3, the required Eb/N0 increases by approximately 1.9–2.8 dB across all code rates relative to the AWGN results. In addition, FER results under Doppler-affected channels with NFO = 1 × 10−4 are shown in Fig. 6, with performance degradations of approximately 0.3-0.4 dB for the four code rates compared to the AWGN case.
Although the absolute FER performance of each code varies under different channel conditions, the relative advantages of the proposed three codes remain consistent. Specifically, CB remains highly competitive at rate 1/2 and 2/3, with its performance closely approaching that of Nguyen’s code. In contrast, CC demonstrates near-optimal performance at rate 3/4 and 4/5, with its performance consistently within 0.1 dB of the optimal result under each channel condition. As expected, CA achieves

Fig. 6. FER performance comparison over a Doppler-affected channel with a normalized frequency offset ΔfdTs = 1 × 10−4 with fixed iterations = 20.
the most balanced performance across all rates, with its FER results remaining close to the optimal and generally falling between those of CB at low code rates and CC at high code rates. The results demonstrate that even under different types of non-Gaussian fading, the proposed codes continue to exhibit their intended performance advantages.
C. Multi-Rate Weighted Normalized Throughput Performance Comparison
In this section, the multi-rate weighted normalized throughput γ˜ is thoroughly examined and compared under different channel conditions based on simulation results. To distinguish it from the theoretical estimate of Id derived from the PEXIT analysis in Section IV, for code rate rd, we denote by Idsim(pe, ξ) (abbreviated as Idsim) the required number of BP decoding iterations to achieve a target FER of pe at a bit energy-to-noise ratio (Eb/N0) of ξ in simulations following the notation in [52]. In practice, Idsim is obtained by gradually reducing the maximum decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6122

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 4, APRIL 2026 TABLE IV REQUIRED DECODING ITERATIONS (I1sim, I2SIM, I3SIM, I4SIM) COMPARISON1

Fig. 7. Multi-rate weighted normalized throughput γ˜ comparison under the AWGN channel. Baseline Eb/N0 values for code rates 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, and 4/5 are set as η∗AWGN = (1.53, 2.12, 2.50, 2.80) dB.

iterations [20], [21] in simulation until the target FER is no longer met. The actual multi-rate weighted normalized throughput γ˜ can be calculated by substituting the simulation-derived required decoding iterations Idsim into (6).
In this work, the target FER is set to pe = 10−3. To evaluate the throughput performance, we adopt the baseline Eb/N0 vector η∗, defined as the lowest Eb/N0 values at which Nguyen’s codes achieve pe = 10−3 under a maximum of 20 decoding iterations for the four code rates. According to Figs. 4, 5 and 6, the baseline vectors η∗s (in dB) are set as
ηA∗WGN = (1.53, 2.12, 2.50, 2.80),
ηR∗ ician, K=5 dB = (3.33, 4.30, 5.03, 5.62),
ηD∗ oppler, ΔfdTs=1×10−4 = (1.92, 2.50, 2.85, 3.17). (19)
The required decoding iterations (I1sim, I2sim, I3sim, I4sim) across the considered channels are summarized in Table IV. The simulated iterations Idsim deviate from the estimated value Id predicted by PEXIT analysis. This is because Id is derived using the PEXIT algorithm based on the decoding threshold, which only reflects the minimum Eb/N0 at which successful decoding becomes theoretically possible. In contrast, Idsim is obtained under a practical performance constraint, where the FER is fixed at 10−3. Nevertheless, the simulation results exhibit the same multi-rate weighted trend as the theoretical predictions across all channel conditions. Specifically, CA achieves performance comparable to the benchmark Nguyen’s code at all rates, with

an additional iteration count of no more than 4. CB demonstrates competitive or even superior performance at low code rates (1/2
and 2/3), but requires notably more iterations at higher rates. For
instance, in the AWGN channel, it needs 8 additional iterations over Nguyen’s code at the 4/5 rate. In contrast, CC requires fewer iterations at code rates 3/4 and 4/5, while its performance at low
rates is less competitive. Based on the required iterations Idsim and the resource esti-
mates Etotal, the multi-rate weighted normalized throughput γ˜ values are calculated and compared in Figs. 7, 8 and 9, corre-
sponding to the AWGN, partial Rician fading, Doppler-affected
channel, respectively. It can be observed that the numerical
results obtained from simulations are consistent with the PEXIT
theoretical analyses in Section IV-B. In general, the proposed codes CA, CB, CC achieve the highest multi-rate weighted normalized throughput in Scene A, Scene B, and Scene C, respec-
tively, which aligns with the intended design objectives. Taking the partial Rician fading channel as an example, CA achieves a γ˜ improvement of 58.67% over the AR4JA code and 15.61% over Nguyen’s code in Scene A. In Scene B, CB provides gains of 58.10% and 19.41% over the two benchmarks, respectively. In Scene C, CC outperforms the AR4JA code and Nguyen’s code by 61.75% and 16.17%, respectively. Notably, even when applying a non-targeted code, e.g., CB in Scene A, considerable multi-rate weighted normalized throughput improvements are
still observed. For instance, under the partial Rician channel, CB in Scene A achieves gains of 51.02% over the AR4JA code and 10.04% over Nguyen’s code.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAN et al.: THROUGHPUT-OPTIMIZED MULTI-RATE LDPC CODES FOR SATELLITE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

6123

Fig. 8. Multi-rate weighted normalized throughput γ˜ comparison under the partial Rician fading channel with K = 5 dB. Baseline Eb/N0 values for code rates 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, and 4/5 are set as η∗Rician, K=5 dB = (3.33, 4.30, 5.03, 5.62) dB.

Fig. 9. Multi-rate weighted normalized throughput γ˜ comparison under the Doppler-affected channel with NFO ΔfdTs = 1 × 10−4. Baseline Eb/N0 values for code rates 1/2, 2/3, 3/4, and 4/5 are set as η∗Doppler, ΔfdTs=1×10−4 = (1.92, 2.50, 2.85, 3.17) dB.

It is worth noting that the primary factors underlying the performance improvements over the two benchmarks differ in nature. Taking CA as a representative example, the normalized throughput advantage over the AR4JA code is primarily attributed to a substantial reduction in the number of decoding iterations (averaging over 30%). In contrast, the improvement over Nguyen’s code is mainly due to lower hardware resource consumption, with the total estimated resource Etotal reduced by 19.4%. These comparative results further demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed multi-rate weighted normalized throughput metric, which incorporates both resource usage and decoding iterations.

D. FER Comparison With the Same Multi-Rate Weighted Normalized Throughput
In practical communication systems, the required decoding throughput can be fulfilled either by adjusting the number of decoding iterations or by increasing the number of parallel decoder cores. When a specified throughput is achieved under fixed hardware constraints, throughput-optimized LDPC codes offer the advantage of allowing more decoding iterations, thereby enabling better error-correction performance. To demonstrate this, a representative operating point of CA is selected from Fig. 7, where the decoding iteration configuration (I1sim, I2sim, I3sim, I4sim) = (23, 20, 21, 23) yields a multi-rate weighted normalized throughput γ˜ = 6.14 × 10−3 in Scene A.

Fig. 10. FER performance comparison at the same multi-rate weighted normalized throughput levels. Operation point configurations are specified in Table V.
For fair comparison, the decoding iterations of the benchmark codes are set to (18, 18, 18, 17) for Nguyen’s code and (21, 21, 21, 21) for the AR4JA code, achieving comparable throughput levels. The corresponding configurations are summarized in Table V.
The corresponding FER performance curves are shown in Fig. 10. At the same normalized throughput γ˜ level, the FER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6124

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VEHICULAR TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 75, NO. 4, APRIL 2026

TABLE V OPERATING POINT CONFIGURATIONS AT THE SAME MULTI-RATE WEIGHTED
NORMALIZED THROUGHPUT LEVEL
curves of the proposed throughput-optimized code exhibit a steeper slope in the waterfall region. In particular, CA achieves at least 0.1 dB coding gain over Nguyen’s code at a FER level of 10−3, and around 0.2 dB gain over the AR4JA code across all code rates. These results confirm that the proposed throughput-optimized LDPC codes can achieve improved decoding performance under the same throughput and hardware resource constraints.
VI. CONCLUSION
This work proposes a new design method for constructing throughput-optimized multi-rate LDPC codes tailored to highspeed data transmission satellite communication with restricted decoder complexity. The study begins by analyzing key factors affecting LDPC decoder resource usage and decoding throughput from the perspective of code construction, leading to the introduction of the multi-rate weighted normalized throughput metric for multi-rate LDPC codes. Based on this metric, a constrained optimization problem is formally defined using the PEXIT algorithm, and an efficient optimization method based on the differential evolution algorithm is developed to solve it. The proposed design approach significantly reduces the number of non-zero elements in the parity-check matrix and minimizes decoding iterations across all code rates. In addition, different codes are optimized to match specific application scenes in which different levels of importance are assigned to the code rates. Simulation results under various channel conditions show that the proposed LDPC codes achieve lower resource consumption and fewer decoding iterations, ultimately resulting in substantial improvements in decoding throughput per unit of resource usage. These advantages are validated by comprehensive theoretical analyses and numerical simulations, confirming the effectiveness and adaptability of the proposed approach.
REFERENCES
[1] I.-K. Fu et al., “Satellite and terrestrial network convergence on the way toward 6G,” IEEE Wireless Commun., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 6–8, Feb. 2023.
[2] T. Liang, T. Zhang, and Q. Zhang, “Toward seamless localization and communication: A satellite-UAV NTN architecture,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 103–110, Jul. 2024.
[3] M. Sheng, D. Zhou, W. Bai, J. Liu, and J. Li, “6G service coverage with mega satellite constellations,” China Commun., vol. 19, no. 1, pp. 64–76, Jan. 2022.
[4] A. Ahmed, A. Al-Dweik, Y. Iraqi, and E. Damiani, “Integrated terrestrialwired and LEO satellite with offline bidirectional cooperation for 6G IoT networks,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 9, pp. 15767–15782, May 2024.
[5] M. Toyoshima, “Recent trends in space laser communications for small satellites and constellations,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 693–699, Feb. 2021.

[6] L. Li, X. Zhang, J. Zhang, C. Xu, and Y. Jin, “Advanced space laser communication technology on cubesats,” ZTE Commun., vol. 18, no. 4, 2020, Art. no. 45.
[7] Y. Li, M. Wang, K. Hwang, Z. Li, and T. Ji, “LEO satellite constellation for global-scale remote sensing with on-orbit cloud ai computing,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 16, pp. 9369–9381, 2023.
[8] B. Zhang et al., “Progress and challenges in intelligent remote sensing satellite systems,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Appl. Earth Observ. Remote Sens., vol. 15, pp. 1814–1822, 2022.
[9] J. Sun, X. Chen, C. Jiang, and S. Guo, “Distributionally robust optimization of on-orbit resource scheduling for remote sensing in space-air-ground integrated 6G networks,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 43, no. 1, pp. 382–395, Jan. 2025.
[10] X. Luo, H.-H. Chen, and Q. Guo, “LEO/VLEO satellite communications in 6G and beyond networks–technologies, applications and challenges,” IEEE Netw., vol. 38, no. 5, pp. 273–285, Sep. 2024.
[11] X. Lin, S. Cioni, G. Charbit, N. Chuberre, S. Hellsten, and J.-F. Boutillon, “On the path to 6G: Embracing the next wave of low earth orbit satellite access,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 36–42, Dec. 2021.
[12] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[13] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, no. 10, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[14] C. Zhang, X. Mu, J. Yuan, H. Li, and B. Bai, “Construction of multirate quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for satellite communications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 69, no. 11, pp. 7154–7166, Nov. 2021.
[15] B. Gadat, L. Barthe, B. Matuz, and C. Poulliat, “LDPC codes with low error floors and efficient encoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2023, pp. 6658–6663.
[16] C. T. Nguyen, H. D. Le, C. T. Nguyen, and A. T. Pham, “Toward practical HARQ-based RC-LDPC design for optical satellite-assisted vehicular networks,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 8619–8634, Dec. 2024.
[17] A. P. Adithyababu, F. Boulos, and S. Caizzone, “Avionic satellite communication terminal requirements and technology maturity analysis,” IEEE Aerosp. Electron. Syst. Mag., vol. 39, no. 1, pp. 4–17, Jan. 2024.
[18] O. B. Yahia et al., “Evolution of high-throughput satellite systems: A vision of programmable regenerative payload,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 27, no. 3, pp. 1565–1597, Jun. 2025.
[19] H. Alam, A. De Domenico, D. López-Pérez, and F. Kaltenberger, “Throughput and coverage trade-off in integrated terrestrial and nonterrestrial networks: An optimization framework,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. Workshops, 2023, pp. 1553–1558.
[20] B. Smith, M. Ardakani, W. Yu, and F. R. Kschischang, “Design of irregular LDPC codes with optimized performance-complexity tradeoff,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 489–499, Feb. 2010.
[21] C. Tang, M. Jiang, C. Zhao, and H. Shen, “Design of protograph-based LDPC codes with limited decoding complexity,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 2570–2573, Dec. 2017.
[22] V. Jamali, Y. Karimian, J. Huber, and M. A. Attari, “On the design of fast convergent LDPC codes for the BEC: An optimization approach,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 2, pp. 351–363, Feb. 2015.
[23] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, C. R. Jones, and K. Andrews, “Capacityapproaching protograph codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 876–888, Aug. 2009.
[24] T. V. Nguyen, H. N. Dang, and H. T. Nguyen, “Delay-limited ratecompatible protograph LDPC codes,” Int. J. Eng. Trends Technol., vol. 67, pp. 115–123, 2019.
[25] Y. Yu, W. Chen, and L. Wei, “Design of convergence-optimized non-binary LDPC codes over binary erasure channel,” IEEE Wireless Commun. Lett., vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 336–339, Aug. 2012.
[26] Y. Yu and W. Chen, “Design of low complexity non-binary LDPC codes with an approximated performance-complexity tradeoff,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 514–517, Apr. 2012.
[27] M. Barakatain, D. Lentner, G. Böecherer, and F. R. Kschischang, “Performance-complexity tradeoffs of concatenated FEC for higherorder modulation,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 38, no. 11, pp. 2944–2953, Jun. 2020.
[28] M. Barakatain and F. R. Kschischang, “Low-complexity rate-and channelconfigurable concatenated codes,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 39, no. 7, pp. 1976–1983, Apr. 2021.
[29] R. Storn, K. V. Price, and J. Lampinen, Differential Evolution-A Practical Approach to Global Optimization. Berlin, Germany: Springer 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAN et al.: THROUGHPUT-OPTIMIZED MULTI-RATE LDPC CODES FOR SATELLITE COMMUNICATION SYSTEMS

6125

[30] J. Nadal and A. Baghdadi, “Parallel and flexible 5G LDPC decoder architecture targeting FPGA,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Syst., vol. 29, no. 6, pp. 1141–1151, Jun. 2021.
[31] S. Hu, K. Han, Y. Zhu, G. Shen, F. Wang, and J. Hu, “High throughput and hardware efficient hybrid LDPC decoder using bit-serial stochastic updating,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 3653–3664, Sep. 2023.
[32] J. Nadal, M. Yaoumi, E. Dupraz, F. Guilloud, and F. Leduc-Primeau, “Energy optimization of faulty quantized min-sum LDPC decoders,” in Proc. 12th Int. Symp. Topics Coding, 2023, pp. 1–5.
[33] Z. Wang and Z. Cui, “A memory efficient partially parallel decoder architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Syst., vol. 15, no. 4, pp. 483–488, Apr. 2007.
[34] T. T. Nguyen-Ly, K. Le, V. Savin, D. Declercq, F. Ghaffari, and O. Boncalo, “Non-surjective finite alphabet iterative decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2016, pp. 1–6.
[35] V. Pignoly, B. Le Gal, C. Jego, and B. Gadat, “High data rate and flexible hardware QC-LDPC decoder for satellite optical communications,” in Proc. IEEE 10th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., 2018, pp. 1–5.
[36] W. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes: Classical and Modern. New York, NY, USA: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2009.
[37] G. Falcao, L. Sousa, and V. Silva, “Massively LDPC decoding on multicore architectures,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst., vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 309–322, Feb. 2011.
[38] M. Li, V. Derudder, K. Bertrand, C. Desset, and A. Bourdoux, “High-speed LDPC decoders towards 1 Tb/s,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 68, no. 5, pp. 2224–2233, May 2021.
[39] D. G. Mitchell, R. Smarandache, and D. J. Costello, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes based on pre-lifted protographs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 5856–5874, Oct. 2014.
[40] T.-Y. Chen, K. Vakilinia, D. Divsalar, and R. D. Wesel, “Protographbased raptor-like LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 1522–1532, May 2015.
[41] F. Amirzade, M.-R. Sadeghi, and D. Panario, “Construction of protographbased LDPC codes with chordless short cycles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 70, no. 1, pp. 51–74, Jan. 2024.
[42] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on exit analysis,” in Proc. IEEE Glob. Telecommun. Conf., 2007, pp. 3250–3254.
[43] H. Uchikawa, “Design of non-precoded protograph-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2014, pp. 2779–2783.
[44] Low Density Parity Check Codes for Use in Near-Earth and Deep Space Applications, Exp. Specification CCSDS 131.1-O-2, 2007.
[45] T. Van Nguyen, A. Nosratinia, and D. Divsalar, “The design of ratecompatible protograph LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 10, pp. 2841–2850, Oct. 2012.
[46] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[47] V. Usatyuk and I. Vorobyev, “Simulated annealing method for construction of high-girth QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Int. Conf. Telecommun. Signal Process., 2018, pp. 1–5.
[48] K.-M. Cheung, D. D. Morabito, and M. Sanchez-Net, “Design and modeling of a coded-interleaving system in the presence of fading,” in Proc. IEEE Aerosp. Conf., 2021, pp. 1–11.
[49] D. Divsalar, M. S. Net, K.-M. Cheung, and S. Dolinar, “LDPC codes with different frame sizes over multipath fading channels,” in Proc. IEEE Aerosp. Conf., 2024, pp. 1–11.
[50] N. Noels et al., “A theoretical framework for soft-information-based synchronization in iterative (turbo) receivers,” EURASIP J. Wireless Commun. Netw., vol. 2005, 2005, Art. no. 576206.
[51] T. Chen, Y. Zhan, H. Xie, and X. Xiao, “Code-aided carrier synchronization with adjustable operating ranges for satellite communications,” in Proc. Int. Wireless Commun. Mobile Comput., 2023, pp. 806–811.
[52] M. Yaoumi, F. Leduc-Primeau, E. Dupraz, and F. Guilloud, “Optimization of protograph LDPC codes based on high-level energy models,” in Proc. 16th Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst., 2019, pp. 6–10.

Xing Pan (Graduate Student Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree in electronic engineering in 2022 from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, where he is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electronic engineering. His research focuses on the design, optimization, and implementation of channel coding for satellite communication systems.
Zhao Chen (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electronic engineering from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2010 and 2015, respectively. He was a Postdoctoral Researcher with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Illinois Institute of Technology, Chicago, IL, USA and Department of Electrical Engineering, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA, in 2016 and 2017, respectively. Since 2020, he has been an Assistant Professor with the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. His research interests include applications of coding theory, optimization, and statistical learning in wireless communications, mobile computing, and information security. He was the recipient of the First Prize from the Science and Technology Award of Chinese Institute of Electronics in 2022 and Best Paper Award for EURASIP Journal on Wireless Communications and Networking in 2024.
Yukui Pei (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2002 and 2008, respectively. He is currently an Associate Professor with the Beijing National Research Center for Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University. His current research interests include coding theory and applications in wireless communication, network security, UWB communication SOC design, and implementation.
Liuguo Yin (Senior Member, IEEE) received the M.Eng. and Ph.D. degrees from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2002 and 2005, respectively. From 2005 to 2007, he was a Research Assistant with the School of Aerospace, Tsinghua University. From 2007 to 2008, he was an ERCIM Postdoctoral Fellow with the Norwegian University of Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway. Since 2009, he has been with the School of Information Science and Technology, Tsinghua University, where he is currently a Professor. His research interests include channel coding, joint source-channel coding, aerospace communications, wireless multimedia communication systems, and quantum secure direct communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 06:05:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

