26th Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE2018)

Low decoding complexity of LDPC Codes over the

Binary Erasure Channel

Sareh Majidi Ivari Electrical & Computer Engineering
Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada m_sareh@ece.concordia.ca

M. Reza Soleymani Electrical & Computer Engineering
Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada msoleyma@ece.concordia.ca

Yousef R. Shayan Electrical & Computer Engineering
Concordia University Montreal, Quebec, Canada yshayan@ece.concordia.ca

AbstractвҖ”In this paper, we present a new low complexity decoding algorithm outperforming existing schemes. When the Belief Propagation fails and cannot solve all the erased bits, the guessing algorithm makes assumptions on a set of erased bits. However, in our new algorithm instead of guessing the values of a set of message bits, the decoder selects a set of check nodes and makes assumption on bits connected to them. The number of possibilities is reduced by half because the field is binary resulting in lower decoding complexity. The proposed decoding algorithm is applied to two regular half rate LDPC codes with lengths of а«ҡа«ҷа«ҷа«ҷ andа«ӣа«ҷа«ҷа«ҷ. The theoretical belief propagation (BP) threshold for these two codes is 0.429. It is shown that the actual BP threshold is improved using the new algorithm. Setting the number of possibilities to two, we achieve a threshold oЬҺа«ҷЗӨ а«қа«ң which is higher than the BP theoretical.
Keywords-component; LDPC codes; BEC; Belief Propagation; Guessing;
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes were introduced by Gallager in the early 1960вҖҷs [1]. At that time, computers could not run codes with a large length. Therefore, LDPC codes were not practical and they were forgotten for several decades. In 1990вҖҷs they were rediscovered by D. MacKay and Neal [2]. LDPC codes have recently received a lot of attention due to their performance, speed, and simplicity. LDPC codes show good properties over the Binary Erasure Channel (BEC). Their performance is close to the Shannon capacity. They utilize iterative decoding algorithms. This class of algorithms is called message passing algorithms [3]. One important class of these algorithms is the belief propagation algorithm (BP) [3]. BP is a suboptimal decoder and approximates the maximum likelihood decoding [3]. There is a tradeoff between complexity of decoder and performance in LDPC codes.
A significant research has been done to design LDPC codes with good performance. The objective function of these works is to determine the pair distribution,бҲәЯЈЗЎ Я©бҲ» which yield the best performance. These codes are known as performance-optimized codes [4], [5]. The problem with these codes is that their complexity is high due to a large number of iterations required for the convergence of the decoder. For some applications when real-time decoding is needed, the decoder may stop after a defined number of iterations. Therefore, the decoder cannot get to the maximum achievable rate. On the other hand, some researchers have worked on designing low decoding complexity

LDPC codes. These codes are denoted by complexity-optimized codes [6]-[7]. All these optimizations have been done to design the desired LDPC code that achieves the best tradeoff between complexity and performance.
Some works have been done to reduce the complexity of decoder or increase the speed of decoding for a given code by improving the iterative algorithms. In [9] Layered Belief Propagation L-BP algorithm has been proposed. In this algorithm, the check nodes are divided into subgroups called layers and each iteration is broken into multiple sub-iterations. It has been shown that the convergence of decoding LDPC codes improves by using a simple and efficient layering strategy.
Authors in [10] took a different approach. Instead of trying to find a good degree distribution, the performance of an existing code has been improved over the binary erasure channel (BEC). In [10] for the first time, the performance of an existing code was improved by guessing values of unknown variable nodes for short-length LDPC codes. The problem of the guessing algorithm is its decoding complexity. In [11] Maxwell decoder is proposed to achieve maximum a posteriori (MAP) solution for decoding LDPC codes over the BEC. However, Maxwell decoder is not practical, due to the high decoding complexity.
Authors in [12] proposed Tree-Structure Expected Propagation algorithm. TEP works as Maxwell decoder. However, its complexity is the same as BP algorithm. In each iteration, TEP removes one check node of degree two and one of the variable nodes connected to it. If two variable nodes connected to a check node of degree two were also connected to a check node of degree three, then a check node of degree one is released. Then, BP can continue decoding. In [13], Authors proposed Generalized TEP (GTEP) algorithm. GTEP removes one check node and one variable node in each iteration. The TEP and GTEP improve the performance of the LDPC codes and have the complexity the same as the BP. However, the success of these methods depends on the structure of the parity-check matrix. Therefore, applying these methods on an existing code is not always successful.
In this paper, we propose a method to improve the performance of an existing LDPC code without having an exponential increase in complexity. The proposed method is based on the BP and the guessing algorithm. If BP gets stuck, then the decoder chooses a set of check nodes and makes assumption on their values. Regarding the binary field, the number of possibilities which has to be checked is reduced by

978-1-5386-4916-9/18/$31.00 В©2018 IEEE

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

505

26th Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE2018)

half in this method. In this paper, we apply the proposed method to a regular LDPC (3, 6) codes with lengths 1000 and 2000. The threshold of a regular LDPC code is 0.429 according to the density evolution. Due to the cycles and finite code length, the actual threshold is less than 0.429. Applying this new method and considering the maximum number of possibilities of two, the actual rate increases to 0.43.
This paper is organized as follows. In section II the performance and complexity of LDPC codes are discussed. Also, the performance of the codes in terms of matrix density and the gap between design rate and the actual rate is discussed. In section III the proposed method is introduced and applied to regular LDPC codes. The simulation results are provided in section IV. Conclusions are drawn in section V.

II. PERFORMANCE AND COMPLEXITY OF LDPC CODES
Message passing decoding algorithms are used to decode LDPC code. They are suboptimal. One important subclass of the message-passing algorithm is BP. BP is very simple and fast over the BEC. BP looks for check nodes of degree one after removing known variable nodes and their associated edges in the Tanner graph. BP transfers the value of the check node of degree Ні to its adjacent variable node [3]. The performance of an LDPC using the BP is evaluated by Threshold. The threshold Яқа®»аҜү associated with a degree distribution pair бҲәЙүЗЎ ЙҸбҲ» is defined as the maximum tolerable loss for which the information can be reliably transmitted over theбҲәЙӮбҲ». The threshold is given by [3],

ЙӮаӯҶаӯ”бҲәЙүЗЎ ЙҸбҲ» аөҢ ВҸВӢВҗ аө¬а®ӣаө«а¬өа¬ҝа®Ўаӯ¶бҲәа¬өа¬ҝаӯ¶бҲ»аөҜаө° ЗЎВҡФ–бҲәНІЗЎ ЙӮаӯҶаӯ”бҲ»ЗӨ

(1)

In LDPC бҲәЭҠЗЎ ЭҮбҲ»code, the actual rate is defined as Ні аөҶ ЙӮаӯҶаӯ” and if the actual rate is closer to the design rateбҲәвҖ« ЭҺвҖ¬аөҢ аҜһбҲ», then the
аҜЎ
code has a better performance. In LDPC codes, the decoding
complexity is related to the density of the parity check matrix вҖ«ЬӘвҖ¬ and denoted by ИҹбҲәвҖ«ЬӘвҖ¬бҲ» and is defined as [15]

ИҹбҲәвҖ«ЬӘвҖ¬бҲ»

аөҢ

а¬ө аҜЎаҜҘ

аё«аөӣбҲәЭ…ЗЎ

ЭҶбҲ»ЗЈ

вҖ«ЬӘвҖ¬аҜңЗЎаҜқ

аөҚ

НІаөҹаё«ЗӨ

(2)

In equation (2) it is shown that with increasing the number of ones in the matrix (edges in the Tanner graph) the decoding complexity increases. The lower bound on the density of LDPC matrices shows the relationship between complexity and performance of LDPC codes which is defined as [14]

ВҺВӢВҸ
аҜЎХңа®¶

ВӢВҗВҲ

ОҝаҜЎ

аөҗ



аҜ„а°ӯа¬ҫаҜ„а°®аҜҹаҜЎаҙға°ӯ а¬өа¬ҝа°Ӣ

(3)

вҖ«ЬӯвҖ¬а¬ө

аөҢ

бҲәНі

ЙӮаӯҶаӯ”ЭҲЭҠ

а®•а°ҫаұҢ а¬өа¬ҝа®•а°ҫаұҢ

аөҶ

ЙӮаӯҶаӯ”бҲ»ЭҲЭҠ

а¬ө а¬өа¬ҝа®•а°ҫаұҢ

ЙӮаӯҶаӯ”

вҖ«ЬӯвҖ¬а¬¶

аөҢ

бҲәНі

аөҶ

ЙӮаӯҶаӯ”бҲ»ЭҲЭҠ

а¬ө а¬өа¬ҝа®•а°ҫаұҢ

where Яң is multiplicative gap and defined as follows [14]:

вҖ« ЭҺвҖ¬аөҢ бҲәНі аөҶ ЙӮаӯҶаӯ”бҲ»бҲәНі аөҶ ЯңбҲ»

(4)

Ні аөҶ ЙӮаӯҶаӯ” аөҶ вҖ«ЭҺвҖ¬ Яң аөҢ Ні аөҶ ЙӮаӯҶаӯ”
If the actual rate is equal to the design rate, then the gap would be zero. If the gap between the actual rate and the design rate increases, then Яң increases. By combining and simplifying equations (2), (3) and (4) we have

Ь°вҖ«ЭӢвҖ¬ЗӨ

вҖ«ЭҸЭҒЭҠЭӢЭӮЭӢвҖ¬

аөҗ

ЭҠ

ЗӨ бҲәаҜҹаҜЎа°ӯа°·аІҚаІҚа°ҫа°ҫаұҢаұҢа°·аіқбҲ»аІҚа°ҫаұҢ
аҜҹаҜЎа°ӯа°·аІҚа°ӯа°ҫаұҢ

(5)

This shows that a lower gap between the threshold and the design rate results in a logarithmic increase in the lower bound on the density. Therefore, a code with a better performance has higher decoding complexity. Following we will investigate how we can improve the performance of an existing LDPC codes without increasing the complexity of decoder considerably.

III. IMPROVING THE PERFOMRNCE OF AN EXISTING LDPC
CODE
In the previous section, it is shown that a lower gap between theoretical threshold and the design rate results in a higher density in the parity-check matrix. It means that an LDPC code with better performance has higher decoding complexity. However, the theoretical threshold is not achievable and BP gets stuck due to the short cycles in the LDPC codes. Here, we investigate situations when a BP gets stuck and cannot correct all the erased bits.

When BP gets stuck, there are two scenarios. The first scenario happens when the number of unknown variable nodes is equal to the number of independent equations. In other words, the matrix is full rank and there is a unique answer for the equations, however, BP cannot find them. The second scenario happens when the number of unknown bits is more than the number of independent equations. The matrix of the coefficients is not full rank. Therefore, there is no unique answer for the unknown bits. Fig.1 (a) and Fig. 1(b) show the Tanner graph when the first and the second scenarios happen, respectively. Equations at the check nodes in Fig.1 (a) are

вҖ«ЭҒЫ“вҖ¬а¬ө Ы–

аө… ЭҒа¬ө

ЭҒа¬¶ аө…

аө… ЭҒа¬¶

ЭҒа¬ё аөҢ

аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬ө

вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬ҙ

вҖ«Ы”вҖ¬ Ы–

ЭҒа¬· аө… ЭҒа¬ё аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬¶ ЭҒа¬ө аө… ЭҒа¬· аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬·

(6)

вҖ«ЭҒЫ•вҖ¬а¬¶ аө… ЭҒа¬· аө… ЭҒа¬ё аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬№

ЭҒаҜң and ЬҝаҜқ represent variable node Э… and check node ЭҶ , respectively. The rank of the matrix is equal to the number of erased bits. There are 4 unknown variable nodes and 4 independent equations. However, due to the cycle in the graph, BP gets stuck and cannot solve these equations. Equations at the check nodes in Fig.1 (b) are

ЭҒа¬ҙ аө… ЭҒа¬ө аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬ҙ

аөһЭҒЭҒа¬ҙа¬¶

аө… аө…

ЭҒа¬· ЭҒа¬·

аөҢ аөҢ

вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬ө вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬¶

(7)

ЭҒа¬ө аө… ЭҒа¬¶ аөҢ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬·

The rank of the matrix for these equations is three and there are four unknown variable nodes. The matrix is not full rank.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

506

26th Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE2018)

c0

e1

c1

e2

c2

e3

c3

e4

c5

(a)

e0

c0

e1

c1

e2

c2

e3

c3

(b)

Figure 1: Tanner graph for (a): the first scenario (b): the second scenario

Therefore, there is no unique solution for these equations and BP cannot solve these equations. If one of these scenarios happen the performance of the LDPC codes degrades. However, the guessing algorithm can solve these undesirable situations.In the following subsection A, Guessing algorithm is explained and based on that the proposed algorithm is discussed in subsection B.
A. Guessing algorithm
Authors in [10] proposed three algorithms. Algorithm A is the same as the BP over the BEC. In algorithm B, if algorithm A fails, the decoder makes some assumption on some of the erased bits. Then BP runs and solves all the remained erased bits. The check-sum determines if guesses are correct or not. This algorithm guesses values of the variable nodes with a higher degree. In the guessing algorithm, for вҖ« Э”вҖ¬guesses on the erased variable nodes there are НҙаҜ« possibilities. The decoder has to find the correct assumption. The correct assumption gives zero check-sum. The drawback of this algorithm is that the complexity of the decoder grows exponentially increasing with the number of guesses. Also, there is a limitation on the number of guessing variable nodes. Algorithm B can find the values of the erased bits in first and second scenarios. However, this algorithm has a probability of error greater than the maximum likelihood if the second scenario happens. To reduce the complexity and improve the performance, the authors proposed algorithm C. In algorithm C, the decoder defines a set of basic equations, if the set of basic equations has a unique solution then the received codeword is maximum likelihood decodable. In algorithm C the complexity does not change but the probability of error reduces.
One of the problems of the guessing algorithm is its probability of error. If the second scenario happens, then the guessing algorithm has a probability of error greater than maximum likelihood. Moreover, it is possible that the guessing algorithm declares a wrong codeword as the output of the decoding. However, the main problem of the guessing algorithm is its complexity. With increasing the number of guesses on the unknown variable nodes the complexity of the decoder grows exponentially. Therefore, there is a limitation on the number of guesses [10]. In the next subsection we propose a method which reduces the complexity of the guessing algorithm while improves the performance of the LDPC codes.
B. Proposed method
In a binary field, we can reduce the number of possibilities using the proposed method. In the guessing algorithm, the decoder chooses a set of variable nodes and poses assumptions

on them. However, in the proposed method the decoder chooses a set of check nodes and makes assumptions on the variable nodes connected to them. In this algorithm if the decoder chooses a set of ЭҮ check nodesбҲјЬҝа¬ҙЗЎ Ьҝа¬өЗЎ ЗҘ ЗЎ ЬҝаҜһбҲҪ which are:

Ьҫа¬өа¬өЗӨ ЬҪа¬ө аө… вҖ« Ъ®вҖ¬аө…Ьҫа¬өаҜҮЗӨ ЬҪаҜҮ аө… Ьҝа¬ө аөҢ НІ

аөқвҖ«ЪӯвҖ¬

вҖ«Ъ°вҖ¬

вҖ« ЪӯЪӯЪӯвҖ¬ЗЎ

(8)

ЬҫаҜһа¬өЗӨ ЬҪа¬ө аө… ЗҘ аө…ЬҫаҜһаҜҮЗӨ ЬҪаҜҮ аө… ЬҝаҜһ аөҢ НІ

Where бҲәаө…бҲ» is the addition of a binary field (Galois field) also b's and c'sЯібҲјНІЗЎНібҲҪ. The number of unknown variables in these equations isЬ°бҮұ

Ь°бҮұ аөҢ ПғаҜҮаҜқаӯҖа¬ө ЭүЬҪвҖ«Э”вҖ¬бҲәаөӣЬҫаҜңаҜқаё«Э… аөҢ НіЗЎ ЗҘ ЗЎ ЭҮаөҹбҲ»ЗӨ

(9)

and the number of possibilities for node values is:

НҙаҜҮбҮІ а¬ҝаҜһ ЗӨ

(10)

Proof: All possible combinations of the binary N-tuple бҲәЬҪа¬өЗЎ ЗҘ ЗЎ ЬҪаҜҮбҲ» isНҙаҜҮ. In linear algebra, given вҖ« ЬҜвҖ¬binary independent set of linear equations, the number of the possible solutions isНҙаҜҮа¬ҝаҜҶ [15].

In addition, the probability of error for the proposed method is the same as algorithm B in the guessing algorithm. However, the complexity of the decoding is reduced.

For example in figure 1.a, if a check node of degree two is selected likeвҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬ө , then the number of possibilities for variable nodes ЭҒа¬ө and ЭҒа¬¶ is two. Table 1 shows the possibilities for ЭҒа¬ө and ЭҒа¬¶ according to the value ofвҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬ө. It shows that if the value of вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬ө is one there are two possibilities forбҲәЭҒа¬өЗЎ ЭҒа¬¶бҲ». In this example, the decoder guesses two variable nodes while the number of possibilities is two.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

In this section, we apply the proposed method to regular бҲәНөЗЎНёбҲ» half-rate LDPC code for lengths of НіНІНІНІ and НҙНІНІНІ and evaluate the performance of the proposed method. These two codes have the same pair distribution. Therefore, they have the same theoretical threshold. The simulation results show how applying this method on these two codes improves the performance. The pairs distribution of these two codes is:

ЯЈбҲәвҖ«Э”вҖ¬бҲ» аөҢ вҖ«Э”вҖ¬а¬¶

Я©бҲәвҖ«Э”вҖ¬бҲ» аөҢ вҖ«Э”вҖ¬а¬№

According to equation (1), the theoretical threshold of this pair distribution isНІЗӨН¶НҙН». However, the actual threshold of the code is less thanНІЗӨН¶НҙН», due to the finite code lengths and short cycles in the codes. We evaluate the performance of the code for different channel erasure rates (channel threshold). Figures 2 and 3 show the probability that a packet received correctly versus different channel thresholds for the code lengths of НіНІНІНІ andНҙНІНІНІЗЎ respectively. We set the maximum number of the

Table 1: values of ЭҒа¬өЗЎ ЭҒа¬¶ if вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬ө аөҢ Ні
аўӢа«ҡ аўӢа«ӣ вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬ө
101

Table 2: values of ЭҒа¬өЗЎ ЭҒа¬¶ if вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬ө аөҢ НІ

аўӢа«ҡ

аўӢа«ӣ

вҖ«ЬҘвҖ¬а¬ө

0 00

011

1 10

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

507

26th Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE2018)
possibilities to two. As we can see from the results in Figure 3, if the channel threshold isНІЗӨН¶Нө, the probability that a packet has erasure after running BP is 0.7 and this probability reduces to 0.23 after running the proposed method.
Figure 4 shows the probability of success according to the proposed algorithm and the guessing algorithm. According to the simulation results, the probability of success for a certain number of possibilities in the proposed method is higher than the guessing algorithm. It means that the method needs smaller number of guesses than the guessing algorithm. Therefore, the complexity of the new guessing algorithm is less than the guessing algorithm.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we present a new low complexity decoding algorithm out performing existing schemes. When the Belief Propagation fails and cannot solve all the erased bits, the guessing algorithm makes assumptions on a set of erased bits. However, in our new algorithm instead of guessing the values of a set of message bits, the decoder selects a set of check nodes and makes assumption on bits connected to them. The number of possibilities is reduced by half because the field is binary resulting in lower decoding complexity. The proposed decoding algorithm is applied to two regular half rate LDPC codes with lengths of НіНІНІНІ andНҙНІНІНІ. The theoretical belief propagation (BP) threshold for these two codes is 0.429. It is shown that the actual BP threshold is improved using the new algorithm. Setting the number of possibilities to two, we achieve a threshold oВҲНІЗӨН¶Нө which is higher than the BP theoretical.

Probability that a packet received correctly

1 0.9 0.8 0.7 0.6 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.2 0.1
00.38

Belief Propagation Proposed Method

0.4

0.42

0.44

0.46

Channel Threshold

0.48

Figure 2: simulation results for code of lengthНіНІа¬·

Propability that a packet received correctly

1 Belief Propagation

0.9

Proposed Method

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

00.39 0.4 0.41 0.42 0.43 0.44 0.45 0.46 0.47 0.48 Channel Threshold

Figure 3: simulation results for code of lengthНҙ аөҲ НіНІа¬·

0.3 Proposed Method
Guessing Algorithm 0.28

Probability of Success

0.26

0.24

0.22

0.2

0.18

0.16 5

10

15

20

25

30

Number of Possibilities

Figure 4: probability of success with the number of success for the channel threshold of 0.43 and code of length Нҙ аөҲ НіНІа¬·
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-density parity-check codes, Cambridge, MA, USA, MIT Press, 1963.J.
[2] D.J.C. MacKay and R.M. Neal. Near shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes.IET JNL, 33:457вҖ“458, 1997.
[3] A. Shokrollahi, вҖңLDPC codes: An introduction,вҖқ Digital Fountain, Inc., Fremont, CA, Tech. Rep., Apr. 2, 2003.
[4] A. Shokrollahi, вҖңNew Sequences of Linear Time Erasure Codes Approaching the Channel Capacity,вҖқ in Proc. AAECC-13, 1999, pp. 65вҖ“ 76.
[5] O. Barak, D. Burshtein, and M. Feder, вҖңBounds on Achievable Rates of LDPC Codes used over the Binary Erasure Channel,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 10, pp. 2483вҖ“2492, Oct. 2004.
[6] I. Sason and G. Wiechman, вҖңBounds on the Number of Iterations for Turbo-Like Ensembles Over the Binary Erasure Channel,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, pp. 2602 вҖ“2617, Jun. 2009.
[7] B. Smith, M. Ardakani, W. Yu, and F. Kschischang, вҖңDesign of Irregular LDPC Codes with Optimized Performance-Complexity Tradeoff,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 489 вҖ“499, Feb. 2010.
[8] X. Ma and E. Yang, вҖңLow-Density Parity-Check Codes with Fast Decoding Convergence Speed,вҖқ in Proc. IEEE ISIT, Jun. 2004, p. 277.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

508

26th Iranian Conference on Electrical Engineering (ICEE2018)
[9] N. Laouini, L. Ben Hadj Slama, A. Bouallegue, вҖңFast decoding of low density parity check codes,вҖқ Proc. 9th International Conf. HONET, pp. 52-56, 2012.
[10] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, вҖңOn decoding of low-density parity-check codes over the binary erasure channel,вҖқ IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 439вҖ“454, Mar. 2004.
[11] C. Measson, A. Montanari, and R. Urbanke, вҖңMaxwell Construction: The Hidden Bridge Between Iterative and Maximum a Posteriori Decoding,вҖқ IEEE Trans. on Information Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5277вҖ“5307, 2008.
[12] P. M. Olmos, J. J. Murillo-Fuentes, and F. PВҙerez-Cruz, вҖңTree-structure expectation propagation for decoding LDPC codes over binary erasure

channels,вҖқ in Proc. 2010 IEEE International Symp. Inf. Theory, pp. 799вҖ“ 803.
[13] L. Salamanca, P. M. Olmos, J. J. Murillo-Fuentes, and F. PВҙerez-Cruz, вҖңTree Expectation Propagation for ML Decoding of LDPC Codes over the BEC,вҖқ IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 61, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2013.
[14] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2008.
[15] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and
Applications. 2nd Edition, Prentice-Hall, 2005.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

509

