Exploiting Noise Correlation for Channel Decoding
with Convolutional Neural Networks
Fei Liang, Cong Shen, and Feng Wu
University of Science and Technology of China
Email: lfbeyond@mail.ustc.edu.cn, {congshen, fengwu}@ustc.edu.cn
AbstractŌĆöInspired by the recent advances in deep learning, we
propose a novel iterative belief propagation-convolutional neural
network (BP-CNN) architecture to exploit noise correlation for
channel decoding under correlated noise. The standard BP
decoder is used to estimate the coded bits, followed by a CNN
to remove the estimation errors of the BP decoder and obtain a
more accurate estimation of the channel noise. Iterating between
BP and CNN will gradually improve the decoding SNR and hence
result in better decoding performance. To train a well-behaved
CNN model, we define a new loss function which involves not
only the accuracy of the noise estimation but also the normality
test for the estimation errors, i.e., to measure how likely the
estimation errors follow a Gaussian distribution. The introduction
of the normality test to the CNN training shapes the residual
noise distribution and further reduces the BER of the iterative
decoding, compared to using the standard quadratic loss function.
We carry out extensive experiments to analyze and verify the
proposed framework.
I. INTRODUCTION
Channel encoding and decoding are important components
in modern communication systems and tremendous progresses
have been made both in coding theory and its applications.
For example, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are
able to yield a performance close to the Shannon capacity for
AWGN channels with a properly optimized encoding structure
and the well developed belief-propagation (BP) decoding
algorithm [2]. However, in practical communication systems,
channels sometimes exhibit correlations in the noise samples
due to filtering, oversampling [3], and device noise [4]. For
example, phase noise and clock jitter in digital systems often
cause pink noise in digital systems [4].
A well-designed channel code may not have satisfactory
performance if the receiver is not designed to handle noise
correlation. Specifically, LDPC codes will encounter a perfor-
mance degradation under colored noise [5]. The difficulty in
addressing this issue mainly comes from the high-complexity
introduced by the colored noise. The most straightforward
method to address this issue is whitening, i.e. to transform
colored noise to white noise. However, this method needs
matrix multiplication, which is of high complexity for long-
length codes. Furthermore, the equivalent coded symbols after
whitening may exhibit different structure than the transmitted
symbols, which complicates the decoding. In theory, the
The work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China
under 61631017.
decoder can first estimate the noise distribution, and then
optimize the BP decoder using the estimated joint distribution.
This approach, nevertheless, is model-based and optimizing
the BP decoder with a joint noise distribution may also be
highly complex when the correlation is strong. Hence, a low-
complexity and robust decoder structure that can well exploit
the characteristics of noise correlations and can be applied to
different correlation models is desired.
Recent advances in deep learning provide a new direction to
tackle this problem. Instead of finding an algorithm based on
a pre-defined noise model, deep learning technologies allow
the system to learn an efficient network model directly from
training data. Deep learning has been applied in computer
vision [6], natural language processing [7], autonomous ve-
hicles [8] and many other areas, and the results have been
quite remarkable. Inspired by these advances, researchers have
recently tried to solve communication problems (including
channel decoding) using deep learning technologies [9]ŌĆō[15].
However, none of these works address the problem of efficient
decoding of linear codes under correlated channel noise.
In this paper, we design a novel receiver architecture to
tackle the decoding problem when correlation exists in channel
noise. This architecture concatenates a trained convolutional
neural network (CNN) with a standard BP decoder, and the
received symbols are iteratively processed between BP and
CNN ŌĆō hence the name iterative BP-CNN. At the receiver side,
the received symbols are first processed by the BP decoder
to obtain an initial decoding. Then, subtracting the estimated
transmit symbols from the received symbols, we obtain an
estimation of channel noise. Because of the decoding error,
the channel noise estimation is not exact. We then feed the
channel noise estimation into a CNN, which further removes
the estimation errors of the BP decoder and obtains a more
accurate noise estimation by exploiting the noise correlation
via training. The estimation results of CNN are then subtracted
from the received symbols and the results are fed back to
the BP decoder again. If the CNN is trained well to provide
an accurate estimation, less noise interference is left for
BP decoding. Iterating between BP and CNN will gradually
improve the decoding SNR and result in lower BER.
The proposed iterative BP-CNN decoder has many desir-
able properties. As we will see, increasing the number of
BP iterations provides little improvement under strong noise
correlation. Utilizing CNN will enhance the ability of the
978-1-5386-3180-5/18/$31.00 ┬®2018 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
LDPC
Encoder
BPSK
Modulator
+
+
BP
+
CNN
+
+
-
-
x
u
s
n
y
╦åx╦åx
╦ås╦ås
╦ån╦ån
╦£n╦£n
BP-CNN Decoder
BP-CNN Decoder
╦åy╦åy
Fig. 1. The proposed iterative decoding architecture which consists of a belief
propagation (BP) decoder and a feed-forward convolutional neural network
(CNN).
decoder to address noise correlation and better results can be
obtained with fewer BP iterations. The execution of CNN is
efficiently supported especially with the rapid development of
AI chips. Therefore, the incremental complexity of CNN will
not impede the application of the proposed architecture. In
addition, this method is data driven and does not require that
the noise correlation model has a specific format. When the
model format changes, the proposed method still works by
re-training the network.
Intuitively, the reason that CNN can help channel decoding
is similar to the success of CNN in low-level tasks in image
processing such as image denoising [16] or image super-
resolution [17]. This becomes more clear when we view the
correlation in channel noise as a ŌĆ£featureŌĆØ, which can be
extracted by CNN. However, our problem setting is very
different to these other applications where extracting features
is the ultimate goal. In the iterative BP-CNN architecture, the
goal of CNN is not only to accurately estimate the channel
noise and depress the residual error, but also to generate
an output that is beneficial to the BP decoder. This unique
requirement has motivated us to develop a novel loss function
for CNN training, which combines the effect of residual noise
power with a Jarque-Bera normality test [18]. We will see that
this new loss function plays an important role in the enhanced
BP-CNN decoder.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. The system
design, including the network training, is explained in detail in
Section II. Extensive experiments is in Section III. We finally
conclude this paper and discuss future works in Section IV.
II. SYSTEM DESIGN
A. System Framework
The proposed architecture is illustrated in Fig. 1. At the
transmitter, a block of uniformly distributed bits x of length ­ØÉŠ,
is encoded to a binary codeword u of length ­Øæüthrough a linear
channel encoder. In this paper, we focus on the LDPC code,
but the proposed method is readily applicable to other linear
block codes. The codeword u is then mapped to a symbol
vector s through the BPSK modulation.
The BPSK symbols will be passed through a channel with
additive Gaussian noise. The channel noise vector, denoted as
n of length ­Øæü, is modeled as a Gaussian random vector with
auto-correlation matrix ╬Ż. Note that the LDPC codeword may
be long, and as a result the size of ╬Ż can be significant.
The received vector y is received and can be written as
y = s + n.
(1)
The signal to noise ratio (SNR) is defined as
SNR = 10 log
(
­Øæā/­Ø£Ä2)
,
(2)
where ­Øæāis the average transmit power ­Øæā= ­Øö╝
[
­ØæĀ2]
and ­Ø£Ä2 in
Eqn. 2 is defined as the power of the complex noise samples.
Since the coding performance is evaluated with BPSK, the
effective noise only comes from the I-samples. Therefore, the
power of real noise samples n is ­Ø£Ä2/2. Here we assume that
the complex Gaussian noise is circularly symmetric.
A BP decoder is then used to decode the transmitted
information bit vector from y. Typically, there is a BPSK
soft demodulator before the BP decoding, to calculate the
log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) of the transmitted symbols with
the knowledge that the channel noise follows a Gaussian
distribution with power ­Ø£Ä2/2.
LLR(1)
­Øæ¢
= log Pr(­Øæ”­Øæ¢ŌłŻ­ØæĀ­Øæ¢= 1)
Pr(­Øæ”­Øæ¢ŌłŻ­ØæĀ­Øæ¢= ŌłÆ1) = 2­Øæ”­Øæ¢
­Ø£Ä2/2,
(3)
where ­ØæĀ­Øæ¢, ­Øæ”­Øæ¢denote the ­Øæ¢th BPSK symbol and the correspond-
ing received symbol, respectively, and the superscript (1) to
LLR indicates that this is the LLR computation for the initial
BP. In our system framework of Fig. 1, we omit this module
and merge it into the BP decoder for simplicity.
We use ╦ås to denote the estimated transmit symbols. Sub-
tracting it from the received symbols y, we obtain ╦ån as
╦ån = y ŌłÆ╦ås,
(4)
which can be viewed as an estimation of the channel noise.
Because of the decoding errors, ╦ån is not exactly the same as
the channel noise n. We can re-write ╦ån as
╦ån = n + ­ØØā,
(5)
where ­ØØāis the error vector of noise estimation.
We are now ready to explain the proposed BP-CNN decod-
ing architecture, as shown in the dashed box of Fig. 1. Inspired
by the successful application of CNNs in image denoising and
super-resolution, and noticing that the correlation in channel
noise n can be considered as a ŌĆ£featureŌĆØ that may be exploited
in channel decoding, we propose to concatenate a CNN after
BP, to utilize this correlation to suppress ­ØØāand get a more
accurate estimation of the channel noise. The details of the
proposed CNN and the associated training procedure will be
presented in subsequent sections. Using ╦£n to denote the CNN
output and subtracting it from the received vector y result in
╦åy = y ŌłÆ╦£n = s + n ŌłÆ╦£n = s + r
(6)
where r = nŌłÆ╦£n is defined as the residual noise. Then, the new
vector ╦åy is fed back to the BP decoder and another round of
BP decoding is performed. Note that before the second round
of BP iterations, the LLR values need to be updated as follows:
LLR(2)
­Øæ¢
= log Pr(╦å­Øæ”­Øæ¢ŌłŻ­ØæĀ­Øæ¢= 1)
Pr(╦å­Øæ”­Øæ¢ŌłŻ­ØæĀ­Øæ¢= ŌłÆ1),
(7)
where ╦å­Øæ”­Øæ¢denotes the ­Øæ¢th element of ╦åy, and the superscript
(2) to LLR indicates that this is the LLR computation for the
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
subsequent BPs after processing the noise estimate with CNN.
With more iterations, the LLR can be calculated in a similar
way.
The CNN should be trained to let the residual noise r be
beneficial to the subsequent BP decoding. We propose two
strategies for training the CNN and concatenating with BP.
1) Baseline BP-CNN. The CNN is trained to output a
noise estimation which is as close to the true channel
noise as possible. This is a standard method which
can be implemented using a quadratic loss function in
CNN training. Intuitively, an accurate noise estimation
will result in very low power residual noise and thus
very little interference to the BP decoding. In order to
calculate the LLR in (7), we also need to obtain an
empirical probability distribution of the residual noise,
denoted as ╦å­Øæā­ØØā(Ōŗģ). This can be done after the network
training is completed using the training data. Therefore,
we have
LLR(2)
­Øæ¢
= log
(
╦å­Øæā­ØØā(╦å­Øæ”­Øæ¢ŌłÆ1)/ ╦å­Øæā­ØØā(╦å­Øæ”­Øæ¢+ 1)
)
.
(8)
2) Enhanced BP-CNN. The baseline BP-CNN may not be
optimal considering that the channel encoding (such as
LDPC) is mostly optimized for the AWGN channel and
the residual noise may not necessarily follow a Gaussian
distribution. Therefore, another strategy is to depress the
residual noise power and simultaneously let the residual
noise follow a Gaussian distribution as much as possible.
By doing this, the LLR in (7) is calculated with the
assumption that the residual noise follows a Gaussian
distribution:
LLR(2)
­Øæ¢
= 2╦å­Øæ”­Øæ¢/­Ø£Ä2
r,
(9)
where ­Ø£Ä2
r is the power of the residual noise which
can be estimated using the training data. Compared to
the baseline BP-CNN, the enhanced BP-CNN has the
following advantages. First, the calculation of LLRs
becomes much easier. It needs to only estimate and store
the power of the residual noise rather than the empirical
probability distribution. Second, it may yield a better
performance considering the channel encoding is mostly
optimized for the AWGN channel.
In Section II-C, we will show how to train the network with
the above two strategies. With a depressed influence of noise,
the BP decoding is expected to yield a more accurate result.
The above processes can be executed iteratively to successively
depress the noise influence and improve the final decoding
performance.
B. CNN for Noise Estimation
As mentioned before, adopting CNN for noise estimation is
enlightened by its successful applications in computer vision.
For some specific image restoration tasks, previous works [16],
[17] have shown that CNN has a strong ability to restore
images by utilizing image features. In our task, the noise
correlation can be viewed as the feature and the CNN is trained
to utilize the feature for an accurate noise estimation.

 	

 

 



 	



Fig. 2. The adopted CNN structure for noise estimation.
In the proposed iterative BP-CNN architecture, the adopted
network structure, which is shown in Fig. 2, is similar to those
used for low-level tasks in image restoration [16], [17] but with
a conspicuous difference in that the input of our network is a
1-D vector instead of a 2-D image. As can be seen at the first
layer in Fig. 2, ­Øæś1 feature maps are generated from the input
data ╦ån, which can be expressed as
c1,­ØæŚ= ReLU(h1,­ØæŚŌłŚ╦ån + ­ØæÅ1,­ØæŚ),
(10)
where c1,­ØæŚis the ­ØæŚth feature map at the first layer, h1,­ØæŚis
the ­ØæŚth convolution kernel, which is essentially a 1-D vector
of length ­Øæō­ØæŚ, ­ØæÅ1,­ØæŚis the corresponding bias, and ReLU(Ōŗģ) is
the Rectified Linear Unit function (max(­Øæź, 0)) in order to
introduce nonlinearity [19]. The bias ­ØæÅ1,­ØæŚis a scalar and it
is added to each element of the convolution output. The bias
is added in a similar way in other layers.
At the ­Øæ¢th layer (­Øæ¢> 1), the convolution operation is
performed over all feature maps of the previous layer, which
can be viewed as a 2-D convolution as shown in Fig. 2. The
output can be written as
c­Øæ¢,­ØæŚ= ReLU(h­Øæ¢,­ØæŚŌłŚc­Øæ¢ŌłÆ1 + ­ØæÅ­Øæ¢,­ØæŚ),
(11)
where c­Øæ¢,­ØæŚis the ­ØæŚth feature map at the ­Øæ¢th layer. h­Øæ¢,­ØæŚis the
­ØæŚth convolution kernel of size ­Øæō­Øæ¢├Ś ­Øæś­Øæ¢ŌłÆ1 where ­Øæś­Øæ¢ŌłÆ1 is the
number of feature maps of the previous layer. We use ­ØÉ┐to
denote the number of total layers. At the last layer, the final
estimation of the channel noise is
╦£n = h­ØÉ┐ŌłŚc­ØÉ┐ŌłÆ1 + ­ØæÅ­ØÉ┐.
(12)
To summarize, the structure of a CNN is determined by its
number of layers, filter sizes, and feature map numbers in each
layer. These parameters need to be decided before training the
network. For simplicity of exposition, we denote the structure
of the network as
{­ØÉ┐; ­Øæō1, ­Øæō2, .., ­Øæō­ØÉ┐; ­Øæś1, ­Øæś2, ..., ­Øæś­ØÉ┐}.
(13)
C. Training
1) Loss function: It is well known in deep learning that
the performance of a network depends critically on the choice
of loss functions for training [20]. Generally speaking, a loss
function is to measure the difference between the actual CNN
output and its expected output, and it should be carefully
defined based on the specific task of the network. In the
proposed architecture, CNN is used to estimate the channel
noise and its output will influence the performance of BP
decoding in the next iteration. Therefore, a proper loss function
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
must be selected by fully considering the relationship between
CNN and the following BP decoding.
As introduced in Section II-A, to facilitate the subsequent
BP decoding, there are two strategies to train the network. One
is to only depress the residual noise power (baseline BP-CNN),
and the other one is to depress the residual noise power and
simultaneously shape its distribution (enhanced BP-CNN).
For baseline BP-CNN, the loss function can be chosen as
the typical residual noise power:
LossA = ŌłźrŌłź2
­Øæü,
(14)
where ­Øæüis the length of a coding block. Note that this is the
widely adopted quadratic cost function in deep learning.
For enhanced BP-CNN, how to define a proper loss function
is an open problem. In this work, we introduce normality test
to the loss function, so that we can measure how likely the
residual noise samples follow a Gaussian distribution. The new
loss function is formally defined as
LossB = ŌłźrŌłź2
­Øæü
+ ­Ø£å
(
­Øæå2 + 1
4 (­ØÉČŌłÆ3)2
)
.
(15)
The first term in (15) measures the power of the residual noise
and the second term, adopted from the Jarque-Bera test [18],
represents a normality test to determine how much a data set
is modeled by a Gaussian distribution. ­Ø£åis a scaling factor
that balances these two objectives. Specifically, ­Øæåand ­ØÉČin
(15) are defined as follows:
­Øæå=
1
­Øæü
Ōłæ­Øæü
­Øæ¢=1 (­Øæ¤­Øæ¢ŌłÆ┬»­Øæ¤)3
(
1
­Øæü
Ōłæ­Øæü
­Øæ¢=1 (­Øæ¤­Øæ¢ŌłÆ┬»­Øæ¤)2)3/2 , ­ØÉČ=
1
­Øæü
Ōłæ­Øæü
­Øæ¢=1 (­Øæ¤­Øæ¢ŌłÆ┬»­Øæ¤)4
(
1
­Øæü
Ōłæ­Øæü
­Øæ¢=1 (­Øæ¤­Øæ¢ŌłÆ┬»­Øæ¤)2)2 ,
(16)
where ­Øæ¤­Øæ¢denotes the ­Øæ¢th element in the residual noise vector,
and ┬»­Øæ¤is the sample mean. In statistics, ­Øæåand ­ØÉČare called
skewness and kurtosis, respectively. Although the Jarque-Bera
test is not the optimal normality test, the cost function is
derivable and simple for training. Furthermore, experimental
results show that it can provide a desirable output.
2) Generating the training data: To train the network, we
need both channel noise data n and estimated noise data ╦ån
from the BP decoding results. For the simulation results in
Section III, we focus on the channel models with known
(to the receiver) noise correlation functions, and thus we are
able to generate adequate channel noise samples to train the
network. For example, given the channel correlation matrix ╬Ż,
the channel noise samples can be generated by
n = ╬Ż1/2n­Øæż,
(17)
where n­Øæżis an AWGN noise vector. The estimated noise
╦ån can be obtained by generating uniform distributed binary
bits x and successively performing channel encoding, BPSK
mapping, simulated channel interference and BP decoding.
Another factor in generating the training data is the channel
condition, i.e., the signal to noise ratio (SNR), which will
determine the severity of errors of the BP decoding and hence
affect the input to the network. We use ╬ō to denote a set
of channel conditions to generate training data. If the channel
condition is very good, very few errors exist ╦ån and the network
may not learn the robust features of the channel noise. On the
other hand, if the channel condition is very bad, many errors
exist in ╦ån and they will mask the channel noise features, which
is also detrimental for the network training. Therefore, we
propose to generate training data under multiple channel SNRs
to avoid the risk of poor performance caused by selecting a
specific channel SNR.
III. EXPERIMENTS
A. Overview
Throughout all experiments, we use a LDPC code of rate
3/4. The code block length is 576 and the parity check
matrix is from [21]. The experimental platform is imple-
mented in TensorFlow [22]. The basic CNN structure is
{4; 9, 3, 3, 15; 64, 32, 16, 1}. We follow the common practice
to train the network. The network is initialized using the
Xavier initialization method [23] and trained with the Adam
optimization method [24]. The training data is generated under
multiple channel SNRs: ╬ō = {0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, 2, 2.5, 3} dB. We
adopt the stochastic gradient descent to optimize the CNN.
Each mini-batch contains 1400 blocks of data and the data of
each SNR occupies the same proportion. During the training
process, we check the loss value over the validation set every
500 iterations. Training continues until the loss does not
drop for a consecutive period of time (eight checks in our
experiment, which equals to 4000 iterations).
In all experiments, the setting is the same as stated above
unless otherwise specified. The system performance is mea-
sured by the bit error rate (BER). In order to test BERs with
high accuracy and low complexity, a total of 108 information
bits are tested for high SNRs and 107 bits for low SNRs. High
SNR causes lower BER and hence more bits are needed for
simulation. The code is available at https://github.com/liangfei-
info/Iterative-BP-CNN.
The correlation matrix ╬Ż for simulation is given by:
­Øø┤­Øæ¢,­ØæŚ= ­Ø£éŌłŻ­Øæ¢ŌłÆ­ØæŚŌłŻ
(18)
where ­Øø┤­Øæ¢,­ØæŚis the (­Øæ¢, ­ØæŚ)th element of ╬Ż, and ­Ø£éis the correlation
coefficient. This is widely adopted in the literature [3].
In the remainder of this section, we will analyze and verify
the proposed iterative BP-CNN decoding architecture from
different perspectives.
B. Performance Evaluation
1) BP-CNN reduces decoding BER: We first compare the
performances of the proposed method and the standard BP
decoder. For the BP decoder, total 50 iterations are executed
(denoted as ŌĆ£BP(50)ŌĆØ in the figure). For the proposed method,
we use its simplest form for testing, i.e. there is only one
iteration between the BP decoder and the CNN. In this case,
the receiver structure can be simply denoted as BP-CNN-
BP. We present the comparison results for two correlation
parameters: ­Ø£é= 0.8 represents a relatively strong correlation
model and ­Ø£é= 0.5 represents a moderate one. In addition, the
test results under an AWGN channel without any correlation
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
SNR(dB)
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
BER
BP(50)
BP(25)-CNN-BP(25), baseline
BP(25)-CNN-BP(25), enhanced
(a) ­Ø£é= 0.8, strong correlation. ­Ø£å= 0.1.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
SNR(dB)
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
BER
BP(50)
BP(25)-CNN-BP(25), baseline
BP(25)-CNN-BP(25), enhanced
(b) ­Ø£é= 0.5, moderate correlation. ­Ø£å= 10.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
SNR(dB)
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
BER
BP(50)
BP(25)-CNN-BP(25), baseline
BP(25)-CNN-BP(25), enhanced
(c) ­Ø£é= 0, no correlation. ­Ø£å= 10.
Fig. 3. Performance comparison of BP-CNN with the standard BP decoding. Only one iteration between CNN and BP decoder is executed for the proposed
design. The numbers in the brackets denote the BP iterations.
(­Ø£é= 0) are presented to demonstrate that the proposed method
can also work with uncorrelated noises, and thus has a wide
range of application. Both baseline and enhanced BP-CNNs
are tested. For enhanced BP-CNN, we set ­Ø£åto 0.1, 10 and 10
for ­Ø£é= 0.8, 0.5 and 0, respectively.
In order to isolate and identify the contribution of CNN,
we have kept the total number of BP iterations the same
in two systems. In the BP-CNN method, we execute 25 BP
iterations in each BP decoding process (denoted as ŌĆ£BP(25)-
CNN-BP(25)ŌĆØ in the figure), resulting in the same 50 BP
iterations as the standard BP decoder.
The experiment results are reported in Fig. 3. We can see
that both baseline and enhanced BP-CNN achieve signifi-
cant performance gains with correlated noise. In the strong
correlation case when ­Ø£é= 0.8, BP-CNN can improve the
decoding performance by approximately 3.5dB at BER=10ŌłÆ4.
It should be emphasized that this performance gain cannot be
compensated by more iterations in the standard BP decoder,
as BP(50) already achieves a saturating performance. In the
moderate correlation case with ­Ø£é= 0.5, the performance gain
becomes smaller, because the correlation is weaker and the
benefit of adopting a CNN is less. For the special case where
­Ø£é= 0, the nominal AWGN channel, the proposed method
performs similarly with the standard BP decoding. We thus
conclude that the iterative BP-CNN decoding method can
support a wide range of correlation levels, and the performance
gains vary with the noise correlation.
We can also compare the baseline and enhanced BP-CNN
decoders from Fig. 3. We see that enhanced BP-CNN further
outperforms the baseline strategy. In addition, enhanced BP-
CNN facilitates the calculation of LLRs for the next round of
BP decoding.
2) BP-CNN achieves performance gain with lower com-
plexity: Besides improving the decoding performance under
the same number of BP iterations, another desirable feature
of the iterative BP-CNN decoder is that it can outperform
the standard BP decoding with lower overall complexity. To
see this, we present another set of results in Fig. 4. The
implementation details are the same as Fig. 3 except that in the
BP-CNN decoder, the number of each BP decreases from 25
to 5. For comparison, we also plot the standard BP decoding
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
SNR(dB)
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
BER
BP(50)
BP(12)
BP(5)-CNN-BP(5), baseline
BP(5)-CNN-BP(5), enhanced
Fig. 4. BP-CNN achieves performance gains with lower complexity. ­Ø£é= 0.8.
performance with 12 and 50 iterations, respectively. Ideally,
we would like to set the BP parameters so that both methods
have exactly the same overall complexity, and then compare
their BER performances. However, an accurate comparison of
the complexity associated with a BP network and a CNN is
quite difficult. We get around this problem by comparing their
runtime under the same computation environment. Both are
implemented in TensorFlow and simulations are run with the
same computation resources. This is not accurate but it gives
an approximation. In our test environment, we observe that the
runtime of CNN with the structure {4; 9, 3, 3, 15; 64, 32, 16, 1}
is roughly equivalent to two BP iterations. This means that
the chosen BP(5)-CNN-BP(5) structure in Fig. 4 has approx-
imately the same complexity as the standard BP decoder
with 12 iterations. We also plot BP(50) and observe that
further increasing the complexity of standard BP provides
some marginal gain. Hence, BP(12) represents a good-but-not-
saturated scenario where the comparison to BP(5)-CNN-BP(5)
is fair and meaningful.
Due to the space limit, only the results for ­Ø£é= 0.8 are
given in Fig. 4. It is clear that the baseline BP(5)-CNN-BP(5)
decoder has comparable performance of standard BP(50), but
with a much lower complexity. When comparing the decoding
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
-3
-2.5
-2
-1.5
-1
-0.5
0
SNR(dB)
10-7
10-6
10-5
10-4
10-3
10-2
10-1
BER
BP(5)-CNN-BP(5)
BP(25)-CNN-BP(25)
2{BP(5)-CNN}-BP(5)
3{BP(5)-CNN}-BP(5)
4{BP(5)-CNN}-BP(5)
Fig. 5. Multiple iterations between CNN and BP can further improve decoding
performance with ­Ø£é= 0.8.
performance with approximately the same complexity, both
baseline and enhanced BP(5)-CNN-BP(5) decoders outper-
form the standard BP(12) decoder.
3) Multiple iterations between CNN and BP further improve
the performance: Up to this point, we have only presented
simulation results of the proposed iterative BP-CNN decoder
with one iteration. Naturally, we can perform multiple it-
erations between CNN and BP with the hope of further
reducing the BER, as shown in Fig. 1. Notation-wise, we
use ­ØÉŠ{BP(­Øæø)-CNN}-BP(­Øæø) to denote the iterative BP-CNN
decoder structure with ­ØÉŠiterations between BP and CNN,
and ­Øæøiterations inside BP. In total, ­ØÉŠ+ 1 BP(­Øæø) and ­ØÉŠ
CNN are run. Enhanced BP-CNN is adopted for this set of
experiments. We report the simulation results with different
­ØÉŠŌĆÖs in Fig. 5. By comparing BP(5)-CNN-BP(5) and BP(25)-
CNN-BP(25), we see that only increasing the BP iteration
number provides limited performance gain. However, it is
clear that multiple iterations can achieve larger improvement.
When ­Ø£é= 0.8, compared to BP(5)-CNN-BP(5), two BP-CNN
iterations improves the decoding performance by 0.7dB at
BER=10ŌłÆ4. In addition, we notice that after four BP-CNN it-
erations, the performance improvement becomes insignificant.
This is because the CNN has reached its maximum capacity
and cannot further depress the residual noise power.
IV. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
In this paper, we have designed a novel iterative BP-CNN
decoding structure to handle correlated channel noise. The
proposed framework serially concatenates a CNN with a BP
decoder, and iterates between them. The BP decoder is to
estimate the coded bits and indirectly estimate the channel
noise. The CNN is to remove the channel noise estimation
errors of the BP decoder by learning the noise correlation. To
implement the framework, we have proposed to adopt a fully
convolutional network structure and provided two strategies
to train the network. Simulation results have shown the ef-
fectiveness of the proposed iterative BP-CNN decoder. In our
future work, we will try to find other loss functions which are
more related to the BER performance. We will also consider to
unfold the iterative structure to an open-loop system, such that
we can design different numbers of BP iterations and CNN
structures. Furthermore, we will also validate our approach
with the data collected from real environment.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, ŌĆ£Low-density parity-check codes,ŌĆØ IRE Transactions on
information theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21ŌĆō28, 1962.
[2] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, ŌĆ£The capacity of low-density parity-
check codes under message-passing decoding,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599ŌĆō618, Feb 2001.
[3] S. K. Sharma, S. Chatzinotas, and B. Ottersten, ŌĆ£SNR estimation for
multi-dimensional cognitive receiver under correlated channel/noise,ŌĆØ
IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun., vol. 12, no. 12, pp. 6392ŌĆō6405, 2013.
[4] A. Hajimiri and T. H. Lee, ŌĆ£A general theory of phase noise in electrical
oscillators,ŌĆØ IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, vol. 33, no. 2, pp.
179ŌĆō194, 1998.
[5] S. S. Tehrani, B. F. Cockburn, and S. Bates, ŌĆ£On the effects of colored
noise on the performance of LDPC codes,ŌĆØ in Proc. IEEE Workshop
Signal Process. Sys. Des. Implementation, 2006, pp. 226ŌĆō231.
[6] K. He, X. Zhang, S. Ren, and J. Sun, ŌĆ£Deep residual learning for image
recognition,ŌĆØ in Proc. IEEE CVPR, 2016, pp. 770ŌĆō778.
[7] I. Sutskever, O. Vinyals, and Q. V. Le, ŌĆ£Sequence to sequence learning
with neural networks,ŌĆØ in Proc. NIPS, 2014, pp. 3104ŌĆō3112.
[8] C. Chen, A. Seff, A. Kornhauser, and J. Xiao, ŌĆ£DeepDriving: Learning
affordance for direct perception in autonomous driving,ŌĆØ in Proc. IEEE
ICCV, 2015, pp. 2722ŌĆō2730.
[9] E. Nachmani, Y. BeŌĆÖery, and D. Burshtein, ŌĆ£Learning to decode linear
codes using deep learning,ŌĆØ in Proc. Annu. Allerton Conf. on Commun.,
Control, Comput., 2016, pp. 341ŌĆō346.
[10] E. Nachmani, E. Marciano, D. Burshtein, and Y. BeŌĆÖery, ŌĆ£RNN decoding
of linear block codes,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint, 2017.
[11] L. Lugosch and W. J. Gross, ŌĆ£Neural offset min-sum decoding,ŌĆØ in Proc.
IEEE ISIT, 2017.
[12] T. Gruber, S. Cammerer, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, ŌĆ£On deep learning-
based channel decoding,ŌĆØ in Proc. CISS, 2017, pp. 1ŌĆō6.
[13] S. Cammerer, T. Gruber, J. Hoydis, and S. ten Brink, ŌĆ£Scaling deep
learning-based decoding of polar codes via partitioning,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint,
2017. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.06901
[14] T. J. OŌĆÖShea, K. Karra, and T. C. Clancy, ŌĆ£Learning to communicate:
Channel auto-encoders, domain specific regularizers, and attention,ŌĆØ in
Proc. IEEE ISSPIT, 2016, pp. 223ŌĆō228.
[15] T. J. OŌĆÖShea, S. Hitefield, and J. Corgan, ŌĆ£End-to-end radio traffic
sequence recognition with recurrent neural networks,ŌĆØ in Proc. IEEE
GlobalSIM, 2016, pp. 277ŌĆō281.
[16] V. Jain and S. Seung, ŌĆ£Natural image denoising with convolutional
networks,ŌĆØ in Proc. NIPS, 2009, pp. 769ŌĆō776.
[17] C. Dong, C. C. Loy, K. He, and X. Tang, ŌĆ£Image super-resolution using
deep convolutional networks,ŌĆØ IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.,
vol. 38, no. 2, pp. 295ŌĆō307, 2016.
[18] T. Thadewald and H. B┬©uning, ŌĆ£JarqueŌĆōBera test and its competitors for
testing normality: A power comparison,ŌĆØ Journal of Applied Statistics,
vol. 34, no. 1, pp. 87ŌĆō105, 2007.
[19] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton, ŌĆ£Rectified linear units improve restricted
Boltzmann machines,ŌĆØ in Proceedings of ICML, 2010, pp. 807ŌĆō814.
[20] I. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep Learning. MIT Press,
2016.
[21] M. Helmling and S. Scholl, ŌĆ£Database of channel codes and ML simu-
lation results,ŌĆØ www. uni-kl. de/channel-codes, (Wimax 3/4A), University
of Kaiserslautern, 2016.
[22] M. Abadi, P. Barham, J. Chen, Z. Chen, A. Davis, J. Dean, M. Devin,
S. Ghemawat, G. Irving, M. Isard et al., ŌĆ£Tensorflow: A system for
large-scale machine learning,ŌĆØ in Proc. OSDI, 2016.
[23] X. Glorot and Y. Bengio, ŌĆ£Understanding the difficulty of training deep
feedforward neural networks.ŌĆØ in AISTATS, vol. 9, 2010, pp. 249ŌĆō256.
[24] D. Kingma and J. Ba, ŌĆ£Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,ŌĆØ
in Proc. International Conference on Learning Representations, 2015.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
