Optimization of Finite-Length SC-LDPC for Uplink NOMA
Shuang Chen∗, Kewu Peng∗†, Yushu Zhang∗, and Jian Song∗† †Shenzhen City Key Laboratory of Digital TV System, Shenzhen 518057, China
∗Tsinghua National Laboratory for Information Science and Technology, Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China
Email: pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn, chenshuang13@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn

Abstract—Due to lack of universality, the achievable channel parameter regions (ACPRs) of conventional channel codes are far from the outer boundary of non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) channel capacity region. Spatially coupled lowdensity parity-check (SC-LDPC) codes show excellent asymptotic performance and their ACPRs are able to approach the outer boundary of NOMA channels. However, the performance of finite-length SC-LDPC codes is not as excellent as its asymptotic counterpart.
In this paper, a two-phase algorithm is proposed to construct capacity-approaching SC-LDPC codes with finite codeword length. By jointly optimizing the protograph, the spatial coupling length and the uncoupled code length, the performance loss of SC-LDPC code caused by finite codeword length is minimized. Simulation results show that the ACPR of the optimized SCLDPC code is only 1.2 dB from the theoretical limit of NOMA channels when the codeword length is 9600.
Keywords—non-orthogonal multiple access, multiple access channel, spatial coupling, spatially coupled low-density paritycheck code, achievable channel parameter region
I. INTRODUCTION
In physical layer of the 5th generation (5G) of wireless communication systems, non-orthogonal multiple access (NOMA) is a key technique for supporting massive connectivity with low latency and has gained lots of attention in both academic and industrial circles [1], [2]. Compared with conventional orthogonal multiple access systems, signals from different users are allowed to be superimposed at the receiver using the same channel resources simultaneously in NOMA systems, which can be represented as multiple access channel (MAC) model in information theory.
In the past decades, many transmission schemes have been proposed to approach the outer boundary of the capacity region of MAC [3], [4]. Although these techniques are able to approach the outer boundary of the capacity region of MAC, the achievable channel parameter regions (ACPRs) of these techniques are far from the outer boundary of the capacity region due to lack of universality property [5]. In another word, when the channel parameters are a bit different from the design target, a transmission failure may occur even when the transmission rates are still theoretically achievable. Therefore, when the channel state information is not perfectly known at
Corresponding Author: Kewu Peng (pengkewu@tsinghua.edu.cn)

transmitter, the performance of the transmission system will be affected.
For having the ACPR approach the theoretical limit of MAC, spatially-coupled LDPC (SC-LDPC) codes have been proposed as a near-universal channel codes [5]. According to asymptotic analysis, SC-LDPC codes have the capability to approach the whole capacity region and the ACPRs of SCLDPC codes are also approaching the ACPR of MAC (MACACPR) when the length of the codeword and the coupling chain tend to infinity [5]. However, when the codeword length is limited, the performance of SC-LDPC codes is not as excellent as its asymptotic counterpart, which may cause large degradation of the ACPR of SC-LDPC coded systems. Finite-length analysis of SC-LDPC codes shows that when codeword length is restricted, e.g. in the case of low-latency block transmission, the performance degradation caused by the finite length of codeword could be much larger than that in conventional channel codes [6], [7].
In this paper, a two-phase algorithm is proposed to construct SC-LDPC codes with limited codeword length. In the first phase, the spatial coupling length is fixed and the protograph of the SC-LDPC code is searched to optimize the asymptotic performance of the code with infinite uncoupled code length. Wherein, greedy row removal algorithm is proposed to minimize the rate loss due to the tailing effect. Then, in the second phase, the spatial coupling length as well as the uncoupled code length is jointly optimized by simulation and Golden-section search. Since the performance of a finite-length SC-LDPC is also affected by its protograph, the sub-optimal results in phase 1 are also kept and further optimized in phase 2 to obtain better finite-length SC-LDPC codes.
The contribution of this paper can be summarized as follows. 1) A two-phase algorithm is proposed to construct finitelength SC-LDPC code with capacity approaching performance for two-user GMAC. 2) Greedy row removal algorithm is proposed to reduce the rate loss due to the tailing effect. 3) Golden-section search is adopted to efficiently optimize the spatial coupling length. 4) As an example, a quasi-cyclic (QC) SC-LDPC whose codeword length is 9600 and code rate is about 1/2 code is constructed such that its ACPR is only 1.2 dB away from the ACPR of two-user GMAC (two-user GMACACPR).

978-1-5386-4328-0/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In section II, the system model and SC-LDPC coded multiple access systems are briefly introduced. The asymptotic performance and non-asymptotic performance of such systems are also reviewed. Then, a two-phase algorithm is proposed in section III. After that, as an example, a QC SC-LDPC code whose codeword length is 9600 and code rate is about 1/2 is designed in section IV and some numeral results compared with other designs are also presented. Section V concludes the paper.

II. SYSTEM MODEL
In this paper, two-user GMAC with random phase rotation is discussed. If the transmitted complex symbols of user 1 and user 2 are X1 and X2 respectively, the received symbol Y at receiver can be written as

Y = exp(iϕ1)X1 + exp(iϕ2)X2 + Z,

(1)

where Z is complex additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) subject to CN(0, N0), exp(iϕ1) and exp(iϕ2) are unit channel gains with random rotation phases which is uniformly dis-
tributed on the unit circle. In this paper, perfect channel state
information at receiver is assumed. Without loss of generality,
the power of AWGN is normalized to 1 and the signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) in this paper is defined as SNR1 = E(|X1|2), SNR2 = E(|X2|2), SNR= E(|X1|2 + |X2|2). Since the amplitudes of channel fading parameters in (1) are normalized to
1, the ACPR of a system or a channel denotes the achievable (SNR1, SNR2) region accordingly.

A. Spatially Coupled LDPC Codes

The parity check matrix (PCM) of a typical SC-LDPC code

can be written as





H1 0 ... 0

HSC = HH..0..w2..

H1 H2 ...
Hw 0

... ... ... ...

... ...
H1 H2 ...



,

(2)

0 ... 0 Hw L·n×(L+w−1)·m

where L is the spatial coupling length, w is the smooth param-

eter of the SC-LDPC code, m and n are the size of uncoupled

LDPC code whose PCM can be written as Hu = ∑wi=1 Hi. When the PCM is a QC matrix, the protograph of the SC-LDPC code

can be represented by





P1 0 ... 0

PSC = P..0..w..

P1 ...
Pw 0

... ... ...

... ... P1 ...



,

(3)

0 ... 0 Pw

where Pi is the protograph of the sub matrix Hi. Each 1 in Pi denotes a circulant sub matrix in Hi and each 0 in Pi denotes a zero sub matrix in Hi.

Fig. 1. The factor graph of an SC-LDPC coded two-user MAC system.
B. Decoding Algorithm and Asymptotic Performance
For two-user GMAC, the belief-propagation based decoding of SC-LDPC codes is almost the same as its single-user counterpart [8]. The factor graph of an SC-LDPC coded twouser GMAC system is plotted in Fig. 1, where variable nodes, check nodes and multi-user detection nodes are represented by circles, squares and diamonds respectively.
At each iteration, each node collects input extrinsic soft information from its neighbor nodes, and calculates extrinsic soft information and sends back to its neighbor nodes. More details of the calculations of extrinsic soft information can be found in [8].
To analyze the asymptotic performance of an SC-LDPC coded system, multi-edge type density evolution (MET-DE) analysis can be adopted to predict the successful decoding threshold. As the computational complexity of MET-DE is extremely high, several simplified algorithms can be adopted as an alternative of conventional MET-DE, e.g. protographbased extrinsic information transfer (PEXIT) [9] analysis.
The MET-DE analysis shows that when the spatial coupling length and the uncoupled code length tend to infinity, the successful decoding threshold of an SC-LDPC coded system with belief-propagation based decoding algorithm tends to the successful decoding threshold of its uncoupled code with maximum a-posteriori based decoding algorithm (MAP threshold) [8]. Since the MAP threshold is usually capacityapproaching for varieties of channels, the universality and capacity approaching property of SC-LDPC with beliefpropagation based decoding algorithm can be derived.
C. Finite Length Performance Degradation
Although SC-LDPC codes show excellent asymptotic performance, the performance of finite-length SC-LDPC codes is not as outstanding as its asymptotic counterpart. In this subsection, we assume that the length of whole codeword N = L · n is limited, therefore the increasing of the spatial coupling length L causes the decreasing of the uncoupled code length n and vice versa. According to the analysis in [6], there are two facts that affect the performance of a finite-length SC-LDPC code: the rate loss caused by the tailing effect, and the performance degradation caused by finite uncoupled code length. For ease of comparison, the rate loss and performance degradation are both converted to the gap between the successful decoding SNR threshold and its ideal counterpart.
For the first aspect, according to the code structure described in (2), the number of variable nodes is L · n, the number of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

check nodes is (L + w − 1) · m, and therefore the code rate is

(L + w − 1) · m

RL = 1 −

L·n

.

(4)

When the spatial coupling length L tends to infinity, the

asymptotic code rate is

m

R∞

=

lim
L→+∞

RL

=

1−

n

,

(5)

which is exactly the code rate of the uncoded code. When L is

limited, the gap between the theoretical SNR limit of an SC-

LDPC code and its uncoupled code under binary-input AWGN

channel can be written as

δL

=

B(R∞) −

B(RL)

≈

dB dR

(R∞)(R∞

−

RL)

w−1

dB

(6)

= L · (1 − R∞) · dR (R∞),

where B(·) denotes the inverse function of the channel capacity of binary-input AWGN channel. Hence, the rate loss due to

finite spatial coupling length is inversely proportional to L.

For the other aspect, according to finite-length scaling

law analysis, the performance degradation caused by limited

uncoupled code length n can be written as [6], [7]

∆n

=

√λ , n

(7)

wherein λ is a parameter related to target bit error ratio (BER), smooth parameter w, the code structure P1,2,...,w and channel parameters. Hence, the performance degradation due to limited uncoupled code length is inversely proportional to square root of n.

III. PROPOSED TWO-PHASE ALGORITHM
As introduced in previous section, there are two factors that affect the performance of a finite-length SC-LDPC code compared with its excellent asymptotic performance. In this paper, a two-phase algorithm is proposed to optimize both factors that affect the performance of a QC SC-LDPC code. The algorithm can be described as follows.
In the first phase, we assume the spatial coupling length is fixed to L = 30 and the protograph of the SC-LDPC code is designed to optimize the asymptotic performance without considering the performance degradation due to finite uncoupled code length n. For retrieving the rate loss due to the tailing effect, greedy row removal algorithm is proposed and adopted for each protograph to be optimized in the first phase.
And then in the second phase, the spatial coupling length L and the uncoupled code length n is jointly optimized by simulation-based Golden-section search. Furthermore, since the performance degradation due to the uncoupled code length is also affected by the protograph of the codeword, multiple sub-optimal solutions of the first phase are kept and further jointly optimized in the second phase. Finally, the best SCLDPC code is selected from all candidate codes in the second phase. A detailed description of the optimizations of the two phases is proposed in the two following subsections.

A. Asymptotic Optimization
In this subsection, the asymptotic performance of the SCLDPC is optimized with the assumption that the spatial coupling length is fixed to L = 30 and the uncoupled code length is sufficiently large. Therefore, conventional asymptotic analysis tools can be used to measure the optimization results of this phase.
In this paper, we use PEXIT analysis to predict the successful decoding threshold of a protograph of SC-LDPC code, and then the difference between the predicted threshold and the theoretical SNR limit is calculated as a metric of the protograph.
Furthermore, as the target of the code design is to approach the whole outer boundary of the capacity region of two-user GMAC, two typical metrics are considered to represent the performance of a protograph for the case of two-user GMAC. The first metric is the same as that for the case of a single-user transmission, which denotes the corner point of the capacity region of the two-user GMAC. And the second metric is the case of a symmetric two-user transmission wherein the transmission powers of two users are equal, which denotes the midpoint of the capacity region of the two-user GMAC. In this paper, we use the maximum value of the two metrics (also referred as L∞ norm) to represent the performance of the underlying protograph to ensure the performance for the worst case.
According to the analysis in the previous section, the performance degradation of an SC-LDPC code with finite spatial coupling length is mainly caused by the tailing effect. In previous works, many different schemes are proposed to reduce the performance degradation due to tailing effect. For example, variable node insertion techniques [10], [11] and variable node puncturing technique [12] were proposed to enlarge the design code rate without affecting the convergence behavior.
In this paper, greedy row removal is proposed to reduce the performance degradation due to finite spatial coupling length. More specifically, for each conventional protograph of an SCLDPC code as shown in (2), the first several rows as well as the last several rows are directly removed. In other words, the first several check nodes and the last several check nodes and all edges connected to them are directly removed from the factor graph. Therefore, the code rate is enlarged and the performance degradation will be reduced hopefully. However, as the row removal might affect the successful threshold of the SC-LDPC code, a greedy procedure is proposed to determine the number of removed rows. Thus, the first and last several rows of PSC is removed one by one, and the removal will continue if and only if the performance of the new protograph is better than the previous one in terms of its SNR threshold gap to theoretical limit. As such gap is also affected by the code rate, the removal will definitely continue if the successful decoding threshold is not affect and will stop when the convergence behavior is significantly affected.
The optimization algorithm is shown in Alg. 1 in detail.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Algorithm 1 Protograph Optimization Algorithm.

Require: Target code rate R.

Ensure: J candidate protographs with L = 30

1: C ← 0/

2: Determine the size of the protograph of the uncoupled

code

3: for smooth parameter w = 2 to wmax do

4: for P1, P2, ..., Pw do

5:

Generate PSC according to (3)

6:

PS∗C ← PSC without first row

7:

while metric(PS∗C) < metric(PSC) do

8:

PSC ← PS∗C, PS∗C ← PSC without first row

9:

end while

10:

PS∗C ← PSC without last row

11:

while metric(PS∗C) < metric(PSC) do

12:

PSC ← PS∗C, PS∗C ← PSC without last row

13:

end while

14:

C ← C ∪ {PSC}

15:

if |C| > J then

16:

C ← C\worst(C)

17:

end if

18: end for

19: end for

20: return C

Firstly, the size of the protograph of the uncoupled code is determined according to the target code rate. For example, when the target code rate is 1/2, the size of the protograph of the uncoupled code is set to 1 ×2. Then, the smooth parameter w and the protographs P1, P2, ..., Pw are enumerated. For each enumerated P1, P2, ..., Pw, the protograph of the target code is generated according to (3). After that, the greedy row removal procedure starts and the best removal result is selected as a candidate of the protograph of target SC-LDPC code. Finally, the best J candidates are selected as the output of phase 1, and will be further optimized in the next phase.

B. Non-asymptotic Optimization

After the phase 1 optimization introduced in previous

subsection, we have obtain J spatially coupled protographs

whose spatial coupling length is assumed as L = 30. In this

subsection, such parameter for each candidate protograph is

further optimized by Golden-section search for a fixed target

code length N and the restriction that L · n = N, where n is the

uncoupled code length.

As introduced before, for a specific SC-LDPC code whose

PCM can be represented by (2), the performance degradation

is

δL

=

w−1 L

·

(1 − R∞) ·

dB dR

(R∞).

After

optimization

in

phase

1,

although the performance degradation is reduced, the rate

difference between the SC-LDPC code and its uncoupled code has still not been completely eliminated. If w∗ rows

in total of a specific protograph are removed in phase 1,

the performance

w−w∗ L

−1

·

(1

−

R∞

)

·

degradation of such

dB dR

(R∞),

which

is

still

code will be δL = inversely proportional

to L and therefore proportional to n. Generally speaking, the

performance degradation due to the spatial coupling length is

written as

δL = θ · n.

(8)

As the performance degradation due to finite uncoupled code

length

is

∆n

=

√λ n

,

the

summarized

performance

degradation

can be approximately written as

δ

=

δL

+ ∆n

=

θ

·n+

√λ , n

(9)

where θ and λ are two parameters related to the optimized protograph, target codeword length and target BER. Theoretically, if the two parameters can be precisely calculated, the summarized performance degradation can be precisely optimized. However, as these parameters are hard to calculated or estimated accurately, in this subsection, the performance of the target codeword is directly optimized in this subsection without calculating θ or λ . Since the optimization target δ is definitely a convex function, Golden-section search can be adopted.
The optimization algorithm for a specific protograph is shown in Alg. 2 and can be briefly explained as follows. Firstly, the range of the parameter n is roughly estimated, e.g. [10, N/10] and we obtain a search interval. Then, we adopt Golden-section search to obtain the optimal parameter n. Wherein the performance for a given parameter n is obtained by BER simulation on a PCM whose uncoupled code length is n and the spatial coupling length is N/n, which can be constructed via conventional QC-LDPC construction algorithm, e.g. cyclic progressive edge-growth (cPEG) [13].

Algorithm 2 Protograph Optimization Algorithm.

Require: Protograph PSC whose L = 30, target codeword length N.

Ensure: P√CM of optimized SC-LDPC code PSC 1: ϕ ← ( 5 − 1)/2

2: whead ← number of lines removed at the head of PSC

wtail ← number of lines removed at the tail of PSC

3: l ← 10, r ← N/10, f1 ← r − (r − l) · ϕ , f2 ← l + r − f1

4: PSC1 ← PSC whose L = f1 according to (2) and then remove first whead rows and last wtail rows

5: HSC1 ← construct PCM of length N according to PSC1 .
6: HSC2 ← construct PCM similar as HSC1 while L = f2. 7: calculate δ (HSC1 ) and δ (HSC2 ) via BER simulation. 8: while | f2 − f1| > ε do

9: if δ (HSC1 ) > δ (HSC2 ) then

10:

l ← f1, f1 ← f2, HSC1 ← HSC2 , f2 ← l + (r − l) · ϕ

11:

HSC2 ← similar construct PCM as HSC1 while L = f2.

12: else

13:

r ← f2, f2 ← f1, HSC2 ← HSC1 , f1 ← r − (r − l) · ϕ

14:

HSC1 ← similar construct PCM as HSC2 while L = f1.

15: end if

16: calculate δ (HSC1 ) or δ (HSC2 ) via BER simulation. 17: end while

18: return HSC1

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

For each candidate protograph collected in the first phase, proposed optimization algorithm is adopted to obtain a PCM with optimized spatial coupling length and uncoupled code length. And finally, we selected the PCM with best performance from these J candidate PCMs as the construction result.
IV. NUMERAL RESULT
In this section, a simple design example and some numeral results are proposed. The design target can described as follows. The target code rate is about 1/2, the length of codeword is 9600 and therefore the number of information bits is about 4800 bits. The target BER is 10−3.
A. Design Example
According to the algorithm proposed in the previous section, the construction of such code is as follows. Firstly, we search for a set of optimal and sub-optimal protographs in phase 1. As the target code rate is 1/2, the protograph of the uncoupled code is set to 1 × 2. Then, the smooth parameter w is enumerated from 2 to wmax = 6. For each enumerated w and P1,2,...,w, e.g. w = 4 and P1,2 = [0, 1], P3,4 = [1, 1], a candidate protograph PSC of SC-LDPC code is generated according to (3). In this example, the code rate of PSC is 27/60 and the gap between the successful decoding threshold of PSC and theoretical SNR limit at rate 27/60 is 1.02 dB according to PEXIT analysis.

SNR gap to theoretical limit (dB)

1.36 1.34 1.32
1.3 1.28 1.26 1.24
15

20

25

30

35 40 45 50 55 60

length of the spatial coupling chain

Fig. 2. The gap between the theoretical SNR limit and the BER simulation results for different values of L.

0

5

10

15

20

0

5

10

15

20

25

30

35

40

Fig. 3. The protograph of the constructed PCM, each point in the figure denotes a ‘1’ in the protograph.





1 1 0 1 0 1 0 ... ...

PS∗C = ..01....

1 0 ... ...

1 1 0 ...

1 1 0 ...

0 1 1 0

1 1 1 0

... ... ... ...

... 0 0 1

.111..

(10)

0 0 ... ... ... ... 0 1 1 31×60

Then, greedy row removal is adopted to decreased the gap.

For example, when the first two rows of PSC is removed, the code rate becomes 29/60 and the gap between the successful

decoding threshold and theoretical SNR limit at rate 29/60

becomes 0.69 dB, which is superior to the original PSC without

row removal. However, when we continue to remove the third

row of PSC, the gap is increased because the convergence

behavior is significantly affected by row removal. Therefore,

for such PSC, only the first two rows will be removed to achieve better performance and the optimized protograph PS∗C is shown
in (10).

In the second phase, the spatial coupling length L of each

protograph selected in phase 1 are further optimized to achieve

better performance for target code length. For example, as

shown in Fig. 2, the gaps between the theoretical SNR limit

and the BER simulation results for different values of L

are plotted, wherein the protograph from (10) is chosen as

an example. Although a curve for all possible L is plotted

in Fig. 2, only a few points are calculated during phase 2

optimization owing to the Golden-section search algorithm as

described in Alg. 2.

Finally, the best construction result is selected from all opti-

mized candidates in phase 2. The protograph of the constructed

PCM is shown in Fig. 3, where the spatial coupling length is

L = 20 and the uncoupled code length is n = 480, the code

rate is 19/40.

B. Performance Evaluation
In this subsection, some performance evaluation results and comparisons are presented to illustrate the proposed algorithm and the constructed code shown in Fig. 3. For comparison, results of conventional (4, 8, 64, 5) SC-LDPC codes proposed in [5] and conventional LDPC codes proposed in [4], [14] are also presented, wherein the LDPC code in [14] is optimized for point-to-point transmission and the LDPC code in [4] is optimized for two-user GMAC.
In Fig. 4, the BER simulation results of all channel codes discussed are plotted and compared. As shown in Fig. 4(a), at midpoint of two-user GMAC, when the target BER is 10−3, the proposed code is 1.2 dB away from theoretical SNR limit. And at corner point of two-user GMAC as shown in Fig. 4(b), the proposed code is 1.2 dB away from theoretical SNR limit. Both of the results are more than 0.35 dB superior to (4, 8, 64, 5) SC-LDPC code. While compared with conventional LDPC code, the proposed code is definitely inferior to one of conventional LDPC code for either point. However, due to lack of universality property, the conventional LDPC code optimized for two-user GMAC shows significant performance degradation for the corner point and vice versa.
Besides the BER simulations at two working points, the ACPRs of these codes are also considered, where ACPR denotes the set of available (SNR1, SNR2) pairs such that the BER is less than a threshold, e.g. 10−3. The boundary of the ACPR of the proposed code is plotted in Fig. 5 as well as those of other LDPC codes and corresponding two-user GMACs. As shown in the figure, due to lack of universality property, conventional LDPC codes proposed in [4], [14]

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

10-1 10-2

Proposed SC-LDPC (R = 19/40) SC-LDPC in [5] (R = 15/32) Conventional LDPC in [14] (R = 1/2) Conventional LDPC in [4] (R = 1/2) Channel Capacity at R = 19/40 Channel Capacity at R = 15/32 Channel Capacity at R = 1/2

BER

10-3

4

4.5

5

5.5

6

6.5

7

7.5

SNR (dB)

(a) At the midpoint of the capacity region of two-user GMAC.

10-2

Proposed SC-LDPC (R = 19/40) SC-LDPC in [5] (R = 15/32) Conventional LDPC in [14] (R = 1/2) Conventional LDPC in [4] (R = 1/2) Channel Capacity at R = 19/40 Channel Capacity at R = 15/32 Channel Capacity at R = 1/2

BER

10-3

-0.5

0

0.5

1

1.5

2

2.5

SNR (dB)

(b) Single-user performance, which denotes the performance at the corner point of the capacity region of two-user GMAC.

Fig. 4. BER simulation results of several channel codes.

4

Proposed SC-LDPC (R = 19/40)

SC-LDPC in [5] (R = 15/32)

3.5

Conventional LDPC in [14] (R = 1/2)

Conventional LDPC in [4] (R = 1/2)

two-user GMAC-ACPR at R = 19/40

two-user GMAC-ACPR at R = 15/32

3

two-user GMAC-ACPR at R = 1/2

SNR
2

2.5

2

1.5

1

1

1.5

2

2.5

3

3.5

4

SNR
1

Fig. 5. The ACPRs of several channel codes and two-user GMACs.

show poor performance for either the midpoint or the corner point. Compared with conventional SC-LDPC codes, the gap between the ACPR of the proposed code and the corresponding theoretical limit is 0.3 dB superior to that of the (4, 8, 64, 5) SC-LDPC code proposed in [5], which disclose the superiority of the proposed code.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this paper, we proposed a two-phase algorithm to construct SC-LDPC codes with target codeword length. By optimizing the protograph by greedy row removal algorithm in

the first phase and optimizing both the spatial coupling length and the uncoupled code length by Golden-section search in
the second phase, the constructed SC-LDPC code shows better performance than conventional constructions.
Simulation results show that the ACPR of the SC-LDPC code constructed by the proposed algorithm is only 1.2 dB
away from the ACPR of two-user GMAC, which is 0.3 dB superior to conventional (4, 8, 64, 5) SC-LDPC code.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by the R&D Project of the
Science, Technology and Innovation Commission of Shenzhen Municipality (JCYJ20160331171115521) and the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61471219).
REFERENCES
[1] Z. Ding, Z. Yang, P. Fan, and H. Poor, “On the performance of nonorthogonal multiple access in 5G systems with randomly deployed users,” Signal Processing Letters, IEEE, vol. 21, no. 12, pp. 1501–1505, Dec 2014.
[2] Z. Ma, Z. Ding, P. Fan, and S. Tang, “A general framework for MIMO uplink and downlink transmissions in 5G multiple access,” in 2016 IEEE 83rd Vehicular Technology Conference (VTC Spring), May 2016, pp. 1– 4.
[3] S. Chen, K. Peng, Y. Zhang, and J. Song, “Near capacity LDPC coded MU-BICM-ID for multiple access channel,” in Proc. Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2015 International, August 2015.
[4] Y. Zhang, K. Peng, J. Song, and Y. Sun, “Channel coding for NOMA schemes with a JD or SIC receiver,” in Wireless Communications and Mobile Computing Conference (IWCMC), 2017 13th International. IEEE, 2017, pp. 1599–1603.
[5] A. Yedla, P. Nguyen, H. Pfister, and K. Narayanan, “Universal codes for the Gaussian MAC via spatial coupling,” in Communication, Control, and Computing (Allerton), 2011 49th Annual Allerton Conference on, Sept 2011, pp. 1801–1808.
[6] S. Chen, K. Peng, H. Jin, and J. S. Tsinghua, “On the performance of fixed-length spatially coupled LDPC code,” in Broadband Multimedia Systems and Broadcasting (BMSB), 2016 IEEE International Symposium on. IEEE, 2016, pp. 1–4.
[7] P. Olmos and R. Urbanke, “A scaling law to predict the finite-length performance of spatially-coupled LDPC codes,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 61, no. 6, pp. 3164–3184, June 2015.
[8] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Spatially coupled ensembles universally achieve capacity under belief propagation,” Information Theory, IEEE Transactions on, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7761–7813, Dec 2013.
[9] G. Liva and M. Chiani, “Protograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,” in Global Telecommunications Conference, 2007. GLOBECOM’07. IEEE. IEEE, 2007, pp. 3250–3254.
[10] H. Kwak, J. Kim et al., “Rate-loss reduction of sc-ldpc codes by optimizing reliable variable nodes via expected graph evolution,” in Information Theory (ISIT), 2017 IEEE International Symposium on. IEEE, 2017, pp. 2930–2934.
[11] M. R. Sanatkar and H. D. Pfister, “Increasing the rate of spatiallycoupled codes via optimized irregular termination,” in Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), 2016 9th International Symposium on. IEEE, 2016, pp. 31–35.
[12] M. Stinner and P. M. Olmos, “On the waterfall performance of finitelength sc-ldpc codes constructed from protographs,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 34, no. 2, pp. 345–361, 2016.
[13] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, D. Divsalar, and J. Thorpe, “Design of lowdensity parity-check (ldpc) codes for deep-space applications,” IPN Progress Report, vol. 42, no. 159, pp. 42–159, 2004.
[14] 3GPP, “NR; multiplexing and channel coding,” 3rd Generation Partnership Project (3GPP), Technical Specification (TS) 38.212, Sep 2017, version 1.0.0.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

