874

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 5, MAY 2018

A Two-Bit Weighted Bit-Flipping Decoding Algorithm for LDPC Codes
Jieun Oh and Jeongseok Ha , Member, IEEE

Abstract— This letter proposes a novel two-bit weighted bit-flipping algorithm (TB-WBFA) for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes on the binary symmetric channel. The proposed TB-WBFA produces reliability bits for the bit-decision results and syndrome values at bit and check nodes, respectively. The reliability bits are exchanged between bit and check nodes as the decoding proceeds. The message update in check nodes is carefully devised with simple bitwise operations, which are especially suitable for high-speed operations. It will be demonstrated that the proposed TB-WBFA achieves a significant performance improvement over existing bit-flipping decoding algorithms by conducting performance comparisons for LDPC codes under various setups, i.e., different rates, lengths, and structures.
Index Terms— Low-density parity-check codes, weighted bitflipping algorithms.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes [1] are known to have capacity-approaching performances with a message passing algorithm such as the sum-product algorithm (SPA). However, in some applications such as highspeed storage devices and low-power and/or low-complexity systems, the complexity of SPA may not be tolerated, and thus there have been extensive studies on low-complexity iterative decoding algorithms for LDPC codes [2]–[8]. The complexity of the SPA is mainly due to the complicated nonlinear operation at the check nodes and multi-bit message exchanges between bit and check nodes. As a low-complexity approach, the bit-flipping algorithm (BFA) exchanges singlebit messages and turns the non-linear operation at the check nodes into the simple XOR operation, which greatly reduces the decoding complexity. However, it suffers from a substantial performance degradation both in the waterfall and error-floor regions.
For a better complexity/performance tradeoff, the weighted bit-flipping algorithm (WBFA) was proposed in [2] and later improved in [3] by introducing an initial bootstrapping step. Since the WBFA was proposed, notable improvements of the WBFA have ensued in [4] and [5] and most recently in [6]. While the WBFA [2] and the enhanced versions of WBFA [4]–[6] provide considerable performance improvements over the BFA, they all assume soft channel outputs which allow the decoders to acquire reliability information for the channel outputs. However, in some situations, only harddecision channel outputs are available since such soft channel
Manuscript received December 5, 2017; revised January 22, 2018; accepted February 18, 2018. Date of publication February 27, 2018; date of current version May 8, 2018. This work has been supported in part by the IITP of Korea under grant no. B0101-16-1274 and the NRF of Korea under grant no. 2015R1A2A2A01007739. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was M. Baldi. (Corresponding author: Jeongseok Ha.)
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-701, South Korea (e-mail: jieunoh@kaist.ac.kr; jsha@kaist.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2018.2809718

outputs are too expensive due to extremely fast data throughput and/or channel characteristics. In such a case, the performance improvement of WBFA over the BFA diminishes. It is also known [2], [7], [9], [10] that the performance of both BFA and WBFA deteriorates when the column weight of LDPC codes decreases. Thus, LDPC codes with large column weights are often assumed despite the fact that the increase of column weight leads to a higher decoding complexity.
There are some practical applications in which a pair of simple and more complicated decoders, e.g. decoders with the BFA and the SPA, are employed and activated in a complementary fashion. For example, in NAND flash application, the BFA decoder is first in action for hard-decision channel outputs aiming at a higher throughput and/or power saving. In the case that the BFA decoder fails, the SPA decoder is opportunistically activated for a better error-correcting performance. In such a scenario, a large column weight makes the SPA decoder have a limited error-rate performance and also suffer from a high decoding complexity. Thus, it is highly desirable to devise a BF algorithm which provides a strong error-rate performance for LDPC codes with a small column weight on hard-decision channel outputs. While there are important applications, to the best of our knowledge, there exist no studies on efficient bit-flipping decoding algorithms for LDPC codes with small or moderate column weights. Motivated by the practical needs, this work specifically targets to propose a bit-flipping algorithm for LDPC codes with small/moderate column weights on the binary symmetric channel (BSC).
Nguyen and Vasic [11] proposed a decoding algorithm called two-bit bit-flipping algorithm (TBFA) which assumes hard-decision channel outputs. The TBFA employs an additional bit at each bit node to represent the reliability of the bit-decision. Additional bit is also introduced at each check node to decide whether the message from the check node is beneficial or not. Nguyen and Vasic [11] demonstrated that the TBFA results in a notable performance improvement on the BSC. In [12], a decoding algorithm was proposed for generalized LDPC codes in which extended Hamming codes are adopted as the constraint nodes. The proposed algorithm in [12] generates one-bit reliability information based on the decoding results for the extended Hamming codes, and the reliability bit is to be added beside the bit transferring between check and bit nodes.
In this work, we propose a novel iterative decoding algorithm for LDPC codes called two-bit weighted bit-flipping algorithm (TB-WBFA) as an improvement of the WBFA on the BSC. In the TB-WBFA, bit and check nodes exchange reliability bits in addition to the bit decisions and syndrome values. In particular, the bit-node message, i.e. the one from a bit node to a check node, is made up of a bit-decision for a coded bit and reliability of the decision. The reliability is

1558-2558 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OH AND HA: TWO-BIT WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING DECODING ALGORITHM FOR LDPC CODES

875

represented by a single bit in such a way that the bit values of “1” and “0” indicate a unreliable and reliable decisions, respectively. In the meantime, the check-node message, i.e. the one from a check node to a bit node, comprises a syndrome bit and an additional bit for the reliability of the syndrome value. Contrary to the WBFA, the proposed TB-WBFA establishes the reliability bits as the decoding proceeds without assuming any reliability information from a channel.
We will compare the performance of the proposed TB-WBFA and the existing WBFA and TBFA by conducting Monte-Carlo simulations for various scenarios which include LDPC codes of high and moderate rates at different block lengths. In particular, the performance evaluations are carried out for LDPC code with a small and moderate column weights, namely dv = 3 and dv = 6. The comparisons clearly show that the proposed TB-WBFA consistently outperforms the competing WBFA and TBFA by several orders of magnitude.
The rest of this letter is organized as follows. In Section II, the WBFA is concisely summarized to help readers understand the proposed TB-WBFA. In Section III, we will introduce the proposed algorithm and discuss how to determine design parameters of the proposed algorithm. In Section IV, performances of the TB-WBFA, WBFA, TBFA and the scaled min-sum algorithm (MSA) will be compared, and the performance superiority of the proposed TB-WBFA over the WBFA and TBFA will be clearly witnessed. Finally, in Section V we will conclude this work and discuss future research directions.

II. BACKGROUND

In this section, we briefly introduce the WBFA to help
readers understand the proposed TB-WBFA. We consider a (dv , dc) regular LDPC code C which is defined as the null space of a binary M × N sparse parity-check matrix H = [hm,n] for m ∈ [1, M] and n ∈ [1, N]. The WBFA consists of the following steps:
Step 0: Set iteration number = 1 and a maximum number of iterations Imax. The bit decision zn ∈ F2 are initialized with the hard-decision results on the soft channel outputs yn ∈ R for 1 ≤ n ≤ N. The soft channel outputs, yn, are from an additive white Gaussian noise channel for inputs with the binary-phase shift keying signaling. The reliabilities of the parity checks, wm , are determined as

wm

=

min
n∈N (m)

|

yn|,

m

∈

[1,

M ],

where N (m) = {n|hn,m = 1} is the index set of bit nodes neighboring the check node m. Step 1: Find the syndrome vector s¯ = z¯HT where s¯ = [s1, s2, . . . , sM ] and z¯ = [z1, z2, . . . , zN ]. If s¯ = 0¯, declare successful decoding and terminate the decoding
with the estimate of codeword z¯. Step 2: Update the flipping function En at each bit node En =
m∈M(n)(2 sm − 1)wm, for n ∈ [1, N], where M(n) = {m|hn,m = 1} is the index set of check nodes neighboring the bit node n.
Step 3: Update the estimate of codeword z¯ by flipping zn for n ∈ {n |En = arg max1≤i≤N Ei }.
Step 4: = + 1. If > Imax, terminate the decoding and declare a decoding failure. Otherwise, go to Step 1.

Note that the reliability of channel output wm is taken into the update of the flipping function in Step 2, which however is not possible on the BSC. In such a case, the WBFA turns out to be the same as the BFA and does not provide any performance improvement over the BFA.

III. PROPOSED ALGORITHM

In this section, we introduce details of the proposed

TB-WBFA as follows:

Step 0: Set iteration number = 1 and a maximum number

of iterations Imax. The bit-decisions, zn ∈ F2 are initialized with the output from a BSC, and the reliabilities of

the bit decisions, rn are all set to 1’s representing the weak bit-decisions for 1 ≤ n ≤ N. Step 1: Find the syndrome vector s¯ = z¯HT where s¯ = [s1, s2, . . . , sM ]. If s¯ = 0¯, declare successful decod-
ing and terminate the decoding with the estimate of

codeword z¯. Otherwise, compute the reliability for the

syndrome γmn = ∨n ∈N (m)\n rn where ∨ is the logical

OR operation.

Step 2: Update the flipping function En( ) at each bit node

En( ) =

(2sm − 1)w(γmn)

(1)

m∈M(n)

where the weighting factor w(γmn) is determined as

follows:

w(γmn) =

ws ww

for γmn = 0, for γmn = 1.

Note that ws and ww represent weighting factors for the strong and weak syndrome values, respectively.

Step 3: Update the estimate of codeword z¯ by flipping zn for

n of

∈th{enc|oErrn(es)p=onadrigngmflaixp1p≤iin≤gNfuEni(c)ti}o, na,nid.e.nEegn(a)te=th−e

sign En( ).

Step 4: Update the reliability function Dn( ) as

Dn( ) = En( ) + En( −1)

where updated

EDn(0n()

),

is assumed to be zero. decide the reliability bit rn

Based as

on

the

rn =

1 0

if Dn( ) ≥ θ ( ) if Dn( ) < θ ( ),

where θ ( ) = θ1 if = 1 and θ ( ) = θ2 when > 1. The reliability value rn tells how reliable the bit-decision zn is, i.e. rn = 0 and 1 for the strong and weak reliabilities, respectively. In this step, we introduce a reliability measure called reliability function, Dn( ) which is the sum of two flipping functions in the most recent two consecutive iterations. That is, the reliability function is designed to change the reliability of bit decision in a conservative manner. However, the reliability function is the same as the flipping function in the first iteration since En(0) = 0, and thus the reliability decision in Step 4 must be made with different threshold values θ ( ) depending on whether the iteration number, is equal to or larger than one. Step 5: Increase the iteration number, = + 1. If > Imax, terminate the decoding and declare decoding failure. Otherwise, go to Step 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

876

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 22, NO. 5, MAY 2018

In Step 1, each check node receives bit-node messages from

the neighboring bit nodes. The syndrome value at a check

node, sm is computed with the XOR operation for the bit

decisions of all incoming bit-node messages. Thus, the check-

node messages emitted from a check node have the same

syndrome value. Meanwhile, the reliability bit to a neighboring

bit node, γmn is obtained by conducting the OR operation

for the reliability bits rn from the other neighboring bit

nodes, which is judiciously devised to prevent the feedback

of reliability information to the originated bit node. Note that

if there is at least one unreliable bit decision involved in the

OR operation, the reliability for the syndrome value will be

marked as “unreliable” as the MSA decides the reliability

of a check-node message as the minimum reliability of the

incoming messages to the check node. It should also be

noticed that contrary to the WBFA, the flipping function En( ) is updated in Step 2 with the reliability bits, γmn’s from the neighboring check nodes. The bit decisions with

the least reliability are flipped in Step 3 where the signs of

the corresponding flipping function values are also negated, i.e. En( ) = −En( ). The negation marks the flipped bit as a

reliable one since the reliability of a bit decision is inversely

proportional to the flipping function value.

Now, we will discuss how to determine the design parame-

ters. The proposed algorithm requires four design parameters:

the two weighting factors, ws and ww in Step 2, and the two threshold values θ1 and θ2 in Step 4. Note that all

the bit decisions, zn are initially assumed weak in Step 0,

i.e. has

rn its

= 1 ∀ n. flipping

Thus, after the function value

first En(1)

iteration, each bit node in E = {(dv − i )ww −

i ww|0 ≤ i ≤ dv }. The bit decisions with the maximum En(1) value, i.e. dv ww, are flipped, and their flipping function

values are correspondingly negated in Step 3. Then, the second

largest value of E, i.e. (dv − 1)ww − ww becomes the largest one which is the least reliability represented by Dn(1)’s in Step 4. Thus, we decide the threshold θ1 in such a way that

zn’s with the least reliability value will be marked as weak.

That is,

R1:

(dv − 2)ww − 2 ww < θ1 ≤ (dv − 1)ww − ww.

In addition, we consider a relation between ws and ww: the contributions of weak syndrome values to Dn( ) in Step 4 is not larger than that of a strong syndrome, which can be expressed
as

R2:

wwdv + ww(dv − 1) ≤ ws .

Note that the relations R1 and R2 will remain unchanged up
to scaling, i.e. scaling the weighting factors and the thresholds
by the same positive number. Thus, without loss of generality,
we can set ww = 1, which enables us to determine the threshold θ1 and ws as dv − 3 and 2dv − 1, respectively. After the first iteration, the reliability function Dn( ) has a broad range of values, i.e. Dn( ) ∈ {(−1)x · a + (−1)y · (2dv − a)ws|x , y ∈ F2, 0 ≤ a ≤ 2dv }, and it looks unfortunately intractable to find a closed-form expression for the probability distribution of Dn( ) for 2 ≤ ≤ Imax. Thus, we conduct BER evaluations by changing the value of θ2 at selected crossover probabilities, e.g. i values in Table I. The threshold, θ2 is decided as the one minimizing the BER at each crossover probability.

By comparing the WBFA in Section II and the TB-WBFA in Section III, it can be noticed that the proposed TB-WBFA has an additional processing at both check and bit nodes. In each check node, the OR operation in Step 1 must be performed. Meanwhile, in each bit node, the additional complexity is required to perform the addition of two integer valued flipping functions, i.e. En( ) + En( −1) and the comparison with θ ( ). However, it should be mentioned that the WBFA is required to find the minimum reliability wm at each check node and send the minimum value to neighboring bit nodes while the processing is performed once in the initialization, Step 0. In Section IV, it will be shown that the additional complexity of the TB-WBFA over that of the WBFA can be justified by a substantial performance improvement of the proposed TB-WBFA. In [13], there are complexity comparisons between the WBFA and other algorithms, e.g. the belief-propagation algorithm. By taking the discussion about the complexities of the TB-WBFA and WBFA into account, the complexity comparisons in [13] enable the interested readers to make relative complexity comparisons between the TB-WBFA and other algorithms.

IV. PERFORMANCE COMPARISONS

In this section, performance of the proposed TB-WBFA will

be compared with those of other existing decoding algorithms

such as the TBFA, WBFA and scaled MSA when the decoders

have hard-decision channel outputs from the BSC. For the

TBFA, we consider two different versions of TBFA which

are denoted by TBFA1 and TBFA2 in [11]. It is assumed

that the maximum number of iterations, Imax is set to 50 in

all the decoders. In Fig. 1, the performance comparisons are

carried out for a (dv = 3, dc = 27) quasi-cyclic LDPC code with a QC-block size of 256 at N = 9216. The

LDPC code has a code rate of 0.889 and a message length

of 1K bytes. It represents a typical error-correcting code for

solid-state drives using NAND flash memory which usually

provides hard-decision channel outputs. For the TB-WBFA,

the threshold θ2 values are obtained from BER simulations

and listed in the third row of Table I where the threshold θ2 are obtained for i ∗(= 7) crossover probabilities. For a

received codeword, the decoder may have to estimate the

crossover probability , which can be implemented in various

ways. For example, the number of unsatisfied check nodes for

the received codeword provides an estimate of the crossover

probability. That is, the estimate of crossover probability, ˆ is

given by

ˆ

=

1 2

(1

−

(1

−

2

m/M)1/dc )

where

M

and

m

are the numbers of check nodes and unsatisfied check nodes,

respectively, for received hard-decision channel outputs. For

an estimate of the crossover probability, ˆ, the threshold value

θ2 is determined in such a way that θ2 = θ2,i for i−1 > ˆ ≥ i for 0 < i ≤ i ∗, and θ2 = θ2,i∗ for ˆ < i∗ . The initial condition is given by 0 = 1. The comparisons in Fig. 1 clearly

show that the proposed TB-WBFA drastically outperforms the

other decoding algorithms by several orders of magnitude.

In particular, it is observed that the proposed TB-WBFA

outperforms all the competing algorithms by more than four orders of magnitude at a crossover probability of 10−3.

It is known that the WBFA has a better performance as the

column weight grows [9], [10]. In Fig. 2, we evaluate BER

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

OH AND HA: TWO-BIT WEIGHTED BIT-FLIPPING DECODING ALGORITHM FOR LDPC CODES

877

TABLE I THRESHOLD VALUES θ2 AT DIFFERENT ’S

Fig. 3. BERs for a (dv = 3, dc = 6) quasi-cyclic LDPC code with a QC-block size of 256 at n = 2048.

Fig. 1. BERs for a (dv = 3, dc = 27) quasi-cyclic LDPC code with a QC-block size of 256 at n = 9216.

V. CONCLUSIONS
This work proposes a novel bit-flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes on the BSC. As the proposed TB-WBFA proceeds, reliability bits are produced and exchanged between bit and check nodes without resorting to any form of soft information from a channel. The check-node message update is judiciously devised only with the simple bitwise operations, which allows the algorithm to achieve a significant performance improvement on the BSC at a moderate increase of complexity as compared to the existing WBFA. As a future research direction, we will analyze the decoding dynamics with the density evolution technique. In addition, it is worth to extend the proposed algorithm to decoding for non-binary LDPC codes on the BSC.

Fig. 2. BERs for a (dv = 6, dc = 54) LDPC code at n = 9216 constructed with the PEG algorithm.
performance of the proposed TB-WBFA with threshold values from the fifth row of Table I for an LDPC code constructed with the progressive edge growth (PEG) algorithm at the same code rate and message length as the ones in Fig. 1 but with a larger column weight of 6. In Fig. 2, the performance of TB-WBFA is compared with those of the WBFA and the scaled MSA with a scaling factor of 0.625 since the details of TBFA for the column weight of 6 were not described in [11]. For the scaled MSA, the log-likelihood ratio values Ln of the hard-decision channel outputs zn are computed as Ln = (−1)zn ln( /(1 − )) for 1 ≤ n ≤ N. In Fig. 2, it is also observed that the proposed TB-WBFA outperforms the WBFA by more than three orders of magnitude at a of 4 × 10−3. The TB-WBFA has a closer performance to that of the decoder with the scaled MSA.
Now, we turn our attention to an LDPC code of a moderate rate at a shorter message length. In particular, a quasi-cyclic LDPC code of rate 0.5 at a message length of 1024 is considered for BER performance comparisons in Fig. 3 where the proposed TB-WBFA with the threshold values from the seventh row of Table I consistently outperforms the other decoding algorithms, namely the WBFA, TBFA1, and TBFA2.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] Y. Kou et al., “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[3] A. Nouh and A. H. Banihashemi, “Bootstrap decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 9, pp. 391–393, Sep. 2002.
[4] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density Parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[5] M. Jiang et al., “An improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814–816, Sep. 2005.
[6] T. C. Y. Chang and Y. T. Su, “Dynamic weighted bit-flipping decoding algorithms for LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 63, no. 11, pp. 3950–3963, Nov. 2015.
[7] J. Cho and W. Sung, “Adaptive threshold technique for bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 857–859, Sep. 2010.
[8] J. Jung and I. C. Park, “Multi-bit flipping decoding of LDPC codes for NAND storage systems,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 979–982, May 2017.
[9] L. Dolecek et al., “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[10] D. V. Nguyen et al., “On the construction of structured LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2280–2302, Apr. 2012.
[11] D. V. Nguyen and B. Vasic, “Two-bit bit flipping algorithms for LDPC codes and collective error correction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 1153–1163, Apr. 2014.
[12] S. Elsanadily et al., “Two-side state-aided bit-flipping decoding of generalized low density parity check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 2122–2125, Oct. 2017.
[13] Z. Liu and D. A. Pados, “Low complexity decoding of finite geometry LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., vol. 4. May 2003, pp. 2713–2717.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:00:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

