A GPS synchronized, Long-Range Uplink-Only Radio Designed for IoT

Seiji Kobayashi, Nabil Loghin*, Ryoji Ikegaya, Hiroyuki Kamata, Katsuyuki Tanaka, Sachio Iida, Yusuke Yoneyama, Toshihiro Fujiki and Masanori Sato†
Sony Semiconductor Solutions Corporation, Kanagawa, Japan *Sony European Technology Center, Stuttgart, Germany
†R&D Platform, System R&D group, Sony Corporation, Tokyo, Japan

Abstract—Targeting IoT (Internet of Things), we have developed an efficient radio system. The system uses GPS (Global Positioning System) for time and frequency calibration. The system uses a newly designed LDPC as error correction, an efficient π/2 shift BPSK modulation and linear chirp modulation for spectrum spreading. In this system, the transmission channel is estimated using evenly-distributed sync symbols and the channel deterioration is corrected. Together with these technologies, we have experimentally confirmed that the system exhibits -144 dBm of sensitivity. We also confirmed that it could achieve long-range communication in an urban environment. Another experiment shows that signals from a fast moving object can also be decoded.
Keywords—IoT; LPWA; GPS; GNSS; LDPC
I. INTRODUCTION
For the newly emerging world of IoT, expectations for lowcost, long-range and reliable wireless data communication systems are ever increasing. Of particular interest is a system in which battery operated devices transmit a small amount of data (about 100 bits) over the ISM (industrial, scientific, and medical) bands. Recently, several Low-Power Wide-Area (LPWA) Networks have been deployed [1-3, 9].
ISM bands are public assets and must be shared among a variety of applications, each of which may be using different topologies and different transmission schemes. Therefore, reducing the chance of channel occupation (i.e., reducing total duration of transmission time by limiting allowed duty cycles) is one of the most important factors to be considered.
In this paper, we describe a wireless system in which the main challenge is to design extremely efficient (short duration) and long-range data transmission capabilities. To achieve this, we designed our system to be an uplink-only STAR topology. By designing it this way, our base stations (BS) do not contain transmitter equipment, which allows us to use a high gain antenna. This will dramatically increase the link budget (up to +8 dB). Another benefit comes from the fact that the BS can be operated by commercial AC electric power. Available electric power allows us to apply the most advanced (but power consuming) signal processing technologies. Specifically, we have implemented a channel estimation technique and a newly developed LDPC (Low-Density Parity-Check) code.

Yet another requirement for IoT applications is to lower the power consumption of end devices. By designing an uplinkonly system, our end device circuity can be simpler and have a lower power consumption.
This paper is organized as follows: Section II outlines the system overview and the transmission format, including chirp modulation, frame repetition, and frequency hopping. Section III summarizes a newly developed LDPC error correction code, designed for low payload sizes and very low signal-to-noiseratio (SNR) applications. The transmitter (TX) and receiver (RX) implementations used for field tests are explained in Sections IV and V, respectively. The outcomes of those field tests are described in Section VI. The Conclusions in Section VII summarize this paper.
II. SYSTEM OVERVIEW A. Total system outlook
In our system (shown in Fig. 1), battery operated TX devices which transmit a small amount of payload (102 bits) in ISM bands (920 MHz) are assumed. The base station is nothing but an RX, which does not transmit beacon or acknowledgement signals, but instead uses a high gain antenna and contains advanced signal processing technologies.
Both the TX devices and the RX contain a GPS (in general, Global Navigation Satellite Systems: GNSS) receiver. GPS is a system which calculates the current location by measuring time-of-travel from satellites, allowing an extremely accurate time base to obtain less than 100 ns of timing error [5]. This timing accuracy is used for calibrating the carrier frequency. GPS time is also utilized as a means to randomly access the radio channel among multiple devices.
Fig. 1. Our system (uplink-only, STAR topology) uses GPS signal for synchronization.

XXX-X-XXXX-XXXX-X/XX/$XX.00 ©20XX IEEE 978-1-5386-3180-5/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:01:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Note that a GPS receiver in the TX devices provides accurate latitude and longitude information, which can be represented by less than 102 bits. By using this latitude and longitude information as payload, a variety of IoT applications (such as vehicle, fleet and elderly people tracking) can be realized. Also note that the power consumption of a GPS receiver is no more than the radio power in ISM bands [6, 7].
B. Frame format The minimum transmission unit is called a “Frame”, with
duration of 0.38 s. As shown in Fig. 2, a 24-bit cyclic redundancy check (CRC) code is generated from the payload (102 bits) and device ID (24 bits). Using the resultant 150 bits, 450 bits of LDPC parity are calculated to form a “Sub-frame” of 600 bits. As described in the next chapter, a rate one-fourth LDPC is used to combat against low SNR signals.
After the Sub-frame is repeated three times, a synchronization word (Sync) formulated by 600-bit pseudo random sequence is prepended. The resultant 2400-bit block is interleaved in such a way that symbols representing Sync are evenly distributed. (After every three data symbols, one Sync symbol is inserted.) As we describe later, this property of evenly distributed Sync symbols enables the RX to estimate the characteristics of the transmission channel.
Finally, the 2400-bit block is scrambled and π/2 BPSK modulation (symbol rate 6.35 kHz) is applied to form a Frame (of duration 0.38 s). Notice that this format does not contain a preamble and thereby satisfies the 0.4 s transmission time criterion. This characteristic is particularly important as it meets regulatory and industry specifications allowing the system to be used in most of the allocated 920 MHz ISM bands in Japan [8].

where u(t) represents the chirp spread signal. A constant chirp rate of β = 387 kHz/s and chirp-start frequency fs = -73.5 kHz is used.
The resultant radio signal u(t) exhibits a wider frequency spectrum as shown in Fig. 4, where the π/2 shift BPSK (symbol rate 6.35 kHz) radio signal is expanded to exhibit 154 kHz of occupied bandwidth. This spectrum is well suited to 920 MHz ISM bands in Japan, which use 200 kHz channels.
Fig. 3. A linear chirp modulation to spread the frequency spectrum. Starting from fs = -73.5 kHz, a center frequency is lineally displaced with a constant rate of β = 387 kHz/s.
D. Frame Repetition A high link budget and reliability can be obtained by

Fig. 2. From a payload and a device ID, the CRC and LDPC parity are generated to form a 600 bits of Sub-frame. By repeating the Sub-Frame three times and adding a 600 bits of Sync, a 2400-bit block is formed. After interleaving, scrambling and π/2 BPSK modulation, this 2400-bit block is transmitted as a Frame. Notice that there is no preamble, but Sync symbols are periodically inserted (after every three data symbols).
C. Chirp modulation
A linear chirp modulation is further applied as a secondary modulation to mitigate frequency dependent interference. Mathematically, the spectrum of π/2 BPSK modulated signal b(t) is spread by the following equation,

u(t) = b(t)·exp{ j2π(fs +βt)·t},

(1)

Fig. 4. By applying chirp modulation, a narrow spectrum of π/2 BPSK (symbol rate 6.35 kHz) is expanded to 154 kHz.
repeatedly transmitting the Frames. Fig. 5 shows an example of an experimental implementation, where a Frame is repeated four times with an interval of 5 s.
In order to avoid collisions between different TX devices, transmission timing and frequency is pseudo-randomly selected. In Fig. 5, the actual transmission start time is shifted from GPS-time (00:00). This timing offset (toffset) is given by a pseudo-random mathematical function of ID and TX time (pf1). In a similar way, the frequency channels (200 kHz separation) are calculated by another pseudo-random function of ID and TX-time (pf2).
In the system, mathematical functions (pf1 and pf2) are pre-configured and known to the receivers. For each RX, a list of IDs to be received at that receiver is provided from the system. Notice that all RXs are equipped with a GPS receiver, allowing the RX to compute the exact timing offset (toffset) and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:01:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

channel frequency being used for the intended transmitting device. Using this information, it is possible for the RX to find and combine the four transmitted Frames even when the

A. Performance confirmation of the Frame format Using the Frame format described in Fig. 2, further
simulation was performed to confirm the frame error rate (FER) over an AWGN channel.
In Fig. 7, we show less than 2% of FER for an input SNR better than -8.1 dB. Assuming 4 dB of NF and 6.35 kHz of bandwidth, this result (SNR= -8.1 dB) corresponds to a sensitivity of -140 dBm.

Fig. 5. Each Tx Frame (0.38 s) is transmitted four times. The timing shift and frequency channels are given by the pseudo-random mathematical function of ID and TX time.
received signals exhibit low SNR.

III. LDPC CODE DESIGN
New LDPC code was designed to accommodate the small payload size. The optimization against additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) resulted in an LDPC with rate 1/4, such that code length is N=600 bits. Degree spectra were optimized for this LDPC code. The final code was selected after eliminating short girths inside the parity-check matrix and performing bit error rate (BER) simulations of more than 50,000 code realizations. Fig. 6 summarizes the BER results of different forward error correcting (FEC) candidates over the energy per information bit to noise density ratio, Eb/N0. The IEEE802.15.4k LPWA standard [7] uses a convolutional code (CC) of rate 1/2. The resulting codeword of 300 bits was repeated twice for fair comparison. Berrou’s original Turbo Code (TC) was further simulated, using the same repetition of two codewords. The TC, which is deployed in UMTS/LTE standards, is another benchmark, where we have chosen rate 1/4 and correspondingly a 600-bit code (without further repetition). As can be seen, the LDPC code offers the largest coding gain, without any error floor in the practical operation range, as is visible from the classical TC. The UMTS/LTE TC code shows similar performance at BER ~ 10-5 and lower, but yielding large degradation for low SNR values.

Fig. 7. Using the Frame format shown in Fig. 2, error rate is evaluated against AWGN (including 4.8 dB gain obtained by 3 Sub-frame repetitions).
IV. TRANSMITTER IMPLEMENTATION The experimental transmitter is shown in Fig. 8. The GPS receiver provides coordinates of the device (latitude and longitude information) as a payload. It also provide GPS time and 1PPS (1 pulse per second) as a synchronization reference. GPS time is used to calibrate the internal clock. Using the 1PPS signal as a counting gate, the actual oscillation frequency of the temperature compensated crystal oscillators (TCXO) is measured. The frequency error (typically less than +/- 1 ppm) is canceled by adding frequency displacements onto the phaselocked loop (PLL) driving signal. With this method, it was experimentally confirmed that the carrier frequency is very well calibrated; the carrier frequency error observed stayed within a +/-20 Hz range. Assuming that the carrier frequency is 920 MHz, an accuracy of +/- 0.02 ppm is achieved in this implementation. This accuracy is at least two orders of magnitude better than that of a conventionally sold TCXO. As described in II, constant envelope π/2 BPSK is used as a channel modulation. This modulation is implemented in an LSI, where channel modulation is realized by a Nyquist 3 filter and a PLL [4]. Within the same LSI, the chirp modulation is implemented as a counter, which increases its counted value with time. Finally, the modulated signal is amplified and transmitted to air with 20 mW of RF power.

Fig. 6. FEC comparison with BPSK signaling over AWGN channel.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:01:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Fig. 8. TX configuration. The GPS information is not only used for acquiring latitude and longitude information, but also for calibrating the frequency of the TCXO and internal timebase.
V. RECEIVER IMPLEMENTATION
A. Baseband IQ extraction The experimental implementation of the RX is shown in
Fig. 9. Here, a GPS receiver is also used to provide GPS time and 1PPS.
Demodulating a BPSK (phase-encoded) signal implies that the receiver has to retrieve the exact frequency, phase and timing. For a long-range (low SNR signal) and bursttransmitted (short-duration) radio, detection performance and computational constraints become significant factors as a design consideration. In the proposed system however, this task is greatly simplified by GPS calibration. The frequency is calibrated in both the TX and RX sides. Using the pseudorandom functions (pf1 and pf2) and the device ID, the RX is able to extract the complex baseband IQ signal at the time when actual transmission may have been performed. The resultant IQ signal is processed by the SDR (Software Defined Radio).

B. Decode process in SDR Even though frequency and timing are exactly calibrated,
the received signal may be degraded by the channel. For example, 10 km of travel distance causes 33 μs of time delay. If the device is moving at a speed of 100 km/h, a Doppler shift of up to 86 Hz will be added.
The task of the SDR is to detect and compensate these additional degradations. For this purpose, the periodically inserted Sync is extracted from the IQ samples, then Fouriertransformed to observe the spectrum C(f). The components of low-frequency and significant amplitude are selected, and Fourier-transformed back to obtain the estimated channel information m(t) (shown in Fig. 10). From the phase portion of m(t), the channel deterioration in phase φ(t) can be detected [10].
The phase compensated signal is then accumulated (four Frames and three Sub-frames) and LDPC decoding is performed to obtain transmitted payload.
Fig. 10. SDR implementation: from the peak frequency components of periodically inserted Sync, frequency, time, and phase degradations are extracted.
VI. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS Our experimental TX module and an RX circuit board are shown in Fig. 11. Notice that a GPS module is included in the tiny TX module (14 mm x 28 mm).

Fig. 9. In our RX a GPS is used for calibrating the frequency of the TCXO and internal timebase. The exact timing and transmission channel frequency are derived from the list of TX device IDs.

Fig. 11. TX and RX circuits used for the experiments.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:01:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

A. Sensitivity measurement (4-Frame repetition) Using our TX which transmits four Frames per message,
(0.38 s times 4 transmissions), we connected the TX and the RX through attenuated cable, and the sensitivity level was evaluated. From this experiment result (shown in Fig. 11), we confirmed the sensitivity of -144 dBm, which is 4 dB better than that of a 1-Frame transmission. This implies that four Frames are detected, and IQ signals are successfully combined to improve the sensitivity.
Assuming that the TX transmits 13 dBm of radio power with a typical 2.15 dB gain antenna, and the RX uses a 6 dB beam antenna, -144 dBm of sensitivity implies that the link budget of 165 dB can be obtained.
Fig. 13. (A) Detected spectrum C(f) from the Sync, (B) selected signal spectrum to estimate channel.

Fig. 12. Measured sensitivity exceeds -144 dBm when 4 Frames are transmitted.
B. Field test results from a moving object. One of the most interesting results obtained through a field
trial was the ability to receive data from a fast-moving object. Fig. 13 shows the Sync signal spectrum observed when the TX device was placed in a Japanese bullet-train (Shinkansen). As shown in (A), the peak frequency shift of 160 Hz is observed, which corresponds to a Doppler shift due to 190 km/h of velocity. A portion of peak frequency components (shown in (B)) is selected, and Fourier-transformed back to obtain estimated channel information m(t). Using this channel information, we have successfully demodulated this signal.
In a similar moving object experiment, the constellation after de-chirp is shown in (C) of Fig. 14. Due to multi-path fading, heavy distortion is observed. However, using the channel estimated phase φ(t), most of this phase degradation can be compensated as shown in (D), where the constellation of π/2 BPSK can be recognized. Finally (E) shows the results after correction of 90° phase rotation (caused by π/2 BPSK), and after the Sub-frames are accumulated. With help of LDPC, the transmitted payload was successfully decoded from the constellation (E).

Fig. 14. Retrieved BPSK constellation when multi-path fading was observed (C). After the degradation caused by the channel is estimated and corrected, we recognize a 90 degree rotated π/2 BPSK constellation (D). By accumulating 3 Sub-frames, we obtain constellation shown in (E), which was successfully demodulated by LDPC.
C. Field test results in an urban area As a total system demonstration, a field test was performed
within an urban area. The TX was located on the roof of a car, transmitting the GPS location as a payload while traveling around Tokyo. The RX was placed on a radio tower located in the center of Tokyo. The antenna height from ground is about 400 m.
With this height and location, heavy interferences from other radio systems installed over almost all the Tokyo area were observed in a regular manner in Fig. 15.
Despite the hostile environment, successful recovery of data inside most of the area within a 20 km range of the tower was achieved (shown in Fig. 16). The circles in the figure denote the locations from where the transmitted signal was successfully decoded. The maximum distance we successfully decoded was 53 km.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:01:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS The authors would like to thank Masayuki Hattori, Toshiyuki Miyauchi, Toshiyuki Hiroi, Kenichi Fujimaki, Kazuhisa Funamoto, Kohei Yamamoto, Takayuki Aoki, Katsutoshi Itoh, Stephen Beck, Rajni Agarwal, John Wilson and all members of “Lfour” project for their continuous support and suggestions for this work.

Fig. 15. To test urban area reception, we installed the RX on the radio tower in Tokyo. The spectrum observed at the radio tower exhibits very strong interferences from other radio systems.
Fig. 16. Field test results in an urban environment. Placing the receiver on the radio tower located in middle of Tokyo, we have confirmed that the most of the transmitted signal within a 20km range can be detected.
VII. CONCLUSIONS We have developed and demonstrated an uplink-only radio system for IoT. The radio system consists of a newly designed LDPC, chirp spectrum spreading and constant envelope π/2 BPSK modulation. GPS is used for the purpose of timing and frequency calibration. As a result, the system is efficient (one Frame of transmission is less than 0.4 s duration). The system allows improvements in sensitivity by combining four Frames and demonstrated -144 dBm of sensitivity. We have experimentally demonstrated that long-range communication is possible even in an urban environment. Using evenly distributed Sync symbols allows the system to estimate the channel. This channel estimation capability is also demonstrated by the experimental result showing that a radio signal from a fast speed moving object was successfully decoded.

REFERENCES
[1] George Margelis, Robert Piechocki, Dritan Kaleshi, and Paul Thomas, “Low throughput networks for the IoT: Lessons learned from industrial implementations,” in Internet of Things (WF-IoT), 2015 IEEE 2nd World Forum on, pp. 181–186, 2015.
[2] M. T. Do, C. Goursaud, and J. M. Gorce, "On the benefits of random FDMA schemes in ultra narrow band networks," in International Symposium on Modeling and Optimization in Mobile, Ad Hoc, and Wireless Networks, 2014.
[3] Lorenzo Vangelista, Andrea Zanella, and Michele Zorzi, “Long-range IoT technologies: The dawn of LoRaTM,” in Future Access Enablers of Ubiquitous and Intelligent Infrastructures, pp. 51–58. Springer, 2015.
[4] Babak Sayar and Subbarayan Pasupathy, "Nyquist 3 pulse shaping in continuous phase modulation," IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-35, no. 1, pp. 57-67, Jan. 1987.
[5] D. Allan and M. M. Weiss, “Accurate time and frequency transfer during common-view of a GPS satellite,” in Proc. 1980 Frequency Control Symp., pp. 334–336.
[6] Chun Geik Tan, Fei Song, Tieng Yi Choke, Ming Kong, De-Cheng Song, Chee-Hong Yong, Weimin Shu, Zong Hua You, Yi-Hsien Lin, Osama Shanaa, “A Universal GNSS (GPS/Galileo/Glonass/Beidou) SoC with a 0.25mm2 Radio in 40nm CMOS,” 2013 IEEE International SolidState Circuits Conference Digest of Technical Papers. pp. 334-335, 2013.
[7] Ken Yamamoto, Kenichi Nakano, Gaku Hidai, Yuya Kondo, Hitoshi Tomiyama, Hideyuki Takano, Fumitaka Kondo, Yusuke Shinohe, Hidenori Takeuchi, Nobuhisa Ozawa, Shingo Harada, Shinichiro Eto, Mari Kishikawa, Daisuke Ide, Hiroyasu Tagami, Masayuki Katakura and Norio Shoji “A 0.7V 1.5-to-2.3mW GNSS Receiver with 2.5-to3.8dB NF in 28nm FD-SOI,” 2016 IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC). Pp 444-445, 2016.
[8] ARIB, “920MHz-Band Telemeter, Telecontrol and Data Transmission Radio Equipment,” ARIB, 2012. ARIB-STD T-108.
[9] “IEEE Draft Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks – Part15.4: Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (WPANs) Amendment – Physical Layer Specifications for Low Energy, Critical Infrastructure Monitoring Networks (LECIM),” IEEE P802.15.4k/D3, November 2013, Jan. 2013.
[10] Mitsuo Takeda, Hideki Ina, and Seiji Kobayashi, “Fourier-transform method of fringe-pattern analysis for computer-based topography and interferometry,” Journal of the Optical Society of America Vol. 72, Issue 1, pp. 156-160 (1982).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:01:48 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

