IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 64, NO. 5, MAY 2018

3411

Characterization of Elementary Trapping Sets in Irregular LDPC Codes and the Corresponding
Efficient Exhaustive Search Algorithms

Yoones Hashemi, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract— In this paper, we propose a characterization of elementary trapping sets (ETSs) for irregular low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes. These sets are known to be the main culprits in the error floor region of such codes. The characterization of ETSs for irregular codes has been known to be a challenging problem due to the large variety of nonisomorphic ETS structures that can exist within the Tanner graph of these codes. This is a direct consequence of the variety of the degrees of the variable nodes that can participate in such structures. The proposed characterization is based on a hierarchical graphical representation of ETSs, starting from simple cycles of the graph, or from single variable nodes, and involves three simple expansion techniques: degree-one tree (d ot), pat h, and l ol l i pop, thus, the terminology dpl characterization. A similar d pl characterization was proposed in an earlier work by the authors for the leafless ETSs of variable–regular LDPC codes. The present paper generalizes the prior work to codes with a variety of variable node degrees and to ETSs that are not leafless. The proposed d pl characterization corresponds to an efficient search algorithm that, for a given irregular LDPC code, can find all the instances of (a, b) ETSs with size a and with the number of unsatisfied check nodes b within any range of interest a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, exhaustively. Although branch-&-bound exhaustive search algorithms for finding ETSs of irregular LDPC codes exist, to the best of our knowledge, the proposed search algorithm is the first of its kind, in that, it is devised based on a characterization of ETSs that makes the search process efficient. For a constant degree distribution and range of search, the worst-case complexity of the proposed d pl algorithm increases linearly with the block length n. The average complexity, excluding the search for the input simple cycles, is constant in n. Extensive simulation results are presented to show the versatility of the search algorithm, and to demonstrate that, compared to the literature, significant improvement in search speed can be obtained.
Index Terms— Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, irregular LDPC codes, trapping sets (TS), elementary trapping sets (ETS), leafless elementary trapping sets (LETS), characterization of trapping sets, exhaustive search of trapping sets, efficient
Manuscript received October 11, 2016; revised October 10, 2017; accepted January 5, 2018. Date of publication February 2, 2018; date of current version April 19, 2018. This work was supported by the NSERC Discovery under Grant 217239-2013-RGPIN. This paper was presented in part at 2017 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory.
Y. Hashemi was with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6. He is now with Huawei Canada, Ottawa, ON K2K 3J1, Canada.
A. H. Banihashemi is with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Communicated by C.-C. Wang, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2018.2799627

search of trapping sets, dpl characterization of trapping sets, dpl search of trapping sets, graphical structure of trapping sets, error floor.
I. INTRODUCTION
I T IS well-known that error-floor performance of lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes is related to the presence of certain problematic graphical structures in the Tanner graph of the code, commonly referred to as trapping sets (TS) [27]. Among TSs, the most harmful ones are known to be the elementary trapping sets (ETSs) [22], [25], [39], whose induced subgraphs contain only degree-1 and degree-2 check nodes. In particular, the leafless ETSs (LETSs), in which each variable node is connected to at least two even-degree (satisfied) check nodes, are recognized as the main culprit for variable-regular LDPC codes [13]. For a given LDPC code, the knowledge of trapping sets is important. Such knowledge can be used, for example, to estimate the error floor [27], [33], to devise decoding algorithms with low error floor [20], [39], or to design codes with low error floor [2], [3], [15], [19], [26].
From the computational complexity point of view, however, it is well-known that problems related to finding trapping sets of an LDPC code are, in general, hard [24]. In particular, McGregor and Milenkovic [24] proved that the problem of finding an (a, b) trapping set with minimum number of unsatisfied check nodes b, for a given number of variable nodes a, is NP-hard, even if one is satisfied with finding an approximation which is larger than the optimal solution by a constant factor α (finding an α-approximation). They also showed that it is NP-hard to find an α-approximation for the optimal solution to the problem of finding an (a, b) elementary trapping set with minimum size a, for a given b.
Although theoretical results show that problems related to finding trapping sets are in general hard to solve, due to the importance of trapping sets, there exist numerous works on the characterization of trapping sets and search algorithms to find them [1], [6]–[9], [11], [13], [16], [17], [20], [21], [26], [29], [31], [36]–[38], [40]. Most of these works, however, are concerned with variable-regular LDPC codes.
There are very few works on the trapping sets of irregular LDPC codes [1], [10], [17], [20], [40]. This is despite the fact that these codes are popular in many applications due to their superior performance over the regular codes in the waterfall region [28]. In fact, irregular LDPC codes have been already adopted in a number of standards [41]–[45]. One main reasonfor the lack of results on trapping sets of irregular

0018-9448 © 2018 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 64, NO. 5, MAY 2018

codes is the variety of variable node degrees that makes the identification and characterization of trapping sets of different classes a challenging task [17]. In the following, we review the main existing literature related to trapping sets of irregular codes: In [1], using the modified impulse algorithm, AbuSurra et al. devised a technique to find a non-exhaustive list of trapping sets of a given irregular LDPC code. Using the branch-&-bound principle, Kyung and Wang [20] proposed an exhaustive search algorithm to enumerate the fully absorbing sets (FASs) of short irregular LDPC codes. The proposed algorithm, however, becomes quickly infeasible to use as the block length, n, and the size of the FASs, a, are increased. In general, the reach of the algorithm is limited to n < 1000 and a < 7, or n < 1000 and a < 14, if the number of unsatisfied check nodes is limited to b < 3. Zhang and Siegel [40] also used the branch-&-bound approach to devise an exhaustive search algorithm for finding trapping sets of LDPC codes. This approach, also, is still only applicable to short block length codes (the block length of the only irregular code studied in [40] is 256). In [17], by examining the relationships between cycles and trapping sets, Karimi and Banihashemi proposed an efficient search algorithm to find the dominant ETSs of a given irregular LDPC code. Although the proposed algorithm in [17] can find ETSs with sufficiently large size within relatively large LDPC codes, it provides no guarantee that the obtained list of ETSs is exhaustive. Very recently, Falsafain and Mousavi [10] proposed yet another branch-&-bound algorithm to find the ETSs of irregular LDPC codes. Although, the proposed 0 − 1 integer linear programming (ILP) formulation in [10] provides a tighter linear programming relaxation in comparison with the one in [20], the exhaustive search algorithm of [10] is still only applicable to short-to-moderate length LDPC codes. To the best of our knowledge, the algorithms proposed in [20], [40], and [10] are the only exhaustive search algorithms of error-prone structures in irregular LDPC codes.
Karimi and Banihashemi [16], and Hashemi and Banihashemi [11], [12] studied the graphical structure of LETSs in variable-regular LDPC codes and demonstrated that all the non-isomorphic structures of LETSs are layered super sets (LSS) of some basic structures. This characterization corresponds to a search algorithm that can find all the instances of LETSs in a guaranteed fashion. Although, the search algorithm itself is simple, one may need to enumerate basic structures with large size in the Tanner graph of the code, as the input to the search algorithm. The multiplicity of such structures increases rapidly with the size and thus the enumeration, storage and processing of these structures pose a practical hurdle in implementing the search algorithm. To overcome this problem, in an earlier work [13], we proposed a novel hierarchical graph-based expansion approach to characterize LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes. The proposed d pl characterization is based on three basic expansion techniques, dubbed, dot, path and lolli pop. Each LETS structure S is characterized as a sequence of embedded LETS structures that starts from a simple cycle, and grows in each step by using one of the three expansions, until it reaches S. The new characterization, allowed us to devise search algorithms that

are provably efficient1 in finding all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , for any choice of amax and bmax, in a guaranteed fashion. To the best of our knowledge, the proposed algorithm in [13] is the most efficient exhaustive search algorithm available for finding LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes. It is also the most general, in that, it is applicable to codes with any variable degree, girth, rate and block length.
In this paper, we generalize the approach proposed in [13] to irregular LDPC codes. We develop a framework to use the d pl characterization of LETS structures in variable-regular graphs to characterize the LETS structures of irregular graphs (in a given range of a and b values, exhaustively). This characterization corresponds to an exhaustive search algorithm. The complexity and memory requirements of the search, however, grow rapidly with the increase in the range of a and b values and the variety of variable node degrees, particularly for irregular codes with degree-2 variable nodes. For such scenarios, we propose an alternate approach to characterize/search for LETSs of irregular codes. The new approach, which is still based on the three expansion techniques dot, path and lolli pop, uses a sequence of recursively derived upper bounds bma ax on the maximum number of unsatisfied check nodes b that can possibly appear in a substructure of size a of a LETS structure within the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax . As another contribution, we extend our characterization/exhaustive search to ETSs that are not leafless. This together with our results on LETSs, provide an efficient exhaustive search algorithm for finding all ETSs (leafless and otherwise) of irregular LDPC codes. We then apply the search algorithm to a large number of irregular LDPC codes with a variety of degree distributions, girths, rates and block lengths, to demonstrate the strength and the versatility of the proposed scheme. We note that compared to the IP-based search methods of [20] and [10], the proposed algorithm is more efficient and has a much wider reach for finding problematic structures of larger size a within codes of larger block length n. The main reason for this superiority is that, unlike the branch-&-bound algorithms of [20] and [10], the proposed scheme uses carefully devised embedded sequences of structures each starting from a simple cycle, and then expanding step by step to larger structures using one of the three simple expansion techniques. In fact, for a constant degree distribution and search range, the worstcase complexity of the proposed d pl search algorithm is linear in n. The average complexity, excluding that of finding the input simple cycles, is constant in n.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Basic definitions and notations are provided in Section II. In Section III, the d pl characterization and search algorithm for finding LETSs of variable-regular graphs is revisited.
1In this paper, we use the term “efficient,” as related to the computational complexity of algorithms, rather broadly. In particular, we do not take this term to necessarily mean that an algorithm is polynomial-time in the input size. In the context of the d pl search algorithm of [13], the efficiency of the algorithm is proved in the sense that the algorithm requires the minimum size of input simple cycles and the minimum number of auxiliary structures, where auxiliary structures are those that are needed as parents of desired LETS structures but are not of direct interest themselves.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION OF ETSs

3413

In Section IV, a novel approach is proposed to extend the d pl characterization/search to irregular graphs. In Section V, the shortcomings of the approach proposed in Section IV are discussed, and an alternate characterization/search is developed to address those shortcomings. The complexity of the proposed search algorithm is also discussed in this section. Characterization of ETSs that are not leafless, and an efficient exhaustive search algorithm to find them are presented in Section VI. Finally, numerical results are provided in Section VII, followed by concluding remarks in Section VIII.
II. PRELIMINARIES
Consider an undirected graph G = (F, E), where the two sets F = { f1, . . . , fK } and E = {e1, . . . , eM }, are the sets of nodes and edges of G, respectively. We say that an edge e is incident to a node f if e is connected to f . If there exists an edge em which is incident to two distinct nodes fi and f j , we represent em by fi f j or f j fi . The degree of a node f is denoted by d f or deg( f ), and is defined as the number of edges incident to f . The maximum degree and the minimum degree of a graph G, denoted by  (G) and δ (G), respectively, are defined to be the maximum and minimum degree of its nodes, respectively.
Given an undirected graph G = (F, E), a walk between two nodes f1 and fk+1 is a sequence of nodes and edges f1, e1, f2, e2, . . . , fk , ek , fk+1, where ei = fi fi+1, ∀i ∈ [1, k]. In this definition, the nodes f1, f2, . . . , fk+1 are not necessarily distinct. The same applies to the edges e1, e2, . . . , ek. A path is a walk with no repeated nodes or edges, except the first and the last nodes that can be the same. If the first and the last nodes are distinct, we call the path an open path. Otherwise, we call it a closed path or a cycle. The length of a walk, a path, or a cycle is the number of its edges. A lollipop walk is a walk f1, e1, f2, e2, . . . , fk , ek , fk+1, such that all the edges and all the nodes are distinct, except that fk+1 = fm , for some m ∈ (1, k). A chord of a cycle is an edge which is not part of the cycle but is incident to two distinct nodes in the cycle. A simple cycle or a chordless cycle is a cycle which does not have any chord. Throughout this paper, we use the notation sk for a simple cycle of length k. The length of the shortest cycle in a graph is called girth, and is denoted by g.
A graph is called connected when there is a path between every pair of nodes. A tree is a connected graph that contains no cycles. A rooted tree is a tree in which one specific node is assigned as the root. The depth of a node in a rooted tree is the length of the path from the node to the root. The depth of a tree is the maximum depth of any node in the tree. Depthone tree is a tree with depth one.2 A node f is called leaf if d f = 1. Although this terminology is commonly used for trees, in this paper, we use it for a general graph that may contain cycles. A leafless graph is a connected graph G with δ (G) ≥ 2.
The graphs G1 = (F1, E1) and G2 = (F2, E2) are isomorphic if there is a bijection p : F1 → F2 such that
2In graph theory, a depth-one-tree is often called a star. To stay loyal to the terminology of [13], however, we continue to use the former term.

nodes f1, f2 ∈ F1 are joined by an edge if and only if p( f1) and p( f2) are joined by an edge. Otherwise, the graphs are

non-isomorphic.

Any m × n parity check matrix H of a binary LDPC

code C can be represented by its bipartite Tanner graph G =

(V ∪ C, E), where V = {v1, v2, . . . , vn } is the set of variable nodes and C = {c1, c2, . . . , cm} is the set of check nodes. An edge e = vi c j in E corresponds to a 1 in the ( j, i ) entry

of matrix H . A Tanner graph is called variable-regular with

variable degree dv if dvi = dv, ∀ vi ∈ V . A Tanner graph is called irregular if it has multiple variable or check node

degrees. The node degrees for an irregular LDPC code are

often described by the code’s variable and check node degree

distributions, λ(x ) = dvmax λi x i−1 and μ(x ) = dcmax μi x i−1,

i =dvm i n

i =dcm i n

respectively, where λi and μi are the fractions of edges in the

Tanner graph that are incident to degree-i variable and degree-

i check nodes, respectively. The terms dvmax and dvmin (dcmax and dcmin ) are the maximum and minimum degrees of variable nodes (check nodes), respectively. The length of cycles in a

Tanner graph can only be an even number. We study the Tanner

graphs that are free of 4-cycles (g > 4).

For a subset S of V , the subset (S) of C denotes the set of

neighbors of S in G. The induced subgraph of S in G, denoted

by G(S), is the graph with the set of nodes S∪(S) and the set

of edges { fi f j ∈ E : fi ∈ S, f j ∈ (S)}. The set of check nodes with odd and even degrees in G(S) are denoted by

o(S) and e(S), respectively. In this paper, the terms unsat-

isfied check nodes and satisfied check nodes are used to refer

to the check nodes in o(S) and e(S), respectively. The size of an induced subgraph G(S) is defined to be the number of

its variable nodes. We assume that an induced subgraph is con-

nected. Disconnected subgraphs can be considered as the union

of connected ones. All the induced subgraphs with the same

size a, and the same number of unsatisfied check nodes b, are

considered to belong to the same class, called (a, b) class.

Given a Tanner graph G, a set S ⊂ V is called an (a, b)

trapping set (TS) if |S| = a and |o(S)| = b. Alternatively, S is said to belong to the class of (a, b) TSs. Parameter a is

referred to as the size of the TS. In the rest of the paper,

depending on the context, the term “trapping set” may be

used to refer to the set of variable nodes S, or to the induced

subgraph G(S) of S in the Tanner graph G. Similarly, we may

use S to mean G(S). An elementary trapping set (ETS) is

a trapping set for which all the check nodes in G(S) have

degree 1 or 2. A set S ⊂ V is called an (a, b) absorbing

set (AS) if S is an (a, b) trapping set and all the variable

nodes in S are connected to more nodes in e(S) than in o(S). An elementary absorbing set (EAS) S is an absorbing set for which all the check nodes in G(S) have degree 1 or 2.

A fully absorbing set (FAS) S ⊂ V is an absorbing set for

which all the nodes in V \S have strictly more neighbors in

C\o(S) than in o(S). A set S ⊂ V is called an (a, b) fully elementary absorbing set (FEAS) if S is an (a, b) EAS and if

all the nodes in V \S have strictly more neighbors in C\o(S) than in o(S).

Elementary trapping sets are the subject of this paper.

To simplify the representation of ETSs, similar to [11], [13],

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 64, NO. 5, MAY 2018

Fig. 1. (a) A LETS in the (4, 2) class and its leafless normal graph, (b) An ETS in the (4, 4) class and its normal graph which has a leaf ( f1).

and [16], we use an alternate graph representation of ETSs, called normal graph. The normal graph of an ETS S is obtained from G(S) by removing all the check nodes of degree one and their incident edges, and by replacing all the degree-2 check nodes and their two incident edges by a single edge. It is easy to see that there is a one-to-one correspondence between the Tanner graph G(S) and the normal graph of S for variable-regular LDPC codes.
Lemma 1: Consider the normal graph of an (a, b) ETS structure of a variable-regular Tanner graph with variable degree dv. The number of nodes and edges of this normal graph are a and (adv − b)/2, respectively. We thus have b = adv − 2 e, where e is the number of edges of the normal graph.
We call a set S ⊂ V an (a, b) leafless ETS (LETS) if S is an (a, b) ETS and if the normal graph of S is leafless.
Example 1: Fig. 1(a) represents a LETS in the (4, 2) class in a variable-regular Tanner graph with dv = 3 and its leafless normal graph. Fig. 1(b) shows an ETS in the (4, 4) class and its normal graph with a leaf. (Symbols and are used to represent satisfied and unsatisfied check nodes in the
induced subgraphs, respectively, and the symbol ◦ is used to
represent variable nodes in both the induced subgraphs and normal graphs.)
Unlike the variable-regular Tanner graphs, there is not a one-to-one correspondence between an ETS and its normal graph for irregular graphs. In other words, for an irregular Tanner graph, the number of edges in the normal graph representation of an ETS is not uniquely mapped to the number of unsatisfied check nodes in the ETS. To have a one-to-one correspondence, in addition to the normal graph, the extra information about the degrees of variable nodes involved in the ETS is also required. For this, we introduce a new graphical representation of an ETS, which we call quasi-normal representation. The quasi-normal hypergraph of an ETS S is obtained from G(S) by replacing all the check nodes (degreeone or two) and their incident edges by a single edge. In this representation, the edges that are connected to only one node (singly-connected edges) are responsible for preserving the degree of variable nodes. It is easy to see that there is a oneto-one correspondence between G(S) and the quasi-normal hypergraph of S for any regular or irregular LDPC code.

Fig. 2. Tanner graph and quasi-normal hypergraph representations of LETSs in an irregular Tanner graph with variable degrees 3 and 4 in (a) (4, 2), (b) (4, 3), (c) (4, 4), (d) (4, 6) classes and (e) their normal graph.
In the following, we still continue to use the normal graph representation for irregular graphs. Such a representation can be considered as the image or projection of quasi-normal hypergraphs into the space of normal graphs, where such a projection involves dropping all the singly-connected edges. In general, in an irregular Tanner graph, multiple ETS structures with different quasi-normal hypergraphs may have the same normal graph representation. We also continue to use the same definition of LETS for irregular graphs, i.e., an ETS S is LETS if the normal graph of S is leafless.
Example 2: Fig. 2 shows the induced subgraphs of four LETS structures in an irregular Tanner graph with variable node degrees 3 and 4. The figure also includes the corresponding quasi-normal hypergraphs and the normal graph representation of the four structures. It can be seen that all four non-isomorphic LETS structures have the same normal graph.
To the best of our knowledge, almost all the structures reported in the literature as error-prone structures of irregular LDPC codes are ETSs, with a large majority being LETS structures. LETSs have thus been the subject of many studies including [4], [11], [13], [16], [17], [35]. In this paper, we first focus on LETS structures of irregular codes in Sections IV and V. We then study ETS structures which are not leafless in Section VI.
In the following, when we are concerned with the characterization of ETS structures, we use the quasi-normal/normal hypergraph/graph representation. On the other hand, when we discuss search algorithms, since the search is performed on a Tanner graph, we are concerned with the bipartite graph representation of an ETS structure. Nevertheless, for consistency and to prevent confusion, even in the context of search algorithms, we still use terminologies corresponding to normal graphs. For example, we use “all the instances of sk” to mean “all the instances of the structure whose normal graph is sk .”

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION OF ETSs

3415

Fig. 3. Expansion of the LETS structure S with (a) a depth-one tree with

m edges, dotm , respectively, (c)

(b) an open and closed a lollipop walk of length

path m+

of length 1 = d + c,

m+ lomc .

1,

pamo

,

pamc ,

In the rest of the paper, when we use the term “characterization of an ETS,” we are concerned with identifying the sequence of embedded topological structures (parent/child relationships) that starts from a simple cycle, or a variable node, and ends at the desired ETS structure. We use this characterization, often described by a characterization table, as a road map for our hierarchical d pl search algorithms. That is, to exhaustively search for the instances of a child in a Tanner graph, we first find an exhaustive list of the instances of the parent, and then examine to see if any such instance can be expanded to an instance of the child (by grafting the corresponding expansion into the parent).
III. EXISTING RESULTS: Dpl CHARACTERIZATION/SEARCH FOR LETSS OF
VARIABLE-REGULAR LDPC CODES
In an earlier work [13], we developed a characterization/search algorithm for LETS structures of variable-regular LDPC codes in the space of normal graphs. In the d pl characterization, each LETS structure is identified with an embedded sequence of LETS structures that starts from a simple cycle and expands, at each step, to a larger LETS structure using one of the three expansions, dot, path or lolli pop, until it reaches the LETS structure of interest. In this characterization, the simple cycle is called a prime structure with respect to d pl expansions. In the following, we briefly explain the three expansions.
Consider an (a, b) LETS structure S of a variable-regular Tanner graph with g ≥ 6 and variable degree dv. Figs. 3(a)-(c) show the three expansions applied to the induced subgraph
of S. In these figures, the symbol ◦ is used to represent the
common node(s) between S and the expansion graph, and the
symbol • is used to represent the other nodes of the expansion
graph. In Fig. 3(a), the expansion using a depth-one tree is shown.
The notation dotm is used for a depth-one tree (dot) expansion

with m edges. For the dotm expansion to result in a valid normal graph for a LETS structure of a variable-regular Tanner
graph with variable degree dv, the m edges of the tree will have to be connected to m nodes of S with degree strictly
less than dv. In addition, the degree m of the root node must be at least 2 and at most dv.
The path expansion of S is a LETS structure S of size a + m, that is constructed by appending a path of length m +1 to S. The first and the last nodes of the path are common with S, and can be identical, in that case, the path is closed. Fig. 3(b), shows the path expansion of S using open and closed paths of length m + 1. It is clear that for an open-path
expansion, the degrees of the two nodes that are common with S must be strictly less than dv (in G(S)), and for the closedpath expansion, the degree of the one common node must be strictly less than dv − 1 (in G(S)). We use the notations pamo and pamc for open and closed paths of length m + 1, respectively. The notation pam is used to include both open and closed paths.
In Fig. 3(c), the expansion of a LETS structure S using a lollipop walk of length m + 1 is shown. The notation lomc is used for a lollipop walk of length m + 1 (m is number of the nodes added to S), which consists of a cycle of length c (c ≥ g/2) and a path of length d (d ≥ 1). Clearly, the common node between S and the lollipop expansion must have a degree strictly less than dv in G(S).
The following proposition shows how the class of a LETS
structure is changed as a result of the application of each of
the three expansions. Proposition 1 [13]: Suppose that S is an (a, b) LETS
structure of variable-regular Tanner graphs with variable degree dv. Then, the expansion of S using dotm with 2 ≤ m ≤ mi n{dv, b}, pam with m ≥ 2, and lomc with m ≥ g/2, g/2 ≤ c ≤ m, will result in LETS structure(s) in the (a + 1, b + dv − 2m), (a + m, b − 2 + m(dv − 2)), and (a + m, b − 2 + m(dv − 2)) classes, respectively. (For dotm and pam expansions, the necessary condition is to have b ≥ 2, while for lomc , it is b ≥ 1.)
It was proved in [13] that any LETS structure of variable-
regular Tanner graphs for any variable degree dv, and in any (a, b) class, can be generated by sequentially applying a
combination of dot, path and lolli pop expansions to simple
cycles. Also, in [13], given amax and bmax, a characterization algorithm was proposed to determine the expansion techniques
needed to be applied to all the LETS structures within each
LETS class to generate all the LETS structures in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , in a guaranteed fashion. The characterization of [13] is minimal, in the sense that, none of
the expansion steps can be divided into smaller expansions
such that the resulting new sub-structures are still LETSs.
It is also proved in [13] that any minimal characterization
is based only on the expansions dot, path and lollipop. Using
the d pl characterization as a road-map, an efficient exhaustive
search algorithm for finding LETSs is also proposed in [13]
that requires only short-length simple cycles of the graph
(prime structures) as the input. The maximum length of the
input cycles for the d pl search algorithm is, in fact, provably
minimal [13].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 64, NO. 5, MAY 2018

TABLE I NON-ISOMORPHIC (a, b) LETS STRUCTURES OF AN IRREGULAR TANNER GRAPH WITH VARIABLE DEGREES 3 AND 4, IN THE RANGE OF a ≤ 5 AND b ≤ 4

IV. Dpl CHARACTERIZATION/SEARCH OF LETS STRUCTURES IN IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
In irregular Tanner graphs, for a given class of LETSs, the variety of non-isomorphic LETS structures would increase significantly compared to that of variable-regular Tanner graphs. This is due to the variety of the degrees of variable nodes involved in LETS structures.
Example 3: Suppose that one is interested in characterizing the non-isomorphic (a, b) LETS structures of irregular Tanner graphs with variable degrees 3 and 4 in the interest range of a ≤ 5 and b ≤ 4. Table I shows the quasi-normal hypergraph representation of all the possible non-isomorphic LETS structures in this range. Comparing the information of this table with that of Tables VI and VIII of [13], for variableregular graphs with dv = 3 and dv = 4, respectively, shows the considerable difference in the number of non-isomorphic LETS structures in this range for variable-regular versus irregular graphs. As an example, Table I shows that there are 19 nonisomorphic LETS structures in the (5, 4) class. This number for the (5, 4) class in Table VIII of [13] is only 2.
It can be seen that by increasing the range of a and b values or by having a larger variety of variable node degrees,

the number of non-isomorphic structures increases rapidly. An important observation, however, is that despite the large number of non-isomorphic quasi-normal hypergraphs in each class, they are all projected to only a few normal graphs. In Table I, the non-isomorphic normal graphs, which are the projections of all the quasi-normal hypergraphs in the table, are boldfaced. For example, the boldfaced graph in the (5, 2) class is the projection of 7 LETS structures, where one, two and four structures are in the (5, 2), (5, 3) and (5, 4) classes, respectively. These 7 LETS structures are presented in Fig. 4.
A. Dpl Characterization of LETS Structures in Irregular Graphs
In the following, we demonstrate, through a sequence of intermediate results, that the d pl characterization of (a, b) LETS structures of variable-regular Tanner graphs of a properly selected variable degree dv, over a properly chosen range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax can be used to exhaustively cover all the normal graphs of all the non-isomorphic (a, b) LETS structures of irregular Tanner graphs with a given degree distribution λ(x) over any desired range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax . (The values amax , bmax , and dv are functions of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION OF ETSs

3417

Fig. 5. All the non-isomorphic LETS structures with size a = 4 in a variable-regular Tanner graph with dv ≥ 3.

Fig. 4. Seven non-isomorphic LETS structures in the (a) (5, 2), (b) (5, 3) and (c) (5, 4) classes, all with the same normal graph.

amax, bmax and λ(x ).) As we subsequently show, this means

that a d pl characterization can also be established for irregular

graphs. Suppose that Ldav is the set of all non-isomorphic LETS
structures of size a in the Tanner graph of a variable-regular

graph with variable degree dv. It is easy to see that the

structures in Ldav can have b values in the range 0 ≤ b ≤ a(dv − 2). The following proposition establishes a relationship

between the sets Ladv , for different values of dv. Proposition 2: In the space of normal graphs, if dv < a −1,

then, Ldav ⊂ Laa−1, and if dv > a − 1, then, Ladv = Laa−1. Proof: For the first part, consider an arbitrary element S

of Ladv . The LETS d in the range 2 ≤

S d

has a ≤ dv.

nodes, each node having a degree Since Laa−1 includes all the LETS

structures with a nodes, where each node can have a degree

in the range [2, a − 1], and since dv < a − 1, the structure S is also in Laa−1, and thus Ldav ⊂ Laa−1.
For the second part, following similar steps as in the proof

of the first part, it can be shown that if a − 1 < dv, then

Laa−1 ⊂ in Laa−1.

Ladv . Now, consider a Structure S must then

structure S in Ladv that have at least one node

is not v with

degree strictly larger than a − 1. This is, however, impossible

as node v must be connected to at least a other nodes,

while there are only a − 1 other nodes in S. We thus have Ladv = Laa−1.
It is important to note that even if two sets of LETS

structures with different variable degrees are identical (in the

space of normal graphs), they still correspond to different sets

of classes. This is explained in the following examples.

Example 4: Fig. 5 shows all the non-isomorphic LETS

structures with size a = 4 in a variable-regular Tanner graph

with dv = 3 and g = 6. Based on the second part of Proposi-

tion 2, these structures are also all the non-isomorphic LETS

structures with size a = 4 in a variable-regular Tanner graph

with dv > 3 and g = 6. For variable-regular graphs with dv = 3 and g = 6, the structures in Figs. 5 (a), (b) and (c) are the only structures in the (4, 0), (4, 2) and (4, 4) classes,

respectively (see [13, Table VI]). The same structures, for

variable-regular graphs with dv = 4 and g = 6, are the only structures in the (4, 4), (4, 6) and (4, 8) classes, respectively

(see [13, Table VIII]).

Example 5: Fig. 6 provides all the non-isomorphic LETS

structures with size a = 5 in a variable-regular Tanner graph

Fig. 6. All the non-isomorphic LETS structures with size a = 5 in a variableregular Tanner graph with dv ≥ 4.
TABLE II CLASSES OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES IN FIG. 6 FOR
VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 3, 4 AND 5

with dv = 4 and g = 6. Based on the second part of

Proposition 2, these structures are also all the non-isomorphic

LETS structures with size a = 5 in a variable-regular Tanner

graph with dv > 4 and g Moreover, based on the first

p=art6o. fFPorropeoxasimtipolne,2,LL55 35

= ⊂

L45. L45.

Table II shows the classes of these structures in variable-

regular Tanner graphs with dv = 3, 4, 5, and g = 6.

The following proposition explains how different LETS

structures of an irregular Tanner graph, corresponding to

different quasi-normal hypergraphs, are mapped (projected) to

normal graphs of LETS structures of a variable-regular Tanner

graph.

Proposition 3: Any (quasi-normal hypergraph of a) LETS

structure S in the (a, b) class of an irregular Tanner graph

with variable degree distribution λ(x) is mapped (via a

surjective mapping) to a (normal graph of a) LETS structure

in the (a, b ) class of variable-regular Tanner graphs with

variable degree dv = f , where f is the largest variable degree
a
in λ(x) strictly less than a and b = a × f + b − dvi , with
i =1
vi , i = 1, . . . , a, being the variable nodes of S.
Proof: The normal graph representation of S has a nodes,

where each of them is connected to at most f other nodes

in S ( f is the largest variable degree in λ(x) strictly less

than a). Based on Proposition 2, this normal graph is thus

a LETS in variable-regular graphs with any variable degree

dv ≥ f . Selecting the minimum variable degree in this range, i.e., dv = f , we can easily find the class of this structure using

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 64, NO. 5, MAY 2018
TABLE III CHARACTERIZATION OF NON-ISOMORPHIC LETS STRUCTURES OF (a, b)
CLASSES FOR VARIABLE-REGULAR GRAPHS WITH dv = 4 AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 7 AND b ≤ bmax = 10

Fig. 7. (a) Tanner graph, and (b) quasi-normal representations of a LETS structure in the (4, 3) class of an irregular graph with variable degrees 2, 3, 4; (c) normal graph, and (d) Tanner graph representations of a LETS structure in the (4, 2) class of variable-regular graphs with dv = 3.

a
Lemma 1. For this, we note that S has e = ( dvi − b)/2
i =1
edges. Based on Lemma 1, the number of unsatisfied check nodes of S in a variable-regular graph with dv = f is b =
a
a × f − 2e = a × f + b − dvi .
i =1
Example 6: Fig. 7 shows a LETS structure in the (4, 3) class of an irregular graph with variable degrees 2, 3, 4, and
the process of surjective mapping to a LETS structure in the (4, 2) class of a variable-regular graph with dv = 3.
Proposition 3 describes how the LETS structures of irregular
graphs are mapped to LETS structures of variable-regular
graphs via the normal graph representation. The following
theorem explains how the d pl characterization of LETS struc-
tures in variable-regular graphs can be used to characterize
the LETS structures of irregular graphs (in a given range of a
and b values, exhaustively).
Theorem 1: The d pl characterization of non-isomorphic LETS structures for variable-regular graphs with dv = t in (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax + amax (t − dvmin ) is sufficient to generate the normal graphs of all the nonisomorphic (a, b) LETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax of irregular Tanner graphs with variable degree distribution λ(x ) = dvmax λi x i−1, where t is the largest variable
i =dvm i n
degree in λ(x ) strictly less than amax. Proof: Proposition 3 describes the mapping between the
LETS structures of irregular graphs to those of variable-regular
graphs. Based on this proposition, to cover the projections of all the LETS structures with a ≤ amax of irregular graphs, the variable node degree of the variable-regular graph needs to be dv = t, where t is the largest variable degree in λ(x) strictly less than amax . Moreover, to cover all the LETS classes of the irregular graphs in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , based on Proposition 3, the maximum value of b is bmax + amax (t − dvmin ). This is obtained by noting that, in Proposition 3, f = t, and that b is maximized by
setting a and b to their maximum values amax and bmax,
amax
respectively, and by minimizing dvi through assuming
i =1
that all the variable nodes in the LETS have the minimum
degree dvmin . Example 7: Based on Theorem 1, to cover all the (a, b)
LETS structures in the range of a ≤ 7 and b ≤ 3, of an
irregular graph with variable degrees 3, 4 and 7, one should
characterize all the LETS structures in a variable-regular graph with dv = 4 in the range of a ≤ 7 and b ≤ 10. This

characterization is summarized in Table III. This representation of characterization is similar to that of [13]. In Table III, columns and rows correspond to different values of a and b, respectively. For each (a, b) class of LETSs, the top entries in the table show the simple cycles that are parents of the LETS structures within that class, and the multiplicity of nonisomorphic structures in the class with those parents. The bottom entries show the expansion techniques applied to all the LETS structures within the class to exhaustively generate all the LETS structures in the range a ≤ 7 and b ≤ 10. The boldfaced entries are the prime structures required to characterize all the LETS structures in the table. Note that to cover this rather small range of a and b values for the irregular graph, one needs to cover a wide range of b values for the corresponding variable-regular graph.
B. Dpl Search Algorithm for Irregular Graphs
In [13], for variable-regular graphs, the d pl characterization of LETS structures was used as a road-map for the d pl search algorithm to find all the instances of LETS structures in any interest range of a and b values, in a guaranteed fashion. The search algorithm of [13] starts by the enumeration of simple cycles. These are the cycles that are identified in the characterization table as the required prime structures. After the enumeration of all the instances of a simple cycle, these instances are expanded recursively (using, in each step of the recursion, the expansions identified in the characterization table for the specific class of LETS structures within that step) to find instances of other LETS structures up to size amax. In each step, after finding a new LETS, the indices of its variable nodes should be saved for subsequent expansions in the next step. The expansion techniques identified by the characterization table should be applied to all the instances of LETS structures in the corresponding classes.
In Subsection IV-A, it was shown that the characterization table for variable-regular graphs with variable degree dv = t in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax + amax (t − dvmin )

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION OF ETSs

3419

can be used to characterize the (a, b) LETS structures of irregular graphs with degree distribution λ(x ) = dvmax λi x i−1
i =dvm i n
in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , where t is the largest variable degree less than amax in λ(x). Unlike the case for variable-regular graphs, in irregular Tanner graphs, however, there is no one-to-one correspondence between a LETS structure and its normal graph, i.e., a normal graph can be the projection of multiple LETS structures in different classes. In the search algorithm for irregular graphs, therefore, for each LETS, in addition to the index of its variable nodes, we need to also keep track of the class of its normal graph in variable-regular graphs with dv = t. Otherwise, the search follows the exact similar steps as in the d pl search of [13]. More details are provided in the following.
The d pl search algorithm for finding LETSs of irregular graphs starts by the enumeration of simple cycles (as identified in the characterization table for the corresponding variableregular graph with dv = t). For different instances of a simple cycle of a given length, based on the degrees of the variable nodes in the cycles, the cycles would belong to different classes, all with the same a but different b values. In addition to saving the information of each instance (indices of its variable nodes), the class of its normal graph in the characterization table for variable-regular graphs with dv = t should be saved as well. After the enumeration of all instances of a simple cycle, these instances are expanded recursively to find instances of other LETS structures up to size amax following the d pl search algorithm ([13, Algorithm 4]). It is important to note that, in the search process, no matter what the actual value of b of an instance of a LETS is, as long as its normal graph is in the (a, b) class of variable-regular graphs with dv = t, the characterization table for the variableregular graph shows which expansions should be applied to that instance. Also, no matter what the class of the resultant instance is, one only needs to keep track of the class of its normal graph (in the characterization table for variable-regular graphs with dv = t). This is done based on Proposition 1.
Example 8: Suppose that in an irregular graph with variable degrees 3, 4 and 7, there are a set of instances of LETSs in different classes with a = 4 and b = 2, 3, 4, 6, 7 and 8. Also suppose that all these instances are projected to the normal graph in the (4, 4) class of Table III. Applying dot2 to all these instances may result in new instances with a = 5 and, for example, b = 1, 2, 5, 7, and 8. However, based on Proposition 1, the normal graph of all the new instances will be in the (5, 4) class of Table III. Therefore, no matter what the classes of new instances are, the class (5, 4) should be saved for each of them for the next step. This class is the one that is used to determine the expansions that will have to be applied to these instances in the next step (based on the lower entries of the (5, 4) cell in Table III).
Example 9: Consider the case of Example 7. The LETS structures of irregular graphs in the (5, 4) class are projected to normal graphs in classes (5, 4), (5, 6) and (5, 8) of Table III. One should thus apply {dot}, {dot} and {dot, pa2} expansions to the instances of corresponding LETS structures, respectively.

V. AN ALTERNATE CHARACTERIZATION OF LETS STRUCTURES IN IRREGULAR LDPC CODES AND THE
CORRESPONDING EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH ALGORITHM
The search algorithm for finding LETSs of irregular graphs described in Section IV can have two major problems, both occurring when the size of the characterization table for the variable-regular graphs with dv = t, where t is the largest variable degree strictly less than amax , happens to become too large. This can happen, in the cases that the value of t is relatively large (for example t ≥ 8), or in the cases where the interest range of a is relatively large (for example amax ≥ 10), or in the cases where variable nodes with small degrees (for example, degree-2 variable nodes) are present. Under such circumstances, the range of a and b values covered in the characterization table of variable-regular graphs with dv = t plus the number of non-isomorphic LETS structures in the table will quickly increase. For example, there are more than nine million non-isomorphic LETS structures in the classes with a = 10 for variable-regular graphs with dv = 8 (|L810| = 9, 545, 887). The first problem resulting from the large size of the characterization table is the excessive time that it takes the characterization algorithm of [13] to generate the table in addition to the large amount of memory that is required to store the information of the characterization table. The second problem is the inefficiency of the search algorithm corresponding to a large characterization table, in the sense that, one may have to enumerate LETS structures with large values of b (and large multiplicities) that are not of direct interest but are parents of LETS structures of interest.
A. Alternate Characterization
To overcome the above problems in circumstances just explained, we use a different approach to characterize/search for LETSs of irregular codes. Rather than relying on the normal graph representation through the characterization table of a variable-regular graph, in the new approach, we focus on the class of LETS structures, i.e., rather than tracking the class of the normal graph within the characterization table of the corresponding variable-regular graph, we concern ourselves with the class of the LETS itself. For each class of LETS structures, we then identify all the possible expansions from the set of dot, path and lollipop expansions that can be applied to LETS structures in that class and eventually (after successive application of one or more expansions) result in an (a, b) LETS structure with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax . As an example, consider the scenario of Example 7. Based on the previous approach, for any LETS structure of the irregular graphs which is projected to one of the two normal graphs in the (5, 4) class of Table III, regardless of the actual class of the LETS structure, the dot expansion is applied. In the new approach, however, the expansions are decided by the class of the LETS structure itself. For example, for a LETS structure in the (5, 4) class, all the possible expansions that can eventually result in a LETS in the range of a ≤ 7 and b ≤ 3 are applied. These are dot and pa2 expansions. (Note that based on Example 9, the LETS structures in the class of (5, 4) can be projected into

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3420

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 64, NO. 5, MAY 2018

normal graphs in three different classes of Table III, including

the (5, 4) class.) The application of this approach recursively

and starting from all the simple cycles with size from g/2 up

to amax can provide us with an exhaustive list of all LETS

structures of an irregular code within any desired range of

a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. The indiscriminate application of

this approach, however, is inefficient in both characterization

and search of LETS structures. The reason is that many of

the structures generated initially or in the intermediate stages

of this process may not eventually reach any LETS structure

within the range of interest. To overcome this problem while

maintaining the exhaustiveness of the characterization/search,

we identify the expansions for each class through a backward

recursion. We start from LETS structures of size amax with b ≤ bmax, and then find out how these structures can be

possibly constructed in a recursive fashion starting from simple

cycles using the three expansions. The first step is to find out

all the possible candidates that can lead to the target LETS

structures through a single expansion step and then backtrack

this recursively until one reaches simple cycles.

In the characterization/search of LETSs in variable-regular

graphs, to find (cover) all the LETSs in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, one should sometimes include (a, b) LETS

structures with their b values outside the range of interest,

i.e., bmax < b ≤ bmax. In [13], it was proved that the value of bmax selected by the d pl characterization/search is minimal. In this work, for irregular graphs, for any given value of a in
the range g/2 ≤ a ≤ amax , we derive an upper bound bma ax, on the b values for the classes of (a, b) LETS structures. This

upper bound determines all the (a, b) classes of the same size a, i.e., (a, b) classes with b ≤ bma ax, that need to be covered in the characterization/search such that by the application of all

the possible expansions to the included classes, starting from

simple cycles, one can obtain all the LETS structures of the

irregular graph within the range of interest a ≤ amax and b ≤

bmax, exhaustively. The upper bound is derived recursively by

tfihnadtinbgmamabaxxma aisx

as a function of equal to bmax .

bma+ax1

with

the

initial

condition

The following lemma imposes a limit on the maximum

degree of a variable node that can be involved in a LETS

structure given the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax.

This will help to further constrain the space of search, and

reduce its complexity.

Lemma 2: Any variable node v involved in an (a, b) LETS

structure of an irregular graph in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , has a degree deg(v) < amax + bmax .
Proof: Consider a variable node v with degree deg(v) ≥

amax + bmax in an (a, b) LETS structure with a ≤ amax . This means that v is connected to at most amax − 1 variable nodes within the LETS structure. Since deg(v) ≥ amax + bmax , this implies that v has at least bmax + 1 unsatisfied check nodes in

its neighbourhood, which is in contradiction with the LETS

structure having a b value of at most bmax.

The next lemma can, in some cases, further limit the search

space.

Lemma 3: In an irregular Tanner graph with variable node

degree distribution λ(x), among the LETS structures with the

same size a, the simple cycle, consisting of variable nodes all

with degree dvmax , has the largest b value, equal to a(dvmax −2). Moreover, for such an irregular graph, among (a, b) LETS

structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, the simple cycle of size a in the (a, a(η − 2)) class has the largest b value, where

η is the largest variable degree in λ(x) strictly smaller than

amax + bmax .

As an intermediate step to deriving the upper bounds, in the

following proposition, we first determine how the class of a

LETS structure of an irregular graph changes as it is expanded

by one of the three expansion techniques. In this proposition, we use the notation dotmk to denote a dot expansion with m edges and a root node with degree k.

Proposition 4: Consider an (a, b) LETS structure S in an

irregular Tanner graph. The application of dotmk (2 ≤ m ≤ k), pam (m ≥ 2), and lomc (m ≥ g/2, g/2 ≤ c ≤ m) to S will

result in LETS structure(s) in the (a + 1, b + k − 2m), (a +

m

m

m, b − 2 + (dvi − 2)), and (a + m, b − 2 + (dvi − 2))

i =1

i =1

classes, respectively, where dvi , i = 1, . . . , m, are the degrees

of the variable nodes in the expansion.

Proof: Similar to the proof of Proposition 1, as given

in [13].

Proposition 5: In an irregular Tanner graph with variable
node degree distribution λ(x), the application of dotmk (2 ≤ m ≤ k), pam (m ≥ 2), and lomc (m ≥ g/2, g/2 ≤ c ≤ m) to an (a, b) LETS structure results in an (a , b ) LETS structure with minimum possible value of b equal to (b+min{z −2a, −y})+, (b−2+m(dvmin −2))+, and (b−2+(m−1)(dvmin −2) +d −2)+, respectively, where ( f )+ = max{ f, 0}, y is the largest variable

degree in λ(x) less than or equal to a, z is the smallest

variable degree in λ(x) strictly larger than a, and d is equal

to dvmin , if dvmin > 2, and is equal to the smallest variable

degree strictly larger than 2, if dvmin = 2. In particular,

i(fbd−vm2in)+=

2, the and (b

minimum values of b for + d − 4)+, respectively,

pam and where d

lomc are is equal

to the smallest variable degree strictly larger than 2.
Proof: For the dotmk expansion, using Proposition 4, we have b = b + k − 2m, and we note that m ≤ min{a, k}.

We consider two cases: (i) a < k and (ii) a ≥ k. For Case (i),

we have m ≤ a, and the minimum value of b is obtained

when m has its maximum value in this interval, i.e., m = a,

and k has its smallest value in the interval k > a, i.e., k = z.

This results in b = b + z − 2a. For Case (ii), we have

m ≤ k, and the minimum value of b is obtained when m

has its maximum value in this interval, i.e., m = k. This

results in b = b − k, which in turn is minimized if k takes

its largest value in the interval k ≤ a, which is y. This results

in b = b − y. Combining the results of Cases (i) and (ii), we obtain b = (b + min{z − 2a, −y})+, where (·)+ simply

indicates that the b value cannot be negative. For the pam

expansion, the minimum is attained when all the m nodes in the expansion have degree dvmin . For the lomc , the minimum is resulted when all the nodes in the expansion have degree

dvmin , with the exception being when dvmin = 2, in which case, one node needs to have a degree equal to the smallest variable

degree strictly larger than 2. Based on Proposition 5, it can be seen that pam and lomc
expansions can cause the decrease of at most 2 and 1 in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION OF ETSs

3421

b value of a LETS structure, respectively. The dot expansion,
however, can cause larger decreases in the b value of a LETS
structure.
The following theorem establishes the upper bounds bma ax, g/2 ≤ a ≤ amax, through a recursive relationship.
Theorem 2: Suppose that we are interested in generating all the (a, b) LETS structures of an irregular Tanner graph with variable node degree distribution λ(x) and girth g within the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax . For this, consider an approach that starts from simple cycles sk, k = g/2, . . . , amax, and recursively applies all the possible dot, path and lolli pop
expansions to any generated LETS structure. Such an approach
will exhaustively generate all the LETS structures in the range of interest, if for any size a in the range g/2 ≤ a ≤ amax, the approach is constrained to only find (a, b) LETS structures with b values satisfying b ≤ bma ax , where bma ax values are obtained through the recursion

bma ax = min{bma+ax1 + max{y, 2a − z} , a(η − 2)}. (1)

In (1), y is the largest variable degree in λ(x) less

than or equal to a, z is the smallest variable degree in λ(x)

strictly larger than a and strictly smaller than amax + bmax, and η is the largest variable degree in λ(x) strictly smaller than amax +bmax . The initial condition for recursion is bmamaaxx =

bmax .

Proof: Based on Proposition 5, it is clear that the largest

decrease in the value of b by increasing a through the three

expansions is caused by the dot expansion. In fact, it is easy to

sceoendthitaiot nthbemarmaeaxcx u=rsibomnabx m,a

ax = bma+ax1 + 1, along cover the range of b

with the initial values required

for exhaustive search based on path and lolli pop expansions.

Focusing on dot then, based on Proposition 5, it is clear that

the largest decrease in the b value by the application of dot is

− min{z − 2a, −y}, or equivalently, max{2a − z, y}. The proof

is then completed by combining this with Lemmas 2 and 3.

We note that Theorem 2 provides a new d pl exhaustive characterization of LETS structures in irregular codes (compared to what was presented in Subsection IV-A). We also note that the upper bounds derived based on Theorem 2 may not be necessarily tight, i.e., one may be able to find smaller bounds that still result in an exhaustive coverage of the LETS structures of interest, thus, further reducing the complexity of the search. One can also perform the search in a smaller space, by reducing the upper bounds, but possibly at the expense of sacrificing the exhaustiveness of the search. In fact, based on our experimental results, we propose the following upper bounds as a lower complexity alternative to (1):
bma ax = min{bma+ax1 + max {y, 2a − z} − 2 , a(η − 2)}. (2)
Although in our extensive simulations, presented in Section VII, the upper bounds (2) have always resulted in an exhaustive search, we have not been able to prove this, in general.
Given the upper bounds bmg/a2x , . . . , bmamaaxx , Algorithm 1 provides a pseudo code for finding the list of expansion techniques that are required to be applied to all the non-isomorphic structures in each (a, b) LETS class. These expansions are

stored in the (a, b) entry of table EX , EX (a,b). Based on Algorithm 1, the expansion dot can be applied to all the (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax − 1. Also, pam and lomc can be applied to all the (a, b) classes with a ≤ amax − m. The
only constraint for using an expansion technique is that the
b value(s) of the new LETS structure(s) need to remain in the range identified by the upper bounds bmg/a2x , . . . , bmamaaxx . The results of Proposition 4 are used to impose this constraint.

Algorithm 1 Finding the Expansion Techniques EX (a,b) for the (a, b) Classes of LETS Structures, g/2 ≤ a ≤ amax, 1 ≤ b ≤ bmax, for an Irregular Tanner Graph with Girth g

1: Inputs: amax , bmg/a2x , . . . , bmamaaxx = bmax , g.

2: Initializations: a = amax − 1.

3: while a ≥ g/2 do

4: EX (a,b) ← dot, ∀ b ∈ {2, . . . , bma ax }. 5: for b = 1, . . . , bma ax do

6:

m = 2.

7:

while a + m ≤ amax do

8:

if 0 ≤ b − 2 ≤ bma+axm then

9:

EX (a,b) ← pam.

10:

end if

11:

if m ≥ g/2 and b − 1 ≤ bma+axm then

12:

for c = g/2, . . . , m do

13:

EX (a,b) ← lomc .

14:

end for

15:

end if

16:

m = m + 1.

17:

end while

18: end for

19: a = a − 1.

20: end while

21: Output: EX .

Example 10: The outcome of Algorithm 1 is presented
in Table IV for the case of amax ≤ 7, bmax ≤ 2, and an irregular graph with variable node degrees {2, 3, 5, 10} and g = 6. These variable node degrees are used in [30]
to design near-optimal irregular LDPC codes over binary-
input additive white Gaussian noise (BIAWGN) channels. In Table IV, the notation dot is used to represent any dotmk expansion that results in (a, b) LETS structures with b ≤ bma ax. Also, the notation lom is used to represent all the lomc expansion techniques with different values of c. Based on Theorem 2, we have bm7 ax = 2, bm6 ax = 7, bm5 ax = 12, bm4 ax = 12, bm3 ax = 9.

B. Alternate Search Algorithm
The pseudo code of the new search algorithm, based on the characterization of previous subsection, is given in Algorithm 2. Having the upper bounds bmg/a2x , . . . , bmamaaxx , and the expansion table EX , as the input, the search algorithm starts by the enumeration of simple cycles of length up to amax through Routine 1.Note that for any sk, where g/2 ≤ k ≤ amax, the number of unsatisfied check nodes of the instances should be less than or equal bmk ax , i.e., only simple cycles that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 64, NO. 5, MAY 2018

TABLE IV
EXPANSIONS REQUIRED FOR (a, b) CLASSES OF IRREGULAR GRAPHS WITH VARIABLE DEGREES 2, 3, 5, 10, AND g = 6 FOR a ≤ amax = 7 AND b ≤ bmax = 2

Routine 1 (CycSrch) Finds All the Instances of Simple Cycles

of Length k with b ≤ bmk ax, in a Given Tanner Graph G. {Ikk,0, . . . , Ikk,bmk ax } = CycSrch(G, k)

1: Initializations: Ikk,b ← ∅, ∀ b ≤ bmk ax .

2: for each variable node vl in G do

3: for each check node ci in the neighbourhood of vl do

4:

Find all the paths PAi,l of length k − 1 in G, starting

from ci that do not contain vl .

5: end for

6: for any pair of check nodes ci and c j in the neighbour-

hood of vl , where i = j do

7:

for any path pa ∈ PAi,l , and any path pa ∈ PA j,l

do

8:

if the two paths end with the same node and that

node is their only common node do

9:

Let v and v denote the last variable nodes of

pa and pa , respectively.

10:

if variable nodes in pa \ v and pa \ v do not

have any common check node do

11:

S = vl ∪{set of variable nodes in pa ∪ pa }.

12: 13:

if

|o (S )| Ikk ,|o (S

)≤| =bmkIakkx,|tho(eSn)|

∪

{S}.

14:

end if

15:

end if

16:

end if

17:

end for

18: end for

19: end for 20: Outputs: {Ikk,0, . . . , Ikk,bmk ax }.

Algorithm 2 (LETS Exhaustive Search) Finds All the

Instances of (a, b) LETS Structures of an Irregular Tanner

Graph G With Girth g, for a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax . The Inputs Are the Upper Bounds bmg/a2x , . . . , bmamaaxx , and Expansion Techniques EX Provided by Algorithm 1. The Output Is the

Set I, which Contains All the Instances of LETS Structures

in the Interest Range

1: Inputs: G, amax , {bmg/a2x , . . . , bmamaaxx }, EX , g. 2: Initializations: I ← ∅.

3: for k = g/2, . . . , amax do 4: Ik = {Ikk,0, . . . , Ikk,bmk ax } = CycSrch(G, k). 5: I = I ∪ Ik . 6: end for

7: for k = g/2, . . . , amax do 8: a = k.

9: while a < amax do

10:

for b = 1, . . . , bma ax do

11:

if dot ∈ EX (a,b) then

12:

{Itae+m1,0, . . . , Itae+m1,bma+ax1 }

=

Dot-

Srch(G, Ika,b, I).

13:

end if

14:

for any pam ∈ EX (a,b) do

15:

{Itae+mm,0, . . . , Itae+mm,bma+axm }

=

Path-

Srch(G, Ika,b, I, m).

16:

end for

17: 18:

for any lomc

{I

I

a+m,0 t em

∈ ,.

EX (a,b) do

.

.

,

I

I

a+m t em

,bma+axm

}

=

Lolli-

19: 20:

SforrcIhsta(e+=mGm,,1sI,ka=.,.b.I,,Itaeb+,mmaImac,xs,

m). do ∪I

I

a+m,s t em

.

21:

end for

22:

end for

23:

for t = a + 1, . . . , amax do

24: 25: 26:

forIIskt,=s==I1,∪I.ktI.,s.tte,,∪smb.Imt ttae,xsm

do .

27:

end for

28:

end for

29:

end for

30:

a = a + 1.

31: end while

32: end for

33: Output: I.

satisfy this condition are stored for further processing. This is performed in Lines 12-14 of Routine 1. After the enumeration of all instances of a simple cycle, these instances are expanded in the while loop (Lines 9-31) to find instances of other LETS structures in the interest range. The selected expansions for each class are those stored in EX . In Algorithm 2, the notation Ika,b is used for the set of LETS instances in the (a, b) class found by starting from the instances of the simple cycle

of length k, and I is the set of all instances which are found so far in the algorithm. Finding the instances of LETS structures using dot, path and lollipop expansion techniques are explained in Routines 2, 3 and 4, respectively.
The Routines are similar to those of [13] for variable-regular graphs, with the difference being that, due to the presence of variable nodes with different degrees, after applying an expansion technique, the algorithm needs to check whether the resultant LETS instances are in the interest range.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION OF ETSs

3423

Routine 2 (DotSrch) Expanding All the Instances of LETS Structures in the (a, b) Class Ika,b of Tanner Graph G Using dot Expansions to Find a Set of Instances of LETS Struc-

tures of Size a + 1, Excluding the Already Found Struc-

tures I, {Itae+m1,0,

.

and Storing . . , Itae+m1,bma+ax1

}

the =

Rest in DotSrch

{Itae+m1,0, . (G, Ika,b, I

. )

.

,

Itae+m1,bma+ax1

}.

1: 2:

Initializations: Itae+m1,b ← ∅, ∀ b ≤ for each instance of LETS structure

bma+ax1. S in

Ika,b

do

3: Consider V to be the set of variable nodes in V \S, which

have at least two connections with the check nodes in

o(S) and have no connection with the check nodes in e (S ). 4: for each variable node v ∈ V do

5:

S = S ∪ v.

6:

if |o(S )| ≤ bma+ax1 then

7:

Itae+m1,|o(S )| = Itae+m1,|o(S )| ∪ {S \ I}.

8:

end if

9: end for

10: 11:

end for Output:

{Itae+m1,0, . . . , Itae+m1,bma+ax1 }.

Routine 3 (PathSrch) Expanding All the Instances Ika,b of LETS Structures in the (a, b) Class of Tanner Graph G Using

pam to Find Instances of LETS Structures of Size a + m,

Excluding the Already Found Instances I, and Storing the

RPaetshtSirnch{I(Gtae+m, mI,ka0,,b.,

. . , Itae+mm,bma+axm I, m)

}.

{Itae+mm,0,

.

.

.

,

Itae+mm,bma+axm

}

=

1: 2:

Initializations: for each LETS

Itae+mm,b ← instance S

∅, in

∀b Ika,b

≤ bma+axm. do

3: for each unsatisfied check node ck ∈ o(S) do

4:

Find all the paths PAk of length m in the Tanner

graph, starting from ck. 5: end for

6: for any pair of unsatisfied check nodes ck and c j in

o(S), where k = j do

7:

for any path pa ∈ PAk and any path pa ∈ PA j do

8:

if pa and pa end with the same node and this

node is their only common node, and if variable

and check nodes of pa and pa are not in G(S)

do

9:

S = S ∪ {set of variable nodes in pa ∪ pa }.

10:

if |o(S )| ≤ bma+axm then

11:

Itae+mm,|o(S )| = Itae+mm,|o(S )| ∪ {S \ I}.

12:

end if

13:

end if

14:

end for

15: end for

16: 17:

end for Outputs:

{Itae+mm,0, . . . , Itae+mm,bma+axm }.

C. Complexity of the Search Algorithm
The proposed search algorithm starts by enumerating all the instances of simple cycles sk of length k = g/2 up to

Routine 4 (LolliSrch) Expanding All the Instances Ika,b of LETS Structures in the (a, b) Class of Tanner Graph G

Using lomc to Find Instances of LETS Structures of Size

a + m, Excluding the Already Found Instances I, and

Storing the Rest in {Itae+mm,0, . . . , Itae+mm,bma+axm }. The Set of

Instances of {Itae+mm,0, . . .

Simple Cycles , Itae+mm,bma+axm } =

of Length LolliSrch

c, Ic, Is Also an Input. (G, Ika,b, I, Ic, m)

1: 2:

Initializations: for each LETS

Itae+mm,b ← instance S

∅, in

∀b Ika,b

≤ bma+axm do

,

d

=

m + 1 − c.

3: Find all the paths PA of length 2(d − 1) in the Tanner

graph, starting from check nodes c in o(S) that have no common nodes with G(S) other than c .

4: for each structure C ∈ Ic, for which G(C) has no

common node with G(S), let o(C) denote the set

of unsatisfied check nodes of G(C) do

5:

for each path, pa ∈ PA do

6:

if pa ends with a check node c in o(C) and if c

is the only common node between pa and o(C)

do

7:

S = {S ∪ {set of variable nodes in pa∪G(C)}.

8:

if |o(S )| ≤ bma+axm then

9:

Itae+mm,|o(S )| = Itae+mm,|o(S )| ∪ {S \ I}.

10:

end if

11:

end if

12:

end for

13: end for

14: 15:

end for Output:

{Itae+mm,0, . . . , Itae+mm,bma+axm }.

k = amax . These instances are then expanded recursively by the three expansions following the steps identified through the characterization table. At each step, all the expansions indicated in the table are applied to all the instances of LETS structures within a given class. The total complexity of the proposed algorithm can be thus divided into two parts: 1) complexity of finding the instances of simple cycle structures, and 2) complexity of recursive expansions of the instances of simple cycles to find all the instances of every class of LETS structures within the interest range. This part of the complexity depends on the multiplicity of instances of different LETS structures in different classes within the characterization table and the expansion techniques used in different classes. In the following, we discuss the two parts of the complexity in more details.
Part 1: The proposed d pl search algorithm uses Routine 1 to find the instances of simple cycles. Based on this approach, the order of complexity for finding the instances of a simple cycle of size k is O(n(dvmax dcmax )k ). This complexity increases linearly, polynomially and exponentially with the block length, maximum variable and check degrees, and the size of the cycle, respectively.
Part 2: Based on the characterization table, a few expansion techniques (those in EX (a,b)) are used to expand the instances of LETS structures within each (a, b) class. The complexity of this part of the algorithm depends on the expansion

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3424

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 64, NO. 5, MAY 2018

techniques, and the multiplicity of LETSs in each (a, b)

class, Na,b. Based on the discussions in [13], one can see

that the complexity for the expansion of all the instances of LETSs in an (a, b) class using dotm, pam and lomc expansions is, respectively, O(Na,bb2dc2max ), O(Na,bb2(dvmax dcmax )m ) and O(Na,b Ncbc(dvmaxdcmax )d ), where d = m + 1 − c, and Nc is the multiplicity of the instances of the simple cycle sc.

To analyze the total complexity of the search algorithm,

we assume that degree distributions and values of amax

and bmax are constant with respect to block length n. This implies that parameters dvmax, dcmax , bmg/a2x , . . . , bmamaaxx , as well as expansion parameters m, c, d, and the lengths k of all input

simple cycles of the search algorithm are constant in n. Under

such assumptions, it is easy to see that

amax k=g/2

Nk ,

an

upper

bound on the number of input simple cycles to the search

algorithm, which is O(n(dvmax dcmax )2amax ), increases linearly

with n in the worst-case scenario. We also note that any

application of dotm, pam and lomc expansions to any (a, b) LETS class throughout the expansion process maintains the

order of complexity of Na,b. (One should note that although the term Nc appears in the complexity expression for the lomc expansion due to the particular implementation of Routine 4,

the actual number of c-cycles that are at a constant distance

d from the parent structure (which also has a constant size)

is a constant with respect to n.) We therefore conclude that

in the worst-case, the complexity of the d pl search increases

linearly with n.

Recently, it was proved in [5] that for a random bipartite

graph, with a given (fixed) degree distribution, the distributions

of k-cycle multiplicities for different values of k, constant with

respect to n, tend to independent Poisson distributions, as the

size of the graph tends to infinity. The expected values of the

distributions were shown to be constant with respect to n and

to be only a function of degree distributions and k. This result

implies that, assuming degree distributions and values of amax

and bmax are constant (in n), the average complexity of the

search algorithm (Part 2) is constant with respect to n. This is

in fact the main reason behind the high efficiency of the d pl

search, particularly for larger block lengths.

Finally, we note that while the complexity of the proposed

d pl search algorithm is rather independent of the block length,

it increases rather rapidly with the increase in the average

variable and/or check node degrees. This would imply that

for short LDPC codes with large average degrees, a well-

devised branch-&-bound algorithm may be able to compete

with the d pl algorithm. At larger block lengths, however,

the proposed algorithm would handily outperform any branch-

&-bound algorithm.

Fig. 8. Two ETSLs in the (a) (3, 3) and (b) (5, 4) classes, respectively.
Fig. 9. Expansion of an ETS structure S with dot1k .
only one satisfied check node [1], [10], [17], [20], [25], [34]. This is particularly the case for irregular codes with degree-2 variable nodes [17], [20]. In Sections IV and V, we studied the LETS structures of irregular LDPC codes. This section is dedicated to ETSs of irregular codes that have leaves. We use the notation “ETSL” for such trapping sets, and remind the reader that it is the normal graph representation of ETSL structures that has at least one leaf. Two examples of ETSL structures in the (3, 3) and (5, 4) classes, along with their normal graphs, are shown in Fig. 8.
The depth-one tree (dot) expansion technique plays an important role in the characterization and search of ETSLs. However, unlike the LETS case, where dotmk expansion with m ≥ 2 was used, in the ETSL case, we are interested in the dotmk expansion with m = 1. Fig. 9 shows a structure expanded by dot1k.
Lemma 4: Suppose that S is an (a, b) ETS structure of irregular Tanner graphs. Expansion of S using dot1k, results in ETS structure(s) in the (a + 1, b + k − 2) class, where k is the degree of the new variable node added to S.
In general, the ETSL structures can be partitioned into two categories. The ETSLs that contain at least one LETS sub-structure, and those that do not contain any LETS substructure. We use notations ETSL1 and ETSL2, to represent these two categories, respectively. The structures in Fig. 8 (a) and (b) are examples of ETSL2 and ETSL1, respectively. In the rest of this section, ETSL1 and ETSL2 structures are characterized and an efficient search algorithm is presented to find them in an exhaustive fashion.

VI. CHARACTERIZATION AND EFFICIENT EXHAUSTIVE SEARCH OF ELEMENTARY TRAPPING SETS FOR IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
Leafless ETSs (LETSs) are known to be the main problematic structures in the error floor region of variable-regular LDPC codes. For irregular LDPC codes, however, in addition to LETSs, there are other ETSs that are problematic but are not leafless, i.e., they have variable nodes that are connected to

A. Characterization of ETSL1
We characterize ETSL1 structures as the expansions of their LETS sub-structures through the following proposition.
Proposition 6: Any (a, b) ETSL1 structure S of irregular graphs, with minimum variable node degree dvmin ≥ 2, in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , can be obtained by successive application of dot1k to the largest (a , b ) LETS substructure of S, where a < amax and b ≤ bmax .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION OF ETSs

3425

Proof: Suppose that S = (F, E), and that S = (F , E ) is the largest LETS sub-structure of S. We assume that the expansion F\F is connected. Disconnected expansions can be
treated as a collection of connected expansions. We first prove
that the number of edges connecting F\F to the nodes in S is
one. Suppose that the number of such edges is at least 2. If at
least two of these edges are connected to one node, v, in F\F , then adding v to S results in a LETS sub-structure of S that is larger than S . This is a contradiction. So the connecting edges must be each connected to a distinct node in F\F . Consider two such nodes and call them v1 and v2. Since the expansion is connected, there is at least one path between v1 and v2 in the expansion. One can thus add all the nodes on that path plus v1 and v2 to S , and obtain a LETS substructure of S larger than S . Again, a contradiction. We thus conclude that the expansion is connected by only one edge to S . (Suppose that the node in F\F which is connected to S is v.) With a
similar approach, it can be shown that the expansion can not
contain a cycle. Since the expansion has only one connection
to S and does not contain a cycle, the only possibility is a rooted tree with the root at node v. It is now easy to see that a
rooted tree, as an expansion, can be implemented by successive application of dot1k expansions. Using Lemma 4, one can see that as dot1k expansions with k ≥ 2 are applied to the LETS structure S , by each application, the a value is increased
by one, and the b value is either increased or remains the
same. This implies that if for the target (a, b) ETSL1 structure S, we have a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, then for the largest (a , b ) LETS substructure of S, we must have a < amax and b ≤ bmax .
Based on Proposition 6, to find all the ETSL1s of an irregular LDPC code in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, one can first find all the instances of (a, b) LETS structures with a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, and then apply dot1k expansions successively to these instances, as appropriate. One should note that all the instances generated in the process of the application of dot1k expansions to a LETS are ETSL1s. The following corollary determines which dot1k expansion should be applied to which LETS or ETSL1 instance.
Corollary 1: To generate all the (a, b) ETSL1 instances of an irregular graph with dvmin ≥ 2, in the range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , for each value of i in the range dvmin − 2 ≤ i ≤ bmax − 1, the expansion dot1k with k ≤ i + 2 should be applied to any LETS and ETSL1s with a ≤ amax − 1 and b = bmax − i .
Example 11: Based on Corollary 1, if one is interested in finding all ETSL1s in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ 2, for an irregular graph with dvmin = 2, expansion dot12 should be applied to LETSs and ETSL1s with a ≤ amax − 1 and b = 2, and dot12 and dot13 expansions should be applied to LETSs and ETSL1s with a ≤ amax − 1 and b = 1.
Remark 1: Although having variable nodes of degree one
is not common in most LDPC codes, the results presented here
can easily be generalized to the case where the code has such
variable nodes.

B. Characterization of ETSL2
It is easy to see that ETSL2 structures (in the space of normal graphs) contain no cycles, and are thus trees. The following proposition is then simple to prove.
Proposition 7: Any (a, b) ETSL2 structure of irregular graphs with dvmin ≥ 2, in the range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , can be obtained by successive application of dot1k expansions to single variable nodes with degree less than or equal to bmax .
Based on Proposition 7, for the special case of bmax = 2, the only configuration of ETSL2 is a chain consisting of only degree-2 variable nodes.
C. Exhaustive Search of ETSLs in Irregular Tanner Graphs
Based on the results of Subsections VI-A and VI-B, Algorithm 3 provides a pseudo code for finding all the instances of all the (a, b) ETSL structures of an irregular Tanner graph in the interest range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax, exhaustively.

Algorithm 3 (ETSL Exhaustive Search) Finds All the

Instances of (a, b) ETSL Structures of an Irregular Tanner

Graph G = (V , E) with Girth g and dvmin ≥ 2, for a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax. The Input Is All the Instances of (a, b) LETS Structures, in the Range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , I. (Ia,b Is

the Set of All the Instances in the (a, b) Class.) The Output Is

the Set IET S L, which Contains All the Instances of ETSL1s

and ETSL2s in the Interest Range

1: Inputs: G, amax , I, g.

2: Initializations: Itae,mb

←

∅,

I

a,b ET S

L

←

∅,

∀a

≤

amax , ∀ b ≤ bmax .

3: for b = 2, . . . , bmax do 4: It1e,mb = the set of variable nodes of degree b in G.

5: end for

6: for a = 1, . . . , amax − 1 do

7: for b = 1, . . . , bmax do

8: 9:

Itae,mb = Itae,mb ∪ Ia,b. for any structure S ∈

Itae,mb

do

10:

Consider V to be the set of variable nodes in V \S

with degrees less than or equal to bmax + 2 − b,

which have only one connection to the check

nodes in o(S) and have no connection to the

check nodes in e(S),

11:

for each variable node v ∈ V do

12:

IEa+T1S,Lb = IEa+T1S,Lb ∪{S ∪v}, Itae+m1,b = Itae+m1,b ∪

{S ∪ v}, where b = b + deg(v) − 2.

13:

end for

14:

end for

15: end for

16: end for 17: Output: IET S L = {IEa,TbS L, ∀ a ≤ amax , ∀ b ≤ bmax }.

We note that the complexity of finding ETSLs is often negligible in comparison with the complexity of search for LETSs. In our experiments, the runtime for finding ETSLs is less than 1% of that of finding LETSs.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3426

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 64, NO. 5, MAY 2018
TABLE V LIST OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES USED IN THIS PAPER

VII. NUMERICAL RESULTS
We have applied the proposed search algorithm of Section V (for LETSs) and that of Section VI (for ETSL) to find the ETSs of a large number of irregular LDPC codes with a wide range of variable node degrees, rates and block lengths, exhaustively. These codes and their parameters including block length, rate, girth and variable and check node degree distributions are listed in Table V. For each code, we have used both the upper bounds of (1) and (2), and observed that, although we have no proof that the latter will result in an exhaustive search in general, for all the codes tested in this work, both upper bounds provide an exhaustive coverage of LETSs.
For all the run-times reported in this paper, a desktop computer with 2.4-GHz CPU and 8-GB RAM is used, and the search algorithms are implemented in MATLAB. Except codes C1 – C6, C17, and C18, the other LDPC codes are all structured codes. Codes C7 – C15 are the LDPC codes used in the IEEE 802.16e standard [42], and Code C16 is a code used in the IEEE 802.11n [41]. For structured codes, their structural properties are used to simplify the search.
Tables VI-XII list the multiplicity of instances of ETSs, LETSs, EASs and FEASs in different (a, b) classes, a ≤ amax, b ≤ bmax, for these codes. Each row of a table corresponds to a non-empty ETS class, and for each class, the total number of instances of ETSs, LETSs, EASs and FEASs are listed. The difference between the total number of ETSs and LETSs gives the total number of ETSLs. In the last two rows of each table, the run-times of the search algorithm based on the upper bounds of (1) and (2) are reported, respectively. Comparison of the runtimes shows that large improvements in the search speed,

TABLE VI MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) ETSS, LETSS, EASS AND FEASS OF CODES C1
AND C2 WITHIN THE RANGE OF a ≤ 7 AND b ≤ 3
in some cases more than an order of magnitude, can be obtained by using (2) instead of (1). We also note that, for each code, only less than 1% of the reported runtime is for finding ETSLs. For example, while most of the ETSs of C15, reported in Table X, are ETSLs, it takes Algorithm 3 only 2 seconds to find all the ETSLs of this code.
To compare the complexity of the two search techniques discussed in Sections IV and V, we consider the two examples of C1 and C16. For C1, since the variable degrees are rather small (3 and 4), and we are interested in ETSs with relatively small values of a and b (a ≤ 7 and b ≤ 3), the search algorithm proposed in Section IV, based on the characterization Table III, is quite efficient and can find all the ETS structures reported in Table VI in only 21 minutes (compared

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION OF ETSs

3427

TABLE VII MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) ETSS, LETSS, ETSS AND FEASS OF CODES C3
AND C4 WITHIN THE RANGE OF a ≤ 9 AND b ≤ 4

TABLE XI MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) ETSS, LETSS, EASS AND FEASS OF CODE C16
WITHIN THE RANGE OF a ≤ 12 AND b ≤ 2

TABLE VIII MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) ETSS, LETSS, EASS AND FEASS OF CODES C5
AND C6 WITHIN THE RANGE OF a ≤ 8 AND b ≤ 7
to 33 minutes for Algorithm 2 with (1)). For C16, however, the algorithm of Section IV becomes clearly inefficient, since based on Theorem 1, one should use the characterization table of a variable-regular graph with dv = 11, in the range of a ≤ 12 and b ≤ 110! The inefficiency of the algorithm in this case is due to the wide range of variable degrees for this code (2, 3, 4, 11), and the relatively large range of a values (a ≤ 12).
In Table XI, we have also reported the multiplicity of instances of ETSs and TSs obtained by the non-exhaustive search algorithms of [17] and [1], respectively. As can be seen, there are some cases in Table XI, where the multiplicity of ETS classes obtained here differs from the multiplicity of

ETS classes reported in [17] and TS classes reported in [1]. These cases are boldfaced in the table.
In [17] and [20], for irregular codes, the authors relaxed the condition that degree-2 variable nodes of (fully) absorbing sets must be connected to two satisfied check nodes. To compare our results for Codes C17 and C18 with those reported in [17] and [20], we have also reported the list of FEASs of these two codes with this modification in the definition of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets. These results are identified with a star in Table XII. As can be seen, for both codes, these results match those obtained by the exhaustive search algorithm of [20], in all the classes where the results are reported in [20]. Comparison with the non-exhaustive results of [17], however, shows a discrepancy in the multiplicity for the (10, 2) class.
We have also compared our results for Codes C13, C14, and C17, with those obtained in [10], in Tables X and XII, respectively. As can be seen, the multiplicities of ETSs for different classes match perfectly for all three codes with those reported in [10]. In terms of run-time, however, the proposed algorithm here is expectedly faster, particularly for C14 and C17. The run-times reported in [10] for the three codes are about 41, 189 and 273 minutes, respectively.3 Notable here is that, while for our algorithm, the run-time for C14 is less than that of C13, the trend for the algorithm of [10] is the opposite. In fact, unlike the branch-&-bound algorithms of [10] and [20], where the complexity, in general, increases rapidly with the block length, the complexity of our algorithm, in general, decreases with the increase in the block length, for a fixed degree distribution. This can be seen by comparing the run-times for Codes C7, C8, and C9, or Codes C10, C11, and C12, or Codes C13, C14, and C15. The reason for this behavior can be explained by the fact that the multiplicity of simple cycles of different length, which are the inputs to our search algorithm, is rather independent of the block length, and that as the block length increases the multiplicity of LETSs in many classes, particularly, those with larger a and b values decreases.
Finally, to demonstrate that the ETSs, discussed in this work, are in fact the main culprits in the error floor region of
3The algorithm of [10] has been implemented in C++, and run on an Intel Core i7-2670QM 2.20 GHz laptop with 4 GB of RAM.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3428

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 64, NO. 5, MAY 2018
TABLE IX MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) ETSS, LETSS, EASS AND FEASS OF CODES C7 -C12 WITHIN THE RANGE OF a ≤ 8 AND b ≤ 2

TABLE X MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) ETSS, LETSS, EASS AND FEASS OF CODES C13 , C14 AND C15 WITHIN THE RANGE OF a ≤ 10 AND b ≤ 2

irregular LDPC codes, we perform Monte Carlo simulations to obtain the frame error rate (FER) of Codes C4 and C7, down to the start of their error floor region. For simulations, we consider binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with coherent detection and a 3-bit quantized min-sum decoder. For each simulation point, we obtain 100 block errors. The FER results are presented in Fig. 10.
For Code C4, at signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 5.5 dB, all the 100 block errors correspond to ETSs, where 88 of those ETSs are within the range of Table VII. We expect the proportion of ETSs within the range of this table to increase by increasing the SNR. The breakdown of the 88 ETSs is as follows: 28×(6, 2), 26×(7, 2), 16×(8, 2), 9×(9, 1), 6×(5, 3), 1×(8, 3), 1×(6, 4) and 1×(7, 4).
For Code C7, at SNR of 6.5 dB, among the 100 errors, 96 of them are ETSs, and out of this 96, 66 of them are ETSs within the range of Table VII. We expect that by increasing the SNR, both the proportion of ETSs to the total errors, as well as the proportion of ETSs within the range of Table VII to total ETSs to increase. From 66 ETSs, 63 are LETSs and 55 are LETSs in

Fig. 10. FER results of Codes C4 and C7.
the (7, 1) class. The breakdown of the 66 ETSs is as follows: 55×(7, 1), 8×(8, 1), 2×(7, 2) and 1×(8, 2).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HASHEMI AND BANIHASHEMI: CHARACTERIZATION OF ETSs

3429

TABLE XII MULTIPLICITIES OF (a, b) ETSS, LETSS, EASS AND FEASS OF CODES C17 AND C18 WITHIN THE RANGE OF a ≤ 10 AND b ≤ 2

VIII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we proposed a hierarchical graph-based approach in the space of normal graphs to characterize ele-
mentary trapping sets (ETSs) of irregular low-density parity-
check (LDPC) codes. Two characterizations were proposed both based on three simple expansion techniques, called depth-
one tree (dot), path and lolli pop, thus, the terminology dpl
characterization. The proposed d pl characterizations, both, describe an ETS as an embedded sequence of ETS structures
that starts from a simple cycle or a single variable node, and is expanded step by step through a combination of
the three expansions to reach the ETS under consideration.
Corresponding to the first characterization, we demonstrated that the d pl characterization of (a, b) leafless ETS (LETS) structures of variable-regular Tanner graphs with a properly
selected variable degree dv, over a properly chosen range a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , can be used to exhaustively cover all the normal graphs of all the non-isomorphic (a, b) LETS structures of irregular Tanner graphs with a given variable node degree distribution λ(x), over any desired range of a ≤ amax and b ≤ bmax , where dv, amax , and bmax , were derived as functions of λ(x ), amax, and bmax . This characterization corresponds to an efficient exhaustive search algorithm for
irregular LDPC codes with relatively small variable degrees, when one is interested in a rather small values of amax and bmax . For other scenarios, where the first characterization appeared inefficient, we developed the second d pl character-
ization of LETS structures of irregular Tanner graphs. This
characterization is based on the application of all the possible dot, path and lolli pop expansions to simple cycles of the
graph, recursively. The characterization, and the efficiency
of the corresponding exhaustive search algorithm, rely on a sequence of upper bounds bma ax , on the b values for the classes of (a, b) LETS structures that will need to be covered in the process, for the values of a in the range g/2 ≤ a ≤ amax. Such upper bounds were derived using a backward recursion with the initial condition that bmamaaxx = bmax . Assuming that the input simple cycles are available, and that the degree
distributions and the range of search, identified by amax and bmax, are fixed, the average complexity of the proposed search algorithm is constant in the code’s block length n. In the
worst-case scenario, the complexity, even with the inclusion

of the search for the simple cycles, increases only linearly
with n.
In summary, the proposed characterizations/search algo-
rithms can be considered as the generalization of our earlier
work [13] on LETSs of variable-regular LDPC codes to the
cases where the code has variable nodes with a variety of
degrees, and to ETSs that are not leafless. To the best of our
knowledge, the proposed graph-based search algorithm is the
most efficient exhaustive search algorithm available for finding
ETSs of irregular LDPC codes. It is also the most general,
in that, it is applicable to codes with any degree distribution,
girth, rate and block length. In particular, compared to the
exhaustive search algorithms of [20] and [10], that are limited
to short to moderate block lengths, our d pl search algorithm
has no such limitation.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors wish to thank the anonymous reviewers and the
Associate Editor whose comments improved the presentation
of the paper.
REFERENCES
[1] S. Abu-Surra, D. DeClercq, D. Divsalar, and W. E. Ryan, “Trapping set enumerators for specific LDPC codes,” in Proc. Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop (ITA), San Diego, CA, USA, Jan./Feb. 2010, pp. 1–5.
[2] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Lowering the error floor of LDPC codes using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 4, pp. 2213–2224, Apr. 2011.
[3] R. Asvadi, A. H. Banihashemi, and M. Ahmadian-Attari, “Design of finite-length irregular protograph codes with low error floors over the binary-input AWGN channel using cyclic liftings,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 4, pp. 902–907, Apr. 2012.
[4] B. K. Butler and P. H. Siegel, “Error floor approximation for LDPC codes in the AWGN channel,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 12, pp. 7416–7441, Dec. 2014.
[5] A. Dehghan and A. H. Banihashemi. (Jan. 2017). “On the Tanner graph cycle distribution of random LDPC, random protograph-based LDPC, and random quasi-cyclic LDPC code ensembles.” [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/1701.02379
[6] Q. Diao, Y. Y. Tai, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Trapping set structure of finite geometry LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Davis, CA, USA, Jul. 2012, pp. 3088–3092.
[7] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets for array-based LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), Glasgow, U.K., Jun. 2007, pp. 6261–6268.
[8] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan. 2010.
[9] K. Deka, A. Rajesh, and P. K. Bora, “An improved technique to find the trapping sets of the irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. Nat. Conf. Commun. (NCC), New Dehli, India, Feb. 2013, pp. 1–5.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3430

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 64, NO. 5, MAY 2018

[10] H. Falsafain and S. R. Mousavi, “Exhaustive enumeration of elementary trapping sets of an arbitrary Tanner graph,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 20, no. 9, pp. 1713–1716, Sep. 2016.
[11] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization and efficient exhaustive search of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 323–326, Mar. 2015.
[12] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Corrections to ‘on characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes’ [Sep 14 5188-5203],” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 61, no. 3, p. 1508, Mar. 2015.
[13] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713–6736, Dec. 2016.
[14] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan. 2005.
[15] M. Ivkovic, S. K. Chilappagari, and B. Vasic, “Eliminating trapping sets in low-density parity-check codes by using Tanner graph covers,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 8, pp. 3763–3768, Aug. 2008.
[16] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On characterization of elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 60, no. 9, pp. 5188–5203, Sep. 2014.
[17] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dominant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[18] M. Karimi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Message-passing algorithms for counting short cycles in a graph,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 2, pp. 485–495, Feb. 2013.
[19] S. Khazraie, R. Asvadi, and A. H. Banihashemi, “A PEG construction of finite-length LDPC codes with low error floor,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1288–1291, Aug. 2012.
[20] G. B. Kyung and C. C. Wang, “Finding the exhaustive list of small fully absorbing sets and designing the corresponding low error-floor decoder,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 6, pp. 1487–1498, Jun. 2012.
[21] S. Laendner, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “Characterization of small trapping sets in LDPC codes from Steiner triple systems,” in Proc. 6th Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Iterative Inf. Process., Brest, France, Sep. 2010, pp. 93–97.
[22] S. Laendner, T. Hehn, O. Milenkovic, and J. B. Huber, “The trapping redundancy of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 1, pp. 53–63, Jan. 2009.
[23] D. Mackay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes. Accessed: Oct. 7, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/ mackay/codes/data.html
[24] A. McGregor and O. Milenkovic, “On the hardness of approximating stopping and trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1640–1650, Apr. 2010.
[25] O. Milenkovic, E. Soljanin, and P. Whiting, “Asymptotic spectra of trapping sets in regular and irregular LDPC code ensembles,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 1, pp. 39–55, Jan. 2007.
[26] D. V. Nguyen, S. K. Chilappagari, M. W. Marcellin, and B. Vasic, “On the construction of structured LDPC codes free of small trapping sets,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2280–2302, Apr. 2012.
[27] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[28] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[29] E. Rosnes and O. Ytrehus, “An efficient algorithm to find all small-size stopping sets of low-density parity-check matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 9, pp. 4167–4178, Sep. 2009.
[30] H. Saeedi and A. H. Banihashemi, “On the design of LDPC code ensembles for BIAWGN channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 5, pp. 1376–1382, May 2010.
[31] C. Schlegel and S. Zhang, “On the dynamics of the error floor behavior in (regular) LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 56, no. 7, pp. 3248–3264, Jul. 2010.
[32] N. Radford. Software for Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes. Accessed: Oct. 7, 2016. [Online]. Available: http://www.cs. toronto.edu/~radford/ldpc.software
[33] S. Tolouei and A. H. Banihashemi, “Fast and accurate error floor estimation of quantized iterative decoders for variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 18, no. 8, pp. 1283–1286, Aug. 2014.
[34] S. Tolouei, “High Speed Low Error Floor Hardware Implementation and Fast and Accurate Error Floor Estimation of LDPC Decoders,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Syst. Comput. Eng., Carleton Univ., Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2014.

[35] X. Zheng, F. C. M. Lau, and T. K. Chi, “Constructing short-length irregular LDPC codes with low error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 10, pp. 2823–2834, Oct. 2010.
[36] B. Vasic, S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, and S. K. Planjery, “Trapping set ontology,” in Proc. 47th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control Comput., Monticello, IL, USA, Sep. 2009, pp. 1–7.
[37] C. C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Finding all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 55, no. 5, pp. 1976–1999, May 2009.
[38] C.-C. Wang, “On the exhaustion and elimination of trapping sets: Algorithms & the suppressing effect,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Nice, France, Jun. 2007, pp. 2271–2275.
[39] Y. Zhang and W. E. Ryan, “Toward low LDPC-code floors: A case study,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 6, pp. 1566–1573, Jun. 2009.
[40] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient algorithms to find all small errorprone substructures in LDPC codes,” in Proc. Global Telecommun. Conf., Houston, TX, USA, Dec. 2011, pp. 1–6.
[41] IEEE Standard for Information Technology—Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Specific Requirements—Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications Amendment 5: Enhancements for Higher Throughput, IEEE Standard 802.11n2009, Oct. 2009.
[42] IEEE Standard for Local and Metropolitan Area Networks—Part 16: Air Interface for Fixed and Mobile Broadband Wireless Access Systems Amendment 2: Physical and Medium Access Control Layers for Combined Fixed and Mobile Operation in Licensed Bands and Corrigendum 1, IEEE Standard 802.16e-2005 and 802.16-2004/Cor 1-2005, Feb. 2006.
[43] IEEE P802.22 Draft Standard for Wireless Regional Area Networks— Part 22: Cognitive Wireless RAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specification: Policies and Procedures for Operation in the TV Bands, IEEE P802.22 Draft Standard D0.3, May 2007.
[44] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB): Frame Structure Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), ETSI Standard TS 102 005, Mar. 2010.
[45] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB) User Guidelines for the Second Generation System for Broadcasting, Interactive Services, News Gathering and Other Broadband Satellite Applications (DVBS2), ETSI Standard TR 102 376 V1.1.1, Feb. 2005.
Yoones Hashemi (S’14) received the B.Sc. degree from Ferdowsi University of Mashhad, Mashhad, Iran, in 2010, and the M.A.Sc. degree from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 2013, and the Ph.D. degree from Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 2017, all in electrical engineering. He is the recipient of the Senate Medal for outstanding academic achievement at Carleton University. He is currently working at Huawei Canada, Ottawa. His research interests include graph theory, coding theory and wireless communications.
Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03–SM’04) received the B.A.Sc. degree (Hons.) in electrical engineering from the Isfahan University of Technology, Isfahan, Iran, in 1988, the M.A.Sc. degree (Hons.) in communications engineering from the University of Tehran, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, and the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada, in 1997. From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Isfahan University of Technology. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, where he was a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada Post-Doctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering, Carleton University, in 1998, where he is currently a Professor with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests include coding and information theory, digital and wireless communications, network coding, theory and implementation of communication algorithms, and compressed sensing and sampling.
Prof. Banihashemi was the Director of the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems Center, Carleton University, from 2005 to 2013. He has been involved in many international conferences as the chair, a member of Technical Program Committee, and a member of organizing committee. He served as the Co-Chair of the Communication Theory Symposium of Globecom07, the TPC Co-Chair of the Information Theory Workshop 2007, a member of the organizing committee for the International Symposium on Information Theory 2008, and the Co-Chair of the Canadian Workshop on Information Theory 2009. He was a member of NSERC’s Electrical and Computer Engineering Evaluation Group from 2013 to 2016, the last two years as a Section Chair. He was also a two-time recipient of NSERC Discovery Accelerator Supplement in 2008 and 2013. He served as an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS from 2003 to 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 12:58:22 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

