Trapping Set Analysis of
Horizontal Layered Decoder
Nithin Raveendran and Bane Vasi´c
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA.
{nithin, vasic}@email.arizona.edu
Abstract—In this paper, we present how the decoding per-
formance of layered decoder can be analyzed using trapping
sets. Surprisingly, a simple horizontal layered Gallager-B decoder
breaks all weight-3 error patterns on a (5,3) trapping set
successfully, resulting in a steeper slope in frame error rate (FER)
curves compared to a flooding schedule decoder. Theoretical
validation of the results is also done using a semi-analytical
method for computing the error floors of LDPC codes on a binary
symmetric channel decoded using layered Gallager-B algorithm.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, Layered Gallager-B decoding,
Trapping set analysis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Capacity approaching low-density parity-check (LDPC) [1],
[2] codes have been extensively researched in the past, on
topics ranging from code construction, decoding algorithms,
their performance analysis and implementation. LDPC encoder
and decoder hardware implementations which are area efficient
and provide high throughput favor structured code construction
techniques with quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes [3] particu-
larly suited for such efficient implementations. LDPC itera-
tive decoders using message passing algorithms are typically
implemented in two types of scheduling strategies: flooding
and layered. Layered decoding on QC-LDPC codes is well
appreciated as it effectively achieves high decoding throughput
with low computation complexity and memory usage [4]–[7].
Faster convergence of layered schedule also enables reduction
of the required maximum number of decoding iterations.
Primarily two types of scheduling, row-layered/horizontal-
layered [4], [8] and column-layered/vertical-layered [8], [9]
have been proposed in literature. In horizontal-layered decod-
ing, the parity check matrix of LDPC code is partitioned into
multiple row/horizontal layers and messages are updated layer
by layer. The vertical-layered decoding partitions the parity
check matrix into multiple column/vertical layers for message
passing. Both these approaches have a better convergence
rate compared to flooding schedule. Layered decoding was
investigated mainly in terms of the convergence comparison
and complexity analysis (in terms of memory usage) with
the flooding schedule. However, there was little theoretical
analysis on the performance of layered decoders and hence,
improvements of layered decoders are mainly due to using
heuristic methods from the implementation stand point. An-
other interesting point is that most of the layered implemen-
tations are done for channels with soft outputs using soft
decision iterative algorithms such as the min-sum [7] and other
improved variants of the min-sum algorithm such as the self-
correcting min-sum [10]. To the best of our knowledge, imple-
mentation of layered decoders using hard decision decoders is
not adequately addressed.
The decoding performance of LDPC codes under iterative
algorithm is related closely to the problematic structures of the
code’s Tanner graph such as trapping sets [11], [12]. A detailed
study of trapping set ontology for the binary symmetric chan-
nel (BSC) and column-weight-three LDPC codes is presented
in [13], [14]. Use of hard decision decoding algorithms such
as Gallager-A/B algorithm simplifies the task of enumerating
trapping sets. Although it has been rigorously proven only for
the Gallager-A/B algorithm and the bit flipping algorithms that
fixed sets are trapping sets, it has been widely recognized that
the subgraphs of these combinatorial objects greatly contribute
to the error floor for various iterative decoding algorithms and
channels. For example, the instanton analysis performed in
[15] suggests that the decoding failures for various decoding
algorithms and channels are closely related and subgraphs
causing these failures share some common topological struc-
tures. These structures are either trapping sets for iterative
decoding algorithms on the BSC or larger subgraphs contain-
ing these trapping sets. Hence, the knowledge of trapping sets
of Gallager-A/B decoder on the BSC is indeed relevant to
additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel and for more
complex decoders. Such detailed trapping set analysis has not
been carried out for layered decoders, specifically using hard
decision decoding algorithms like Gallager-A/B algorithms.
There is also clearly a lack of understanding in characterizing
the failures of layered decoders in general. In this paper,
we investigate how the performance of layered hard decision
decoders can be estimated from a theoretical viewpoint using
trapping sets. This requires trapping set definitions to be
adapted to also accommodate the layers (horizontal or vertical)
in the message passing algorithm. For analyzing the horizontal
layered decoder, we label the check nodes based on the which
layer they are updated in the algorithm. This approach opens
up new possibilities for implementing dynamic scheduling
strategies. We also use a semi-analytical method proposed in
[16], directly based on trapping set combinatorics to estimate
the error floor region of the FER vs SNR curve to analyze the
effect of trapping sets on decoders with the layered scheduling.
Interestingly, we observe that in case of hard decision decoding
978-1-5386-3180-5/18/$31.00 ©2018 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
algorithms, scheduling strategies can be effectively used to
improve decoding performance by breaking certain harmful
trapping set configurations and at the same time converging
faster than the flooding schedule.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we
describe
the
flooding
and
layered
Gallager-B
decoding
algorithms. In Section III, we introduce the trapping set with
definitions and various parameters associated with a trapping
set. In Section IV, we explain the semi analytical method
to estimate FER in case of flooding and layered Gallager-B
decoders, followed by the simulation results comparing the
decoding performance of the decoders, both using theoretical
methods and MC simulation. Concluding remarks and future
research directions are given in Section V.
II. LAYERED GALLAGER-B ALGORITHM
A. Notations
Consider a (𝛾, 𝜌)-regular binary LDPC code, denoted by
(𝑁, 𝐾), with code rate 𝑅= 𝐾/𝑁≥1 −𝛾/𝜌and parity
check matrix 𝐻of size 𝑀× 𝑁, the bi-adjacency matrix of
a Tanner bipartite graph 𝐺= (𝑉∪𝐶, 𝐸), where 𝑉is a set
of variable nodes, 𝐶is a set of check nodes, and 𝐸is a
set of edges. Each matrix element 𝐻𝑐,𝑣= 1 indicates that
there is an edge between nodes 𝑐∈𝐶and 𝑣∈𝑉, which are
referred as neighbors. Let 𝒩𝑣(𝒩𝑐) be a set of neighbors of a
variable node 𝑣(check node 𝑐). Then, ∣𝒩𝑣∣= 𝛾, ∀𝑣∈𝑉, and
∣𝒩𝑐∣= 𝜌, ∀𝑐∈𝐶, where ∣⋅∣denotes the cardinality. Note that
the layered decoding approach is also applicable for irregular
LDPC codes.
Let x = (𝑥1, 𝑥2, . . . , 𝑥𝑁) denote a codeword of an LDPC
code, where 𝑥𝑣represents the binary value associated with
the variable node 𝑣. Consider a BSC where the code bits
are flipped independently with probability 𝛼. Let the 𝑁-bit
received word be y = x ⊕e, where e = (𝑒1, 𝑒2, . . . , 𝑒𝑁)
is the error vector superimposed to the codeword during
transmission over BSC and ⊕is component-wise XOR.
B. Flooding Schedule Gallager-B
In [1], Gallager proposed two binary message passing
algorithms, namely Gallager-A and Gallager-B, for decoding
of LDPC codes over the BSC channel. The messages send
over the edges of the Tanner graph (in an iterative way) are
calculated based on the node update functions which follows
the extrinsic message passing rule that a message sent over
an edge is computed as a function of all received messages
except the one arriving over that edge.
Gallager-B algorithm use simple update functions such as
majority logic and XOR logic at the variable node and check
node respectively. Let message passed from a check node 𝑐
to a variable node 𝑣in the ℓ-th iteration be denoted by 𝜇(ℓ)
𝑐→𝑣.
The message passed from a variable node 𝑣to the check
node 𝑐is denoted by 𝜈(ℓ)
𝑣→𝑐. Also, let 𝜇(ℓ)
𝒩𝑣∖𝑐→𝑣denote all
incoming messages to the variable node 𝑣except a message
from the check node 𝑐. Similarly, 𝜈(ℓ)
𝒩𝑐∖𝑣→𝑐denote all incoming
messages to the check node 𝑐except from the variable node 𝑣.
For decoders with binary messages, it is convenient to define
the message alphabet as ℳ= {0, 1} (The notations follow
ones used in [17]).
The ℓ-th decoding iteration in a flooding schedule can be
summarized as follows:
∙Every check node 𝑐∈𝐶calculates 𝜌XOR operations as:
𝜇(ℓ)
𝑐→𝑣=
⊕
𝜈(ℓ−1)
𝒩𝑐∖𝑣→𝑐.
∙Variable node message from every 𝑣∈𝑉is updated by
using a 𝛾-input majority operation as follows:
𝜈(ℓ)
𝑣→𝑐=
{
𝑦𝑣
ℓ= 0
Φ(𝑦𝑣, 𝜇(ℓ)
𝒩𝑣∖𝑐→𝑣)
ℓ> 0,
where
Φ(𝑦𝑣, 𝜇(ℓ)
𝒩𝑣∖𝑐→𝑣) =
⎧

⎨

⎩
1, if ∑𝜇(ℓ)
𝒩𝑣∖𝑐→𝑣> ⌈𝛾
2 ⌉,
0, if ∑𝜇(ℓ)
𝒩𝑣∖𝑐→𝑣< ⌈𝛾
2 ⌉,
𝑦𝑣,
otherwise,
where ⌈𝛾/2⌉denotes the smallest integer greater than or
equal to 𝛾/2.
The decided bit value in the ℓ-th iteration ˆx(ℓ)
𝑣
is calculated
by a majority vote among the all incoming messages at the
variable node 𝑣together with its channel value.
These operations are performed until the codeword is found
or a predefined maximum number of iteration is reached.
We say that a codeword is found if all 𝑀check nodes are
satisfied. When a check node 𝑐performs XOR operation, it is
said to be satisfied if the XOR output 𝜎𝑐= 0, and unsatisfied
if 𝜎𝑐= 1. The syndrome at ℓ-th iteration is the ordered
set {𝜎(ℓ)
𝑐}𝑐∈𝐶obtained from the codeword estimates, i.e.,
𝜎(ℓ)
𝑐
= ⊕ˆx(ℓ)
𝒩𝑐. A codeword is found if ⋀
𝑐∈𝐶𝜎(ℓ)
𝑐
= 0. The
decoding is called successful if a codeword (either correct or
wrong) is found. Otherwise, the decoding is said to have failed.
C. Horizontal Layered Gallager-B
We now describe the horizontal layered Gallager-B decod-
ing algorithm for which we analyze the trapping sets and
estimate the error floor decoding performance. The layered de-
coding approach is highly suitable for QC-LDPC codes. These
are a class of codes constructed using circulant permutation
matrices [3]. They are defined by a base matrix 𝐵of size
𝐼× 𝐽, with integer entries 𝑏𝑖𝑗≥−1. The parity check matrix
𝐻of size 𝑀×𝑁is obtained from the 𝐵matrix by replacing
each entry with a 𝑝×𝑝matrix, where 𝑝represents the circulant
size. Non-negative 𝑏𝑖𝑗elements are replaced with the identity
matrix shifted by 𝑏𝑖𝑗positions (cyclic permutations of an
identity matrix) and negative entries are expanded with the 0
matrix. We consider row-layered/horizontal layered Gallager-
B decoder wherein a layer is considered as group of 𝑝check
nodes or equivalently one row in the base matrix 𝐵. There are
𝐼such layers denoted by 𝐿𝑖, 1 ≤𝑖≤𝐼.
Unlike the flooding Gallager-B algorithm where an iteration
constitutes of check node update followed by variable node
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
update for all check nodes and variable nodes respectively,
the layered Gallager-B algorithm proceeds layer by layer:
𝐿1, 𝐿2 . . . 𝐿𝐼. i.e., all the check node messages in layer 𝐿𝑖are
computed in parallel followed by all variable nodes computing
the new updates to the check nodes in layer 𝐿𝑖+1 mod 𝐼.
Then, the check node messages in layer 𝐿𝑖+1 are updated
next followed by the variable node updates until the last
layer 𝐿𝐼. We obtain the decision metric on the variable nodes
followed by syndrome checking for the stopping criterion. This
constitutes one iteration in the horizontal layered Gallager-B
algorithm.
The variable node and check node update in layered
Gallager-B algorithm effectively remains the same as in the
flooding algorithm. It is the scheduling strategy which is
horizontal based on the layer parameter that varies depending
on the QC-LDPC code. To have the same complexity as
in flooding Gallager-B, not all the variable node messages
need to be updated, only the ones to be used in next layer
is updated. This ensures all the updated messages can be
immediately used in the next step, thereby accelerating the
decoding convergence.
D. Algorithm description: Layered Gallager-B
Algorithm 1 Layered Gallager-B Algorithm
Initialize the variable node messages from 𝑣with 𝑦𝑣.
Initialize the check node messages to variable nodes as
channel value at corresponding variable nodes.
while Syndrome ⋀
𝑐∈𝐶𝜎(ℓ)
𝑐
∕= 0 and ℓ≤max iter do
for all layers 𝐿𝑖do
Update all check node messages in layer 𝐿𝑖
Update variable node messages to check nodes in
layer 𝐿(𝑖+1 mod 𝐼)
Proceed to next layer 𝐿(𝑖+1 mod 𝐼)
end for
Compute decision on all variable nodes
Compute syndrome 𝜎(ℓ)
𝑐
to check stopping criteria
end while
Output of layered Gallager-B decoder = ˆx.
III. TRAPPING SET CHARACTERISTICS
An (𝑎, 𝑏) trapping set 𝒯is a set of 𝑎variable nodes whose
induced graph has 𝑏odd degree checks. Suppose 𝒢has such a
specific set of 𝑎variable nodes forming an (𝑎, 𝑏) trapping set
𝒯. The set of all such subgraphs equivalent (up to labeling)
to 𝒯is termed as a class of trapping sets, denoted by 𝒳
with cardinality ∣𝒳∣. Critical number 𝑚of a trapping set 𝒯
is defined [16] to be the minimum number of variables in
𝒯that need to be initially in error for a specific decoder
to fail. Not all combinations of 𝑚variable errors among 𝑎
variables in a trapping set need to result in a decoding failure.
Let us call the subset of 𝑚nodes in 𝒯resulting in decoding
failure as a failure set. The number of such failure sets, denoted
by 𝑠, is called the strength of 𝒯. These values change with
respect to decoding algorithms and specific code constructions.
We first review the results for flooding Gallager-B and then
analyze these parameters specifically for the layered Gallager-
B algorithm described in Section II in case of the Tanner code
[18].
The (3, 5) regular (155, 64) Tanner code from [18], con-
structed using permutation matrices have girth eight and
relatively large minimum distance of 20. The base matrix 𝐵
is formed as follows:
𝐵=
⎡
⎣
1
2
4
8
16
5
10
20
9
18
25
19
7
14
28
⎤
⎦
Trapping set analysis [12] shows that the Tanner code has
sets of variable nodes (formed by the union of three eight
cycles) which induce subgraph forming the (5, 3) trapping set
for flooding Gallager-B decoder.
Critical parameters 𝑚and 𝑠for the (5, 3) trapping set
are obtained by analyzing error patterns in the trapping set
leading to decoding failure. In case of flooding Gallager-B
algorithm, only one configuration of three errors leads to a
decoding failure. Hence, for flooding Gallager-B algorithm,
critical parameters are 𝑚= 3 and 𝑠= 1 for the (5, 3)
trapping set. This most harmful weight-three error pattern
present in the (5, 3) trapping set can be seen in Fig. 1.
A. Layered decoder corrects (5, 3) trapping set three-error
patterns
In [12] it is shown that the flooding Gallager-B algorithm
gets trapped for a single weight three-error pattern in the (5, 3)
trapping set. Here, we proceed to show in the following steps
that the layered Gallager-B decoder explained in Section II can
correct any weight-three error pattern in the (5, 3) trapping set.
As depicted in the base matrix for the (155, 64) Tanner
code, 𝑀= 93 check nodes can be ordered into 𝐼= 3
layers, each layer 𝐿𝑖having 31 check nodes. This layering
comes naturally from the permutation matrices used in QC-
LDPC code construction. Also, the Tanner graph has variable
node degree 𝛾= 3. Every variable node have one check node
associated in each of the layer 𝐿𝑖. This can be also observed
in the (5, 3) trapping sets as shown in Fig. 1. Note that for
trapping sets for layered decoders as shown in Fig. 1, we add
an additional information for the check nodes denoting which
layer they belong to using labels/colors. This property is vital
for tracking message passing stages across layers in case of a
layered decoder.
The horizontal layered Gallager-B algorithm is able to
decode to an all zero codeword starting from the harmful
weight-three error pattern shown in Fig. 1. This is shown
step by step using the message passing illustration in Fig. 2.
The decision at the end of second iteration in Fig. 2(n) shows
that decoder converges to an all zero codeword whereas a
flooding Gallager-B decoder would be oscillating between
the three-error pattern of Fig. 1 and the flipped error pattern
as shown in Fig. 2(h).
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
Fig. 1. Most harmful weight-three error pattern in a (5, 3) trapping set in a
flooding Gallager-B algorithm. In case of trapping sets for layered decoders,
we add an additional information for the check nodes denoting which layer
they belong to. Notations of the check nodes 𝐿1, 𝐿2, 𝐿3 denote the respective
layers, also illustrated using colors (also on the connections) by red, green
and blue respectively. This additional feature is essential as message passing
stages depend on these layers in case of a layered decoder. As in previous
trapping set notations, a ■/□denotes odd degree/even degree check node,
while / denotes the erroneous/correct variable node.
Now, using the characteristics of a trapping set, we
describe the semi-analytical method for FER computation to
theoretically validate our simulation results.
IV. SEMI-ANALYTICAL METHOD FOR FER COMPUTATION
Error floor [11] is an abrupt change in the frame error
rate (FER) performance of an iterative decoder in the high
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region. Analytical methods to
characterize decoding performance of iterative decoders are
important specially in the error floor regime. For sufficiently
long codes, the error floor phenomenon manifests itself
in the region unreachable by brute force Monte-Carlo
(MC) simulations. In [15], [19]–[21], analytical methods
using importance sampling and instantons to characterize
the FER performance in the error floor region are investigated.
A semi-analytical method for FER computation is proposed
in [16] establishing the relation between trapping sets and the
FER performance of LDPC codes at low values of 𝛼of the
BSC. It was shown that the slope of the FER curve in the error
floor region is determined by the minimal critical number. We
first explain the method briefly and use similar analysis to
estimate FER curves for layered decoder.
A. FER Estimation
We calculate the contribution to the FER of each class of
trapping set 𝒳having critical number 𝑚and strength 𝑠as
follows:
Pr{𝒳} =
𝒮
∑
𝑟=𝑚
Pr{𝒳∣r errors }Pr{r errors}
(1)
Pr{r errors} is the probability that channel introduces 𝑟errors,
calculated using binomial expression as
Pr{r errors} =
(𝑛
𝑟
)
𝛼𝑟(1 −𝛼)𝑛−𝑟.
(2)
Pr{𝒳∣r errors } is the probability that the decoder ends in
failure set of the class 𝒳, given that channel introduced 𝑟
errors.
We assume, that if a critical number 𝑚of the 𝑟errors
belong to the failure set, decoder gets trapped. A class 𝒳has
𝑠∣𝒳∣failure sets. Hence, the probability that a given set of 𝑚
variable nodes is a failure set of class 𝒳is 𝑠∣𝒳∣/
( 𝑛
𝑚
)
. For a
set of r elements, there are
( 𝑟
𝑚
)
subsets with cardinality 𝑚.
Hence, we have
Pr{𝒳∣r errors } = 𝑠∣𝒳∣
( 𝑟
𝑚
)
/
(𝑛
𝑚
)
.
(3)
The susceptibility of a trapping set 𝒮is defined as the
maximum number of errors that can end up in a trapping set.
𝒮determines the channel value 𝛼at which trapping set errors
starts to dominate. Calculated FER approaches the true value
for lower 𝛼values. The correct value for 𝒮is estimated by
heuristics and simulations [12].
For the (155, 64) Tanner code, we have seen that the
relevant trapping set 𝒳is the (5, 3) trapping set with 𝑚= 3
and 𝑠= 1 for flooding Gallager-B decoder. We also estimate
𝒮≈10. The simulation and theoretical FER plot as shown
in Fig. 3 show that the dominant error events are due to
the (5, 3) trapping set at low values of 𝛼and that the
semi-analytical method captures the error floor.
In Section III-A, we showed that the horizontal layered
Gallager-B algorithm escapes from the (5, 3) trapping set
induced by any 3 error pattern. This makes the critical number
for layered decoder 𝑚= 4 and 𝑠= 5 for the (5, 3) trapping
set. The 𝒮value is estimated as 20. Using these parameters,
we estimate the FER for the horizontal layered decoder using
Equation 1.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)
(k)
(l)
(m)
(n)
(o)
Fig. 2. Illustration of how the horizontal layered Gallager-B algorithm is able to break from the harmful weight-three error pattern shown in Fig. 1. In Fig.
2(a), initialization and variable node messages to 𝐿1 check nodes (in red) are shown. In Fig. 2(b)-2(f) shows row-layered decoding for first iteration wherein
messages are updated in successively in layers 𝐿1, 𝐿2 (in green) and 𝐿3 (in blue). The decision is flipped as shown in Fig. 2(h) which also shows the variable
update for layer 𝐿1 (in red) in iteration 2. Subsequent figures show how the layered decoder is able to break out from the harmful weight-three error pattern
in (5, 3) trapping set. The decision at the end of second iteration in Fig. 2(o) shows that decoder converges to an all zero codeword. A flooding Gallager-B
decoder oscillates between the weight-three error pattern of Fig. 1 and the flipped error pattern as shown in Fig. 2(h) and hence remains stuck.
10-2
BSC (α)
10-8
10-6
10-4
10-2
Frame error rate (FER)
Simulation Flooding Gallager-B
Simulation Layered Gallager-B
Theoretical Flooding m =3, s =1
Theoretical Layered m = 4, s = 5
Fig. 3.
FER plot for flooding and layered Gallager-B decoders for the
(155, 64) Tanner code. Our theoretical FER estimation for the layered decoder
matches with MC numerical results at low 𝛼values in the error floor region.
We use the semi-analytical method to compare the FER esti-
mation for the flooding and the layered Gallager-B algorithm.
The MC simulation results shown in Fig. 3 coincide with the
estimated FER curve for flooding and layered decoders. It can
be observed that the semi-analytical results give closer values
to the simulation in regions of high SNR where error flooring
effects are predominant. The order magnitude improvement
in the slope of error floor curves for layered decoder can be
attributed to these decoders ability to handle all weight-three
error patterns occurring in the (5, 3) trapping set.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
We present a simple decoder which can correct all weight-
3 error patterns using the horizontal layered scheduling. We
showed that the improvement in slope of error floor curves for
the horizontal layered Gallager-B decoder can be attributed
to the decoder escaping from all weight-three error patterns
occurring in the (5, 3) trapping set. Also, theoretical estimation
of FER performance curves for layered decoder from trapping
set viewpoint was shown. These results can also be applied
for irregular LDPC codes as well. The results presented in
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
this paper offer huge prospects of using the relation between
trapping sets and scheduling to successfully enable decoders
to learn the optimal scheduling strategy using trapping set
information. The results also motivate us to look at layered
algorithms with different scheduling strategy from an alterna-
tive perspective, investigating more into trapping set of layered
decoders extended to min-sum algorithm and its variants for
other structured LDPC codes.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is funded in by NSF under grant ECCS-1500170,
and is supported by Indo-US Science and Technology Forum
(IUSSTF) through the Joint Networked Center for Data Stor-
age Research (JC-16-2014-US).
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory,
vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-
approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf.
Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[3] M. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circu-
lant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp.
1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[4] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered
decoding of LDPC codes,” in IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing
Systems, Oct 2004, pp. 107–112.
[5] S. Planjery, D. Declercq, B. J. Reynwar, and B. Vasi´c, “Efficient
FPGA-based architectures of finite alphabet iterative decoders for flash
memories,” in Non-volatile Memories Workshop, Mar. 1-3 2015, pp. 1–2.
[6] Y. Sun, G. Wang, and J. R. Cavallaro, “Multi-layer parallel decoding
algorithm and VLSI architecture for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Intl.
Symp. of Circuits and Systems (ISCAS), May 2011, pp. 1776–1779.
[7] Z. Cui, Z. Wang, and Y. Liu, “High-throughput layered LDPC decoding
architecture,” IEEE Trans. on VLSI Systems, vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 582–587,
April 2009.
[8] P. Radosavljevic, A. de Baynast, and J. R. Cavallaro, “Optimized mes-
sage passing schedules for LDPC decoding,” in Conference Record of the
Thirty-Ninth Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers,
2005., Oct 2005, pp. 591–595.
[9] Z. Cui, Z. Wang, and X. Zhang, “Reduced-complexity column-layered
decoding and implementation for LDPC codes,” IET Communications,
vol. 5, no. 15, pp. 2177–2186, October 2011.
[10] V. Savin, “Self-corrected min-sum decoding of LDPC codes,” in IEEE
Intl. Symp. on Inf. Theory. Toronto: IEEE, July 6-11 2008, pp. 146–150.
[11] T. J. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Ann.
Allerton Conf. Commun., Contr. and Comp., Monticello, IL, USA, Sept.
2003, pp. 1426–1435.
[12] B. Vasi´c, D. Nguyen, and S. K. Chilappagari, “Chapter 6 - failures
and error floors of iterative decoders,” in Channel Coding: Theory,
Algorithms, and Applications: Academic Press Library in Mobile and
Wireless Communications.
Oxford: Academic Press, 2014, pp. 299–
341.
[13] S. K. Chilappagari, D. V. Nguyen, B. Vasi´c, and M. W. Marcellin,
“On trapping sets and guaranteed error correction capability of LDPC
codes and GLDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory,
vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 1600–1611, April 2010. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/0805.2427?context=cs
[14] ——, “Error correction capability of column-weight-three LDPC codes
under the Gallager A algorithm - Part II,” IEEE Transactions on
Information Theory, vol. 56, no. 6, pp. 2626–2639, June 2010.
[Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/0807.3582
[15] S. Chilappagari, M. Chertkov, M. Stepanov, and B. Vasi´c, “Instanton-
based techniques for analysis and reduction of error floors of
LDPC codes,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications,
vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 855–865, August 2009. [Online]. Available:
http://arxiv.org/abs/0903.1624
[16] S. K. Chilappagari, S. Sankaranarayanan, and B. Vasi´c, “Error floors
of LDPC codes on the binary symmetric channel,” in Proc. IEEE Int.
Comm. Conf., vol. 3, Istanbul, Turkey, 2006, pp. 1089–1094.
[17] P. Ivanis and B. Vasi´c, “Error errore eicitur: A stochastic resonance
paradigm for reliable storage of information on unreliable media,” IEEE
Trans. on Commun., pp. 3596–3608, Sept. 2016.
[18] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. Fuja, “A class of group-structured
LDPC codes,” in Proc. ISTA, 2001.
[19] L. Dolecek, P. Lee, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, B. Nikolic, and M. Wain-
wright, “Predicting error floors of structured LDPC codes: deterministic
bounds and estimates,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas in Commun., vol. 27, no. 6,
pp. 908–917, Aug. 2009.
[20] M. Karimi and A. Banihashemi, “Efficient algorithm for finding dom-
inant trapping sets of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58,
no. 11, pp. 6942–6958, Nov. 2012.
[21] C. Cole, S. Wilson, E. Hall, and T. Giallorenzi, “Analysis and design
of moderate length regular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc.
40th Annual Conf. on Information Sciences and Systems, March 2006,
pp. 823–828.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 13:02:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
