IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

507

A 7.92 Gb/s 437.2 mW Stochastic LDPC Decoder Chip for IEEE 802.15.3c Applications
Xin-Ru Lee, Chih-Lung Chen, Hsie-Chia Chang, and Chen-Yi Lee, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents the first silicon-proven stochastic LDPC decoder to support multiple code rates for IEEE 802.15.3c applications. The critical path is improved by a reconfigurable stochastic check node unit (CNU) and variable node unit (VNU); therefore, a high throughput scheme can be realized with 768 MHz clock frequency. To achieve higher hardware and energy efficiency, the reduced complexity architecture of tracking forecast memory is experimentally investigated to implement the variable node units for IEEE 802.15.3c applications. Based on the properties of parity check matrices and stochastic arithmetic, the optimized routing networks with re-permutation techniques are adopted to enhance chip utilization. Considering the measurement uncertainties, a delay-lock loop with isolated power domain and a test environment consisting of an encoder, an AWGN generator and bypass circuits are also designed for inner clock and information generation. With these features, our proposed fully parallel LDPC decoder chip fabricated in 90-nm CMOS process with 760.3 K gate count can achieve 7.92 Gb/s data rate and power consumption of 437.2 mW under 1.2 V supply voltage. Compared to the state-of-the-art IEEE 802.15.3c LDPC decoder chips, our proposed chip achieves over 90% reduction of routing wires, 73.8% and 11.5% enhancement of hardware and energy efficiency, respectively.
Index Terms—Error correction, IEEE 802.15.3c, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code, stochastic decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check block codes (LDPC-BCs) are powerful linear block codes with near-capacity performance. It was introduced by Gallager [1] in the 1960s and forgotten for decades until rediscovered by Mackay [2]. An LDPC-BC is defined by a sparse parity-check matrix which can be mapped to a bipartite graph composed of check nodes and variable nodes. The reason of its excellent performance is based on iteratively belief-propagation (BP) on the graph, also known as message passing algorithm. To simplify the decoding complexity, offset min-sum (OMS) algorithm [3] and normalized min-sum (NMS) [4] algorithm were introduced to make a trade-off between hardware cost and performance.
Due to the parallelism characteristic, LDPC-BC decoders have a great potential to perform high decoding throughput.
Manuscript received June 13, 2014; revised August 18, 2014; accepted September 04, 2014. Date of publication October 14, 2014; date of current version January 26, 2015. This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology under Grants MOST 103-2221-E-009-198-MY3 and MOST 101-2628-E-009-013-MY3, Ministry of Education under 5Y50B program, and MediaTek-NCTU Research Center. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor V. Chandra.
The authors are with the Department of Electronics Engineering and the Institute of Electronics, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu 300, Taiwan (e-mail: mark@si2lab.org; lung@si2lab.org; hcchang@mail.nctu.edu.tw; cylee@si2lab.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2014.2360331

A fully parallel architecture means all of check nodes and variable nodes are implemented, while these nodes operate in parallel. Hence, it has higher decoding throughput but larger area. In contrast, a partial parallel architecture, such as row-based layered scheduling or column-based shuffled scheduling architectures, shares the check node units (CNUs) or variable node units (VNUs) to achieve smaller area, but the decoding throughput would be reduced. Hence, it has become popular in academies and industries to design a high speed and also area efficient LDPC-BC decoder. Nowadays, LDPC-BCs have been adopted by several standards such as IEEE 802.16e (WiMAX), IEEE 802.3an (10GBASE-T), and IEEE 802.15.3c (WPAN) for its better performance and data rate. The IEEE 802.15.3c wireless personal area network (WPAN) standard is designed to support wireless communication at the 60-GHz (millimeter wave) frequency band. As the indoor data communication such as uncompressed video, conference ad hoc and kiosk file downloading [5], high data rate (over 5 Gb/s) is required for an LDPC-BC decoder. In this work, we implemented an LDPC decoder of four irregular quasi-cyclic LDPC-BCs (QC-LDPC-BCs) provided by the high-speed interface (HSI) mode in this standard. The structural properties of four QC-LDPC-BCs are based on a rate 7/8 base matrix. The parity-check matrices can be divided into 32 groups, each one is a 21 21 zero matrix or cyclic shift identity matrix. Moreover, the matrices can be split into four layers in horizontal direction. By extending the matrix of rate 7/8, rate 1/2, 5/8, and 3/4 matrices are derived, as shown in Fig. 1. Based on these characteristics, the simplified implementations are discussed, such as configurable architectures, layered decoding algorithm and message permutation networks [6], [7].
For LDPC-BC decoders, the major design challenge is the complex interconnection. For high code rate LDPC-BCs, more edges are connected to a check node such that large sorters are required to find the minimum value in the NMS algorithm. Furthermore, a fully parallel design causes large silicon area and low chip density owing to a large amount of messages exchanging between CNUs and VNUs in one iteration. In [8], it reported the size of decoder is determined by routing congestion and not by the computation logic gate count in the past years. Moreover, higher hardware cost and more complicated routing network are obstacles to support various code rates in an LDPC-BC decoder. For example, the IEEE 802.15.3c applications requires four code rates, where irregular degrees and different connections in parity-check matrices make the routing network more complicated. In [7], it shows the chip utilization is only 73%.
Stochastic decoding is an alternative method for implementing decoders of error control codes. In this approach, messages are converted to stochastic bit streams instead of

1549-8328 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:18:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

508

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 1. Parity-check matrices of rate 5/8 and 7/8.

probabilities. As a result, the hardware could be carried out

by simple logic circuits and the computation delay will be

reduced such that a higher operating frequency and throughput

feature can be accomplished. Because of its bit-serial property,

the message between processing units is only 1-bit. Based on

these advantages, the stochastic decoding is suitable for imple-

menting a high throughput LDPC-BC decoder. Furthermore,

considering a multi-rates scheme in the future communica-

tion system, interconnections will become more complicated.

Stochastic decoding cleverly provides a routing efficient and

compact solution for LDPC-BC decoders. Early stochastic

computation is only applied on short block codes [9]. It had

been also considered to decode the trellis-based Hamming code

and turbo block code [10], [11]. The first stochastic decoding

with near-optimal performance for a practical LDPC-BC

was proposed in [12]. After that, an FPGA-based stochastic

LDPC-BC decoder was shown to provide over Gb/s throughput

[13], [14]. Recently, a post-layout simulation in [15] showed

that a high-throughput design for IEEE 802.3an applications

could be provided. However, these works only support a single Fig. 2. Overview of stochastic LDPC decoding. parity-check matrix with easier interconnections. Multi-rate

LDPC codes seem to be a best candidate of error correcting shows the chip implementation, measurement results and

codes for IEEE standards to support different modulation comparisons with other works. Finally, a conclusion is given in

schemes in the near future.

Section V.

In this paper, we propose an energy and hardware efficient fully parallel stochastic LDPC-BC decoder chip for IEEE 802.15.3c applications. A reconfigurable CNU with concealed syndrome checking and a reconfigurable VNU with the reduced complexity architecture of tracking forecast memory (RCA-TFM) are proposed to deal with four code rates. Hence, the longer critical path caused by various degrees is shortened such that the proposed LDPC decoder achieves maximum data rate 7.92 Gb/s under clock frequency of 768 MHz. The less storage requirement and combinational circuits of the RCA-TFM lead to better energy efficiency. Based on the parity-check matrices, the input reallocation and the layer

II. STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODING

In the stochastic decoding, channel values are translated to

stochastic streams. Then iterative decoding between VNUs and

CNUs is executed. The decoding procedure is illustrated in Fig.

2. First, channel values are transformed into probabilities. As-

sumed the condition is binary phase shift keying (BPSK) trans-

mission over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel

with a power-spectral density , the log likelihood ratio (LLR)

value

converted from channel value

and the corre-

sponding probability form are (1) and (2), where is the

transmitted bit.

spreading techniques are adopted to alleviate the congestion of

(1)

routing networks. To our best knowledge, the chip with 90%

utilization is the highest design for IEEE 802.15.3c applications. For the purpose of high speed operation, a delay-locked

(2)

loop is designed to generate a higher clock signal for decoder.

Therefore, the speed limitation of I/O pad and testing equipment Subsequently, the conversion of probabilities to stochastic

is solved. Finally, considering the functional test, an encoder streams are realized by comparators. A stochastic stream is

and an AWGN engine are integrated into the chip.

generated by comparing a -bit probability with a -bit random

The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, number generated by a uniform-distributed random number

the stochastic LDPC decoding as well as its state-of-the-art generator (RNG). The occurrence of 1's in the stochastic stream

works are introduced. The proposed decoder architecture and is equal to the probability to be represented. The locations of

each functional block are discussed in Section III. Section IV 1's in the stochastic stream are trivial, so the stochastic stream

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:18:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: A 7.92 Gb/s 437.2 mW STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER CHIP FOR IEEE 802.15.3C APPLICATIONS

509

may not be unique for the same probability. For instance, both 0110001011 and 1100101010 can stand for a probability of 0.5.
After that, the decoding process on the bipartite graph will be activated. In the stochastic LDPC decoding, each 1-bit message exchanging round between CNUs and VNUs is called a decoding cycle (DC). The messages continue to be updated between CNUs and VNUs until maximum DC is reached or the syndrome is zero. According to the massage passing algorithm, CNUs and VNUs of a 2-inputs case update its messages by (3) and (4) in each DC.
(3)
Fig. 3. Proposed decoder architecture.
(4)

Accordingly, a CNU is mapped by an XOR gate directly and

a VNU is designed to a flip-flop and control logics. The above

equations could be implemented and extended to higher degree

cases easily based on stochastic computation.

Finally, in order to gather information from a variable node,

an up/down counter is used for computing the statistical prop-

erty. If a “1” is received from the neighboring VNU, the counter

increases by one; otherwise, the counter decreases by one. After

certain decoding cycles, the decoder will decode an attempted

codeword according to the status of counters. When the counter

is equal to or greater than zero, the decoded bit is 1. On the other

hand, the decoded bit is 0.

At the beginning of stochastic decoding, the main challenge

was performance loss. The reason is the existing cycles of the Fig. 4. Proposed CNU architecture.

graph lead to the lower switching activities. This phenomenon

is called latching problem [10] since the nodes are stuck in a

fixed state because of the correlation of stochastic streams. In

[12]–[16], a noise-dependent scaling (NDS) method and prob-

ability tracking units (PTUs) were proposed to overcome the

problem. The NDS method was proposed to provide the same

switching activities for different SNR conditions. As shown in

(5), channel values are scaled by a factor

, where is a

selective factor based on the best BER performance of the de-

coder and is the maximum magnitude of the channel value.

As long as the hold state condition is detected, a random bit is chosen from the EM as an outgoing bit to prevent performance degradation.
However, as the block size increases, the area occupied by the EM becomes larger. To reduce this overhead, both tracking forecast memories (TFMs) [16] and majority-based tracking forecast memories (MTFMs) [15] were proposed. The TFM measures the probability of regenerative bits and updates itself based on successive relaxation [17]. The updating criterion provides an exponential time-decaying dependence on regen-

(5) erative bits. The strong dependence on recent regenerative bits and gradual forgetting older regenerative bits enable the TFMs

For the stochastic VNU process in each DC, a hold state means the input bits from neighbouring CNUs are different, and a regular state means the input bits are equivalent. In this respect, an output bit generated by this VNU could be separated into two categories: a regenerative bit produced in the regular state, and a conservative bit produced in the hold state. Originally, the VNU transmits the regenerative bit to the neighboring CNU for a regular state, but it uses the previous output bit during a hold state condition, as shown in (6).

if

regenerative bit (6)

otherwise

This updating rule prevents the decoder from converging toward a correct codeword and degrades performance. Therefore, a PTU is designed to memorize regenerative bits in the regular state condition and generate a reliable bit based on its statistics

to track changes of probabilities. As the same as the EM, the TFM is only updated in the regular state. In the hold state condition, the TFM is not updated; instead, the probability stored in the TFM is compared to a random number. The outgoing bit is “1” when the probability is larger; otherwise, the outgoing bit is “0.” In order to enhance the area efficiency, all of edges shares only one centralized TFM as the PTU instead of assigning one TFM per edge in the MTFM method. Assumed some of edges are in the regular state and the rest edges are in the hold state for a VNU. The rule is to compute the majority of regenerative bits, then to update the TFM by this majority bit. If the edge is in the regular state, the regenerative bit produced by itself is transmitted to the corresponding CNU. Otherwise, according to statistics of majority bits, the centralized TFM generates an outgoing bit.
III. PROPOSED DECODER ARCHITECTURE

in the hold state condition. The first mentioned PTU is an edge The architecture of proposed fully parallel decoder is shown

memory (EM) [13]. It is composed of shift registers assigned to in Fig. 3. In the beginning, the probability conversion circuits

each edge of variable nodes and updated by regenerative bits. convert channel values to probabilities. Then, probabilities are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:18:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

510

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 5. Reconfigurable VNU. (a) Degree-2. (b) Degree-3. (c) Degree-4.
TABLE I LAYER PARTITION OF PARITY CHECK MATRICES

sent to comparators to generate stochastic streams. After that,

the iterative process between all of VNUs and CNUs is acti-

vated. At the same time, counters capture the outputs of VNUs

to gather the statistics. The C-to-V and V-to-C routing networks Fig. 6. Reduced complexity architecture of TFM. deal with permutation of wires among four code rates. Finally,

after certain decoding cycles, the counters generate an attempted codeword. The details of each block will be discussed in the following subsections.

B. VNU With RCA-TFM-Based PTU
In the proposed decoder, a fully parallel and reconfigurable stochastic VNU is implemented to deal with irregular variable

A. CNU With Concealed Syndrome Checking

node degrees, as shown in Fig. 5. For a stochastic VNU, unequal inputs induce the hold state condition. Therefore, the more in-

In the normalized min-sum algorithm, a CNU requires sorters puts, the higher opportunity to stick in the hold state and the

to find the 1st min, 2nd min, and index of 1st min. The sorting poorer decoding performance. To reduce the chance of unequal

process becomes complicated since the number of rows and row inputs, an output of VNU would be cascaded by 2-input sub-

degrees are irregular among four code rates. For instance, there VNUs. Hence, the output should be computed through three

are 336 check nodes with a maximum degree of 8 in (672, 336) stages for a degree-4 variable node. In order to support the lower

LDPC code; while in (672, 588) LDPC code, the parity check degree cases, the 1st stage of VNU will be disabled for those

matrix is composed of 84 check nodes with a maximum degree degree-3 variable nodes and the 1st, 2nd stages of VNU will be

of 32. Furthermore, larger sorters cause longer critical path and disabled for those degree-2 variable nodes. During the process

lower operating frequency.

excluding the final stage, an internal memory (IM) composed

To solve the problem, a reconfigurable 32-input stochastic of 1-bit register is embedded to provide a previous regenerative

CNU is proposed. Fig. 4 shows the CNU architecture. The parity bit once hold state condition is detected. Moreover, in order to

checking process is implemented by XOR gates to reduce the maintain decoding performance, a PTU is assigned to the final

critical path. Moreover, it is observed one 32-input XOR gate stage of VNUs. To track the statistic correctly, a PTU needs

can be decomposed into four 8-input XOR gates. Therefore, area-consuming registers as the EM or complicated computa-

one degree-32 check node in (672, 588) LDPC code and four tion as the TFM in previous works. In the EM approach, the

degree-8 check nodes in (672, 336) LDPC code can share the selected probability of each bit is the same such that EM should

same CNU. In this way, we divide the parity check matrix into be as large as possible to achieve higher precision. On the other

four layers, the corresponding check nodes are shown in Table I. hand, the TFM approach requires less storage compared to EM

The overall number of CNUs is 84, so there are 21 CNUs in each since the probability of regenerative bits is calculated, but it has

layer. In addition, the proposed CNU architecture includes the longer delay and extra combinational circuits. Consequently, the

functionality of syndrome checking. Either a min-sum or a sto- decoder area is dominated by the complexity of PTUs. In this

chastic decoder, the decoded codeword is sent to a termina- respect, providing an area-efficient PTU without degrading de-

tion block to check syndrome

. For a stochastic LDPC coding performance is important.

decoder, is calculated by hard decisions of the counters. Since Considering the degrees of variable nodes are low in parity

the inputs of CNUs move toward a correct codeword to satisfy check matrices of IEEE 802.15.3c, the MTFM method based

the check equations when the decoding cycles are elapsed, the on majority vote mechanism is not suitable for this work. As

syndrome checking can be concealed inside the CNUs by com- shown in Fig. 6, we introduce the reduced complexity architec-

bining outputs of CNUs as the approximate syndrome at every ture of TFM (RCA-TFM) [15]. It is also composed of shift reg-

decoding cycle.

isters and measures the statistics of outgoing stochastic stream.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:18:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: A 7.92 Gb/s 437.2 mW STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER CHIP FOR IEEE 802.15.3C APPLICATIONS

511

Fig. 7. V-to-C routing network of rate 1/2.
TABLE II EXAMPLE OF INPUT REALLOCATION
Since each digit of the RCA-TFM is a weighted value rather than a single “1” or “0” in the EM method, the number of registers can be reduced significantly. To neglect the computation of probability, the value of RCA-TFMs in the proposed decoder is set to 0.5. Therefore, the combinational circuits such as adders and multiplexers in RCA-TFMs can be removed. When the state of edge is regular, the most significant bit (MSB) of an RCA-TFM is updated by regenerative bit and the other bits inside the RCA-TFM are shifted to right; Contrarily, if hold state occurs in the edge, the RCA-TFM stops updating until next regenerative bit. At the same time, every bit in the RCA-TFM is given a weighting and combined as the probability :

C. Routing Network

To support four code rates of LDPC codes, the routing net-

works should variably switch variable nodes to its neighboring

check nodes, and vice versa. For example, Table II shows the

possible connections of

, where

means the 25th

input of

and means the th VNU connected to this

CNU. For a single CNU, the original V-to-C routing network

needs a 3-to-1 multiplexer to deal with each input. This network

leads to higher routing congestion since the overall 84 CNUs

need

3-to-1 multiplexers. In order to alleviate

the overhead of interconnections, we introduce a reallocation

method [7] to enhance the routing capacity. The motivation is

to rearrange locations of VNUs such that the inputs of CNU

are fixed for different code rates. According to the standard,

the parity-check matrices can be decomposed into 32 groups, so

each group contains 21 (672/32) VNUs, as shown in Fig. 7. The

numbers in the matrices indicate the permutation amount of an

identity matrix and “ ” indicates a zero matrix. To describe the

method clearly, we define as the th group of the matrices.

The operation of a traditional 32-input CNU is as follows:

(9)

(7) As mentioned in Section III-A, the check node process of

each layer of (672, 336) LDPC code can be separated into four

In other words, an RCA-TFM in the proposed decoder is served as a base-2 system where each digit represents a power

8-input XOR gates S1 S4. For example, the layer 1 of (672, 336) LDPC code is represented by the following (10a)–(10d).

of two. Then the probability of regenerative bit is determined

(10a)

by taking the sum of the products of the binary digits and the powers of two which they represent. With the convergence of iterative decoding, the closer to MSB of the RCA-TFM, the higher reliability of the bit. Consequently, the weighting

(10b) (10c) (10d)

of MSB is the highest and other bits are gradually reduced in the RCA-TFM. For example, the RCA-TFM with the content

Therefore, a 32-input CNU is decomposed by

of 0110010001 represents the probability

.

This probability random number

is compared with a uniform-distributed

(11)

, and the outgoing bit is generated by

In other words, the CNUs of layer 1 always acquire the messages

(8)

from

as its 1st input. Since other three LDPC codes can

be derived from the (672, 336) LDPC code, the inputs of each

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:18:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

512

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 8. C-to-V routing network. (a) Layer re-permuted. (b) Input reallocation.

CNU are fixed at the same groups for different code rates. Fig. 7

shows the result of input reallocation for each layer. As shown

in Table II, all of 3-to-1 multiplexers are eliminated.

In the C-to-V network, the input permutation is easier for

a degree-4 variable node, but it is not intuitive for a variable

node with lower degree in the stochastic decoding. Generally

speaking, a VNU is designed based on the highest degree

; once a variable node with lower degree

is de-

tected, the edges receive the messages from its neighboring

CNUs and the

edges are given a zero value in the

min-sum algorithm. On the contrary, the messages of stochastic

decoding are only 0 or 1. To ensure the correctness of VNU

process, either 0 or 1 should not be transmitted on the non-ex-

isting

edges.

In this work, layer spreading skill is adopted to decrease the

number of multiplexers and fix the input locations for each vari-

able node with lower degree. In the beginning, we observe that

more multiplexers can be reduced once the input order of VNU

is exchanged, as shown in Fig. 8(a). In other words, the layers of

parity check matrices are re-permuted such as the inputs of each

VNU come from layer 3, 1, 2, 4 in order. However, for some

of VNUs with lower degrees, their inputs will be separated to

discontinuous input locations. Namely, there is a non-existing

input between inputs of VNU, as shown in Fig. 8(b). For

example, the inputs are located in 1st, 3rd, and 4th input loca-

tion for those degree-3 VNUs as shown in Fig. 8(b) by circles.

Then, an input reallocation technique is used to arrange the in-

puts of those VNUs. As mentioned in Section III-B, the inputs

of a degree-3 VNU are located at 2nd, 3rd, and 4th input to skip

the 1st stage. As a result, the 1st input which comes from layer

3 is switched to 2nd input location. Consequently, the inputs are

fixed to 2nd, 3rd, and 4th input location for each degree-3 vari-

able node; the inputs are fixed to 3rd and 4th input location for

each degree-2 variable node.

According to [7], the routing wire amount is proportional to

the number of multiplexers' inputs. Assumed the bit width of

message is 6 bits for min-sum algorithm and the number of

32-input CNU and VNU are

and for a fully parallel

LDPC decoder, the original V-to-C network and C-to-V net-

work need 84 and 672 3-to-1 multiplexers, respectively. There-

fore, the overall number of routing wires is

Considering the row-based layered scheduling in [7], the

V-to-C routing network requires

wires, where

is the number of sorters. The C-to-V routing network is imple-

mented by

wires. Moreover, the pre-coded routing network needs

wires. The

overall number of wires for routing network is

In the proposed decoder, the flooding scheduling is adopted and the bit-width of stochastic message is only 1-bit. Based on the reallocation method, there is no multiplexer in the V-to-C routing network. Therefore, the number of wires for V-to-C network in the proposed decoder is
For C-to-V network, we adopt the layer spreading technique consisting of layer re-permutation and input reallocation. For 21th 24th group of (672, 336) LDPC code and 30th 31th group of (672, 588) LDPC code, their inputs are separated to discontinuous input locations after layer re-permutation, as shown in Fig. 8(b). To deal with these groups, a 2-to-1 multiplexer is used for switching input location, called input reallocation (IR). Therefore, the number of wires for C-to-V network in the proposed decoder is
where stands for the number of VNUs with input reallocation. Hence, the overall number of wires for the routing network is

According to above discussions, the reduction of routing wires to a fully parallel min-sum decoder and a layered
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:18:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: A 7.92 Gb/s 437.2 mW STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER CHIP FOR IEEE 802.15.3C APPLICATIONS

513

Fig. 9. Chip implementation. (a) Testing circuits. (b) Chip micrograph.
min-sum decoder [7] are 92.7% and 90.7%, respectively. The proposed decoder achieves the lowest routing wires and enhances chip utilization among the state-of-the-art decoders in IEEE 802.15.3c applications.

TABLE III GATE COUNT AND POWER PROFILING OF EACH MODULE

IV. CHIP IMPLEMENTATION

In this work, random number generators (RNG), an encoder,

an AWGN engine, a delay-locked loop (DLL), and a proposed

decoder are integrated into a chip, as shown in Fig. 9(a). The information sequence can be fed from external random sequence

CLK tree, input and output buffers

or a linear feedback shift register (LFSR) circuit inside the chip. while maintaining the decoding capability. From the viewpoint A shift-register-adder-accumulator (SRAA) circuit [18] is im- of performance, the comparison of RCA-TFM with different plemented as the encoder. It simply contains registers, AND values is demonstrated in Fig. 10. The convergent speed

gates, XOR gates, and ROM to finish the encoding process. The and data rate of the decoder is higher when is increasing.

AWGN engine is built-up with Box-Muller algorithm [19]. The purpose of AWGN and encoder is a backup test plan if malfunction of IO PAD appears. In other words, if some of IO PADs fail to work owing to the fabrication defects, we can switch to this testing mode to verify the functionality of decoder. The channel values to probabilities transformation is finished by a look-up table. Moreover, considering the speed limitation of chip testing equipment (Agilent 93000), an internal clock source of the decoder is created by the DLL which can generate 4 clock frequency from external clock source. In order to handle the failure of each component, the bypass circuits are designed to allow external inputs to test the function of the decoder only.
The RNGs are used for generating the stochastic streams in the hold state condition. Since the performance degradation is negligible when VNUs can share the same RNG, the design considerations will be: 1) random numbers should be different in every DC to prevent data correlation. 2) output loading of the RNG should be as small as possible. Based on the constraints, we design a random number engine with 32 RNGs that each group of variable nodes shares one RNG. An RNG is composed

At the same time, the error rates of RCA-TFM with different values are similar. From the viewpoint of complexity, the
combinational circuits such as adders and multiplexers in an RCA-TFM with is equal to 0.5 can be removed, leading to higher area efficiency. Based on these considerations, an RCA-TFM with is equal to 0.5 is chosen to implement the variable node unit in the proposed decoder.
Fig. 11 shows the bit-error-rate (BER) performance of different code rates for BPSK and 16-QAM modulations. The simulation environments are AWGN channel, 10-bit input quantization, 6-bit up/down counter, 10-bit RCA-TFM-based probability tracking unit with is equal to 0.5, and the maximum decoding cycle 1000. In the BPSK modulation, the performance degradation is acceptable for all code rates under different SNR conditions. However, the proposed decoder receives a performance loss in the low SNR region; it reaches higher convergent speed in the waterfall region and achieves similar performance with NMS algorithm for 16-QAM modulation. Based on above observations, we conclude that the stochastic decoding suffers more performance degradation

of a 10-bit LFSR whose period is larger than the maximum DC. than min-sum decoding in the high order modulation scheme.

The outputs of the decoder are decided by 6-bit saturated counters with a range from 32 to 31. In each DC, the C-to-V messages and stochastic streams are delivered to the counters. When the maximum DC is reached or syndrome checking is satisfied, the decoded bits are decided by sign bits of counters.

To improve performance for stochastic decoding, the NDS factor, which is used for enhancing the BER performance as mentioned in Section II, should be adjustable for different SNR conditions. Nonetheless, the SNR condition can not be obtained on-the-fly during the decoding process without

A. Implementation and Measurement Results

channel estimation. Since the demanding condition for wireless

communication is usually around

, the

To verify the functionality of proposed decoder, computer NDS factor of our proposed decoder is optimized near this

based software simulation and chip fabrication are adopted. region. At

, compared to floating point simulation

Table III shows the area distribution of modules based on of NMS algorithm with 10 iterations and scaling factor 0.75,

post-layout simulation result. The impact of the VNU design the performance gap is negligible while considering the loss

over the entire decoder is significant since the VNU module between floating point and fixed point simulations.

occupies over half of the area. As mentioned in the previous A test chip is implemented in UMC 90-nm 1P9M CMOS

sections, we attempt to reduce the overhead of RCA-TFM technology. Based on the result of placement and routing using

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:18:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

514

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

Fig. 10. Comparison of different values. (a) Bit-error-rates. (b) Data rates.

Fig. 11. BER performance of BPSK and 16-QAM.

Cadence SOC Encounter, the total gate count of proposed de- conditions fairly. To take the code length into account, the com-

coder is 760.3 K. The die photo of this chip is shown in Fig. 9(b). paring method of [15], which is throughput per coded bit per

The chip core area including the testing circuit is

scaled area, is adopted. The corresponding hardware efficiency

with 90% utilization. The measurement result of the of proposed work, [15] and [20] are 5.04

, 4.69

chip at SNR of 9 dB under different supply voltages and frequencies is shown in Fig. 12. The result indicates that the decoder consumes 437.2 mW under 1.2 V supply at 768 MHz. Since the decoding cycle is 57, the data rate of proposed decoder achieves 7.92 Gb/s. To meet the information throughput requirement of the standard (5.775 Gb/s), the operating frequency can

, and 21.42

, respectively. Therefore,

the proposed decoder is more hardware-efficient than [15] but

less than [20]. Although [20] is the most hardware-efficient de-

sign, [20] reported that it suffers the BER performance degrada-

tion of 0.2 dB compared to [15]. Moreover, [15] and [20] don't

provide a DLL for generating a high frequency clock signal such

be scaled down to 560 MHz, where the chip consumes 280.7 that a high throughput decoder might not be achieved easily

mW with better energy efficiency of 48.6 pJ/bit. The Shmoo

plot is shown in Fig. 12(a). We choose the SNR of 9 dB, where

the BER is equal to

for (672, 588) LDPC code to simulate

the working range between different supplies and frequencies.

under a silicon verification. A comparison with other IEEE 802.15.3c LDPC decoders
is also given. The results of proposed and other designs are based on (672,588) LDPC code with its maximum operating fre-

B. Comparison With the State-of-the-Art Works

quency. To give a fair comparison, performance normalization is applied to 90-nm CMOS technology, the scaling factor is de-

Table IV summarizes the key features of the proposed de- fined as follows (both technologies are 1 V supply):

coder. First of all, compared to stochastic LDPC decoders [15]

and [20] for IEEE 802.3an applications, the data rate of pro-

posed decoder is lower owing to different SNR conditions. In

[15] and [20], the data rates are 51.57 Gb/s and 172.4 Gb/s at

SNR 5.5 dB, but both BERs are smaller than

. Under this

condition, the decoding cycle is much smaller and data rate can

be higher. Because of different applications, it is hard to com-

pare the decoders with different code lengths and performance

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:18:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LEE et al.: A 7.92 Gb/s 437.2 mW STOCHASTIC LDPC DECODER CHIP FOR IEEE 802.15.3C APPLICATIONS

515

Fig. 12. Measurement result. (a) Shmoo plot. (b) Average decoding cycle and data rate.
TABLE IV COMPARISON WITH THE STATE-OF-THE-ART LDPC DECODERS

(): normalized to 90-nm technology, 1 V supply Measured at 1 V supply BER is below Scaled data rate per information bit per scaled area

Although the gate count of our decoder is the largest among port four code rates and enhance data throughput, a reconfig-

three designs, the hardware efficiency is still the best due to higher data rate. As mentioned in the previous section, the computation unit is simpler with shorter critical path. Therefore, the operating frequency can be much higher to

urable stochastic CNU with concealed syndrome checking and a reconfigurable stochastic VNU architectures are proposed. To improve area and power consumption, we propose a simplified RCA-TFM-based probability tracking unit embedded in the

achieve the higher information throughput than other works. VNU. In addition, to alleviate routing complexity, reallocation

Compared to the other two decoders, the proposed decoder techniques are adopted in V-to-C and C-to-V networks. A chip

improves the hardware efficiency from 2.38

[7], fabricated in 90-nm CMOS process occupies 2.67

area

2.9

[6], to 5.04

. From the viewpoint

of power consumption, our decoder only consumes 437.2 mW

such that the corresponding power efficiency is 55.2 pJ/bit,

which achieves 11.5% and 39.6% reduction of [6], [7]. These

benefits come from the bit-serial characteristic of stochastic

computation, simpler and reconfigurable processing units, and

low-power simplified RCA-TFM-based PTU design. In sum-

mary, our proposed work is not only energy-efficient but also

cost-efficient, which is suitable for low power/high throughput

communication systems.

and achieves 90% chip utilization. The measurement results

show that the proposed decoder reaches 7.92 Gb/s at 768 MHz

with 5.04

area efficiency. The power consumption

is 437.2 mW with 55.2 pJ/bit energy efficiency at 1.2 V supply.

Compared to other state-of-the-art works, our proposed design

can realize the best energy and area efficiency among available

LDPC decoders.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, an energy, routing and area efficient LDPC decoder chip for IEEE 802.15.3c applications is presented. To sup-

The authors would like to thank Chip Implementation Center (CIC), Taiwan, for providing CAD tools and measurement equipment.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:18:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

516

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 33, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[4] J. Chen and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[5] T. Baykas, C.-S. Sum, Z. Lan, J. Wang, M. A. Rahman, H. Harada, and S. Kato, “IEEE 802.15.3c: The first IEEE wireless standard for data rates over 1 Gb/s,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 114–121, Jul. 2011.
[6] Z. Chen, X. Peng, X. Zhao, L. Okamura, D. Zhou, and S. Goto, “A 6.72Gb/s 8 pJ/bit/iteration IEEE 802.15.3c LDPC decoder chip,” IEICE Trans. Fundam. Electron., Commun., Comput. Sci., vol. E94-A, no. 12, pp. 2587–2596, Dec. 2011.
[7] S. W. Yen, S. Y. Hung, C. L. Chen, H. C. Chang, S. J. Jou, and C. Y. Lee, “A 5.79-Gb/s energy-efficient multirate LDPC codec chip for IEEE 802.15.3c applications,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 9, pp. 2246–2257, Sep. 2012.
[8] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mw 1-Gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[9] V. Gaudet and A. Rapley, “Iterative decoding using stochastic computation,” Electron. Lett., vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 299–301, Feb. 2003.
[10] C. Winstead, V. C. Gaudet, A. Rapley, and C. Schlegel, “Stochastic iterative decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2005, pp. 1116–1120.
[11] C. Winstead, “Error-control decoders and probabilistic computation,” in Proc. Tohoku Univ. 3rd Student-Organizing Int. Mini.-Conf. Inf. Electron. Syst. (SOIM-COE), 2005, pp. 349–352.
[12] S. S. Tehrani, W. J. Gross, and S. Mannor, “Stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 10, no. 10, pp. 716–718, Oct. 2006.
[13] S. S. Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “An area-efficient FPGA-based architecture for fully-parallel stochastic LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), 2007, pp. 255–260.
[14] S. Tehrani, S. Mannor, and W. Gross, “Fully parallel stochastic LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 56, no. 11, pp. 5692–5703, 2008.
[15] S. S. Tehrani, A. Naderi, G. Kamendje, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Majority-based tracking forecast memories for stochastic LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 9, pp. 4883–4897, Sep. 2010.
[16] S. S. Tehrani, A. Naderi, G. Kamendje, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “Tracking forecast memories in stochastic decoders,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process. (ICASSP), 2009, pp. 561–564.
[17] C. T. Kelley, Iterative Methods for Linear and Nonlinear Equations. Philadelphia, PA, USA: SIAM, 1995.
[18] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 71–81, Jan. 2006.
[19] A. Alimohammad, S. F. Fard, B. F. Cockburn, and C. Schlegel, “A compact and accurate Gaussian variate generator,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 517–527, May 2008.
[20] A. Naderi, S. Mannor, M. Sawan, and W. J. Gross, “Delayed stochastic decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 59, no. 11, pp. 5617–5626, Nov. 2011.

Chih-Lung Chen received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2004, 2006 and 2012, respectively, all in electronics engineering.
His general research interests include VLSI implementation of error control codes and wireless communication systems.
Hsie-Chia Chang received the B.S., M.S., and Ph.D. degrees from National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1995, 1997, and 2002, respectively, all in electronics engineering.
From 2002 to 2003, he was with OSP/DE1 in MediaTek Corporation, working in the area of decoding architectures for Combo single chip. In February 2003, he joined the faculty of the Electronics Engineering Department, National Chiao-Tung University, where he has been a Professor since August 2010. His research interests include algorithms and VLSI architectures in signal processing, especially for error control codes and crypto-systems. Recently, he has also committed himself to designing high code-rate ECC schemes for flash memory and multi-Gb/s chip implementations for wireless communications Dr. Chang served as the deputy director general in Chip Implementation Center (CIC), Taiwan, since April 2014. He also served as an Associate Editor of IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—PART I: REGULAR PAPERS since 2012 and a Technical Program Committee (TPC) member for IEEE A-SSCC 2011 to 2013. He was the recipient of the Outstanding Youth Electrical Engineer Award from Chinese Institute of Electrical Engineering in 2010, and the Outstanding Youth Researcher Award from Taiwan IC Design Society in 2011.
Chen-Yi Lee (M'01) received the B.S. degree from National Chiao Tung University (NCTU), Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 1982, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from Katholieke University Leuven (KUL), Leuven, Belgium, in 1986 and 1990, respectively, all in electrical engineering.
In February 1991, he joined the Department of Electronics Engineering, and from 2003–2006, he was the Chairman. He was the Dean of the Office of Research and Development in 2007–2010, NCTU. During 2000–2003, he was the director of National CHIP Implementation Center, Taiwan. During 2003–2005, he was the coordinator of Microelectronics Program of Engineering Division, National Science Council, Taiwan. Currently, he serves as Co-Program Director of National Program of Intelligent Electronic (NPIE) and professor of the department of electronics engineering, NCTU. His research interests mainly include VLSI algorithms and architectures for high-throughput DSP applications. He is also active in various aspects of micro sensing, low-power system-on-chip, and Big Data analysis. Dr. Lee is currently serving as IEEE A-SSCC TPC member, IEEE VLSI Symposium JFE Circuits Program Committee member, and IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—PART II Associate Editor. He was the program committee member of IEEE ISSCC in 2004–2006, DATE TPC member in 2006–2007, and the Past-Chair of Taipei Chapter of IEEE Circuits and Systems (CAS) Society. He received the Award of Outstanding on Technology Licensing in 2007, 2008 from National Science Council, and 2009 from Ministry of Economic Affairs. In 2009, he received the Outstanding Research Award from National Science Council.

Xin-Ru Lee received the B.S. degree in power mechanical engineering from National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu, Taiwan, in 2007 and the M.S. degree from the Institute of Electronics Engineering, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, in 2009. He is currently working toward the Ph.D degree at National Chiao Tung University.
His research interests include VLSI implementation of error correcting codes and digital communication systems.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:18:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

