IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

127

Multi-Threshold Bit Flipping Algorithm for Decoding Structured LDPC Codes
Yuan-hua Liu, Xin-liang Niu, and Mei-ling Zhang

Abstract—A novel bit-flipping (BF) decoding algorithm is proposed for structured low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The proposed BF algorithm which is called multi-threshold bit-flipping (MTBF) algorithm, flips multiple bits by using multiple thresholds at each iteration. It only requires some real operations before iterations and requires only logical operations during the iterations. The MTBF algorithm has lower complexity than the weighted bit-flipping algorithm and its modifications. Simulations show that the proposed algorithm has fast convergence speed and good performance.
Index Terms—Bit flipping, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes have recently attracted much attention due to their capacity-approaching performance and low decoding complexity. As an attractive class of LDPC codes, structured LDPC codes have recently attracted much attention due to their easy implementations. Structured LDPC codes can be decoded using hard-decision, soft decision, and hybrid decoding methods. Soft decoding algorithms, such as belief propagation (BP), sum product (SP) algorithm and min-sum (MS) algorithm provide good performance, but require real operations, and are therefore not very suitable for hardware implementations. Instead, hard-decision and hybrid schemes such as bit flipping (BF) [1], weighted BF (WBF) [2] and its variants [3]–[10] have low complexity, and various WBF algorithms offer a good tradeoff between performance, complexity, and decoding speed.
The first BF algorithm was developed by Gallager [1]. Although the bit error rate (BER) performance of the BF algorithm is inferior to that of the BP algorithm, in general, the BF algorithm enables the design of a much simpler decoder, which is easier to implement. To reduce the performance gap between BF decoding and BP decoding, weighted bit flipping (WBF) [2], modified WBF (MWBF) [3], improved MWBF (IMWBF) [4], adaptive weighted multibit-flipping (AWMBF) [5], parallel weighted bit-flipping (PWBF) [6], gradient descent bit flipping (GDBF) [9] and many other algorithms have been proposed.
Manuscript received June 12, 2014; revised November 11, 2014; accepted November 11, 2014. Date of publication November 24, 2014; date of current version February 6, 2015. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 61201194, 61471294, 61301091, the Natural Science Basic Research Plan in Shaanxi Province of China (2014JQ8318), the Program for young teachers in Xi’an University of Posts and Telecommunications (ZL2014-03), and the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program) (2012CB328300). The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was E. Paolini.
Y. Liu and M. Zhang are with the School of Telecommunication and Information Engineering of Xi’an University of Posts and Telecommunications, Xi’an 710121, China (e-mail: yuanhliu@163.com).
X. Niu is with Xi’an Branch of China Academy of Space Technology, Xi’an 710000, China.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2014.2373352

Although these variants of BF algorithms achieved better performance than the standard BF algorithm, real operations were introduced to the iterative process and the decoding complexity was increased. To offer a better tradeoff between performance, complexity, and decoding speed, a multi-threshold bit-flipping (MTBF) algorithm is proposed in this letter. It only requires some real operations before iterations, and only logical operations during the iterations. It flips multiple bits by using multiple thresholds at each iteration and has low complexity, fast convergence speed and good performance.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents some preliminaries and definitions for the bit-flipping algorithms. The proposed MTBF decoding algorithm is introduced and analyzed in Section III. Simulation results of several BF decoding algorithms are compared in Section IV. Finally, Section V concludes the paper.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Notation and Definitions
A binary LDPC code is specified by a sparse parity-check matrix containing mostly zeros and only a small number of ones. A regular binary (N, K)(γ, ρ) LDPC code of length N and dimension K has a sparse M × N parity-check matrix H = [hm,n]. The parity-check matrix H has exactly γ ‘1’s in each column and ρ ‘1’s in each row. We denote the set of column indices such that the m-th row is ‘1’ in the parity-check
matrix as N (m) = {n : Hmn = 1}, and the set of row indices
such that the n-th column is ‘1’ in the parity-check matrix by
M (n) = {m : Hmn = 1}.
Suppose the code bits are binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulated, and transmitted over the the binary-input additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. A codeword c = [c0, c1, . . . , cN−1] is mapped to x = [x0, x1, . . . , xN−1] by xn = 1 − 2cn before transmission, where cn ∈ {0, 1}. At the receiver, we get the soft-decision received vector r = [r0, r1, . . . , rN−1], where rn = xn + vn, and vn are i.i.d. Gaussian random variables with zero mean and variance σ2 = N0/2. Let z = [z0, z1, . . . , zN−1] be the binary hard-decision vector obtained from r, where zn = 0, if rn ≥ 0, otherwise, zn = 1. Let s = [s0, s1, . . . , sM−1] be the vector of syndromes of z, where s = zHT is computed by the check-sums sm = ∑Nn=−01 znHmn.
B. Brief Review of Standard BF Algorithm
The standard BF decoding algorithm is a hard decision algorithm based on a very simple concept. In the decoding process of BF algorithm, some unreliable bits which are contained in more than a fixed number T of unsatisfied checksums are flipped repeatedly until all check-sums are satisfied or the maximum number of iterations is reached. The value

1089-7798 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t7s:/1in6d:5e9x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

128

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

of T should be chosen to optimize the error performance. The ferent from the original hard-decision bit, and its corresponding

standard BF decoding is given as follows.

threshold Tn should be reduced to Tn − 1. Otherwise, threshold

Step 1) For m = 0, 1, . . . , M − 1, compute the syndrome sm = Tn should be increased by 1, i.e., Tn = Tn + 1.

∑nN=−01 znHmn. If all the syndromes are zero, stop the The procedure of the MTBF decoding is given as follows.

decoding.

Step 1) Divide the code bits into multiple groups with dif-

Step 2) For n = 0, 1, . . . , N − 1, compute the number of

ferent thresholds according to the magnitudes of

nonzero syndromes fn checking on bit zn and flip zn if fn > T . Step 3) Repeat Step 1 and 2 until all the syndromes are zero or the maximum number of iterations is reached.
It can be seen that the standard BF decoding requires only logical operations.

received symbols and a predetermined parameter
α. For n = 0, 1, . . . , N − 1, if kα ≤ |rn| < (k + 1)α, k = 0, 1, . . . , γ/2 − 2, the threshold is set to be Tn = γ/2 + k, else if |rn| ≥ ( γ/2 − 1)α, the threshold is set to be Tn = γ/2 + γ/2 − 1. The parameter α is a positive real number, which can be chosen by

empirical testing to optimize the performance.

III. MULTI-THRESHOLD BIT-FLIPPING ALGORITHM The standard BF decoding has the lowest complexity, how-

Step 2) For m = 0, 1, . . . , M − 1, compute the check-sum sm = ∑nN=−01 znHmn. If all the check-sums are zero, stop the decoding.

ever, hard decision results in performance loss. To improve the performance, WBF decoding and its variants utilize the soft-valued reliability information for the received symbols. However, real operations are introduced in the iterative process and the complexity is increased. To offer a better tradeoff between performance and complexity, [8] proposed an improved BF (IBF) with two decoding thresholds, which improved the

Step 3) For each bit zn(n = 0, 1, . . . , N − 1), compute the number of unsatisfied check-sums fn, and flip zn if fn is larger than its relative threshold. If the bit zn has been flipped an odd number of times, then Tn is reduced by 1, i.e., Tn = Tn − 1. Moreover if the flipping time is even, then Tn = Tn + 1.
Step 4) Repeat Step 2) and 3) until all the check-sums are

performance while maintaining low complexity. It can be seen

satisfied or the maximum number of iterations is

that the performance can be further improved by using multiple

reached.

thresholds without additional complexity. In this section, we will introduce a low complexity MTBF algorithm with better performance than the standard BF, IBF and WBF algorithms.
For the AWGN channel, a simple measure of the reliability of a received symbol rn is its magnitude |rn|. The larger the magnitude |rn| is, the larger the reliability of the corresponding hard-decision bit zn is, and a larger decoding threshold should be set to reduce the possibility to be flipped. On the contrary, smaller thresholds should be set for channel observations with smaller magnitudes to increase the possibility to be flipped.

It is easy to see that the MTBF algorithm requires real comparisons to divide the code bits before iterations and it requires only logical operations during each iteration, i.e., MTBF decoding has the same complexity as the standard BF algorithm. Since multiple bits will be flipped at each iteration, the MTBF algorithm can converge very fast. It can be seen that the MTBF decoding requires a sufficiently number of threshold values to improve the performance, and it is more suitable for the LDPC codes whose column weight is relatively large. Generally, it is much easier for the structured construction

Based on this analysis, we propose a multi-threshold bit- methods to design LDPC codes with a relatively large variable

flipping decoding to improve the performance of BF algorithm. In the MTBF algorithm, the hard-decision bits are divided into multiple groups based on the magnitudes of the corresponding observations before iterations, and each group has its own threshold. During each iteration, we use multiple thresholds to

node degree than the random constructions. It follows that the proposed MTBF algorithm is more suitable for the structured LDPC codes whose parity check matrix has relatively large column weight.

determine the hard-decision bits whether to be flipped or not. Based on the principle of majority-logic decoding, if a ma-

IV. PERFORMANCE RESULTS

jority of check equations related to one bit has a value of one, In this section, performance of several EG-LDPC codes un-

the current bit will be voted down by large majority, and it will der different BF decodings is compared over an AWGN channel

be flipped. Thus, the minimum threshold is set as γ/2 , where with zero mean and variance σ2 = N0/2 via BPSK modulation. γ is the column weight of H, i.e., the number of check equations The BER performance of the (1023, 781) EG-LDPC code

corresponding to each bit, the maximum threshold is set as with the BF, WBF, IBF, IMWBF, GDBF, AWMBF, PWBF, BP

( γ/2 + γ/2 − 1), and the difference between the thresholds and MTBF decodings is shown in Fig. 1. The parameter α

of the adjacent groups is set as 1. Thus, the hard-decision bits for MTBF decoding is set to be 0.1. The maximum numbers

are divided into γ/2 groups. To reduce the implementation of iterations are set to 10, 20, and 50 for different decodings.

complexity, we group the hard-decision bits uniformly based The MTBF algorithm achieves about 0.25 dB coding gain over on their magnitudes in this letter, although the non-uniform WBF and 0.15 dB coding gain over GDBF at BER = 10−6.

division can be used to improve the performance.

Although MTBF performs worse than IMWBF, AWMBF and

In addition, if the bit zn after flipping is different from the PWBF, it has lower complexity, which will be seen later.

original hard-decision bit, the reliability of the current bit zn In addition, the MTBF decoding with 10 iterations and 20

will be reduced and its corresponding threshold should be iterations give almost the same performance, which implies that

decreased. If the flipping time of bit zn is odd, then zn is dif- it converges fast and has short decoding delay. Fig. 2 shows

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:16:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: MULTI-THRESHOLD BIT FLIPPING ALGORITHM FOR DECODING STRUCTURED LDPC CODES

129

Fig. 1. BER performance of the (1023,781) EG-LDPC code decoded by using Fig. 3. BER performance of the (1023,781) EG-LDPC code decoded by the

various BF algorithms after different iterations.

MTBF algorithm for different choices of α.

Fig. 2. BER performance of the (1023,781) EG-LDPC code decoded by using Fig. 4. BER performance of the (4095,3367) EG-LDPC code decoded by

various BF algorithms at most 10 iterations.

using various BF algorithms after different iterations.

a comparison of the (1023, 781) EG-LDPC code between the Since real addition operation is much more complex than

BER of MTBF and the BER of the competing decoders when logical operation, the computational complexity is dominated

10 iterations are used for all of them. From Fig. 1 and Fig. 2, we by the number of real operations. It is known that WBF require can see that the BF, WBF and IMWBF algorithms need more M(ρ−1) real operations for initialization, IMWBF and AWMBF iterations to converge and MTBF performs better than IMWBF require 2M(ρ − 1) real operations for initialization. At each

after 10 iterations. Although MTBF with 10 iterations performs worse than AWMBF with 10 iterations, the gap between them is smaller, which implies that MTBF converge faster than AWMBF.
The optimal value of α in Step 1) for a specific LDPC code can be determined through simulations. Fig. 3 shows the BER

iteration, WBF and IMWBF need about (N−1+ργ) real operations, and AWMBF needs (N+L(k)ργ) real operations, where L(k) is the number of bits flipped at kth iteration. The MTBF
algorithm requires at most γ/2 N real comparisons for initial-
ization and no real operation is required during the iterations. In
addition, the parameter α does not need to be very accurate and

performance of the (1023,781) EG-LDPC code decoded by the the real comparisons of the MTBF algorithm for initialization

MTBF algorithm for different choices of α. From Fig. 3, we can be quantized much less accurately than the real operations can see that the error rate is not very sensitive to the value of α, in various WBF algorithms, thus the MTBF algorithm needs and the optimal value of α is not dependent on the signal noise less quantization bits to implement a real operation.

ratio (SNR).

Fig. 5 plots the average number of iterations (dashed line)

Fig. 4 shows the BER performance of the (4095,3367) EG- and average number of real operations (solid line) needed for

LDPC code decoded by using various BF algorithms and BP various algorithms to decode the (1023,781) EG-LDPC code.

decoding after different iterations. The parameter α for MTBF The maximum number of iterations is set to 50. It can be

decoding is set to be 0.05. The MTBF algorithm achieves about observed that the MTBF algorithm requires considerably less

0.25 dB coding gain over WBF and 0.18 dB coding gain over real operations than the other algorithms, and it converges faster IBF at BER = 10−5. Although MTBF performs worse than than AWMBF for Eb/N0 ≥ 3.8 dB. Since a large amount of
the IMWBF, AWMBF and PWBF algorithms, it has lower real operations will result in long decoding delay, the MTBF

complexity, which can be seen later.

algorithm has higher decoding speed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:16:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

130

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

based on larger thresholds, which can reduce the probability of error flipping. If the flipping time is odd, then the corresponding threshold is decreased, otherwise the corresponding threshold is increased, which can improve the performance. Compared to the WBF algorithm, the proposed algorithm reduces computational complexity and decoding time while achieves better performance. It is very competitive for design of high throughput decoders.

Fig. 5. Average number of real operations (solid) and average number of iterations (dashed) of the (1023,781) EG-LDPC code with various BF algorithms, at most 50 iterations.
In this section, the EG-LDPC codes are chosen to prove the efficiency of the proposed algorithm. It should be noted that there are many other LDPC codes which are suitable for our decoder, if the column weight is large enough.
V. CONCLUSION
A multi-threshold bit-flipping decoding algorithm for structured LDPC cdoes has been presented. Only logical operations are required during the decoding iterations, and the complexity is similar to the standard BF decoding. In the proposed decoding, bits are determined whether to be flipped or not by multiple thresholds. Bits with larger magnitude are checked

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 7, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[3] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “A modified weighted bit-flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 3, pp. 165–167, Mar. 2004.
[4] M. Jiang, C. Zhao, Z. Shi, and Y. Chen, “An improvement on the modified weighted bit flipping decoding algorithm for LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 9, no. 9, pp. 814–816, Sep. 2005.
[5] T.-C. Chen, “Adaptive weighted multibit-flipping decoding of LDPC codes based on ordered statistics,” IET Commun., vol. 7, no. 14, pp. 1517– 1521, Sep. 2013.
[6] X. Wu, C. Zhao, and X. You, “Parallel weighted bit-flipping decoding,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 11, no. 8, pp. 671–673, 2007.
[7] T. M. N. Ngatched, M. Bossert, A. Fahrner, and F. Takawira, “Two bitflipping decoding algorithms for low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 3, pp. 591–596, Mar. 2009.
[8] Y. Liu and M. Zhang, “An improved bit-flipping decoding of structured low-density parity-check codes,” J. Beijing Univ. Posts Telecommun., vol. 35, no. 4, pp. 116–119, 2012.
[9] T. Wadayama et al., “Gradient descent bit flipping algorithms for decoding LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 6, pp. 1610–1614, Jun. 2010.
[10] J. Cho and W. Sung, “Adaptive threshold technique for bit-Flipping decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 14, no. 9, pp. 857–859, Sep. 2010.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:16:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

