IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

147

Variable-Node-Based Dynamic Scheduling Strategy for Belief-Propagation Decoding of LDPC Codes
Xingcheng Liu, Senior Member, IEEE, Yuanbin Zhang, and Ru Cui

Abstract—Among the belief-propagation (BP) decoding algorithms of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, the algorithms based on dynamic scheduling strategy show excellent performance. In this letter, we propose a variable-node-based dynamic scheduling decoding algorithm. For the proposed algorithm, the reliability of variable nodes is evaluated based on the loglikelihood ratio (LLR) values and the parity-check equations; then, a more accurate dynamic selection strategy is presented. Simultaneously, the oscillating variable nodes are processed so that the influence of the spread of error messages caused by oscillation are suppressed. In addition, the proposed algorithm updates the same number of messages in one iteration as the original BP decoding algorithm does, which is different from some other dynamic decoding algorithms. Simulation results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm outperforms other algorithms.
Index Terms—Belief-propagation (BP), dynamic scheduling strategy, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, dynamic selection strategy, oscillating variable nodes.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes which were proposed in 1962 [1] had been proved to approach the Shannon-limit performance with the belief-propagation (BP) decoding algorithm [2]. Scheduling strategies play an important role in decoding algorithms of LDPC codes [3]. Among them, the parallel scheduling strategy is the basic one, in which all check-to-variable (C2V) messages are updated simultaneously first and then all variable-to-check (V2C) messages are updated simultaneously [1]. The serial scheduling strategy is another one, with which the messages are updated serially according to a fixed update sequence [4], [5]. Simulation results show that the serial scheduling strategy surpasses the parallel one [6]. Recently, a better hardware-friendly fixed schedule is presented [7].
Though the serial scheduling strategy has excellent performance, the fixed update sequence is not always the best option since the error-correcting performance can still be further improved. To this end, the residual belief propagation (RBP) algorithm [8] is designed to formulate the update sequence, and a new scheduling strategy, the informed dynamic scheduling strategy, is presented [9], [10]. As for the informed dynamic scheduling strategy, messages are updated according to the residual, and the message with the maximum residual is up-
Manuscript received July 1, 2014; revised November 30, 2014 and December 15, 2014; accepted December 16, 2014. Date of publication December 22, 2014; date of current version February 6, 2015. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grants 60970041 and 61173018. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was H. Saeedi.
The authors are with the School of Information Science and Technology, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China (e-mail: isslxc@mail. sysu.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2014.2385096

dated first. Simulation results demonstrated that the informed dynamic scheduling strategy has outstanding performance with fewer iterations. Since then, some decoding algorithms using informed dynamic scheduling strategy were introduced, such as the Variable-to-Check residual belief-propagation (VC RBP) [11], the efficient dynamic scheduling for layered belief-propagation (EDS-LBP) [12], the informed Variableto-Check residual belief-propagation (IVC RBP) [13], the quota-based residual belief-propagation (Q-RBP) [14] and the silent-Variable-node-free residual belief-propagation (SVNFRBP) [14]. Recently, such strategy for decoding of non-binary LDPC codes [15] was also presented.
Dynamic selection strategy is an important part in dynamic decoding algorithm. In this letter, a more accurate dynamic selection strategy is proposed. The oscillation phenomenon of variable nodes, which was not paid enough attention in the dynamic decoding algorithms, is also discussed, and a method that processes the oscillation is presented. Based on the new dynamic selection strategy and the suggested oscillation processing method, we propose a new dynamic decoding algorithm. Simulation results illustrate that the proposed algorithm could not only increase convergence speed but improve the error-correcting performance at medium to high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) when compared to other algorithms.

II. LLR BP DECODING ALGORITHM

A binary LDPC code is represented by an M × N matrix H. This matrix can be expressed with the Tanner Graph that is composed of N variable nodes, v j, and M check nodes, ci, where j = 1, 2, . . . , N, i = 1, 2, . . . , M. At the beginning of the decoding algorithm, every variable node is initialized with the information transmitted from the channel. We only discuss the decoding algorithms with computation of information reliability in the common log domain. The log-likelihood ratio (LLR) Cvj , of the information for variable node v j, is computed as follows

Cv j = log

p (y j|v j = 0) p (y j|v j = 1)

,

(1)

where the received signal y j = (1 − 2v j) + z for binary phase-
shift keying (BPSK) modulation, z is a Gaussian distribution random variable with mean 0 and variance σ2. The messages

from the check nodes ci to variable nodes v j (C2V) are

propagated with

⎛

⎞

∏ mci→vj = 2arctanh ⎝

tanh

vb∈N(ci)\v j

mvb→ci 2

⎠,

(2)

where N(ci)\v j denotes all the variable nodes connected to check node ci except variable node v j.

1089-7798 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t7s:/1in6d:0e4x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

148

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

The messages sent from the variable nodes to check nodes (V2C) are

∑ mv j→ci =

mca→v j + Cv j ,

(3)

ca∈N(v j)\ci

where N(v j)\ci denotes all the check nodes connected to variable node v j except check node ci. After updating all the C2V and V2C messages, the decoded LLR value of each variable
node v j is given as

the largest residual in C1 is to be chosen as the next one to be updated, while the variable node with the largest residual in set C2 is to be selected for updating if C1 is empty and C2 is non-empty. However, the set C can also be empty. If the case appears, the variable node with the largest residual among all the variable nodes is chosen as the next one to be updated. Intuitively, the new dynamic selection strategy can select the least reliable variable node more accurately than the strategy only using one single judgement for updating [10].

∑ L(v j) =

mca→v j + Cv j .

ca∈N(v j)

(4) B. Oscillation of Variable Nodes The error types of the LLR BP decoding algorithm were

A hard decoding decision is made based on the LLR values studied years ago [16], one of which is that the decoder does

of these variable nodes given by (4). The LLR BP decoding not converge due to the oscillation of variable nodes, where

algorithm runs iteratively, where the entire operation, including the oscillation is defined as the LLR sign changes before and

updating all the C2V and V2C messages, is counted as one after an update [11], [14]. The reason why the variable nodes

iteration. The algorithm continues the iterative processing until oscillation happens is that there are two or more cycles through

either all the parity check equations are satisfied or the maxi- one variable node. Meanwhile, the accurate and inaccurate

mum number of iterations is reached.

messages looping in the cycle and arrive at the variable node

with different times [16]. The oscillation reason is related to the

III. THE PROPOSED ALGORITHM

structure of the parity check matrix and has little to do with the

A. Dynamic Selection Strategy
Unlike the serial strategy, the dynamic scheduling strategy does not have a fixed update sequence. In fact, before the next update step starting, the dynamic selection strategy is first processed to determine which edge (node) will be updated. Usually, the dynamic decoding algorithms update the least reliable message preferentially. It is the main purpose of the dynamic selection strategy that is to choose the least reliable message. Most of the dynamic decoding algorithms [11], [14] only take the residual as the basis of the dynamic selection strategies, where the residual is computed as

decoding algorithms. So, the phenomenon of the variable nodes oscillation appears in nearly all the BP algorithms. Unfortunately, all the recently-proposed dynamic decoding algorithms neglect to treat the problem. So, no specific method is taken to decrease the effect of the variable nodes oscillation.
As has been well-known, the main characteristic of dynamic decoding algorithms is that one variable node can generate new messages as many times as possible in one iteration and the newest variable node message can be immediately used in the same iteration. The processing of variable nodes oscillations in dynamic decoding algorithms is very important. When a variable node oscillates, it is relatively unreliable and tends to

r(mk) = f (mk) − mk ,

(5) be selected by the dynamic selection strategy. Meanwhile, the method proposed here is taken to handle the oscillation. If this

where r(mk) denotes the residual, mk and f (mk) denote the edge variable node oscillates again, it will also be re-selected. Conse-

(node) message before and after an update, respectively.

quently, this variable node will be updated many times and the

In the proposed dynamic decoding algorithm, the update oscillation will also be processed many times in one iteration,

sequence of the information is formulated from the viewpoint which leads to the consequence that the influence of the variable

of the variable nodes, which is that the least reliable variable node oscillation becomes smaller and smaller during decoding.

has the highest updating priority. However, whether a variable When processing the node oscillations, the method suggested

node is least reliable or not does not just only rely on the here is employed to recompute the LLR value as

residual. So, if the least reliable node is judged only based on the single condition, the criterion thus yielded is not so

L(v j)i ← L(v j)i−1 + L(v j)i,

(6)

accurate as it should be. In fact, the variable node with the largest residual does not mean this variable node is definitely the least stable. In our proposed dynamic selection strategy, a more accurate criterion with a combination of triple judgments is adopted. First, all variable nodes are divided into two sets, one of which consists of variable nodes whose signs of the LLR change before and after an update, and is denoted with C, the other of which consists of the remaining variable nodes. Then, the number of unsatisfied parity check equations of each variable node is counted. Thus, the largest number of the unsatisfied parity check equations is found and denoted with P.

where L(v j)i−1 and L(v j)i represent the LLR values of the j-th variable node before and after an update, respectively. When a variable node oscillates, it means either the LLR value of the variable node before an update or that after an update can reflect the correct case. However, it is difficult to distinguish which one among those before and after an update is correct. Therefore, we take the sum of the variable node LLR value before and after an update for the new generated message. In this way, the incorrect LLR value will be counteracted by the correct one to some extent.

Obviously, P ≤ M. The variable nodes in set C whose number of the unsatisfied parity check equations reaches P are to be C. The Proposed OV-RBP Algorithm

marked and denoted with the subset, denoted with C1, while the So far, we presented the two key steps for the dynamic deunmarked variable nodes form the other subset, denoted with coding algorithm to be proposed. Because the new algorithm is

C2. Finally, if subset C1 is non-empty, the variable node with suggested based on the oscillating variable nodes, the algorithm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:16:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: VARIABLE-NODE-BASED DYNAMIC SCHEDULING STRATEGY FOR BP DECODING

149

TABLE I COMPUTATION COMPLEXITY TABLE OF DIFFERENT DECODING ALGORITHMS

is accordingly named as the oscillating variable nodes based residual belief propagation (OV-RBP) algorithm. Now, the concrete update steps are to be introduced as follows. The first step, all the LLR values of variable nodes are computed and the dynamic selection strategy is performed to select the least reliable variable node. Without loss of generality, we assume that the selected variable node is v j. The next step, for all the check nodes which are connected to variable node v j, the corresponding C2V messages are updated. The third step, the LLR value of variable node v j updated with the new C2V messages is calculated and an oscillation decision is made for v j. If v j oscillates, the oscillation is to be processed with (6). Again the next step, for all the check nodes which are connected to variable node v j, the corresponding V2C messages are updated. The last step, for each check node ca that is connected to variable node v j, the LLR values of variable nodes which are connected to ca excluding v j are computed and the dynamic selection strategy is performed.
The OV-RBP algorithm in pseudo-code is given below.
Algorithm OV-RBP

D. Computation Complexity of the OV-RBP Algorithm
In the analysis of the computation complexity of the OVRBP algorithm, it is assumed that, dc and dv denote the average degrees of check nodes and variable nodes respectively, and E is the total number of edges in the Tanner Graph. It is easy to obtain the relations, E = dc · M = dv · N, no matter which type of LDPC codes (regular or irregular) is used. The total number of updates for all of the variable nodes in one iteration is computed as the computation complexity. For convenient comparison, the computation complexity of different decoding algorithms is presented in Table I. It is clear that the proposed OV-RBP algorithm updates 2E messages (E for C2V and V2C each) in one iteration, which is the same as that of the original BP algorithm [1]. However, for other dynamic decoding algorithms like the NWRBP [10] and the VC RBP [11], more than 2E messages are required to be updated in one iteration, which means the OV-RBP algorithm needs more than one iteration to update the same number of messages. Furthermore, the OVRBP has lower computation complexity than the NWRBP [10] and the IVC RBP [13].

1: Initialize all mc→v = 0 2: Initialize all mvi→c = Cvi using (1) 3: for every check node ca do 4: for every variable node vi ∈ N(ca) do 5: Compute mca→vi using (2) 6: end for
7: end for
8: for every variable node vido 9: Compute L(vi) using (4) and r(vi) using (5) 10: end for
11: Perform the proposed dynamic selection strategy and
select the least reliable variable node vi 12: for every ca ∈ N(vi) do 13: Generate and propagate mca→vi using (2) 14: end for
15: Calculate L(vi) using (4) 16: Make oscillation decision for vi 17: if variable node vi oscillates then 18: Recalculate LLR value using (6)
19: end if
20: Set r(vi) = 0 21: for every ca ∈ N(vi) do 22: Generate and propagate mvi→ca using (3) 23: end for
24: if stopping rule is not satisfied then
25: Go back to line 3
26: end if

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In order to examine the error-correcting performance of the proposed OV-RBP algorithm, simulations are performed over the AWGN channel with BPSK modulation. In the simulation, six other decoding algorithms are used for comparison, where the LDPC codes are constructed based on the IEEE 802.16e standard [17]. The maximum number of iterations is set to 5. Fig. 1 shows the bit error rate (BER) performance of the different decoding algorithms for block-length 576 LDPC codes. From Fig. 1, it is clearly shown that the OV-RBP algorithm obtains the best BER performance at medium to high SNR among the algorithms of interest. One of the main reasons is that the proposed dynamic selection strategy can better overcome the influence of trapping sets [18] on the error correction performance of LDPC codes. Meanwhile, the processing of oscillating variable nodes can decrease the influence of error information propagating in the Tanner Graph. The BER performance vs. the number of iterations for block-length 576 LDPC codes at Eb/N0 = 2.2 dB is presented in Fig. 2. It is demonstrated that the OV-RBP algorithm converges faster than any other algorithms within about 25 iterations and has almost the same performance as that of the excellent IVC RBP algorithm [13] when the iterations exceed 25. Fig. 3 indicates the BER vs. Eb/N0 performance of the different algorithms for block-length 2304 LDPC code. From these figures, it is clearly observed that the OV-RBP algorithm has better BER performance and faster convergence speed than any other algorithms.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:16:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

150

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 2, FEBRUARY 2015

V. CONCLUSION

An variable nodes based dynamic decoding algorithm is proposed. A more accurate dynamic selection strategy using triple judgements is designed, which helps the OV-RBP algorithm to overcome the influence of the trapping sets effectively. Meanwhile, the oscillating variable nodes are processed in the proposed algorithms in order to decrease the influence of error information caused by oscillation. The comparison targeting the OV-RBP algorithm is relatively fair for the reason that it updates the same number of messages as that of the original BP algorithm in one iteration. However, the number of messages updated in one iteration in most of the other dynamic decoding algorithms is larger than that of the proposed algorithm. Simulation results demonstrate that the OV-RBP algorithm outperforms other decoding algorithms in terms of BER performance and convergence speed. Further study shows the high accurateness of the OV-RBP algorithm.

Fig. 1. BER vs. Eb/N0 performance of (576, 288) LDPC code for LLR BP, CSBP, NWRBP, VC RBP, EDS-LBP, IVC RBP and OV-RBP.

REFERENCES

Fig. 2. BER vs. the number of iterations performance of (576, 288) LDPC code at Eb/N0 = 2.2 dB for LLR BP, CSBP, NWRBP, VC RBP, EDS-LBP, IVC RBP and OV-RBP.
Fig. 3. BER vs. Eb/N0 performance of (2304, 1152) LDPC code for LLR BP, CSBP, NWRBP, VC RBP, EDS-LBP, IVC RBP and OV-RBP.

[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] Y. Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with probabilistic scheduling,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 10, pp. 414–416, Oct. 2001.
[4] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “High-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. Syst., vol. 11, no. 6, pp. 976–996, Dec. 2003.
[5] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 2, no. 53, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[6] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “Efficient serial messagepassing schedule for LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 11, pp. 4076–4091, Nov. 2007.
[7] H. C. Lee and Y. L. Ueng, “LDPC decoding scheduling for faster convergence and lower error floor,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 62, no. 9, pp. 3104–3113, Sep. 2014.
[8] G. Elidan, I. McGraw, and D. Koller, “Residual belief propagation: Informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing,” in Proc. 22nd Conf. Uncertainty Artif. Intell., Cambridge, MA, USA, Jul. 2006, pp. 165–173.
[9] A. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “Informed dynamic scheduling for belief-propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” in IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Glasgow, UK, Jun. 2007, pp. 923–937.
[10] A. V. Casado, M. Griot, and R. Wesel, “LDPC decoders with informed dynamic scheduling,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 58, no. 12, pp. 3470– 3479, Dec. 2010.
[11] J. H. Kim, M. Y. Nam, and H. Y. Song, “Variable-to-check residual belief propagation for LDPC codes,” IET Electron. Lett., vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 117– 118, Jan. 2009.
[12] G. J. Han and X. C. Liu, “An efficient dynamic schedule for layered beliefpropagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 950–952, Dec. 2009.
[13] Y. Gong, X. C. Liu, W. C. Ye, and G. J. Han, “Effective informed dynamic scheduling for belief propagation decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 10, pp. 2683–2691, Oct. 2011.
[14] H. C. Lee, Y. L. Ueng, S. M. Yeh, and W. Y. Weng, “Two informed dynamic scheduling strategies for iterative LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 886–896, Mar. 2013.
[15] G. J. Han, Y. L. Guan, and X. M. Huang, “Check node reliability-based scheduling for BP decoding of non-binary LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 3, pp. 877–885, Mar. 2013.
[16] G. Lechner and J. Sayir, “On the convergence of log-likelihood values in iterative decoding,” in Mini-Workshop Topic Inf. Theory, Essen, Germany, Sep. 2002, pp. 1–4.
[17] LDPC coding for OFDMA PHY., IEEE C802.16e-05/0066r3. [18] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. Allerton
Conf. Communications, Control and Computing, Monticello, VA, USA, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:16:04 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

