This full-text paper was peer-reviewed and accepted to be presented at the IEEE WiSPNET 2016 conference.
A Low-ComplexMin-Sum Decoding Algorithm for Irregular LDPC Codes

Michaelraj Kingston ROBERTS
Assistant Professor, ECE Department DayanandaSagar College of Engineering,
Bangalore, Karnataka-560078, INDIA king.pane@gmail.com

Maria Falaq
PG Scholar, ECE Department, DayanandaSagar College of Engineering,
Bangalore, Karnataka-560078, INDIA coolfalaq@gmail.com

Abstract—This paper presents a low complexity Min-Sum algorithm for decoding irregular Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) codes. In the proposed algorithm, the significant improvement in the error correcting performance without enhancing the hardware complexity is achieved by employing adaptive and optimized normalization factors for both the extrinsic information and log-likelihood ratio data bits respectively. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed algorithm with 6-bit non-uniform quantization achieves reasonable decoding performance in terms of Frame Error Rate (FER) and Bit Error Rate (BER) without increasing the hardware complexity by avoiding finite word length effects of soft information.
Keywords—LDPC; Min-Sum Decoding; Finite Word Length; Hardware Complexity; non-uniform quantization;
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) code, also popularly known as channel capacity approaching codes is a superior forward-error-correcting (FEC) code [1]. As of late, many research works in FEC codes have shown that it is possible to achieve optimal error correcting performance with acceptable hardware complexity by utilizing irregular LDPC codes.Hence, irregular LDPC codes are popular and widely embraced in many modern communication standards such as Wi-Fi (short frame standard) and DVB-S2 (long frame standard). Due to the rising need of the effective bandwidth efficiency for advanced and next generation wireless communication and data storage systems, an LDPC decoding algorithm must be capable of achieving good trade-off between error correcting capability and computational complexity. The conventional Belief Propagation decoding algorithm (BPA) [2], a soft decision based iterative message passing algorithm can achieve optimal decoding performance close to the theoretical limits. However, the BPA suffers from very high computational complexity and its hyperbolic tangent (tanh) function is too complex for hardware implementation. Therefore, Min-Sum algorithm (MSA) [3] overcomes the complexity issues of BPA. The MSA provides low complexity and high degree of parallelism for implementation. Although, MSA is most suitable for hardware implementation it suffers from very high performance degradation compared to BPA. Hence Normalized Min-Sum algorithm (NMSA) [4] with one–dimensional normalization factor and 2-D NMSA [5]

with two-dimensional normalization factors were incorporated to enhance the decoding performance of the conventional MSA. However, NMSA and 2-D NMSA exhibit small performance degradation with increase in hardware complexity.

II. FRAMEWORK

Consider an irregular LDPC parity check matrix H with degree distribution polynomials Ȟ(x) and c(x), where Ȟ(x) and c(x) corresponds to bit node and check node degree

distributions respectively. Then, the degree distribution for

check node and bit node is given as

dc max

¦ c(x) =

cm ⋅ xm−1

(1)

m =1

dν max

¦ ν (x) =

ν ⋅ xn−1 n

(2)

n =1

where the variables dc max and dȞ max denotes maximum
check node and maximum bit node degree respectively. Also the fraction of edges emanating from mth check node edge to nthbit node edge is represented by cmand Ȟnrespectively.
Let the set of bit nodes connected to the cth check node be N(c), and the subset excluding the Ȟth bit node from N(c) be
denoted as N(c)\Ȟ. Similarly the set of check nodes connected to the Ȟth bit node be M(Ȟ), and the subset excluding the cth
check node from M(Ȟ) be denoted as M(Ȟ)\c The following are

the notations associated with the decoding process of the

proposed algorithm:

Lch : the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) information generated from channel output.

α (i) cν

:

the

outgoing

LLR

information

from

check

node

c

to bit

node Ȟ.

β (i) νc

:

the

outgoing

LLR

information

from

bit

node

Ȟ

to

check

node c.

978-1-4673-9338-6/16/$31.00 c 2016 IEEE

269

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:48:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full-text paper was peer-reviewed and accepted to be presented at the IEEE WiSPNET 2016 conference.

β (i) ν

:

aposteriori

LLR

information

computed at each

iteration.

hnT = (hn,1 , hn,2 ....hn,N ) n=1,2....,N : Rows of the parity-check

matrix H.

c = decoded codeword.

θ (i) dc (m)

: Normalization factor for check node update

processing.

δ : (i) dν ( n)

Scaling

factor for LLR message in bit node update

process.

A. Decoding process of the proposed algorithm

LDPC

code

are

set

to

be

θ( (i) dc (m)

δ, (i) dν ( n)

)=

(0.8750,

1.25)

for

rate 1/2 and (0.8542 ,1.15) rate 3/4 are obtained through

rigorous simulations. From the experimental results depicted

in Fig.1 and Fig.2 it is evident that the performance

degradation suffered by the proposed algorithm to achieve FER of 10-3 and BER of 10-5 is not more than 0.1 dB, which is

better than conventional MS algorithms [5] and very much

close to BP algorithm [2].

The decoding process of the proposed algorithm is described briefly in the following steps

Step 1: Initialization Process

β (0) νc

=

L ch

(3)

Step 2: Check node processing (Horizontal Step)

∏ sgn(β ) ⋅ min β α = θ (i)

(i)

cν

dc (m)

n∈N (c )\ν

( i −1) nc

n∈N (c)\ν

( i −1) nc

(4)

Fig.1 FER decoding performance of (1728,864) rate 1/2 and rate 3/4 irregular LDPC codes of WLAN standard.

Step 3: Bit node processing (Vertical Step)

¦ α = L + β (i) νc

ch

(i) mν

(5)

m∈M (ν )\c

⋅ ¦ −α ) = L δ + ( β (i) νc

(i) ch dν ( n)

α (i) mν

(i −1) mν

(6)

m∈M (ν )\c

¦ α β (i) ν

=

L'ch

+(

α − ) (i)

( i −1)

mν

mν

(7)

m∈M (ν )

where L'ch

=

Lch

⋅δ (i) dν ( n )

Step 4: Decision
If ( H T ⋅ c == 0 ) output x and stop the decoding process.
III. SIMULATION RESULTS
Fig.1 and Fig.2 show Frame Error Rate (FER) and Bit Error Rate (BER) performance between proposed algorithm and existing algorithms [2], [5]. To evaluate the decoding performance of the proposed work IEEE 802.11n standard [7] is chosen. The experimental simulations were carried out using the MATLAB software by encoding the data bits using binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulation and then transmitting it over the symmetric Additive White Noise Gaussian (AWGN) channel.The number of maximum number decoding iterations is fixed at 20. Likewise, to subdue the effects of finite word length, a6-bit non-uniform quantization is obtained through rigorous simulations. The normalization factor of check node and variable node process for irregular

Fig.2BER decoding performance of (1728,864) rate 1/2 and rate 3/4 irregular LDPC codes of WLAN standard.
IV. CONCLUSION
In this work, a low-complex Min-Sum algorithm for decoding irregular LDPC is proposed. The performance analysis of the proposed algorithm shows that it achieves reasonable error performance with other decoding algorithms by removing channel errors at comparatively low SNR. Furthermore, it is evident from the experimental results that the FER and BER of the proposed algorithm is very similar to that of the BPA with less than 0.1 dB performance loss at FER of 10-3 and BER of 10-5.The proposed algorithm reduces finite word length effects of high precision soft information by using a 6-bit non-uniform quantization scheme. This 6-bit nonuniform quantization scheme lowers the hardware complexity by reducing the quantity of memory blocks needed to store the intrinsic information and subsequently reducing memory accessing information bits per iteration. Compared to existing

270
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:48:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

This full-text paper was peer-reviewed and accepted to be presented at the IEEE WiSPNET 2016 conference.

Min-Sum based decoding algorithms, the proposed algorithm achieves good error performance without increasing the hardware complexity and with these unique features the proposed algorithm can suitable for implementation of various wireless applications.
REFERENCES
[1] T.Richardson, A.Shokrollahi, and R.Urbanke, "Design of capacity approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes," IEEE Trans. Inf.Theory,vol.47, no.2, Feb2001 pp.619-637.
[2] D.J.C. Mackay, " Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices, " IEEE Trans. Inf.Theory,vol.45, Mar 1999, pp.399-431.
[3] J.Chen and M.Fossorier, " Density evolution for two improved BP-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol.6 May 2002, pp.208-210.
[4] J. Chen, "Reduced complexity decoding algorithms for low-density parity check codes and turbo codes," Ph.D dissertation, Dept. Electrical Eng., Univ. Hawaii,Honolulu,HI,2003.

[5] J.Chen and M.Fossorier, and D.Gu, "Two-dimensional correction for min-sum decoding of irregular LDPC codes," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol.10, no.3, Mar 2006, pp.180-182.
[6] Xiaofu Wu, et.al., "Adaptive-Normalized/Offset Min-Sum Algorithm," IEEE Commun. Lett., vol.14, no.7, Jul 2010, pp.667-669.
[7] IEEE P802.11wireless LANs TGn Sync Proposal: TGn Sync Proposal Technical Specification, IEEE 11-04-088906-000n, May.2005.

271
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 15:48:30 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

