㻿㻞㻞㻙㻟㻌㻔㻠㻜㻤㻤㻕

*&&&"TJBO4PMJE4UBUF$JSDVJUT$POGFSFODF /PWFNCFS
5PZBNB
+BQBO

A 7.72 Gb/s LDPC-CC Decoder with Overlapped Architecture for Pre-5G Wireless Communications

Chia-Lung Lin, Rong-Jie Liu, Chih-Lung Chen, Hsie-Chia Chang, and Chen-Yi Lee Department of Electronics Engineering National Chiao Tung University, 1001 Ta-Hsueh Road, Hsinchu, Taiwan, R.O.C.
Tel: +886-3-5712121 ext: 54238 email: {jllin, cylee}@si2lab.org, hcchang@mail.nctu.edu.tw

Abstract—LDPC block codes (LDPC-BCs) have attracted great interests in recent years by highly parallel computation and good bit-error-rate performance, and one of the decoder implementation issues is high routing complexity. LDPC convolutional codes (LDPC-CCs) not only release routing complexity but also are natural to dynamic length of data frame. Thus, the codes are very suitable for video stream and pre-5G wireless communication systems. LDPC-CC decoder is composed of several concatenated processors, where the long FIFOs are usually the bottleneck of area and decoding latency. To improve hardware efficiency, we use overlapped architecture to share partial FIFO between processors. Furthermore, check node unit and hybrid-partitioned FIFO are proposed to increase throughput and pipeline efficiency. The measurement results of test chip in 65nm technology show that our work can achieves 7.72 Gb/s under 322MHz operating frequency. The decoder with 6 processors occupies an area of 1.19 mm2, drawing 410.5 mW of power with an energy efficiency of 8.75pJ/bit/proc.
LDPC convolutional codes, high throughput, LDPC, overlapped architecture, digital signal.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes was first introduced by Gallager in 1963 [1], and have attracted many research interests. Because of their near-Shannon limit performance, tremendous research efforts have been done on code construction, encoding, decoding, and applications in communications. In the mobile communication systems, channel coding plays an important role to maintain the quality of transmission. And, for the good error-correcting performance and high decoding throughput, LDPC Block Codes (LDPC-BCs) attract high interests in research. Despite of the LDPC-BCs have capacity-approaching performance, routing complexity problem is still a great challenge in decoder implementations. Furthermore, the parity-check matrices of different block lengths are needed for LDPC-BCs to encode and decode arbitrary lengths of data. To conquer these difficulties, LDPC Convolutional Codes (LDPC-CCs) were proposed in 1999. This convolutional version also can perform near Shannon limit. Compared to LDPC-BCs, LDPC-CCs can deal with variable lengths of data frame, and the regular pipeline decoder architecture greatly mitigates the routing problem of the VLSI implementation [2]. Besides, LDPC-CCs have much simpler
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology under Grants MOST 103-2221-E-009-198-MY3, MOST 104-2221-E-009-166-MY3, and Ministry of Education under 5Y50B program. The authors would like to thank UMC and CIC for their assistance, including manufacturing and testing.

encoder architecture [3], and they also can provide flexible code rates through puncturing [4]. With those advantages, LDPC-CCs have great potential to meet the high throughput requirements in the next generation communication systems.
However, there are some challenges for LDPC-CCs decoder implementation, such as long decoding latency, large number of storage units and high power consumption. To improve the decoder hardware and energy efficiency, we use overlapped architecture to save the amount of shift registers. Besides, we set the throughput target is around ten Gb/s to fit pre-5G wireless communications. To achieve such high throughput, we farther apply folding technique, and redesign check node unit to overcome stalls in pipeline processing. We demonstrate the proposed techniques with 65nm CMOS, and the measurement results show that 7.7Gbps can be achieved with 410.5mW.
This paper is organized as follows. Section II is the introduction to LDPC-CCs. Section III describes the proposed decoder architecture, including overlapped architecture, check node unit, and hybrid-partitioned FIFO. Then, Section VI gives the implementation result and comparison. Finally, the conclusion is given in Section V.

II. BACKGROUND
A. Decoding of LDPC-CC
LDPC-CCs employ the same iterative message passing algorithm as the decoding for LDPC-BCs. The Tanner graph of LDPC-CCs are semi-innite. The architecture with a nite sliding window is needed to perform variable node and check node updates on the Tanner graph. Because the memory size of a LDPC-CC is ms, which means the the check node connects the variable nodes within ms + 1 time instants, the decoding can be implemented by several length ms + 1 sliding window processors. The decoding can be realized independently with at least ms + 1 time instants apart. This reason allows the pipeline decoder to perform simultaneous on different regions of the Tanner graph. In order to realize the iterative decoding, I independent processor is connected as a serial concatenation to perform I iteration.

H0T (D) =

1 + D5 + D11 1 + D7 + D14

(1)

We give a R = 1/2 time-invariant (14, 3, 6) LDPCCC dened by the parity check matrix polynomial in eq.

*&&&

337

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:50:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

㻿㻞㻞㻙㻟㻌㻔㻠㻜㻤㻤㻕

*&&&"TJBO4PMJE4UBUF$JSDVJUT$POGFSFODF /PWFNCFS
5PZBNB
+BQBO

(1) as an example to describe the operation of the pipeline decoder on the Tanner graph and the proposed techniques. The corresponding trellis diagram and the illustration of pipeline decoder is shown in Fig. 1. The ring with the dot line is a decoder processor, and C and V represent the active check nodes and variable nodes respectively, which means these nodes with the highlights perform the check node and variable updates. Because of the critical path concerns, we add one stage of register for pipelining. Thus, the length of the sliding window is ms + 2 instead of ms + 1.

'

'

'

&&&

'

'

'

&KDQQHO 3URF

3URF

3URF

&RGHZRUG

9DOXHV

-

,

'HFLVLRQ

Fig. 1. Tanner graph and the corresponding parallel processor architecture

B. OVA Scheduling
Studies show that the message-passing schedule affects the rate of decoding convergence and computation complexity. If we observe the ooding schedule, the variable node units are activated only once before the values leave the processor. Most LLRs are shifting while few LLRs are updating in a processor. To increase the decoding convergence speed, sequential scheduling is introduced in decoding LDPC-BCs. Recently, an on-demand variable node activation (OVA) scheduling is proposed in [5] to accelerate the decoding convergence speed for LDPC-CCs. The main idea is to move the variable node activation location from the end of the processor to the place where the LLRs just go into the check node. This method can instantaneously update the input message of the check node units. We use the same example given in eq. (1) to demonstrate the OVA scheduling technique.
A variable node unit (VNU) can be divided into dv subVNUs (SVNUs) which are distributed within a processor. Before the check node unit is activated, the SVNU calculates a single variable node to check node message instead of calculating all the variable node to check node messages at the end of a processor. Therefore, the check node to variable node messages are obtained by the partial computation of the variable nodes, and these updated messages can be used to calculate the remaining variable node to check node units. The major difference of OVA scheduling from the ooding scheduling is the order of updating procedure.
III. OVERLAPPED LDPC-CC DECODER
In the existing LDPC-CC decoders, the storage units take up a lot of the decoder area whether the register-based or the

Fig. 2. Overlapped Architecture
memory-based architecture is. We know that the more memory size and iteration of LDPC-CC is required for pursuing good correcting abilities in the previous section, but it means we need more storage units and wait longer decoding latency. For example, the LDPC-CC decoders in [6] improve many disadvantages of conventional decoder, such as low throughput, long decoding latency, but the storage account for over half of decoder area. Even if the decoder adopts some technique to reduce the hardware cost, but the proportion of storage can still be neglected. Due to the above reason, we proposed an overlapped architecture to reduce the number of storage units and decoding latency. In this section, we will introduce the concept and the hardware implementation of overlapped architecture, and proposed a overlapped LDPC-CC decoder for high throughput application.
A. Overlapped Architecture
In a LDPC-CC decoder, most of elements only shift LLRs, even if adopting the OVA scheduling to make the decoding converge quicker. For good BER performance, the LDPC-CC require a bigger memory size. In the long FIFO, it is not efficient that the decoder only perform calculation at some position. Therefore, we propose the overlapped architecture which let two neighboring processor overlap to reduce the storage requirement of the decoder. According to the idea of overlapped architecture, the messages generated by the i-th processor are available for the i+1−th processor with certain time instants apart instead of ms + 1 time instants. In other words, two neighboring processors share the decoder elements in the overlapped region between two processors as shown in Fig. 2. In the figure, S indicates the distance from the head of processor. If S is larger, the overlapped region is shorter.
The main idea of the overlapped architecture is to change the order the check node updates, and the number of the CNUs and VNUs is the same as the original decoder. Considering the problem of data collision, we combine every two processors into a group and only change the order of the check node updates in two processor. The overlapped architecture of the LDPC-CC in eq. (1) is shown as Fig. 4 S = 9. We modify the processor unit, which contains the CNUs and VNUs of two original processors, and the FIFO shift registers of length ms + 1 + S. In other words, one modified processor is equivalent to two original processors but only change the order of the check node updates. We define the front processor of two processor as PE1, and the rear processor as PE2. For the original decoder, the calculations of PE1 and PE2 are independent. Because of the overlapped architecture, the calculating units are merged into one modified processor. The VNUs are divided into two groups, where one is belong to PE1, and the other belongs to PE2. And in the modified processor, there

338
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:50:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

㻿㻞㻞㻙㻟㻌㻔㻠㻜㻤㻤㻕

*&&&"TJBO4PMJE4UBUF$JSDVJUT$POGFSFODF /PWFNCFS
5PZBNB
+BQBO

Fig. 4. Processor architecture of hybrid-partitioned FIFO

Fig. 3. The CNU architecture of min-sum algorithm with dv = 6
are two CNUs supporting the check node updates for PE1 and PE2 respectively. Because the check node updates of the back processor are moved up, the length of shift registers is reduced from 2(ms+1) to ms+S+1 for a modified processor. In our proposed architecture, (ms + 1 − S)/(2(ms + 1)) % storage units are saved by using the overlapped architecture.
B. Proposed Check Node Unit
In order to reduce the critical path, there is one pipeline stage in the CNU. When we adopt the folding technique with the maximum folding factor, there are two SVNUs which are adjacent. Because the check node degree of this work is 15 and the folding technique are adopted, the critical path is composed of one CNU and one SVNU. For reducing the critical path, we want to add some pipeline stages in the CNU, but there is a problem about unready data. We observe that the message obtained from CNU delays 2 clock cycles, but the message is needed after one cycle in the conventional design. If we adopt the overlapped architecture, the condition of unready messages is more likely to happen because there is another opportunity which occurs between two SVNUs in the front and rear processor respectively.
In order to overcome this problem, we recongure the CNU that moving the partial calculation of SVNU into the CNU as shown in Fig. 3. There are 11 messages which are ready for the check node update and four unready messages. The idea of the proposed CNU is that the calculations about unready messages are not performed until the needed message is ready. Hence, we adding four partial SVNUs in the example and put them into different pipeline stages according to the position of SVNU.
C. Hybrid-Partitioned FIFO
Although the memory based architecture prevents the disadvantage of large hardware cost and high power consumption,

the throughput is limited by the data collision for memory access. When high parallelization is used, the collision is more serious. Hence, the parallel architecture such as the folding technique which can improve the throughput signicantly is unsuitable for memory based design. In order to resolve the problem about less bandwidth, an hybrid architecture is proposed in [6], so called hybrid-partitioned FIFO. The main concept of this architecture combines the advantages of register and memory based design. The registers allow the decoder support many CNUs at the same time instant in a processor because of large bandwidth, and the decoder with memory based architecture save lots of hardware area and power consumption. The mixed design is based on the register based architecture and replace the partial registers with memory. Fig. 4 shows the illustration of the hybridpartitioned FIFO structure. The rst step is to pick up the longer section of registers which only shift data. Then, we choose the minimum length of these sections and merge the sections into one memory bank as shown in the figure.
Because of applying the modied storage architecture, the storage units are divide into two kinds; one is to store the posterior LLRs, the other is to save the check node states. For the check node update states, the memory only output one check node state which can infer all the check node to variable node LLRs at a time instant. Hence, it is not needed to apply hybrid-partitioned FIFO on this kind of storage units. The storage units store post LLRs require to output many messages, so the hybrid-partitioned FIFO must be used to support large bandwidth. Due to apply the overlapped architecture and the folding technique, the continuous section of register is shorter than the original ones. Hence, we choose the sections of length 12, 16, 20 to be replaced by memory and merge all the sections with same length into the memory banks. Because the bandwidth of the memories is limited by technology process, the memory banks are required. In our work of the (215,3,6) time-varying LDPC-CC decoder with parallelism of six and the overlapped architecture, about 40% of all post LLRs in three processors are partitioned into twelve two-port memories.

339
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:50:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

㻿㻞㻞㻙㻟㻌㻔㻠㻜㻤㻤㻕

*&&&"TJBO4PMJE4UBUF$JSDVJUT$POGFSFODF /PWFNCFS
5PZBNB
+BQBO

Fig. 5. BER performance of on-demand variable node activation (OVA) and the proposed Overlapped OVA (OOVA) with ten iterations under AWGN channel and BPSK modulation.
IV. MEASUREMENT RESULTS An over Gb/s (215,3,6) LDPC-CC decoder is implemented in UMC 65-nm process to demonstrate the proposed techniques, and the die photo is shown in Fig. 6(a). The measurement results show the throughput of 7.73 Gb/s under 1.2 V can be achieved with 1014.4k gate for code rate 4/5, and corresponding power consumption is 410.5 mW. The shmoo plot is shown in Fig. 6(b).

(a)

(b)

Fig. 6. (a) Die photo (b) Shmoo plot of test chip
A comparison with state-of-the-art designs is given in TABLE I. Since these designs have different implementation parameters including code memory size ms, CMOS technology, supply voltage, input quantization, and the number of processor, it is necessary to apply performance normalization for a fair comparison. The normalization method in [6] is used. For a fair comparison, the hardware performance is usually evaluated by area-efciency and energy-efciency which are dened by throughput-to-area ratio and power-to-throughput ratio respectively. Compared with [6] and [7], the proposed decoder can provide better hardware efficiency with the highest throughput.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, a (215,3,6) time-varying LDPC-CC chip design is proposed. With the proposed overlapped architecture, the decoder can reduce the requirement of the storage units

which occupy the most of decoder area. To save messages efficiently, we apply hybrid-partitioned FIFO, which replaces some registers with memories and adjusts the storage architecture. In order to achieve over Gb/s throughput, folding technique is adapted to achieve parallel computing and CNU is proposed to improve the limitation of the critical path in the decoder. Integrated with these schemes, the test chip of a (215,3,6) LDPC-CC decoder is implemented in a 65nm CMOS process. The decoder occupies 1.19 mm2. Measurement results show that the decoder can provide a maximum throughput of 7.7 Gb/s under 1.2V supply voltage with a 8.75 pJ/bit/proc . It consumes 410mW of power for a 1.20V (code rate 4/5) supply while running at 322 MHz. Compared with previous LDPCCC decoders, the hardware efciency of this work outperforms state-of-the-art designs. With the properties of low latency, low power, and high throughput, this work makes LDPC-CCs as a candidate for pre-5G wireless communications.

TABLE I COMPARISON OF PREVIOUS DESIGNS
This work JSSC’12 [6] TCAS-II’14 [7]

Code

LDPC-CC LDPC-CC

Code Rate

4 rates

5 rates

Constraint

1135

984

Length Tech.

65nm

90nm

Quantization

6-bit

6-bit

# Proc.

6

5

Memory(Kb)

47.04

52.5

Area(mm2) 1.19(0.198) 2.24(0.269)

Max Frequency 322 MHz 198 MHz

Data Rate(Gbps) 7.72(7.72) 2.37(2.95)

Power

410.5 mW 284 mW

Energy Efficiencya 8.75

24.0

Area

39.03

5.29

Efficiencyb

(39.03) (10.97)

LDPC-CC 4 rates 1135 130nm 6-bit 10 152.76
3.55(0.089) 180 MHz 0.3(0.54) 200.4 mW
66.8 0.85 (6.06)

a : pJ/bit/Processor # b : Throughput / (Area/Processor #) ( ): Technology normalized
REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] A. F. Jimenez and K. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” in IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, 1999, pp. 2181–2191.
[3] N. ul Hassan, M. Lentmaier, and G. P. Fettweis, “Comparison of ldpc
block and LDPC convolutional codes based on their decoding latency,” in International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), 2012, pp. 225–229. [4] H. Zhou, D. G. M. Mitchell, N. Goertz, and D. J. Costello, “Robust ratecompatible punctured LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 61, no. 11, pp. 4428–4439, 2013. [5] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug 2005.
[6] C. L. Chen, Y. H. Lin, H. C. Chang, and C. Y. Lee, “A 2.37-Gb/s 284.8 mW rate-compatible (491,3,6) LDPC-CC decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 4, pp. 817–831, 2012.
[7] Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, D. Wu, C. Zhou, and X. Zeng, “An efficient multirate
LDPC-CC decoder with a layered decoding algorithm for the IEEE 1901 standard,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 992–996, Dec 2014.

340
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:50:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

