IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2016

3101211

Defect Detection and Burst Erasure Correction for TDMR
Chaitanya Kumar Matcha and Shayan Garani Srinivasa Department of Electronic Systems Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru 560012, India

Media defects are common in magnetic recording, resulting in the bursts of erasures. The use of error correcting codes can be aided by a defect detector for indicating the location of erasures. In this paper, we propose a model to study 2-D media defects that can occur in 2-D magnetic recording (TDMR). We also propose a novel defect identification and detection algorithm to identify the location of defects by the magnitude thresholding of the readback samples and identifying defective data patterns at the output of a 2-D signal detector. The defect detector identifies a 2-D edge-connected region of defects for burst erasure correction. Using simulations, we show that the defect detector can be designed to identify the location of 2-D defects with >90% accuracy for deep defects. The effect of the defect detector in TDMR is studied over a Voronoi-based media model where low density parity check (LDPC) codes are used for error correction. The defect detector is observed to achieve >2 dB gain in signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) for a 38 × 38 burst erasure. We also study simple interleaving schemes for LDPC codes that give a further gain of >0.3 dB in SNR and can correct 76 × 76 and larger burst erasures.
Index Terms— 2-D magnetic recording, 2-D soft-output Viterbi algorithm, burst erasures, code interleaving, defect detection.

I. INTRODUCTION
B URST erasures can occur in magnetic recording due to thermal asperities, inherent defects on the magnetic medium, scratches on the surface, or due to external mechanical shocks/vibrations [1]. The error correcting codes correct the errors that arise due to 2-D inter-symbol interference (ISI) and the irregularities of the magnetic medium. This error correction can be aided by a defect detector that indicates the location of burst erasures to efficiently recover the data in the defective region.
Several architectures and techniques for defect detection were proposed for 1-D magnetic recording. Dorfman and Wolf [2] have characterized the effects of thermal asperities and proposed a generalized partial response (PR) target to reduce the effects on signal detection using Viterbi algorithm. Deploying run-length-limited (RLL) codes is a well-known technique to detect the bursts of erasures as studied by Tan et al. [3] for magnetic recording. Tan et al. [4] have also used a full response zero-forcing equalizer to identify the location of media defects.
The log-likelihood ratio (LLR) values at the output of the signal detector in a 2-D magnetic recording (TDMR) read channel were observed to have low magnitude in the defective regions. The Viterbi algorithm for signal detection is also observed to remain/transition within a small group of states in the defective regions [5]. The magnitude of the LLR and the state transitions of the signal detector can be used to detect the defect location as proposed in [3] and [5].
The size of the boundary of a 2-D burst is usually large unlike in the case of 1-D burst. For example, 1 bit boundary of a 10 × 10 burst includes 36% of the bits within the 10 × 10 region. This poses an additional constraint for accurately identifying defect boundaries in the case of 2-D defect detection.
Manuscript received March 9, 2016; revised May 12, 2016; accepted June 22, 2016. Date of publication July 7, 2016; date of current version October 17, 2016. Corresponding author: C. K. Matcha (e-mail: mchaitanyakumar@dese.iisc.ernet.in).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2016.2587639

1-D LDPC codes have been successfully used for correcting bursts of erasures. This motivates us to use such a construction for handling 2-D defects. Fossorier [6] gave a construction of LDPC codes that can achieve the Roger bound for harddecision decoding, i.e., (n, k) LDPC codes that can correct up to (n − k − 1) length of burst erasure. Algorithms to construct LDPC codes for good burst erasure correction using a belief propagation (BP) algorithm by identifying the trapping sets of the LDPC code are proposed in [7]–[9].
In this paper, we propose a 2-D media defect model for a Voronoi-based TDMR channel model. We study the statistics of the readback signal and the soft outputs of the 2-D signal detector within a defective region to propose an efficient defect detector. The performance of the TDMR system with the proposed defect detector is studied using computer simulations, where a quasi-cyclic LDPC code is used for error correction using the BP algorithm. We also propose a simple interleaving scheme to enhance the burst erasure correcting capability of the LDPC code.
This paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we describe a Voronoi-based TDMR channel model and the 2-D media defect model. In Section III, we describe the system architecture for 2-D defect detection and propose a 2-D soft-input soft-output Viterbi algorithm (SOVA) that can exchange information with the BP algorithm for turbo detection-decoding scheme. In Section IV, we study the effects of media defects on the readback signal and the signal detection and propose a 2-D defect detection algorithm. In Section V, we study the performance of the proposed defect detector using simulations and discuss interleaving schemes to enhance the performance in the presence of media defects. Section VI concludes this paper.
II. CHANNEL MODEL AND BACKGROUND
Several magnetic recording channel models are proposed to aid simulations in studying the signal processing algorithms. These models vary in complexity and accuracy in capturing the behavior of a magnetic medium. Voronoi-based media models give a good tradeoff between the implementation complexity

0018-9464 © 2016 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101211

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2016

and the accuracy of representing a magnetic medium. In this paper, we use a Voronoi-based granular media model proposed in [10]. Before we begin our discussion, we introduce a few notations used in this paper.

A. Notation

We use a vector notation that helps in simplifying the repre-

sentation of 2-D discrete-time signals as proposed in [10]. Any

2-D ISI response can be represented using a matrix H whose

elements h(i, j ) correspond to the ISI response coefficients.

Note that the row and column indices of H can take negative

values. We call this an ISI mask.

This ISI mask can be converted into a column vector using

a vec (·) operator by choosing an ordering of the indices

of the matrix (e.g., by stacking the columns of the matrix).

In this paper, we use the raster scan ordering of elements in a

matrix to form a vector. However, any suitable ordering can be

chosen.

Let x(i, j ) represent a 2-D discrete-time signal. We define

the

notation

x

(k,l) H

to

represent

a

vector

of

values

x(i, j )

ordered in the same fashion as the elements of H, where x(i, j )

corresponds to the position of h(0, 0) in H. For example

H=

h(0, 0) h(1, 0)

h(0, 1) h(1, 1)

⇒ vec H = [h(0, 0) h(0, 1) h(1, 0) h(1, 1)]T

x

(i, H

j

)

=

[x (i,

j)

x(i, j + 1)

x(i + 1, j )

x(i + 1, j + 1)]T .

Let y(i, j ) represent the signal after filtering x(i, j ) using the mask H. The samples y(i, j ) are given by

y(i, j ) =

h(k,

j )x(i

+

k, i

+

l)

=

(H)T

x

(i, H

j

).

kl

Notice that the double summation in the above equation becomes a 2-D convolution operation by substituting hˆ(−k, −l) = h(k, l). This gives the relation between 2-D impulse response coefficients hˆ(−k, −l) and the elements h(k, l) of the mask H.
We use this notation for all 2-D filtering operations. This vector notation can be extended to masks of any size and shape. For example, this notation simplifies the representation of hexagonal masks and staggered sampling in bit patterned media.

B. TDMR Channel Model
We use a Voronoi-based TDMR channel model as proposed in [10]. The model consists of a media model, write process model, and a readback model.
1) Voronoi-Based Media Model: The random position of grains are generated using Poisson-disk process with boundary sampling [10]. This distribution is characterized by the grain size parameter or the center-to-center (CTC) distance. In this model, the grain centers are separated by at least a distance of CTC and each grain has at least one neighbor whose center is at a distance of CTC.

2) Write Process: The magnetic medium is split into a rectangular grid. Each rectangular cell of size Bx × By represents a channel bit. Bx and By represent the size of each bit in the crosstrack (X) and downtrack (Y ) directions. When a bit is written into the medium, all grains whose centers lie within the bit region are polarized according to the bit value.
We also consider overwrite effects within a track and across tracks represented by the grain flip probability (GFP) parameter. The overwrite effects depend on the write order and the design of read–write head. We consider the shingled recording model where the overwrite effects on location (i, j ) are prominent while writing data into next bit (i, j + 1) in the same track or while writing into the neighboring bit (i + 1, j ) in the next track [11]. When the bit value at current position (i, j ) differs from either of the two neighboring bits (i, j + 1) and (i + 1, j ), each grain in the current bit region can flip its polarity with a GFP. If the two neighboring bits have the same bit values as the current bit, then there are no write-in errors in the current bit region.
3) Readback Process: Each grain in the magnetic medium is modeled to contribute a signal called read-head response. The read head response is modeled as a 2-D Gaussian pulse characterized by pulse widths (PW50x and PW50y) at half amplitude in the crosstrack and downtrack directions. The read head response is given by

h(x, y) =

ln 2

exp

π PW50x PW50y

−

(ln 2)x 2 PW502x

−

(ln 2)y2 PW502y

(1)

such that
∞∞
h(x, y)d x d y = 1.
−∞ −∞
The continuous-time readback signal is the sum of the contribution of each grain on the magnetic medium. The discrete-time readback signal is obtained by averaging the continuous-time signal over each individual bit region. White Gaussian noise samples are added to the discrete-time readback signal to model the electronic noise.
The 2-D response of each bit depends on the sum of the contribution of grains in the bit region. We can represent the discrete-time response of the bit at position (i, j ) using the mask Hi, j . Note that Hi, j is a random matrix and depends on the positions of the grains in the bit region and the write-in errors. If ai, j ∈ {−1, 1} represent the symbols written onto the medium, the readback samples are given by

yi, j =

ak,l hk,l (i − k, j − l) + ni, j

(2)

kl

where ni, j represents the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) sample at position (i, j ) and hk,l (x, y) are the coefficients of (k, l)th bit response Hk,l .
We define energy in signal, media noise, and electronic
noise as

Esignal = E[Hi, j ] 2 Emedia = E[ Hi, j 2] − E[Hi, j ] 2
Eelec = σw2

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MATCHA AND GARANI SRINIVASA: DEFECT DETECTION AND BURST ERASURE CORRECTION FOR TDMR

3101211

Fig. 1. Simplified read channel architecture, where the readback signal from the medium is equalized to achieve a controlled ISI called partial target response. The resultant signal is given to a 2-D SOVA algorithm for signal detection followed by a BP algorithm for decoding of LDPC code. The 2-D SOVA and LDPC code work in turbo fashion by exchanging the extrinsic information. A defect detector indicates the locations of erasures (defect) to the BP algorithm for efficient error/erasure correction.

where σw2 is the variance of AWGN, and E[·] is the expectation operator. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as

SNR(dB) = 10 log10

Esignal Emedia + Eelec

.

(3)

The media noise for the channel model is completely determined by the choice of channel model parameters. In order to separately study the effects of media noise and electronic noise, we separately define the SNR corresponding to the media noise and the electronic noise as follows [10]:

SNRmedia(dB) = 10 log10

Esignal Emedia

(4)

SNRelec(dB) = 10 log10

Esignal Eelec

.

(5)

C. Defect Model
We extend the 1-D defect model in [3] and [5] to TDMR, where the defects on the magnetic medium are characterized by a depth parameter and the region of the defect. For our study, we model the defects to be of rectangular in shape. The depth of defect is indicated by the parameter α ∈ [0, 1], where α = 0 indicates a deep defect and α = 1 indicates no defect. The defect gets shallower with an increase in α. The effect of a defect is modeled by scaling the readback response of the defective bit by the parameter α. Defining αi, j = 1 if the (i, j )th bit region is not defective and αi, j = α if the (i, j )th bit region is defective, the readback signal is given by

yi, j =

ak,l αk,l hk,l (i − k, j − k) + ni, j .

(6)

kl

Remarks:

1) The burst erasures observed in TDMR can have variation in signal amplitude unlike the model considered here. As we will see in Section V, the performance degrades with the increase in defect depth. Therefore, the model can be used to study the worst case behavior of burst erasures by considering the worst case depth of the defect.
2) The actual size and shape of 2-D burst erasures depend on the design of the array of read heads in TDMR. In this paper, we study rectangular burst erasures in our simulations. However, the proposed algorithm is not restricted to the shape of the burst erasure.

III. TURBO DETECTION AND DECODING
The effects of burst erasures in the read channel are multifold, all contributing to a degraded throughput [bit error rate (BER)].
1) The output of signal detector in the defective region is less reliable.
2) The error correcting codes cannot correct the large bursts of erasures
3) The timing and track synchronization will be affected.
In this paper, we ignore the effect of burst erasures on the timing recovery of the read channel.
In this section, we discuss a read channel architecture, as shown in Fig. 1, consisting of all the system blocks relevant to the burst erasures and ignoring the timing/track synchronization.
A. System Architecture
Fig. 1 shows a read channel architecture with a PR equalizer, a 2-D signal detector, a decoder, and a defect detector. The 2-D signal detector and the decoder operate in a turbo fashion, exchanging the extrinsic information with each other. The defect detector aids the operation of the decoder by providing information of the erasure location. The defect detector uses the readback signal and the output of the detector to estimate the location of the defect.
The PR equalizers and the 2-D PR targets are designed as proposed in [10]. The PR equalizer helps in reducing the signal detection complexity by reducing the extent of 2-D ISI in the readback samples.
The 2-D signal detector is adapted from the 2-D SOVA proposed in [10] that includes data-dependent noise prediction. In order to facilitate the turbo detection-decoding scheme, the 2-D SOVA is enhanced to take the a priori information of the symbols to be detected. For the sake of completeness, the details of these enhancements to the 2-D SOVA are discussed in Section III-B.
Error correcting codes are widely studied for 1-D burst erasure channels. Codes can be constructed to correct the burst erasures as large as the number of parity bits [6]. We use LDPC codes for error correction on the output of the 2-D SOVA. The decoder uses the BP algorithm to correct errors in the output of the detector.
The defect detection algorithm is discussed in Section IV.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101211

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2016

B. 2-D SOVA With Soft Inputs

The 2-D SOVA proposed in [10] is a local maximum likelihood (ML) detector, where the decisions are made by maximizing the likelihood probability of the received samples within a local region. Since the likelihood probability does not use the prior information of the bits, we update the detection scheme to maximize the a posteriori probability of the symbols in the local region. The updated detection algorithm is summarized as follows.

1) The detection algorithm is a single pass algorithm that
operates in the raster scan order, i.e., operating from left
to right in each row and from top row to bottom row.
2) A local region defined by a mask M defines the local
region over which the decisions are locally optimal. 3) At each position (i, j ), the decision aˆi, j of the cor-
responding symbol is computed by maximizing the a priori probability of aˆi, j , given the samples y(Mi, j) in the local region M.
4) The soft decisions are the LLRs defined using the a priori probability of aˆi, j , given the samples y(Mi, j) in the local region M.

The a posteriori probability of the symbol ai, j , given the readback samples, is

Pr

aˆi, j

y

(i, M

j

)

= Pr

aˆ i,

j

,

y

(i, M

j

)

× Pr

y

(i, M

j

)

.

Let L(i, j) denote the set of positions of symbols that contribute to y(Mi, j). If G is the ISI mask that the detector is equalizing, this set of positions L(i, j) can be obtained by

applying the mask G on the mask M.

Since the detector operates in the raster scan order, the

symbols at positions

P(i, j) = {(m, n) ∈ L(i, j) | m < i or (m = i and n < j )}

are already detected and the symbols at positions S(i, j) = {(m, n) ∈ L(i, j) | m > i or (m = i and n > j )}

will be detected in the future. Let a(L(i, j)), a(P(i, j)), and a(S(i, j)) denote the symbols in
the positions given by L(i, j), P(i, j), and S(i, j), respectively.
We have

L(i, j ) = P(i, j ) ∪ {(i, j )} ∪ S(i, j ).

Since we have already made the decisions aˆ (P(i, j)), the

a

posteriori

probability

of

aˆi, j ,

given

y

(i, M

j

)

and

aˆ(P(i, j )),

is

Pr

aˆi, j

y(i, j ), aˆ (P (i, j ))
M

=

Pr

aˆi, j , a(S(i, j ))

y(i, j ), aˆ (P (i, j ))
M

a(S(i, j))

=1 K

Pr

y(i, j )
M

aˆi, j , a(S(i, j )), aˆ (P(i, j ))

a(S(i, j))

×Pr[aˆi, j , a(S(i, j)) | aˆ(P(i, j))]

(7)

=1 K

Pr y(Mi, j ) a(L(i, j ))

(8)

a(S(i, j))

×Pr[aˆi, j , a(S(i, j))]

(9)

Algorithm 1 Soft-Input 2-D SOVA
• Inputs: Nrow × Ncol page of received samples yi, j , a priori information Pr ai, j , ISI mask G, local ML region M, noise feedback region N, noise prediction and
whitening filters P(k) and W(k) for the data patterns k = 1, 2, · · · , Npatterns as defined in [10]. • Initialization: Set aˆi, j = −1 for (i, j ) outside the boundary of Nrow × Ncol page. • Hard Decisions:
For i = 1 to Nrow For j = 1 to Ncol
– For each choice of ai, j and S(i, j), compute Pr y(Mi, j) | a(L(i, j)) using data-dependent noise prediction (DDNP) algorithm in [10].
– For each choice of ai, j and S(i, j), compute Pr[ai, j , a(S(i, j ))]

= Pr[ai, j ] +

Pr [am ,n ].

(m,n)∈S(i, j)

–

Co⎡mpute

L L Ri, j of the symbols ai, j as
Pr yM(i, j)|a L(i, j) Pr ai, j =1,a S(i, j)

⎤

ln ⎣⎢

a(S(i, j))
Pr

y(Mi, j) |a(L(i, j))

Pr[ai, j =−1,a(S(i, j))] ⎦⎥ .

(a S(i, j))

• Output: Nrow × Ncol page of soft decisions L L Ri, j .

where

K

=

Pr[

y

(i, M

j

)

|

aˆ (P(i, j))].

The soft output of the detector for the symbol at posi-

tion (i, j ) is given by the LLR

LLRi, = ln

j = ln ⎡ ⎣⎢⎢ a(S

(i,

Pr aˆi, j = 1 y(Mi, j ), aˆ (P(i, j ))

Pr aˆi, j = −1 y(Mi, j ), aˆ (P(i, j ))

Pr

y

(i, M

j

)

a(L(i, j ))

Pr[ai, j

=

1, a(S(i, j))]

j))

Pr y(Mi, j ) a(L(i, j )) Pr[ai, j = −1, a(S(i, j ))]

⎤ ⎦⎥⎥.

a(S(i, j))

The term Pr[y(Mi, j) | a(L(i, j))] is the likelihood probability

of

samples

y

(i, M

j

)

and

can

be

computed

with

data-dependent

noise prediction as given in [10].

Assuming the statistical independence of the bits ai, j , the term Pr[ai, j , a(S(i, j))] is computed using the a priori information Pr[ai, j ] as

Pr[ai, j , a(S(i, j))] = Pr[ai, j ] +

Pr[am,n]. (10)

(m,n)∈S(i, j)

The hard decisions aˆi, j are obtained from LLRi, j as

aˆi, j =

1, LLRi, j ≥ 0 −1, LLRi, j < 0.

The soft-input 2-D SOVA is given in Algorithm 1. Remarks:
1) As seen in Algorithm 1, the prior information of the bits in P(i, j) is not used to compute the soft-output LLRi, j .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MATCHA AND GARANI SRINIVASA: DEFECT DETECTION AND BURST ERASURE CORRECTION FOR TDMR

3101211

Fig. 2. Performance of the 2-D SOVA is compared against MAP detector operating on 4 × 5 pages. The average KL distance between the soft outputs from the two detectors is also shown. At BER ∼ 10−5, the KL distance is very low, indicating good-quality soft decisions from 2-D SOVA. (a) BER comparison. (b) Average KL distance.

However, this prior information influences the computa-

tion of LLRi, j as the hard decisions aˆ (P(i, j)) required to

compute

Pr[

y

(i, M

j

)

|

a(L(i, j ))]

use

this

prior

information.

The performance and computational complexity of the

2-D SOVA is compared against joint two-dimensional

self-iterating equalization and detection algorithm [12]

in [10].

2) The algorithm gives maximum a posteriori probability

(MAP) performance when the size of local region M

is at least the page size. This approximation using the

local region M provides a computationally feasible 2-D

detection algorithm.

3) Fig. 2 compares the performance of the 2-D SOVA with respect to the MAP detector detecting 4 ×5 page of data

at a time. Fig. 2 also shows the average KL distance
D ( pMAP p2−DSOVA) between the soft outputs from MAP detector and the 2-D SOVA. At SNRs achieving raw BER ∼ 10−5, we observe that the KL distance is

very small indicating good-quality soft decisions from

the 2-D SOVA. The simulations are done over a simple

2-D ISI channel whose response is ⎡1 1 1⎤

⎣⎢⎢⎢⎢

16 1 4 1

4 1 1

16 1 4 1

⎥⎥⎥⎦⎥

.

(11)

16 4 16

C. Turbo Detection-Decoding Scheme
Gains in performance can be achieved iteratively by exchanging information between the 2-D SOVA and the BP

algorithm in a turbo fashion [12]. Let LLRpderit represent the prior LLRs of the bits and LLRdet represent the output LLR of the 2-D SOVA. Similarly, let LLRpdreic represent the prior LLRs of the bits and LLRdec represent the output LLR of the
BP algorithm. The extrinsic information of the detector and
decoder are given by

LLRdexett = LLRdet − LLRdpreit

(12)

LLRedxetc = LLRdec − LLRpderic.

(13)

In the turbo detection-decoding scheme, the prior information of the detector and decoder in each iteration are updated as

LLRdpreit ← αdecLLRedxetc

(14)

LLRpderic ← αdetLLRdexett

(15)

where the scaling constants 0 < αdet < 1 and 0 < αdec < 1 control the influence of the detector/decoder on the overall performance and the rate of convergence of the algorithm. For the 2-D SOVA and the BP algorithm, we have experimentally observed that αdet = αdec = 0.75 gives the optimal performance. The gains in performance due to the turbo detection-decoding scheme are discussed
in Section V.

IV. 2-D DEFECT DETECTION ALGORITHM
Defect detection algorithms for 1-D magnetic recording typically use any one or a combination of the following techniques [3], [5] to identify defective locations:
1) using a threshold on LLRs at the output of the detector; 2) identifing frequently occurring transitions in detector’s
state trellis within a defective region; 3) the use of RLL codes to identify the bursts of erasures.
Though these techniques seem very generic, they are not readily applicable for 2-D defect detection. Among these techniques, thresholding on LLRs is feasible only if there is a significant difference in the distribution of LLRs between defective and non-defective regions as studied later in this section. Defining trellis for 2-D SOVA and identifying state transitions is hard and computationally expensive. The design and the construction of 2-D RLL codes have their own challenges. Apart from these, the 2-D defect detection poses additional challenge of identifying defect boundaries accurately. For example, leaving out 1-bit boundary of a 10 × 10 defect region is only 64% effective in identifying the defect region. The connected regions of bursty defects of arbitrary shapes must also be effectively identified. In this section, we study the effect of defects on the readback signal and 2-D SOVA to design an efficient 2-D defect detection algorithm. The algorithm also includes a region growing procedure to identify the defect bursts of arbitrary shapes and sizes.
The effects of the media defects are as follows.
1) The signal amplitude is reduced. 2) The output of the detector will correspond to the data
patterns that result in low signal amplitude. 3) The reliability of the output of the detector will be less.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101211

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2016

Fig. 3. Empirical distributions of the readback signal and the output of 2-D SOVA in defective and non-defective regions are compared. The magnitude of the
readback samples and the data patterns at the output of 2-D SOVA are suitable to defect detection. The statistics are collected for the channel model parameters CTC=10 nm, Bx = By = 22 nm, 4.5 grains/bit, PW50x = PW50y = 30 nm, and SNRelec = 14.5 dB. (a) Distribution of magnitude of readback samples in defective and non-defective regions are compared. The concentration of readback samples at low magnitude increases with the increase in the defect depth. This is due to the scaling of bit response by the parameter α. (b) Distribution of 5-bit data patterns at the output of 2-D SOVA in defective and non-defective regions are compared. The MSB to LSB in the binary representation of the data pattern index corresponds to the symbols ai, j , ai−1, j , ai, j−1, ai, j+1, and ai+1, j in that order. In the region with deep defect, the patterns with indices 15 and 16 occur frequently as they correspond to the least magnitude signal for the
choice of the PR target. (c) Distribution of the magnitude of LLRs at the output of 2-D SOVA in defective and non-defective regions is compared. LLRs in
the defective regions are more concentrated near the low magnitudes as the decisions from the 2-D SOVA will be less reliable.

In this section, we study these effects and formulate an algorithm to identify the defective region.

A. Statistics in the Defective Region

Fig. 3 compares various distributions in the defective and

non-defective regions for the channel model parameters chosen

as CTC = 10 nm, Bx = By = 22 nm, 4.5 grains/bit, PW50x = PW50y = 30 nm, and SNRelec = 14.5 dB. The monic PR

target response designed under MMSE criterion [10] for this

choice of channel parameters is

⎡

⎤

0.026332 0.215724 0.030587

G = ⎣0.216051 1.000000 0.216170⎦.

(16)

0.030590 0.215788 0.026639

Fig. 3(a) shows the distribution of readback signal magnitudes in the defective region. As expected from the defect model, the amplitudes are concentrated near low magnitudes in the deep-defective region. There is a clear contrast in the distribution between defective and non-defective regions.
Fig. 3(b) shows the distribution of 5-b data patterns at the output of the detector in the defective region. The MSB to LSB in the binary representation of the pattern index correspond to the symbols ai, j , ai−1, j , ai, j−1, ai, j+1, ai+1, j in that order. The observations show that in the defective region, the detector gives the data patterns with indices 15 and 16 given by

1

0

1 0 1 and 0 1 0 .

1

0

In the deep-defect region, ignoring the electronic noise, the readback signal from the channel model has low magnitude. The detector gives these patterns at the output since these patterns result in low magnitude signal for the target in (16). Therefore, these patterns are observed with high frequency in the deep-defect region. These patterns are also the harmful patterns that result in detection errors as studied in [13]. In the region with a shallow defect, where the readback samples

have low to mid-range magnitudes, the data patterns that result in high signal magnitude are observed less frequently.
Fig 3(c) shows the distribution of magnitude of the soft outputs of the 2-D SOVA in the defective region. For the 2-D SOVA, there is no ambiguity in identifying the data patterns that result in low signal magnitude. Therefore, the deep defect resulted in median LLR higher than that in the region of shallow defect.
B. 2-D Defect Detection
From the statistics in Fig. 3, we observe that the magnitude of signal and data patterns at the output of 2-D SOVA can be used to identify the defect region. The magnitude of LLRs for the choice of channel and PR target is not suitable for identifying the defect region. Identifying the boundaries accurately is important for effective 2-D defect detection. The signature analysis, thresholding of signal energy within a local region or using RLL codes as proposed for 1-D defect detection [3], [5] are not effective near the defect boundaries. Observing the statistics in Fig. 3(a), we can use threshold on signal magnitude as an efficient alternative to the threshold on the signal energy within a local region to identify the defect boundaries accurately.
We formulate the defect detection algorithm using the signal magnitude and the data patterns at the output of the 2-D SOVA as follows.
A position (i, j ) is identified to be potentially defective using thresholding and signature analysis as follows:
1) Thresholding: The location (i, j ) is potentially defective if the signal magnitude yi, j at the location is within a threshold τy.
2) Signature Analysis: The location (i, j ) is potentially defective if the decisions aˆi, j in the neighborhood form a defective pattern. For the choice of PR targets that we used, the dominant condition for a defective signature is
aˆi, j = aˆi−1, j = aˆi, j −1 = aˆi, j +1 = aˆi+1, j .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MATCHA AND GARANI SRINIVASA: DEFECT DETECTION AND BURST ERASURE CORRECTION FOR TDMR

3101211

Fig. 4. Procedure to locate the defective region is shown. Regions that are 3 × 3 or larger are marked defective to avoid false alarms in the non-defective region. Non-defective locations that are completely surrounded by defective locations are allowed. This helps in achieving performance gains for shallow defects by not completely discarding the information in the defective region. (a) Step 1: potentially defective locations are marked using signature analysis and a threshold on signal magnitude. (b) Step 2.1: 3 × 3 or larger regions of potentially defective locations are marked as defective. (c) Step 2.2: extend the defective region by marking all edge-connected locations as defective.
Since we are interested in erasures occurring in bursts, we have to identify large connected regions of potentially defective positions. A potentially defective location (i, j ) is identified to be defective using the following two criteria:
1) Criterion 1: The defective region is large (bursty): the location (i, j ) is within a potentially defective region of size at least Dy × Dx or
2) Criterion 2: The defective region is connected: the location (i, j ) is edge-connected to another defective location, i.e., any of the immediate neighboring locations (i − 1, j ), (i, j − 1), (i, j + 1), (i + 1, j ) is defective.
We choose edge-connectivity of the defective region since the choice of PR targets, as given in (16) for example, have very low correlation in the diagonal direction.
The LLRs of the identified defective locations are set to zero indicating erasure location to the BP algorithm. The defect detection algorithm is given in Algorithm 2. Fig. 4 shows the defect detection procedure for an example pattern of defect.
C. Discussion on the Defect Detection Algorithm
As seen in Fig. 3, the threshold on signal magnitude as well as the signature analysis are effective for deep defects. The two criteria complement each other by being resilient to the drawbacks of the other criterion. The signature analysis is suitable for only in the interior of the defect region, but threshold on signal magnitude is suitable even near the boundaries of the defect region. The threshold on signal magnitude may fail if there is spurious noise at a particular location. However, the signature analysis is resilient to spurious noise as the 2-D SOVA also uses neighboring samples to make decisions.
The 2-D SOVA algorithm is itself resilient to shallow defects to some extent. Hence, accurate identification of defect region is not required for shallow defects. Therefore, we design the threshold τy to be effective for the case of deep defect. We identify the threshold τy such that the defective location is identified with 90% accuracy, i.e., Pr[|yi, j | < τy] = 0.90 within the defective region.
The choice of minimum burst size Dx × Dy helps in reducing false alarms. The choice of Dx = Dy = 3 could result in a false alarm if any of the following patterns occur:

Algorithm 2 2-D Defect Detection Algorithm

• Inputs: Nrow × Ncol page of received samples yi, j , hard decisions aˆi, j , extrinsic soft decisions L L Ri, j from the 2-D SOVA, minimum defect size Dy × Dx , and signal amplitude threshold τy.
• Initialization: Set di, j = −1 for all (i, j ) inside the page

indicating all locations as non-defective.

• Step 1: Identify potentially defective locations

For each (i, j ) inside the page, identify if the location is

potentially defective: ⎧ ⎪⎨0, yi, j < τy,

di, j = ⎪⎩0−,1,

aˆi, j = aˆi−1, j = aˆi, j −1 = aˆi+1, j = aˆi, j +1, otherwise.

• Step 2: Identify defective locations

– Step 2.1: Identify bursts For each (i, j ) inside the page, mark a location defective if it occurs in burst:

di, j =

1, di, j ,

dm,n = 0∀(m, n) ∈ D(i, j), otherwise,

where

D(i, j) = (m, n) ∈ Z2 | 0 ≤ m − i < Dy , 0 ≤ n − j < Dx} .

– Step 2.2: Identify largest connected region For each (i, j ) inside the page, mark a potentially defective location as defective if it is adjacent to a defective location:

di, j =

1, di, j = 0, ∃(m, n) ∈ N(i, j), dm,n = 1, di, j , otherwise,

where

N(i, j) = {(i − 1, j ), (i, j − 1), (i, j + 1), (i + 1, j )}.

Repeat Step 2.2 until there is no update in the defective region.
• Step 3: Update LLRs to indicate erasure For each (i, j ) inside the defective region, set L L Ri, j = 0

L L Ri, j =

0,

di, j = 1.

L L Ri, j , otherwise.

• Output: Nrow × Ncol page of soft decisions L L Ri, j with information on burst erasures.

101

010

10101 01010

0 1 0 1 0 or 1 0 1 0 1 .

10101 01010

101

010

For equally likely input bits, the probability of any of these patterns occurring in the input bits is 2−20. Therefore, the
probability of false alarms outside the defective region is very

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101211

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2016

Fig. 5. Performance gains due to turbo detection-decoding scheme are shown as a function of iteration number. BER is measured at the output of the detector and decoder for the TDMR channel configuration CONFIG1 in Table I. (a) BER at detector’s output. (b) BER at decoder’s output.

low. A larger choice of Dx = Dy may not effectively identify the defective region, especially in case of shallow defect.
Other alternative criteria to identify defect locations that were proposed for 1-D magnetic recording are
1) Threshold on energy of a local span of the readback signal: This generalizes the criterion of threshold on signal magnitude. This criterion is resilient to spurious noise, but does not accurately identify the boundaries of the defect region. Since the accurate identification of boundaries of 2-D defect is critical, signal energy criterion is not useful for 2-D defect detection. In our simulations, threshold on signal magnitude (i.e., threshold on energy in 1 × 1 span) is observed to be superior because of accurate identification of boundaries of defect region.
2) Analysis on the state transitions of the detector: This generalizes the criterion of defective patterns at the output of the detector. This criterion is useful when the output data patterns cannot be used to identify defect location. This depends on the choice of the PR target. For the case of 2-D signal detection, defining state transitions is not trivial.
3) Threshold on LLRs: As discussed in Section IV-A, this criterion can be useful depending on the PR target.
V. SIMULATIONS AND RESULTS
The choice of code rate depends on the channel capacity for the TDMR channel model. The TDMR channel capacity can be bounded by estimating the symmetric information rate (SIR) as proposed in [14]–[16]. However, these methods make inherent assumptions on the ergodicity of the channel model. Due to time-varying statistics, a practical approach is to identify code rates that can achieve desirable BER performance empirically.
For the simulations, we designed a (32 768, 27 625) quasicyclic LDPC code with circulant length of 1024 and code rate 0.84 to achieve a BER of the order of 10−6. The code rate of 0.84 is empirically chosen by reducing the code rates until the detector’s BER in the turbo loop is in the range of∼ 10−3 − 10−4 is achieved. With carefully designed LDPC

TABLE I TDMR CHANNEL MODEL CONFIGURATIONS USED FOR
SIMULATIONS. THE MODEL USES CTC = 10 nm
codes, this could achieve a sector failure rate (SFR) below 10−15. The minimum distance of the code is upper bounded by dmin ≤ 986.
Each 32 768 bit codeword is populated into a 128 × 256 page corresponding to a 4 KB sector. The channel model generates readback samples corresponding to the 128 × 256 pages. The channel model is configured for 4.5 grains per bit with CTC = 10 nm achieving a channel bit density of 1.3 Tb/in2. Other channel model parameters are mentioned in Table I. The channel model introduces a 38×38 rectangular defect in every page. The starting position of the rectangular defect is randomly chosen within each page from a uniform distribution.
The readback signal is equalized for a 3 × 3 monic PR target response designed as in [10]. The resultant signal is detected using 2-D SOVA given in Algorithm 1 followed by LDPC decoding using the BP (sum-product) algorithm. The 2-D SOVA and the BP algorithm exchange information in a turbo fashion, achieving gains in the overall performance. The BP algorithm is configured to run for at most 25 iterations and the number of turbo iterations is configured to be 10. The location of the defect is detected by the defect detector given in Algorithm 2. The defect detector indicates the defect location by setting the prior LLRs to zero at the identified location of the defect. The threshold on the signal magnitude τy is chosen such that Pr[|yi, j | < τy] = 0.90 for deep defect at SNRelec = 14.5 dB, i.e., the defect location is identified with 90% accuracy at that particular operating point. The same threshold is used at all SNRelec.
The performance of the proposed defect detector in Algorithm 2 is compared against an ideal defect detector that knows the location of defect exactly. We use the BER at the output

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MATCHA AND GARANI SRINIVASA: DEFECT DETECTION AND BURST ERASURE CORRECTION FOR TDMR

3101211

⎡

⎤

0.035434 0.297595 0.035520

GCONFIG2 = ⎣0.182777 1.000000 0.182505⎦. (19)

0.030942 0.297908 0.030392

Fig. 6. Efficiency of the defect detection algorithm measured for the deep defect (α = 0) of size 38 × 38 under different channel conditions in Table I. The defect detector is able to achieve efficiency of > 90% at 14.5 dB as designed.

of the 2-D SOVA in turbo loop to characterize the overall performance of the system. The sector failure rates are not presented, because very low SFRs could not be obtained deep down due to the limitations of our computational setup and the complexity of the 2-D SOVA and Voronoi channel model.
Fig. 5 shows the gain in the performance of the turbo detection-decoding scheme as a function of iteration number.

A. Performance of the Defect Detector

In the case of shallow defect, the detected symbols given by the 2-D SOVA are all not erroneous in the defect region. Therefore, the effectiveness of the defect detection algorithm depends on the accuracy of identifying the locations within the defect region that resulted in erroneous decisions by the 2-D SOVA. In order to quantify this effectiveness, we define the efficiency of the defect detection algorithm as

ηdd

=

Ndd N2−DSOVA

(17)

where N2−DSOVA represents the number of bit errors by 2-D

SOVA within the actual defect region and Ndd is the count of

locations within these N2−DSOVA locations that are identified to be defective by Algorithm 2. The parameter ηdd gives

a measure of effectiveness in indicating the detection errors

within the defective region.

Fig. 6 shows the efficiency ηdd of the defect detection algorithm for the deep defects of size 38 × 38 under different

conditions of inter-track interference (ITI). Since the algorithm

is affected by noise in the readback samples, the efficiency

of the algorithm increases with the increase in SNRelec. We

can observe that the algorithm is very effective in identifying

the defect locations at high SNRelec. The algorithm is also

effective under different ITI conditions. The monic targets for

the two channel configurations at 14.5 dB are

⎡

⎤

0.026332 0.215724 0.030587

GCONFIG1 = ⎣0.216051 1.000000 0.216170⎦ (18)

0.030590 0.215788 0.026639

Fig. 7 shows the performance of the TDMR system using the proposed defect detector with ideal defect detector as the reference for comparison. In the presence of a defect, flooring in the detector BER performance is observed because defects will always result in detection errors. However, no flooring in decoder BER performance is observed even in the SNR region where flooring in detector’s BER is observed. This shows that the LDPC code is able to fully correct the burst erasure. For deep defects, the proposed defect detector is able to identify the location of defect accurately and achieves the BER performance within 0.5 dB that of the ideal defect detector. For shallow defects, the readback signal and the output of 2-D SOVA contain some valid information about the input data. The proposed defect detector outperforms the ideal defect detector by 0.9 dB by not fully ignoring the information within the defect region. We can also conclude that the LDPC code is using the bursty nature of erasures to correct 1444 b erasures, which is more than dmin(≤ 986) of the code.

B. Interleaving of LDPC Codewords

Interleaving of codewords can be of two forms: 1) intracodeword interleaving, i.e., a permutation of the codeword and 2) inter-codeword interleaving, i.e., multiple codewords are interleaved within each other.
1) Intra-Codeword Interleaving: For a (n, k) code with the minimum codeword distance of dmin, the maximum number of isolated erasures that can be corrected is dmin. However, knowing that the erasures occur in bursts can help in correcting the burst erasures of length up to n − k − 1 bits as proposed by Fossorier [6] for 1-D burst erasures. A natural way is to identify a class of codewords with good burst erasure correction capability, such as quasi-cyclic LDPC codes. The burst erasure correction capability of the identified code can be further enhanced by permuting the codeword as studied in [6]–[8] for 1-D burst erasures. While it is not often explicitly mentioned, the permutation of codewords is to improve the burst erasure correcting capability in the presence of isolated bit errors/erasures.
We use a simple 2-D interleaving scheme for QC LDPC codes that can improve the burst error correction capability. The permutation of a codeword is achieved by the following.

1) Populating the codeword into a 2-D page in raster scan order.
2) A predetermined 2-D burst size Brows × Bcols is identified.
3) The rows of the 2-D page are permuted such that Brows rows with erasure are as far apart as possible. This is achieved as follows.

If H denotes the number of rows in the 2-D page, we define the interleaving depth as

Dintrlv =

H Brows

where x indicates the greatest integer less than or equal to x.

Let irow denote a row index in the 2-D page before interleaving

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3101211

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 52, NO. 11, NOVEMBER 2016

Fig. 7. Performance of the TDMR system with the proposed defect detector is compared with the performance in the presence of an ideal defect detector for CONFIG1 in Table I. For deep defects, the proposed defect detector gives a performance within 0.5 dB of the performance of the ideal defect detector. For shallow defects, the proposed defect detector outperforms the ideal defect detector by 0.9 dB by ignoring only erroneous information from the 2-D SOVA in the defect region. The ideal defect detector ignores all information from the 2-D SOVA within the defect region resulting in inferior performance. Flooring in detector’s BER performance is observed in the presence of defects because defects will always result in detection errors. However, the BER performance of the decoder does not floor in the range of SNRs where detector’s BER flooring is observed. This shows that the LDPC code is able to correct burst erasures effectively. (a) BER at detector’s output. (b) BER at decoder’s output.
Fig. 8. Interleaving scheme for 4 KB codeword written into a 128 × 256 page designed for the defects of size 38 × 38 is shown. The rows of the 128 × 256 pages are permuted using a matrix interleaver with the number of columns in the matrix is equal to the number of rows in the defect size. The permuted row indices are obtained by populating the original row indices in row-first (raster scan) order and reading back the indices in column-first order.

Fig. 9. Performance of the TDMR system with configuration CONFIG1 from Table I is compared with and without intra-codeword interleaving. Four codewords of length 32 768 bit are interleaved into a 256 × 1024 page. Interleaving of four codewords enabled us to correct a burst (76 × 76) four times larger than the burst (38 × 38) without interleaving, achieving the same BER performance. Flooring in detector’s BER performance is seen due to the presence of defects. However, this does not lead to flooring in decoder’s performance. Decoder’s BER performance shows that the LDPC code is able to correct burst erasures effectively. (a) BER at detector’s output. (b) BER at decoder’s output.

and iˆrow denote a row index in the 2-D page after interleaving. Writing

irow = p × Dintrlv + q, irow = 0, 1, . . . , H − 1
where p = (irow/Dintrlv) and 0 ≤ q < Dintrlv, and the two indices are related using a matrix interleaver as

iˆrow =

q × (Dintrlv + 1) + p, q ≤ qintrlv q × Dintrlv + qintrlv + p, q ≥ qintrlv

where qintrlv = H mod Dintrlv.

Fig. 8 shows the interleaving scheme for a 128 × 256 page size and a predetermined burst size of 128×256. The permuted row indices are
0, 40, 80, 120, 1, 41, 80, 121, 2, 42, 82, 122, 3, 43, . . .
2) Inter-Codeword Interleaving: An efficient interleaving of the codewords will distribute the burst erasure into multiple codewords. This helps in handling the large bursts of erasures [17]. To demonstrate this effect, we interleave four codewords each of 4096 b into a page of 256 × 512 size. The interleaving scheme is given by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MATCHA AND GARANI SRINIVASA: DEFECT DETECTION AND BURST ERASURE CORRECTION FOR TDMR

3101211

The i th codeword is populated in the locations indicated with the index i for i = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4. The 2-D detected pages are de-interleaved before decoding by the BP algorithm.
Fig. 9 shows the performance gains of the TDMR system due to intra- and inter-codeword interleaving. We notice a gain of 0.3 dB in SNRelec due to intra-codeword interleaving. We also notice that the inter-codeword interleaving with burst size of 76 × 76 gives a similar performance as non-interleaved system with burst size of 38 × 38. This corresponds to a gain of four times in burst size.
A good interleaver distributes the bursts to different codewords as equally as possible as studied in [18]. Since de-interleaving of codewords before decoding adds to latency, a zero-latency interleaving scheme can be of practical importance as proposed in [19].
VI. CONCLUSION
We have proposed a novel defect detection algorithm that uses a threshold on readback signal and signature analysis to effectively recover data from the burst erasures relevant to TDMR. We have studied the performance of the algorithm using a Voronoi-based TDMR channel model with rectangular defects. Simulations show that the proposed defect detector identifies defect location with >90% accuracy in the range of SNRs of interest. The defect detection algorithm is tuned for the statistics observed for the TDMR channel model and provides an improvement of >2 dB in performance. We have also proposed simple interleaving scheme for LDPC codes that achieves further >0.3 dB gain in performance. The design of error correcting codes that can handle 2-D burst erasures can help in the better recovery of the data due to burst erasures in TDMR.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work was supported by the Department of Science and Technology (DST), India, under Grant SERB/F/3371/2013-14.

REFERENCES
[1] B. Vasic´ and M. E. Kurtas, Coding and Signal Processing for Magnetic Recording Systems. Boca Raton, FL, USA: CRC Press, 2004.
[2] V. Dorfman and J. Wolf, “A method for reducing the effects of thermal asperities,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 19, no. 4, pp. 662–667, Apr. 2001.
[3] W. Tan, H. Xia, and J. R. Cruz, “Erasure detection algorithms for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 3099–3101, Jul. 2004.
[4] W. Tan, S. Yang, K. Fitzpatrick, H. Zhong, L. Du, and Y. Lee, “Media defect recovery using full-response reequalization in magnetic recording channels,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, Nov./Dec. 2008, pp. 1–5.
[5] S. Garani and S. Parthasarathy, “Identifying a defect in a data-storage medium,” U.S. Patent 12/860 653, Aug. 20, 2010.
[6] M. Fossorier, “Universal burst error correction,” in Proc. ISIT, Jul. 2006, pp. 1969–1973.
[7] G. Sridharan, A. Kumarasubramanian, A. Thangaraj, and S. Bhashyam, “Optimizing burst erasure correction of LDPC codes by interleaving,” in Proc. ISIT, Jul. 2008, pp. 1143–1147.
[8] E. Paolini and M. Chiani, “Construction of near-optimum burst erasure correcting low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 1320–1328, May 2009.
[9] K. Li, A. Kavcˇic´, and M. F. Erden, “Construction of burst-erasure efficient LDPC codes for use with belief propagation decoding,” in Proc. ICC, May 2010, pp. 1–5.
[10] C. K. Matcha and S. G. Srinivasa, “Generalized partial response equalization and data-dependent noise predictive signal detection over media models for TDMR,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 51, no. 10, Oct. 2015, Art. no. 3101215.
[11] H. Nobuhara et al., “Influence of writing ITI effects in shingled magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 49, no. 7, pp. 3814–3817, Jul. 2013.
[12] Y. Chen and S. G. Srinivasa, “Joint self-iterating equalization and detection for two-dimensional intersymbol-interference,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 8, pp. 3219–3230, Aug. 2013.
[13] M. Bahrami, C. K. Matcha, S. M. Khatami, S. Roy, S. G. Srinivasa, and B. Vasic´, “Investigation into harmful patterns over multitrack shingled magnetic detection using the Voronoi model,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 51, no. 12, Dec. 2015, Art. no. 3102307.
[14] A. Kavcˇic´, X. Huang, B. Vasic´, W. Ryan, and M. Erden, “Channel modeling and capacity bounds for two-dimensional magnetic recording,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 812–818, Mar. 2010.
[15] M. Khatami, M. Bahrami, and B. Vasic´, “Symmetric information rate estimation and bit aspect ratio optimization for TDMR using generalized belief propagation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2015, pp. 1620–1624.
[16] M. Khatami, M. Bahrami, and B. Vasic´, “Information rates of constrained TDMR channels using generalized belief propagation,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Diego, CA, USA, Dec. 2015, pp. 1–6.
[17] G. Forney, “Burst-correcting codes for the classic bursty channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun. Technol., vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 772–781, Oct. 1971.
[18] M. Blaum, J. Bruck, and A. Vardy, “Interleaving schemes for multidimensional cluster errors,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 730–743, Mar. 1998.
[19] S. Garani, N. Richardson, X. Hu, and S. Parthasarathy, “Channel constrained code aware interleaver,” U.S. Patent 8 055 973, Nov. 8, 2011.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:55:21 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

