The Finite Length Analysis of Spatially-Coupled Codes for 1-D Magnetic Recording Channels
Homa Esfahanizadeh, Ahmed Hareedy, Lara Dolecek Department of Electrical Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, USA
hesfahanizadeh@ucla.edu, ahareedy@ucla.edu, dolecek@ee.ucla.edu

Abstract—Spatially-coupled (SC) codes have recently attracted significant attention due to their capability to achieve capacity approaching performance. Significant recent research has been devoted to the asymptotic study of SC codes. Although the asymptotic analysis is relevant, it cannot be directly applied in the finite-length setting due to cycle-free and averaging assumptions. In this paper, we consider the problem of finite length analysis of SC codes for magnetic-recording (MR) applications. First, we propose an efficient approach to enumerate certain combinatorial objects inside the Tanner graph representation of SC codes, objects that are found to lead to decoding errors in the high reliability regime. This enumeration approach exploits the structure of SC codes to dramatically decrease the complexity of the enumeration. Next, we consider the class of array-based SC codes with column weight 3 as a representative example, and identify the problematic combinatorial objects that cause performance degradation in the error floor area. We show that SC codes designed to have a minimal number of these problematic objects have a notable performance improvement in the error floor area.
I. INTRODUCTION
Spatially-coupled (SC) codes are a class of graph-based codes that are constructed by coupling a number of identical low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes together to make a chain of underlying block codes [1]. We consider circulantbased (CB) LDPC codes, where all circulants are non-zero, as the underlying block codes [2]. An SC code is constructed by partitioning the parity-check matrix H of a block code into matrices H0 and H1 via a so-called cutting vector and coupling L replicas of H0 and H1 together to achieve the parity-check matrix HSC , as shown Fig. 1.
Significant recent research efforts have been devoted to the asymptotic analysis of SC codes, i.e., when the code length approaches infinity, e.g., [3], [4]. While the asymptotic analysis is important, these results are not immediately translatable to the practical setting and the finite-length code design. There are only few works that have studied the finite length performance of SC codes, and they are primarily focused on AWGN channels, [5]–[7]. The performance of SC codes over nonAWGN channels is still largely unexplored.
In this paper, we study a class of structured SC codes for magnetic recording (MR) applications. We characterize combinatorial objects of interest in the Tanner graph representation of SC codes specifically in the context of MR applications. We introduce an efficient approach for the enumeration of these objects, and demonstrate that the choice of the cutting vector affects the population of the problematic combinatorial objects.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 1: (a) The parity-check matrix, H, of an arbitrary block code is partitioned by a cutting vector with four elements, ζ = [ζ1 ζ2 ζ3 ζ4], (b) The parity-check matrix, HSC , of an SC code with L = 6.

First, we present a novel approach for the enumeration of combinatorial objects that efficiently exploits the structure of SC codes to decrease the complexity of enumeration. Previous methods for the enumeration of objects are too complex to be used for higher code lengths or column weights, see [6], [7]. Our new approach is neither brute force nor case-based, and thus can be used to study SC codes with diverse code lengths and column weights. Using the new enumeration approach, we can analytically find the optimal cutting vector that results in the minimum number of problematic objects.
Then, we consider the array-based (AB) SC codes with column weight 3 as a class of circulant-based SC codes and investigate their problematic objects for MR applications. We show that decoding errors in the error floor area are balanced absorbing sets (BASs) which were previously introduced in [8] to characterize the decoding errors of LDPC (block) codes over MR channels. By a careful analysis of the error profile in the error floor area, we establish a convenient topological property: several dominant BASs in the MR setting share a common denominator structure. It is then this sub-structure that we try to avoid in the code design.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we briefly review the structure of SC codes and the definitions of ASs and BASs. In Section III, we propose our novel approach for the enumeration of combinatorial objects within SC codes. In Section IV, we consider the array-based SC codes with column weight 3, as an illustrative exemplar, and characterize their problematic combinatorial objects for MR applications. Our simulation results are given in Section V. Lastly, Section VI delivers conclusions and offers suggestions for further research.

978-1-5386-3954-2/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE

1128

Asilomar 2016

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:52:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

H=
Fig. 2: A CB code with γ = 3 and κ = 17, partitioned by a cutting vector ζ = [4 8 13]. (Each mini square corresponds to one circulant.)

HSC =

II. PRELIMINARIES
We start by summarizing relevant background. First, we describe circulant-based LDPC codes and their derived SC codes. Then, we review the definitions of combinatorial objects that cause the error floor phenomenon in SC/LDPC codes.

A. Circulant-Based LDPC Codes and SC Codes
In this paper, we consider circulant-based (CB) LDPC codes as underlying block codes for constructing SC codes. CB codes are a class of structured regular (γ, κ) LDPC codes, where γ is the column weight of the parity-check matrix (variable node degree in the Tanner graph), κ is the row weight (check node degree), and they can offer simple hardware implementation thanks to their spacial structure [2]. Suppose p is the size of the constituent circulants, the parity-check matrix, H, of a CB code is constructed as follows:

 σf0,0

σf0,1 . . . σ  f0,κ−1

 σf1,0

σf1,1 . . . σ  f1,κ−1

H =  

...

...

...

...

.  

σ σ . . . σ fγ−1,0

fγ−1,1

fγ−1,κ−1

The circulant matrix σ is obtained by cyclic shifting of columns of a p × p identity matrix to the left. Each column of H is corresponding to one variable node (VN) and each row is corresponding to one check node (CN). In the parity-check matrix H, let i, 0 ≤ i ≤ γ − 1, be the row group index and j, 0 ≤ j ≤ κ − 1, be the column group index. The circulant powers are non-negative integer values. If the term fi,j can be factorized into functions f1(i) and f2(j), the code is a separable-circulant-based (SCB) LDPC code which includes a well-known class of structured LDPC codes namely array-based (AB) codes [2]. For AB codes, f (i, j) = i · j and κ = p.
An SC code is constructed by partitioning the paritycheck matrix, H, of a block code via a cutting vector ζ = [ζ0 ζ1 . . . ζγ−1] into entries in two matrices H0 and H1, as illustrated in Fig. 2. The cutting vector ζ is a vector of ascending natural numbers (0 ≤ ζ0 ≤ ζ1 ≤ · · · ≤ ζγ−1 ≤ κ). Matrices H0 and H1 are of the same size as H. Matrix H0 is constructed by copying all circulant sub-matrices of H with row and column group indices in {(i, j)|j < ζi} to the same coordinates in H0, and setting all remaining elements of H0 to 0. Matrix H1 is then simply H1=H−H0. Then, L replicas of the partitioned components are put together to achieve an SC code with coupling length L as shown Fig. 1 (b). Fig. 3 shows an SC code with L = 2 and underlying block code given in Fig. 2.

Fig. 3: An SC code is constructed by coupling L = 2 replicas of H0 and H1 from the underlying block code shown in Fig. 2. The mini squares outside the staircase area (shown in gray) are zero circulants.

Consider the matrix H of a block code partitioned by ζ. The region Rn, n ∈ {0, · · · , γ}, is defined as the set of columns with column group indices in {ζn−1, · · · , ζn − 1} (ζ−1 = 0 and ζγ = κ). For the derived SC code with coupling length L, the region Rn, n ∈ {0, · · · , γL}, is the set of column groups between two consecutive down-steps in the staircase area, see
Fig. 3. The number of column groups in each region is the
length of that region. For the block codes, the length of region Rn is πn = ζn − ζn−1. For the SC codes, the length of region Rn is shown by πn, and it is a function of the lengths of regions of the underlying block code:

 

π0

 
πn =


πγ π(n mod γ)

 

π0+πγ

if n = 0, if n = γL, if (n mod γ) = 0, if n = 0, n = γL, and (n mod γ) = 0.
(1)

The elements of the parity-check matrix for a non-binary (NB) code are chosen from GF(q), q > 2. In the associated Tanner graph, there exists an edge between a VN and a CN iff the corresponding entry in the parity-check matrix is nonzero. This non-zero value is called the weight of that edge. If we replace all edge weights in the Tanner graph (all nonzero entries in the parity-check matrix) by 1’s, we achieve the unlabeled graph (unlabeled parity-check matrix).
B. The Definition of Combinatorial Objects of Interest
In this section, we review the key combinatorial objects of interest. Under iterative decoding algorithms, certain structures in the Tanner graph of graph-based codes cause the error floor phenomenon. These structures correspond to specific decoding errors, and they do not need only be codeword errors.
Definition 1. (cf. [9]) Consider a subgraph induced by a subset V of VNs in the Tanner graph of an NB-LDPC code. Set all the VNs in V to values in GF(q)\{0} and set all other VNs to 0. The set V is said to be an (a, b) absorbing set (AS) if the size of V is a, the number of neighboring unsatisfied CNs is b, and each VN in V is connected to strictly more satisfied than unsatisfied neighboring CNs (for the given assignment of variable node values).
For MR applications, only a subclass of ASs is problematic [8]. It is because in the MR setting, there are global iterations between the detector and the decoder that can overcome the errors caused by the existence of ASs that are on the verge

1129
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:52:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

of instability. The problematic subclass of ASs is balanced absorbing sets (BASs). We classify ASs as either balanced absorbing sets (BASs) or unbalanced absorbing sets (UBASs):

Definition 2. (cf. [8]) Let g =

γ−1 2

weight γ. An (a, b) absorbing set with 0

for a ≤b≤

given column

ag 2

is defined

as a balanced absorbing set (BAS), while an (a, b) absorbing

set with

ag 2

< b ≤ ag is defined as an unbalanced absorbing

set (UBAS).

Fig. 4 (b) depicts the configuration of (4, 4) AS and Fig. 4 (a) shows two non-isomorphic configurations for (6, 0) BAS.

III. AN EFFICIENT APPROACH FOR THE ENUMERATION OF COMBINATORIAL OBJECTS FOR SC CODES

In this section, we present an efficient approach to enumerate specific (a, b) configurations for SC codes. We consider the unlabeled parity-check matrix (or Tanner graph). Below is the outstanding features of our new approach:
• We efficiently exploit the repetitive structure of SC codes to search over few smaller sub-graphs (sub-matrices) rather than the whole Tanner graph (parity-check matrix). We then compute the total number of objects of interest by combining these intermediate results.
• The underlying block code can be any circulant-based LDPC code.
• The object of interest can be any (a, b) ASs, cycles, or other combinatorial objects inside the Tanner graph.
We now derive several structural properties that will simplify the search.

Remark 1. In this paper, we make an assumption that for any (a, b) AS of interest, there exists at least one cycle that spans all VNs. This assumption simplifies the analysis but it is not too restrictive as it holds for almost all detrimental objects of interest.

Lemma 1. Consider an SC code with column weight γ. The

VNs of an (a, b) AS belong to at most β consecutive regions,

where β is:

a

β = (γ − 1) + 1.

(2)

2

Proof. Consider a cycle that passes through all VNs in the graphical representation of an (a, b) AS. Among the VNs of the (a, b), let v1 be the VN with the lowest index (the index of the corresponding column in HSC ), and vf be the VN with the highest index. The shortest path on the cycle that connects v1 to vf includes at most λ intermediate VNs, where λ is:

a λ = − 1.
2

As shown in [7], in an SC code, any two VNs connected to a CN (any two adjacent VNs) must belong to most γ consecutive regions. There are (λ + 2) VNs on the shortest path from v1 to vf . These variable nodes can belong to (λ + 2) different regions, and there can be at most (γ − 2) different regions between the regions of two adjacent VNs. Consequently, all

VNs on the path from v1 to vf must belong to a window of at most β consecutive regions, where β is defined as follow:
a β = (λ + 1)(γ − 2) + (λ + 2) = (γ − 1) + 1.
2
The rest of VNs of the AS must also belong to these β consecutive regions since they have indices in v1 to vf .
Next we introduce the search matrix, which is a sub-matrix of HSC. It will be used to describe the smaller areas that need to be investigated to find the total number of objects of interest.
Definition 3. Consider an SC code with parameters γ, p, and L. Let the lengths of regions be {π0, · · · , πγL}. The search matrix An,k is defined as follows, with n ∈ {0, · · · , γL} and k ∈ {1, · · · , γL − n + 1},

An,k = HSC θn1,k : θn2,k φn1 ,k : φn2 ,k .

(3)

The matrix An,k is a a sub-matrix of HSC with row indices {θn1,k, · · · , θn2,k} and column indices {φ1n,k, · · · , φ2n,k}. The parameters θn1,k, θn2,k, φn1 ,k, and φn2 ,k are:

θn1,k = pn,
(4) θn2,k = p min{n + k − 1, γL} + γ − 1,

n−1

φ1n,k = p πj ,

j=0
(5)
min{n+k−1,γL}

φ2n,k = p

πj − 1.

j=0

We say an (a, b) AS starts in region Rn, n ∈ {0, · · · , γL}, if among all VNs of the AS, the one with the lowest associated column index belongs to region Rn.
Lemma 2. The search matrix An,β, n ∈ {0, · · · , γL} comprises all rows and columns that correspond to CNs and VNs, respectively, of (a, b) ASs that start in region Rn.
Proof. Based on Lemma 1, all VNs of an (a, b) AS must belong to at most β consecutive regions. So, if the VN with the lowest index belong to regions Rn, all a VNs must belong to regions {Rn, · · · , Rmin{n+β−1,γL}}. The non-zero part of columns that correspond to region Rn is:

n−1

n

Bn = HSC pn : p(n + γ) − 1 p πj : p πj − 1 .

j=0

j=0

The smallest sub-matrix of HSC that includes all matrices {Bn, · · · , Bmin{n+β−1,γL}} is exactly An,β defined by equations (3)–(5). In other words, for all (a, b) ASs that start in
region Rn, the matrix An,β contains all rows and columns of HSC that correspond to their CNs and VNs.

We conclude the section with the following result, whose proof is in the longer version of this paper, [10].

1130
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:52:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Theorem 1. Let F denote the total number of (a, b) ASs for

an SC code with parameters γ and L ≥ 2, and let Fi denote the number of (a, b) ASs that start in region Ri. Then,

γ γ(L + 1) − β − i

γL

F = F0 +

γ

Fi +

Fi. (6)

i=1

i=γL+1−β

By using Theorem 1 for finding the number of objects of interest, we need to search over (γ + β + 1) considerably

smaller search matrices rather than the whole parity-check

matrix. Neither the number of search matrices that we need to inspect nor their sizes depend on the coupling length L, so the complexity of the enumeration method does not grow with L.

IV. ANALYSIS OF AB-SC CODES WITH COLUMN WEIGHT 3 FOR MR APPLICATIONS

In this section, we present a new methodology for the finite length analysis of SC codes for MR applications. We consider array-based SC (AB-SC) codes with γ = 3 as an illustrative example. The same method is also applicable to other types of circulant-based SC codes.
First, we show that the type of problematic objects that are dominant in the error floor performance of SC codes over MR channels is different from AWGN channels, and the decoding errors of SC codes can be viewed as BASs. Then, we demonstrate that several dominant BASs in the MR setting share a common denominator structure. Identifying the common denominator is useful for two reasons:
1) By minimizing the number of common denominator instances, we can simultaneously decrease the population of several topologically-distinct problematic BASs.
2) The common denominator has a simpler topology relative to its super-structures, so its instances can be easier identified during the search through the Tanner graph.
After identifying the common denominator structure, we use the enumeration approach introduced in Section III to find the cutting vector that corresponds to the minimal number of these sub-structures. For non-binary SC codes, we then perform existing edge weight optimization techniques that further reduce the number of remaining detrimental structures [8].
By examining the error profile of AB-SC codes with γ = 3 in the MR setting, we recognized that the dominant problematic objects are (6, 0), (8, 0), and (10, 0) BASs; however, for the AWGN setting, the most problematic objects are (3, 3) and (4, 2) ASs [6]. Let AB-SC Code 1 be a non-binary AB-SC code over GF(4) with p = 23, γ = 3, and L = 5 (code length 5290 bits). The error profile of AB-SC Code 1 is shown in Table I which is corresponding to the FER curve in Fig. 5 at SNR=17.25 dB. For the (6, 0) BAS, there are exactly two non-isomorphic configurations which are depicted in Fig. 4 (a). Both of these configurations have (4, 4) ASs as sub-structures, while for example (3, 3) AS is present in only one of the two configurations. Additionally, other problematic BASs such as (8, 0) and (10, 0) also have (4, 4) ASs in their configurations, so we identify (4, 4) AS, shown in Fig. 4 (b), as the common denominator. We then seek to minimize the number of instances of this configuration by a guided choice of the cutting vector.

(a)

(b)

Fig. 4: (a) The two non-isomorphic configurations for (6, 0) BAS. In each configuration, one (4, 4) sub-structure is shown in green dash lines, and unsatisfied check nodes are shown in red dash lines. (b) (4, 4) AS.

TABLE I: Error profile (number of specific errors out of 100 errors) for
AB-SC Code 1 with random cutting vectors and random edge weights; at SNR=17.25 dB and FER=2.33 × 10−6.

Error Type (6, 0) (8, 0) (10, 0) (6, 1) (8, 2) Other

Count

76

8

6

3

2

5

V. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we compare AB-SC codes with γ = 3 constructed with the optimal, randomly selected, and worst cutting vectors. A cutting vector is optimal if it results in the minimum number of common denominator instances, which is (4, 4) AS here. First, we compare the number of (4, 4) ASs for the unlabeled Tanner graphs of these SC codes. Then, we compare the error floor profile and FER curves. We demonstrate that the cutting vector corresponding to the degenerate case, in which H0 = H and H1 = 0 or vice versa, has the maximum number of (4, 4) ASs and the worst error floor performance. As a result, the degenerate case is the most inferior compared to other cutting vectors.
Table II compares the number of (4, 4) ASs as the instances of the identified common denominator for an AB-SC code with p = 23, γ = 3, several different values of L, and a number of different cutting vectors. According to our result, the optimal cutting vector results in around 60 percent reduction in the population of (4, 4) ASs compared to the degenerate case. Using the optimal cutting vector also results around 20 percent reduction compared to the average number of (4, 4) ASs over all possible cutting vectors.
Next, we compare the error floor performance of optimized and unoptimized non-binary AB-SC codes over GF(4). The parameters of the codes are as follows: AB Code 1 is a nonbinary AB (block) code with p = 23, γ = 3, randomly selected edge weights, and the design rate 0.87. Then, we consider ABSC codes with L = 5. For AB-SC Code 1–4, the underlying

TABLE II: The cutting vector analysis for an AB-SC code with p = 23, γ = 3, and different L.

L

Optimal

Random

Worst

Average

5

[5 11 18] 1000270 ASs

[3 6 18] 1103471 ASs

[23 23 23] 2705835 ASs

1285379.42 ASs

20

[5 11 18] 4466140 ASs

[3 6 18]

[23 23 23]

5586013.01

4791521 ASs 10823340 ASs

ASs

50

[4 11 18] 11386012 ASs

[3 6 18] 12167621 ASs

[23 23 23] 27058350 ASs

14187280.19 ASs

1131
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:52:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

FER normalized over L

the enumeration of combinatorial objects. Then, we carefully

10−2

AB Code 1 (R)

studied the dominant problematic objects of AB-SC codes and

AB−SC Code 1 (RR) AB−SC Code 2 (OR)

their common sub-structures. This new methodology enabled

10−3

AB−SC Code 3 (RO)

us to design SC codes with minimum number of problematic

AB−SC Code 4 (OO)

10−4

objects for the MR setting. An interesting future direction is to

investigate the objects of interest for SC codes with different

10−5

underlying block codes and higher column weights.

10−6

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

Research supported in part by NSF CAREER grant number

10−7

1150212 and a grant from ASTC-IDEMA.

10−8

16

16.5

17

17.5

18

SNR (dB)

Fig. 5: The performance comparison for the optimized and unoptimized SC codes with γ = 3 over the MR channel.

TABLE III: Error profile (number of specific errors out of 30 errors) for AB-
SC Code 4 with optimal cutting cutting vectors and optimized edge weights; at SNR=17.25 dB and FER=4.11 × 10−8.

Error Type (6, 0) (8, 0) (10, 0) (6, 1) (8, 2) Other

Count

0

0

1

0

0

29

block code is AB Code 1 and the design rate is 0.84. ABSC Code 1 refers to SC codes with randomly assigned edge weights and randomly selected cutting vectors (notation ’RR’ in the plots), and AB-SC Code 2 refers to the SC codes with randomly assigned edge weights and optimal cutting vectors (notation ’OR’ in the plots). Likewise, AB-SC Code 3 refers to the SC codes with optimized edge weights and randomly selected cutting vectors (notation ’RO’ in the plots), and ABSC Code 4 refers to the SC codes with optimized edge weights and optimal cutting vectors (notation ’OO’ in the plots).
Fig. 5 demonstrates the FER curves for AB Code 1 and ABSC Code 1–4. This figure shows the performance improvement achieved by optimized SC codes relative to unoptimized SC codes and the uncoupled block codes. For the optimized SC code, the cutting vector is carefully chosen to have the minimum number of (4, 4) ASs. Then, the edge weight optimization is done to remove as many as possible of remaining (6, 0), (6, 1), (8, 0), (8, 2), and (10, 0) BASs. Based on our enumeration results, the optimal cutting vector is [5 11 18]. The random cutting vector is arbitrarily chosen to be [3 6 18]. As it is apparent from Fig. 5, the best error floor performance is achieve when both the cutting vector and edge weights are optimized. The resultant code has around 2 orders of magnitude performance improvement relative to the unoptimized case.
The error profile for AB-SC Code 4 over the MR channel is shown in Table III, which demonstrates a dramatic reduction of dominant BASs compared to the error profile for AB-SC Code 1 shown in Table I.

REFERENCES
[1] A. J. Felstrom and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 2181–2191, Sep 1999.
[2] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec 2004.
[3] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, Feb 2011.
[4] M. Lentmaier, A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, and K. S. Zigangirov, “Iterative decoding threshold analysis for LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 56, no. 10, pp. 5274–5289, Oct 2010.
[5] A. E. Pusane, R. Smarandache, P. O. Vontobel, and D. J. Costello, “Deriving good LDPC convolutional codes from LDPC block codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 835–857, Feb 2011.
[6] D. G. M. Mitchell, L. Dolecek, and D. J. Costello, “Absorbing set characterization of array-based spatially coupled LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), June 2014, pp. 886–890.
[7] B. Amiri, A. Reisizadeh, J. Kliewer, and L. Dolecek, “Optimized arraybased spatially-coupled LDPC codes: An absorbing set approach,” in Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory (ISIT), June 2015, pp. 51–55.
[8] A. Hareedy, B. Amiri, R. Galbraith, and L. Dolecek, “Non-binary LDPC codes for magnetic recording channels: Error floor analysis and optimized code design,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 64, no. 8, pp. 3194–3207, Aug 2016.
[9] L. Dolecek, Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, M. J. Wainwright, and B. Nikolic, “Analysis of absorbing sets and fully absorbing sets of array-based LDPC codes,” IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 56, no. 1, pp. 181–201, Jan 2010.
[10] H. Esfahanizadeh, A. Hareedy, and L. Dolecek, “Spatially-coupled codes optimized for magnetic recording applications,” IEEE Transactions on Magnetics, vol. PP, no. 99, pp. 1–1, 2016.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we presented a methodology for the finite length analysis of SC codes over MR channels. We exploited the structure of SC codes to present an efficient approach for

1132
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:52:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

