Design and FPGA Verification of a Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Code for Optical Communication Systems

Genaro Bergero∗, Damia´n A. Morero∗‡, Ariel L. Pola†, Mario A. Castrillo´n‡, and Mario R. Hueda‡
∗ ClariPhy Argentina S.A. - Humberto Primo 680 - Co´rdoba (5000), Argentina ‡ F.C.E.F.N - Universidad Nacional de Co´rdoba - IDIT - CONICET - Av. Ve´lez Sarsfield 1611 - Co´rdoba (5016), Argentina
† Fundacio´n Fulgor - Romagosa 518 - Co´rdoba (5016), Argentina Emails: {mario.hueda,acastrillon,dmorero}@unc.edu.ar, arielpola@gmail.com, genaro.bergero@clariphy.com.ar

Abstract—Powerful forward error correction codes such as quasi-cyclic low density parity check (QC-LDPC) are required in next-generation coherent optical communication systems [1]. This work describes the design and experimental verification of a high net coding gain (NCG), low complexity QC-LDPC code. Towards this end, we develop a field programmable gate array (FPGA) based platform specially designed for optimization and performance evaluation of LDPC codes. The proposed FPGA framework includes several features such as the capability of changing the internal resolution of the decoder algorithm or capturing error patterns for error-floor analysis. Experimental results derived from the FPGA platform show that the designed QC-LDPC code is able to achieve an NCG of 11.6 dB at a bit-error-rate (BER) of 10−15 with an overhead of 25% and a codeword length of only 16K bits.
I. INTRODUCTION
Since the birth of the field of channel coding with the work of Claude Shannon in 1948 [2], its main objective has been to find practical coding schemes that could approach channel capacity (a.k.a. “the Shannon limit”). However, it was not until the advent turbo codes and the rebirth of the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes during the two past decades that this goal proved to be feasible. Today LDPC codes are being considered for a wide variety of emerging applications such as high-density flash memory, satellite broadcasting, WiFi, mobile WiMAX, and optical communications. Particularly, in next generation multi-hundred gigabit-per-second (Gb/s) digital coherent transmission systems, forward error correction (FEC) codes are required to achieve a net-effective coding gain (NCG) ≥ 10dB1 at a bit-error-rate of 10−15 [3]. Given their superior performance and intrinsic suitability for parallel processing, LDPC codes are the preferred non-concatenated FEC alternatives for high-speed optical transport systems. Although it is well known that these codes can perform close to the Shannon limit, their application to multigigabit optical systems is difficult as a result of the error floor problem [4].
Very low error floor, complexity, and power consumption of LDPC are major challenges for practical implementation
1The NCG is defined as: CG + 10 · log10(R) where CG is the signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) difference between the uncoded and coded system required to achieve a certain bit-error rate (BER) (e.g., 10−15 ), and R is the code rate. The NCG is expressed in dB.

in commercial devices. The error-floor of LDPC strongly depends on the design of the matrix of parity check and the resolution used in soft-decision decoder. On the other hand, parallel architectures of LDPC usually feature from high layout complexity as a result of a complex interconnection pattern inherent in their iterative decoders. The jointly optimization of all these factors is crucial to make the implementation of LDPC-based FEC schemes in practical transceivers feasible.
In this work we present the design of a high NCG, low complexity, quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC code suitable for ultrahigh speed optical communication networks. Moreover, we develop a field programmable gate array (FPGA) based platform specially designed for a rapid optimization and performance evaluation of LDPC codes. Towards this end, the developed FPGA framework includes numerous features such as the possibility of (i) varying the number of iterations depending of channel noise or (ii) changing the resolution of internal operations. In order to analyze the codewords that produce the trapping sets2 in the code, the platform also has the capability to save the erroneous codewords and their corresponding decoder soft input values with the objective of performing a posterior analysis. The FPGA platform is used to investigate the designed QC-LDPC code. Experimental results show that the proposed QC-LDPC code is able to achieve an NCG of 11.6 dB at a BER of 10−15 with an overhead of 25% and a codeword length of only 16 K bits.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents a brief background about LDPC codes. Section III describes the proposed architecture and implementation details, while Section IV discusses the experimental results. Finally, conclusions are drawn in Section V.
II. LDPC CODE
A. Background
An LDPC code is a linear block code defined by a sparse3 parity check matrix H of dimensions (m × n) where m is the number of parity check equations and n is the code length.
2In the error floor region virtually all failures are due to “near codewords” called trapping sets [4].
3A sparse matrix is a matrix populated mainly with zeros.

978-1-5090-5137-3/16/$31.00 ©2016 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:53:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

The code dimension is k = n − rank(H) ≥ n − m where it is not necessary for H to be a full-rank matrix. Associated to H there is a graph called Tanner Graph (TG) [5]. The Tanner graph is composed of two types of nodes: variable nodes (VN) vi and check nodes (CN) ci. The nodes vi and cj represents the i-th coded bit or column of H, and the j-th check equation or row of H, respectively. In a TG, connections exist only between a variable node and a check node. vi is connected to cj if and only if Hj,i = 0, where index j stand for H’s row while index i stand for H’s column. The degree of a TG’s node is determined by the number of connections the node has; i.e. the degree of vi and cj represent the number of nonzero elements on the i-th column and on the j-th row of H, respectively. If all vi nodes have the same degree γ and all ci nodes the same degree ρ, then the code is said to be regular, otherwise it is called irregular. A cycle of length g in the TG is a set of nodes {q1, q2, . . . , qg} in which qi is connected with qi+1 and qg is connected with q1. The length of the shortest cycle in the TG is called the girth of the code.

Decoding Algorithm

Typically, LDPC codes are iteratively decoded using the sum-product algorithm (SPA) [6]. Let bi and xi be the i-th coded bit and the corresponding channel output, respectively.
The input to the SPA decoder is the prior log-likelihood ratio Lia defined by

Lia = ln

Pr{bi = 0|xi} Pr{bi = 1|xi}

.

(1)

Then, an iterative decoding procedure between variable and check nodes is carried out as follows:

Lvei→cj = Lai +

Lcek→vi ,

(2)

ck ∈C (vi ) \cj









Lcej →vi

=

φ−1

φ

vk∈V (cj )\vi

Levk →cj

, 

(3)

where C(vi) = {cj : Hj,i = 0}, V (cj) = {vi : Hj,i = 0}, φ(x) = ln [tanh (x/2)], and φ−1(x) = 2 tanh−1 (ex). The posterior LLR is computed in each iteration by

Lio = Lai +

Lcek→vi .

(4)

ck ∈C(vi)

Hard decisions are derived from (4). The iterative decoding

process is carried out until hard decisions satisfy all the parity

check equations or when an upper limit on the iteration number

is reached.

Computation of (2), (3), and (4) are performed by inde-

pendent blocks called variable-node processing-unit (VNPU),

check-node processing-unit (CNPU), and a-posteriori pro-

cessing unit (APU), respectively. Since the CNPU consumes

most of the computational requirements of SPA, a simplified

expression of (3) is usually implemented:

Lˆcej →vi

=

min
vk∈V (cj )\vi

Levk →cj

·

sign(Lvek→cj ).

vk∈V (cj )\vi

(5)

This approach is known as the min-sum algorithm (MSA) [7]. To reduce the approximation error of (5), some modifications to MSA have been proposed in [8]. In this paper we use the scaled min-sum algorithm (SMSA) [8]. The check node computation in SMSA is given by

Lˆecj →vi

=

α · min
vk∈V (cj )\vi

Lvek →cj

·

sign(Lvek→cj )

vk∈V (cj )\vi
(6)

with α being a factor smaller than unity (typically α ≈ 0.75).

B. Parity Check Matrix Design
The performance of the above mentioned iterative decoding algorithm depends on the structural properties of the Tanner graph. For instance, practically all LDPC code constructions impose the constraint of not having cycles of length 4 which significantly degrades the performance of the SPA. This constraint is usually called the row-column (RC) constraint because it forbids that two rows (or two columns) of H have more than one position in common that contains a nonzero element. In addition to the RC constraint, several additional properties are usually added to the parity check matrix in order to further improve performance or to simplify the implementation. Among these techniques, the most common ones are (see [7] for more details):
• Semi-Random designs
– Progressive edge-growth (PEG) – Cyclic listing/elimination – Approximate cycle extrinsic message degree
• Explicit designs
– Finite Geometry LDPC codes – Repeat Accumulate (RA), Irregular RA (IRA) and
extended IRA (eIRA) codes – Combinatorial Design based LDPC codes, such as
Balance Incomplete Block Design (BIBD) – Reed-Solomon (RS) based LDPC codes – Turbo Product codes
Explicit designs can provide codes with good performance and well algebraic structured parity-check matrices. Unfortunately, in general the design parameters are not flexible enough to support multiple rate codes as those required in Elastic Optical Network (EON) [9]. Towards this end, semirandom designs can provide higher flexibility in the code parameters and at the same time they can achieve in most cases a better performance than explicit designs (particularly for irregular LDPC codes). Furthermore, semi-random design can include hardware constraints that reduce significantly the implementation complexity without compromising the code performance [1]. For these reasons, this work focuses on semirandom design. In particular, a quasi cyclic parity check matrix constraint is imposed to facilitate the hardware implementation while the optimization is focused on reducing the number of short cycles. The latter is done by using the PEG algorithm [10].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:53:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Quasi-Cyclic Constraint
A QC-LDPC code is an LDPC code whose parity check matrix is a (mq × nq) array of (q × q) cyclic sub-matrices4. Since cyclic q × q matrices are isomorphic to the polynomials ring Z[x]/(xq − 1), it is possible to represent a QC matrix as a (mq × nq) matrix H¯ whose elements belong to Z[x]/(xq − 1) [7]. The latter significantly speedups the arithmetic computations related to H and reduces the amount of memory required to store it.

Cycle Optimization Algorithm
As previously mentioned, small cycles in the TG degrades the performance of the SPA. Therefore, the higher the girth of the code the better from the point of view of the SPA. However, it is not possible to arbitrarily increase the girth without degrading the code parameters (such as the minimum distance) [7]. For this reason, the cycle optimization is usually carried out under several matrix constraints to jointly improve the decoder performance, the code parameters and the implementation complexity. In this work, a QC constraint is used to reduce the implementation complexity while additional constrains on the number of rows and columns of H and their weight distributions are included to keep the code parameters under control. For instance, the latter keeps the code rate almost constant during the cycle optimization process while the constraint on row/column weight distributions helps to improve performance under iterative decoding.
The cycle optimization is carried out in two stages. The first stage is an optimization of the location of the non-zero elements of H¯ while the second stage is an optimization of the values of these non-zero elements. The first stage is done by using the PEG algorithm subject to a constraint in the number of rows and columns and their weight-distributions as previously mentioned. For the second stage we used the random-walk-like optimization proposed in [11].
Generated Code
As an example of the code design method described above, a parity check matrix H¯ with mq = 50 rows and nq = 250 columns is generated by using the PEG. The number of rows and columns is chosen to get a code rate of ≈ 0.8. An additional constraint on the weight distribution of the columns is used in order to generate 90% with weight 3 and 10% with weight 4. This distribution provides good performance for the target code rate 0.8 while keeping the weight distribution variability very low to simplify the implementation. The size q of the cyclic sub-matrices is 64. The latter gives a parity check matrix H of size 3200×16000 which is 1.5 times smaller than that proposed in [1].
III. FUNCTIONAL ARCHITECTURE AND IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS
Figure 1 shows the top level diagram of the emulation system for LDPC codes. It is composed of an LDPC codeword
4Note that cyclic codes are a sub-class of QC codes

Figure 1. Physical communication system.

generator, an LDPC decoder and the equivalent transmission link between the encoder and the decoder. The implementation was carried out on a KC-705 kit which includes a Kintex-7 (XC7K325T-2FFG900C) FPGA [12] where it is possible to operate at a maximum bit rate of 1 Gb/s. As it will be described in the next sections, the proposed system can be configured to emulate different fixed-point resolutions in the messages Levi→cj and Lecj→vi of SPA algorithm. The latter is critical to evaluate the trade-off between performance and complexity at very low BER.

A. Codeword generator
Since the emulation of the LDPC encoder is not strictly necessary for the evaluation of the code performance, it is here replaced by a random codeword generator (RCG) to reduce implementation complexity. The RCG only stores 32 codewords in RAM (these codewords were generated by encoding random information bits). To increase the set of possible codewords produced by the RCG, each time a new codeword has to be generated, the RCG selects one of the 32 codewords at random and computes its bit-level XOR operation with the last codeword transmitted. The latter randomly generates all linear combination of the 32 codewords stored in the RAM, i.e., a total of 232 different codewords.

B. Transmission link model
The transmission link model (TLM) comprises the concatenation of a PAM2 modulator, an AWGN channel and the LLR computation as described in equation (7)

AWGN Channel

Lia

=

2 σ2

( 1 − 2bi

+ni)

(7)

PAM2 Mod.

LLR Comp.

where ni is the noise sample with Gaussian distribution, mean value µ = 0 and variance σ2. These noise samples are generated by the Gaussian noise generator (GNG) IP block
proposed in [13]. Five parallel instances of this GNG with
different seeds were implemented at a clock frequency of
200MHz giving a maximum throughput of 1Gb/s. The SNR is defined as 1/σ2 and it can be configured to take any value between 2 and 12 dB.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:53:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 2. Decoder module (DM).

C. Decoder
The implementation architecture of the LDPC decoder was designed in order to take advantage of the RAM blocks available in the FPGA. To this end, the SPA iteration is divided into two steps. During the first step the VNPUs read the Lcej→vi from the Le memory5, compute the Lvei→cj messages and store them in the same Le memory bank by overwriting the Lecj→vi messages that were read. Symmetrically, during the second step the CNPUs read the Levi→cj from the Le memory, computes the Lcej→vi messages and store them in the same Le memory bank by overwriting the Levi→cj messages that were read.
Note that messages Lcej→vi (and Levi→cj ) cannot be simultaneously read/written due to the serial nature of RAMs. In order to read/write M messages simultaneously, at least M independent blocks of RAM are required. However, the distribution of the messages among the different blocks of RAMs is not straightforward. Let us assume that there is one CNPU and one VNPU implemented in hardware. Therefore, the extrinsic messages have to be stored in the RAM blocks in such a way that it is possible to simultaneously access the messages corresponding to one row and one column of H. This is equivalent to the classical graph-coloring problem [14] in which the nodes of the graph G represent the non-zero elements of H and any two nodes of the graph are connected if they belong to the same row or column of H. The RAM blocks assignation of the extrinsic messages is equivalent to assign a color to each node of G in such a way that two connected nodes do not have the same color (where each color represents a different RAM block). This problem has to be solved with the minimum number of colors in order to reduce the number of RAM blocks. The latter can be done by using the Brelaz graph coloring algorithm [15]. This approach can be generalized to process nc CNPUs and nv VNPUs by grouping the rows and columns of H in sub-sets of nc and nv rows and columns respectively and adding to the graph the corresponding connections between the nodes involved in each sub-set.
The relation between nv and nc is chosen in order to balance the computation time of the check nodes and variable nodes.
5During the first iteration messages Lcej →vi are set to zero.

Figure 3. Throughput-Complexity trade-off. Solid line: Throughput normalized to complexity. Dashed line: Complexity normalized.
Since the LDPC code designed in Section II-B has 3200 check nodes and 16000 variable nodes, nv/nc is 16000/3200 = 5, the amount of logic blocks is therefore proportional nc. However, increasing nc will also require an increase in the number of RAM blocks since more messages have to be accessed simultaneously. Although these new RAM blocks could be smaller (because the total number of messages is the same), the RAM utilization efficiency may be reduced because the FPGA provides fixed RAM block sizes. Furthermore, the higher number of interconnected RAM blocks and logic units significantly increases the wires congestion. The latter has to be avoided because it reduces the efficiency of the FPGA utilization. It is therefore preferable to have several instances of small decoders than a big decoder. For the Kintex-7 FPGA used in this project, Fig. 3 shows the normalized complexity and throughput as a function of the number variable and check nodes. Parameters nc = 1 and nv = 5 achieve a good balance between RAM and logic blocks while keeping the wires congestion very low. This architecture is summarized in Fig. 2. The number of clock cycles required to process all Lcej→vi and Lvei→cj is 3200 in both cases, resulting in an optimal balance.
In addition to the mentioned blocks, the decoder also includes a control unit (CI), a fixed-point resolution unit (FPRU) and a syndrome computation unit (SCU). The CI manages the internal decoder status, the FPRU controls the resolution of the extrinsic messages and the SCU is used to implement early termination (i.e., the decoding algorithm stops when the syndrome is equal to zero). The implementation details for each block is described in what follows:
1) Check node processing unit: The CNPU solves equation (6). It has 16 inputs and outputs to be able to manage the maximum row weight of H (see section II-B) and an additional one bit output that represents the status (satisfied or unsatisfied) of the corresponding parity check equation. A diagram of the CNPU is shown in Fig. 4. Each input is composed of 11 bits, 10 of which belong to the extrinsic messages Lvei→cj and the remaining bit is the a-posteriori decision. This latter bit is used to compute the parity check equation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:53:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 4. Check node processing unit (CNPU).

Figure 5. Variable node processing unit (VNPU).

of the corresponding CNPU in order to later determine if the syndrome is zero or not. Each of the Lcej→vi message output is composed of 10 bits. Both Levi→cj and Lcej→vi are represented in sign-module (SM) format (i.e., 1 bit for sign and 9 bits for magnitude) since it simplifies the implementation algorithm of the CNPU. The sign and magnitude of Lcej→vi are computed separately. A global sign sg is computed by doing the XOR operation of the sign values of all Lvei→cj inputs. Then, each particular output sign is just the XOR operation of sg with the sign of its corresponding input. On the other hand, the first and second minimum values of the input magnitudes are computed jointly with the position of the first minimum by the minimumposition selector (MPS) blocks. Each output magnitude is just the first minimum value except for the output corresponding the position of the first minimum where the second minimum is used.
2) Variable node processing unit: The VNPU solves equation (2). Since the maximum column height of H is 4, each VNPU comprises 4 inputs and 4 outputs for extrinsic messages and one additional output for the a-posteriori LLR. The inputs are messages Lecj→vi each of which has 10 bits resolution. The a-posteriori decision sign(Loi ) has only one bit and it is computed according to eq. (4). The remaining 4 outputs have 11 bits each one, where 10 bits belong to the Levi→cj messages and the additional bit is a copy of the a-posteriori decision sign(Loi ) (which is used for the syndrome computation at the CNPU). A top-level diagram of the VNPU is shown in Fig. 5. The input and output values are coded in signmagnitude format (i.e, one bit for the sign and the rest for the magnitude). However, since the arithmetic operations involved in the VNPU are simpler to implement in two-complement (2C) format, the inputs and outputs are transformed by the SM → 2C and 2C → SM modules. All internal operations are computed without truncation nor saturation effects by properly increasing the fixed point resolution after each operation except for a controlled saturation block (denoted SAT) before the final 2C → SM conversion.
3) Change resolution block: The change resolution block (CRB) controls the effective fixed-point resolution used in the decoder algorithm. This is done by controlling the saturation level and the quantization step. Note that the decoder algorithm is implemented at maximum resolution (i.e., 11 bits) and the CRB reduces the effective resolution in order to analyze the

effect on the performance (see section IV-A). 4) Control unit: The CI is in charge of initializing the
system and setting up each steps of the decoding algorithm. In particular, its main function is to control the RAM blocks access through the multiplexers located at the inputs and outputs of the CNPU and VNPUs and command the RAM addresses (see Fig. 2).
D. Emulator Manager
The entire emulation system is controlled by a Microblaze [12] processor (MP). It runs a program in C language which is compiled by the software development kit (SDK) 2015.2 [12]. This processor is in charge of the communication with the PC and the management of the setup of all the previously mentioned blocks. The connection with the PC is carried out through an UART interface at 115200 baud/s while the connection to the internal modules is done through general purpose input-output (GPIO). The MP also deals with the control of the pre-FEC and post-FEC BER estimations as well as the transfer of the Lai and Loi values that belong to uncorrected codewords to the PC.
IV. EXPERIMENTAL RESULTS
The architecture presented in Section III was implemented using Verilog hardware description language (HDL) and properly verified through Vivado 2013.3 [12] environment provided by Xilinx. The functional verification was executed for each module individually as well as for their integration. For physical verification, the architecture was synthesized for Development Kit KC-705 [12]. The resource usage is detailed in Table I with only 13% of Slice utilization. SDK [12] was used to load resultant bitstream and the software to run in processor inside FPGA. The FPGA implementation of the receiver was previously designed and verified in a system level simulator which was coded using the SystemC library to validate the architecture. The first version of the simulator was written using floating-point variables and then a fixed-point version was developed to define the quantization resolution required in the signal paths.
A. Measurements
The emulation platform was used to analyze the performance of the code described in section II-B. Figure 6 shows the BER vs. Eb/N0 for the mentioned code with 30 iterations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:53:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table I FINAL IMPLEMENTATION RESOURCES UTILIZATION

Block
Transmitter CWG 5 Noise adder Decoder selector
Decoder 8 Decoder
Diagnostic and control unit 8 Error codeword Pre-fec BER counter 8 Post-fec BER counter
Total of architecture Microblaze
Total (%)

LUT as Logic
301 1464 39
45912
428 46 1528 51631 1413 53068 (26)

LUT as FF
839 2157
50
60056
452 264 4903 70311 2114 72459 (36)

BRAM 36Kb
20 0 56
264
64 0 27 429 8 437 (98)

Figure 7. Transmission rate and average iterations realized.
V. CONCLUSION A QC-LDPC code suitable for ultra-high speed optical communication networks has been designed and investigated. The performance of the proposed QC-LDPC has been experimentally demonstrated by using an FPGA platform. The FPGA emulation system described in this paper includes several features to facilitate the design and evaluation of LDPC-based FEC solutions. Experimental results showed that the proposed QC-LDPC code is able to achieve an NCG of 11.6 dB at a BER of 10−15 with an overhead of 25%.

Figure 6. Performance for proposed code with 30 iterations and 6 different bit resolutions. These resolutions are grouped in 2 groups, 4 integer bits (cases 0,1,2) and 3 integer bits (cases 3,4,5).
and 6 different fixed point resolutions. The fixed point resolution is denoted as S(NB,NBF) where “S” stands for signed variable while “NB” is the total number of bits (including the sign bit) and “NBF” is the number of fractional bits. The resolutions emulated are: S(10,5), S(9,4), S(7,2), S(9,5), S(8,4), and S(6,2). From Fig. 6 it can be observed an error floor at 10−9 when the number of integer bits N B − N BF − 1 is 3 (i.e., cases S(9,5), S(8,4) and S(6,2)). On the other hand, no error floor is seen when the number of integer bits is 4 (cases S(10,5), S(9,4) and S(7,2)). This observation matches the results of [1] where the error floor strongly depends on the saturation effect of the extrinsic messages. The resulting NCG is expected to be 11.6 dB with S(10,5) or S(9,4) resolution at a post-FEC BER of 10−15 where the required Eb/N0 is 3.4 dB. Finally, Fig 7 shows the average number of iterations and throughput versus Eb/N0. The maximum throughput achieved at Eb/N0 ≥ 5.0 dB is limited to 1 Gb/s due to the parallelism factor used in the codeword and noise generators. At the FEC threshold Eb/N0 = 3.4 dB the throughput is 400 Mb/s.

REFERENCES
[1] D. A. Morero, M. A. Castrillon, F. A. Ramos, T. A. Goette, O. E. Agazzi, and M. R. Hueda, “Non-concatenated fec codes for ultra-high speed optical transport networks,” in GLOBECOM, Dec 2011, pp. 1–5.
[2] C. E. Shannon, “A mathematical theory of communication,” SIGMOBILE Mob. Comput. Commun. Rev., vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 3–55, Jan. 2001. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/584091.584093
[3] A. Leven and L. Schmalen, “Status and recent advances on forward error correction technologies for lightwave systems,” J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 32, no. 16, pp. 2735–2750, Aug 2014.
[4] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41th Annu. Allerton Conf. Commun., Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, 2003.
[5] R. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 27, no. 5, pp. 533–547, Sep 1981.
[6] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, Feb 2001.
[7] W. E. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel codes. Classical and modern. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. xi, 692 p., 2009.
[8] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. C. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of ldpc codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug 2005.
[9] O. Gerstel, M. Jinno, A. Lord, and S. J. B. Yoo, “Elastic optical networking: a new dawn for the optical layer?” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 50, no. 2, pp. s12–s20, February 2012.
[10] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D. M. Arnold, “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 386–398, Jan 2005.
[11] D. A. Morero, “Error correction codes schemes applied to transmission and storage systems,” Ph.D. dissertation, National University of Cordoba, Argentina, Dec. 2013. [Online]. Available: https://rdu.unc. edu.ar/handle/11086/1463
[12] Xilinx, “Oficial Page,” March 2016. [Online]. Available: http: //www.xilinx.com
[13] OpenCores, “Gaussian Noise Generator,” February 2015. [Online]. Available: http://opencores.org/project,gng,Overview
[14] N. Christofides, “An algorithm for the chromatic number of a graph,” Comput. J., vol. 14, no. 1, pp. 38–39, 1971. [Online]. Available: http://comjnl.oxfordjournals.org/content/14/1/38.abstract
[15] D. Brelaz, “New methods to color the vertices of a graph,” Commun. ACM, vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 251–256, Apr. 1979. [Online]. Available: http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/359094.359101

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 14:53:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

