2020 3rd IEEE International Conference on Information Communication and Signal Processing

RS-LDPC Concatenated Coding for NAND Flash Memory: Designs and Reduction of Short Cycles

Weidong Zhang National Space Science Center Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China e-mail: zhangweidong@nssc.ac.cn
Zhenxing Dong National Space Science Center Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China e-mail: dongzhenxing@nssc.ac.cn

Jing Kang National Space Science Center Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China e-mail: k_naive@163.com
Yan Zhu National Space Science Center Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China e-mail: zhuyan@nssc.ac.cn

AbstractвҖ”In NAND flash memory, the increase of Program / Erase cycles and external interference, such as electromagnetic interference and vibration, will cause various channel obstacles, including a large amount of random errors and burst errors. This work considers reliable recovery of data from such flash channels using a novel cascade of outer RS codes and inner quasi-cyclic (QC) LDPC codes. In this paper, designs and constructions of QC-LDPC code with reduction of short cycles are presented and an optimized computation cycles elimination (OCCE) algorithm is proposed. The performance of RS codes with different code rates and code lengths for concatenated codes is analyzed. Simulation results show that the decoding iterations of the QCLDPC codes in this paper compared with conventional QC-LDPC codes is reduced by up to 76% which depends on the code length of QC-LDPC at the bit error rate (BER) of 10-8. The proposed RS(273,269)-QC perform a BER of 10-10 at the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) of 3.9 dB.
Keywords-Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, NAND flash, Reed-Solomon codes, Concatenated codes, Short Cycles
I. INTRODUCTION
NAND flash memory with excellent characteristics, such as high performance, large storage capacity, and shock resistance, is widely used in a variety of storage systems [1]. Due to the internal structure of NAND flash memory, how to ensure the reliability of data has always been one of the key issues in NAND flash memory researches. NAND flash memory has successively adopted Hamming code, RS (Reed-Solomon) code, and BCH (Bose-ChaudhuriHocquenghem) code as an error correction code to solve the error problem. With the progress of technology and the widespread use of Multi-Level Cell (MLC) NAND flash, the bit-error-rate (BER) has increased dramatically. The traditional architecture of error correction code is getting hard to meet the needs of NAND flash memory anymore. Low-density parity check(LDPC) codes have been widely

used in communications and other fields because of its excellent performance close to the Shannon limit. In recent years, it has also been used in error correction control of NAND flash memory. [2] studied the performance of mixed coding of RS code and BCH code in flash memory. This scheme has made achievements in hardware overhead and coding delay, but its error correction ability is limited when the raw bit error rate (RBER) is high. [3] proposed a novel QC-LDPC coding architecture for flash memory, and achieved good performance at high RBER. But it is expensive both in terms of area and latency. The concatenated codes of RS and LDPC can further enhance the data reliability of flash memory in extreme environments with less cost. The coding architecture of RS-LDPC cascaded codes have been proved not only perform well, but also are practically implementable [4], [5].
It is widely recognized by researchers that short cycles in LDPC codes will degrade the performance of iterative decoding. There are numerous techniques for eliminating short cycles in LDPC codes, including RS-QC-LDPC codes that are designed appropriately. These techniques are roughly divided into two approaches. In the first approach, techniques are proposed to eliminate short cycles from Tanner diagrams of given LDPC codes, in particular, a QCLDPC code, see e.g., [6]. In another approach, QC-LDPC codes are constructed by following certain constraints to ensure that no short cycles exist, see e.g., [7]. In this paper, the technique of reducing short cycles belongs to the second method. In this method, the constraints are imposed on the design of the check matrix for QC-LDPC codes so that the resulting codes do not have four cycles. Besides, to meet the requirements of encoding delay for NAND flash memory, we split the check matrix into two sub-matrices for separate design, and propose an optimized computation cycles elimination (OCCE) algorithm to reduce six-cycles as much as possible with a very low computation. Comparing with

978-1-7281-8823-2/20/$31.00 В©2020 IEEE

342

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

QC-LDPC-PEG [8], we use a slight reduction on BER performance to exchange for a significant reduction in decoding iterations. This is a worthwhile current application in flash memory. The OCCE algorithm, which has strong versatility, is suitable for flexibly constructing QC-LDPC codes of various code lengths and code rates. Cascading with RS codes can further improve encoding performance. Our goal is to design a flexible architecture of RS-QC-LPDC concatenated codes to balance the performance and computation.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II presents the basic structure of RS codes and QC-LDPC codes, and proposes a construction method with reduction of short cycles which is optimized for calculation. Section III introduces the RS codes and discusses how to optimize concatenated codes of RS and QC-LDPC. In Section IV, simulation experiments are made under the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel to evaluate the performance of QC-LDPC and concatenated codes, and the factors that affect performance are analyzed. Section V concludes the paper with some comments.

II. CONSTRUCTION OF RS AND QC-LDPC

A. Construction of RS
RS encoding algorithms are mainly divided into time domain and frequency-domain. Time-domain coding algorithms are more mature and widely used. This paper mainly discusses RS encoding algorithms based on timedomain. The key to time-domain encoding of RS codes is the construction of the generator polynomials. For RS(n, k, d)
codes that can correct t errors, the encoding algorithm is as
follows: The generator polynomial for the original RS code with the minimum distance equal to d is:

( )( )( ) ( ) ( ) g x = x вҲ’пҒЎ m x вҲ’пҒЎ m+1 x вҲ’пҒЎ m+2 x вҲ’пҒЎ m+dвҲ’2

(1)

The polynomial of information symbols can be expressed as:

S ( x) = пҒЎ0 + пҒЎ0 x + пҒЎ0 x2 + + пҒЎ0 xkвҲ’1

(2)

where пҒЎi is an element of the GF (2m ) domain. The check bit
polynomial after coding is: C ( x) = xnвҲ’kS (x)mod g (x) .

B. Introduction of QC-LDPC
The QC-LDPC code is an important subclass of LDPC codes and its check matrix has quasi-cyclic characteristics. Generally, the QC-LDPC code is constructed by cyclic submatrix, and its check matrix is shown in (3):

Hqc

=

пғҰ пғ§
пғ§

I(p0,0 ) I(p1,0 )

пғ§

I(p0,1) I(p1,1)

I(p0,t вҲ’1) I(p1,t вҲ’1)

пғ¶ пғ·
пғ·

пғ·

(3)

пғ§

пғ·

пғЁпғ§I(pc вҲ’1,0 ) I(pc вҲ’1,1)

I(pc вҲ’1,t вҲ’1)пғ·пғё

The matrix Hqc is composed of c пӮҙ t cyclic submatrices
( ) I pi, j , and the dimension of ( ) I pi, j is L(1 пӮЈ i пӮЈ c,1 пӮЈ j пӮЈ t ) .

Therefore, the dimension of matrix Hqc is cL пӮҙ tL . The code
length of QC-LDPC is tL and the number of information
bits is (t вҲ’ c) пӮҙ L , where ( ) I pi, j is the shift factor index of
matrix P , as shown in (4). The check matrix Hqc is
determined by the index matrix P . The presence of short cycles during decoding will cause messages passed by nodes to pass back to themselves after several iterations. This can cause information to be reused and to reduce decoding performance. Therefore, to meet the high-performance requirements of NAND flash memory for QC-LDPC, short cycles need to be avoided or eliminated as much as possible. Besides, the physical features of NAND flash memory with large page capacity and small out of band(OOB) area make it necessary to design high code rate QC-LDPC.

P

=

пғҰ пғ§
пғ§
пғ§

p0,0 p
1,0

p0,1 p
1,1

p0,t вҲ’1 p1,t вҲ’1

пғ¶ пғ·
пғ·

пғ·

(4)

пғ§

пғ·

пғ§пғЁ pc вҲ’1,0 pc вҲ’1,1

pc вҲ’1,t вҲ’1 пғ·пғё

C. Fast-coding QC-LDPC with Reduction of Short Cycles
[9] avoids the corresponding short cycles by choosing the appropriate parameters to construct the index matrix P, as shown in (5).

пғҰ1 a

a2

at вҲ’1 пғ¶

P

=

пғ§ пғ§ пғ§

b

ab

a 2b

at вҲ’1b

пғ· пғ·

(5)

пғ·

пғ§ пғЁ

b

c

вҲ’1

abc вҲ’1

a2bc вҲ’1

at

вҲ’1b

c

вҲ’1

пғ· пғё

where a , b are called multiplier factors and pi,j = aj вҲ’1bi вҲ’1,1 пӮЈ i пӮЈ c,1 пӮЈ j пӮЈ t .
[10] gives the parameter constraints of QC-LDPC without four cycles, which can construct any code length and code rate quickly and has good error rate performance. When the dimension L of a given circular submatrix is a prime number, the necessary and sufficient condition for the absence of four cycles in the check matrix Hqc constructed
by (5) is a,b пғҺпҒ»2, , L вҲ’1пҒҪ,a пӮ№ b and satisfies (6):

(bf вҲ’ 1) пғ— (ad вҲ’ 1) пӮ№ 0 mod L,1 пӮЈ f пӮЈ c вҲ’ 1,1 пӮЈ d пӮЈ t вҲ’ 1 (6)
The value of pi, j = a b jвҲ’1 iвҲ’1 is calculated to construct the
index matrix P . The c пӮҙ t identity matrices of dimension L are cyclic shifted according to the index matrix P to form the check matrix Hqc . In this way, QC-LDPC without four cycles can be constructed, but there are still two problems. First, there are at least c вҲ’1 rows of linear independent in the Hqc , that is, Hqc is a singular matrix. This will lead to a complex generator matrix design and reduce the speed of encoding. Second, there are six cycles in the constructed check matrix Hqc , and the number is large at ultra-high code rates, which affects the information independence of iterative

343
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

decoding and reduces the decoding performance. These two problems make the QC-LDPC by this method unable to be directly used for NAND flash memory. Therefore, this paper proposes a high-performance QC-LDPC construction method that can reduce short cycles and remove row correlations. This method regards the check matrix Hqc
constructed previously as two parts, that is H = пғ©пғ«H1 Hp пғ№пғ» ,
corresponding to the index matrix P = пғ«пғ©P1 Px пғ»пғ№ , and designing the sub-matrix H1 , Hp respectively.

D. Design of Hp
The key to solving row-related problems is to construct the check matrix Hqc into a non-singular matrix. This paper uses the quasi-double diagonal structure to construct the check matrix. Let the corresponding index matrix Px be:

пғҰx 0

пғ¶

пғ§ пғ§

вҲ’1

0

0

пғ§

0

пғ·

пғ· пғ·

(7)

Px

=

пғ§ пғ§

0

пғ· пғ·

пғ§

0пғ·

пғ§

пғ·

пғ§ вҲ’1

0 0пғ·

пғЁпғ§ x

0 пғёпғ·

where вҖң -1 вҖқ is a zero matrix with dimension L , вҖң 0 вҖқ is the identity matrix with dimension L (shift times is 0), вҖң x вҖқ is the identity matrix with dimension L shifted x times. The
matrix Px is constructed by the value of x, x пғҺ (0, L) . The
c пӮҙ t identity matrices with dimension L are cyclically shifted according to the index matrix Px to obtain the check matrix Hp , as shown in (8). Hp replaces the right half of the
original Hqc . It ensures that the matrix Hqc has quasi-double
diagonal form with no row correlations or four cycles.

пғҰpx I 0

0 0пғ¶

пғ§ пғ§

0

I

I

0

0

пғ· пғ·

(8)

пғ§ 0I

0 0пғ·

Hp

=

пғ§ пғ§

I

0

пғ· пғ·

пғ§ 00 пғ§ пғ§0 0 0

I 0пғ· пғ·
I Iпғ·

пғ§пғЁ p x 0 0

0 I пғ·пғё

E. Design of H1
Since Hp is quasi-double diagonal, there are no six
cycles inside when column weight is larger than 3. So the key to reducing six cycles is the construction of H1 . [11] proposed a cycles elimination (CE) algorithm based on matrix inner cycles search and correction of corresponding elements. It is found that the CE algorithm has two limitations. The first is to keep the traversed elements unchanged and only modify the current elements which will take a long time to find a value that could meet the cycle

constraints at high bit rates. The other is that after modifying the current element, the CE algorithm may introduce new four cycles, which will cause performance degradation. For this reason, this paper proposes an optimized computation cycle elimination (OCCE) algorithm based on calculating the weighted sum of four-six cycles, and corrects the maximum weighted sum of four-six cycles instead of correcting each element row by column. In addition, high-rate LDPC codes have a large number of six cycles, and it takes a long time to completely eliminate them. Therefore, this paper sets the maximum iterations and introduces the concept of a threshold. When the number of six cycles is reduced to a certain value пҒў , the iteration can be automatically stopped. QC-LDPC codes with different BER and encoding performance can be obtained by changing the value of пҒў .
This paper defines the number of short cycles of the index matrix P : the number of four cycles formed by the element p(i, j) and other position elements in the index matrix P which is composed of c rows and t columns is recorded
as the four cycles correlation number C4 (i, j) . The larger C4 (i, j) is, the more four cycles are formed by p(i, j) and
other elements. Similarly, the number of six cycles in the
index matrix is written as C6 (i, j) .
The pseudocode describes the OCCE algorithm of the index matrix P1 . At k вҲ’ th iteration, first, the p(i, j) nodes update the number of four and six cycles and calculate the weighted values. Second, find the node with the largest weight and shift it. The iteration process stops when the maximum number of iterations is reached or the iteration stop condition is met. The sub-matrix H1 can be obtained by cyclically shifting the c пӮҙ t identity matrices I with dimension L according to P1 . Combining H1 with the Hp designed in the previous section generates the check matrix H .

344
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

III. CONCATENATE RS AND QC-LDPC FOR NAND FLASH

A. Characteristics of NAND Flash

MLC NAND flash memory stores two bits per cell, with

four states (i.e., вҖң11,вҖқ вҖң10,вҖқ вҖң01,вҖқ and вҖң00вҖқ). The state of

flash cell is determined by the amount of electric charge on

the floating-gate. Compared with SLC NAND flash memory,

the gap between MLC flash cells is narrower, and the

interference is more significant, which is mainly manifested

by grid voltage interference and leakage voltage interference.

In addition, flash programming takes much longer than flash

reading, and this will interfere with flash cells and cause

programming errors. Each cell of MLC flash can store more

data, but it also results in a higher bit-error-rate.

Page is the basic unit of flash programming operation.

The page capacity of NAND flash memory is mainly 2K, 4K,

8K and 16K bytes. 8K-page is currently the most widely

used. Taking Micron MT29F128G NAND flash memory as

an example, the flash memory chip has a capacity of 16GB

and is divided into 8192 blocks. Each block has 256 pages,

and the size of page is 8192B (data area) + 744B (out of

band area). Information bits are usually stored in the data

area, while check bits are put in the out of band area. To

minimize the loss of flash memory capacity, the cascaded

codeword length lcode should satisfy or close to

( ) lcode

=

cdata k

k пғҺN*

, where cdata

is the size of data area in flash

memory. If the code length has a serious deviation, the data

area will not be filled eventually, resulting in a waste of data

area. The size of data area and out of band area also

determines the code rate of concatenated codes. For this

paperвҖҷs example, the minimum code rate of cascaded codes

is 1-744 пӮё 8192=0.91 .

B. Design of Concatenated Codes
Concatenating RS and QC-LDPC codes does not always improve performance compared with LDPC codes only. A typical scenario is when the RS code is decoded incorrectly, it will be decoded into another codeword, which will increase the bit error rate of concatenated codes. This situation is easy to occur when the SNR is relatively low. So in order to design a high-performance architecture of RSQC-LPDC concatenated codes, our solutions are as follows: first, RS codes with higher code rates should be adopted, since concatenating RS codes will reduce the code rate of the entire concatenated code and increase the noise energy which will bring a lower SNR performance. Second, the code rates of RS and QC-LPDC should be close. If the code rates of RS and QC-LPDC differ greatly, the code rate of cascaded codes will be led to the lower one. It will result in BER performance degradation, even lower than QC-LDPC only. Third, the code length of RS codes should match with QCLDPC codes. The mismatch will introduce additional symbols to fill the codeword. This will increase the proportion of invalid information in the codeword and the noise energy of the coding system, resulting in a lower BER performance. On the basis of these designing limitations, this paper designs and implements three representative QC-

LDPC codes by the method of this paper: column weight 3 QC-LDPC(4260, 4047), column weight 4 QC-LDPC (8610, 8190) and column weight 4 QC-LDPC (16999, 16235); five RS codes: 0.98 RS(273,269), 0.98 RS(256,252), 0.89 RS(273,245), 0.70 RS(273,191) and 0.50 RS(273,137) to verify the performance of QC-LDPC and cascaded codes.
IV. EXPERIMENT AND RESULT ANALYSIS
A. Experiment Methology
This paper uses MATLAB to develop an experimental platform shown in Fig. 1 to explore the best match between RS codes and QC-LDPC. During encoding, the information sequence is first encoded by the selected RS and QC-LDPC, and modulated by 4-pulse amplitude modulation to simulate MLC NAND flash cells [12], and then sent to the AWGN channel, which has proved to be close to the flash channel. LDPC decoding uses the minimum sum algorithm widely used in flash memory chips and sets the maximum number of iterations to 50. The bit error rate and the number of iterations are recorded under different encodings, and the performance of the encoding is assessed.

Gear box

Information sequence

Error statistics

Gear box

Concatenated encoder RS Encoder 0

RS Encoder 1

interleaving

with depth 4

RS

codewords

Outer encoder

Concatenated decoder RS Decoder 0

de-interleaving RS

RS Decoder 1

codewords

LDPC Encoder

Concatenated codewords

Inner encoder Flash Model

Channel response
NAND Flash Memory Cell

Iteration statistics
LDPC Decoder

Concatenated codewords

AWGN channel Add burst random error Set program/read delay

Figure 1. Experimental platform for concatenated codes performance.

B. Result Analysis
In this experiment, we chose the QC-LDPC codes designing by the PEG algorithm [8], which is widely used in flash memory, to compare with the work in this paper. As shown in Fig. 2(a), for QC-LDPC codes in this paper, QCLDPC(8610,8190) has 0.2dB improvement compared to QCLDPC(4260,4047) at BER of 10-8. As the flash page capacity increases, longer codes can provide greater error correction. But it can be found that when the code length increases, the trend of performance improvement slows down. For example, QC-LDPC(16999,16235) is only 0.1dB higher than QCLDPC(8610,8190). At the same code length, the BER performance of QC-PEG is improved by 0.15dB compared to QC-LDPC. The reason is that QC-PEG uses irregular codes to construct the check matrix. Irregular codes can achieve higher BER performance with the same SNR [8]. However, comparing the number of iterations in Fig. 2(b), it is shown that the iterations of QC-PEG has increased significantly compared to the QC-LDPC in this paper. At BER of 10-8, the iterations of QC-PEG(8610,8190) reaches the maximum 50, while QC-LDPC(8610,8190) is only 12, and the decoding iteration performance is improved by 76%.

345
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Under the same conditions, QC-LDPC(16999,16235) has a 50% improvement over QC-PEG. More iterations means increased decoding complexity and longer decoding time. This is fatal when LDPC codes are used in flash memory. Considering the coding performance and decoding time, QCLDPC (8610, 8190) is chosen as the inner code to concatenate with the RS code.
The BER performance of concatenated codes is shown in Fig. 3. It shows a decline in BER performance as the code rate of RS codes decreases. The 0.98 RS(273,269)-QC achieves a BER of 10-10 at an SNR of 3.9 dB without a visible error-floor. 0.89 RS-QC gets the error floor at the BER of 5пӮҙ10-10 . The same phenomenon occurs on 0.70 RSQC and 0.50 RS-QC, but they only reached the BER of 1.6пӮҙ10-8 and 4 пӮҙ10-7 respectively. This is consistent with our
previous analysis. The low-code-rate RS code will lower the rate of concatenated codes. For coded codewords, the noise energy will increase, resulting in the performance degradation. The experiment results support that the concatenated codes composed of RS codes with low code rates have even worse BER performance than QC-LDPC

only at high SNR. The BER performance of concatenated codes for RS (273,269) and RS(256,252) with the same code rate is close. However, since the code length of RS(256,252) does not match that of QC-LDPC(8610,8190), RS codewords need to be complemented with вҖң0вҖқ before LDPC encoding. For example, a 256-bit RS codeword requires 31 groups of RS codewords and extra 254 bits вҖң0вҖқ to match a QC-LDPC with 8190 bits. The complement вҖң0вҖқ operation does not affect decoding performance, but it increases the proportion of invalid information in the codeword, i.e. increases the noise energy, which causes a slight decrease in BER performance. It is also expected that the complement вҖң0вҖқ operation will increase the complexity of hardware implementation and encoding delay. The concatenated codes composed of RS codes with a high code rate and code length matching with QC-LDPC have the optimal BER performance. The experimental results show that RS(273,269)-QC-LDPC has the best performance in error correction and decoding complexity, and achieves a BER of 10-10 at 3.9 dB, while QC-LDPC only has a BER of 10-8 at 5.5 dB.

(a)

(b)

Figure 2. The BER and decoding performances of the three QC-LDPC by this paper and the QC-LDPC-PEG by [8]. (a) BER performance at 50 iterations.

(b) Average decoding iterations.

V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we presented a construction method of QCLDPC with reduction of short cycles and proposed an optimized computation cycles elimination algorithm. The average decoding iterations of the QC-LDPC codes designed in this paper can be reduced by up to 76%, compared with the QC-PEG codes. We analyzed the factors that affect the performance of RS and LDPC concatenated codes and proposed a high-performance flexible construction method which can be used in NAND flash memory. The proposed coding scheme is significant in that 1) it gives large performance gain with respect to the QC-LDPC only, 2) despite the use of a RS outer code, the utilization of RS decoder decisions most of the time makes the decoding complexity quite manageable and 3) unlike any coding scheme relying on LDPC codes, the proposed scheme allows performance analysis in low bit-error-rate and does not suffer

from the usual error floor of LDPC codes. Although this paper focuses on the flash memory channel, the proposed concatenation could be applied in other important areas including deep space communication channels.
Figure 3. The BER performance of concatenated codes at 10 iterations.

346
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by Space Science Leading Satellite Project, Chinese Academy of Sciences (XDA15320 100).
REFERENCES
[1] M. Zhang, F. Wu, Y. Du, W. Liu, and C. Xie, вҖңPair-bit errors aware ldpcdecoding in mlc nand flash memory,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Computer-Aided Design of Integrated Circuits and Systems, vol. 38, no. 12, pp.2312вҖ“2320, 2019.
[2] C. Yang, Y. Emre, and C. Chakrabarti, вҖңProduct code schemes for error correction in mlc nand flash memories,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Very Large Scale Integration (VLSI) Systems, vol. 20, no. 12, pp. 2302вҖ“2314, 2012.
[3] Y. Lin, H. Li, M. Chung, and A. Wu, вҖңByte-reconfigurable ldpc codec design with application to high-performance ecc of nand flash memory systems,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1794вҖ“1804, 2015.
[4] M. Zhang, L. Tang, Q. Huang, and Z. Wang, вҖңLow complexity encoding algorithm of rs-based qc-ldpc codes,вҖқ in 2014 Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), 2014, pp. 1вҖ“4.
[5] S. Kuo, Z. Liu, and J. Yang, вҖңOn practical ldpc code construction for nand flash applications,вҖқ in 2017 IEEE Information Theory Workshop (ITW), 2017, pp. 191вҖ“195.
[6] X. He, L. Zhou, and J. Du, вҖңPeg-like design of binary qc-ldpc codes based on detecting and avoiding generating small cycles,вҖқ IEEE

Transactions on Communications, vol. 66, no. 5, pp. 1845вҖ“1858, 2018.
[7] G. Zhang, R. Sun, and X. Wang, вҖңNew quasi-cyclic ldpc codes with girth at least eight based on sidon sequences,вҖқ in 2012 7th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC), 2012, pp. 31вҖ“35.
[8] M. Diouf, D. Declercq, M. Fossorier, S. Ouya, and B. VasiВҙc, вҖңImproved peg construction of large girth qc-ldpc codes,вҖқ in 2016 9th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing (ISTC). IEEE, 2016, pp. 146вҖ“150.
[9] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, вҖңLdpc block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Information Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966вҖ“2984, 2004.
[10] Y. Zhao and Y. Xiao, вҖңThe necessary and sufficient condition of a class of quasi-cyclic ldpc codes without girth four,вҖқ IEICE Transactions on communications, vol. 92, no. 1, pp. 306вҖ“309, 2009.
[11] Lei Yang, Hui Liu, and C. . R. Shi, вҖңCode construction and fpga implementation of a low-error-floor multi-rate low-density paritycheck code decoder,вҖқ IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular Papers, vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 892вҖ“904, 2006.
[12] J. Wang, T. Courtade, H. Shankar, and R. D. Wesel, вҖңSoft information for ldpc decoding in flash: Mutual-information optimized quantization,вҖқ in 2011 IEEE Global Telecommunications ConferenceGLOBECOM 2011. IEEE, 2011, pp. 1вҖ“6.

347
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:12:46 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

