IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 67, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

1599

Efficient Implementation of a Threshold Modified Min-Sum Algorithm for LDPC Decoders
Yanfang Liu , Member, IEEE, Wei Tang , Member, IEEE, and David G. M. Mitchell , Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this brief, we present a hardware efficient implementation of a threshold modified min-sum algorithm (MSA) to improve the performance of a low density parity-check (LDPC) decoder. The proposed architecture introduces a novel lookup table based threshold attenuation technique, called threshold attenuated MSA (TAMSA). The proposed TAMSA implementation is shown to improve bit error rate (BER) performance compared to the conventional AMSA and MSA. Furthermore, a layered version of the TAMSA implementation is investigated to reduce hardware cost. Utilizing circuit optimization techniques, including a parallel computing structure, the proposed layered TAMSA field-programmable gate array (FPGA) implementation results show that the modified architecture requires no extra circuit power or circuit area compared to conventional AMSA, and only 0.07% extra leaf cells compared to conventional MSA.
Index Terms—LDPC codes, min-sum algorithm, LDPC decoder, attenuation, FPGA.
I. INTRODUCTION
A S A CLASS of linear block codes, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes were originally proposed by Gallager in the 1960’s [1], but were not considered practical for a long time due to prohibitive hardware requirements [2]. MacKay rediscovered LDPC codes in the 1990’s [3] and showed that LDPC codes are capable of approaching channel capacity with low-complexity iterative message passing (MP) decoding. Since then, significant effort has been made to develop hardware efficient decoders, e.g., [4], [5], [6], and LDPC codes have been included in many communication standards, such as IEEE 802.6, IEEE 802.20, IEEE 802.3, DVB-RS2, and CMMB. The min-sum algorithm (MSA) is widely used for hardware implementation of LDPC decoders since no estimation of the channel signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is needed over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, as well as its low complexity and robustness against quantization error [7], [8], [9]. However, the MSA incurs a degradation in performance when compared to the (more complex) sum product algorithm (SPA) due to approximations involved in the message computation [2]. Empirically, MSA is observed to have little degradation in performance compared to the SPA for short code lengths, but for long code lengths
Manuscript received February 29, 2020; revised May 20, 2020; accepted May 27, 2020. Date of publication June 11, 2020; date of current version September 3, 2020. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant ECCS-1710920, Grant OIA-1757207, Grant ECCS2015573, and Grant ECCS-1652944. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor A. Kumar. (Corresponding author: Yanfang Liu.)
The authors are with the Klipsch School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, New Mexico State University, Las Cruces, NM 88003 USA (e-mail: viviliu@nmsu.edu; wtang@nmsu.edu; dgmm@nmsu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2020.3001601

the degradation can vary from several tenths of a decibel (dB) to one dB [10].
To improve the decoding performance, two modifications of MSA, called attenuated MSA (AMSA) and offset MSA (OMSA) were proposed in [11], [12] to reduce the approximation error. Both variants have been shown to achieve better bit error rate (BER) performance at low to moderate SNRs when compared to the conventional MSA. Moreover, to save hardware resources, a layered version of MSA, AMSA, and OMSA were employed and shown to have faster convergence speed, reducing iterations and decoder power consumption, as well as circuit area [13], [14], [15], [16].
To further improve the performance of quantized LDPC decoders, threshold AMSA (TAMSA) and threshold OMSA (TOMSA) were proposed in [17]. The TAMSA (respectively, TOMSA) selectively attenuates (offsets) the outgoing loglikelihood ratio (LLR) message used to update a variable node during MP decoding of an LDPC code if this value has a magnitude below some threshold τ , while allowing an LLR to reach the maximum quantizer level if the magnitude is greater than τ . Given that most of the decoding failures in the high SNR regime occur due to problematic graphical objects that are randomly distributed in the Tanner graph of LDPC codes, the authors of [17] showed that the new algorithms are less prone to decoding failures and can significantly improve the performance compared to AMSA and OMSA.
In this brief, we present a novel implementation of the TAMSA algorithm using look-up tables (LUTs) for message quantization and attenuation, and also investigate a layered TAMSA algorithm to reduce hardware cost. To demonstrate our approach, we implement the (155, 64) Tanner code [18], which is attractive for hardware implementation due to its quasi-cyclic (QC) structure. Simulation results of MSA, AMSA, TAMSA, and layered TAMSA show that the layered TAMSA decoder gains approximately 0.4dB at a bit error rate (BER) equal to 10−9 over the MSA and AMSA, with a 0.1dB performance gain compared to TAMSA. We then consider a hardware implementation of these algorithms where, according to the QC structure, we consider a full-parallel architecture to speed up the decoding process. It is shown that, as a result of the LUT-based approach, the performance gain achieved by the proposed layered TAMSA implementation is achieved with no extra hardware cost when compared to AMSA by comparing the LUT, leaf cell, power, and area values from the synthesis results, and only 0.07% extra leaf cells compared to conventional MSA.
II. MIN-SUM ALGORITHMS
In the following, we briefly describe the MSA and its modifications. MP decoding [2] of LDPC codes operates by iteratively exchanging messages in the Tanner graph of an

1549-7747 c 2020 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:13:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1600

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 67, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

Fig. 1. Tanner graph of an LDPC code.

LDPC code between variable nodes (white circles) and check nodes (plus boxes), see Fig. 1. At the kth iteration, let Vikj denote the LLR value passed from variable node vi to check node cj and let Cjki denote the LLR value passed from check node cj to variable node vi. The set of check nodes in the graph connected to vi are represented by N(vi) and the set of variable nodes connected to cj are represented by N(cj). Assume that codeword u = (u1, u2, . . . , un) is transmitted on an AWGN

channel under binary phase shift keyed (BPSK) modulation,

where each zero is mapped to +1 and each one is mapped

to −1. Let p0 represent the probability that a 0 is received

from the channel and let p1 represent is received from the channel. Let ri =

the ln(

probability that a 1

p0 p1

)

denote

the

LLR

values received from channel for bit i [2]. The MSA algo-

rithm is initialized in iteration 0 by passing the received value

ri from each variable node vi to the check nodes in N(vi) as

V0ij = ri.

(1)

Following initialization, the outgoing message Ckji from check

node cj to variable node vi at iteration k is given by

⎛

⎞

Ckji

=

⎝
i

sign(Vik j )⎠i
∈N(cj)\i

∈mN(icnj)\i|Vki j|,

(2)

where N(cj)\i denotes the set of all variable nodes connected to check node j except vi. For iteration k > 0, the outgoing message Vikj from variable node vi to check node cj is given by

Vikj = ri +

Cjk i,

(3)

j ∈N(vi)\j

where N(vi)\j denotes the set of all check nodes connected to variable node i except cj. After all check nodes and all variable nodes are updated, the hard decision estimate is computed

uˆik =

0, ri + 1, ri +

j ∈N(vi) Cjk i > 0, j ∈N(vi) Ckj i < 0.

(4)

If the hard decision uˆ is a codeword, decoding stops, otherwise

the decoder starts the next iteration until some pre-specified

amount of decoder iterations Imax are reached. To reduce the BER performance loss of MSA when com-

pared to SPA, the attenuated MSA (AMSA) was proposed

in [11]. AMSA operates as MSA, but where (2) is replaced by

⎛

⎞

Cjki

=

α⎝
i

sign(Vki j)⎠i
∈N(cj)\i

∈mN(icnj)\i|Vik j|,

(5)

where α > 0 is a constant. AMSA reduces the negative

effect of overestimating the LLR magnitudes in MSA and

improves performance in the low SNR region; however, nei-

ther of them necessarily achieves good performance in the

high SNR region. Threshold AMSA (TAMSA) was proposed

in [17] to improve performance in high SNR region com-

pared to AMSA and MSA. The new algorithm is based on

the assumption that small problematic graphical objects, called

trapping sets, are the major cause of the performance loss

in high SNR. TAMSA operates as MSA, but where (2) is

replaced by

⎧

Cjki

=

⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪ i ⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩⎪⎪ α

sign(Vki j)
∈N(cj)\i

i

sign(Vik j )
i ∈N(cj)\i

∈mN(icnj)\i|Vki j|, if i ∈mN(icnj)\i|Vki j|
i ∈mN(icnj)\i|Vki j|, otherwise.

≥

τ,

(6)

TAMSA locally reduces the magnitudes of the check node LLRs by adding a simple threshold test compared to AMSA (5), which improves the performance with a negligible complexity increase.
In this brief, we also consider a layered version of TAMSA, with modified update rules. The algorithm is initialized by (1), then the outgoing message Vkij at iteration k > 0 is replaced by

Vikj = Vki −1 − Ckji−1,

(7)

where Cj0i = 0, and the outgoing message Cjki for some subset of check nodes is computed following (6). The choice of subsets will very depending on the code and desired parallelization (See Section IV-A). Message Vkij is updated again for the variable nodes connected to the selected subset of check nodes as

Vikj = Vkij + Ckji.

(8)

The decoder repeats (6) and (8) until all check nodes and variable nodes are updated. Finally, the hard decision estimate is replaced by

uˆki =

0, Vik > 0, 1, Vik < 0.

(9)

If the hard decision uˆ is a codeword, decoding stops, otherwise the decoder starts the next iteration from (7) until some prespecified amount of decoder iterations Imax are reached.

III. FINITE PRECISION REPRESENTATION OF LLRS
Practical hardware implementation of LDPC decoders requires a finite precision representation of LLRs. The effects of clipping and quantization on the MSA were investigated in [12]. Moreover, a quantized density evolution (DE) algorithm was used to find the optimal attenuation parameter α from (5) for quantized AMSA in [11]. In the remainder of this section, we describe our method of representing LLRs with finite precision in the hardware implementation of these algorithms and present simulation results comparing MSA, AMSA, and TAMSA (both regular and layered), based on this strategy.
In [17], the authors used a 5-bit quantizer for LLR values. In this brief, we propose a 4-bit LUT to map the magnitude of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:13:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF THRESHOLD MODIFIED MIN-SUM ALGORITHM FOR LDPC DECODERS
TABLE I FLOATING-POINT LLRS TO 4-BIT STRINGS

1601

TABLE II ATTENUATED 4-BIT STRINGS FOR α = 0.8

Fig. 2. Simulation results comparing the decoding performance of quantized MSA, AMSA, TAMSA, and layered TAMSA for a (155, 64) QC Tanner LDPC code.
TABLE III AVERAGE NUMBER OF ITERATIONS RECORDED
FOR THE (155, 64) QC TANNER CODE

LLRs (and the LLRs after attenuation), and one extra bit for the sign of the LLRs. Table I shows the LUT used to convert received floating-point LLRs to quantized LLRs, where the LLRs are represented as a range. This mapping is done once in order to quantize ri as a 4-bit string with 1 bit sign. After this, all operations in (2)-(9) are performed with (4 + 1)-bit strings. Attenuation (multiplication by α in (5) or (6)) is not computed in real-time, rather it is computed in advance for each range of LLRs, for a given α, with a resulting LUT for the new mapping. The LUT for attenuation of the mapping in Table I with α = 0.8 is shown in Table II. Threshold attenuation can be achieved by modifying Table II. For example, for τ = 1.425 and α = 0.8, quantized LLRs smaller than 1010 will be attenuated according to (6). In this case, the TAMSA LUT will be the same as Table II for LLRs 0000 to 1001, but LLRs 1010 to 1111 will not be attenuated.1
Fig. 2 shows simulation results for quantized MSA, AMSA, TAMSA, and layered TAMSA with an attenuation factor α = 0.8 for all attenuated algorithms and a threshold τ = 1.425 for threshold algorithms (using the LUTs as described above). All algorithms were allowed a maximum of 100 iterations. We observe that both TAMSA and layered TAMSA result in significantly improved performance over the AMSA and MSA; with the best performance resulting from layered TAMSA, which offers close to 0.4dB gain at a BER equal to 10−9 over AMSA and MSA. AMSA and TAMSA (the two dashed curves) have exactly the same performance for 1dB-4dB. TAMSA, by design, will attenuate almost all of the time at low Eb/N0 (for an appropriately chosen threshold τ ) since there is a high probability of at least one weak incoming LLR to a check node, resulting in approximately equal BER performance to AMSA. On the other hand, at high Eb/N0, TAMSA selectively attenuates based upon message reliability and yields significantly better BER performance than both AMSA and MSA.
1Note that the TAMSA algorithm makes use of quantizer mapping 1111, unlike AMSA, which helps decoder convergence.

Another important metric related to decoder power consumption is the average number of iterations (ANI) performed for each algorithm. The results are summarized in Table III. We observe that both AMSA and TAMSA provide a significant reduction in the average number of iterations when compared to MSA at low SNR, with similar numbers elsewhere.

IV. SYSTEM DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS
In this brief, we implement layered TAMSA with a (155, 64) QC Tanner code as an example. In this section, we introduce this particular LDPC code and strategies to implement the corresponding decoder in hardware.

A. LDPC Codes

The parity-check matrix of the (155, 64) QC Tanner code

is given by

⎡

⎤

I1 I2 I4 I8 I16

H = ⎣ I5 I10 I20 I9 I18 ⎦,

(10)

I25 I19 I7 I14 I28

where Ix is a 31 × 31 identity matrix with rows shifted cyclically to the left by x positions. According to this specific QC structure, we use a full-parallel architecture to implement layered MSA, layered AMSA, and layered TAMSA to speed up the decoding process. Specifically, we use 31 check node unit (CNU) modules in the LDPC decoder. At each iteration, message Vkij is computed by (7). We then compute

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:13:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1602

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 67, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2020

Fig. 4. CNU Architecture.

Fig. 3. System Diagram.
Cjki using (2), (5), or (6), where appropriate for the first 31 rows in parallel (j = 1, 2, . . . , 31), then update all connected variable node LLRs using Vkij using (8). This is repeated for the next 31 rows (j = 32, 33, . . . , 62), and then the final 31 rows (j = 63, 64, . . . , 93) in the parity-check matrix (10). After these three batches of parallel computation, one iteration is completed, the iteration number increases by 1, and the sign of the LLRs is calculated for the hard decision according to (9). The decoder stops either if the hard decisions give a valid codeword or the iteration number achieves a preset maximum iteration number Imax.
B. System Design
The Decoder system consists of several important building blocks, as shown in Fig. 3, where the black arrows represent data flow and the white arrows represent control flow. The input serial data V0ij is first converted into parallel data by the SIPO (serial-in parallel-out). The data is then stored in the VRAM. The VRAM also stores the temporary variable node LLRs Vkij during the decoding process. The Decoder Controller controls the decoding process, and the values of check nodes and variable nodes are updated according to the status of the Decoder Controller and the equations (5)-(8). First, according to the parity check matrix of the (155, 64) QC Tanner code in (10), the Decoder Controller asks the Address Generator to generate several addresses to access the data Vi0j stored in the VRAM. Then this data is sent to the CNU, where the minimum values and sub-minimum (second minimum) values are calculated according to (2), (5), or (6), the Decoder Controller then asks Address Generator to generate addresses to store the minimum and sub-minimum values to CRAM. Meanwhile, Vkij is computed according to (8) and stored back into the VRAM. After a decoding iteration is complete, the Decoder Controller asks the VRAM Hard Decision to make a hard decision according to the sign of LLRs and decide whether it is a valid codeword (which means the decoding is successful). If it is successful, then the final data is sent to the output of the Decoder. If not, the Decoder Controller compares the number of current iterations with a predetermined maximum iteration number Imax. If the number of iterations is smaller than Imax, the decoder starts the next iteration of decoding, computing Vkij using (7) and updating the VRAM, otherwise, the Decoder Controller

finishes the decoding process and outputs the result from the VRAM.
To implement the CNU, we consider the full-parallel structure described in Section III. For the CNU unit, the LLRs and minimal values from previous iteration are sent to the unit serially, where two SIPO units are applied. There are 5 FullSubtractor modules used to implement (7), and 5 Full-Adder modules used to implement (8). The sign and the magnitude values to be sent to each variable node are calculated separately. First, the signs of all variable nodes connected to this check node are multiplied together to form i∈N(cj) sign(Vij). The sign of the outgoing message to each variable node is computed by multiplying i∈N(cj) sign(Vij) with the sign of the corresponding variable node. Second, the minimum value and the sub-minimum value among the incoming messages from vi ∈ N(cj) are determined. In [19], the authors proposed bit-serial circuits to determine the minimum and sub-minimum values. Here, we transform them to a parallel design to speed up the CNU module. The architecture used to determine the minimum is shown in Fig. 5. There are five 4-bit inputs corresponding to the five incoming quantized LLRs (Data i bit 1, Data i bit 2, . . . , Data i bit 4, for i = 0, 1, . . . , 4) and one 4-bit output (min bit 1, min bit 2, . . . , min bit 4). The circuits to determine the sub-minimum value is similar, except that it has four 4-bit data inputs because the previously found minimum value is not used. Let M1,j represent the minimum value and let M2,j represent the sub-minimum value input to cj. Finally, we compare each value of the variable node with M1,j to determine the minimum value: if the variable node message vik equals M1,j, we assign M2,j as the minimum value in (2), (5) and (6), otherwise, M1,j is used for minimum value. Using this method, we avoid multiple calculations to update each check node. Layered AMSA and TAMSA require an additional LUT for attenuation; however, the hardware costs are same for each case. Note that, although we have focused our discussion on the implementation on the (155, 64) QC Tanner code, the above architecture suitably generalizes for other QC LDPC codes.
Regarding low-power hardware design considerations, we do not consider a pipeline structure for our particular design given that we use a full-parallel architecture and since the layered decoder requires a complete computation of the first 31 rows in the parity-check matrix to continue the computation of the following 31 rows. However, for different LDPC codes, a pipeline structure is a popular choice to speed up the decoding process. The comparison of hardware resources used in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:13:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

LIU et al.: EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF THRESHOLD MODIFIED MIN-SUM ALGORITHM FOR LDPC DECODERS

1603

Fig. 5. Circuit architecture for minimum computation.

TABLE IV COMPARISON OF HARDWARE RESOURCES
layered MSA, layered AMSA, and layered TAMSA are summarized in Table IV. The FPGA device used is a Xilinx Kintex 7 FPGA and the Vivado design suite software was used for the design and simulation environment. The power consumption and area are determined using a Cadence SOC Encounter tool based on a 0.18um CMOS process. The highest frequency that the design can achieve is 700 MHz. The power and area of layered MSA, AMSA, and TAMSA are the same, when the clock is 500 MHz (CLK1) and 100 MHz (CLK2), respectively. The data comparison shows that layered TAMSA requires no extra hardware resources compared to layered AMSA, and both attenuated algorithms require only 0.07% extra leaf cells compared to conventional layered MSA.
V. CONCLUSION In this brief, we presented a hardware efficient implementation of the threshold attenuated min-sum algorithm (TAMSA) to improve the performance of an LDPC decoder. The TAMSA algorithm was shown to improve the BER performance compared to the conventional AMSA with no extra hardware cost. Furthermore, a layered TAMSA architecture was proposed to reduce the hardware cost. Using circuit optimization techniques, including a full-parallel computing structure, the FPGA implementation results of layered TAMSA show that the modified architecture adds no extra circuit power or circuit area compared to conventional AMSA, and only 0.07% extra leaf cells compared to conventional MSA.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding, Second Ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ, USA: Prentice-Hall, 2001.

[3] D. J. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 2, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] G. Masera, F. Quaglio, and F. Vacca, “Implementation of a flexible LDPC decoder,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 54, no. 6, pp. 542–546, Jun. 2007.
[5] P. Hailes, L. Xu, R. G. Maunder, B. M. Al-Hashimi, and L. Hanzo, “A survey of FPGA-based LDPC decoders,” IEEE Commun. Surveys Tuts., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1098–1122, 2nd Quart., 2016.
[6] T. T. Nguyen-Ly, V. Savin, K. Le, D. Declercq, F. Ghaffari, and O. Boncalo, “Analysis and design of cost-effective, high-throughput LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 26, no. 3, pp. 508–521, Mar. 2018.
[7] J. H. Lee and M. H. Sunwoo, “Low-complexity first-two-minimumvalues generator for bit-serial LDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 63, no. 5, pp. 483–487, May 2016.
[8] K. Cushon, C. Leroux, S. Hemati, S. Mannor, and W. J. Gross, “A min-sum iterative decoder based on pulsewidth message encoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. II, Exp. Briefs, vol. 57, no. 11, pp. 893–897, Nov. 2010.
[9] K. Gunnam, J. M. C. Perez, and F. Garcia-Herrero, “Algorithms and VLSI architectures for low-density parity-check codes: Part 1-lowcomplexity iterative decoding,” IEEE Solid-State Circuits Mag., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 57–63, Nov. 2016.
[10] J. Chen, R. M. Tanner, C. Jones, and Y. Li, “Improved min-sum decoding algorithms for irregular LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Adelaide, SA, Australia, 2005, pp. 449–453.
[11] J. Chen, A. Dholakia, E. Eleftheriou, M. P. Fossorier, and X.-Y. Hu, “Reduced-complexity decoding of LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288–1299, Aug. 2005.
[12] J. Zhao, F. Zarkeshvari, and A. H. Banihashemi, “On implementation of min-sum algorithm and its modifications for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 4, pp. 549–554, Apr. 2005.
[13] D. E. Hocevar, “A reduced complexity decoder architecture via layered decoding of LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Austin, TX, USA, 2004, pp. 107–112.
[14] K. Zhang, X. Huang, and Z. Wang, “High-throughput layered decoder implementation for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 985–994, Aug. 2009.
[15] Y. Sun and J. R. Cavallaro, “VLSI architecture for layered decoding of QC-LDPC codes with high circulant weight,” IEEE Trans. Very Large Scale Integr. (VLSI) Syst., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 1960–1964, Oct. 2013.
[16] K. Gunnam, G. Choi, W. Wang, and M. Yeary, “Multi-rate layered decoder architecture for block LDPC codes of the IEEE 802.11n wireless standard,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., New Orleans, LA, USA, 2007, pp. 1645–1648.
[17] H. Hatami, D. G. M. Mitchell, D. J. Costello, Jr., and T. E. Fuja, “A threshold-based min-sum algorithm to lower the error floors of quantized LDPC decoders,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 2005–2015, Apr. 2020.
[18] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[19] A. Darabiha, A. C. Carusone, and F. R. Kschischang, “A bit-serial approximate min-sum LDPC decoder and FPGA implementation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), Island of Kos, Greece, 2006, pp. 149–152.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:13:11 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

