Improving the minimum distance of QC-LDPC codes by removing cycles

Massimo Battaglioni Dept. of Information Engineering Polytechnic University of Marche
Ancona, Italy m.battaglioni@staff.univpm.it

Marco Baldi Dept. of Information Engineering Polytechnic University of Marche
Ancona, Italy m.baldi@staff.univpm.it

Giovanni Cancellieri Dept. of Information Engineering Polytechnic University of Marche
Ancona, Italy g.cancellieri@staff.univpm.it

Abstract—We focus on regular and irregular quasi-cyclic lowdensity parity-check codes and analyze their codewords. We show that any codeword can be decomposed into component codewords with smaller weight belonging to some component codes. Component codewords can be associated to cycles in the Tanner graph of the code. We transfer these theoretical results into the code design, finding that the removal of some specific classes of cycles yields benefits in terms of minimum distance and error rate performance.
Index Terms—Cycles, minimum distance, QC-LDPC codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
Most of the low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes adopted in modern communication standards, including IEEE 802.16e, IEEE 802.11n and 5G, belong to the family of quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) codes. This is because their quasi-cyclic nature allows performing encoding and decoding with lowcomplexity, hardware-oriented techniques.
We denote as column-regular code a code with a paritycheck matrix having columns with constant Hamming weight γ. Any codeword in a column-regular code with γ = 2 can be associated to a union of simple cycles in the code Tanner graph. However, the connection between codewords and cycles is not clear when γ > 2 or when the code is column-irregular. For spatially coupled LDPC (SC-LDPC) codes, it is shown in [1] that if there is at least one column with weight larger than 2, then the codewords can be decomposed into a number of component codewords of suitable component codes with γ = 2. In this paper, we exploit the connection between QCLDPC and SC-LDPC codes [2], [3], and generalize the results in [1] to a broader class of codes. Exploiting these theoretical results, we devise a procedure based on the removal of cycles for the design of codes with good minimum distance, which generalizes and improves that given in [1]. The proposed examples show that our approach leads to significant improvements in the minimum distance properties and performance of these codes. In contrast to [1], we consider separately the bound on the ensemble minimum distance and that given by the actual code, which is at least as tight as the former one.
A different approach has been followed in [4], where an algorithm for the search of low-weight codewords of regular LDPC codes, relying on a decomposition of codewords into trapping sets (TSs), is proposed. Similarly, expansion tech-

niques are applied in [5] to TSs in order to find codewords and derive bounds on the code minimum distance. In contrast to these previous works, we devise a technique to find the cycles composing any codeword of QC-LDPC codes, rather than obtaining codewords starting from cycles or TSs. Then, we eliminate the shortest of these cycles to remove the low-weight codewords and improve the code minimum distance properties. In this way, differently from [4], [5], the search for cycles is limited to a relatively small matrix and we do not need to apply any expansion technique to them. It is shown in [6] that the vast majority of elementary TSs originate from short cycles. For these reasons, our approach yields improvements in the error rate performance of the codes we consider under iterative decoding. Minimum distance and weight spectrum have a direct impact on maximum likelihood decoders, whose performance provides the ultimate bound for sub-optimal iterative decoders. Moreover, low-weight codewords are the main cause of undetectable errors. Hence, analyzing and improving the minimum distance of QC-LDPC codes is a desirable goal and has been the object of extensive research [2], [3], [7], [8]. With the exception of [3], [7], this challenge has never been directly related to the removal of short cycles in the code Tanner graph, the subject of this work.
The paper is organized as follows. Section II recalls some basic concepts and introduces the notation that will be used throughout the paper. Section III describes how codewords can be decomposed. Section IV provides some examples. Finally, in Section V some final remarks are drawn.
II. PRELIMINARIES AND NOTATION
We define W(·) as the Hamming weight function, extended to the case of arguments with polynomial entries (in which case it results in a weight matrix or vector). The min∗ operator takes a list of entries as its argument and returns the smallest non-zero entry of the list; if the list is empty or contains only 0’s, the operator gives back +∞. The function perm(·) results in the permanent of its argument. The symbol we use for transposition is . Given two polynomials p0(x) and p1(x), we say that p0(x) ⊆ p1(x) if p0(x) is either 0 or contains only monomials that are included in p1(x).
A protograph is a small Tanner graph described by an m × n biadjacency matrix B, known as base matrix. Each

978-8-8872-3747-4 c 2020 AEIT Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:13:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

entry Bi,j indicates the number of edges between two nodes in the graph. The parity-check matrix H of QC-LDPC codes

can be obtained from B by applying a circulant lifting to the

protograph, that is, replacing each non-zero entry of B with the

sum of Bi,j circulant matrices of size p with non-overlapping support and each zero entry with a p × p all-zero matrix.

An ensemble of codes Ep(B) contains all the codes with the

same B and with the same blocklength np. The rate of the

codes

in

Ep(B)

is

not

smaller

than

1

−

m n

.

The

code

minimum

distance is denoted as dmin. We only consider parity-check

matrices whose columns have Hamming weight larger than

one. It is well-known that, if we consider p → ∞, we obtain

time-invariant spatially coupled LDPC convolutional codes

(SC-LDPC-CCs) [2]. A representation which is often used to

describe QC-LDPC codes exploits the isomorphism between
p×p circulant matrices and polynomials in F2[x]/(xp −1), the ring of polynomials with binary coefficients modulo (xp − 1).

In this case, the code is described by an m × n symbolic

matrix with polynomial entries hi,j(x), i = 0, 1, . . . , m − 1, j = 0, 1, . . . , n−1, hi,j(x) ∈ F2[x]/(xp−1). If H(x) contains

only monomial entries, the corresponding code is defined as a

fully-connected monomial code. A codeword is a row vector

T = T0 T1 . . . Tn−1 ,

where each Ti is a p-bit vector, as follows Ti = Ti(0) Ti(1) . . . Ti(p−1) and such that TH = 0. The polynomial codeword corresponding to T is denoted as
a vector of polynomials T(x) = T0(x) . . . Tn−1(x) , whose polynomial entries can be obtained as

p−1

Ti(x) = Ti(j) · xj .

(1)

j=0

We denote the l-th monomial in Ti(x) as Ti(l)(x), l = 0, . . . , W(Ti(x))−1, assuming ascending order of the powers.
The support φ(T) of a codeword T is the set of positions of the non-zero bits in T. H˜ is defined as the sub-matrix

containing only the columns of H whose indices are in

φ(T). A non-zero codeword T is defined as a minimal

codeword if φ(T) does not contain the support of any other

codeword. For a given H(x), we define component code any

code described by a column-regular matrix Hc(x) such that hci,j (x) ⊆ hi,j(x), ∀i, j. The codewords of any component code are called component codewords. We define W as a

diagonal square matrix such that its entry at position (i, i)

is

m−1 j=0

W (hj,i (x)),

∀i

=

0,

.

.

.,

n

−

1,

and

any

other

entry

is 0. We remark that W(H(x)) corresponds to B, as defined

at the beginning of this section. It is shown in [3, Theorem 8]

that all the codes belonging to the same ensemble obey to the

following bound on the ensemble minimum distance

dmin ≤ min∗
L⊆[0,n−1]

perm(W(HL\i(x))) = dEp(B), (2)

|L|=m+1 i∈L

where L is the l-th subset of [0, . . . , n − 1] with size (m + 1),

with l ∈ [0, 1, . . .

n m+1

− 1]; HL\i(x) is the sub-matrix of

H(x) that contains only the columns of H(x) with indices in L \ i. However, a tighter upper bound on the code minimum distance can be derived as [3, Theorem 7]

dmin ≤ min∗
L⊆[0,n−1]

W(perm(HL\i(x))) = dH(x) ≤ dEp(B).

|L|=m+1 i∈L

(3)

The parity-check matrix of a code is the bi-adjacency matrix

of its Tanner graph; thus, a λ-cycle can be represented over H

as a closed loop with λ/2 vertical edges and λ/2 horizontal

edges, passing through λ different symbols 1. In this paper

we only consider simple cycles, i.e., cycles which do not

contain other cycles. It is easy to verify that simple cycles

cannot contain two or more vertical (horizontal) edges in the

same column (row) of H. Moreover, any λ-(simple) cycle in

H can be put in the following form, after row and column

permutations [9]

1 1

1 1

  

...















 

λ 2

rows

.

(4)

 

1

1

  



11

 

λ 2

columns

The girth g of a code is the length of the shortest cycle in
its Tanner graph. The number of cycles with length λ in H
is denoted as Nλ. Cycles can be grouped in two categories: that of the avoidable ones and that of the unavoidable ones.
Avoidable cycles depend on the values of the exponents of the
entries of H(x). Instead, unavoidable cycles only depend on
B. A matrix H is said to be cycle coverable if any symbol 1 in H˜ is involved in at least one cycle. A codeword T is said to be cycle coverable if the corresponding H˜ is cycle coverable.

III. DECOMPOSITION OF CODEWORDS
In this section we focus on minimal codewords. Nonminimal codewords can be studied decomposing them into minimal codewords.

Lemma 1 Given a cycle coverable matrix H˜ having rows with constant Hamming weight 2 and no columns with weight 1, it is possible to find a group of cycles such that each entry of H˜ participates in the same number of cycles s.
Proof: If the two entries of a row of H˜ participate in two distinct cycles C1 and C2, of respective length λ1 and λ2, then there also exists a cycle C3 of length λ1 +λ2 −4 formed by all the symbols of C1 and C2, except for the two common ones. The same reasoning can be extended to the case of C1 and C2 sharing r > 0 rows of H˜ , yielding a cycle C3 of length λ1 + λ2 − 4r. Thus, all the entries in C1 and C2 participate in exactly s = 2 cycles. This easily generalizes to the case of more than two cycles, with s changing accordingly. Clearly, if all the cycles in H˜ are disjoint, the proof holds with s = 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:13:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Theorem 1 Any minimal codeword T(x) of a QC-LDPC code that is cycle coverable can be written as

T(x) =

N −1
tj (x)

W−1

·

2 ,

s

(5)

j=0

Corollary 1 Let us consider a QC-LDPC code C. Given a subset of r0 rows and n0 columns of H, forming H0, let us consider the corresponding n0-tuple T0. If Theorem 1 holds for T0, then H0 is cycle coverable. Furthermore, T0 is a minimal cycle coverable codeword of a component code of C.

where N is the number of component codewords tj(x), j = 0, . . . , N − 1 and s is an integer representing the number of cycles involving the ones in H˜ . The sum in (5) is performed
over the set of integers Z.

Corollary 2 Given a minimal codeword T(x) which is not cycle coverable, the symbols 1 of H˜ which are not involved in
any cycle form paths connecting cycle coverable sub-matrices.

Proof: Given a minimal codeword T(x) and the associated H˜ , let us define as E the following linear system

YH˜ = 0,

(6)

where Y = [y0 y1 . . . yW(T(x))−1] are the variables of the system. E contains the parity-check equations associated

to T(x). Let us assume for simplicity that all the equations

in the system only contain two terms (the assumption is

removed later). According to (4), any λ-cycle C corresponds

to

a

subset

EC

with

cardinality

λ 2

of

the

equations

of

E

such

that

λ 2

−1

of

them

are

linearly

independent

and

each

variable appears in exactly two equations in EC. Let us

consider N cycles C0, . . . , CN−1 with different lengths and

the union of the corresponding N subsets EC0 , . . . , ECN−1 , called E. According to Lemma 1, there exists at least an E∗

containing the same parity-check equations as E and each equation appears the same number of times, say s. E∗ contains

some redundant equations with respect to E, due to the fact

that each equation appears s times and that each of the N

cycles includes an equation that is linearly dependent on the

others. The jth cycle can be unambiguously associated to

a component codeword, tj(x). Each variable yi corresponds
to a monomial of tj(x). Let us sum over Z the component codewords associated to C0∗, . . . , CN∗ −1, which correspond to the equations in E∗, thus obtaining

N −1
S(x) = tj(x) = [S0(x) . . . Sn−1(x)]. (7)
j=0

In order to derive T(x) from S(x), let us consider that

T(x) and S(x) contain the same monomials with different coefficients, i.e. Sk(x) = αkTk(x), ∀k, since E and E∗ contain

the same equations but (7) is computed over Z. So, the entries

of S(x) do not belong to F2[x]. Clearly, αk is the number of

subsets EC0∗ , . . . , ECN∗ −1 containing any variable associated to the kth column of H(x) and it depends on s and wk,k. In particular, we know that in E∗: i) each equation appears s times,

ii) there exist wk,k distinct equations containing a variable associated to the kth column of H(x), and iii) each subset EC∗

contains any variable twice. Hence, 2αk = wk,ks, from which

(5)

can

be

readily

obtained

by

computing

Tj (x)

=

. 2Sk (x)
wk,k s

Removing the assumption that each equation in E contains

exactly two terms, the proof still holds with the definition of

s generalized in the number of times each variable appears in E∗, when taken from the same equation of E.

Proof: Let us consider the Tanner graph G˜ associated to H˜ . A bridge in a graph is an edge which does not participate to any cycle. According to Corollary 1, if G˜ contains a bridge,
then there are at least two cycle coverable submatrices, which
are connected by the same bridge. Longer bridges may be
formed by more than one connected bridge.
It follows from Corollaries 1 and 2 that, even if a codeword is not cycle coverable, we can isolate the symbols 1 of H˜ which are not involved in any cycle and apply separately The-
orem 1 to cycle coverable component codewords. Component
codewords obey to the following rule, which enables a fast
enumeration.

Corollary 3 The component codewords tj, j = 0, 1, . . . N −1 that must be superimposed in order to obtain any cycle coverable codeword T of a code described by H(x) satisfy

N −1

2 W(tj) = s

w

i p

,

i p

.

(8)

j=0

i∈φ(T)

Proof: Eq. (8) is obtained by applying W(·) to (5). Given H(x) and any of its cycle coverable codewords, Algorithm 1 allows finding the cycles corresponding to the component codewords tj(x) described in Theorem 1.

Algorithm 1 Find cycles associated to a cycle coverable

codeword

Input: H(x), T(x)

Output: Cycles forming the possible decompositions of T(x)

1: Compute T from T(x) according to (1) and find H˜

2: List all the cycles of H˜

3: List all the possible solutions of (8) in a set S

4: for each solution u in S do

5: Generate a set J containing all possible sets of indices

J(0), . . . , J(e), where e is a function of the number of cycles

in

H˜ ,

such

that

J

(k)

i 2

−1

≤

Ni

v

i 2

−1

,

∀k

∈

{0, . . . , e},

∀i

∈

{4, 6, . . . 2W(T)}

6: for each k ∈ {0, . . . e} do

7:

Z ← {}

8:

for each i ∈ {4, 6, . . . , 2W(T)} do

9:

Store

the

J

(k)

i 2

−1

th

combination

of

i-cycles

in

Z

10:

if s is constant for the cycles stored in Z then

11:

The stored combinations of cycles form a valid de-

composition of T

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:13:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TABLE I DECOMPOSITION OF (11)

Solution 0 1 2 3 4 5 6
Cycles length

Number of cycles

60

0

32

0

04

0

40

1

12

1

20

2

00

3

8 12 16

Number of decompositions 1 0 10 0 12 3 0 -

From now on, we will denote the length of the shortest cycle(s) in the decomposition of any codeword T as LmTin. Algorithm 1 can be seen as a change-making problem, where
the total amount of money is given by any side of (8) and
the size of the coins is given by the length of the cycles in H˜ . The generic jth solution of the change-making problem
corresponding to the decomposition into cycles of a codeword T is a vector with length W(T) − 1, denoted as v(j), such that vi(j) ≤ N˜i, where N˜i is the number of cycles with length i in H˜ . The number of combinations ∆total that Algorithm
1 tests in order to find all the possible decompositions into
cycles of a codeword T gives a measure of the complexity of the procedure and strongly depends on H˜ , which is an
mp × W(T) matrix with girth g˜. We have

∆cmp −1

∆total =

∆(cjy)cles,

(9)

j=0

where ∆cmp is the number of ways in which the right side of

(8) can be expressed as

2W (T) i=g˜,i even

iv

i 2

−1

;

it

is

easy

to

derive

that ∆c(jy)cles =

2W (T) i=g˜,i even

N˜i v(2ij− ) 1

. As discussed next, our aim

is to find the solution involving the smallest possible coins,

that is, the shortest possible cycles.

Example 1 Let us consider the following code with p = 5

1 1 1 1 

H(x) = 1 x2 x3 x4

(10)

1 x3 x2 x

and its codeword

T(x) = x2 + x3 x2 + x3 x + x4 x + x4 . (11)

The corresponding H˜ contains six 8-cycles, sixteen

12-cycles and six 16-cycles. In this case, (8) gives

s

w i∈φ(T)

i p

,

i p

= 24s. For s = 2 there are only

ten solutions of the change-making problem: 48 is the total;

the value of the coins is the length of the cycles in H˜ ; the

number of available coins is the number of cycles in H˜ (six

with value 8, sixteen with value 12 and six with value 16).

The solutions are listed in Table I. According to (9), the

search of the cycles forming valid decompositions required

8876 tests and produced 26 decompositions. The last column

of Table I includes the number of decompositions belonging

to each family of solutions.

IV. CODE DESIGN AND EXAMPLES
A code with good minimum distance and error rate performance can be obtained through the following procedure, labelled as Algorithm 2, which specializes that devised in [1].
Algorithm 2 Design method
Input: B, p Output: C 1: Compute dEp(B), by using (2) 2: Randomly pick a code C belonging to Ep(B) 3: Compute dH(x), by using (3) 4: if dH(x) < dEp(B) then goto 2: 5: do 6: Estimate the minimum distance dmin of C 7: if dmin = dH(x) then return C
8: Look for a low-weight codeword T (using, for example, the tools in [10]) such that W(T) = dmin
9: Use Algorithm 1 to find the cycles associated to T 10: Modify H(x) in such a way that all the avoidable Lm Tin-
cycles are removed, obtaining a new code C 11: while any of the LmTin-cycles is avoidable

In step 11 of Algorithm 2, the choice of removing all the LTmin-cycles is dictated by the empirical assumption that if LmTin-cycles appear in the decomposition of T, they will also appear in the decomposition of many other codewords with weight W(T). If this assumption is not valid, the output of Algorithm 2 but the approach is slower.
In case the tools in [10] fail to find codewords such that W(T) = dmin, our procedure may not directly improve the minimum distance of the code, as the removed cycles may not be the ones actually composing the codewords such that W(T) = dmin. In any case, the code error rate performance would benefit from the removal of short cycles.
A different approach is to remove just the cycles appearing in the decomposition of any T. The disadvantage of this variant is that the number of low-weight codewords to test increases. However, designing codes with unnecessarily large girth may be worthless or unfeasible. So, we can modify line 10 in such a way that “[...] the avoidable LTmin-cycles appearing in the decomposition of T are removed [...]”. In the following we test both approaches via numerical simulations.
Moreover, as shown next, the input of Algorithm 2 can also be a given code, rather than an ensemble. In this case, we just need to run instructions 6-11 of Algorithm 2.
In order to validate our approach, we consider the ensemble of fully-connected monomial QC-LDPC codes. Let us consider the code C0 with m = 3, g = 8 and p = 83, described by

1 1 1 1 

H0(x) =  1 x x2 x4  .

(12)

1 x3 x8 x14

Applying (3), we obtain dmin ≤ 24, which coincides with dEp(B), for fully-connected monomial codes with γ = m = 3. We remark that choosing smaller values of the girth causes
a drop of dH(x), as shown in [3]. Using the tools in [10], it

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:13:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

can be verified that this code contains many codewords with weight 22. For the sake of brevity, we only report one of them

T(x) = (1 + x5 + x76 + x77)

(x4 + x5 + x73 + x74 + x77 + x78)

(1 + x4 + x72 + x73 + x75 + x78 + x81)

(13)

(x72 + x74 + x75 + x76 + x81) .

By means of Algorithm 1, we have found two decompositions for (13). The first one involves four 8-cycles, three 12cycles and four 16-cycles. The second one, instead, involves five 8-cycles, a 12-cycle and five 16-cycles. Both of them satisfy (8) with s = 2. The minimum distance of this code is then dmin ≤ 22, which is lower than the upper bound of the ensemble, that is 24. In order to improve the minimum distance of C0, according to Algorithm 2, we remove all the 8-cycles, obtaining a code C1 with m = 3, p = 83 and g = 10, which also meets the condition dE(B) = dH(x), defined by

1 1 1 1 
H1(x) =  1 x10 x7 x11  . 1 x15 x53 x66

The minimum distance of C1, estimated through the tools in [10], is indeed dmin = 24. This empirically confirms the assumption discussed above, as the removal of all the 8-cycles enabled the removal of all the codewords of weight 22. In order to perform a fair comparison with existing literature, we have considered HB1(x), designed as in [8], representing a code CB1 having p = 83, g = 10 and dmin = 24
1 1 1 1  HB1(x) =  1 x x14 x17  .
1 x11 x6 x2

We have designed a code C2 with the same blocklength by removing just the 8-cycles appearing in the decomposition of the low-weight codewords with weight 22 of C0. Thus, C2 has girth g = 8 but minimum distance dmin = 24, according to the tools in [10]. Its symbolic matrix is as follows
1 1 1 1  H2(x) =  1 x38 x2 x4  .
1 x18 x14 x73

Let us assess the performance of these codes in terms of their bit error rate (BER) via Monte Carlo simulations of binary phase shift keying (BPSK) modulated transmissions over the additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. We consider a BP decoder performing 100 iterations. The results are shown in Figure 1. We notice that the minimum distance improvement achieved through our design approach results in a considerable improvement also in the code error rate performance. These numerical results match our expectations, since H2(x) contains 8-cycles, which are very likely to cause the existence of harmful TSs that are the main causes of the slightly worse performance of C2 with respect to C1 at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). However, we note that the

100

10-1

10-2

10-3

BER

10-4

10-5

C

0

C
1

10-6

C
2

C
B1

10-7

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

Eb/N0 (dB)

Fig. 1. Simulated performance of QC-LDPC codes as a function of the signalto-noise ratio.

performance of C2, despite its smaller girth, largely coincides with that of CB1 at low SNRs. Finally, we notice that our method yields an improvement of the performance in the newly designed C1 over CB1, which is characterized by the same girth and minimum distance as C1.
V. CONCLUSION
We have connected low-weight codewords of QC-LDPC
codes to cycles in their Tanner graph. We have shown that
it is possible to improve their minimum distance, as well as
their error rate performance, by removing these cycles.
REFERENCES
[1] M. Battaglioni, M. Baldi, and G. Cancellieri, “Connections between lowweight codewords and cycles in spatially coupled LDPC convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 66, no. 8, pp. 3268–3280, Aug. 2018.
[2] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, “LDPC block and convolutional codes based on circulant matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 12, pp. 2966–2984, Dec. 2004.
[3] R. Smarandache and P. O. Vontobel, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes: Influence of proto- and Tanner-graph structure on minimum Hamming distance upper bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 58, no. 2, pp. 585–607, Feb. 2012.
[4] S. M. Khatami, L. Danjean, D. V. Nguyen, and B. Vasic, “An efficient exhaustive low-weight codeword search for structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory and Applications Workshop (ITA), San Diego, California, Feb. 2013, pp. 1–10.
[5] Y. Hashemi and A. H. Banihashemi, “Tight lower and upper bounds on the minimum distance of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 33–36, Jan. 2018.
[6] ——, “New characterization and efficient exhaustive search algorithm for leafless elementary trapping sets of variable-regular LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 62, no. 12, pp. 6713–6736, Dec. 2016.
[7] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.
[8] I. E. Bocharova, F. Hug, R. Johannesson, B. D. Kudryashov, and R. V. Satyukov, “Searching for voltage graph-based LDPC tailbiting codes with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2265– 2279, Apr. 2012.
[9] S. Kim, J.-S. No, H. Chung, and D.-J. Shin, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes with girth larger than 12,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 2885–2891, Aug. 2007.
[10] D. J. C. MacKay. (2008) Source code for approximating the mindist problem of LDPC codes. [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.eng. cam.ac.uk/mackay/MINDIST\_ECC.html

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 11:13:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

