Understanding NAND’s intrinsic characteristics critical role in Solid State 
Drive (SSD) design 
A key enabler for Enterprise Data Center applications 
 
Will Akin 
Nonvolatile Memory Solutions, Micron Technology, Inc. 
Milpitas, CA, USA 
wakin@micron.com 
 
Abstract:  The use of NAND flash-based SSDs in enterprises has grown at a ~33% compound annual growth rate [1] worldwide for 
the past three years. The majority of the growth comes from enterprise data center applications where the trend is to leverage the cost 
benefits of using MLC and TLC NAND flash memory by focusing on the use model behavior to optimize performance and life 
characteristics. In the data center, requirements for these MLC/TLC SSDs demand high sequential performance and reliability, 
moderate IOPS, and low power consumption along with maintaining 3 to 5 years of useful life. These challenges are tackled by 
tightening the links between the SSD’s operation, host operating environment, and intrinsic NAND memory behavior and by exploiting 
increasingly sophisticated controllers, firmware, and flash memory error management techniques. 
Index Terms:  NAND internals, SSD controllers, error correcting codes, data center devices, storage architecture 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The increasing use of cheap smartphones, tablets, and 
lower-end laptops is making compute devices available to 
more people worldwide. This is fueling the growing 
reliance on data in the cloud, which translates to significant 
growth in the amount of storage consumed. Service 
providers are expanding by placing severs and data centers 
in the same region as users. The idea is that users accessing 
the cloud in the same region will get the best user 
experience. As new data centers are developed, IT 
architects are taking advantage of solid state drives (SSDs) 
to provide low latency and a consistent user experience 
along with maintaining the best quality of service (QoS) at 
a lower cost than previous generations. The tenants of 
success include achieving consistent performance and 
exceptional reliability over alternative hard disk drive 
(HDD) solutions. The IT professionals managing prior-
generation storage servers have previously relied on HDDs 
are now quickly adopting SSDs to overcome performance 
bottlenecks, performance consistency and poor reliability. 
Fig. 1 shows the expected growth of SSDs in the 
enterprise segment by interface.  
Other benefits, in addition to performance and reliability 
(as measured percentage of uptime), include increased 
power efficiency and higher storage density, which 
contribute to lowering overall operating expenses (OPEX). 
Enterprise SSDs must be available at the lowest cost per 
gigabit without sacrificing performance or reliability. To 
achieve optimal cost, server providers and SSD designers 
have focused on the workload characteristics driving many 
elements of design. 
 
Fig. 1. Enterprise SSD growth dominated by SATA solutions [2] 
  For example, we can design for less NAND, as measured 
by simple over-provisioning (OP), of the SSD knowing 
that the workload is not 100% random and involves 
mostly sequential writes over the device life.[3, 4]   
   
  𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑝𝑙𝑒 𝑂𝑣𝑒𝑟 𝑃𝑟𝑜𝑣𝑖𝑠𝑖𝑜𝑛𝑖𝑛𝑔  =
𝑃ℎ𝑦𝑠𝑖𝑐𝑎𝑙 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦 − 𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦
𝑈𝑠𝑒𝑟 𝐶𝑎𝑝𝑎𝑐𝑖𝑡𝑦
 
Overall, taking advantage of segment requirements and 
understanding the expected workloads results in the best 
alignment of NAND device behaviors to SSD design. 
   A key concern is how to relate multilevel cell (MLC) and 
triple-level cell (TLC) NAND flash intrinsic behavior to 
data center requirements. To begin to address this concern 
in this paper, we first describe the major expectations and 
measurement requirements for data center SSDs. We show 
an example of performance, latencies, and expected 
reliability within a data center environment. Next, we 
describe the intrinsic characteristics and tradeoffs within 
the NAND that apply to data center SSDs. Finally, we 
briefly review controller, firmware, flash management, and 
978-1-4673-6933-6/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:30:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
error correcting code techniques and how they can affect 
the web search use case. Fig. 2 shows the most important 
data center attributes and their relationships to client 
segment solutions. 
DATA CENTER STORAGE ATTRIBUTES VS. TYPICAL CLIENT SSDS 
Feature 
Data Center Class 
Client Class 
Capacity 
128GB to >4TB 
128GB to <2TB 
Steady State Performance 
MLC/TLC rate within 20% 
over life 
SLC burst cache 
QoS 
99.9% <5ms,  
100% <100ms  
99.9% <25ms 
100% <1 sec 
Read Average Latency 
65µs 
>70µs 
Data Protection 
Full E2E, SECDED 
Best effort 
Write Cache Protection 
Full power protection 
FUA protection 
Power 
10-15 watts 
<10 watts 
Endurance 
<3 drive fills/day 
100X capacity fills total 
Uncorrectable Bit Error Rate 
(UBER) 
1 in 1017 
1 in 1016 
Mean Time Between Failures 
(MTBF) 
2 million hrs 
1.2 million hrs 
Expected Use Life 
5 years 
<5 years 
Fig. 2. Data center vs. client SSD requirements   
II. DATA CENTER SSD PERFORMANCE AND RELIABILITY 
EXPECTATIONS 
Although Fig. 2 lists many attributes that are critical for 
SSDs in the data center, we focus on cost-driven 
performance, latency, and endurance in this paper.  The 
data center performance is measured in both input and 
output operations per second (IOPS) and consistent 
bandwidth for read, write, and mixed activity. It’s 
important to note that sustained or consistent performance 
is more important than peak performance over the life of 
the SSD. Unlike the fresh-out-of-box (FOB) measurement 
in client SSDs, FOB for enterprise SSDs is expected to be 
100% written with uncompressible content and to perform 
with consistent behavior. Fig. 3 shows typical IOPS and 
latency over time for several data center SSDs. The length 
of the test is critical as we need the SSDs to have ~8 drive 
fill cycles and then settle down to steady state behavior.   
 
The FOB state is visible at the extreme left of the 
plot in Fig. 3. This state is reached when the drive 
has little to no user data; all the NAND cells are 
erased and able to receive new data.  Typically, 
this is the SLC burst cache area where we can 
write in SLC mode, then later compress to MLC 
as space is needed 
 
Immediately following the FOB state, the drive 
enters a transition state, marked by steadily 
decreasing performance.  
 
After the transition state, the drive is in a steady 
state, as described in SNIA’s Solid State Storage 
Performance Test Specification Enterprise v1.1, 
which is ideal for standard testing of IOPS, 
throughput, latency, and write saturation [8].  
 
 
Fig. 3. Performance and latency comparison of different data center SSDs  
Fig. 4 shows the QoS measure and how client SSDs (SSD 
A and E) do not achieve the stricter data center 
requirements. 
 
 
Impact of QoS in Database Transactional Processing Applications 
 
Latency from Micron SSD testing, table curtesy of Intel Corporation, [5] 
Intel® Solid-State Drive DC 
S3700 Series – Quality of Service, Technical Brief, July 2013 Order Number: 329281-001US 
Fig. 4. QoS % measured in 9’s [5] 
To ensure the reliability of enterprise storage applications 
that operate 24/7, data centers need SSDs capable of 0.1 
to 3 SSD drive fills per day. These SSD’s are to use the 
most cost efficient NAND (3D) available to enable cost-
effective capacity. The SSD shall be packaged in a 
removable form factor that is quick and easy to replace. 
Our reliability testing of enterprise SSDs follows JEDEC 
[5] specifications as outlined in JESD218 – Solid State 
Drive (SSD) Requirements and Endurance Test Method 
and JESD219 – Solid State Drive (SSD) Endurance 
Workloads documents.  These specifications employ a 
master trace-based activity generator that mimics actual 
expected use within enterprise and client segments. By 
focusing on the enterprise workload traces and limiting the 
expected drive fills per day, the reliability over a drive’s 
lifetime can be measured.  Fig. 5 shows three regions of 
testing: Reliability demonstration testing (RDT) early life 
failures and 1000 drive/1000 hours lifetime MTBF 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:30:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
prediction, drive fills per day cycling, and “cycle-to-death” 
testing. 
 
 
Fig. 5. Three reliability areas tested on an enterprise SSD 
 
RDT covers the early region and low-level events; 
high-volume with lower cycle counts and 
measures the mean time to failure (MTTF) of the 
drive.  
Note: Using a large unit volume of SSDs only 
achieves lower cycle counts due to the limited 
testing time of 1000 operational hours. Using the 
large (1000) volume of drives, we can predict the 
MTTF and, to a lesser extent, the uncorrectable 
bit error rates (UBER) of the drive. 
 
The total bytes written (TBW) qual covers the 
expected drive lifetime and post-TBW data 
retention; “Short stroke” method should be used 
to ensure lower volume with higher cycle counts. 
“Short stroke” restricts access to a limited LBA 
range. The TBW qual measures UBER according 
to  JESD218.  
NOTE: The TBW qual may already be covered 
by RDT.   
 
Cycle-to-death testing covers raw endurance 
beyond TBW; lowest volume and highest cycle 
counts and measures end-of-life (EOL) margin 
and behavior, giving better visibility into EOL life 
cycling error rates.  
 
The NAND, controller, and firmware contributions are all 
factor that can help enable the SSD to meet the reliability 
requirements. 
III. CRITICAL INTRINSIC NAND CHARACTERISTICS  
The foundation of the requirements driving data center 
steady state performance, latency, and reliability can be 
found within the NAND design and optimization choices. 
Design choices in cell, string, pages, and blocks, along with 
the manufacturing process, dictate the key NAND 
specifications of page programming (tPROG), page reads 
(tREAD), block erase (tERASE), and cycling-based raw bit 
error rate (RBER) and retention. The goal of the NAND 
architect and designers is to balance all of the block 
geometry factors that have a direct impact on 
performance. As the lithography decreases with each 
generation, 
tradeoffs 
established 
between 
product 
parameters can simultaneously maximize performance and 
reliability while minimizing cost, time to market, and 
power. Solutions can come from process technology, 
NAND die features, and/or system-level features. Fig. 6 
highlights some of the key parameters, process technology, 
NAND die features, and system features to manipulate. 
 
 
Fig. 6. Balancing process, NAND, and system features  
Program Disturb occurs when erased cells on the 
same word line as another cell that is being programmed to 
a higher Vt state. Program noise is caused by a variable 
number of electrons tunneling during each programming 
pulse. Cycling trap-up is when program/erase cycling 
results in electron trapping and trap generation. High- and 
low-temp data retention occurs when charge loss results 
from de-trapping (high temp) and single-bit charge loss or 
SBCL (low temp). All of these items have impact on the 
program, erase, and read times. The challenges increase 
when scaling to smaller geometries. The NAND array 
structure and internal programming algorithms that deal 
with reliability and maximize cycling and retention all work 
in concert to drive the tPROG behavior. Fig. 7 shows the 
typical circuit structure for a 2D NAND die.  
 
Fig. 7. NAND cell structure [7] 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:30:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
The number of pages and planes increase from SLC to 
TLC. As a result, we need the controller and firmware to 
handle larger erase blocks along with more valid data 
movement when performing garbage collection [9]. One 
system technique to increase performance is to write and 
read in overlapping plane operations. This helps “hide” the 
overall tPROG for a multi-plan operation and achieve the 
best performance. As we move to TLC and more planes, 
parallel operations within the die are standard for SSDs.  
IV. SSD SYSTEM SOLUTIONS 
Bringing together the NAND to form an SSD is the task 
of the controller with flash transaction layer (FTL) and 
firmware embedded within. Fig. 8 shows the entire 
NAND flash management stack.  The SSD is responsible 
for the FTL, flash file system, error control, and the driver 
or interface to NAND via ONFI [10]. To address the 
reliability related to the RBER, we need to apply error 
correction. 
 
  
Fig. 8. 2D NAND cell structure [7] 
The error correction code (ECC) for SSDs depends 
on the flash technology, and for today’s 16nm to 20nm 
MLC and TLC NAND, we look to more complex 
correction algorithms like stronger BCH and low-density 
parity check (LDPC).[11] 
V. CONCLUSION 
Data centers are embracing new technology at a rapid 
pace as build outs occur due to the expanding growth of 
data in the cloud along with the consumer’s appetite for 
that data on-demand. Enterprise data center SSDs that 
have been designed to take advantage of ever smaller 
lithography’s and 3D NAND structures and successfully 
confront inherent NAND behavioral challenges will gain  
market share. The key is understanding the segment 
requirements and workloads and optimizing for the 
NAND behavior with innovative flash management 
algorithms all while minimizing cost. NAND intrinsic 
challenges are also times of opportunity. Innovation is 
required in dealing with the increasing bit density. 
Expanding 3D structures and more bit levels should be 
assumed for the next decade. 
It is important to listen to data center customers and 
watch out for system innovation as NAND management 
will also be taken to a vertical level. More and more 
operating systems are making “NAND-like management” 
decisions on data placement based on the dynamic 
performance, latency, and reliability. For silicon designers 
and architects, physics rule the day and OS providers do 
not fully know what you and your technology are capable 
of. It is the technologists, architects, silicon designers, and 
engineers who have the power and the responsibility to 
make a difference and change the shape of this storage 
industry. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
I would like to thank Micron’s SSD Engineering and 
Development organization with a special thanks to Mark 
Bauer, Mark Helm, and Pete Feeley for their support and 
encouragement. 
 
REFERENCES 
[1] 
IDC, Worldwide Solid State Drive 2014–2018 Forecast Update, Jeff 
Janukowicz Nov 2014. www.idc.com  
[2] 
NVM Summit, January 2014, Matt Bryson, John Chen, ABR Investment 
Strategy, LLC, TRENDFOCUS. 
[3] 
A closed-form expression for Write Amplification in NAND Flash, Rajiv 
Agarwal and Marcus Marrow. IEEE Globecom 2010 Workshop on 
Application of Communication Theory to Emerging Memory 
Technologies http://web.stanford.edu/~rajivag/papers/wa.pdf  
[4] 
Extending the Lifetime of Flash-based Storage through Reducing Write 
Amplification from File Systems. Youyou Lu, Jiwu Shu and Weimin 
Zheng. 11th USENIX Conference on File and Storage Technologies 
(FAST ’13) 
[5] 
JEDEC’s JC-64.8 Subcommittee for Solid State Drives. Documents are 
available at www.jedec.org. 
[6] 
Intel® Solid-State Drive DC S3700 Series – Quality of Service, Technical 
Brief, July 2013 Order Number: 329281-001US 
[7] 
NAND Error Sources and Options for Reliable Management, Pete Feeley, 
Micron Technology. Denali Memcon Sept 12-14 2006.  
[8] 
The SNIA PTS–Enterprise v1.1 provides both standard testing (IOPS, 
Throughput, Latency, and Write Saturation). www.snia.org/forums/sssi 
[9] 
IEEE xplore, Modelling Symposium (EMS), 2013 European. ISBN 978-1-
4799-2577-3 www.ieeexplore.ieee.org/xpl/  
[10] Open NAND Flash Interface, ONFI 4.0 Specification. 
www.onfi.org/specifications  
[11] Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Codes and the Need for Stronger ECC. 
www.flashmemorysummit.com/English/Collaterals/Proceedings/2011/20
110810_T2A_Nelson.pdf 
 
Will Akin holds a BSEE from San Jose State University, CA, USA. He joined 
Micron’s Nonvolatile Engineering organization in October 2014. As a Micron 
Fellow, Will leads system architecture for all SSD solutions. Prior to Micron, Will 
worked at Intel Corporation leading NAND-based SSD architecture and systems 
integration for all internally developed solutions within NSG.  Will has spent 
over 25 years working with storage at established companies such as Quantum, 
Maxtor, Intel, and now Micron. Will has expertise in a wide range of 
technologies including ASIC and firmware, hardware, and storage interfaces.  His 
personal hobbies include software-defined radios and RF circuit design.  
 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:30:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
