IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2015

3411

Joint Detection and Decoding in LDPC-Based Space-Time Coded MIMO-OFDM Systems via Linear Programming
Kun Wang, Student Member, IEEE, Hong Shen, Member, IEEE, Wenhao Wu, Student Member, IEEE, and Zhi Ding, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—This work proposes a novel linear programming approach for the joint detection and decoding of LDPC-based space-time (ST) coded signals in multi-antenna orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) systems. While traditional receivers typically decouple the detection and decoding processes as two disjunctive blocks or require iterative turbo exchange of extrinsic information between the soft detector and decoder, we formulate a joint linear program (LP) by exploiting the constraints imposed on the data symbols, training symbols, noise subspace as well as channel code. In consideration of the vast amount of LDPC parity check inequalities, we further present an adaptive procedure to significantly reduce the complexity of the joint LP receiver. Our LP-based receivers outperform existing receivers with substantial performance gains. Moreover, the proposed joint LP receiver demonstrates strong robustness when pilot symbols are sparsely arranged on subcarriers.
Index Terms—Linear programming, LDPC, space-time code, joint detection and decoding, MIMO-OFDM.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE surging demand for high-rate data transmissions has been the major propulsion behind multi-antenna broadband wireless communications. Many wireless channels, however, exhibit frequency-selectivity, which results in substantial performance degradation. To mitigate the multi-path distortions, OFDM, through an inverse fast Fourier transform (IFFT) operation at the transmitter plus cyclic prefix and a
Manuscript received July 03, 2014; revised January 26, 2015; accepted March 25, 2015. Date of publication April 13, 2015; date of current version May 29, 2015. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. Marius Pesavento. This material is based on works supported by the National Science FoundationGrants CNS-1443870, ECCS-1307820, CIF-1321143, and the Research Fund of National Mobile Communications Research Laboratory, Southeast University (No. 2015B02). Part of this work was presented at the IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing (ICASSP), Florence, Italy, 2014.
K. Wang and W. Wu are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA (e-mail: kunwang@ucdavis.edu; wnhwu@ucdavis.edu).
H. Shen is with National Mobile Communications Research Lab, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, China (e-mail: shenhongseu@gmail.com).
Z. Ding is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA 95616 USA, and also with ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 200031, China (e-mail: zding@ucdavis.edu; dingzhi@ shanghaitech.edu.cn).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2015.2422681

corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) at the receiver, splits a frequency-selective channel into parallel orthogonal flat sub-channels [1]. To further enhance the transmission reliability, space-time coding has been proved effective in combating the fading effect and it is widely adopted in flat-fading multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) systems. By exploiting the presence of spatial diversity offered by multiple antennas, ST code takes advantage of simultaneous coding over space and time to achieve diversity gain without necessarily sacrificing system throughput [2]. Thus, the combination of space-time block code (STBC) and MIMO-OFDM is now common in modern wireless systems.
In spite of the much improved capacity and reliability, wireless channel fading and noise still lead to detection errors. In practice, forward error correction (FEC) codes are routinely employed in MIMO-OFDM systems. Particularly, low-density parity-check (LDPC) code gains high popularity owing to its excellent error correction performance [3]. Moreover, LDPC codes, when decoded via the well-known sum-product algorithm (SPA), can approach the Shannon limit with reasonable decoding complexity [4]. When we have LDPC code as outer code and ST code as inner code, it is ideal to apply a joint maximum likelihood (ML) detection of ST code and decoding of LDPC code. However, such an optimal joint receiver has a prohibitive complexity for large number of transmit antennas, high-order modulations and sufficiently long LDPC codes; therefore it is impractical to implement.
We note that most ST code detection algorithms for MIMO system are separated from the FEC code decoder. The reason is that the symbol detection of ST code typically operates in either real-number or complex-number field whereas FEC decoding generally operates in Galois field. Despite the success of SPA for LDPC decoding, its high nonlinearity during message passing makes it challenging to integrate with the MIMO detection step. Thus, joint MIMO detection and FEC decoding receivers in the literature are typically based on the exchange of soft information to form a turbo-equalizer/detector [5]–[7]. This kind of iterative receivers is shown to be capable of providing near-ML performance with perfect channel state information (CSI). When CSI is not available, however, these belief propagation based turbo receivers may suffer significant performance degradation. Also, the convergence of such iterative receivers is not a certainty when exchanging unreliable soft information at low to moderate signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) regimes.

1053-587X © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3412

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2015

Recently, Feldman et al. [8] proposed an LP-based LDPC decoding scheme, which is amendable to existing detection algorithms. Relying on this LP decoding, Cui et al. [9] developed an -norm based joint detector and decoder for flat-fading MIMO channels. However, the authors focused on affine mapping between data symbols and binary bits, e.g., BPSK and QPSK modulations. For transmissions with higher-order modulations, the authors suggest transforming to an equivalent system with QPSK. On the other hand, Flanagan [10] proposed a unified framework for LP-based receivers, while Kim and Pfister considered the joint-decoding problem for finite-state channels [11]. Furthermore, without introducing a large number of extra variables, the authors in [12] extended the treatment of non-affine QAM mapping proposed in [10] for MIMO-OFDM systems. By extracting LP variables and constraints from the factor graph, the proposed joint LP receiver demonstrates excellent performance. We notice that, however, this method requires perfect CSI or closed-form estimates at the receiver.
Focusing on LDPC coded and ST coded MIMO-OFDM transmissions, we present a novel joint detection and decoding algorithm based on a single unified linear program. Utilizing the minimum peak distortion (MPD) criterion that targets QAM data symbols, we exploit limited pilot symbols to avoid the all-zero trivial solution and to resolve phase-rotation ambiguities. We also apply a subspace approach for noise suppression. We further improve the joint receiver performance by incorporating the LDPC code information through a set of LP decoding constraints. The unification of MIMO equalization, pilot symbol, subspace separation and LDPC code constraints in this LP receiver can help to improve the detection accuracy and thus the decoding performance.
It is noted that MPD criterion using LP was first proposed for equalization of single-input single-output (SISO) dispersive channels in [13] and was later extended in [14] to flat-fading MIMO systems with space-time block codes. In both [13] and [14], the algorithms are blind and the equalized symbol sequence suffers from a phase ambiguity. Different from previous works that assume perfect CSI [12] or are totally blind [14], this joint detection-decoding receiver takes advantage of both QAM data symbols and limited pilot symbols in receiver optimization [15]. Notably, compared with [16] that proposed a joint algorithm for SISO frequency-selective channel equalization, the work in this paper provides the MPD criterion with more design insights, including the pilot structure presented under the MIMO setting, the demonstration of performance advantage over turbo equalization as well as strong robustness when pilot symbols are sparse in frequency. We also substantially reduce the receiver complexity with a slight performance sacrifice in order to accommodate practically long LDPC codes [17].
Our manuscript is organized as follows. First, Section II describes the system model and Section III briefly discusses related receivers. Section IV presents the disjoint LP formulation by elaborating on various available constraints to refine the LP receiver. We prove the zero-forcing (ZF) nature of the proposed equalizer solution, and provide a sufficient and necessary condition on pilot symbols to resolve convergence ambiguity in Section V. We further integrate LDPC code constraints in Section VI, and summarize the joint LP with means for com-

plexity reduction in Section VII. Section VIII presents simulation results of the proposed joint receiver algorithms before the conclusions in Section IX.

II. LDPC CODED ST-OFDM SYSTEM

A. Notations

Throughout this manuscript,

and

stand for

matrix conjugate, transpose and Hermitian, respectively.

represents the Moore-Penrose pseudo-inverse. denotes the

-norm of a vector and denotes the Frobenius norm. Also,

by convention, we use uppercase and lowercase boldface let-

ters for matrices and vectors, respectively. Moreover,

denotes the Kronecker product of matrices and . In addi-

tion,

and

are used to represent the set of

matrices over real numbers and complex numbers, respectively.

We use

to denote a matrix of diagonal elements from

vector .

B. Channel Model

We consider an LDPC-based space-time coded wireless

communication system equipped with transmit antennas

and receive antennas. The channel is assumed to be an

-tap quasi-static MIMO channel with coherence time

and the channels over various fading blocks are supposed to

have the same delay spread . The channel impulse response

between the -th transmit antenna

and the -th receive antenna is modeled as a zero-mean complex

Gaussian random variable with power normalization constraint

. Assume that each transmit antenna

uses an -tone OFDM modulator (IFFT), and each receive

antenna correspondingly uses an -tone OFDM demodulator

(FFT) with perfect time and frequency synchronization. Further

suppose that the time-domain symbols are prepended with a

cyclic prefix, longer than the channel delay spread , to com-

pletely remove the inter-block interference between adjacent

OFDM symbols.

For notational convenience, define the index sets of

transmit antenna

, receive antenna

and subcarriers

.

Let

be the (frequency domain) data transmitted by the

-th transmit antenna on the -th subcarrier. Let

be the

frequency domain channel from transmit antenna to receive

antenna on subcarrier . Then,

(1)

is the -point FFT of the time-domain channel vector . After removing the
cyclic prefix and applying FFT, the received signal on the -th antenna at subcarrier is

(2)

where is the frequency-domain noise following circularly symmetric zero-mean Gaussian distribution with variance .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT DETECTION AND DECODING IN LDPC-BASED SPACE-TIME CODED MIMO-OFDM SYSTEMS VIA LINEAR PROGRAMMING

3413

Fig. 1. Block diagram of transmitter in an LDPC-based space-time coded MIMO-OFDM system.

By collecting received symbols from all antennas, we can represent the received signals on the -th subcarrier in a compact form as

(3)

in which

and

.

C. Signal Model

As illustrated in Fig. 1, binary bits from information source

are first de-multiplexed into multiple streams. On each stream,

a block of information bits is encoded by an

LDPC

code, and the output coded bits are then fed into a -ary

QAM modulator with constellation , producing

QAM data symbols. We say that the

symbols form

a codeword, which spans over

time slots

after the serial-to-parallel (S/P) conversion. Assuming that

codewords are transmitted under one fading block, then it takes

time

to transmit all the codewords. Before S/P

conversion, codewords are prepended with

pilot

symbols for the purpose of channel estimation or equalizer

training, and hence these training symbols spread over time

slots after S/P. Therefore, together with the coded data symbols,

there are

OFDM symbols in total on each

stream within one coherence time. For the sake of clarity in

later derivations, define the time index sets for OFDM symbols

as

and

.

We emphasize that the signal vector

is already

space-time coded and is ready for transmission. Since a tone-

by-tone based space-time coding is adopted in this work, let us

concentrate on a single subcarrier to illustrate the encoding

process. One STBC block consists of signal vectors ,

i.e.,

. Under the framework

of linear dispersion code [18], complex information symbols

are mapped to one STBC block, written

as

where

and

. According to the equivalent

spatial diversity (ESD) model [14], the standard STBC trans-

mission in (5) can be equivalently expressed as

(6)

where

and

are the equivalent

observation and noise vectors, respectively. The equivalent

channel

incorporates the underlying structure

of STBC into the actual channel , such that is code-de-

pendent. In addition, taking the practical assumption that no

spatial fading correlation exists between any antennas, the

matrix has full column rank for any well-designed STBC.

D. Full Rate STBC

In this work, we focus on full rate STBC so as to possibly

maintain high system throughput. In particular, we are interested

in the orthogonal STBC (OSTBC) Alamouti code [19] and the

quasi-orthogonal STBC (Q-OSTBC) [20]. For the well-known

Alamouti code, the ESD channel corresponding to the actual

channel

is

(7)

The observation and noise vectors can be obtained by reshaping and conjugating and respectively, shown as follows
(8)

where the MATLAB colon notation

is used to represent

the -th column of matrix .

For the Q-OSTBC, the ESD channel matrix of the phys-

ical channel

, observation vector

and noise vector are given as

(9)

(4)
(10) where and are code matrices. Accordingly, the transmission of one STBC block can be represented as
Note that, the number of transmit antennas in the ESD (5) system is identical to that of the actual system for these two
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3414

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2015

Fig. 2. Block diagram of iterative turbo receiver.

rate-1 codes. Hence, we shall not distinguish and in the rest of this manuscript. For more details about the ESD model, see the discussions in Appendix B.

III. TRADITIONAL RECEIVERS

A. Disjoint ZF Receiver

The exponential complexity of joint ML symbol detection

and channel decoding in prohibitive in practical use. Therefore,

serial detection and decoding is a natural alternative. For the

purpose of comparison, we use ZF detection on each subcarrier.

It is observed that the ESD channel matrix is column-orthog-

onal under OSTBC, satisfying

. Thus, the

ZF detection is simply

, the Q-OSTBC system with four transmit antennas can be decomposed into two MIMO systems each with two transmit antennas, and thus the complexity is halved [20].
Even though turbo equalization gains wide success, it admits several weaknesses. First of all, the iterative nature of turbo detection may cause performance degradation as the consequence of unreliable information exchange, especially when the CSI is not perfectly known at the receiver. Secondly, the turbo detector works in such an iterative way that can hardly be guaranteed to converge in limited iterations. As an alternative, we develop a joint detection and decoding algorithm that takes the form of a single unified LP formulation without iterative belief exchange.
IV. LINEAR PROGRAMMING ALGORITHM DEVELOPMENT
We expand the concept of blind equalization in [13] and [14] to the semi-blind joint detection and decoding of LDPC-based and space-time coded MIMO-OFDM transmissions. Specifically, the proposed algorithm relies on the assumption of persistent excitation. For the data-bearing symbol on any stream and any subcarrier , it has to satisfy

For the pilot symbol

, however, it requires

(11)

Note that the symbol is unquantized and thus can be further processed by soft-input soft-output decoder. Under Q-OSTBC, nonetheless, ZF detection does not admit such a simple form, due to the reason that the columns of channel matrix are not fully orthogonal. Therefore, we employ channel matrix inverse or pseudoinverse for signal detection.

Basically, the data-bearing symbols can achieve the maximum amplitude along time axis, whereas one more dimension (the spatial dimension) may be needed for the pilot symbols to achieve . Moreover, it implicitly requires that and are square constellations that are rotation-invariant to and . Typically, the square QAM signals, e.g., QPSK and 16-QAM, satisfy the assumption for .

B. Joint Turbo Receiver

A. Convex Peak Distortion Cost Function

Without any information exchange between detector and de- To begin the algorithm development, we focus on a noiseless

coder, the performance of the aforementioned disjoint receiver MIMO channel for the cost function. Our goal is to design the

is far from optimum. In this regard, an iterative receiver called equalization matrices for all the subchannels. Specifically, de-

turbo equalizer is known to be near-capacity-achieving [6], [7]. note the equalizer on the -th subcarrier as

As illustrated in Fig. 2, the basic turbo receiver consists of a

soft MIMO detector and an SPA decoder. Extrinsic informa-

(12)

tion, in the form of log-likelihood ratio (LLR), is exchanged between these two components. In each turbo iteration, the soft MIMO detector outputs the extrinsic LLR value of each coded bit to the decoder, while the SPA decoder feeds back the computed LLR vector as a priori information to the soft de-

and therefore the equalized signal vector of the ESD model is

. Let

be the -th column of the

matrix . It is clear that recovers the -th symbol in

the vector , i.e.,

tector for LLR updates. It is worth noting that certain advanced

(13)

hardware structures for turbo equalization, such as the one based

on queuing [21], have already been proposed. Similar principle Further define the concatenated channel-equalizer response as

may also facilitate the fast implementation of our proposed re-

ceiver algorithms.

We want to point out that the complexity of the soft MIMO detector is exponential in the number of transmit antennas

...

...

(14)

and QAM constellation size. For Alamouti code, the com-

plexity is still moderate, but the complexity is prohibitive for

Q-OSTBC because of the large number of transmit antennas. where

. It is desired

Fortunately, by exploiting the quasi-orthogonal structure of to have

for perfect channel equalization.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT DETECTION AND DECODING IN LDPC-BASED SPACE-TIME CODED MIMO-OFDM SYSTEMS VIA LINEAR PROGRAMMING

3415

In this work, we consider the minimum peak distortion (MPD) criterion proposed in [13]. Associated with the ESD model, our algorithm is essentially on a stream-by-stream basis. Particularly, suppose we aim to find the -th stream equalizer and correspondingly define the cost function

Note that

and

are piecewise linear

and convex functions of . Furthermore, the concatenated

response is linear in . For this reason,

is a

convex function of and globally convergent. It is observed

that the minimization of

would result in a trivial

solution

if without any additional constraints. Next

we will show how to resolve triviality by adopting simple but

practical constraints.

B. Pilot Symbol Constraints
In blind equalization [13], [14], an anchor tap constraint is adopted to prevent the all zero trivial solution. However, it yields phase rotational and scalar multiplicative ambiguities. As a result, it is problematic to further integrate additional constraints for tightening the optimization solution.
By adopting training symbols, we ideally expect the equalizer outputs to exactly match the pilots

(15)

where

is the transmitted pilot symbol vector during the

training period. We can depict the exact pilot constraint in the

form of hyperplane in -space, as illustrated in Fig. 3. Appar-

ently, the hyperplane keeps the MPD level set (in dotted lines)

from shrinking to zero.

However, in the presence of channel noise, the exact

pilot constraints typically do not hold. Instead, we apply the

squeezing box pilot constraints [16] on every subcarrier

(16a)

Fig. 3. 2-D geometric interpretation of

in -space.

can be expressed as

the received signal as

and

. Then, we get

. Also, decompose , where

(17)

in which

and

due to the

fact that

. Note that the term

contains noise element only. Hence, we want our equalizer

to be orthogonal to

so as not to waste effort in a subspace

without any signal component.

Because the channel is unknown to the receiver, the well-

known singular value decomposition (SVD) approach is applied

to estimate the subspace

from the received signals

[22]. Specifically, apply SVD on a frame of received data sym-

bols

(18)
where and are unitary, and is a diagonal matrix consisting of singular values in descending order

(16b)

(19)

where

and

are expected to be small. In

practice, we lift variables

and

into the ob-

jective function for minimization, as we will see in (21).

C. Subspace Separation Constraints

Another condition we exploit is the orthogonality between

signal and noise subspace. Clearly, a clean signal

is in the column space of . The noisy channel observation

in (6) can be decomposed into components that

lie in the column space of and the null space of , denoted

as

and

respectively. To make things clear, let

be the basis of

, i.e.,

. It is noted that

and

are orthogonal complements. As a result,

where is the noise variance. In (18), corresponds to

the largest singular values and spans the signal subspace

, whereas contains the remaining columns and spans

the noise subspace

. Therefore, we have the following

subspace separation constraints for noise suppression

(20)

V. DISJOINT LP AND CONVERGENCE ANALYSIS
At this point, we are in a good position to summarize the first algorithm, called disjoint LP (DLP). Before we proceed, define

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3416

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2015

a vector

, which is a stack of the -th

stream equalizers over all subcarriers. Now the convex MPD

cost function to be considered is

By introducing auxiliary variables

and

to account for

and

respectively and

lifting

and

into the objective function, the

DLP can be formulated as

(21)

where is the weight used to adjust the emphasis on pilot con-

straints. is the set of symbol index for equalization, defined

as

, where is the equalization length that

can meet the requirement of persistent excitation but is not nec-

essarily as long as the data frame length .

We notice that the minimization problem DLP is totally sep-

arable for each subcarrier, therefore we can focus on a single

subcarrier for the purpose of analysis. Also, in order to show the

nature of our designed equalizer, we do not consider noise, and

we re-express the MPD cost function as well as the exact pilot

constraint in -space in the following convergence analysis. One

more important observation is that since we adopt the MPD cri-

terion from blind equalization, the pilot symbols are essentially

serving as reference symbols to resolve ambiguities. Thus, one

time slot of training is adequate in the ESD model, i.e.,

.

Based on these arguments, the sub-problem, named Sub-DLP,

to be analyzed is

(22)

For the ideal ZF equalizer

on the -th stream and

-th subcarrier, it is clear that

and the remaining

in the concatenated channel-equalizer

response

. Hence,

the convex cost function

. Assume there exists a such that the

cost function

. During the training period,

and

, so we can conclude that

. This contradicts the assumption that the

pilot symbol on the -th stream attains the maximum magnitude

. Therefore, the optimal value of the objective function is

equal to one and is a minimizer of

.

Proposition 1 reveals the equalizer’s ZF nature, which is

shared by all algorithms based on the MPD criterion [13],

[14], [16]. However, we only demonstrate that the ideal ZF

equalizer is one of the candidates that can attain the optimum

of Sub-DLP. For reliable equalization, we need to further

guarantee that the ZF solution is the unique optimal point,

whose condition is given in the following proposition.

Proposition 2: Suppose the -th data stream is of our interest

and let the pilot symbols be chosen such that

. The desired ZF equalizer for the

-th stream is obtained if and only if

.

Proof: See Appendix A.

Basically, Proposition 2 suggests to select the four corners

of a square QAM constellation for pilots on the targeted data

stream. For the pilot positions on other streams, we could put

data symbols with smaller power in order to reduce training

overhead. Or we simply do not place anything, which avoids

inter-stream interference and could potentially achieve better

performance. In another word, the pilot constellation con-

sists of the four outermost symbols from the data constellation

.

VI. INTEGRATION OF LDPC CODE CONSTRAINTS

We advocate the integration of detection and decoding at the

receiver in a unified optimization process. Instead of applying

the transitional belief propagation between the ML detector and

the SPA decoder in the iterative turbo equalization, we would

like to incorporate a set of linear constraints that are generated

from the LDPC parity check nodes.

Consider an

LDPC code . Let and be the set

of check nodes and variable nodes of the parity check matrix ,

respectively. Denote the set of neighbors of the -th check node

as . For an arbitrary subset

with odd cardinality

, the characterization of fundamental polytope is given in [8]

by the following parity check inequalities

Proposition 1: If the -th data stream is of our interest and the

(23)

pilot symbol on the -th stream attains the maximum magnitude

, then the cost function zero-forcing (ZF) equalizer.

is minimized by an ideal and box constraints

Proof: We will first show that ZF equalizer can make

(24)

the objective value to be unity, and then use contradiction to

prove that the optimal value of the cost function

is in- Note that the fundamental polytope contains both integral and

deed equal to one, which implies is a minimizer.

fractional vertices; see [8] and [23] for more details.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT DETECTION AND DECODING IN LDPC-BASED SPACE-TIME CODED MIMO-OFDM SYSTEMS VIA LINEAR PROGRAMMING

3417

Now, the remaining question is how to incorporate the parity

check inequalities (23) and box constraints (24) into our frame-

work. To accomplish this, we need to employ additional linear

constraints that connect the binary bits

with the QAM

symbols

. Recall that a codeword is on a certain stream

, but spans time slots and across all the subcarriers. In

the following, we outline the linear constraints for several com-

monly used bit-to-symbol mappings.

A. QPSK—Gray Mapping
We first consider QPSK with Gray mapping, which admits affine relationship between bits and symbols. Without loss of generality, we restrict the most significant bit on the left and thus the mapping follows

(25a)

(25b)

B. 16-QAM—Binary Mapping
For the 16-QAM with binary mapping, it is observed that both in-phase component and quadrature component are in fact 4-PAM modulations. Therefore, it is easy to describe the affine bit-to-symbol connection as

(28b)
By integrating the LDPC code constraints, we have tightened the optimization solution, and the nature of our equalizer remains to be ZF, whose rationale is stated as follows. Since noise is not taken into account at this moment, DLP achieves the perfect ZF equalizer under the assumptions of square constellation and persistent excitation as well as the condition on pilot symbols stated in Proposition 2. Then, through the symbol-to-bit connection (25) or (26) or (27), we obtain the bits that form a valid codeword. Obviously, those bits satisfy the parity check inequalities (23) and box constraints (24). Thus, integration of LDPC code constraints does not change the ZF nature.

VII. JOINT LP AND COMPLEXITY REDUCTION

Based on DLP, we further add LDPC code constraints and

symbol-to-bit mapping constraints. Also, we lift

and

to the objective function. In summary, the joint LP

(JLP) for detection and decoding is

(26a)

(26b)

C. 16-QAM—Gray Mapping

In general, 16-QAM modulation with Gray mapping does not

admit such nice affine relationships between bits and symbols.

However, we manage to link the bits and symbols by intro-

ducing indicator variables

where

is the index set of constellation points. Specif-

ically, we have the following constraints [10]

(29)

(27a) (27b) (27c)

where and are the weights applied on the pilot constraints and the LDPC code constraints, respectively. We can address certain constraints by setting a larger weight. In our case, we emphasize the pilot constraints for good equalization effect, since we have limited number of pilot symbols. Note that we aim to obtain the equalizer parameters , though the optimization variables in JLP also include auxiliary variables

(27d) and additional auxiliary variables

for 16-QAM Gray map-

ping constraints. Upon the recovery of , we can utilize the

where

is the constellation point

and

denotes the index set of constellation symbols whose

-th bit is 1.

Ideally,

should be the same as the equalized symbol

. But under noise, the detector output sample does not

exactly match the QAM constellation point. For this reason, we

again use the squeezing box technique to relax the constraints as

code-dependent mapping to obtain the remaining equalizers, cf.

Appendix B.

We note that the JLP in (29) has a complexity issue. If each

row of the parity check matrix has a row weight , then the

total number of parity check inequalities (23) is

.

The constraints would be prohibitively many if the LDPC code

has relatively large row weights or there is a vast amount of

parity check nodes. For this reason, we are motivated to reduce

(28a) the complexity. For complexity reduction at the receiver, we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3418

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2015

adopt the cutting plane method [23] in which only violated parity inequalities are added. Accordingly, our adaptive LP (ALP) receiver works as follows
[S1] Initialize the JLP without parity check constraints (23). [S2] Solve the current LP to obtain the equalizer vector
; detect and then demodulate the symbols to bits .
[S3] If cuts (violated constraints) are found by substituting into the parity check inequalities, add them
to LP and return to S2; otherwise, go to S4. [S4] Use the column mapping in Appendix B to obtain all the
equalizer vectors and detect symbols in one frame.

VIII. SIMULATION RESULTS

Section provides numerical results with respect to the per-

formance of the proposed detection algorithms DLP, JLP and

ALP in multiple scenarios. We use the commercial solver,

MOSEK [24], with the large-scale interior-point implementation to solve the LPs. Throughout this section, we use a 3-tap FIR multi-path channel in our tests. We empirically select the

Fig. 4. BER comparisons—(1024,512) LDPC code, QPSK modulation, Gray mapping, Alamouti code and 2-by-2 MIMO system with 16 OFDM tones.

equalization length

, which satisfies the persistent

excitation without incurring too high complexity. We also em- are the BERs after another post-processing by SPA decoder. We

pirically set the weights in the objective function. Specifically, can see from Fig. 4 that our JLP with SPA decoding achieves

we select

for both modulations, while

for a SNR gain of more than 2 dB over the turbo equalization, and

QPSK and

for 16-QAM. As analyzed before, the pilot even the DLP with SPA decoding is comparable to turbo equal-

symbols of targeted stream are from the four outermost corners ization. This is not surprising, since our turbo equalization now

of while pilot symbols of other streams are set to zeros. In relies on estimated channels instead of perfect CSI. In the iter-

addition, we set equal to for convenience.

ative process, unreliable information is exchanged between the

For comparison, we also test two other receivers—one is the detector and decoder. In contrast, our JLP is a unified optimiza-

disjoint ZF receiver and another is the joint turbo receiver. For tion problem which does not suffer from inaccurate information

these two receivers, we estimate the channel based on the least transfer. In addition, it is evident that the disjoint ZF detection

squares (LS) principle [25]. In turbo equalization, the stopping with SPA decoding has the worst performance.

criterion is when all LDPC parity checks are satisfied or when Furthermore, the performance comparison under Q-OSTBC

the maximum number of turbo iterations reaches 10, which al- is shown in Fig. 5. The simulation settings are almost the same

lows reasonably good convergence. For LDPC decoding, we as in the case of Alamouti, except that this time we use a 4-by-4

use the standard log-domain SPA decoder with the maximum MIMO system and a (1536,768) LDPC code with column

iterations set to 50. Note that the equalizer outputs by our pro- weight 2. Similar to the Alamouti case, JLP with SPA performs

posed algorithms are un-quantized and can be processed by an better than turbo equalization, DLP is the intermediate one and

SPA decoder to further improve the bit error rate (BER) perfor- ZF is the worst in BER performance.

mance. In this section, we first illustrate the BER comparisons with several combinations of modulations, symbol-to-bit map- B. Higher Order Modulation: 16-QAM

pings, space-time codes and LDPC codes. We then implement To obtain higher system throughput, we test a higher order

the complexity reduction method presented in Section VII to modulation. In this subsection, we investigate the performance

make our proposed algorithms competitive for longer LDPC of 16-QAM modulation with both Gray and binary mappings.

codes. Finally, we investigate the effect of channel interpola- Note that, for Gray mapping in Subsection VI-C, the number of

tion when pilot symbols are not present on every subcarrier in variables

is

. For large number of subcarriers and

certain practical systems.

long LDPC codes, the number of variables would be too many.

A. Affine Mapping: QPSK

To present a proof of concept here, we set

and select a

moderate length LDPC code (1024,512) with column weight 2.

We first demonstrate the comparative performance between The first example of 16-QAM is given in Alamouti code with

different receivers under Gray-mapped QPSK modulation. In 2-by-2 MIMO and the corresponding BER comparison is illus-

our first example, we test the Alamouti code, and fix the number trated in Fig. 6. As we can see, the performance of binary map-

of transmit antennas to 2. We use a regular LDPC code ping is nearly identical to that of Gray mapping in both DLP and

(1024,512) with column weight 2. Also, the number of subcar- JLP, although Gray mapping should perform better than binary

riers

and the number of receive antennas

.

mapping. The possible reason lies in the fact that we relax the

Fig. 4 shows the resulting BER comparisons under this set- indicator variable

to

, which

ting. The solid lines of JLP, DLP and ZF denote the BERs by causes inexact mapping in the presence of noise. Since binary

hard decision on the equalized symbols, whereas dashed lines mapping gains almost the same performance as Gray mapping

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT DETECTION AND DECODING IN LDPC-BASED SPACE-TIME CODED MIMO-OFDM SYSTEMS VIA LINEAR PROGRAMMING

3419

Fig. 5. BER comparisons—(1536,768) LDPC code, QPSK modulation, Gray Fig. 7. BER comparisons—(2048,1024) LDPC code, 16-QAM modulation, bi-

mapping, Q-OSTBC and 4-by-4 MIMO system with 16 OFDM tones.

nary mapping, Alamouti code and 2-by-2 MIMO system with 8 OFDM tones.

Fig. 6. BER comparisons—(1024,512) LDPC code, 16-QAM modulation, Gray mapping vs. binary mapping, Alamouti code and 2-by-2 MIMO system with 4 OFDM tones.

Fig. 8. BER comparisons—(2048,1024) LDPC code, 16-QAM modulation, binary mapping, Q-OSTBC code and 4-by-4 MIMO system with 8 OFDM tones.

C. Complexity Reduction: Adaptive LP

but has much lower complexity, we only test on 16-QAM with In this subsection, we show the simulation results of ALP

binary mapping in this subsection.

by following the adaptive procedure. The first experiment is on

The next simulation example of 16-QAM is on binary map- QPSK and 16-QAM modulations, both under Gray mapping.

ping with a longer LDPC code. We still use Alamouti code with The basic settings are exactly the same as those in Figs. 4 and

the 2 2 transmit-receive antenna configuration. We choose a 6 whose BERs we borrow for comparison. For the adaptive LP,

regular (2048,1024) LDPC code with column weight 2. This we set the maximum number of iterations to 5. The resulting

time the number of subcarriers is set to 8. The BER results BER comparisons are shown in Fig. 9(a) and (b). As we can see

are shown in Fig. 7. In this scenario, the JLP with SPA obtains in Fig. 9, the performance loss is modest, while we achieve sub-

a similar BER to our benchmark—turbo equalization, at low to stantial complexity reduction (we will see shortly). It is worth

medium SNRs. But in the high SNR regime, our JLP exhibits noting that the slight BER loss may be because not all the cuts

advantage over turbo equalization by approximately 1 dB. The are found within the preset maximum number of iterations (5).

general trends stay the same as in QPSK. Furthermore, we also To see the difference in complexity, we evaluate the flops

test the Q-OSTBC case, shown in Fig. 8, which also demon- for each algorithm by reading from MOSEK, as illustrated in

strates good performance by our proposed receivers.

Fig. 10. The LDPC codes used in this test are all regular codes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3420

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2015

Fig. 10. Flops comparisons—rate-1/2 LDPC codes with column weight 3, QPSK modulation, Gray mapping, Alamouti code and 2-by-2 MIMO system with 16 OFDM tones.

It implies that the JLP can work without explicit channel inter-

polation in the system of comb-type pilot arrangement. On the

other hand, many other receivers must resort to channel inter-

polation to define individual subcarrier CSI in this comb-type

pilot pattern.

Fig. 11 shows the BER results of JLP with(wt)/without(wo)

interpolation (intpl), DLP with interpolation, and ZF with in-

terpolation. The BER curves named “JLP ref”, “DLP ref” and

“ZF ref” are borrowed from Fig. 4 for reference, where the pi-

lots are placed on every subcarrier. Fig. 11(a) illustrates the case

when the separation of pilot symbols is 2, i.e., we place one pilot

symbol every 2 subcarriers. We can see that all tested detection

algorithms work well in this case. However, if we test a larger

separation, the JLP receiver without interpolation is the only

one that can detect and decode properly, as shown in Fig. 11(b).

Fig. 9. BER comparisons—(1024,512) LDPC code, QPSK and 16-QAM, Gray mapping, Alamouti code and 2-by-2 MIMO system. (a) QPSK modulation, (b) 16-QAM modulation.

In fact, we observe that the correlation among sub-channels separated by more than 3 subcarriers is rather weak. This observation is consistent with the simulation results of poor per-

formance from interpolation based CSI. In a word, this experi-

ment shows that the advantage of the proposed JLP in providing

with column weight 3 and code rate 1/2. Thus, the only factor stronger robustness when pilots are sparsely arranged in prac-

that impacts complexity is the code length. As we increase the tice.

code length, the number of parity inequalities grows rapidly,

indicated by the growing flops of JLP, whereas the flops of ALP hardly increases and that of DLP remains the same. In short, ALP is a practical algorithm to deal with long LDPC codes or codes with relatively large row weights, while sacrificing little performance.

IX. CONCLUSION
This work presents a new joint detection-decoding algorithm for LDPC-based space-time coded MIMO-OFDM systems. Unlike traditional disjoint or belief propagation receivers, we jointly utilize the feature of QAM signals, the available pilots

D. Practical Consideration: Channel Interpolation

and LDPC code constraints in an integrated linear programming formulation. Our receiver manifests as a single constrained

In the practical MIMO-OFDM system, we usually do not optimization problem. We also reduce the algorithm com-

place pilot symbols on each subcarrier. Instead, pilot symbols plexity to make it work for practically long LDPC codes. The

are placed in a comb-type pilot arrangement. To study the effect proposed LP receivers exhibit substantial SNR gains over

of channel interpolation on our algorithms, we use the linear in- traditional disjoint receivers in the simulation tests and present

terpolation method for CSI estimation in [26].

a viable alternative to belief propagation receivers. Future

The simulation setting is identical to that of Fig. 4. Recall that works will consider the joint detection-decoding problems with

in our system one LDPC codeword spans over all subcarriers. more efficient characterization of the fundamental polytope

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT DETECTION AND DECODING IN LDPC-BASED SPACE-TIME CODED MIMO-OFDM SYSTEMS VIA LINEAR PROGRAMMING

3421

When

, subtract (30a) from (30b)

When

, add (30a) and (30b)

Therefore, it must have

(30b) (31) (32)

(33)

Define

and

, and introduce auxiliary vari-

ables such that

. Therefore we convert Sub-DLP to

the following equivalent problem

Further define the variable vector matrix for inequality constraints

(34) and define the

...

...

...

...

... (35)
...

Fig. 11. Effect of channel interpolation—(1024,512) LDPC code, QPSK

modulation, Gray mapping, Alamouti code and 2-by-2 MIMO system with 16

OFDM tones. (a) Pilot

, (b) Pilot

.

The vector and constant for equality constraints are defined as (36)

[27] and may exploit approaches such as ADMM to solve the Moreover, the coefficient vector for the objective function is optimization problems faster [27], [28].
(37)

APPENDIX A PROOF OF PROPOSITION 2

We first prove the “only if” direction. Without loss of gen-

erality, suppose we are interested in the 1st stream, i.e.,

.

Also, we would like to drop the all subscripts whenever it

does not cause confusion, that is, in the following, and

are replaced by and , respectively. At this moment, let’s ig-

nore the subspace separation constraints.

Separate the real part and imaginary part of in the pilot

constraints as below

Based on the aforementioned notations, we can rewrite Sub-DLP concisely as

One critical observation is that desired optimal solution is

(38) at optimality. Thus, the

(30a)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

(39)

3422

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2015

Due to the convexity of problem (38), we can apply the well-known Karush-Kuhn-Tucker (KKT) conditions. Firstly, by complementary slackness, we have

...

...

KKT conditions. Therefore, and

are primal and dual

optimal.

The last step is to show that the optimum solution also sat-

isfies the subspace separation constraints. The MIMO channel

has the SVD:

. Since

and is

full rank as stated in Subsection II-C, it follows that

(40)

(47)

...

...

In addition, it is known that

. Thus

where

and

of the LP in (38) is

. The Lagrangian (41)

(48)

This finishes the proof that

is the nec-

essary and sufficient condition for Sub-DLP to converge to the

desired equalizer .

and its gradient at the optimal point is

Specifically,

gives a set of

the last equations, we obtain

...

... The first equations give us

(42) equations. From
(43)
(44)

APPENDIX B EQUALIZER COLUMN MAPPING FOR OSTBC AND Q-OSTBC
this Appendix, we elaborate on the equalizer column mapping of the ESD model. This mapping works the same for every subcarrier. For this reason, in what follows, may be viewed as dropping the subscript from , or we may regard it as the matrix defined as with a little abuse of notations of lowercase letter. Columns of the ZF equalization matrix in ESD model for OSTBC and Q-OSTBC are inter-dependent. In fact, there exists a closed-form linear mapping between different columns. The basis code matrices for the Alamouti OSTBC and Alamouti-based Q-OSTBC are
(49)

(50)

...

...

(45) A. OSTBC The Alamouti code that we employ is of the form

Here we assert that must not be equal to 0; otherwise it would

lead to contradiction since we know

in (44) but

in (45) if

. Therefore, we have

(46)

(51)

Consider an Alamouti system with one receive antenna only.

Now we derive the mapping from

to

in great detail, shown as follows.

Hence,

.

Based on the assumption

,

(52)

we can conclude that

.

Conversely, given that

and

, it is obvious that . We

(53)

can thus construct (46) by and and
Moreover, by letting

that satisfy

For more generic Alamouti OSTBC systems with multiple re-

. ceive antennas, the column mapping from to is

, where the

two 1’s are at position 1 and

satisfy all the

(54)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

WANG et al.: JOINT DETECTION AND DECODING IN LDPC-BASED SPACE-TIME CODED MIMO-OFDM SYSTEMS VIA LINEAR PROGRAMMING

3423

where

and

are the

mapping matrices for the real part and imaginary part, respec-

tively.

B. Q-OSTBC
The derivations of column mapping for Q-OSTBC is similar to that of OSTBC. Thus, we simply outline the essentials and point out the subtle differences of Q-OSTBC from OSTBC. The Q-OSTBC used is

(55)

where

is the matrix with and in

of (51) re-

placed by and . Then the ESD transmission is depicted

in (6) together with (9) and (10), but a slight difference is that

for Q-OSTBC.

The general rule of mapping still follows (54). Here, we only

describe the mapping from to for

. More generic

treatment can be found in [14].

(56a)

(56b)

(56c) (56d) (56e)

(56f)

where is a special permutation matrix given by

(57)

ACKNOWLEDGMENT The authors would like to thank Wei Zhou for the construction of the LDPC codes used in this work, and also thank Yong Li for valuable discussions.
REFERENCES
[1] G. L. Stüber, J. R. Barry, S. W. Mclaughlin, Y. Li, M. A. Ingram, and T. G. Pratt, “Broadband MIMO-OFDM wireless communications,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 92, no. 2, pp. 271–294, Feb. 2004.
[2] V. Tarokh, H. Jafarkhani, and A. R. Calderbank, “Space-time block codes from orthogonal designs,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 45, no. 5, pp. 1456–1467, July 1999.
[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[4] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] B. Lu, X. Wang, and K. R. Narayanan, “LDPC-based space-time coded OFDM systems over correlated fading channels: Performance analysis and receiver design,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 1, pp. 74–88, Jan. 2002.
[6] B. M. Hochwald and S. Ten Brink, “Achieving near-capacity on a multiple-antenna channel,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 389–399, Mar. 2003.
[7] M. Tüchler and A. C. Singer, “Turbo equalization: An overview,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 920–952, Feb. 2011.

[8] J. Feldman, M. J. Wainwright, and D. R. Karger, “Using linear programming to decode binary linear codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 3, pp. 954–972, Mar. 2005.
[9] T. Cui, T. Ho, and C. Tellambura, “Linear programming detection and decoding for MIMO systems,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Seattle, WA, Jul. 2006, pp. 1783–1787.
[10] M. F. Flanagan, “A unified framework for linear-programming based communication receivers,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 3375–3387, Dec. 2011.
[11] B.-H. Kim and H. D. Pfister, “Joint decoding of LDPC codes and finite-state channels via linear-programming,” IEEE J. Sel. Topics Signal Process., vol. 5, no. 8, pp. 1563–1576, Dec. 2011.
[12] Y. Li, L. Wang, and Z. Ding, “An integrated linear programming receiver for LDPC coded MIMO-OFDM signals,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 7, pp. 2816–2827, July 2013.
[13] Z. Ding and Z.-Q. Luo, “A fast linear programming algorithm for blind equalization,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, no. 9, pp. 1432–1436, Sept. 2000.
[14] M. Zia and Z. Ding, “A linear programming receiver for blind detection of full rate space-time block codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 58, no. 11, pp. 5819–5834, Nov. 2010.
[15] L. Tong, B. M. Sadler, and M. Dong, “Pilot-assisted wireless transmissions: General model, design criteria, and signal processing,” IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 21, no. 6, pp. 12–25, Nov. 2004.
[16] N. Jacklin and Z. Ding, “On efficient utilization of training pilots for linear equalization of QAM transmissions,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 61, no. 12, pp. 4984–4996, Dec. 2013.
[17] K. Wang, W. Wu, and Z. Ding, “Joint detection and decoding of LDPC coded distributed space-time signaling in wireless relay networks via linear programming,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Process. (ICASSP), Florence, Italy, May 2014, pp. 1925–1929.
[18] B. Hassibi and B. M. Hochwald, “High-rate codes that are linear in space and time,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 48, no. 7, pp. 1804–1824, July 2002.
[19] S. M. Alamouti, “A simple transmit diversity technique for wireless communications,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 16, no. 8, pp. 1451–1458, Oct. 1998.
[20] H. Jafarkhani, “A quasi-orthogonal space-time block code,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, no. 1, pp. 1–4, Jan. 2001.
[21] K. K. Gunnam, G. S. Choi, M. B. Yeary, S. Yang, and Y. Lee, “Next generation iterative LDPC solutions for magnetic recording storage,” in Proc. 42nd Asilomar Conf. Signals, Syst., Comput., Pacific Grove, CA, USA, Oct. 2008, pp. 1148–1152.
[22] A.-J. Van Der Veen, E. F. Deprettere, and A. L. Swindlehurst, “Subspace-based signal analysis using singular value decomposition,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 81, no. 9, pp. 1277–1308, Sep. 1993.
[23] M.-H. Taghavi and P. H. Siegel, “Adaptive methods for linear programming decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 54, no. 12, pp. 5396–5410, Dec. 2008.
[24] The MOSEK optimization toolbox for MATLAB manual. ver. Version 7.0 [Online]. Available: http://www.mosek.com
[25] M. Biguesh and A. B. Gershman, “Training-based MIMO channel estimation: A study of estimator tradeoffs and optimal training signals,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 3, pp. 884–893, Mar. 2006.
[26] M.-H. Hsieh and C.-H. Wei, “Channel estimation for OFDM systems based on comb-type pilot arrangement in frequency selective fading channels,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron., vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 217–225, Feb. 1998.
[27] S. Barman, X. Liu, S. Draper, and B. Recht, “Decomposition methods for large scale LP decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 59, no. 12, pp. 7870–7886, Dec. 2013.
[28] X. Zhang and P. H. Siegel, “Efficient iterative LP decoding of LDPC codes with alternating direction method of multipliers,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), Jul. 2013, pp. 1501–1505.
Kun Wang (S’12) received the B.E. degree in communication science and technology from Fudan University, Shanghai, China, in 2012. He is currently working towards the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering of University of California, Davis, CA, USA.
He was a research intern working on phase noise compensation in orthogonal frequency division multiplexing (OFDM) systems at Broadcom Corporation, Sunnyvale, CA, USA in the summer of 2014. His research interests are in the area of physical-layer wireless communications, with current emphasis on joint detection-decoding algorithms in LDPC-coded multiple-input-multiple-output (MIMO) systems and polar-coded hybrid-automatic-repeat-request (HARQ) systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3424

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 13, JULY 1, 2015

Hong Shen (S’11–M’14) received the B.E., M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in information and communication engineering from Southeast University, Nanjing, China, in 2009, 2011 and 2014, respectively. During his doctoral studies, he has conducted cooperative research with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of California, Davis, CA, USA. He is currently a lecturer with the National Mobile Communications Research Lab., Southeast University. His research interests include multiple-input-multiple-output systems, optimization in wireless communications, and source localization in wireless sensor networks.
Wenhao Wu (S’12) received the B.S. degree in electrical information science and technology from Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in July 2012. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical and computer engineering at the Broadband Radio Access Technologies Laboratory, University of California, Davis, CA, USA. During his Ph.D. studies, he conducted cooperative research at Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, MO. His research interests include communications and information theory with special emphasis on multiple-inputmultiple-output systems and signal processing for wireless communications.

Zhi Ding (S’88–M’90–SM’95–F’03) is currently at ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai, China. Since 2000, he has been Professor at the University of California, Davis, Davis, CA, USA. He received his Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA, in 1990. From 1990 to 2000, he was a faculty member of Auburn University, Auburn, AL, USA, and later, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. Prof. Ding has held visiting positions in Australian National University, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, NASA Lewis Research Center and USAF Wright Laboratory. Prof. Ding has active collaboration with researchers from several countries including Australia, China, Japan, Canada, Taiwan, Korea, Singapore, and Hong Kong. Dr. Ding is a Fellow of IEEE and has been an active member of IEEE, serving on technical programs of several workshops and conferences. He was associate editor for IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING from 1994–1997, 2001–2004, and associate editor of IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS 2002–2005. He was a member of technical committee on Statistical Signal and Array Processing and member of technical committee on Signal Processing for Communications (1994–2003). Dr. Ding was the Technical Program Chair of the 2006 IEEE Globecom. He is also an IEEE Distinguished Lecturer (Circuits and Systems Society, 2004–2006, and Communications Society, 2008–2009). He served on as IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS Steering Committee Member (2007–2009) and as its Chair (2009–2010). Dr. Ding received the 2012 IEEE Wireless Communication Recognition Award from the IEEE Communications Society and is a coauthor of the text, Modern Digital and Analog Communication Systems (4th ed., Oxford, 2009).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

