2015 IEEE 35th International Conference on Electronics and Nanotechnology (ELNANO)
Reconfigurable Decoder for Irregular Random Low Density Parity Check Matrix Based on FPGA

Maksym Musiyenko, Yaroslav Krainyk, Oleksii Denysov
Department of Information Technologies and Software Systems Petro Mohyla Black Sea State University Mykolaiv, Ukraine
musienko2001@ukr.net, codebreaker7@ukr.net, maildenisov@gmail.com

Abstract — Method for design of partially parallel reconfigurable LDPC-decoder based on FPGA is presented in the paper. The decoder is able to process messages according to irregular random parity check matrix. The decoder can work with irregular random matrix and makes only small constraints on its structure. Parallel processing with several decoding units is considered. It is shown that decoder based on quad-port memory created on two-port memory can increase throughput in four times.
Keywords — LDPC; FPGA; decoding unit; processing; throughput; parity check matrix; memory.
I. INTRODUCTION
Low density parity check (LDPC) codes [1] can provide data transfer quality over channel with noise close to Shannon limit.
LDPC-codes became part of different standards through suboptimal decoding algorithms appearance and technological level development. Min-Sum algorithm [2] stimulated further researches in LDPC-decoding and hardware implementation. Various decoder architecture types are investigated. Architectures are classified according to mapping of parity check matrix on Tanner graph: sequential, partially parallel, and fully parallel. Partially parallel architectures provide balanced resource consumption and throughput. They have got widest application.
Reconfiguration of LDPC-decoder means possibility of making changes in decoder parameters. Such possibility is significant and important due to repeated resource utilization of decoder. Field Programmable Gate Array (FPGA) integrated circuits are perspective in context of repeated resource utilization with configuration changes.
Parity check matrix makes the most influence on decoder implementation. Analysis of matrix structure allows to define complexity of decoder implementation, matrix parallel processing capabilities etc. Matrix structure simplification simplifies implementation by resource consumption parameter and necessary throughput of decoder. Special matrix types (quasi-cyclic, irregular repeat accumulative – IRA, etc.) obtain wide application sphere. However, irregular matrices with random element positions can provide quality of decoding with only 0.0045 dB lose to Shannon limit [3]. Great disadvantage of this matrix type for decoder implementation is

necessity of collision avoidance in process stage and also in read/write stages. This peculiarity requires significant decoder complexity and increase overall resource consumption with decrease throughput due to changes in maximum work frequency of the decoder. Additionally, this matrix type provides fewer possibilities for parallel message processing. This also affect throughput. LDPC-decoder architecture development for this type of matrix is important through the features that it can assure.
According to the facts, there is a problem of LDPCdecoder implementation for irregular parity check matrix with random element positioning. Also valuable is problem of decoder maximum flexibility with reconfiguration capabilities. Additional issue is providing maximum throughput for the decoder.
II. REVIEW OF PREVIOUS RESEARCHES
Science community devotes many researches to the problem of LDPC-decoder construction.
T. Mohsenin [4] proposes modified Min-Sim algorithm based on row split operation and threshold value usage in computation process. This simplifies implementation of the decoder and also provide significant throughput. However, decoder architecture is complex and requires great resource consumption. Great amount of combinational logic resources are required. This makes it possible to implement the architecture only on expensive integrated circuits.
Author of work [5] proposes method for decoder implementation for digital television standard DVB-S2. The decoder is able to provide necessary high throughput. IRA matrices are used in processing. Nevertheless, processing of matrix with random structure is difficult for the decoder. This also requires significant increasing in memory resource consumption. Combinational logic requirements of the decoder are also an issue even for the newest FPGA.
Most of the reviewed investigations, e.g., [4-6], assume that parallel computation of check nodes is possible. However, this solution is reasonable only when number of elements is known. In case of reconfigurable decoder this approach could cause even lose in the throughput.
In article [7] model of parallel queues for computation organization is proposed. It provides parallel data processing.

978-1-4673-6534-5/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE

498

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:23:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2015 IEEE 35th International Conference on Electronics and Nanotechnology (ELNANO)

Disadvantages of the model are additional resource usage for pattern of correspondence storage and rise of commutation network complexity with rise of the number of processing elements.
In work [8] preprocessing of parity check matrix is recommended for simplification of decoder complexity in case of processing irregular matrix with random matrix positioning. Usage of elementary transformation for preprocessing is proposed. However, there is no description for preprocessing algorithms.
Therefore, method of designing reconfigurable partially parallel LDPC-decoder based on FPGA is presented in the paper. Decoder is able to process message according to parity check matrix with irregular random structure. Minimal constraints are set on parity check matrix structure. Decoder allows to change the matrix for processing. Additionally, approach for increasing throughput of decoder is considered.
III. METHOD FOR DECODING UNIT DESIGN
Let us define some notations for parity check matrix features. We define as M number of row in matrix, N – number of columns in matrix, and nmax – maximum number of non-zero element in i row of matrix, i = 1...M . Min-Sum algorithm is iterative message passing decoding algorithm. Messages are passed between check nodes and value nodes. Soft data are used during decoding process. The soft data are logarithmic likelihood ratios (LLR) for j symbol, j = 1...N .
Define as Z j final LLR values for decision of value of j
symbol. Value of Z j is initialized to data from the channel
(a priori LLR), Zstart j , and changes in process of iterations (posterior LLR). During iteration check node messages are computed as

αij = ∏ sign( βij∈J' ) ⋅ min( βij∈J' ) ,

(1)

J'

where βij – message of value node (initialized as Zstart j ), J' – set of value nodes connected to i check node excluding j.
Message of value nodes are computed as

βij = ∑ αi∈I' j + Zstart j ,

(2)

I'

where I' – set of all check nodes connected to j value node excluding i .
Value of Z j as result of iteration is calculated as

Z j = ∑ αi∈Ij + Zstart j ,

(3)

I

where I – set of all check nodes connected to j value node.
According to (2) and (3) values of Z j and βij differ only in single summand. Thus, βij could be presented as

βij = Z j − αij .

(4)

For implementation this means that values βij could be computed fast instead of storing the values in memory. Thus, it is required Z j data source that is not changes during decoding iteration. As βij is only temporary result and final
decision is received based on Z j value then this value is important and require storage. Let us define additional temporary value Ztemp j that allow to get result value of iteration during partially execution of vertical step (3) from result of (2) as

Ztemp j = Ztemp j + αij .

(5)

In this case, decoding unit design that performs processing of single row (rows are processed sequentially) and partial processing of column requires following memory organization. Horizontal indices of non-zero elements are stored in memory. This part of memory can be divided on
nmax for parallel access. Index memory is initialized as

indexl = order( 1ij∈J );l = 1...nmax ,

(6)

where order – function that returns ordinary number of element in a row, J – set of all value nodes connected to i check node. In case when number of non-zero elements in single row ni is less than maximum number of elements for selected matrix

ni < nmax ,

(7)

values of missed indices are set to special value. E.g., if number of bits required for storing index value is index_num_bits , then it could be set to

2index_num_bits − 1 .

(8)

Thus, during decoding it is necessary to perform index checking and do not process elements with this index value.
Memory of αij values should be divided on nmax parts. Access to the elements is performed in parallel. Initially, all values of memory must be set to 0.
As structure of parity check matrix is not known in advance then index values are unknown too. According to the

499
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:23:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2015 IEEE 35th International Conference on Electronics and Nanotechnology (ELNANO)

index value access to Z j and Ztemp j memory is performed.
Therefore, receiving of necessary values could not be organized in parallel, i.e., memory could not be divided on several parts. Access to data is performed sequentially that guaranties collision avoidance.
According to proposed statements, simplified decoding unit work organization on k iteration without syndrome checking and hard decoding is presented on Fig. 1.

nmax

n max

Decoding unit work during sequential operation execution

could be presented as finite state machine (FSM). In the

simplest case decoding unit go through the whole sequence of

state,

e.g.,

for

reading

sread = { s1read , s2read ,..., sn max_ read , s finish } . During parity

check matrix processing with nmax < nmax_dec processing of

all values is unnecessary and could cause lose in performance. We use input signal var_processing for providing maximum

flexibility. This signal is a bit row. Elements of the signal is assigned according to

index1 index2 … indexnmax

αvalue1 αvalue2 … αvaluenmax

Index memory
1

Value memory of α
26

4

βikj

=

Z

k j

−

αk ij

5

∏ αk ij

=

j'∈J \ j sign(βikj-'1 )× mj'∈Jin\ j(|βikj'-1|)

8 Ztempkj = Ztempkj +αikj

LDPC decoding unit
3 7

9
Ztemp

Z
Parallel processing for nmax values Sequential processing for nmax values

Fig. 1. Decoding unit organization
On Fig. 1 numbers mean sequence of operation execution. Also on Fig. 1 parallel and sequential operations for nmax values are shown.
IV. RECONFIGURATION CAPABILITIES Main advantage of reconfigurable LDPC-decoder is its repeated utilization for different parity check matrices. Minimal constraints are set to the matrix:
1) number of rows in matrix should not exceed maximum selected value for decoder;
2) maximum number of non-zero elements in a row should not exceed selected value of maximum number elements in a row for decoder nmax_ dec .
Providing capabilities of different matrix processing without lose in throughput requires that do not processing unused elements.

var_processing(u)

=

⎧⎪ ⎨⎩⎪

1,u ≤ nmax ; 0,nmax < u ≤

nmax_

dec;

(9)

u = 1...nmax_ dec.

In this case, for reading stage rules of transition between current state suread can be formulated as follows

snext

=

⎧⎪su+1read ⎨⎩⎪s finish ,

, var_ proces sin g( u ) = 1; var_ proces sin g( u ) = 0.

(10)

Thus, only necessary number of elements is processed.
According to this approach decoder work during sequential operation execution is organized. The peculiarity is necessary to take into account during other processing stages. It is make possible simplification in decoder implementation by means of separate stage union. Additionally, it can increase decoder throughput, nevertheless, parallel operations become sequential. αij calculation stage on Fig. 1 marked as parallel
could be performed sequentially with receiving data βij .
Separate computation block is used for each element. General αij computation organization is presented on Fig. 2.

Shift direction Enable shift register

βij

Abs processing

0

data

α1j *

1

Sign processing

enable

1

... 1

...

Abs processing
data

αnmaxj

1

*

1

enable Sign processing

1

Fig. 2. Simplified strcuture of sequential check node processing unit

500
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:23:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2015 IEEE 35th International Conference on Electronics and Nanotechnology (ELNANO)

Shift register is used for marking necessity of processing current element. Proposed unit has fixed delay regardless of nmax value.
The proposed approach to implementation allows to organize decoding process using parity check matrix with minimal constraints to matrix structure. Thus, change of parity check matrix is possible by means of loading new values of indices and appropriate control signal (number of row, length of input message) manipulation without reprogramming FPGA.
V. PARALLEL PROCESSING FOR DECODING UNITS
Defined above architecture of decoding unit assumes that only one port of memory is used. Connection of additional units to memory creates possibilities for increasing processing speed. It is necessary to take into account state-of-the-art level of technologies for FPGA. Only two ports are available for usage for read/write operations. It is possible to simulate quadport memory by configuring frequency of memory as twice higher than main frequency [9].
Mere connection of additional decoding units to memory ports cannot guarantee correct processing due to:
• block memory limitations – it is not possible to write by one address from two different ports simultaneously;
• decoding collision limitations – during parallel processing of several rows it is necessary to have only different index values in rows (without repeat).

For increasing decoder throughput syndrome checking stage could be carried on only to first parity error. It requires transition to the next decoding iteration in context of synchronization. The following check is performed for this purpose

exit_synd = cur_error ∨ error1 ∨ error2 ∨ error3 (13)
where cur_error – value of existence error in current block, error1 ...error3 – input value from other blocks about parity error existence. Transition to the next decoding iteration takes place on the next cycle of syndrome checking after error detection.
Thereby, parallel connection of four decoding units allows to increase throughput in four times. It is important to take into account synchronization issues for decoder correct work.
VI. DECODER IMPLEMENTATION AND TESTING
Reconfigurable LDPC-decoder for irregular random parity check matrix is implemented using quad-port block-RAM of FPGA in VHDL hardware description language. Development environment is Altera Quartus II 13.1 and modeling environment is Modelsim Altera Starter Edition 10.1d, target device for implementation – Altera Stratix IV EP4SGX180KF40C2. Decoder implementation results by FPGA resource utilization are shown in Table I.

TABLE I.

RESOURCE UTILIZATION

Four decoding units usage requires that there is no four sequential rows with the same index value:

Resource name

Utilization

Number of elements

Percentage, %

Combinational ALUTs

10869

8

∀indexi1j ,∀indexi2 j ,¬∃indexi1 j = indexi2 j ,

(11)

Dedicated registers

logic

13017

9

j = 1...nmax ,i1,i2 = 1...4,i1 ≠ i2.

Logic utilization

17188

12

M9K blocks

388

41

M144K blocks

0

0

Condition (11) is possible to satisfy using row permutation PLL

1

25

operation for parity check matrix. It is advisable create I/O pins

16

2

initially empty result matrix and add into it all matrix row Clock pins

1

57

according to (11).

Global clocks

2

12

Synchronization is needed for correct parallel work of several processing units. It is used for continue decoding decision and accordance of all processing stages between decoding units.
Finish work condition of decoder is

finish = (iter = iter_max) ∨

(e1 = 0 ∧ e2 = 0 ∧ e3 = 0 ∧ e4 = 0),

(12)

where iter – number of current iteration, iter_max –
maximum number of iterations, e1 ...e4 – errors count in syndrome checking stage for single decoder.

As can be seen from Table I, the resource utilization by any single resource type does not exceed half of available ones for the selected FPGA circuit. This means that it is possible to place two decoder working parallel in the specified IC and get double throughput of decoder. However, it requires additional implementation of package scheduler for correct order of package processing. Final decision about several decoder usage depends on target application. The target application may require additional data processing logic which will make large influence on overall resource consumption.
Implementation of decoders with different number of decoding units (two and four) is performed for throughput comparison. Simulation results are shown on Fig. 3.

501
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:23:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2015 IEEE 35th International Conference on Electronics and Nanotechnology (ELNANO)

Fig. 3. Simulation results for dual-port and quad-port implementations

According to Fig. 3, number of rows processed simultaneously is doubled. Small change in processing period is connected with additional cycle for synchronization. There are two main frequencies for decoder work. Signal clk is used as main frequency for decoding units. Signal clk 2x is used to feed block memory.
According to [10] throughput of LDPC-decoder can be calculated as

Data transfer interface Avalon Streaming Interface is used for loading matrix into the index memory.
Decoder testing is performed using developed software based on Java programming language and simulation in Modelsim software. The resulted outputs are compared for verification. Test workflow is shown on Fig. 4.
Input data file without errors

T = ( F ⋅ L ) /( I ⋅ N )

(14)

Modulation and noise simulation

where F – work frequency of decoder, MHz, L – message length, bits, I – number of decoding cycles, N – number of iterations.
According to (14), throughput of decoder during processing irregular matrix with 16k columns and 4k rows with frequency 200 MHz and 1 decoding iteration results in 45 Mbit/s and 10 decoding iterations – 4.5 Mbit/s. The frequency value (200 MHz) is received after fitter tool processing stage with the specified constraints for maximum frequency.
The received throughput results could be compared with known solution [11]. It has up to 14.5 Mbit/s in comparison with 45 Mbit/s in the implemented decoder. The disadvantage of the analogue is that selected parity check matrix could not be changed during runtime and requires stop of device work. In the proposed solution index memory values could be loaded without need of device restart. The index values are obtained as results of matrix preprocessing.

Modelsim Result text file

Developed software
Result text file

Comparison
Fig. 4. Decoder test workflow
File with correct data is used as input. Further, modulation is performed and noise simulation executed. These data is used for developed software and decoder in Modelsim. Results of decoding should be identical.
Uniform change of LLR value is provided in implemented decoder according to selected quantization. Decoder testing is performed by parameters of bit count, noise and parity errors count. Results of tests are presented on Fig. 5.

502
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:23:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2015 IEEE 35th International Conference on Electronics and Nanotechnology (ELNANO)

Parallel processing with several decoding units is considered. It is shown that decoder based on quad-port memory peculiarities can increase throughput in four times. However, simultaneous work of decoding units requires taking into account possible collisions during processing stages. Avoiding of collision is based on parity check matrix preprocessing and creating index memory according to preprocessed matrix

Implementation of decoder with quad-port memory supposes usage of two main frequencies. Memory frequency should be twice larger as decoding units frequency.

Decoder implementation confirms small resource usage. Proposed method of decoder design is applicable and suitable for usage in FPGA with medium resource capabilities.

Fig. 5. Number of parity errors depending on quantization and noise level

Performed simulation shows that LDPC-decoder with quad-port memory storage provides gain in throughput. It is four time faster than single decoding unit version.

Presented on Fig. 5 results demonstrate transmission of 100 messages for each step of noise value and for each bit count step. Start binary message is identical, but adding noise to the start values and mapping double value to the quantization range (integer value) provides different data on the input of the decoder. This also means different error positions and different set of combinations for correction value. The maximum decoding iteration count was set to the 10. If there are no parity check errors then decoder stops. Error correction performance with Eb/N0 above 4.5 dB is sufficient. Number of bits selected for quantization has an influence on the quality of correction. Decision about the number of bits representing soft information should be done according to the expected signal power, storage resources of FPGA, and required quality of error correcting capabilities in the decoder.
Further investigation based on implemented LDPCdecoder could be connected with usage of different quantization schemes, increasing throughput with parallel processing, possibilities for increasing number of decoding iterations, and using peculiarities of special type of matrix for decoder architecture adaptation (parallel processing, other decoding unit construction approach) and increasing throughput for different communication technologies.
CONCLUSIONS
Method for design of reconfigurable LDPC-decoder based on FPGA is presented in the paper. The decoder can process messages according to irregular random parity check matrix. Decoder can work with irregular random matrix and makes only small limitations on matrix structure. The decoder is not limited to this type of matrix and can do processing using different matrix types. Decoder unit processing organization and connection with other parts of the decoder is provided. Sequential unit for check node values computation is designed. The unit allows to increase throughput of the decoder and is less complex then parallel version that performs computation in parallel but requires to wait all input data ready.

Calculated throughput and simulation shows that even for irregular random matrix it is possible to achieve decoding speed up to tens of Mbit/s and the decoder constructed according to the proposed approach outperforms known LDPC-decoder in the throughput parameter.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity check codes”, Information Theory, IEEE Transaction on, vol. 8, pp. 21-28, 1962.
[2] M. P. C. Fossorier, Miodrag Mihaljevic and Hideki Imai, "Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low-density parity check codes based on belief propagation," IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 47, pp. 673-680, 1999.
[3] R. Prasad, A. Mihovska, “New horizons in mobile and wireless communations”, vol. I, 2009, p. 105.
[4] T. Mohsenin, “Algorithms and Architectures for Efficient Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) Decoder Hardware”Ph.D. Dissertation, Technical Report ECE-VCL-2010-11, VLSI Computation Laboratory, ECE Department, University of California, Davis, 2010.
[5] G. Falcao, “Parallel Algorithms and Architectures for LDPC Decoding”, Ph.D. Thesis, FCTUC, University of Coimbra, 2010.
[6] Z. Zhong, Y. Li, X. Cheng, H. Hu, J. Wang, “Modified Min-sum Decoding Algorithm for LDPC Codes Based on Classified Correction”, Third International Conference on Communications and Networking in China, 2008. ChinaCom 2008, pp. 932-936.
[7] M. Musiyenko, Y. Krainyk, “Pidvyshchennya shvydkodii neregulyarnykh LDPC-kodiv na osnovi organizatsii paralelnykh cherg zapysu/zchytuvannya”, Informatsiino-vymiruvalni ta obchysluvlani systemy i kompleksy v tehnologichnykh protsesakh, vol 3, pp. 111-114, 2014.
[8] F. Guilloud, “Generic Architecture for LDPC Codes Decoding”, Ph.D. dissertation, Paris, 2004.
[9] N. Sawyer, M. Deffosez, “Quad-Port Memories in Virtex Devices”, Xilinx, Application Note, 2002.
[10] K. Zhang, X. Huang, Z. Wang “High-throughput layered decoder implementation for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 27, issue 6, pp. 985-994.
[11] “AHA4704 15 Mbps LDPC Low Density Parity Check Code Encoder/Decoder Core”, AHA , Product Brief, 2010.

503
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:23:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

