Asynchronous Decoding of LDPC Codes over
BEC
Saeid Haghighatshoar⇤, Amin Karbasi†, Amir Hesam Salavati‡ ⇤Department of Telecommunication Systems, Technische Universita¨t Berlin, Germany, †School of Engineering
and Applied Sciences, Yale, USA, ‡School of Computer and Communication Sciences, EPFL, Switzerland Emails: saeid.haghighatshoar@tu-berlin.de, amin.karbasi@yale.edu, hesam.salavati@epfl.ch

Abstract—LDPC codes are typically decoded by running a synchronous message passing algorithm over the corresponding bipartite factor graph (made of variable and check nodes). More specifically, each synchronous round consists of 1) updating all variable nodes based on the information received from the check nodes in the previous round, and then 2) updating all the check nodes based on the information sent from variable nodes in the current round. However, in many applications, ranging from message passing in neural networks to hardware implementation of LDPC codes, assuming that all messages are sent and received at the same time is far from realistic.
In this paper, we investigate the effect of asynchronous message passing on the decoding of LDPC codes over a Binary Erasure Channel (BEC). We effectively assume that there is a random delay assigned to each edge of the factor graph that models the random propagation delay of a message along the edge. As a result, the output messages of a check/variable node are also asynchronously updated upon arrival of a new message in its input. We show, for the first time for BEC, that the asymptotic performance of the asynchronous message passing is fully characterized by a fixed point integral equation that takes into account both the temporal and the spatial features of the factor graph. Our theoretical result is reminiscent of the fixed point equation in traditional BP decoding. Also, our simulation results show that asynchronous scheduling reduces decoding time compared to the traditional BP in certain cases in the finite block-length regime.
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes are a class of codes with a sparse parity
check matrix and a sparse bipartite graph representation
[1]. They can achieve a significant fraction of the channel
capacity under a relatively low-complexity iterative belief
propagation (BP) algorithm [2], [3]. This algorithm relies on
a graph-based representation of the code, and it can be seen
as message passing between variable and check nodes in the
underlying bipartite graph. The order in which the messages
are passed between these nodes is referred to as an updating
rule or a schedule. The simplest message-passing schedule
is a version of the so-called flooding schedule [4], in which
in each iteration all the variable nodes, and subsequently
all the check nodes, pass new messages to their neighbors.
It has been empirically observed that the performance of
the message passing algorithm might highly depend on the
schedule [5]. Consequently, there has been several attempts
to find a schedule that guarantees a better performance, in
terms of finite-length bit error rate, convergence speed, etc.,
than the flooding schedule. In particular, Mao and Banihashemi [6] used a prob-
abilistic variant of the flooding schedule by taking into

account the loop structure of the code’s graph. The proposed

schedule was shown to reduce the error floor and the number

of undetected errors. Later, Zhang and Fossorier [7] as

well as Kfir and Kanter [8] proposed a serial decoding

schedule based on updating the variable node messages

in a serial manner (it can be seen as a shuffling of the

flooding schedule). Empirical simulations shows that a serial

decoding schedule has a faster convergence than the flooding

schedule. Similarly, in [9] a new dual schedule was proposed

based on the serial update of check node messages which is

more efficient than the one proposed in [7], [8].

Going beyond the realm of iterative coding/decoding,

message passing algorithms, due to their low computational

complexity, have been extensively used as an effective

strategy for inference over graphical models. These methods,

which originated with the simple loopy belief propagation

(BP) algorithm of Pearl [10], have been the focus of much

research; many extensions have been proposed, and much

analysis has been done on their convergence [11], and in

particular on its dependence on the message scheduling.

The closest work, in spirit, to our efforts, is residual belief propagation (RBP) algorithm [12] where messages are updated sequentially (one message per iteration) with

an additional possibility of random selection of messages

in each iteration. Since sequential scheduling explores a

random local neighborhood of every node in the graph

(rather than a fixed-depth neighborhood as it is done in

synchronized scheduling), it tends to converge faster to a

fixed point than a synchronized schedule.

Scheduling aside, asynchronous message algorithms also

naturally arise when running iterative decoding algorithms

in VLSI circuit, also known as the analog decoding problem [13]. It has been shown that a relaxed version of BP

for analog LDPC codes actually outperforms the digital

synchronous version in BSC and AWGN channels [14].

In this paper, we mainly focus on the coding scenario

with a given ensemble of LDPC codes over a Binary

Erasure Channel (BEC) of a given erasure parameter ✏. We

modify the underlying graph ensemble by adding a temporal feature. More precisely, we add independent propagation delays to the edges of the graph with each delay being

sampled from an arbitrary but fixed probability distribution

p
d

over

R+.

Such

delays

can

be

introduced

artificially

or

they may simply be part of the underlying application (e.g.,

neural networks, FPGA or VLSI implementation of LDPC

decoders). Based on these delay parameters, we propose a

978-1-4673-7704-1/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE

2678

ISIT 2015

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:23:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

simple asynchronous scheduling for message passing. The proposed scheduling is very similar to flooding scheduling with the difference that messages travel along the edges of the graph with a propagation delay that is assigned to each edge. Once a message arrives at a variable/check node all the outgoing messages are updated and start propagating to the neighboring nodes. There are some similarities between our method and sequential update scheduling proposed in [7], [8]. At each time instance, the outgoing message of a variable/check node depends on the information in a random local neighborhood rather than a fixed-depth one resulted from the flooding scheduling. Also note that by changing the assigned delay parameters, one can completely change the explored random neighborhood. We analyze the asymptotic performance of our asynchronous message passing algorithm in terms of the delay distribution p and the graph structure.
d
Moreover, through simulations, we asses numerically the performance of our asynchronous scheduling in terms of the convergence speed and correcting errors.
II. NOTATION AND PROBLEM STATEMENT
In this section, we first define the ensemble of asynchronous LDPC bipartite graphs. For this ensemble, we then introduce the asynchronous message passing algorithm that aims to infer the information bits of the transmitted code over a BEC(✏).

A. Ensemble of Asynchronous LDPC Bipartite Graphs

We follow the standard notation used in [15] to introduce

the ensemble of LDPC bipartite graphs. An element from

this ensemble is generated by constructing a Tanner graph

on n variable nodes and m check nodes as followsP. Let the

number of variable nodes of degree i be ⇤ , thus, ⇤ =

n.

Similarly,

let PPj

denote

the

number

i
of check

ii
nodes of

degree j, where P = m. Then, each node is associated

jj

with a number of sockets equal to its degree. An element of

the LDPC ensemble, denoted by LDPC(⇤, P ), is generated

by matching the check and variable sockets according to a

uniformly random permutation. Note that the elements of

LDPC(⇤, P ) are nothing but bipartite graphs. Based on the

ensemble of LDPC(⇤, P ) graphs, we can build the ensemble

of asynchronous LDPC(⇤, P ) graphs by assigning temporal

delay parameters to the edges as follows.

Definition

1.

Let

p
d

be

a

probability

distribution

over

R+.

Elements of the asynchronous ensemble ALDPC(⇤, P, p )

d

are generated as follows: we pick an element from

LDPC(⇤, P ) and assign i.i.d. delay parameters to the edges

of the graph according to p .
d

We call the variable-check adjacency of a graph generated

from

the

ensemble

ALDPC(⇤, P, p )
d

the

spatial

feature

of the ensemble. The delay parameters assigned to the

edges of the graph constitute the temporal feature of the ensemble. Similar to the LDPC(⇤, P ), we can construct a

code from a graph in the ensemble ALDPC(⇤, P, p ) by
d
simply dropping the delay parameters of the edges. Recall

that to assign a code to a specific instance of the ensemble LDPC(⇤, P ), we form an m-by-n parity check matrix H with {0, 1} components, where H = 1 if and only if the j-
i,j
th variable node is connected to the i-th check node. Hence, the code structure only depends on the spatial feature of the underlying graph. As we will explain later, the temporal feature plays a prominent role when we consider inference via an iterative message passing algorithm.
Let us also define the variable and check degree distributions for a graph from ALDPC(⇤, P, p ) by
d

X lmax

X rmax

⇤(x) = ⇤ xi, P (x) = P xj,

(1)

i

j

i=1

j=1

and their normalized versions by

L(x)

=

⇤(x) , ⇤(1)

R(x)

=

P P

(x) (1)

.

(2)

where lmax and rmax denote the maximum variable and check degrees. For the asymptotic analysis carried out in this paper,

it is more convenient to take an edge perspective defined as

follows:

(x) =

⇤0(x) ⇤0(1)

=

L0(x) L0(1)

,

⇢(x) =

P 0(x) P 0(1)

=

R0(x) R0(1)

.

(3)

B. Inference via Asynchronous Message Passing

Recall that to decode the information bits of a graph

sampled from LDPC(⇤, P ) whose variables are observed

via a BEC, one typically uses Belief Propagation (BP) by

passing messages/beliefs between variable and check nodes

according to an arbitrary schedule. When the underlying

bipartite graph is a tree, and as long as the messages get

updated often enough, they will all converge to the right

marginal distribution in a finite number of iterations. In

contrast, when there are cycles in the graph, there is gen-

erally no guaranty that BP approaches to the true marginal

distribution. However, if the graph is sparse, meaning that

it has a locally tree-like neighborhood around every check

and variable node, then BP decoding provides a very good

approximation. It is observed that the performance (rate of

convergence, etc.) highly depends on the message schedul-

ing. In its simplest form, namely, synchronous BP, messages

are sent in synchronous rounds. In this case, the asymptotic

decoding performance (as n gets large) of the BP algorithm

is fully characterized by a density evolution equation (DE). More precisely, let us define de(x) , ✏ (1 ⇢(1 x)),

where ✏ is the erasure probability of the channel. Let x
`
be the fraction of undecoded code-bits after ` round of

message passing between the variable and check nodes, then

it was shown that x satisfies the density evolution iteration

`

x = de(x

`

`

1), for `

1 with the initialization x0 = 1 [2].

To introduce our asynchronous message passing algo-

rithm, consider a graph sampled from ALDPC(⇤, P, p ).
d
We first start from check nodes and assume that all their

messages are initialized to 1. This is intuitively the belief of

a check node about its neighbors (i.e., variable nodes) being

an erasure. These messages start propagating along the edges

2679
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:23:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ttr = 1.4 v?

assume synchronous communication among neurons, such models are far from reality. We will show that there is no need to assume synchrony to obtain analytical guarantees.

c1 0.3 0.4

0.6

0.7

c2

0.3 c3

ttr = 1.1

0.5 0.5 1.1 0.9

1.1 0.3

0.4

01 ?

? ?0

0 10

ttr = 0
Fig. 1: Illustration of the Asynchronous Message Passing for a tree of depth 2. The numbers on the edges show the associated propagation delay of the edge.

of the graph. The time it takes for a message to reach the variable node is given by the assigned propagation delay of the edge. On the variable side, every variable node upon receiving a message updates all of its outgoing messages along all its edges (except the edge from which it receives the message). Note that messages no longer reach variable and check nodes at the same time. Also, nodes (being check or variable) do not wait for all the incoming messages in order to send out the outgoing messages; they act as soon as they receive an incoming message.
Figure 1 illustrates a simple example of the asynchronous message passing algorithm for a random graph from the ensemble ALDPC(⇤, P, p ) for a local neighborhood of a
d
variable node v of depth 2. Before the start of the algorithm, all the messages propagating along the edges are equal to 1 (erasure belief about the neighboring nodes). At time t = 0, the channel observations are revealed. The output message for those variables that are not erased by the channel transitions immediately from 1 to 0 and propagates along the outgoing edges to the neighboring check nodes. Looking at check nodes, it can be seen that c3 is the only check node among c1, c2, c3 whose outgoing message can make a transition and this happens once all the 1-to-0 erasure transition messages arrive from the neighboring variable nodes, which happens at ttr = 1.1. Variable node v at the top of the tree has an erasure message from the channel, thus, its outgoing message stays 1 at t = 0. Since c1 and c2 always send erasure message 1, v can only be decoded if it receives a 1-to-0 transition message from c3, which happens at t = 1.4 as seen from the figure.
Asynchronous message passing is more suitable for many real-world applications. For instance, when the graph is very large such that nodes reside on different machines, communicating between devices takes random delays. Similarly, for hardware implementation of LDPC code (on VLSI or FPGA) there is always a random delay (dictated by the physical wiring) between sending a message from one node and receiving it by another. The same is true for neural networks. Even though many models of neural networks

III. ASYMPTOTIC PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

In this section, we analyze the performance of the asyn-

chronous message passing over BEC(✏). The analysis is

reminiscent of the traditional BP algorithm, which in turn

leads to a density evolution integral equation. Let us recall

the computation graph ensemble C~ (n, , ⇢) of height ` from

an

edge

perspective.

An

element

`
from

C~

(n,

, ⇢) is drawn

`

by (i) choosing a random element G from ALDPC(⇤, P, p ),

d

(ii) choosing a random edge e in G (note that e is incident

to a variable and a check node), and (iii) letting T be

the subgraph of G induced by depth-(2` + 1) directed

neighborhood of e from the variable node side. It is known

that for any fixed ` > 0, the probability that the computation

graph is a tree up to height ` approaches 1 as n tends to

infinity [2]. Hence, this result implies that for a fixed ` and as

n grows large, the error probability is equal to that observed on a tree. Let T~ ( , ⇢) denote the ensemble of computation
`
trees with height-` from the edge perspective. A sample T

is generated from this ensemble by (i) choosing a variable

node of degree d according to (x), (ii) attaching d 1 check

nodes whose degrees are drawn i.i.d. according to ⇢(x), and

(iii) attaching to each open check edge a random element of T~ 1( , ⇢). To start the recursive definition, T~0( , ⇢) is
`
drawn from (x). We also assume that i.i.d. propagation

delays with distribution p are assigned to all the edges of
d
the resulting tree.

Definition 2. For a T 2 T~ ( , ⇢), we define E(T, ✏, t) as the
`
output erasure indicator function of the root variable node of T at time t of the asynchronous decoding when all the variable nodes of T are observed through a BEC(✏).

A sample realization of E is shown in Figure 1 for a

simple tree of height ` = 1. Note that E(T, ✏, t) is a {0, 1}-

valued step function with 1 showing that the variable node

is not still decoded, i.e., it is in the erasure state. As we start

the algorithm at t = 0, as an initialization, we assume that

E(T, ✏, t) = 1 for t < 0. Once a variable node is decoded, it

remains decoded, thus, E has at most one 1-to-0 transition

for t 0 whose time depends on the erasure pattern of the

variables nodes and the propagation delay of the edges of T.

As a very simple case, if the variable node is not erased by

the channel, the jump location is t = 0, i.e., E(T, ✏, t) = 0

for t 0, implying that it is immediately decoded at t = 0.

We also define the average erasure function as follows.

f (✏, t) , X P(T~ ( , ⇢) = T)E(T, ✏, t),

(4)

`

`

T

where f (✏, t) is the erasure probability of a typical variable
`
node at time t based on all the information received from a height-` tree neighborhood, and where the average is taken over the tree structure (spatial feature) as well as the random propagation delays (temporal feature) of T.

2680
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:23:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

For a real-valued function g(t), we define its average w.r.t the delay as g(t) = Epd {g(t d)}. Throughout this paper, we assume that p is supported on positive reals. In particular,
d
p ({0}) = 0. This avoids an avalanche of decoding events
d
over the graph during a finite time interval.

Theorem 1 (Finite Depth DE Equation). The asynchronous

decoding of an LDPC ensemble, with degree distributions ( , ⇢)
, satisfies the following density evolution:

f (✏, t) = ✏ (1 ⇢(1 f 1(✏, t))), t 0, (5)

`

`

f (✏, t) = 1, t < 0, ` 0

(6)

`

f0(✏, t) = ✏, t 0,

(7)

` where denote the message passing iteration between the

variable and check nodes.

Theorem 1 characterizes the behavior of the average

erasure probability for a fixed `. In the asymptotic regime,

what

we

are

really

interested

is

f1(✏,

t)

,

lim`!1

f (✏,
`

t),

which takes into account all the asynchronous messages

received from any arbitrary depths in the graph. The fol-

lowing theorem fully characterizes f1(✏, t) as we run the

asynchronous message passing.

Theorem 2 (Infinite Depth DE Equation). f1(✏, t) satisfies

the following fixed point integral equation:

f1(✏, t) = ✏ (1 ⇢(1 f1(✏, t)))

(8)

with

the

initialization

f1(✏,

t)

=

1,

t

<

0 .

To better understand the implications of Theorem 2, let

us consider a simple example. The synchronous message

passing

algorithm

is

the

one

with

p
d

=

1{d=

1 2

}

,

which

corresponds to half a unit of delay per edge. In this case,

the fixed point integral equation can be simply written as

f1(✏, t) = ✏ (1 ⇢(1 f1(✏, t 1))).

(9)

It is not difficult to see that the resulting solution is a rightcontinuous stair-case function with

f1(✏, t) = f1(✏, k) t 2 [k, k + 1), k 2 Z+. From Eq. (9), for k 2 Z+, one obtains

f1(✏, k) = ✏ (1 ⇢(1 f1(✏, k 1))) = de(f1(✏, k 1)),

with the initialization f1(✏, 1) = 1. The above equation
is nothing but the traditional density evolution, where each
round of the message passing takes 1 unit of time. The function f1(✏, t) characterizes the performance of the
asynchronous message passing decoding in the asymptotic
regime as a function of time. The decoding is successful if f1(✏) , limt!1 f1(✏, t) = 0, where the decoding time depends on how fast the function approaches 0.

Theorem

3.

Let

(⇤, P, p )

ALDPC

d

be

the

code

ensemble

( , ⇢) with a degree distribution . For a given channel erasure

✏ sync(✏)

parameter , let

be the largest fixed point of the

de(x) = ✏ (1 ⇢(1 x))

synchronized DE equation

in

[0,

1] .

Then

f1(✏)

=

sync(✏) .

Theorem 3 essentially implies that for large block-lengths the asynchronous message passing has a behavior similar to the traditional synchronous one. In the next section, we use numerical simulations to show that the same phenomenon also occurs in the finite block-length regime.
IV. SIMULATION RESULTS
In this section, we first numerically validate our theoretical analysis for the asymptotic regime and then show similar trends also hold for the performance of the asynchronous decoding in the finite length regime, with improvements in decoding time.

A. Asymptotic Regime

Solution of the fixed point equation: We numerically solve

the fixed point integral equation for an exponential delay

with mean

1 2

,

i.e.,

p (x)
d

=

2e

2 x

1{x

0}. This corresponds

to an average of 0.5 time unit propagation delay along the

edges of the graph. We use the (4, 8)-regular ensemble with

an approximate BP threshold of ✏BP = 0.38. The resulting asymptotic curve is shown in Figure 2a for two different

values of ✏, one above and one below ✏BP. Comparison with synchronous BP: In Figures 2b and

2c, we compare the performance of the synchronous and

asynchronous message passing algorithms in terms of the

decoding time for two different values of ✏: ✏ = 0.3 ⌧ ✏BP and ✏ = 0.37 ' ✏BP. As we see, asynchronous message
passing converges to the right codeword much faster.

B. Finite-Length Regime
In the finite-length regime, we again consider the (4, 8)regular ensemble where we fix the number of variable nodes to n = 128 and the number of check nodes to m = 641. We also consider 3 message passing algorithms: Standard BP: Each link is assigned a fixed delay of 0.5 unit time. Hence, for every message, it takes exactly 0.5 unit time to reach a node. We also call this algorithm synchronous decoder. Asynchronous Decoding: To send a message along an edge, an i.i.d random delay from an exponential distribution with mean 0.5 is sampled and assigned to the edge. Hence, messages reach nodes in different times. Jittered Asynchronous Decoding: Before decoding, the delay of each link is sampled i.i.d. from an exponential distribution with mean 0.5. During the decoding, the delay of an edge slightly varies around its initial sampled value. In all cases, the average delay across all links is 0.5 unit time. To model the delay variations of link in jittered asynchronous BP, we sample the variations from a uniform distribution with mean 0 and maximum value of 0.05 (in time unit). Figure 3 illustrates the Bit Error Rate (BER) for the three algorithms. The figure clearly shows that even in the finitelength regime, the performance of the asynchronous decoder closely follows the synchronous one.
1The simulation code is available at rr.epfl.ch/paper/HKS2015.

2681
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:23:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

f1(✏, t) 1 0.8 0.6

f1(✏, t)
1 ✏ = 0.39
0.8 ✏ = 0.37
0.6

Synchronous Asynchronous

f1(✏, t) 1 0.8 0.6

Synchronous Asynchronous

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

t

0

0

0

1

2

3

(a) Plot of f1(✏, t) for different values of ✏

0.2

t0

t

0 2 4 6 8 10 (b) ✏ = 0.3 (below the BP threshold)

0

5

10

15

(c) ✏ = 0.37 (very close to the BP threshold)

Fig. 2: Comparison of the performance of the synchronous (traditional) and asynchronous (exponential delay distribution)

message passing for different values of ✏ and for a (4, 8)-regular ensemble with an exponential delay distribution with

average

1 2

(one

round

of

message

passing

takes

on

average

1

unit

of

time.)

BER t(s)

100

BP threshold

10 2

10 4

Shannon capacity

10 6 10 8
0

Standard BP Aynch., jittered Asynchronous

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

✏

Fig. 3: BER for three different decoders over an erasure channel. Shannon’s limit and the standard BP decoding threshold for a (4,8)-regular ensemble are marked as well.

Next, we investigate the effect of decoding methods (i.e.,

synchronous vs. asynchronous) on the number of iterations

performed by the decoder. The complete set of results are

given in the extended version of this paper [16]. Note that

since the synchronous decoder rapidly identifies whether

or not it can eliminate erasures, it usually spends fewer

iterations (with more failed status) than the asynchronous

decoder.

In

contrast,

the

decoding

2
time

seems

to

be

gener-

ally lower for the asynchronous decoder in the operational

regime (below the BP threshold), as shown in Fig. 4.

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Tran. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, 1962.
[2] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Tran. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, 2001.
[3] S. Kudekar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Threshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,” IEEE Tran. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803–834, 2011.
[4] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H. A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Tran. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 498–519, 2001.
[5] G. D. Forney Jr, “On iterative decoding and the two-way algorithm,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, 1997, pp. 12–15.

2Note that this is the time of the last event processed by the decoder (taking into account the link delays) and differs from the CPU time when running simulations. Hence, decoding time is more relevant to the cases where message passing is performed in a distributed manner, i.e., separately located nodes collectively trying to minimize the error probability.

10

Standard BP

8

Aynch., jittered

Asynchronous
6

4

2

BP threshold

0

0

0.25

0.5

0.75

1

✏

Fig. 4: The (virtual) time of the last decoding event processed by the three different decoding methods.

[6] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with probabilistic schedule,” in Proc. IEEE PACRIM, vol. 1. IEEE, 2001, pp. 119–123.
[7] J. Zhang and M. Fossorier, “Shuffled belief propagation decoding,” in Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers, vol. 1. IEEE, 2002, pp. 8–15.
[8] H. Kfir and I. Kanter, “Parallel versus sequential updating for belief propagation decoding,” Physica A: Statistical Mechanics and its Applications, vol. 330, no. 1, pp. 259–270, 2003.
[9] E. Sharon, S. Litsyn, and J. Goldberger, “An efficient message-passing schedule for LDPC decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Convention of Electrical and Electronics Engineers in Israel. IEEE, 2004, pp. 223–226.
[10] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[11] M. J. Wainwright, T. S. Jaakkola, and A. S. Willsky, “Tree-based reparameterization framework for analysis of sum-product and related algorithms,” IEEE Tran. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 5, pp. 1120–1146, 2003.
[12] G. Elidan, I. McGraw, and D. Koller, “Residual belief propagation: Informed scheduling for asynchronous message passing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1206.6837, 2012.
[13] H.-A. Loeliger, F. Tarkoy, F. Lustenberger, and M. Helfenstein, “Decoding in analog vlsi,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 99–101, 1999.
[14] S. Hemati and A. H. Banihashemi, “Dynamics and performance analysis of analog iterative decoding for low-density parity-check (ldpc) codes,” IEEE Tran. Comm., vol. 54, no. 1, pp. 61–70, 2006.
[15] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, Modern Coding Theory. Cambridge University Press, 2008.
[16] S. Haghighatshoar, A. Karbasi, and A. H. Salavati, “Asynchronous Scheduling for BP decoding of LDPC codes over BEC,” 2015. [Online]. Available: http://rr.epfl.ch/paper/HKS2015

2682
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:23:01 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

