6096

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 22, NOVEMBER 15, 2015

On the Encoding Complexity of Quasi-Cyclic LDPC Codes
Ahmed Mahdi and Vassilis Paliouras, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we propose a parity check matrix (PCM) construction technique that reduces the encoding complexity of quasi-cyclic (QC)-LDPC codes. The proposed construction method is based on a constraint selection of shifting factors, shown here to reduce the density of an inverted matrix used in several encoding algorithms. Furthermore, it demonstrates that the complexity of encoding schemes involving inverted matrices, can be defined by the density of the small inverted binary base matrix and not by the extended QC-PCM. Comparisons of the proposed codes with codes employed in international standards and with randomly shifted QC-LDPC codes of comparable characteristics, show the low complexity of the corresponding hardware implementations and a BER performance equivalent to that of previously reported codes without increasing the decoding complexity. Furthermore, adoption of the proposed method can decrease the complexity of several encoding procedures; in particular, an area reduction of 40%–55% is reported for QC-LDPC encoders, while a reduction of 86% is reported for Multi-Level-QC-LDPC encoders.
Index Terms—BER performance, density reduction, encoding complexity, hardware architecture, LDPC encoding, matrix inversion, quasi-cyclic LDPC.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK (LDPC) codes, invented by Gallager [1] in 1962, have been largely improved in terms of their construction and performance. Due to their excellent error-correcting performance and the availability of highly parallel decoders, LDPC codes have been lately selected by the digital video broadcasting (DVB-S2) standard and several high-throughput applications, such as IEEE 802.16e, IEEE 802.11n/ac, 10 Gb Ethernet and magnetic storage. Despite the fact that error-correction performance of LDPC codes has been shown superior to alternatives, efficient hardware implementations remain a challenge. This is mainly due to the large codeword sizes and complex random interconnections of hardware blocks, imposed by the random nature of the codes.
Manuscript received October 24, 2014; revised March 12, 2015 and June 19, 2015; accepted July 18, 2015. Date of publication July 31, 2015; date of current version October 07, 2015. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Dr. John McAllister.
The authors are with the VLSI Design Laboratory, Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Patras, Patras 26500, Greece (e-mail: mahdi@ece.upatras.gr; paliuras@ece.upatras.gr).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2015.2463258

In the context of LDPC encoder design, the straightforward method is to multiply the information bits with the dense generator matrix derived from the sparse parity check matrix (PCM). The density of the generator matrix and the typically large code length make this straightforward method impractical due to the very high implementation complexity. Richardson and Urbanke, RU [2] demonstrated that, if the PCM is approximate lower (or upper) triangular, the encoding complexity can be largely reduced by performing the encoding directly exploiting the sparse PCM. Most recently-proposed low-complexity encoder hardware design schemes [3]–[5] essentially follow this idea.
For the practical LDPC coding system implementations, it has been shown that the conventional code and encoder and/or decoder design approach, i.e., first construct the code and then develop the encoder/decoder hardware implementations, should be revised. In fact, substantial complexity-related benefits occur if the code construction and encoder/decoder hardware implementation are jointly considered. The essence of joint code-architecture design is to apply certain implementation-oriented constraints on the LDPC code construction to simplify the LDPC encoder/decoder hardware implementations. Such a concept has been recently followed by Xia et al. [6], where the PCM has been constructed exploiting characteristics of permutation matrices to reduce the complexity and latency of encoding caused by multiplications by inverse matrices in the RU encoding scheme. In order to reduce hardware complexity, structured codes have been exploited by confining code constructions. A class of such LDPC codes are the Quasi-Cyclic (QC)-LDPC codes.
QC-LDPC codes have the advantage of linear encoding time and reduced decoding complexity. A QC-PCM is composed of circulant sub-matrices, each is defined by a particular permutation value, called shifting value. Such codes can be encoded efficiently by using shift registers [7]–[9], and their decoder architecture requires simple address generation mechanisms, less memory and localized memory access [10]. Li et al. [9] computed the generator matrix in systematic circular form and proposed encoding schemes that take advantage of this form. Encoding schemes for block-circulant codes based on the structure of the PCM and the generator matrix have been proposed by Andrews et al. [11], while Yasothran and Carusone have presented a low-complexity encoding architecture based on straightforward multiplication with the generator matrix [12].
Fossorier has proposed various methodologies to build quasi-cyclic codes and derived conditions to ensure that such codes are short-cycle free [13]. Algebraic approaches to the

1053-587X © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: ON THE ENCODING COMPLEXITY OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

6097

study of QC-codes were also pursued by O’Sullivan [14], and low density of the inverted matrix as in [25], allowing for much

Lally and Fitzpatrick [15]. Myung et al. [16] presented a special more choices for the shifting values. This wider choice facili-

class of QC-LDPC codes linearly encodable, memory efficient tates higher randomness of the shifting values than in [25], im-

and with an almost lower triangular PCM. Hardware implemen- proving significantly the BER performance in the error-floor

tations of the encoder for QC-codes were presented in [17], [18]. area, as demonstrated in hardware and software simulations.

Nevertheless, implementation of QC-LDPC codes remains a The proposed code construction method is not a part of the

challenge; construction of good LDPC codes with low hard- encoder. It leads to simplified and low-complexity hardware en-

ware complexity has attracted tremendous research interest. A coding architectures. To illustrate the contribution of this paper,

class of these codes is the systematic recursively-constructed we provide two sets of comparisons of the decoding perfor-

QC-LDPC codes proposed by Miladinovic and Fossorier [19]. mance and the underlying encoding complexity of the proposed

This method uses the PCM of a QC-LDPC code, with given constraint-based codes. In a first experiment, we compare the

row and column weights, as a core upon which a larger code performance of the codes used in IEEE 802.11n/ac and IEEE

is recursively constructed with extensive use of pseudorandom 802.16e to proposed modifications of these codes, obtained by

permutation matrices, providing desirable properties for the altering shift values in parts of the parity-check matrix ,

resultant extended PCM such as minimum distance and girth as dictated by the proposed method. It is demonstrated that the

[13], [20]. They propose a lattice-based recursive construction obtained inverted matrix of is of significantly reduced com-

method, which relies on the partial Kronecker product oper- plexity, while the BER performance of the modified codes is

ation, to generate long-length, high-rate and low-complexity shown to be the same with that of the corresponding original

codes. These codes are also called Multi-Level QC-LDPC, codes. In addition, decoding latency measurements show that

(ML-QC-LDPC) codes [19], [21].

the modified codes require the same average number of de-

Chen and Fossorier have shown that this Multi-Level coding iterations with that of the original IEEE Wifi and Wimax

structure is suitable and efficient for implementation of codes to achieve the same BER performance.

high-throughput scalable LDPC decoders with low area com- In a second experiment, we compare the performance of the

plexity [22]. A recent decoder architecture utilizing similar proposed constraint-based constructed codes against the perfor-

codes has been introduced by Tsatsaragkos and Paliouras [23], mance of randomly shifted QC-LDPC codes, and against the

while efficient encoder architectures of ML-QC-LDPC codes performance of the QC-LDPC codes constructed according to

with good BER performance have been proposed by the authors [25]. Comparisons are in terms of BER performance and en-

of [24].

coding complexity. The results show minimal BER degrada-

In a previous work [25], the authors have proposed a con- tion, at the error-floor area, and high encoding complexity re-

struction method based on semi-random shifting factors. This duction, when comparing the proposed against the randomly

method provides an error-correction behavior almost identical shifted codes, and significant BER enhancement when com-

to that of randomly shifted QC-LDPC codes of similar char- paring BER of the proposed codes against BER of [25]. In par-

acteristics. Particularly, the achieved BER performance is the ticular, while the proposed constraint-based codes and codes of

same as low as the BER of

at 3.6 dB of Additive White [25] have the same desired structure and density of the inverted

Gaussian Noise (AWGN), having minimal degradation of de- matrix, the inhere proposed construction method provides BER

coding performance below that point. The particular construc- performance of lower error floor, almost at the same BER point

tion method is related to the structure of the inverted matrix in- and noise level with those of the randomly shifted QC-LDPC

volved in encoding. It has been shown that the choice of shifting codes, which are shown to have the best error-correction capa-

factors of a given matrix has a significant impact on the density bility and used as reference for the comparisons in this case. In

of its inverse, affecting directly the corrective capability of the addition, we provide indicative complexity reduction of various

corresponding LDPC code and its encoding complexity.

encoding algorithms obtained by adopting the proposed con-

The previous construction method [25] shows that when a struction method.

single shifting factor is used along each column (or row) of The remainder of the paper is organized as follows:

the base shift matrix , the inverse of the corresponding ex- Section II reviews the QC-LDPC codes and related definitions. tended binary matrix isboshf much lower density than the inverse Section III addresses LDPC encoding and the complexity of

of other extended matrices obtained using random shifting fac- the involved matrices. Section IV reviews the blockwise matrix

tors. Furthermore, the low density of the inverse is combined inversion, while Section V details the proposed construction

with a comparable BER performance. However, the particular method that derives a sparse inverted matrix for a given base

constraint of using an identical shifting factor per column or matrix by controlling the shifting values. Performance evalua-

row, severely limits the choice of shifting factors, thus limiting tion and accomplished complexity reduction are discussed in

the randomness of the shifting values of the code. Although Section VI, while Section VII discusses conclusions.

the random construction shows good asymptotic performance, its randomness complicates the analysis and implementation

II. PRELIMINARIES

[26]. The BER performance of the QC-LDPC codes based on The PCM of a QC-LDPC code is obtained by replacing

semi-random selection of the shifting values in [25] is not as ef- each element hij of a binary base matrix bb by a q q perficient as that of randomly shifted constructed QC-LDPC codes. mutation matrix when hij or by a q q -zero matrix other-
In this paper, we generalize the approach presented in [25]. wise. A PCM constructed in this way is shown in Fig. 1, where

The proposed generalized method achieves the same desired q .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6098

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 22, NOVEMBER 15, 2015
TABLE I REPRESENTATION OF MATRIX CONTENTS WHERE n IS THE
NUMBER OF -COLUMNS

Fig. 1. Structure of PCM of QC-LDPC code.

parity-check matrix is of size

, where

is the number of parity bits, and it defines a set of equations by

Definition 1: A permutation matrix is any square matrix with

constant row and column weight ; when

, the circulant

permutation matrix is a permutation matrix which is cyclic [13],

[27].

The circulant permutation matrix is an identity matrix with

its elements shifted cyclically by positions, where is called

shifting factor, and the resultant matrix is called monomial

permuted matrix. The monomial permuted matrices are orthog-

onal, therefore the following properties hold

(1)

q

q

(2)

q

(3)

where q denotes the modulo-q operation, and , and

are shifting factors,

q.

Due to its construction, every QC-PCM can be represented

by a corresponding shift base matrix bsh where the elements

in bFshiigj.

are the 1, is

shifting

factors.

For

example,

matrix

bsh of

bsh

(4)

where the non-negative elements are shifting factors

q , while ( 1) denotes a zero sub-matrix.

Definition 2: When for the row/column weight of a permu-

tation matrix it holds that

q , the matrix is called

polynomial permutation matrix [28].

A polynomial permutation matrix can be written as

c

mod

(7)

where c is a codeword.

The main task of an LDPC encoder is to compute the parity

bits. Many procedures have been proposed for that aiming

mainly to reducing the complexity of this task, as discussed

in Section I. Notice that several of these encoding procedures

involve operations with inverted matrices, or with matrices

that result from operations with inverted sub-matrices, as in

the RU [2] and the MacKay encoding methods [29]. Similar

operations are required for techniques based on multiplication

by the generator matrix, which is a function of an inverse

matrix in most cases [9], [11]. Furthermore, such operations are

involved in the procedure based on multiplications by a sparse

sub-matrix of the PCM followed by a dense multiplication by a

second inverted sub-matrix of the same PCM [9].

In this paper, we present a matrix construction method that

reduces the density of the above mentioned inverted matrices,

leading in sequel to complexity reduction. To demonstrate the

impact of the proposed method on the density of these matrices,

and the hardware complexity of the corresponding LDPC en-

coder, we use the following algorithm and its full-parallel im-

plementation as a complexity evaluator [24]. Let and be

sub-matrices of , of size

and

, respectively, such

that

. Since the code is systematic, the codeword

c is then expressed as c s s , where s is a vector of infor-

mation bits and is composed of the parity bits. From (7), it

follows that

s

p

mod

(8)

p

s mod

(9)

fx

x

x

q xq

(5)

The proposed methodology reduces the density of

in (9).

It can be applied for other encoding algorithms suitable for

where

denotes the absence or presence of an ace

in the th column of the first row of the polynomial matrix, and

x

. Operations are assumed in

.

QC-LDPC codes, that use inverse matrices. In Section VI we report the performance of the proposed method and its influence on various encoding procedures.

From (1) and (5), it follows that the sum of circularly- A. Structure of PCM and Encoding of QC-LDPC Codes

shifted identity matrices i , i

is given by

QC-LDPC codes have the advantage of linear encoding

i

i

i

qq

i

i

fx

ij

ij

odd

even

(6)

i

j

where q q is the q q zero matrix and and f x are defined by (1) and (5), respectively.

complexity for a given bb, since non-zero elements in each row/column can be stored in memory addresses computed as a

function of their column/row position and their corresponding

shifting factor, as shown in Table I. Encoding by (9) is executed

in two steps:

I- p

s,

III. LDPC ENCODING

II- p Since

p. is a part of , the first encoding step executes a

In general, a systematic

binary LDPC code has in- sparse matrix-vector multiplication, whilst in the second step,

formation bits, coded bits, and a code rate ,

. The a dense matrix-vector operation may be required. Inversion of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: ON THE ENCODING COMPLEXITY OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

6099

Fig. 2. Structure of

and

non-zero elements respebcbtively.

of WiFi (1296, 5/6) code with 9 and 12
bb

performed using Gauss-Jordan Elimination or Block Matrix Inversion [31]. Gauss-Jordan elimination executes row reduction by performing elementary row operations. On the other side, block matrix inversion, also called blockwise inversion, partitions the matrix to be inverted into sub-blocks of arbitrary size, and subsequently, solves a corresponding system of linear equations.
In this section we review the block matrix inversion to demonstrate the impact of the values of the shifting factors in
on the structure and density of . Absshsume that the r r matrices and are partitioned as

where and are

matrices. Suppose that is non-

singular and

. In the following we derive the ’s in

terms of the ’s. Since

, then

Fig. 3. Impact of shifting factors on the density of the inverted matrix. Matrices

shown in (a) based matrix

and (b) have is constructed

the by

same imposing

of bsbome

Fig. 2 and constraints

q on

. Constraintvalues of shifting

factors. “nz” is the number of non-zero elements. (a)

: Random shifting

factors; (b)

: Constraint-based shifting factors; (c) Dbsehnsity and structure

of random bs;h(d) Density and structure of Constraint-based

.

11 r1 1

1 r1 r1 r1

(10)

where denotes the identity matrix and is a zero matrix. The solution of (10) for the ijs, reduces to the solution of a set of four matrix equations:

can deform its sparse quasi-cyclic structure. Gray has shown that inversion of a matrix composed of circulant sub-matrices

(11)

derives to a matrix also composed of circulant sub-matrices

(12)

[30]. By enumerating the different types of the non-zero q q sub-matrices that compose , it is found that it is composed

(13)

of a set of types,

, where , i

g could

(14)

be monomials of form of (1), or polynomials of form of (5). The number of these types increases with the value of q, requiring Since,

additional memory to store them [24].

The techniques introduced in this paper minimize the number

(15)

of non-zero sub-matrices in

and target the elimination of

polynomial sub-matrices. Figs. 3(c) and 3(d) show that matrix

could be composed of mb non-zero sub-matrices, where

mb m q is the size of the base matrix of , while, as shown

in Fig. 2, the inverse matrix of

bb , denoted as

, could
bb

have less non-zero elements than , where the non-zero ele-

and ij are determined by (11)–(14), we can derive the inverted matrix in terms of sub-matrices of and their inverses. Motivated by this observation we deduce that we can optimize the structure of the resultant inverse matrix by controlling the entries of the original matrix , as implied by (11)–(14).

ments are the non-zero single entries and the non-zero sub-ma-

trices of

and , respectively. Therefore, we set the

bb

number of non-zero elements of

as the upper bound to

bb

the number of non-zero sub-matrices in . Furthermore we

require that the non-zero sub-matrices of to be monomial.

We use the choice of shifting values as a means to achieve these

objectives. In the following we study the inversion of and

the impact of the values of the shifting factors on the density of

.

V. PROPOSED PARITY-CHECK MATRIX CONSTRUCTION

The base matrix

of of QC-LDPC PCMs is usually

very small, so it is easbyb to apply algebraic manipulations onto

it. Fig. 2 shows the structure of the binary base matrix of WiFi

(1296, 5/6) code and the corresponding inverse matrix. This

structure is the most common for QC-LDPC-based standards.

Fig. 3 depicts as an example, two possible

matrices and

their inverted binary matrices. It can be seen thabtsthhe inverse ma-

IV. REVIEW OF MATRIX INVERSION

trix (Fig. 3(c)) of a QC-matrix (Fig. 3(a)) formed using random shifting factors, can be very dense and composed of polyno-

As discussed in Section III-A, inversion of derives to a mials. In contrast to that, the inverse (Fig. 3(d)) of a matrix

matrix that may contain polynomials. Matrix inversion is widely (Fig. 3(b)) formed by shifting factors chosen as explained in the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 22, NOVEMBER 15, 2015

following, is composed only of monomials and has the same structure with . We call such a matrix a constraint-based matrix. The shiftinbbg factors of the constraint-based matrix are appropriately selected through a proposed technique detailed in the following sections, with the objective to minimize the inverse matrix density.

A. Constraint-Based Base Shift Matrix

Construction

bsh

To study the structure of the inverse matrix, we apply block-

wise inversion on matrix

. Let

and assume

that are

shhifbtshing

ij are single bsschalar entries factors, and is of order 2

of 2.

, bsh In tbhshe

thus ijs following

we define notations and list a set of identities to be used hence-

forth. Since ij are shifting factors and their application can be conceived as the matrix multiplication of a q q square matrix

by

,
ij

ij

, we define the operations with regard to

shifting factors. The summation of shifting factors is used as an

image of the summation of the corresponding q q matrices.

The summation properties described in (6) are applicable, i.e.,

ij, kl

,

ij

kl

if ij

kl; is

a polynomial sub-matrix otherwise. By application of shifting

factors, we refer to the operation of rotating a corresponding

identity sub-matrix by an amount of columns indicated by the

shifting factor. Successive application of shifting factors is an

image of the multiplication of the corresponding matrices and

corresponds to successive shifts. To simplify notation, we de-

fine the product of shifting factors as

ij

kl

ij

kl q

(16)

in correspondence with (3). The following special cases of shifting-factor addition and multiplication are also useful:

ij

ij

ij

ij

ij

ij

q

ij q ij

(17) (18) (19) (20)

terms in the computation of the remaining entries of , require

addition of shifting factors.

Therefore, to eliminate the polynomials from the inverse ma-

trix, we primarily need to avoid additions of different values of

shifting factors that derive to polynomial sub-matrices due to

(6). To achieve this objective, we propose an iterative proce-

dure which starts from a random base shift matrix and obtains

an invertible matrix, the inverse of which does not contain poly-

nomial sub-matrices.

For a given binary base matrix

, let

ace of zero by

(

bb1)bb.byThaeqrarnesduolmtansthbmifetattvhraiexlupiersomceastsriwx hicqh

replabcbes each and each
and has the

structure of (4), where the entries ijs represebnsht the shifting

factors ijs. We then compute the inverted matrix using (15). In the sequel, a polynomial-free inverted

of matrixbsihs

obtained by inserting some constraints to the original matrix

. Let and denote the matrices the inverse of which givbesh and , then due to (11) and (14),

(21)

The value of can be determined as follows

if

,

if

(22)

f x otherwise.

Similarly for .

Since and must correspond to invertible matrices in

order to derive and through (11) and (12) respectively,

it is required that

and

. Also, to en-

sure the absence of polynomials, we require that

or

, which implies that matrix

and, hence, the

binary base matrix of is lower or upper triangular, or iden-

tity matrix. The particular requirements combined with (21) and

(22), lead to

where the value ( 1) represents a zero sub-matrix. Identity (17)

defines that addition of any shifting factor to the value ( 1) results to the same shifting factor. Correspondingly, identity (18)

(23)

denotes that multiplication of any shifting factor by the value

( 1) results to ( 1). Also, since the sub-matrices are binary

matrices with elements in

, they are equal to their op-

posite; hence the shifting factors of opposite sub-matrices are

the same, as described in identity (19). Identity (20) defines that

the shifting factor of an inverted monomial permuted matrix is

equal to the shifting factor of the original permuted matrix de-

ducted from the size of the matrix, as also described in (1).

Therefore, using (1)–(3), (16), and the identities (17)–(20), it

follows that the products required for the inversion of matrix

in (11)–(14), i.e.,

The following proposition states that the occurrence of poly-

nomials during the inversion is because of the addition of two

terms with different shifting values, thus the result is neither

monomial nor zero.

Proposition 1: For all shifting factors a b c d

,x

ac bd is not polynomial if and only if ac bd, and x is then

( 1).

We propose the use of Proposition 1 to guide the selection

of shifting factors so that no polynomial matrices occur during

matrix inversion and the number of non-zero matrices is mini-

mized. This is achieved by opting for the addition of identical

shifting values during inversion, which obtains a result of ( 1),

which is used in subsequent calculations.

Now assume that ij are sub-blocks of a shift base matrix

evaluate to monomial sub-matrices, ij

. However,

, i.e., ij are matrices of order 2 2, composed of shifting

polynomial sub-matrices can occur due to additions; computa- factors and they have a structure that corresponds to the binary

tions of the two terms and , which are also common base matrix. In particular, values greater than ( 1) denote shift

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: ON THE ENCODING COMPLEXITY OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

6101

factors and are placed at positions corresponding to non-zero en-

tries of the binary base matrix, while the value of ( 1) denotes a

zero sub-matrix and is placed at positions corresponding to zero

of the binary base matrix. As an example, consider the binary

base matrix of of the (1296, 5/6) IEEE 802.11n/ac code, as

shown in Fig. 2; the shift base matrix

is partitioned to

aa

a

b

c

dd

(24)

c

d

where aij, bij, cij and dij are shifting factors. We seek the inverse

matrix

. As discussed earlier, a 2

2 base shift matrix has a polynomial-free inverted matrix if it is lower/upper triangular. Matrices and are of upper triangular form and their inverted matrices are polynomial-free.

a

a aa

a

d

d dd

d

aa a
dd d

(25)

A triangular structure of the corresponding

is desired; this

By the constraint (30) we ensure that the lower-right part of is also polynomial-free, thus

d

cab d

d dcab
d

cab

xx

(31)

x

Having ensured that and are polynomial-free, we proceed with the computation of the two other entries, namely and
.

abx abx

abx abx

(32)

which is polynomial-free also. Sub-matrix is computed as

adc

adc

adc

adc

adc

adc

(33)

where by substituting the value of in (27) to the two top entries of (33), becomes polynomial-free of the form

requires that ,

, thus to give a triangular matrix. In each

(34)
ad c ad c

computation step, we inhibit the occurrence of polynomials as Due to constraints (27) and (30), it follows that dictated by Proposition 1 by properly selecting values of shifting

factors. In the computation of

,

dd

c

dc c
d

d ab

dd c
dab

(35)

b

d

c

which is defined by the values of the remainder of the entries

(26)

bd c

bd c

we eliminate b d c

b d c by using Proposition 1

which imposes the following constraint

of the matrix

. Therefore, for an invertible randomly con-

structed , we modify its shift base matrix

by updating

the values of c and c according to (30) andbsh(35). In other

words, we construct

in such a way that the constraints

(27) and (35) are met. Tbhshe derived matrix has an inverse

bd c
hence

bd c

dc c
d

(27)

with structure similar to the inverted matrix of the corre-

sponding binary base matrix

as shown in Fig. 2.

Corollary 1: Non-zero sub-mbbatrices of a polynomial-free

(28)

inverse are monomials, the number of which is equal to the number of non-zero single entries of its binary base matrix

thus ensuring that the top-left part of Similarly for , we write

c

aa

c

a

is polynomial-free.
b

inverse.

This result directly follows from application of Proposition

1, when inverting the shift base matrix

; since

is bi-

nary matrix and its inverse is derived by abslhgebraic opebbrations

over

, thus addition of aces results to either zero or ace,

dd

cab

when number of aces is even or odd, respectively. Correspond-

d

cab

ingly, the application of Proposition 1 throughout the inversion

d

cab d

cab

d

results to either zero or monomial sub-matrix, when the number (29) of shifting factors is even or odd respectively, as also defined in

(6). Therefore, the number of non-zero single elements of

which must be polynomial-free of triangular form. Therefore is predefined by (42) as a function of number of non-zero single

according to Proposition 1 we require that

elements of and the size of the employed QC-sub-matrix q.

d

cab

d c
ab

In case that matbrbix

is partitioned into sub-blocks of higher

order, a similar analysbisshis required to find the necessitated con-

(30) straints by following the basic rule stated as Proposition 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 22, NOVEMBER 15, 2015

TABLE II INVERTED MATRIX DERIVATION USING GAUSSIAN ELIMINATION. EXECUTED OPERATIONS FOLLOW THE PRE-REPORTED GUIDELINES, AND ri DENOTES THE iTH ROW OF THE CORRESPONDING MATRIX

As depicted in Table II, if we replace the values of the shifting

factors aij

dij by the value of ace, the obtained matrix is

the binary base matrix. Its inverse is derived in the same way,

therefore the number of shifting factors in

is equal to the

number of monomial non-zero matrices in bsh is also equal

to the number on non-zero elements in the inverted binary base

matrix . Also, the relation between the values of shifting

factors in cbob lumns of

and rows of

is shown.

In the sequel, we showbsthhat the results obtbashined in [25] occur

as a special case of the method presented in Section V-A. This

is directly proved using the analysis of constraint-based struc-

ture of

in Section V-A by selecting a single value for

all shiftingbfshactors per column/row during the computation of

the intermediate blocks. To demonstrate that, considering the

sub-matrices of (24), we need to prove that if

c

c

a

(36)

a

a

(37)

b

d

(38)

d

d

(39)

the constraints (30) and (35) are met.

B. Straightforward Construction for Polynomial-Free Inverted Matrices
A polynomial-free inverted matrix can also be achieved by a direct determination of the shifting factors as previously reported by the authors [25]. The following Lemmas define how to construct a such matrix where it is also shown that the method of [25] is a special case of the inhere proposed constraint-based

According to the constraint of (27), c d c , it holds that

d

if

, we get d d . Also, according to (25), where

d

d and d

d d d , it stands that d

d

if and only if d d , which is required by (39), and conse-

quently, the left part of (36), c c is also proved. Further-

more, according to (30), if d

b , it results that c

a,

where a fore, by

a
imposing

aa
(37), if

,
a

and

so
a

a

,

we

a
get

a c

a . Therea , which

is required to prove the right part of (36).

construction method.

The two construction methods in Sections V-A and V-B show

Lemma 1: If each column/row of

is composed of one that for a given binary base matrix, the increased randomness

shifting value, the inverse of the corresbpsoh nding binary matrix degree of the shifting values allows construction of substan-

,

is composed of monomial sub-matrices, the number tially more different QC-LDPC codes than [25]. Illustratively,

of which is equal to the number of non-zero elements of the according to the method in Section V-B, if is of order

corresponding inverted binary base matrix .

, this method provides q different matribcbes since a single

Lemma 2: The inverse of a matrix conbbstructed as dis- shifting value is required along each row (or column). How-

cussed in Lemma 1, is composed of monomial sub-matrices and ever for the proposed constraint-based construction method, the

expressed by its own base shift matrix

whose entries of number of all possible combinations depends on the number of

each row/column are equal to the invertedbsvhalue of the corre- non-zero elements in the binary base matrix and the adopted size

sponding entries of each column/row of

.

Lemmas 1 and 2 have been proven in [2b5sh] using properties

of the QC-sub-matrices q. Therefore, the number of all combinations regardless any constraint, is equal to q , where

of Kronecker and Khatri-Rao products. Notice that the proof in

is the number of the non-zero elements in the corre-

[25] stands for any invertible matrix extended as in [25] due sponding binary base matrix.

to the simple structure of one shifting factor per column/row, Concerning the proposed constraint-based construction

while the method inhere requires processing of the base ma- method, and since all the shifting values are randomly chosen

trix to deriving the constraints as described in the previous sec- except to those which eliminate the polynomial sub-ma-

tions. Matrices of most IEEE QC-LDPC codes feature a trices, the number of possible combinations is then equal to

staircase structure (dual diagonal), and their inversion can be ef- q

, where is the number of the Constraint-based

ficiently derived using Gaussian Elimination. In the following Shifting Values. For example, for the matrix described in (24),

we demonstrate that the straightforward application of Gaussian

by considering that c and c are two shifting factors

Elimination produces the same solution as [25]. For example, the values of which are not freely chosen. Furthermore, notice

consider the 4 4 matrix

of the (1296, 5/6) IEEE 802. that not all the randomly constructed shift base matrices, for

11n/ac QC-LDPC code, wherebshthe non-zero elements of each different values of q, are invertible since they must be non-sin-

column have a unique value. In Table II we derive its inversion gular with a non-zero determinant (not ( 1) for the case of

using Gaussian Elimination.

the shift base matrix). Indicatively, the determinant of the shift

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: ON THE ENCODING COMPLEXITY OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

6103

base matrix of the (1296,4/5) IEEE 802.11n/ac code, described in (24), is given by

bsh

aadd

ab cd

cd

(40)

Therefore, for any randomly constructed

, the corre-

sponding matrix determinant depends on all the bsshh ifting values

of

. On the other side, considering the proposed con-

straint-bbshased method and for the particular matrix, the part

a b c d c d of (40) is eliminated after substituting

the constraint-based values of c and c in (40), and the

determinant is then given by

bsh

aadd

(41)

which always gives non-zero value. Therefore, for this matrix,
the proposed method provides q possible matrices for , all are invertible and each one provides a different QC-LDPC code,
while for the same matrix, the method of [25] provides q different matrices.

Fig. 4. Iterative Construction Method (ICM) of polynomial-free inverted matrix.

C. Iterative Construction Method (ICM)

The proposed construction method can be applied for any ma-

trix required to be inverted. The inhere presented method is tar-

geted to the construction of

, however, it can be used to

derive any other sub-matrix of tbhshe PCM that is required to be

inverted in order to implement a certain encoding algorithm.

Fig. 4 summarizes the proposed Iterative Construction

Method (ICM). The “ structs the shift base matrix

bb

q
and

the

” process conextended binary

matrix

by using random shbisfhting factors. Subsequently

and due to the random selection of the shifting factors, the

“constraints met” condition checks in

whether all the

constraints required to construct the polynobsmh ial-free inverted

Fig. 5. Complexity of the proposed ICM as a function of q, where

.

is of order 6 6.

bb

matrix are met or not, i.e., checks if c

d ab

and

c

d d , as shown in (30) and (35) respectively. If the

constradintsa arbe met, the ICM proceeds to checking the invert-

ibility of , otherwise the processes “update value” revalues

the shifting factors that violate the constraints assigning to them

the required value, i.e., give c and rebuilds the binary matrix

the

value of d d in using thed neaw bshifting

,
bsh
fac-

memory amount required to store the inverted matrix. Also, as depicted in Figs. 2 and 3, the number of non-zero sub-matrices of , obtained through the proposed ICM, and hence, the number of required multiplications, is significantly decreased. In fact, it is defined by the number of non-zero elements of the small inverted binary base matrix .
The complexity of the proposed ICbbM shown in Fig. 4, depends mainly on meeting the invertibility condition of the mod-

tors. The updated is then sent to the invertibility checking ified matrix. Fig. 5 depicts the convergence complexity of ICM

condition “invertible”, resulting either to the polynomial-free for different values of q. It is shown that for large values of q,

inverted matrix or to rerun the whole ICM procedure.

the procedure executes more iterations in order to achieve the

Notice that the invertibility check for the matrix of (24) is desired matrix. Notice that the required constraints for a given

not required. For this matrix, and by imposing the constraints

are always the same for any size of the rotated identity

(30) and (35), the resultant matrices are always invertible, as de- subb-bmatrices q, since these constraints are based on the positions

scribed in (41), thus decreasing the complexity of the ICM. Also of aces in

and the corresponding shifting values in

.

notice that the ICM can be further simplified; the desired base Also notice thbbat the functionality of ICM can be extendedbstho

shift matrix can be directly constructed by applying the con- meet any other matrix construction constraints that may be rel-

straints during the first process, “

bb q

VI. PERFORMANCE OF THE PROPOSED CONSTRUCTION METHOD

Controlling the values of the shifting factors of

”. , as dis-

evant, such as constraints that guarantee a cycle-four free matrix

[13]. The ICM of Fig. 4 is implemented in the Mathworks tool

Matlab and shown to have a moderate execution time, for in-

stance, for required to

the case of obtain 100

pqolynomaniadl-freebb

, 753.1 seconds are inverse executing 3921

cussed previously, has a significant impact on the density of iterations when running on a 4-core processor at 2.12 GHz.

. It can eliminate the occurrence of polynomials in and An essential metric of QC-LDPC codes quality is their error-

thus, it simplifies the hardware encoding core and reduces the correction capability; constraints imposed on choosing of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 22, NOVEMBER 15, 2015

Fig. 6. Common structure base shift matrix of Wimax and WiFi QC-LDPC codes.

shifting factors could restrict the BER performance of the code

due to limiting its shifting values randomness. The constraint-

based construction method of does not affect noticeably

the overall randomness, since the values of few entries are re-

quired to be modified, in order to avoid the occurrence polyno-

mials. However, the second construction method of Lemma 1

might restrict the randomness of . The error correction per-

formance of the constructed codes has been thoroughly mea-

sured via simulation. The conducted experiments use the nor-

malized min-sum decoding algorithm with a maximum number

of iterations

, and an AWGN generator.

To quantify the underlying area complexity, a full-parallel ar-

chitecture has been implemented [24], [25]. This architecture is

based on hardwired XOR gates; the bits of each input vector,

corresponding to non-zero elements of the matrix by which they

are multiplied, are XORed to determine the resultant vector,

as shown in Fig. 7. The number of XOR gates, and hence the

complexity of this architecture, is completely dependent on the

number of non-zero elements of the involved matrices, and

. The number of non-zero entries, , of

of the pro-

posed construction method is evaluated by Corollary 1 and pre-

defined as follows:

Fig. 7. Overview of parallel hardware encoder architecture. Input SR and Output SR are two Shift Registers of lengths and , respectively.
TABLE III IMPACT OF THE PROPOSED METHOD ON AREA COMPLEXITY

q
bb

(42)

where

returns the number of non-zero elements of

the small matribxb

.

bb

A. Impact of the Proposed Method on Wifi and Wimax QC-LDPC Codes and Performance Evaluation

The area complexity is shown to be reduced up to 40%–55%. A related area/time complexity reduction is also achieved when implementing a serial encoding architecture; the number of nonzero sub-matrices is reduced, and both encoding steps are im-

To evaluate the impact of the proposed construction methods

on BER performance and area complexity, we apply the pro-

posed constraints on sub-matrix

of the Wimax 802.16e

and WiFi 802.11n codes. Matrices bsh of these two standards

have similar structure; they are semi-dubsahl diagonal, and the q q

sub-matrices of two diagonals are identity sub-matrices q q.

Only the first column of

has three shifting factors of two

different values, as depictedbisnh Fig. 6. By updating the required

shifting factors, and keeping, as much as possible, the remainder

of the factors unchanged, the ICM changes the shifting factors

plemented using one multiplication unit based on a rotating circuit followed by an accumulator, since all the non-zero sub-matrices are monomial shifted identity matrices [24]. As depicted in Fig. 8, it can be observed that the corrective capability of the modified codes is similar to that of the corresponding original codes. The updating of one shifting factor is not found to degrade the BER performance. The decoding Average Number Of Iterations (ANOI) remains the same for both original and modified codes, as shown in Fig. 9, while at the same time, the encoding complexity is significantly reduced.

of the first column only. The produced

has one shifting

value per column, where only the value of bshis modified to be-

come . Therefore, the structure of

strictly follows the

construction method described by Lemmbsah s 1 and 2. Table III

B. Impact of the Proposed Method on Randomly Shifted ML—QC-LDPC Codes and Performance Evaluation
In [25], the Multi-Level Quasi Cyclic (ML—QC-LDPC)

details the number of XOR gates required to implement mul- codes are employed. It has been illustrated that for two-level

tiplication by

for both original and modified codes. The semi-random QC- , constructed according to Lemma 1, the

number of XOR gates required to execute the first encoding step achieved complexity reduction is up to 86% compared to a

is the same for both original and modified codes since they have corresponding matrix with all-random shifting factors. This

the same number of non-zero elements. Therefore, the encoding method has no effect on the decoding performance for BER

complexity depends on the density of .

as low as

, while the impact of semi-random shifting is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: ON THE ENCODING COMPLEXITY OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

6105

Fig. 8. BER performance of the modified (M) QC-LDPC codes vs. the original (O) corresponding codes.

Fig. 10. BER performance of (2016, 1512) Wimax (‘3/4A’) code and

various ML—QC-LDPC codes where

and

. A label

denotes the selected shifting values for each column of

the base matrix of the extension step . The label

means

that each column has a randomly selected shifting factor. For the QC-LDPC

code of “Full Random Shifts”, all the shifting values are randomly chosen.

Fig. 9. Decoding Average Number Of Iterations (ANOI) of the modified (M) QC-LDPC codes vs. the original (O) corresponding codes.

expressed at lower BER due to the restricted shifting random-

ization, as shown in Figs. 10 and 11. However, the methodology

proposed in Section V-A, provides an increased randomization

for the shifting factors of . In each extension step, the

corresponding constraints are preserved, thus the result matrix

has a polynomial-free inverse. Therefore, to evaluate the

error-corrective capability of the constructed codes at lower Fig. 11. Impact of randomization based on Lemma 1 on BER performance

BER, particularly in the error-floor area, we have constructed below

of the codes’ performance of Fig. 10.

a (2016, 1512) ML-QC-LDPC code following the procedure

described in Section V-A. The error-correction performance

is significantly improved and outperforms the codes con- best coupling between the good BER performance in the

structed as described by Lemma 1, as shown in Fig. 12. The error-floor area and the lowest possible encoding complexity

BER performance depicted in Fig. 12, is achieved by (2016, which depends on multiplications by

as described here,

1512) Two-Level—QC-LDPC codes, where is constructed is achieved when the first extension step in the construction of

according to Lemma 1 and/or to the proposed iterative poly-

is based on Lemma 1 and its randomization scheme [25],

nomial-free procedure ICM of Fig. 4. It is observed that the while the second extension step relies on ICM.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 22, NOVEMBER 15, 2015

Fig. 12. Impact of the increased randomization of the iterative polynomial-free

procedure on BER performance below . A (

level: method) legend

denotes the construction method of each extension level, using Lemma 1 and/or

Constraint-based (the iterative polynomial-free procedure).

Fig. 13. Impact of the proposed method on the density of the generator matrix . Notations “F”, “P”, “O” and “M” denote to Full random selection of shifting
factors, Proposed, Modified and Original codes, respectively.

TABLE IV HARDWARE IMPLEMENTATION COST AND COMPARISONS FOR ML—QC-LDPC (2016,1512) ENCODERS BASED ON FULL RANDOM SELECTION OF THE SHIFTING VALUES AND ON THE PROPOSED
CONSTRAINT-BASED STRUCTURE OF

C. Prior Art—Complexity Reduction Due to the Proposed Polynomial-Free Inverted Matrix
The proposed construction methods can be adopted to either construct new low-density inverted matrices or to modify al-

ready existing QC-LDPC codes, to derive variants that require

reduced encoding complexity. The architecture of Fig. 7 de-

pends completely on the number of non-zero elements of the

involved matrices. Detailed and extended comparisons of this

architecture to prior art are presented in [24] showing the bene-

fits of the architecture. The algorithm employed in [24] is based

on LU decomposition of matrix and it requires 3048 XOR

gates for multiplications by the corresponding and ma-

Table IV details the implementation complexity of multipli-

cation by assuming a ML—randomly shifted and a pro-

posed ML of the same base matrix. Specifically, the number

of XOR gates required for multiplication by , the FPGA

occupied slices and the corresponding clock frequency of the

parallel encoding architecture of Fig. 7 for the (2016, 1512)

Two-Level QC-LDPC, are reported.

Note that a cycle-four-free base matrix derives to a cycle-

four-free extended matrix. Therefore for the two proposed con-

struction schemes of

, matrix is cycle-four-free. How-

bsh

ever, in case that the PCM presents length-four cycles due to

the concatenation,

, we expand sub-matrix ,

the binary base matrix of , concatenated with the already

constraint-based constructed , to construct a cycle-four-free

trices. Here we directly multiply by the a modified matrix

obtained through the proposed technique requiring 1764 XOR

gates only. Specifically we modify

of [24], which is men-

tioned in Figs. 10–12 and in Table IV, as the QC-LDPC code

with Full Random Shifts, to derive the other codes. Therefore,

the proposed construction method allows implementation of en-

coders with even lower complexity than [24] and the other com-

pared architectures. This reduction comes at the cost of BER

degradation as shown in Fig. 12. In the following, the impact

of the proposed construction methods on known QC-LDPC en-

coding procedures is discussed.

1) -Based Encoding: The generator matrix of an LDPC

code is defined by the two matrices and . Therefore,

any density reduction of these two matrices reduces the density

of the generator matrix. However, since is sparse (part of

PCM, or by following the opposite process, i.e., construct

the PCM),

defines the density of . Fig. 13 depicts the

concatenated with , preserving the constraints of the polyno- generator matrices of various QC-LDPC codes before and after

mial-free procedure combined with additional constraints that applying the proposed constraint-based construction method of

guarantee cycle-four-free PCMs.

. Density reduction of resembles that of . Therefore

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MAHDI AND PALIOURAS: ON THE ENCODING COMPLEXITY OF QUASI-CYCLIC LDPC CODES

6107

the decoding performance for BER as low as

. The im-

pact of semi-random shifting is expressed at lower BER due

to the restricted randomization of the shifting values, for the

case of using a single shifting value per column/row of

.

This BER deterioration is shown to be eliminated by adoptibnshg

the proposed constraint-based construction method of

.

The performance improvement is shown at BER below , bsh

at the error floor area, where when comparing to the randomly

shifted code, the BER degradation of the proposed based-con-

straint constructed codes is less than 0.2 dB at BER of

,

as shown in Fig. 12, while the BER loss of the codes of [25]

is about 0.6 dB at BER of

, as shown in Fig. 11. There-

Fig. 14. Impact of the proposed method on the density of the matrix RU encoding procedure [2].

of fore, there is an improvement of up to 0.5 dB at a BER of when comparing the performance of the proposed con-

straint-based codes to the prior codes [25]. Furthermore, the pro-

posed constraint-based construction method allows construc-

hardware encoders based on or

([7], [9], [12]) can be

simplified.

2) RU-Based Encoding: The constraint-based structure

of a polynomial-free inverted matrix can directly affect the

complexity of RU encoding procedure, since the particular

procedure utilizes operations with inverted matrices. Despite

the relatively small size of the inverted matrices in the RU algo-

rithm, a corresponding complexity reduction can be achieved

by adopting the proposed method, as indicated in Fig. 14.

3) Dual Diagonal-Based Encoding: Encoding procedures

based on Forward/Backward (F/B) substitution are commonly

tion of large ensembles of codes since each column in the base matrix can have many different shifting values, in contrast to [25]. Also, the proposed construction techniques have no impact on decoding complexity, since the check degree and the ANOI remain the same for both original and modified codes. For a given architecture based on operations with inverted matrices, the proposed construction methods for QC-LDPC codes provide a sparser inverted matrix and lower area/time multiplication complexity than the corresponding density and complexity of matrices based on random selection of the shifting values, as shown in Tables III and IV.

used for the QC-LDPC codes of Wifi and Wimax standards, due

to their dual diagonal structure and the particular shifting values

in matrix

[5], [32], [33]. Specifically all the shifting

values along tbhshe two diagonals must be identical and two of

the three shifting values in the first column of

must be

the same. This structure enables efficient eliminabtsihon of the

linear algebraic system of the equations required to compute

the first parity bits, proceeding after that with F/B substitution

to determine the remainder of the parity bits.

The construction method described in Section V-B derives

codes for which such procedures are applicable. Specifically, the

particular method does not violate the predefined matrix struc-

ture as it gives identical values for all the shifts over the diag-

onals, and a single shifting value for the first column of

.

However this implementation ability comes at the cost of BEbshR

deterioration as shown in Figs. 10–12.

On the other side, due to the inherent serial data dependencies

in F/B substitution, the use of parallelism is costly. Furthermore,

such encoding is not efficient for a randomly shifted , constructed as described in Section V-A. Therefore methodbsshbased

on matrix inverse might provide efficient implementation so-

lutions together with the enhanced BER performance obtained

due to the increased randomization of the shifting factors.

VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a joint consideration of code construction and QC-LDPC encoder implementation has been proposed. Complexity is shown to be dependent on the chosen values of shifting factors and is significantly reduced by the introduced construction methods of . The proposed methods have no effect on

REFERENCES
[1] R. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[3] E. Eleftheriou and S. Olcer, “Low-density parity-check codes for digital subscriber lines,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun. (ICC), 2002, vol. 3, pp. 1752–1757.
[4] T. Zhang and K. Parhi, “Joint (3,k)-regular LDPC code and decoder/encoder design,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 52, no. 4, pp. 1065–1079, Apr. 2004.
[5] S. Kopparthi and D. Gruenbacher, “Implementation of a flexible encoder for structured low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Pacific Rim Conf. Commun., Comput., Signal Process. (PacRim), Aug. 2007, pp. 438–441.
[6] D. Xia, H. He, Y. Xu, and Y. Cai, “A novel construction scheme with linear encoding complexity for LDPC codes,” in Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Wireless Commun. Netw. Mobile Comput. (WiCOM), Oct. 2008, pp. 1–4.
[7] A. Cohen and K. Parhi, “A low-complexity hybrid LDPC code encoder for IEEE 802.3an (10GBase-T) Ethernet,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 4085–4094, Oct. 2009.
[8] H. Fujita and K. Sakaniwa, “Some classes of Quasi-Cylic LDPC codes: Properties and efficient encoding method,” IEICE Trans. Fund. Electron., Commun. Comput., vol. E88-A, no. 12, pp. 3627–3635, Jan. 2005.
[9] Z. Li, L. Chen, L. Zeng, S. Lin, and W. Fong, “Efficient encoding of quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 11, p. 1973, Nov. 2005.
[10] Y. Chen and K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Paper, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, 2004.
[11] K. Andrews, S. Dolinar, and J. Thorpe, “Encoders for block-circulant LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Inf. Theory (ISIT), 2005, pp. 2300–2304.
[12] H. Yasotharan and A. Carusone, “A flexible hardware encoder for systematic low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 52nd IEEE Int. Midwest Symp. Circuits Syst. (MWSCAS), Aug. 2009, pp. 54–57.
[13] M. Fossorier, “Quasi cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 50, no. 8, pp. 1788–1793, Aug. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

6108

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 63, NO. 22, NOVEMBER 15, 2015

[14] M. O’Sullivan, “Algebraic construction of sparse matrices with large girth,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 52, no. 2, pp. 718–727, Feb. 2006.
[15] K. Lally and P. Fitzpatrick, “Algebraic structure of quasi-cyclic codes,” Discrete Appl. Math. vol. 111, no. 12, pp. 157–175, 2001 [Online]. Available: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0166218X00003504, Coding and Cryptology
[16] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894–2901, Aug. 2005.
[17] D. Hocevar, “Efficient encoding for a family of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf. (GLOBECOM), Dec. 2003, vol. 7, pp. 399–4000.
[18] Z. He, S. Roy, and P. Fortier, “Encoder architecture with throughput over 10 gbit/sec for quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst. (ISCAS), May 2006, p. 4.
[19] N. Miladinovic and M. Fossorier, “Systematic recursive construction of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 5, pp. 302–304, May 2004.
[20] M. Esmaeili and M. Tadayon, “A lattice-based systematic recursive construction of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 10, pp. 2857–2863, Oct. 2009.
[21] J.-F. H. Chun-Ming Huang and C.-C. Yang, “Construction of quasicyclic LDPC codes from quadratic congruences,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 313–315, Apr. 2008.
[22] J. Chen and M. Fossorier, “Density evolution for two improved bp-based decoding algorithms of LDPC codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 208–210, May 2002.
[23] I. Tsatsaragkos and V. Paliouras, “A flexible layered LDPC decoder,” in Proc. 8th Int. Symp. Wireless Commun. Syst. (ISWCS), Nov. 2011, pp. 36–40.
[24] A. Mahdi and V. Paliouras, “A low complexity-high throughput QC-LDPC encoder,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 62, no. 10, pp. 2696–2708, May 2014.
[25] A. Mahdi and V. Paliouras, “Simplified multi-level quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for low-complexity encoders,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), Oct. 2012, pp. 1–6.
[26] Y. Xiao and M. H. Lee, “Construction of good quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. IET Int. Conf. Wireless, Mobile, Multimedia Netw., Nov. 2006, pp. 1–4.
[27] Z. Xian-da, Matrix Analysis and Application. Beijing, China: Tsinghua Univ. Press, 2004, vol. 1.
[28] S. Johnson and S. Weller, “A family of irregular LDPC codes with low encoding complexity,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 79–81, Feb. 2003.
[29] D. MacKay, S. Wilson, and M. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, no. 10, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[30] R. M. Gray, Toeplitz and Circulant Matrices: A Review, ser. Foundations and Trends in Communications and Information Theory. Norwell, MA, USA: Now Publishers, 2006, vol. 2, no. 3.

[31] J. E. Gentle, Numerical Linear Algebra for Applications in Statistics. New York, NY, USA: Springer, 1998.
[32] Y. Sun, M. Karkooti, and J. R. Cavallaro, “High throughput, parallel, scalable LDPC encoder/decoder architecture for OFDM systems,” in Proc. IEEE Dallas/CAS Workshop Design, App., Integrat., Softw., Oct. 2006, pp. 39–42.
[33] Y. Jung, C. Chung, J. Kim, and Y. Jung, “7.7 Gbps encoder design for IEEE 802.11n/ac QC-LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. SoC Design Conf. (ISOCC), Nov. 2012, pp. 215–218.
Ahmed Mahdi holds a diploma in Electrical and Computer Engineering, a MSc in Integrated Software and Hardware Systems, and a PhD diploma on VLSI architectures for error correction systems from the University of Patras, Greece. Dr. Mahdi’s research interests broadly involve the areas of high throughput-low complexity VLSI architectures for digital signal processing, and algorithm modelling and hardware implementation co-design. His current work focuses on efficient implementation of digital telecommunication modules.
Vassilis Paliouras (M’89) is an associate professor at the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Patras, Greece. His research interests are in the areas of VLSI architectures for signal processing and communications, low-power digital design and computer arithmetic. He has published more than 115 research articles in international journals, conferences, and book chapters and has edited three books. He is advisor to five PhD students, and has supervised two PhD, 25 masters, and 30 diploma theses. Dr. Paliouras has received the IEEE CASS Guillemin—Cauer best-paper award for the year 2000. Dr. Paliouras has served as the general co-chair of International Workshop on Power and Timing Modeling, Optimization and Simulation (PATMOS 2004). He has also served as technical program chair of PATMOS 2005, the IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems Implementation (SiPS) 2005, and technical program co-chair of IEEE International Conference on Electronics Circuits and Systems (ICECS) 2010 and a European liaison for IEEE ISCAS 2012, Korea. He has served in editorial boards of journals and technical program committees of numerous conferences in the areas of signal processing, circuits, systems, and communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:38 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

