Analysis and Comparison of Decoding Algorithms on 
Repeat Accumulate Code 
Xueting Zeng, ling He 
Faculty of Science and Technology 
Communication University of China 
Beijing, China 
Abstract-This paper presents some decoding methods based on 
Tanner graph for the analysis of the repeat accumulate code 
which has been proved to be linear time encoding and linear time 
decoding. We study the structure of the repeat accumulate code 
and make a detail derivation of the procedure of these iterative 
algorithms. The extensive simulation results show that these 
efficient decoding 
methods based 
on the 
message 
passing 
algorithm are suitable for the repeat accumulate code both in 
performance and complexity. 
Keywords-iteration decoding, Sum Product Algorithm (SPA), 
Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA), Repeat Accumulate (RA) code 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Channel coding is playing a vital role in the modem 
communication system, and Shannon information theory set 
the necessary foundation of it. The pioneer work can be traced 
to 1960s when LOPC (Low Density Parity Check) codes were 
proposed in Gallager's doctoral thesis 
[1]. Researchers 
reconsidered the LOPC codes and broadened the work of 
Gallager after the defmition of Turbo codes by Berrou in 1993 
[2]. Then Oivsalar and Jin put forward a new Turbo-like code 
[3], which is a simple class of rate 1 / q serially concatenated 
codes where the outer code is a q-fold repetition code and the 
inner code is a rate 1 convolution code with transfer function 
1/ (l+D). We call this code for Repeat Accumulate (RA) code. 
It has already been strictly proved that the maximum likelihood 
word error probability of RA code approaches zero as the code 
word length goes to infinity in the binary memory less channel 
[4]. In 2000, Jin advanced Irregular Repeat Accumulate (IRA) 
code which not only can be linear time decoding using iterative 
algorithm on the Additive White Gaussian Noise (A WGN) 
channel, but also can achieve the reliable communication at 
data rates near capacity of Shannon limit [5]. RA code can be 
seen as a subclass of Turbo code, as well as the subclass of 
LOPC code. In a word, RA code can provide near-capacity 
performance with 
linear time encoding and linear time 
decoding with simple encoding structure. 
II. THE STRUCTURE OF RA CODE 
RA encoder is composed of repeater, interleaver and 
accumulator, and the structure of RA encoder is showed below 
in Fig.1 : 
978-1-4673-65 44-4/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE 
22 
bit 
.. 
q Repeater 
q 
bit 
) 
lnterleaver 
q 
bit 
q bit 
-
Accumulator .. 
Fig. l. Structure of RA encoder. 
We denote the code length as N bit. As is shown in Fig.l, the 
information symbols are first fed into a q-fold repeater and they 
are repeated q times. Then the total number of repeat 
information symbols are 
interleaved and fed into an 
accumulator. The output of the accumulator code is qN bit. 
RA code can be described by both parity check matrix and 
Tanner graph as well as LOPC code [6].The parity check 
matrix H of RA code has the form H = [HI H2], where HI is a 
regular matrix having an constant row weight and H2 is a 
square dual-diagonal matrix with full rank. The position of 
nonzero elements in HI are up to the interleaver mapping the 
information nodes to check nodes in its Tanner graph. The 
position of nonzero elements in Hz is determined by the 
accumulator corresponding to the connection between parity 
nodes and check nodes. We can construct RA code with 
different 
length rate by changing the number of rows and 
columns in the interleaver and the accumulating factor in the 
accumulator. In this paper, the decoding algorithms which we 
focus on need to build the relationship between RA encoder 
and its parity check matrix, so that we can reduce the 
complexity of encoding and make the iterative linear time 
decoding at the same time. 
III. DECODING METHODS OF RA CODE 
A. Sum Product Algorithm 
One of the significant reasons why LOPC code could 
achieve much better performance than other traditional error 
correcting code is that the decoding method of LOPC code is 
iterative decoding algorithms [7]. This kind of decoding 
algorithms is called Sum Product Algorithm (SPA) or Belief 
Propagation Algorithm (BPA). In the same way, SPA is being 
applied to RA soft decision decoding processing. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
SPA is based on Tanner graph [8]. Each node in the Tanner 
graph exchange information with other nodes along the edges 
connected to itself and update the information repeatedly until 
all the information bits meet the constraints of parity check 
matrix. The message transmitted along the edges in the Tanner 
graph is Log-Likelihood Ratios (LLR) of probability density, 
and it is defined as 
LLR(x) = 109( P(X I Y = O)J 
(1) 
p(x I y = 1) 
where x is the transmitted code word and y is the received code 
word. 
A complete standard SPA can be divided into two parts. One 
is the update of check nodes, the other is the update of variable 
nodes which involve infonnation nodes and parity nodes. 
At the qth iteration, each check node receives all of the 
variable nodes which linked to it and update the infonnation of 
the check node according to 
L7--+i =( II 
... Sign(L;'8)J.rp(. I rp(IL;'8jl)J (2) 
l'EQ(f)\[l) 
I'EQ(;)\{/I 
x 
eX + 1 
where rp(x) = -log(tanh(-)) = log(--)
. 
2 
eX -1 
At the qth iteration, each variable node receives all of the 
check nodes which linked to it and update the infonnation of 
the variable node according to 
LLJ = F; + I L1,--+;o. 
(3) 
j'EQ(i)\{j) 
At each information node, the sum of all the extrmslC 
infonnation about a bit is compared with zero. According to (4) 
and (5), we can know the value of the bit. 
q-P 
"Lq 
z; - ; + ! J--+; 
cq = {a, 
I 
1 , 
JEQ(i) 
else 
(4) 
(5) 
The process mentioned above is repeated until all the parity 
check equations are satisfied or until some maximum number 
of decoder iterations has passed and the decoder halts. 
B. 
Min-Sum Algorithm 
Following the 
definition used in (2), the multiplication 
operation and the inverse function of nonlinear hyperbolic 
tangent will increase the complexity of computation. This will 
lead to a growing number of decoding time and hardware cost. 
When it comes to Min-Sum Algorithm (MSA), we can take 
advantage of the monotone of the hyperbolic tangent [9]. Let 
qJ(min(x)) take the place of L9(x) . Then use I x I instead of 
qJ(9(x)) . After that, (2) can be written as : 
Lq (fl· (Lq-1)J 
. 
Lq-1 
J--+; ( 
. . 
szgn ;'--+J 
., mm .. ;'--+J 
(6) 
;'EQ(j)\(i) 
. 
I EQU)\{/] 
. 
In this way, only comparison operation and add operation 
are required during each update of check nodes so that the 
23 
complexity of the algorithm have been decreased at the cost of 
quantized noise sensitivity. 
The message passing procedure of MSA is identical with 
that of SPA. At each iteration, each check node has access to 
the information from every connected variable node to update 
itself at first. Then the extrinsic message sent from check nodes 
to variable nodes which are connected update the variable 
nodes. At the same time, posterior probability of every 
infonnation bit will be calculated to make a hard decision. At 
last, consider the check matrix equation to check whether the 
decoded code is a valid code word. If the code is a valid code 
word, stop the decoding and return it as the decoded word. If 
not, go back to the next iteration. 
Layered Decoding Algorithm (LDA) is also an improvement 
based on SPA [10]. It is also a subclass of min-sum algorithm. 
The main idea of layered decoding is to regard the check 
matrix of RA code as a series of horizontal layers in order that 
code can be decoded in layers simultaneously. Posterior 
probability obtained from preceding layer can be transferred to 
the following layer efficiently. In each iteration, the horizontal 
layers are processed sequentially from the top to the bottom 
layer. 
The algorithm is summarized as follows. 
1) 
Initialization: Set 
F; = 2ri /0'2 
(7) 
Zi[O]=F; 
L2--+; = 0. 
2) 
Update variable nodes: 
(8) 
(9) 
LLj[k] = znk -1] + L13i[k]. 
(10) 
3) 
Update check nodes: 
L1-->i [k] = [ fl. 
sign (L;,-->I )J., min. LLI· (11) 
;'EQ(j)\[i] 
. 
1 EQU)\(l) 
. 
4) 
Calculate the poster log-likelihood ratios of each bit: 
znk] = LLj[k]+L1-->Jk]. 
(12) 
5) 
Make a hard decision of the current bit: 
cq = {a, znLp4 ° 
(13) 
1 
1, 
znL] < 0· 
6) 
Check the decoding code: If cq Hi = ° then go to 
step 7. If not, go back to step 2. 
7) 
End of decoding. 
As mentioned above, the check matrix is separated into 
different layers by the algorithm and each layer can be seen as 
an unit of decoding, with the result that the latest updated 
external information can be immediately transferred to the next 
layer to be calculated. This kind of message passing method 
will reduce the total number of iterations so that RA code can 
achieve higher rate and lower hardware cost relatively. 
IV. SIMULATION AND ANALYSIS 
In section, we established a digital communication system to 
evaluate the performance of different decoding algorithms 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
based simulation platform with MA TLAB which is shown in 
Fig.2. 
[jCOding 
result 
Geer 
Fig. 2. Communication System. 
In the simulation of this paper we adopt Binary Phase Shift 
Keying (BPSK) modulation and A WGN channel. The code 
rate in Fig.3 is fixed at 0.625, while the RA code length differs 
from 400 the shorter to 4000 the longer. The length frame is 20 
and the maximum iteration number is 50. 
-+- SPA (N;400) 
10.3 - SPA (N;4000) I ....... , ... , ... , .......... , ............. .... ..:.. ... , .... , . ........ ; ............... .... , .... .  \',: .... ....... .. ´ 
· --+- MSA (N;400) 
· -6- MSA (N;4000) 
· -- LOA (N;400) 
-.or- LOA (N;4000) 
10·444=:46.5=*327-='=-- --:-":-...i..-8.i... 5-J 
Fig. 3. The bit error rate performance of RA code at a rate of 5/8 with 
proposed decoding algorithms and diflerent lengths. 
Fig.3 shows the characteristic Bit Error Rate (BER) for three 
decoding methods mentioned above of RA code versus the 
signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). It can be clearly seen that 
the 
layered decoding algorithm performs better when the signal­
to-noise ratio is less than approximately 6.5 dB. However, the 
sum product algorithm has an overwhelming advantage when 
the signal-to-noise ratio exceed 8.5 dB since the bit error rate 
of min-sum algorithm and layered decoding algorithm 
decreases gradually and remains steady while the bit error rate 
of sum product algorithm decreases drastically. When 
the 
signal-to-noise ratio is varied from 8 dB to 8.5 dB, the bit error 
rate of sum product algorithm has a rapid drop and reach the 
lowest which is around zero while the bit error rates of other 
algorithms are still high and remains relatively flat which is 
fixed at a constant as the signal-to-noise is increased. 
FigA describes the comparison of the running time which 
each decoding algorithm costs once through. The slope of time 
curve reflects the convergence rate. According to the 
contradistinction of these curves, it can be interpreted that 
increasing the code word length has an enormous impact on the 
24 
10' 
-SPA 
--A-MSA 
-t- MSA (N;4DOO) 
-- LOA (N;400) 
--'i'- LOA (N;4000) 
10° 1=;o;:==j==89:;:-0-<--'---:-L-= 
4 
4.5 
8.5 
Fig. 4. Running time comparison ofRA code at a rate of 5/8 with proposed 
decoding algorithms and diflerent lengths. 
running time it takes. Further more, increasing the code word 
length improves the decoder performance by increasing the 
slope of the curve . We can see that a dramatic improvement in 
the performance of three decoding algorithms can be 
accomplished by a sharp decline for small increments in SNR 
when rising the SNR from 8 to 8.5 dB. It also indicates that the 
longer length code can get faster operation speed than the 
shorter one without regard to hardware restriction when the 
SNR is high enough. It is to be remarked that the layered 
decoding lost its advantage of fast decoding when the code 
length become long. 
v. CONCLUSION 
In this paper, we discuss three efficient decoding algorithms 
based on repeat accumulate code. It has been verified that sum 
product algorithm is suitable for the code with long length 
while 
the 
repeat 
accumulate 
code 
achieves 
the 
best 
performance. On the contrary, layered decoding algorithm 
prefers the short one. Min-sum algorithm has lower complexity 
than the sum product algorithm at the sacrifice of accuracy. In 
addition, the performance of the same decoding algorithm 
varies according to the signal-to-noise ratio, code length, 
hardware cost etc. Hardware implementation and practical 
demands should be taken into consideration when choosing 
proper decoding algorithm for the repeat accumulate code. 
REFERENCES 
[I] 
R. G. Gallager, " Low-Density Parity-Check Codes, " 
Ph.D 
dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, 
1963. 
[2] 
J. Boutros, G. Caire, E. Viterbo, H. Sawaya, and S. Vialle, 
"Turbo code at 0.03 dB from capacity limit," Proc. IEEE Symp. 
Information Theory (ISl T 2002), IEEE Press, pp. 56, June. 2002. 
[3] 
D. Divsalar, Jin. H, and R. McEliece, " Coding theorems for 
Turbo-like codes," Proceedings of the 36th Annual Allerton 
Conference on Communication Control and Computing, vol. 9, 
1998, pp. 201 -210. 
[4] 
Jin. 
H, "Analysis and design of Turbo-like codes," 
Ph.D 
dissertation, California Institute of Techno]ogy, 2001. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
[5] 
Jin. H, R. McEliece, " Irregular repeat-accumulate codes," Proc. 
2nd International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related 
Tonics, Brest, France, vol. 9, 2000, pp. 1-8. 
[6] 
S. Johnson and S. Weller, " Interleaver and accumulator design 
for 
systematic 
repeat-accumulate 
codes," 
6th 
Australian 
Communications Theory Workshop, pp. 1-7, Feb. 2005. 
[7] 
Shu Lin and Daniel lCostello, Error Control Coding, Second 
Edition. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, Nl, 2004. 
25 
[8] 
S. ten Brink and G. Kramer, " Design of Repeat-Accumulate 
Codes for Iterative Detection and Decoding," submitted to IEEE 
special issue on Signal Processing for MIMO, Dec. 2002. 
[9] 
1. Chen. A. Dholakia. E. Eleftheriou. M. Fossorier. and X. Hu. 
"Reduced-Complexity Decoding of LDPC Codes," IEEE Trans. 
1. vol. 53, no. 8, pp. 1288-1299, Aug. 2005. 
[10] D. Hocevar, 
"A reduced complexity decoder architecture via 
layered decoding of LDPC codes," 
Proc. IEEE Workshop on 
Signal Process. Syst. (SiPS), pp. 107-112, Oct. 2004. 
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
