IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

505

Efficient Decoding of Short Length Linear Cyclic Codes
Mohamed Ismail, Stojan Denic, and Justin Coon, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—Iterative soft decision decoding of linear block codes is a practical necessity when working with even modest block lengths. A number of algorithms have been proposed in the literature which use the permutation group of a code and the belief propagation (BP) algorithm for decoding. A novel soft-input, soft-output algorithm is presented that can be used for efficiently decoding of linear cyclic codes. Utilising the automorphism property of cyclic codes the permutation is incorporated into the belief propagation algorithm resulting in faster convergence and better error correcting performance. Performance of the new approach is analysed using a (63,45) BCH code and a (72,36) quadratic residue code. Simulation results show significant reduction in the average number of required decoding iterations and some improvement in error correcting performance over published algorithms.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, linear cyclic codes, permutation codes, belief propagation.
I. INTRODUCTION
M UCH work has gone into the design of medium to long sized block codes and associated encoding and decoding methods. However, for short length block codes in the region of 60–300 bits in length the trade-off necessary between good error correcting performance and decoding complexity has, on one hand, led to a significant gap between error correcting performance and the theoretical lower bound and a dearth of practical decoding solutions on the other. The sphere packing bound [1] defines a lower bound on the achievable symbol error rate for a given value of energy-per-bit to noise variance, Eb/N0, code rate and block length. In [2] a measure termed imperfectness is defined as the difference, in dB, between the Eb/N0 value required to achieve a given symbol error rate as given by the sphere packing bound and the Eb/N0 value required to achieve the same symbol error rate by a real code. Low density parity check (LDPC) codes have been shown to achieve an imperfectness value of a fraction of a dB for long block lengths [3]. For very short block lengths linear algebraic codes, such as Golay codes, can be decoded using maximum likelihood (ML) detection to give good performance. However, extension to even modestly longer block lengths all but prohibits ML decoding due to the exponential rise in required computation.
In an environment replete with low power wireless devices with low duty cycles and relatively low computational capability the need for an efficient coding system is of great importance if such devices are to be of practical value. Latency may also be a factor where time sensitive control systems are employed as
Manuscript received October 3, 2014; accepted November 3, 2014. Date of publication January 14, 2015; date of current version April 8, 2015. The associate editor coordinating the review of this paper and approving it for publication was M. Xiao.
M. Ismail and S. Denic are with the Telecommunications Research Laboratory of Toshiba Research Europe Ltd., Bristol BS1 4ND, U.K. (e-mail: mohamed@toshiba-trel.com).
J. Coon is with the Department of Engineering Science, University of Oxford, Oxford OX1 3PJ, U.K.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2015.2392114

in, for example, wireless control of actuators [4]. Thus, the need for low latency decoding of short length block codes is also a requirement.
This paper presents a novel low complexity decoding algorithm designed for decoding of linear cyclic codes. The proposed algorithm is based on the belief propagation (BP) algorithm and utilises a permutation of the candidate codeword to another valid codeword to achieve faster convergence of the decoding process. Compared to other similar algorithms the proposed scheme incorporates the permutation within the belief propagation algorithm. Performance of the proposed algorithm is evaluated on a Bose-Chaudhuri-Hocquenghem (BCH) code and an extended Quadratic Residue (QR) code.
The following section introduces the proposed decoding algorithm after summarising previous work. Section III explains how the permutation sets used in the decoding algorithm are derived. Section IV gives a commentary on the relative complexity of the proposed algorithm to the BP algorithm, since the other studied algorithms use the BP algorithm as a kernel. Section V compares performance of the proposed algorithm with two other algorithms from the literature for two different code types. Finally, Section VI provides some concluding remarks.
II. PERMUTED BELIEF PROPAGATION
A. Background
In the belief propagation process each new piece of information is viewed as a perturbation that propagates through the network along connecting edges between neighbouring nodes via the passing of messages. Where the underlying graph topology is cycle free, the BP algorithm will achieve the maximum likelihood result for asymptotically long codes. However, the existence of short length cycles in the corresponding factor graph can significantly degrade performance. In [5] the BP algorithm has an additional stochastic shifting operation which involves applying a random cyclic shift to the vector of updated log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) from iteration-to-iteration. Halford [6] explains this step as being equivalent to decoding the received vector by a permuted version of the parity check matrix, in effect redundant Tanner graph decoding. Hehn [7] explicitly uses multiple versions of a base matrix for decoding, termed multiple-basis belief propagation, coupled with a least metric selector at the decoding output for deciding the most likely codeword.
Let the parity check matrix, H, of a linear block code, C, consist of M parity check equations on N codeword bits. The set of permutations, P er(C), that map a codeword in C to another codeword form the automorphism group of C [8]. The iterative decoding algorithms proposed in [6] and [9] use the automorphism group of a code to achieve a similar effect to the stochastic shifting of Jiang and Narayanan’s approach [5].
Halford’s Random Redundant Decoding (RRD) algorithm [6] applies a number of iterations, I1, of the BP decoder to a

1558-2558 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/imwiwtewd.itoee: eY.oonrgs/epiuUbnliivc.atDioonwsn_lsotaadneddarodns/Jpuunbeli2ca4t,i2o0n2s6/raigt h1t7s:/3in1d:5e6x.UhtTmCl ffroormmIEoEreEinXfpolromrea.tiRone.strictions apply.

506

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

identity permutation. Let S be the automorphism group of the linear code C.

2) Update from check nodes: Calculate the update messages

to be sent from each of the M check nodes as given by:

⎛

⎞

LLRc→v = 2 tanh−1 ⎝

tanh

1

2

LLRv c →

⎠

v ∈Vc\{v}

where, v ∈ Vc\{v} means all nodes in the set Vc except node v. 3) Update from variable nodes: Calculate the update messages to be sent from each of the N variable nodes as given by:

LLRv→c = vˆ(t) +

LLRc v →

c ∈Cv\{c}

where, c ∈ Cv\{c} means all nodes in the set Cv except node c.

Fig. 1. Proposed decoding algorithm.

4) Form bit estimate: For each of the N variable nodes

received codeword, if the decoded output is a valid codeword the algorithm terminates. Otherwise, a permutation from the

form an estimate of the associated bit by summing the incoming messages:

automorphism group of the code, P er(C), is selected at random and applied to the decoded vector prior to further iterations of the BP decoder. The maximum number of permitted candidate

vˆ(t) ← vˆ(t) +

LLRc→v

c∈Cv

permutations is set in advance as I2. In addition, since the RRD algorithm is based on the algorithm of Jiang and Narayanan, a

5) Accumulate: Apply permutation to previous soft output and add to current soft output:

damping factor is used to scale the extrinsic LLR values within the BP decoder. An outer loop iterates, for I3 iterations, over

vˆ(t) ← vˆ(t) + P er (vˆ(t − 1), θ(t − 1))

an evolving damping factor for a given input vector to be decoded. Thus, the RRD algorithm has (I1 × I2 × I3) maximum

6) Permute: Generate a random permutation from the automorphism group of the code, apply to current soft values

possible iterations of the BP algorithm.

and variable node values. Update the cumulative set of

The modified RRD algorithm of Dimnik and Be’ery [9],

permutations, Θ:

termed mRRD, removes the need for a damping factor instead using the approach of Hehn [7] of utilising multiple parallel decoders each with a different parity check matrix. The novelty

θ(t) ← random group element of S vˆ(t) ← P er (vˆ(t), θ(t))

of the mRRD being the use of a single parity check matrix with different permutations from the code automorphism group applied to the received codeword prior to decoding. This approach

LLRv→c ← P er LLRv→c , θ(t) Θ ← θ(t)Θ

is shown to achieve better BER performance than the RRD 7) Termination: For each of the N variable nodes form a

algorithm or, alternatively, the same BER performance with up

hard decision, vˆhard, as follows:

to ten times lower complexity.
B. Proposed Decoding Algorithm
The proposed algorithm, shown in Fig. 1, also uses a set of permutations from the automorphism group of a code in the decoding process. For each iteration the BP algorithm is applied to the received codeword, if the resulting codeword is valid the algorithm terminates. Otherwise, a random permutation is selected from the automorphism group of the code and applied to the output from the previous iteration. A subsequent iteration of the BP decoder is applied and the process repeated. By incorporating the permutation step into the BP algorithm the complete redundant Tanner graph is made available for decoding. The Permuted Belief Propagation (PBP) algorithm is shown below.
1) Initialise: Set the N variable node values with the received log-likelihood ratio values, LLRv. For all hij = 1 in H, where i ∈ M, j ∈ N , let LLRv→c = LLRv, vˆ(1) = vˆ(0) = LLRv, t = 1, θ(0) = I, where I is the

vˆhard =

1 0

if vˆ(t) < 0, otherwise.

If vˆhardH = 0 or the maximum number of permitted iterations is reached terminate the decoding procedure and apply the inverse permutation, Θ−1, to the output.
The modified BP algorithm, in step 6, requires generation of a random element from the automorphism group of the code, this is achieved using the product replacement algorithm described in [10]. The permuted belief propagation algorithm in Fig. 1 has an outer loop which is traversed when the modified BP algorithm has concluded without finding a valid codeword. For each iteration of the outer loop the set of permutations input to the modified BP algorithm is re-initialised to the original set. This step has a similar effect to that of the damping coefficient employed by [5] and [6], namely that of controlling the dynamics of the convergence process. For comparison, a flowchart of Halford’s’ RRD is shown in Fig. 2. The incorporation of the permutation process into the BP algorithm is clear to see when compared to Fig. 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:31:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISMAIL et al.: EFFICIENT DECODING OF SHORT LENGTH LINEAR CYCLIC CODES

507

Fig. 3. BER performance of the PBP, RRD and mRRD algorithms for a (63,45) BCH code.
Furthermore, an extended Quadratic Residue code of length p + 1 is fixed by P SL2(p). Finding the complete automorphism group of a linear code is in general difficult. However, if the permutation set is limited to just the cyclic permutations simulation results have shown the performance to degrade significantly. Thus, a set of permutations consisting of the cyclic set and some other subset of the complete automorphism group would suffice to improve performance.

IV. COMPLEXITY ANALYSIS

Fig. 2. Random redundant decoding algorithm [11].
Compared to the stochastic shifting based iterative decoding (SSID) algorithm of [5] the proposed algorithm uses a wider set of permutations by employing the complete automorphism group. In this respect, the proposed algorithm is a generalisation of the SSID algorithm as the set of cyclic codeword shifts is a subset of the automorphism group.

The PBP algorithm has two additional steps to the belief propagation algorithm, an accumulation step and a permutation step. Compared to the stochastically shifting based iterative decoding (SSID) scheme of Jiang [5] there is no damping coefficient, α, and there is an accumulate step. Thus, the main computational difference for the PBP algorithm compared to the BP algorithm are the N summations necessary in the accumulate step. The generation and application of permutations is not included in the computational cost as it can be achieved by appropriate mapping of memory addresses when exchanging messages.
V. SIMULATION RESULTS

III. AUTOMORPHISM GROUPS
The permutation set required by the decoding algorithms under study is taken from the automorphism group of a code. Clearly, the automorphism group of a cyclic code contains the set of all cyclic permutations. In addition, the automorphism group of a cyclic code also contains the permutation σ2 : y → y2. In [8] a large group of permutations, termed a projective special linear group P SL2(p) is defined for a prime p of the form 8m ± 1 by the following three permutations:
S :y→y+1 V : y → ρ2y T : y → −1
y
where ρ is a primitive element of GF(p) and y is a coordinate index.

The error correcting performance and the average number of decoding iterations of the proposed algorithm were compared to the Random Redundant Decoding (RRD) algorithm detailed in [6] and the modified RRD (mRRD) algorithm in [9]. Performance with a (63,45) BCH code and a (72,36) extended Quadratic Residue (QR) code were compared.
The RRD algorithm used I1 = 2, I2 = 50, I3 = 20 iterations, where I1 was the maximum number of iterations of the BP algorithm and I2 the maximum number of iterations per outer iteration with each iteration using a different permutation. Finally, I3 was the number of outer iterations with each outer iteration using a different damping coefficient, α. The mRRD algorithm used I1 = 15 and I2 = 50. The total number of parallel decoders used in the mRRD algorithm were 1, 3, 5, 10, and 15.
Figs. 3 and 5 show the BER performance for the two codes. For the BCH code, at a BER of 1 × 10−5 the PBP algorithm

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:31:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

508

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 19, NO. 4, APRIL 2015

Fig. 4. Average no. of iterations of the PBP, RRD and mRRD algorithms for Fig. 6. Average no. of iterations for the PBP, RRD and mRRD algorithms for

a (63,45) BCH code.

a (72,36) extended QR code.

based on the belief propagation algorithm and a permutation set. The technique proposed in this paper also utilises the BP algorithm with the key difference of incorporating the permutation into the message passing process. This has the dual benefit of improving error correcting performance and reducing the average number of decoding iterations. The proposed algorithm has been tested on two different short length block codes, BCH and quadratic residue, showing a modest gain in BER performance and a significant reduction in the average number of decoding iterations compared to an algorithm of similar complexity for both cases. This improvement allows for the use of short length block codes in low power, limited computational capability applications which necessitate channel coding.

REFERENCES

Fig. 5. BER performance of the PBP, RRD and mRRD algorithms for a (72,36) extended QR code.
matches performance of the mRRD algorithm with 10 parallel decoders. Compared to the RRD algorithm the PBP algorithm has a coding gain of 0.2 dB at a BER of 1 × 10−5. The average number of decoding iterations using the BCH code show, from Fig. 4, the PBP algorithm to have the lowest of all the studied algorithms, being almost two orders of magnitude lower than the mRRD algorithm with 10 parallel decoders at an Eb/N0 of 5 dB. At a BER performance of 1 × 10−5 for the extended QR code the PBP algorithm matches performance of the mRRD algorithm with 15 parallel decoders and is similar to the RRD algorithm. Again, the average number of decoding iterations of the PBP algorithm is the lowest of all the algorithms studied, being almost two orders of magnitude lower than the mRRD algorithm with 15 parallel decoders at an Eb/N0 of 5 dB, as shown in Fig. 6. Similar observations were made for a (63,39) BCH code, a (31,26) BCH code and a (200,100) extended QR code.
VI. CONCLUSION
A number of iterative decoding algorithms have been proposed in the literature for the decoding of linear block codes

[1] C. E. Shannon, “Probability of error for optimal codes in a Gaussian channel,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 611–656, 1959.
[2] S. Dolinar, D. Divsalar, and F. Pollara, “Code performance as a function of block size,” Telecommun. Mission Operat. Progress Rep., vol. 133, pp. 1–23, Jan. 1998.
[3] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[4] J. Nilsson, “Real-time control systems with delays,” Ph.D. dissertation, Lund Instit. Technol., Lund, Sweden, 1998.
[5] J. Jiang and K. Narayanan, “Iterative soft decoding of Reed-Solomon codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 244–246, Apr. 2004.
[6] T. Halford and K. Chugg, “Random redundant soft-in soft-out decoding of linear block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, 2006, pp. 2230–2234.
[7] T. Hehn, J. Huber, S. Laendner, and O. Milenkovic, “Multiple-bases belief-propagation for decoding of short block codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Jun. 2007, pp. 311–315.
[8] F. MacWilliams and N. Sloane, The Theory of Error Correcting Codes, ser. North-Holland Mathematical Library, vol. 1/2. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: North-Holland, 1977. [Online]. Available: http://books. google.co.uk/books?id=aB8IAQAAIAAJ
[9] I. Dimnik and Y. Be’ery, “Improved random redundant iterative HDPC decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 57, no. 7, pp. 1982–1985, Jul. 2009.
[10] F. Celler, C. R. Leedham-Green, S. H. Murray, A. C. Niemeyer, and E. O’Brien, “Generating random elements of a finite group,” Commun. Algebra, vol. 23, no. 13, pp. 4931–4948, 1995. [Online]. Available: http:// dx.doi.org/10.1080/00927879508825509
[11] T. Halford and K. Chugg, “Transactions letters—random redundant iterative soft-in soft-out decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 56, no. 4, pp. 513–517, Apr. 2008.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:31:56 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

