84

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, MARCH 2015

Simplified Detection for DVB-NGH MIMO Decoders
Dario Perez-Calderon, Vicente Baena-Lecuyer, Jorge Chavez, Ana Cinta Oria, and Jose Garcia Doblado

Abstract—Nowadays, communication systems need to satisfy very demanding constraints in order to cope with users new necessities. One of the most promising techniques to improve the system capacity is multiple input multiple output (MIMO). However, the use of MIMO implies a huge complexity increase in the detection process. In this paper, a method to reduce the aforementioned complexity is presented. Although the proposed method is analyzed for digital video broadcasting next generation for handhelds, its implementation is useful for any MIMO system that requires the computation of log likelihood ratios (LLRs), used by the low density parity check codes. The presented technique consists of applying a simplification when calculating the Euclidean distances needed by the LLRs. The simplification avoids almost all the multiplications, very area demanding when translated into hardware, and presents a performance loss under 0.1 dB.
Index Terms—Digital video broadcasting next generation for handhelds (DVB-NGH), multiple input multiple output (MIMO), decoder, orthogonal frequency division multiplexion (OFDM).
I. INTRODUCTION
N OWADAYS, wireless communication systems have a performance close to the theoretical limits exposed by Shannon. This is mainly due to the mature state of the technologies applied in them. Clear examples of this are the 802.11 family standards (a, b, g, n), 802.16 (WiMax) or the mobile telephone standards as Universal Mobile Telephone System (UMTS). Increasing the data rate in these types of systems (power, bandwidth and complexity limited) represents a very challenging task. In order to achieve this target, one of the most recent and widely used technologies is Multiple Input Multiple Output (MIMO). This technology is already applied in state-of-the-art communication standards as Long Term Evolution (LTE) and it is said to be one of the key features for incoming new ones as Digital Video Broadcasting Next Generation for Handhelds (DVB-NGH) [1].
MIMO consists in using several transmission and reception antennas. The use of MIMO schemes leads to an increase of the channel capacity. The first works on this area were carried out by Winters [2], Foschini and Gans [3], and Telatar [4] and
Manuscript received February 24, 2014; revised September 24, 2014; accepted October 3, 2014. Date of publication December 12, 2014; date of current version February 28, 2015. This work was supported by the Spanish Government under Project TEC2010-17029.
The authors are with the Departamento de Ingenieria Electronica, Escuela Superior de Ingenieros, Universidad de Sevilla, Sevilla 41092, Spain (e-mail: dperez@gie.esi.us.es).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TBC.2014.2367991

generated very high expectations over MIMO techniques. All this interest was the starting point for many investigations on this field in order to characterize the theoretical and practical aspects related to MIMO wireless channels.
The high spectral efficiency associated to the MIMO channels is based on the fact that a channel with enough diversity offers independent propagation paths between each transmitting and receiving antenna. In a first approximation the capacity of the channel increases linearly with the minimum number of transmitting (M) and receiving (N) antennas. In this way it is possible to surpass the capacity of the equivalent Single Input Single Output (SISO) scheme.
The type of the MIMO coding affects drastically the system performance and also the complexity of the detection process. In this paper we present a method that greatly reduces the complexity introduced by the use of MIMO in DVB-NGH, although a similar reasoning can be followed to simplify other MIMO systems.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, a brief overview of the technologies implied in the detection process is given. Section III exposes the characteristics of the MIMO codification scheme chosen for DVB-NGH, enhanced Spatial Multiplexing (eSM). The complexity of the MIMO decoding process is evaluated in Section IV, whereas a simplification is proposed in Section V. In Section VI the impact of the proposed method on the system performance is evaluated. Section VII focuses on the achieved complexity reduction. Finally, in Section VIII the main conclusions that can be obtained from the presented work are summarized.
II. TECHNOLOGY OVERVIEW
As stated in the introduction, DVB-NGH has adopted MIMO to improve the robustness or capacity that can be achieved. The basic scheme proposes a 2x2 (2 transmitter antennas and 2 receiver antennas) MIMO scenario with cross-polarization. Due to the fact that DVB-NGH is supposed to work with frequencies under 900MHz, the use of cross-polarization allows allocating both transmitter antennas at the same location without the need of a large separation between them. The MIMO coding adopted in DVB-NGH, that will be widely explained in Section III, is applied to a pair of 2m-QAM symbols with Gray mapping, where m can take the values 2, 4, and 6, resulting in MIMO symbols of 6, 8, and 10 bits. For the sake of clarity, Fig. 1 shows the coding and shape of a 4-QAM and a 16-QAM constellation.

0018-9316 c 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:34:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEREZ-CALDERON et al.: SIMPLIFIED DETECTION FOR DVB-NGH MIMO DECODERS

85

Fig. 1. 4-QAM (squares) and 16-QAM (circles) constellations.

A. Generic MIMO System
In Fig. 2 a generic MIMO scenario is depicted, where M represents the number of transmitter antennas and N the number of receiver antennas.
From Fig. 2 it can be seen there are M × N propagation paths. This system can be modeled mathematically as shown in (1), where Y is an N × 1 vector representing the received signal, H is an N × M matrix modeling the channel complex coefficients, S is an M × 1 vector with the transmitted data, and W an N × 1 vector modeling the additive white Gaussian noise at the receiver.

Y = HS + W

(1)

The channel matrix can be expressed as shown in (2), where

hnm represents the complex gain of the channel between the

nth receiver antenna and the mth transmitter antenna.

⎡

⎤

h11 · · · h1M

H = ⎢⎣ ... . . . ... ⎥⎦

(2)

h1N · · · hNM

The performance gain of MIMO schemes is highly related with the properties of the channel matrix, being higher when the correlation between the different propagation paths is lower.
As stated in Section II, the chosen scheme for the basic MIMO profile in DVB-NGH is a 2 transmitter and 2 receiver antennas, leading to the simplest possible MIMO scheme. The MIMO coding used by the future standard will be described in Section III.

B. Log Likelihood Ratios

DVB-NGH uses Low Density Parity Check (LDPC) codes [5], [6], in the forward error correction field. These codes work with Log Likelihood Ratios (LLRs) and offer a performance close to the Shannon capacity limit. The exact calculation of LLRs in a MIMO system can be expressed as shown in (3), where bi refers to the ith bit in the MIMO codeword, and Y the received signal.

LLR(bi) = ln

Pr(bi = 1|Y) Pr(bi = 0|Y)

(3)

A positive LLR means that the bi bit sent has a higher probability of being a “1”, meanwhile a negative value indicates
that the transmitted bi bit had a higher probability of being a “0”. The larger the magnitude of the LLR is, the more likely

Fig. 2. Generic MIMO scenario.

the transmitted symbol will be a “1” or a “0” (depending on the LLR sign), this makes essential for any approximation not to distort this value.
Ideally, if a particular MIMO codeword S is transmitted, the receiver should be able to detect the same value. However, in a real propagation scenario this is far from being true. The carriers that bear the information are affected by amplitude fading and noise, decreasing considerably the quality of the signal. Taking this into account the conditional probability density function (PDF) of receiving Y having transmitted S and propagated through channel H in an AWGN scenario with variance σ 2, can be expressed as shown in (4).

p(Y |S)

=

1 2π σ 2

exp

−

||Y

− HS||2 2σ 2

(4)

Considering the reception of a particular bit bi of a MIMO symbol S, and supposing that all the symbols are transmitted
with the same probability, the conditional PDF for the received
signal Y is given in (5), where j represents the possible values
of bit bi (“0” or “1”), m corresponds to the number of bits in the MIMO symbol S, and Cij denotes the set of constellation points with the ith bit equal to j.

p(Y |bi

=

j)

=

1 2mπ σ 2

exp

−

||Y

− HS||2 2σ 2

(5)

S∈Cij

As it will be shown in Section IV, the generation of the LLRs at the MIMO decoder implies a high complexity.

III. DVB-NGH MIMO CODING
Enhanced Spatial Multiplexing (eSM) [7] derives from Spatial Multiplexing (SM), which consists in transmitting even and odd symbols by different transmitter antennas, as depicted in Fig. 3. Note that in DVB-NGH the symbols are QAM constellation points.
The eSM technique adds a rotation between antennas performed by means of a linear combination of odd and even QAM symbols before the SM stage is applied. The linear combination is performed as shown in (6), where z is the eSM coder block output, P1 and P2 are the intentional power imbalance (PI) between antennas and are defined in (7) and (9) respectively, R is defined in (8) and represents an angle rotation of θ , x are the normalized QAM symbols, Ndata is the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:34:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

86

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, MARCH 2015

TABLE II TOTAL AMOUNT OF OPERATIONS TO PERFORM IN THE DETECTION
PROCESS FOR EACH RECEIVED SYMBOL

Fig. 3. SM scheme.
TABLE I ESM CONFIGURATION IN DVB-NGH

IV. DECODER COMPLEXITY
For a simpler detection and calculation of the LLR metrics, the Max-log approximation is commonly used leading to the expression in (11), where bi represents the ith bit of the received symbol, σ 2 is the noise variance, Cij is the subset of symbols of the ideal MIMO constellation in which the ith bits value is j (“0” or “1”), H is the estimated channel matrix, Y is the received signal, and S is the ideal transmitted MIMO symbol.

LLR(bi)

≈

1 2σ 2

min
S∈Ci0

Y − HS 2 − min
S∈Ci1

Y − HS 2 (11)

number of QAM symbols, and finally α and β are positive

real numbers lower than 1.

z2n z2n+1

√ = 2P1RP2

x2n x2n+1

(6)

n = 0,√1, 2, ..., Ndata/2 − 1

P1 =

β√ 0 0 1−β

(7)

R=

cos(θ ) − sin(θ ) sin(θ ) cos(θ )

(8)

√

P2 =

α√ 0 0 1−α

(9)

The configurations that can be set in DVB-NGH for different PI are the ones shown in Table I, where nbpcu represents the number of bits per cell (6 for QPSK+16-QAM modulations, 8 for 16-QAM+16-QAM, and 10 for 16-QAM+64-QAM), and θ is expressed in degrees.
After the eSM coding, an additional processing is carried out in order to enhance the system performance. It consists in introducing a cyclic variable phase to the eSM coded data to reduce the impact of high correlated propagation paths. This variable phase insertion reduces the correlation between paths and thus increases the efficiency of the MIMO coding, provided that the higher the uncorrelation between paths is, the higher diversity is obtained. This technique is known as Phase Hopping (PH) [8] and it is described in (10), where s represents the output coded symbols of the MIMO processing, and k is set to 0 at the beginning of each LDPC data block and it is incremented by one for each output of the eSM coder block.

s2n s2n+1

=

1 0

0 ejφPH (k)

z2n z2n+1

(10)

2kπ φPH(k) = 9 , n = 0, 1, 2, . . . , Ndata/2

In the case of MIMO, the symbols are vectors of M components that increase the number of possible candidates in the Cij subsets when compared to the SISO equivalent scheme (same number of bits per QAM constellation symbol). For a generic MIMO system as depicted in Fig. 2, the number of possible candidates is 2nbpcu . Therefore, in order to find the minimums of (11), we need to calculate the squared Euclidean distance shown in (12) for every possible candidate, where yn represents the nth component (with n taking the values 0 or 1) of the received vector Y, and hsn is the nth component of the vector result of the multiplication HS. and represent the real and imaginary part respectively.

Y − HS 2 = ( (y0) − (hs0))2 + ( (y0) − (hs0))2 + ( (y1) − + ( (y1) − (hs1))2

(hs1))2 (12)

For example, for two 16-QAM (nbpcu = 8) there will be 256 possible candidates. Therefore, according to expression (12), the number of real multiplications required to perform the detection of one received MIMO symbol, without taking into account the product HS, is 1024. In the case of nbpcu = 10 (16-QAM and 64-QAM combination) the number of possible candidates is 1024, increasing the number of multiplications to be calculated to 4096, which represents the worst case in DVB-NGH.
At the decoder, the HS product is also required in order to compute (12), Table II shows the total amount of operations to be performed for each received symbol when the exact squared Euclidean distance calculation is used.
All the multiplications required to find the minimum distances represent a considerable problem when facing the hardware implementation of receivers and this becomes critical when applied to mobile devices as DVB-NGH ones.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:34:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEREZ-CALDERON et al.: SIMPLIFIED DETECTION FOR DVB-NGH MIMO DECODERS

87

Fig. 4. Parameter optimization example for 2-D approximation.

Fig. 5. Block diagram for the proposed method.

V. PROPOSED METHOD
As shown in the previous section, the use of MIMO implies a high complexity decoder. In order to minimize this important drawback (and more taking into account that DVB-NGH is a mobile communications standard), it is proposed to apply an approximation for the calculation of (12). The distance computation will be now substituted by (13) where a0, b0, a1, and b1 are defined by (14) and (15), and f0 and f1 are expressed as (16), where w and z represent real a positive number. In (14), (15), and (16), the subscript i takes the values 0 and 1. Finally, λi and γi are constants that shall be selected to minimize the error of the approximation in (13). This approximation is a generalization of the two dimensions distance approximation known as α max plus β min [9].

Y − HS ≈ f1 (f0(a0, b0), f0(a1, b1)) = D (13)

ai = abs( (yi) − (hsi))

(14)

bi = abs( (yi) − (hsi))

(15)

fi(w, z) = λimax(w, z) + γimin(w, z)

(16)

The values of λi and γi in (13) are selected to obtain the minimum root mean square error (RMSE) of the proposed method applied to the decoder output LLRs. This has been achieved using a brute force approach, that is, testing all the values of the four parameters to optimize in a determinate quantized range and looking for the ones that minimize the RMSE. To illustrate this, Fig. 4 shows the normalized mean square error of the proposed approximation when only 2 parameters are optimized (λ, γ ). The same process is followed to obtain the optimum values in the case of 4 parameters to be optimized.
The simulations show that the optimum values are λ0 = 0.7, γi = 0.3, λ1 = 0.9, and γi = 0.4. However, in order to further reduce the hardware complexity, these values have been rounded to the nearest power of 2 so the hardware implementation consists of bits shifts instead of multiplications. As result of this constraint, the chosen values are finally λ0 = 0.5, γ0 = 0.25, λ1 = 1, and γ1 = 0.5. As it will be shown in next section, these values lead to a negligible impact on the system performance. A block diagram of the proposed solution can be seen in Fig. 5.
Note that the simplification proposed is only used when looking for the minimums that appear in (11), once the

TABLE III TOTAL AMOUNT OF OPERATIONS TO PERFORM IN THE DETECTION
PROCESS APPLYING THE PROPOSED METHOD FOR EACH RECEIVED SYMBOL
two minimums required are found two exact distances are calculated to avoid any error on their values.
In Section II, the number of multiplications and additions for the exact distance calculation were presented, for comparison purpose the same analysis for our proposed method is shown in Table III. Comparing both tables it can be seen that the number of complex multiplications, which belong to the unchanged HS product, remains the same. The number of additions or subtractions have slightly increased due to the comparators of our proposed simplification (comparisons can be seen as subtractions where the sign indicates which value is higher). Note however that the number of real multiplications have been drastically reduced, having a big impact in the hardware complexity as we will see in Section VII.
VI. SIMULATION RESULTS The impact of the proposed method on the system performance has been analyzed via bit error rate (BER) curves at the output of the LDPC decoder of a DVB-NGH system. In order to obtain these results, the DVB-T2 Common Simulation Platform (CSP) [11], which is a simulation model developed and verified by the DVB-T2 technical module, has been taken as basis. Since DVB-T2 [10] does not include MIMO, the CSP has been modified leading to the transmitter shown in Fig. 6, where two transmission paths are represented from the MIMO block, depicting the case of 2 transmitter antennas. All the interleavers are allocated after the MIMO processing, so that every data path benefits of the protection that these blocks offer against error bursts in the time and frequency domain. Apart from these structural changes, more robust coding rates than the ones defined for DVB-T2 are introduced for LDPC codes as 3/15, 4/15, 5/15 and 6/15. This system model has been used to evaluate the different MIMO proposals presented

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:34:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

88

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, MARCH 2015

Fig. 8. Results for 4/15 code rate.

Fig. 6. DVB-NGH model transmitter block diagram.

Fig. 9. Results for 5/15 code rate.

Fig. 7. Results for 3/15 code rate.
as response to the call for technologies of DVB-NGH, and its results [12]–[14] were crosschecked with top level companies during the standardization group meetings.
In order to evaluate the performance of the proposed method, the channel model used during the DVB-NGH standardization process and obtained after a measurement campaign held in Helsinki [15] was chosen. This model represents a characteristic mobile outdoor channel by using an 8 taps propagation scheme, furthermore effects as polarization rotation and power asymmetry between polarizations are added. The variation range of Doppler frequencies is set between 33.3 Hz and 194.8 Hz (corresponding to speeds of 60 and 350 km/h for the carrier frequency of 600 MHz). This channel model is supposed to be representative in the UHF frequency band (from 500 to 1000 MHz approximately).

All the simulations presented in this paper have been obtained for a LDPC block size of 16200 bits (16 k), code rates form 3/15 to 11/15, and a Doppler frequency of 33.3 Hz. The eSM configuration has been set to 0dB PI and 16-QAM+16-QAM (nbpcu = 8) input modulations.
The performance of the aforementioned scheme is characterized by means of BER curves versus carrier to noise ratio (C/N) after the LDPC decoder at the receiver side. The proposed method is compared to the Max-log approximation. It can be followed from Figs. 7–15 that the performance loss due to the use of the proposed method is almost negligible, being under 0.1 dB in every code rate. Similar results have been obtained for nbpcu = 10 and nbpcu = 6.
VII. DISCUSSION ABOUT THE COMPLEXITY REDUCTION
As shown in Section V the number of multiplications to perform when using the proposed method is lower than when using the exact calculation. In order to compare the number of total operations required with both the exact and the proposed method, the additions, subtractions, and comparisons will be taken as additions and complex products will be taken as 3 real multiplications, and 5 additions following the Gauss’s complex multiplication algorithm [16]. As a consequence of these assumptions follows Table IV. In the case of nbpcu = 10 it can be seen a 25% reduction in the amount of multiplications at

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:34:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PEREZ-CALDERON et al.: SIMPLIFIED DETECTION FOR DVB-NGH MIMO DECODERS

89

Fig. 10. Results for 6/15 code rate.

Fig. 13. Results for 9/15 code rate.

Fig. 11. Results for 7/15 code rate.

Fig. 14. Results for 10/15 code rate.

Fig. 12. Results for 8/15 code rate.
the cost of an increment of a 10% in the number of required additions.
To compute the hardware complexity reduction obtained by the use of the proposed technique, a very fair comparison method has been followed. The proposed cell (see Fig. 5) has been modeled with Verilog-HDL and synthesized using a 180 nm technology. This process has been carried out for the exact calculation of the distance in (12) and the approximation presented in Section V. The input data of the cell is

Fig. 15. Results for 11/15 code rate.
quantized using 10 bits that, as stated in [17], is a reasonable value to perform the decoding process. The resulting area for each method has been compared with the area required for a NAND gate in the used technology to obtain the equivalent gate count of each design. Table V summarizes the results obtained.
From Table V it can be seen that the method presented in this paper can achieve a complexity reduction of almost an

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:34:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

90

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON BROADCASTING, VOL. 61, NO. 1, MARCH 2015

TABLE IV OVERALL OPERATION REDUCTION
TABLE V EQUIVALENT GATE ACCOUNT
80% in the distance computation needed for the LLRs and, as it was shown in Section VI, with almost no performance loss.
Note that this equivalent gate count is only for one distance calculation block. As stated earlier, for a 16-QAM+16-QAM eSM scheme, the decoder requires computing 256 distances. Depending on the receiver system clock and the decoder architecture, several distance computation blocks could be required in parallel so the area saving may be quite high.
VIII. CONCLUSION In this paper a MIMO decoder simplification method has been presented. The proposed method introduces a negligible performance loss in the system (under 0.1 dB in every studied case). It reduces the demapper hardware implementation complexity greatly, reaching an 80% area reduction in the distance calculation needed for the LLRs computation when compared to the hardware implementation of the ideal Euclidean distance. Finally, the proposed method decreases a 25% the overall number of multiplications needed at the detection process.
REFERENCES
[1] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Next Generation Broadcasting System to Handheld, Physical Layer Specification (DVB-NGH), Draft ETSI Standard EN 303 105 V1.1.1, 2012.
[2] J. Winters, “On the capacity of radio communication systems with diversity in a Rayleigh fading environment,” IEEE J. Sel. Areas Commun., vol. 5, no. 5, pp. 871–878, Jun. 1987.
[3] G. J. Foschini and M. J. Gans, “On limits of wireless communications in a fading environment when using multiple antennas,” Wireless Pers. Commun., vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 311–335, 1998.
[4] I. E. Telatar, “Capacity of multi-antenna Gaussian channels,” AT&T Bell Lab., Murray Hill, NJ, USA, Tech. Rep. BL0 112 170-950 615-07TM, 1995.
[5] R. G. Gallagher, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. IT-8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[6] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The renaissance of Gallagers lowdensity parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Mag., vol. 41, no. 8, pp. 126–131, Aug. 2003.
[7] W.-S. Ko, “LG response to NGH CfT,” DVB Technical Module SubGroup on Next Generation Handheld, Tech. Rep. TM-NGH076r1, 2010.
[8] M. Petrov, “PRDCG MP LOS components,” DVB Technical Module Sub-Group on Next Generation Handheld, Tech. Rep. TM-NGH652, 2012.
[9] R. G. Lyons, Understanding Digital Signal Processing. Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA: Prentice Hall, 2001, pp. 400–406.
[10] Digital Video Broadcasting (DVB); Frame structure, Channel Coding and Modulation for a Second Generation Digital Terrestrial Television Broadcasting System (DVB-T2), ETSI Standard EN 302 755 V.1.3.1, 2012.
[11] O. Haffenden, “The common simulation platform,” BBC White Paper, BBC Research White Paper 196, 2011.

[12] D. P.-C. Rodrguez, “AICIA SFNs power imbalance,” DVB Technical Module Sub-Group on Next Generation Handheld, Tech. Rep. TM-NGH419, 2009.
[13] D. P.-C. Rodriguez and V. B. Lecuyer, “AICIA NGH 1.5 channel model results,” DVB Technical Module Sub-Group on Next Generation Handheld, Tech. Rep. TM-NGH656, 2011.
[14] D. P.-C. Rodriguez and V. B. Lecuyer, “AICIA NGH 2 channel model corner cases,” DVB Technical Module Sub-Group on Next Generation Handheld, Tech. Rep. TM-NGH817, 2011.
[15] M. Petrov et al., “DVB-NGH Helsinki2 channel models 1v5,” DVB Technical Module Sub-Group on Next Generation Handheld, Tech. Rep. TM-NGH063r5, 2010.
[16] D. E. Knuth, The Art of Computer Programming Volume 2: Seminumerical Algorithms. Reading, U.K.: Addison-Wesley, 1988, pp. 519–706.
[17] M. Baldi, F. Chiaraluce, and G. Cancellieri, “Finite-precision analysis of demappers and decoders for LDPC-coded M-QAM systems,” IEEE Trans. Broadcast., vol. 55, no. 2, pp. 239–250, Jun. 2009.
Dario Perez-Calderon was born in Jerez de la Frontera, Spain. He received the telecommunication engineering degree from the University of Seville, Seville, Spain, in 2009. Since 2008, he has been with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Escuela Superior de Ingenieros, University of Seville. His current research interest is mainly in OFDM systems and diversity techniques for communication systems, especially the ones applied in DVB standards.
Vicente Baena-Lecuyer was born in Athis-Mons, France. He received the telecommunication engineering and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Seville, Seville, Spain, in 1997 and 2001, respectively. Since 1997, he has been with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Escuela Superior de Ingenieros, University of Seville. His current research interest is mainly in OFDM systems, especially in DVB systems.
Jorge Chavez was born in Seville, Spain. He received the master’s and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Seville, Seville, Spain, in 1992 and 1996, respectively. Since 1992, he has been with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Escuela Superior de Ingenieros, University of Seville. His current research interests include analogue and digital signal processing, communication systems, and broadband communications systems design, including power line communications and DVB standards.
Ana Cinta Oria was born in Huelva, Spain. She received the master’s and Ph.D. degrees in telecommunication engineering from the University of Seville, Seville, Spain, in 2005 and 2010, respectively. Since 2005, she has been with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Escuela Superior de Ingenieros, University of Seville. Her current research interest is in OFDM systems, especially in DVB systems.
Jose Garcia Doblado was born in Huelva, Spain. He received the telecommunication engineering and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Seville, Seville, Spain, in 2008 and 2013, respectively. Since 2006, he has been with the Department of Electronic Engineering, Escuela Superior de Ingenieros, University of Seville. His current research interest is mainly in digital signal processing, especially digital video broadcasting.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:34:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

