2015 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications, Invited Position Papers
Soft Decision Decoding of RAID Stripe for Higher Endurance of Flash Memory Based Solid State Drives

Ravi Motwani and Chong Ong Non-Volatile Systems Group Intel Corporation Santa Clara, California, USA
Email: ravi.h.motwani@intel.com

Abstract—RAID schemes have been in use for hard disk drives to provide improved performance or fault tolerance. RAID schemes, particularly RAID 2 and higher comprise of striping and adding parity. For solid state drives (SSDs), to combat die failures, schemes like RAID 5 and RAID 6 are effective. The idea is to have block level striping with distributed parity to provide data recovery in case of single or multiple die failures. In this work, we analyze the RAID 5 case used in SSDs when there is no die failure. For this case, the distributed parity information can be used to either combat higher raw bit error rate (RBER) or to improve the uncorrectable bit error rate (UBER).

is performed to recover the codeword in the failed die.

The algorithm we propose can be used with BCH or LDPC codes. With LDPC codes, it uses soft information on RAID 5 parity in order to recover from multiple error correcting code (ECC) fatals in a RAID stripe. The entire stripe data is read and then decoding is performed using the RAID parity to try recovery. We used simulations in order to characterize the RBER gains. First, modeling of the RBER distribution of the dies was performed using the log-normal distribution. Using this model, a performance evaluation for ECC schemes like LDPC codes and BCH codes was performed. We show that if LDPC codes are used, RAID 5 theoretically offers an RBER capability which is 3 times that of the error correcting code RBER capability. However, it is not possible to realize this RBER benefit completely since it has SSD performance downside. In order to meet the Quality of Service (QoS) specification, a realizable RBER gain is by a factor of 1.3 to 2 instead of 3. Further, these gains can only be realized if an LDPC code is used as an error correcting code, algebraic codes like BCH codes will provide limited gains. If no RBER benefit is permitted by a particular configuration of solid state drive, this scheme can be used to provide UBER gain by 3 orders of magnitude.
I. INTRODUCTION
RAID-like schemes have been proposed for SSDs. These schemes offer protection from die failures. Can RAID-like schemes for SSDs provide more than just resilience to die failures? We propose a recovery scheme where, in the case of no die failure, the RAID redundancy can be used to recover from ECC fatals. This particularly leads to higher endurance of SSDs when LDPC codes are used as error correcting codes. To illustrate the concept, we consider RAID 5 scheme used in a solid state drive. One of the implementations of RAID 5 that we consider is that in which there is one codeword in each die in a stripe and the codeword in the last die of the stripe is the XOR of all the codewords in the stripe. The XOR which is also a valid codeword is stored in the last die to complete the stripe. In case of a single die failure, the entire stripe except the failed die is read and the codewords in the stripe are decoded. An XOR of the decoded codewords

Figure 1. RAID Scheme with no soft decision decoding.
In case of no die failure, we propose schemes which permit recovery from ECC fatals. Say, a codeword read from a die reports a fatal. For recovery of this codeword, all the codewords in the stripe can be read and the fatal codeword obtained as an XOR of the decoded codewords in the stripe. This scheme works if there is only one ECC fatal in a stripe as shown in figure 1. If more than one codewords in the stripe report fatals, this scheme does not work. However, if LDPC codes are used as ECC, a recovery of multiple fatal codewords in the same stripe is possible. Unlike BCH codes, LDPC codes never give a decode failure, they always produce an output, which may be a valid codeword or not. This information is used to create side channel information about the failing codeword. The output of an unsuccessful LDPC decode may not be a valid codeword, but it still has enough useful soft information. Consider than n dies in an SSD comprise a RAID system, the dies 1, 2, 3, . . . n − 1 store LDPC codewords and the n-th die stores the XOR of these n − 1 codewords. Assume that the codeword in die 1 is not a successful decode. Codewords from dies 2, 3, . . . n in the stripe are read and say there is unsuccessful decode of one or more codewords. As shown in figure 4, say die 4 decode is unsuccessful. This situation is unsolvable if BCH codes are used. With LDPC codes, dies 4 decode results in soft output. A

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

978-1-4799-6959-3/15/$31.00 ©2015 IEEE

603

2015 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications, Invited Position Papers

soft information combining scheme can be used to generate soft information about the codeword in die 1 from the soft information of the codeword in die 4 and the successfully decoded codewords from dies 2, 3, 5, . . . n. Various flavors in which information can be combined from the decoding of the codewords in the stripe are considered in this work. The mathematical details of the algorithm are provided in Section 3. Simulation results using proper modeling of real NAND Flash memory dies RBER distributions are provided in Section 4. These results characterize the RBER and UBER gains which the proposed soft decision combining algorithm attains. The proposed algorithm attains RBER gains of factor of 3x as is validated by simulation results. However, due to QoS limitations, it is not practical to realize these gains in an SSD. Depending on the QoS restrictions, RBER gains between 2x to 1.3x can definitely be realized. We studied the statistics of the scenarios of multiple fatals and combined it with the performance requirements. For some systems, the performance limitations may not permit realization of any RBER gain. For these cases, the current algorithm can be used to realize a UBER improvement of more than 3 orders at virtually no QoS impact.
In the next section, we provide an overview of RAID storage systems. Note that the RAID concept applied to SSDs is in a different context than the way it is applied to hard disk drives (HDDs). Since endurance of SSDs is our primary focus, we also provide background information on Flash memory and the impact of program/erase (P/E) cycle on its performance.
II. RELEVANT BACKGROUND
In this section, we provide the relevant background for this paper. We first go over some literature on RAID schemes, and then provide background on NAND Flash memory and SSDs. Since soft bit reads from NAND Flash memory is used in the proposed algorithm, we provide relevant information on how this is accomplished for NAND Flash memory.
A. RAID Schemes
RAID schemes have been in use with HDDs in order to improve the system input/output (I/O) performance. The idea of aggregating together multiple disks in parallel to create a disk array to increase aggregate disk performance was discussed in [3]. Various forms of RAID schemes have been proposed, level 0 through 6 and level 10 being most popular. 2D-RAID based arrays have also been studied in literature [2]. Different schemes offer different read and write performance and have different array failure rates. In this paper, we focus on RAID level 5 scheme which was studied in detail in [1].
B. NAND Flash Memory and SSD Background
In the past 10 years, the density of NAND flash memory has grown exponentially, as the semiconductor process technology has scaled down to as low as 19 nm feature sizes. NAND flash memory is organized in pages, and these pages are organized in blocks. A page, typically 8 Kilo-Bytes (KB) in size, represents the smallest unit of data for reading and programming the flash memory. A block, typically 2 MegaBytes (MB) in size, represents the smallest unit of data for erasing the flash memory. One program of the block and its later erase is called as a program/erase cycle or P/E cycle

for short. In NAND Flash memory, the P/E operation causes deterioration of the oxide layer causing damage to the floatinggate transistor leading to a reduction in the endurance of the memory cell. With increasing P/E cycles, the memory cells gradually wear out as charge gets trapped in the interface and oxide layers of the floating-gate transistor. The charge trap increases the cell Vt distributions, causing the cell to become unreliable. The endurance of the NAND Flash memory is measured in terms of the P/E cycles.
NAND Flash memory is the only non-volatile memory used to make SSDs today. A large set of NAND Flash memory dies are stacked together into different channels. The read and write bandwidth requirements for SSDs is quite high and hence a parallel architecture becomes mandatory. NAND Flash memory dies from different channels can be simultaneously read and data from each read can be decoded to meet the high throughput requirements. Wear levelling algorithms are used to ensure that all the blocks are uniformly worn out. This will ensure that the RBER of the pages is mostly uniform, so that a single error correcting code (ECC) works uniformly for the SSD.
C. RAID Schemes Applied to SSDs
RAID level 5 used in SSDs is in a slightly different context than HDD arrays. When RAID architecture for HDDs is constructed, one or more extra hard disk drives are added and striping is performed to incorporate the parity distributed across HDDs. A RAID architecture in the SSD context comprises of incorporating extra Flash memory dies within an SSD and is not to be interpreted as comprising of a RAID system made up of SSDs. In this paper, the RAID 5 scheme considered has striping across 41 dies, where the 41-st die stores redundant information from the 40 dies. This schematic is shown in figure 2. A similar RAID level 5 scheme applied to SSDs was proposed in [4]. As shown in figure 2, encoded user data D1-D40 and parity D41 comprise stripe 0, encoded user data D42-D81 and parity D82 comprise stripe 1, and so on. The parity information D41 is constructed by a bitwise XOR of the bits from D1-D40. The encoded user data Di’s comprise of one or more codewords. The codes employed can be BCH or LDPC codes. An XOR of all the Di’s also comprises of valid codewords due to the linear property of the BCH and LDPC codes.
Figure 2. RAID 5 Scheme applied to a Solid State Drive.
In the event of die failure, say if die 1 fails, then encoded user data D1 is lost. D2-D41 have sufficient information to reconstruct D1 codewords. First, all the codewords in D2-D41 are decoded. If these all decode successfully, the D2-D41 are bitwise XOR-ed to reconstruct D1 codewords.
Consider the event of no die failure, as an example, consider that the encoded user data D1 reports an ECC

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
604

2015 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications, Invited Position Papers

decode failure. Similar to the die failure case, D2-D41 can be decoded and upon a successful decode of all codewords, the failed codeword in D1 can be reconstructed. But even if a single codeword in D2-D41 reports a decode failure, there is no straight-forward method for reconstruction of D1. If BCH codes are used, then there is no way that D1 can be reconstructed. However, if LDPC codes are used as ECC, then there are recovery methods. Note that unlike BCH decoding, LDPC decoding returns soft output even for unsuccessful decodes. This LDPC decoded output information for the failed codeword or the input soft information can still be used to attempt a D1 recovery. In the next section, we provide the details of this algorithm and quantify the upsides of this algorithm in Section 4. Since soft decision decoding is being considered, we provide details of how to generate soft information from NAND Flash memory in the next subsection.

D. Soft Bit Read from NAND Flash Memory

In figure 3, we show the voltage distributions of a singlelevel cell (SLC) NAND Flash memory. A hard read from this memory will comprise of applying a read reference voltage to the control gate of the floating gate transistor. Soft information about a bit can be obtained by applying different voltage levels to the control gate. Hence, depending on the voltage applied to the control gate, we effectively partition the voltage region (x-axis of figure 3) into disjoint regions and depending on the region the voltage of the cell is zeroed in, soft information is generated. If we apply 5 distinct voltages to the control gate, we partition the x-axis into 6 disjoint regions.

For infinite reads, the soft information with the read volt-

age value r is mapped to the log-likelihood-ratio (LLR). By

definition, the LLR as a function of the read level information

r is

LLR(r)

=

log

p(r|x p(r|x

= =

0) 1)

The above equation can be modified to consider integrals of the variable r depending on the bin which is sensed by the read operation. Hence, it is possible to get soft information by
reading multiple times with different reference voltages from
the NAND Flash memory.

41 dies. The algorithm works only if LDPC codes are used as ECC. Consider that there is no die failure, and the host requests encoded user data D1. Say this read leads to an ECC fatal, meaning that the soft-bit read of D1 leads to an output which does not satisfy the syndrome check.
The recovery mechanism in this case consists of reading the codewords D2-D41 and decoding each of these codewords. Consider that one or more of these decodes also lead to a decode failure, say D4 is an unsuccessful decode as shown in figure 4. The idea is to then use the soft information of the D4 and the successful decodes D2-D3 and D5-D41 to construct a side channel information about D1. This side channel information is called as the XOR information about D1. The relation between D2-D41 is that XOR of their error-free versions equals D1. Since D2-D3 and D5-D41 are decoded, they are error-free. However the soft information about D4 is noisy. Since D1 is an XOR of D2-D41, and soft information about D4 is available, the XOR operation that works on soft operands is performed.
Figure 4. RAID 5 Scheme with Soft Decision Decoding.

Figure 3. SLC NAND Flash memory with 5 reads.
III. SOFT DECISION DECODING OF RAID LEVEL 5 STRIPE
In this section, we propose the algorithm for soft decision decoding of RAID level 5 stripe. The case study is for the schematic shown in figure 2, where the stripe is defined across

Figure 5. Check-sum update to obtain XOR information on the fatal codeword.

Figure 5 shows the XOR represented in the check-sum form for one bit. D1i − D41i are the i-th bits of D1-D41. It is known that

D1i = D2i + D3i + . . . D41i

(1)

The soft information of D1i is obtained by implementing (1) using the soft information of bits D2i, D3i, . . . D41i. Since D2i, D3i, D5i − D41i are successful decodes, their reliabilities are infinite. The soft information generation of D1i using (1) is equivalent to the message passed by the check-node during conventional LDPC decoding. We know that the message passed by the check engine during LDPC decode is theoretically given by the box function operating pairwise on the input operands [5]. The box function can be approximated by the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
605

2015 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications, Invited Position Papers

min operation to obtain the magnitude of the soft information and the product of the signs of the operands gives the sign of the soft information [5].
Hence, the extrinsic or XOR information about D1i is given by
41
Ext(D1i) = ∏ sgn(LLR(Dji))|LLR((D4i)| j=2
Note that the extrinsic information obtained from the XOR is from a channel which is at a poor signal to noise ratio compared to the intrinsic information, since the bit errors for that channel are approximately the sum of the bit errors in the failed channels (In this case, the channel corresponding to D4).
The extrinsic information on D1 from the XOR channel is combined with the intrinsic LLR of D1 from the NAND Flash memory read. Since D1-D41 are all codewords stored in different dies, there is no correlation between them, hence the information combining consists of adding the information components in the log domain. This combining of the information is equivalent to the bit node update which takes place in traditional LDPC decoding. Since the XOR channel is at a poor signal to noise ratio compared to the intrinsic soft read of D1, a weighing of the extrinsic information is suggested. The LLR update of D1 bits is given by
LLR(D1i) = βLLR(D1i) + Ext(D1i),
where β is an appropriately chosen scale factor. The choice of β depends on the signal-to-noise (SNR) of the intrinsic information and the XOR channel. If the two channels have the same SNR, then β equals 1. In general, β should be set as the ratio of the SNR of the XOR channel and the intrinsic channel.
The updated LLRs on the bits of D1 can then be used to try the LDPC decode. This information generation and combining method is shown in figure 6.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

We modeled the RBER of the dies used in the SSD using the log-normal distribution described in detail in [6]. The critical mass of the dies are at an RBER around the median of the log-normal distribution. However, there are outliers which are at RBERs much higher and it is these dies whose codewords cause fatals in the stripe. For ECC, we considered an LDPC code of length 1KB with rate 0.9. Soft reads of the bits using 5 strobes was performed. The soft decision decoding performance of this code is shown in figure 7. If no soft decoding of RAID stripe is employed, and only XOR is performed on successful reads across the stripe, then the performance improves as shown in the plot labelled ‘LDPC RAID’. This would be the scheme depicted in figure 1. Say, the codeword failure probability is p. The probability of more than or two codeword failures in a stripe involving n codewords is given by

∑n
k=2

n k

pk(1 − p)n−k

The above would be the codeword failure probability for the ‘LDPC RAID’ scheme. This results in mostly a UBER improvement, as is evident in the ‘LDPC RAID’ plot, the RBER improvement is quite low due to the steep nature of the plot.

Figure 7. Simulation Results with Soft Decoding of the RAID 5 Stripe.

Figure 6. Soft XOR and information combining in the soft domain.
We applied this algorithm to an SSD built from NAND Flash memory dies. We first modeled the RBER distribution across the dies and then characterized the gains by using the proposed algorithm on soft decoding of the stripe. The next section provides details about the model used and the simulation results.

If we employ soft decoding of the RAID stripe, we see

more than 3x improvements in RBER. The main reason for

this improvement is that the soft decoding effectively gives

us two information components about D1, one intrinsic and

the other from the XOR channel. This effectively works like

having

a

rate

1 2

code.

However,

to

realize

the

RBER

gain,

the

soft decoding of RAID needs to be triggered quite frequently.

This is impractical since a full read of a stripe impairs the

QoS. A more practical approach would be to trigger the soft

decoding of the RAID at rates around 0.1%. This would

provide RBER gains of 1.3x to 2x depending on the SSD

configuration.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
606

2015 International Conference on Computing, Networking and Communications, Invited Position Papers
V. CONCLUSIONS An algorithm which performs soft decoding of RAID stripe was proposed. This algorithm is particularly suited when LDPC codes are used as ECC for NAND Flash memory SSDs. When multiple ECC fatal occurs in a stripe, a soft read of the stripe needs to be done. The soft information provides side channel information about the fatal codeword. The side channel information and the intrinsic information can be combined to enhance the soft information about the fatal codeword. Taking RAID 5 as an example, the RBER gains of the algorithm were characterized. It was shown that potentially 3x RBER gains are possible. However, due to trigger rate limitations of this scheme, practical gains of 1.3x-2x can be realized.
REFERENCES
[1] P. M. Chen and E. K. Lee, “Striping in a RAID Level 5 Disk Array,” Proc. SIGMETRICS 95, pp. 136–145, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, 1995.
[2] Ji. Zhang, He. Bing, “2D-RAID-Based Array Self-adaptation Strategy,” IEEE ICITIS, 2010.
[3] David A. Patterson, G. Gibson and R.H. Katz, “A Case for Redundant Arrays of Inexpensive Disks (RAID),” International Conference on Management of Data (SIGMOD), pp. 109–116, June 1988.
[4] J. Kim, J. Lee, J. Choi, D. Lee and S.H. Noh, “Improving SSD Reliability with RAID via Elastic Striping and Anywhere Parity,” IEEE DSN 2013, pp. 1–12.
[5] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer and L. Papke, “Iterative Decoding of Binary Block and Convolutional Codes,” IEEE Tran. Information Theory, vol. 42, no. 2, pp. 429–445, March 1998.
[6] R. Motwani and C. Ong, “Design of LDPC coding schemes for exploitation of bit error rate diversity across dies in NAND flash memory,” IEEE ICNC, pp. 950–954, Feb. 2013.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:24:52 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.
607

