IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 15, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2015

363

Quality-of-Service Implications of Enhanced Program Algorithms for Charge-Trapping NAND in Future Solid-State Drives
Alessandro Grossi, Lorenzo Zuolo, Francesco Restuccia, Cristian Zambelli, Member, IEEE, and Piero Olivo

Abstract—Three-dimensional NAND memory devices based on charge trapping (CT) technology represent the most promising solution for hyperscaled solid-state drives (SSDs). However, the intrinsic low reliability offered by that storage medium leads to a high number of errors requiring an extensive use of complex error correction codes (ECCs) and advanced read algorithms such as read retry. This materializes in an overall reduction in the SSD’s QoS. In order to limit the error number, enhanced program algorithms that are able to improve the reliability figures of CT memory devices have been introduced. In this paper, the impact of such program algorithms combined with read retry and the ECC is experimentally characterized on CT-NAND arrays. The results are then exploited for cosimulations at the system level, assessing the reliability, performance, and QoS of future SSDs integrating CT-based memory devices.
Index Terms—CT-NAND, bit error rate, read retry, program algorithms, reliability, performance, quality of service, solid state drives.
I. INTRODUCTION
S SDs are now the most effective solution for fast mass storage systems in cloud services and high performance computing [1]. One main SSDs’ limitation is their reliability, which is dependent upon the non-volatile NAND memories used as the storage medium. This reliability progressively decreases because of their intrinsic wear-out [2]. A direct indication of this phenomenon is an increase in the Bit Error Rate (BER) in a NAND memory. The BER is the percentage of bits in error after a single read operation [2]. Such an increase translates into the inability to correct data after a number of Program/Erase operations (i.e., P/E cycles) or after long retention times.
To deal with increasing BERs, NAND vendors have introduced new read techniques, such as the Read Retry (RR) algorithms [3], bridging the gap between the internal memory algorithms and ECC: if, during a read operation, the number of errors in a page exceeds the ECC’s correction capability ECCth, the operation is repeated modifying read parameters with the aim of reducing the number of read errors. However, the joint use of sophisticated RR algorithms and advanced ECC correction engines such as BCH or Low Density Parity Check
Manuscript received April 29, 2015; accepted June 7, 2015. Date of publication June 22, 2015; date of current version September 1, 2015.
The authors are with Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Università degli Studi di Ferrara, 44122 Ferrara, Italy (e-mail: cristian.zambelli@unife.it).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TDMR.2015.2448108

(LDPC) deeply impact on the overall SSD performance since they reduce read bandwidth while increasing power consumption [4]. The overall metric considering latency, bandwidth, power consumption, endurance and retention is represented by the Quality of Service (QoS) [5].
The wide adoption of SSDs also in enterprise scenarios requires newly scaled NAND memories with higher storage densities, while complying to the same QoS requirements for the former storage medium generations. Moreover, since SSD’s form factors are limiting the space allocation for memory chips, there are new constraints on the development of the Printed Circuit Boards hosting the SSDs.
3D-NAND solutions are to be rapidly adopted in order to take into account all the previous considerations [6]. The 3D-NAND concept is based on the CT technology [7], [8], that is preferred with respect to the standard floating gate NAND Flash since the stored information depends on the amount of charge trapped into discrete traps present in a storage layer. In such a way the cells scalability is increased while reducing the coupling effects and the typical disturbances of a floating gate-based technology.
CT memories however, suffers for a relatively low reliability since part of the trapped charge constituting the storage information is located in shallow traps that can be rapidly emptied. Therefore, the charge measured in read operations, and hence the threshold voltage determining the logical stored information, may be different to the one determined during program [9]–[11]. This problem is further aggravated by the oxide degradation related to the physical mechanisms exploited to introduce or remove charge into/from the storage layer, thus resulting in a low number of P/E cycles (i.e., the endurance), a reduced retention time, and a high BER [9], [12], [13].
To overcome these reliability issues in future CT-based SSDs, a massive exploitation of RR algorithms and data correction by ECC engines would be mandatory, thus resulting in a degraded QoS. As a consequence, in order to make CT technology appealing in hyper-scaled SSDs, it is necessary to reduce memories’ BER and, consequently, the requests for ECC and RR intervention. Since the high BER in CT-NAND is mainly due to charge loss in shallow traps, the straightforward solution is to design program algorithms able to stabilize the trapped charge. The enhanced program algorithms presented in literature [11], [14] will result in a programming time increase compared to the standard program algorithms [15], but their advantages in terms of reliability and overall QoS are terrific.

1530-4388 © 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized liceSneseedhtutpse://lwimwitewd.ietoe:eY.oorngs/peui bUlniciva.tiDoonws_nslotaanddeadrdosn/pJuubnleic2a4ti,o2n0s2/6riagth1ts7/:i3n3d:e1x3.hUtmTCl ffroormmIoErEeEinXfoprlomreat.ioRne.strictions apply.

364

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 15, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2015

TABLE I MLC STANDARD NAND FLASH CODING

Fig. 1. MLC target distributions and LP, UP discrimination levels (V1, V2, V3).

In this work, by characterizing Multi-Level-Cells (MLC) CT-NAND arrays it was possible to understand the impact of different program algorithms in terms of performance and reliability at a single memory level. The results are then used in simulations using a dedicated SSD co-simulation environment [16] to assess the QoS implications in future SSD architectures integrating multiple CT-based memories.

Fig. 2. Read retry technique schematic: a) Threshold voltage shift induced by increased number of writing operations. Several cells may result in a threshold voltage higher than the reference read voltage VREAD, thus producing a read error. b) When the number of erroneous bits is too high to be corrected by ECC the read reference voltage is shifted.

II. READ OPERATIONS BACKGROUND

A. MLC Read Operation

In this paper we consider MLC architectures, where each Word-Line (WL) contains an upper page (storing the MSB) and a lower page (storing the LSB). By considering the standard MLC NAND Flash coding (see Table I), lower page (LP) is read by applying a read voltage V2, whereas upper page (UP) is read by applying a read voltage pair (V1, V3) as depicted in Fig. 1. Therefore, when reading a LP, an error occurs when a cell in L1 moves to L2 and vice versa. On the contrary, when reading an UP, two different errors are possible: a bit flip either between E and L1 or L2 and L3.

Fig. 3. Schematic representation of the CT cell tested in this work.

B. Read Retry Procedure
Among several optimized reading techniques, RR allows a dynamic adaptation of the read reference voltages: when BER > ECCth, the algorithm shifts upwards or downwards the read reference voltage and repeats the read operation until BER ≤ ECCth as sketched in Fig. 2. If after a maximum number of attempts BER is still higher than ECCth, the page is considered as failed, and therefore unrecoverable. Since any page have a different BER and since it is not known a priori whether an up-shift or a down-shift must be applied (the former required to deal with endurance effects [17], the latter to take

test vehicles manufactured in a sub-4X technology node. The memory cells feature a p-Si/SiO2/Si3N4/SiO2/Si3N4/Al2O3 stack overwhelmed by a high work function TaN/Ti/TaN metal gate (Fig. 3). Such a stack will likely be present also in 3DNAND architectures [7], [8], and therefore the issues retrieved on a traditional 2D technology are inherited by 3D architectures. The array architecture consists of a standard NAND array, whose pages organization is indicated in Fig. 4. The program and the read operations are performed page-wide. The erase operation is performed block-wide with a single voltage pulse featuring 19 V amplitude and 100 μs duration.

into account retention problems [17], [18]), it is not predictable

which solution provides the best results, eventually burdening B. Program Algorithms

on the read time predictability and on the reliability.

The standard Incremental Step Pulse Program (ISPP) [15]

III. EXPERIMENTAL BER MEASUREMENT

algorithm and the enhanced one to reduce the charge loss suffered by CT-NAND, hereafter denoted as Recovery (REC)

A. Experimental Setup

[14], [17], are depicted in Fig. 5. MLC paradigm has been performed by defining three target program distributions (L1, L2,

The different programming techniques for CT-based memo- and L3). Program operation has been performed by applying

ries have been experimentally tested on 4Mbits 2D CT-NAND the Full-sequence paradigm [19]: after every program pulse a

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GROSSI et al.: QoS IMPLICATIONS OF PROGRAM ALGORITHMS FOR CT-NAND IN SSDs

365

Fig. 4. Single block of the 4 Mbits CT-NAND array considered in this work.

Fig. 6. Illustration of trapped charge distribution during ISPP (a) and REC (b) program algorithms and charge loss mechanisms after writing.

Fig. 5. Schematic of ISPP (a) and REC (b) algorithms.

read-verify operation has been performed in order to check the

cells state and to stop the algorithm execution when the target

distribution is reached. ISPP algorithm has been performed by

increasing the pulse voltage from 12 V up to 18.5 V (depending

on the target level) with 0.25 V steps and 10 μs duration

[Fig. 5(a)], with a maximum programming time of 1.23 ms for

L3 distribution. REC has been performed by increasing the pulse voltage
from 12 V up to 19 V with 0.25 V steps and 10 μs duration and

Fig. 7. REC VT distributions after a Recovery algorithm at P/E = 1, 2 k, 10 k.

by applying a soft erase pulse after every program pulse with a constant voltage of −10 V and 100 μs duration [Fig. 5(b)], with a maximum programming time of 6.97 ms for L3 distribution. These values have been chosen to minimize the disturbs and other unwanted phenomenon due to the soft-erase operation applied on all the cells within a common block [20].

traps with a high de-trapping probability even at low electric fields [Fig. 6(b)]. The soft programming pulses applied during REC are able to remove charge from shallow traps before verify operations occur. Therefore, the target voltage threshold mainly depends on charge stabilized in deep traps [14].

In program operation, electrons cross the equivalent oxide barrier and are randomly captured by deep and shallow traps

C. BER Results

of the nitride storage layer [21]. In cells programmed by ISPP, Fig. 7 shows VT distributions shifts and broadening at difelectrons in shallow traps are easily de-trapped during storage ferent endurance cycles when REC algorithm is performed.

period, thus charge loss is observed [Fig. 6(a)] [11]. On the con- Results are even worse for the ISPP algorithm. As it can

trary, REC is able to stabilize the stored charge during program- be seen, the most dangerous effect is due to L1 distribution

ming, by reducing the presence of electrons trapped in shallow crossing the V2 read reference voltage. For this reason, in

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

366

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 15, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 8. ISPP programmed cells LP-BER vs. P/E cycle calculated without
(a) and with (b) RR procedure, respectively. ECCT H limit corresponding to 100 errors per read page is shown.

Fig. 10. Uncorrectable pages percentage calculated at different endurance cycles.

Fig. 9. REC programmed cells LP-BER vs. P/E cycle calculated without
(a) and with (b) RR procedure, respectively. ECCT H limit corresponding to 100 errors per read page is shown.

the rest of the paper we will consider LP errors as source of

reliability decrease, which represent the worst case without lack

of generality.

Fig. 11. SSD baseline architecture modeled by the simulator.

Fig. 8 shows the BER calculated on LP during endurance cy-

cles obtained with ISPP before (a) and after (b) RR application. Thanks to RR, a BER reduction can be observed. Nevertheless a rapid BER increase occurs after 6 k P/E cycles. Moreover, due to the edge wordline effects [22], all the cells on WL0 of a memory string show significantly higher BER compared to the average value, further increasing the average BER. Fig. 9 shows the BER calculated on LP during endurance cycles obtained with REC before (a) and after (b) RR application: in both cases

cells on WL0 pages. However, no significant advantages are obtained in this case. In fact, when ISPP with RR is considered, all the pages are shown to suddenly cross the ECCT H limit after 6 k P/E cycles, hence the failures are almost simultaneous. On the contrary, when REC with RR is considered, all pages’ BER is below ECCT H limit up to 20 k P/E cycles, hence there is no perceived impact.

the BER is reduced compared to ISPP and it is shown to be lower than 10−3 up to 20 k cycles thanks to RR procedure.

IV. IMPACT ON SYSTEM LEVEL

Fig. 10 shows the percentages of uncorrectable pages calculated In this section, the different programming algorithms

during cycling for both ISPP and REC algorithms: a page has performance/reliability figures obtained through the character-

been considered uncorrectable by the ECC when more than ization of the CT-NAND arrays are evaluated from a SSD-

100 errors are detected on the page (BER > ECCT H ) and all QoS perspective. This task has been performed exploiting a RR attempts have been applied. Although RR procedure allows co-simulation framework able to extract performance and la-

improving ISPP performances, all pages become uncorrectable tency of a target disk architecture as a function of memory

after 5 k cycles. The usage of REC program algorithm com- wearout, while allowing detailed reliability analysis [16], [23],

bined with RR procedure, on the contrary, allows keeping null [24]. Fig. 11 shows the baseline architecture modeled by the

the percentage of uncorrectable pages up to 20 k cycles. As simulator. As it can be seen it is composed by a proces-

a comparison, the same uncorrectable pages percentages have sor, a host interface, a DRAM buffer, a channel controller, a

been calculated not considering the contributions coming from multi-threaded BCH ECC engine [25] and a regular matrix of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GROSSI et al.: QoS IMPLICATIONS OF PROGRAM ALGORITHMS FOR CT-NAND IN SSDs

367

TABLE II ARCHITECTURE CONFIGURATIONS

Fig. 13. Sequential read throughput calculated at different endurance cycles.

Since the scope of this work is to show CT-NAND-based

SSDs’ exploitation in hyper-scaled systems, the following anal-

Fig. 12. 100 % sequential read throughput calculated at different endurance cycles with different architecture configurations for ISPP and REC, respectively.

ysis will be focused on enterprise-class SSD’s, hence only configuration A will be considered further on. This configuration meets the high density requirements provided by 3D memories

exploiting CT technology that is leading to use these solutions

non-volatile memory targets. Different CT-NAND chips shar- for cold storage applications, in which data are written once

ing the same bus are defined as channels. Each single channel and read many times [31]. As a consequence, read-intensive

is connected in parallel on the same channel controller.

workload is the most expected use case for such memories,

In the following system level analysis both the ISPP and the whereas write-intensive workload represent a corner case.

REC algorithms embodying RR algorithms will be considered The 100% sequential read throughput performances obtained

since this represents a realistic study case used in all SSD with ISPP and REC algorithms are reported in Fig. 13: while

platforms [26], [27]. A QoS threshold value has been set for an with ISPP no more than 3 k P/E cycles are possible before QoS

enterprise scenario, in terms of host interface bandwidth. For a degradation, the endurance obtained with REC is improved by

standard interface like the PCI express Gen2 x8 [28] the limits a factor of 4, reaching almost 12 k P/E cycles. The experienced

corresponds to 4 GB/s which is further reduced to 1150 MB/s bandwidth degradation is due to the joint effect of the RR and

due to the host system I/O drivers overhead [29], [30].

ECC engines whose execution time increases with the number

In the simulated architectures a SSD is considered to miss of errors to be corrected. Moreover, by considering that WL0

the QoS target when the achieved bandwidth is below such pages usually show higher BER than others, if it is used a Flash

threshold. It is worth to point out that if the bandwidth achieved Translation Layer in the SSD that excludes those pages from

by the SSD is greater than the target QoS, any performance programming, REC throughput can get a further endurance

fluctuation introduced by the programming algorithm, the ECC, boost of ≈500 P/E cycles. On the contrary, when ISPP is

and the RR are not exposed to the end user, since the perceived considered, no relevant advantages are obtained in terms of

overall SSD bandwidth is the one imposed by the QoS limit. bandwidth by using this approach, because of the too high

Program algorithm’s QoS implications have been investi- bit error density. Finally, in the case of a 100% random read

gated on multiple SSD configurations exploiting different num- workload, results obtained perfectly matched those achieved

ber of channels and targets (see Table II). The results of the with the 100% sequential read workload. This phenomenon

simulations on different SSD architectures, performed by using is due to the high parallelism offered by the simulated SSD

a 100% sequential read workload after a program operation at architectures, which is able to sustain the output bandwidth

different endurance cycles using either the ISPP or the REC, even when random operations are issued. To this extent, random

are shown in Fig. 12. As it can be seen, only the configuration results are not shown in the paper.

A is able to satisfy enterprise QoS requirements for a defined The usage of enhanced program algorithms like the REC

number of P/E cycles that varies by using one of the two in SSD architectures carries the drawback of an increased

programming algorithms. When considering SSD architectures program time. To this extent, in order to understand if a longer

using the ISPP algorithm, in all cases a sudden performance program time could impact the perceived SSD’s bandwidth,

drop is experienced after 3 k P/E cycles because of the too high two mixed traffic scenarios have been considered: 75% write

bit error density. Configurations A, B, and C show a faster QoS and 25% read, 75% read and 25% write (both using 4 kB

degradation around 3 k P/E cycles with respect to D and E. interleaved random read and write operations) [32]. The latter

This effect is due to the high number of flash targets saturating is the one closer to the scenario that are targeted in this paper.

the channel bandwidth, hence masking the initial performance SSD throughput results are shown in Fig. 14. Even if in write-

drop. A similar behavior is observed for SSDs using the REC intensive conditions ISPP shows a slightly higher throughput

algorithm, although a larger number of P/E cycles can be compared to REC, both algorithms do not satisfy the QoS

experienced before performance degradation.

enterprise requirements. REC allows satisfying enterprise QoS

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

368

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON DEVICE AND MATERIALS RELIABILITY, VOL. 15, NO. 3, SEPTEMBER 2015

Fig. 14. Random mixed traffic throughput calculated at different endurance cycles.
requirements up to 12 k P/E cycles if read-intensive or 100% read conditions are considered. Bandwidths obtained with mixed scenarios involving more than 25% write operations cross the QoS limit for both ISPP and REC algorithms. However, it is worth pointing out that such workloads represent a worst-case corner for hyper-scaled SSDs which are foreseen in cold storage scenarios.
V. CONCLUSION
In this work the results obtained through CT-NAND test vehicles characterization have been used to investigate the program algorithm implications in terms of SSD’s QoS. Thanks to a paved charge loss reduction, an enhanced program algorithm is shown to increase the overall memory reliability of the memory compared to the standard programming algorithm. The endurance gain in different SSD architectures for enterprise environments is quantified by a factor four. As a consequence, the advantages in terms of SSD’s QoS are demonstrated to be outstanding for cold storage scenarios.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Micheloni, A. Marelli, and K. Eshghi, Eds., Inside Solid State Drives (SSDs). London, U.K.: Springer-Verlag, 2012.
[2] N. Mielke et al., “Bit error rate in NAND flash memories,” in Proc. IEEE IRPS, Apr. 2008, pp. 9–19.
[3] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distribution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, and modeling,” in Proc. DATE, Mar. 2013, pp. 1285–1290.
[4] K. Zhao et al., “LDPC-in-SSD: Making advanced error correction codes work effectively in solid state drives,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. FAST, 2013, pp. 243–256.
[5] Intel SSD Data Center S3700 Series Quality of Service, Intel, Santa Clara, CA, USA, Jun. 2013. [Online]. Available: http://www.intel.com/ content/www/us/en/solid-state-drives/ssd-dc-s3700-quality-servicetech-brief.html
[6] B. Prince, Ed., Vertical 3D Memory Technologies. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2014.
[7] J.-W. Im et al., “A 128Gb 3b/cell V-NAND flash memory with 1 Gb/s I/O rate,” in Proc. IEEE ISSCC, Feb. 2015, pp. 1–3.
[8] A. Nitayama and H. Aochi, “Bit cost scalable (BiCS) flash technology for future ultra high density storage devices,” in Proc. Int. Symp. VLSI-TSA, Apr. 2010, pp. 130–131.
[9] H. Park et al., “Charge loss in TANOS devices caused by Vt sensing measurements during retention,” in Proc. IEEE IMW, May 2010, pp. 1–2.
[10] W. Tsai et al., “Data retention behavior of a SONOS type two-bit storage flash memory cell,” in Proc. IEDM Tech. Dig., Dec. 2001, pp. 32.6.1–32.6.4.

[11] C.-P. Chen et al., “Study of fast initial charge loss and it’s impact on the programmed states VT distribution of charge-trapping NAND Flash,” in Proc. IEEE IEDM, Dec. 2010, pp. 5.6.1–5.6.4.
[12] G. Ghidini et al., “Cycling Degradation in TANOS stack,” Microelectron. Eng., vol. 86, no. 7–9, pp. 1822–1825, Jul./Sep. 2009.
[13] H. Park et al., “Tunnel oxide degradation in TANOS devices and its origin,” in Proc. Int. Symp. VLSI-TSA, Apr. 2010, pp. 50–51.
[14] C. C. Yeh et al., “Novel operation schemes to improve device reliability in a localized trapping storage SONOS-type flash memory,” in Proc. IEDM Tech. Dig., Dec. 2003, pp. 7.5.1–7.5.4.
[15] K.-D. Suh et al., “A 3.3 V 32 Mb NAND flash memory with incremental step pulse programming scheme,” in Proc. IEEE ISSCC, Feb. 1995, pp. 128–129.
[16] L. Zuolo et al., “SSDExplorer: A virtual platform for fine-grained design space exploration of solid state drives,” in Proc. DATE, Mar. 2014, pp. 1–6.
[17] A. Grossi, C. Zambelli, and P. Olivo, “Bit error rate analysis in charge trapping memories for SSD applications,” in Proc. IEEE IRPS, Jun. 2014, pp. MY.7.1–MY.7.5.
[18] S. Amoroso et al., “Reliability constraints for TANOS memories due to alumina trapping and leakage,” in Proc. IEEE IRPS, May 2010, pp. 966–969.
[19] L. Crippa and R. Micheloni, “MLC storage,” in Inside NAND Flash Memories. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Springer-Verlag, 2010, pp. 261–298.
[20] C. Zambelli and P. Olivo, “Statistical investigation of anomalous fast erase dynamics in charge trapping nand flash,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 514–516, Apr. 2013.
[21] A. Padovani, L. Larcher, D. Heh, and G. Bersuker, “Modeling TANOS memory program transients to investigate charge-trapping dynamics,” IEEE Electron Device Lett., vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 882–884, Aug. 2009.
[22] C. Zambelli, A. Chimenton, and P. Olivo, “Analysis of edge wordline disturb in multimegabit charge trapping flash NAND arrays,” in Proc. IEEE IRPS, Apr. 2011, pp. MY.4.1–MY.4.5.
[23] L. Zuolo, C. Zambelli, R. Micheloni, D. Bertozzi, and P. Olivo, “Analysis of reliability/performance trade-off in solid state drives,” in Proc. IEEE IRPS, Jun. 2014, pp. 4B.3.1–4B.3.5.
[24] L. Zuolo et al., “SSDExplorer: A virtual platform for performance/ reliability-oriented fine-grained design space exploration of solid state drives,” in IEEE Trans. Comput.-Aided Design Integr. Circuits Syst., to be published.
[25] Y. Lee, H. Yoo, I. Yoo, and I.-C. Park, “6.4 Gb/s multi-threaded BCH encoder and decoder for multi-channel SSD controllers,” in Proc. IEEE ISSCC, Feb. 2012, pp. 426–428.
[26] R. Frickey, “Data integrity on 20 nm SSDs,” presented at the Flash Memory Summit, Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2012.
[27] J. Yang, Silicon Motion, “High-efficiency SSD for reliable data storage systems,” presented at the Flash Memory Summit, Santa Clara, CA, USA, 2011.
[28] PCIe Base 2.1 Specification, PCI-SIG, Beaverton, OR, USA, 2005. [Online]. Available: https://www.pcisig.com/specifications/pciexpress/ base2
[29] D. Cobb and A. Huffman, “NVM express and the PCI express SSD revolution,” presented at the Intel Developer Forum, San Francisco, CA, USA, 2012. [Online]. Available: http://www.nvmexpress.org/wp-content/ uploads/2013/04/IDF- 2012- NVM- Express- and- the- PCI- Express- SSDRevolution.pdf
[30] “Flexible I/O Tester,” [Online]. Available: http://freecode.com/projects/fio [31] C. Sun, A. Soga, T. Onagi, K. Johguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “A workload-
aware-design of 3D-NAND flash memory for enterprise SSDs,” in Proc. ISQED, Mar. 2014, pp. 554–561. [32] Solid-State Drive (SSD) Endurance Workloads, Std. JESD219, 2010.
Alessandro Grossi received the M.Sc. degree in electronic and telecommunications engineering from Universitá degli Studi di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, in 2013 and is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in engineering science with Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Universitá degli Studi di Ferrara.
His main research interests include the characterization, physics, and modeling of emerging nonvolatile memory devices.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

GROSSI et al.: QoS IMPLICATIONS OF PROGRAM ALGORITHMS FOR CT-NAND IN SSDs
Lorenzo Zuolo received the Laurea Magistrale degree (M.Sc.) in technology for telecommunications and electronic engineering from Universitá degli Studi di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, in 2012, and is currently pursuing the Ph.D. degree in engineering from, Universitá degli Studi di Ferrara.
His main research interests include the architectural/physical simulation of solid-state disks and emerging nonvolatile memory devices.
Francesco Restuccia received the B.Sc. degree in information engineering from Università degli Studi di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, in 2014 where he is currently working toward the M.Sc. degree in electronic and telecommunications engineering.

369
Cristian Zambelli (S’08–M’12) received the M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees (with honors) in electronic engineering from Università degli Studi di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy, in 2008 and 2012, respectively.
Since 2015, he has been an Assistant Professor with Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Università degli Studi di Ferrara. His main research interests include the characterization, physics, and modeling of the reliability of nonvolatile memory devices, and algorithmic solutions for the reliability–performance tradeoff exploitation in solid-state drives.
Piero Olivo received the M.Sc. degree in electronic engineering and the Ph.D. degree from the University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy, in 1980 and 1987, respectively.
Since 1994, he has been a Full Professor of Electronics with Dipartimento di Ingegneria, Università degli Studi di Ferrara, Ferrara, Italy. His scientific activity concerns the theoretical and experimental aspects of microelectronics, with an emphasis on the physics, reliability, and characterization of electron devices and nonvolatile memory devices.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:13 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

