56

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Design of a High-Throughput QC-LDPC Decoder With TDMP Scheduling
Ming Zhao, Xiaolin Zhang, Ling Zhao, and Chen Lee

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes with turbodecoding message-passing (TDMP) scheduling can obtain good performance and high convergence rates. In addition, the min– sum (MS) algorithm can reduce the complexity. The hybrid normalized MS algorithm with TDMP scheduling is presented to achieve good performance and to lower the complexity. For a quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) code with a long code length, parallel degree optimization and an offset iterative sequence rule are proposed. With the proposed techniques, the data correlation problem and memory access conflicts during TDMP scheduling can be resolved so that the iteration can smoothly proceed through the reasonable division of each block row. Fabricated in the 90-nm 1-Poly 9-Metal (1P9M) CMOS process, a multimode 96 000-bit irregular QC-LDPC decoder is implemented. It attains throughputs of 1.7–3.0 Gb/s and dissipates an average power of 502 mW at an operation frequency of 100 MHz and at 10 iterations. The decoder chip area is 13.32 mm2, with a core area of 9.73 mm2.
Index Terms—Decoder architecture, iterative sequence, min– sum (MS) algorithm, parallel degree, quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check (QC-LDPC) decoder, turbo-decoding messagepassing (TDMP) scheduling.
I. INTRODUCTION AND SUMMARY
T HE LOW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) code can achieve excellent performance close to the Shannon limit [1], [2], and it has a low complexity and the potential of parallel decoding [3]. To reduce the encoding complexity, the corresponding parity-check matrix needs to have a special structure, such as a dual or quasi-dual diagonal structure [4]. In addition, a quasi-cyclic LDPC (QC-LDPC) code, which is formed with a group of cyclic submatrices, can reduce the computational complexity [3], [4].
The main decoding method for an LDPC code is the belief propagation (BP) algorithm. The message-passing schedules used in the BP algorithm are flooding scheduling [2], i.e., two-phase message-passing (TPMP), and layered BP (LBP) scheduling, i.e., turbo-decoding message passing (TDMP) [3]. The convergence rate with the TDMP is nearly twice of that with the TPMP. The architectures of QC-LDPC decoders have fully parallel [5], [6] and partially parallel structures [7], [8].
Manuscript received May 27, 2014; revised July 22, 2014; accepted September 24, 2014. Date of publication October 13, 2014; date of current version January 1, 2015. This work was supported in part by the application of the China National Terrestrial Digital TV System Research (The Second Generation) Project. This brief was recommended by Associate Editor Z. Zhang.
The authors are with the School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, China (e-mail: mysr002@126.com; zxl@buaa.edu.cn; zhaoling@ee.buaa.edu.cn; lichen_813@vip.126.com).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this brief are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSII.2014.2362661

To reduce the complexity, Fossorier et al. proposed the min–sum (MS) algorithm [9]. The MS algorithm and its improved algorithms were used in many LDPC decoders [8], [10]. The hybrid normalized MS (HNMS) algorithm based on TDMP scheduling with 8-bit quantization is presented in this brief to simplify the implementation and obtain good performance.
To improve the speed of a decoder with TDMP scheduling, the overlapping operation of a key calculation unit was proposed in [11], and it can fully overlap the variable node updating (VNU) and check node updating (CNU) phases in some optimal cases. However, the decoder [12] completely overlapped the CNU and VNU phases using the sparsity of the parity-check matrices.
The reordering of the base matrix was presented in [8] to obtain the overlapped operation. The decoder [12] used the reordering of the base matrix to scan two nonzero block submatrices. A multistandard LDPC decoder with a shuffled decoding method and a variable node group-partitioning algorithm was proposed in [13]. The decoder [14] proposed to resolve the message updating conflicts by using a block-serial decoding method.
For long-code-length QC-LDPC codes, we propose two main design techniques: 1) the optimization of the iterative parallel degree and 2) an offset iterative sequence rule. In the decoding process with TDMP scheduling, although there is computation latency in the actual iteration, the data correlation and memory access conflicts can be still resolved with the proposed techniques without the complicated reordering of the base matrix. Moreover, the proposed methods can reduce the clock cycles of the iteration.
The proposed decoder is compatible with QC-LDPC codes with different rates, and the decoder has high throughputs while reducing the chip area and the power consumption.
This brief is organized as follows. Section II describes the HNMS algorithm based on TDMP scheduling. Section III proposes the optimization of the iterative parallel degree and the offset iterative sequence rule. The decoder architecture is shown in Section IV. Section V discusses the implementation results. The final results are concluded in Section VI.
II. HNMS DECODING FOR QC-LDPC CODE
Each submatrix in the parity-check matrix of a QC-LDPC code is either an all-zero matrix or a cyclic shift identity matrix. Here, M represents the number of block rows in the paritycheck matrix, N is the number of block columns, and b is the expansion factor of the sub-matrix.
The convergence rate of TDMP scheduling is faster than that of TPMP scheduling [4]. However, for high-speed decoding, it is required to solve the parallel problems of the TDMP [15].
Let the M b × N b rank matrix H be the parity-check matrix of an LDPC code; the variable node set of the Tanner graph for

1549-7747 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licensSeedeuhstetpli:m//witewdwto.i:eYeeo.nosregi/pUunbivli.cDatoiwonnslo_asdtaenddoanrdJsu/pnueb2li4c,a2t0io2n6sa/rti1g7h:t2s/0i:n1d9eUx.ThCtmfrlofmorImEEoEreXinpfloorrem. aRtieosnt.rictions apply.

ZHAO et al.: DESIGN OF A HIGH-THROUGHPUT QC-LDPC DECODER WITH TDMP SCHEDULING

57

Fig. 1. BER performance curves with different algorithms for QC-LDPC Fig. 2. Average number of iterations curves with different decoding algo-

codes with code rates 1/2, 2/3, and 3/4.

rithms for QC-LDPC codes with rates 1/2, 2/3, and 3/4.

H is vn(n = 1, 2, . . . , N b), the check node set is cm(m = 1, 2, . . . , M b), code word c = [v1, v2, . . . , vNb] is sent as x = [x1, x2, . . . , xNb] through an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, the received signal is

yi = xi + ni (i = 1, 2, . . . , N b)

(1)

where ni is the Gaussian random noise with a mean of 0 and a

variance of σ2, ni ∼ (0, σ2), and they are independent of each

other. The signal to noise ratio (SNR) is denoted as Eb/N0,

where Eb stands for the energy of the per-bit symbol before

encoding, and σ2 = N0/2.

First, we define the following notations: N (m) = {vn : Hmn =

1}: all variable nodes in cm; N (m) \ n : N (m) removing

variable node vn; M (n) = {cm : Hmn = 1}: all check nodes

that contain vn; M (n) \ m : M (n) removing check node cm;

Qnm: message sent from vn to cm; Rmn: message sent from

cm to vn; Qn: posterior probability message of variable node

vn; Ψ(x) = ln[tanh(|x/2|)] = ln[(e|x| − 1)/(e|x| + 1)]; and

⎛

⎞

Rm nenw = −Ψ⎝

Ψ (|Qn m|)⎠×

sign(Qn m).

n ∈N (m)\n

n ∈N (m)\n

(2)

The MS algorithm eliminates the lookup table operation and just uses some simple comparison, addition, and other operations. However, the direct use of the MS algorithm will result in severe performance degradation [10]. To obtain better decoding performance, the HNMS algorithm based on TDMP scheduling is presented, and (2) can be reduced to

Rm nenw

=

−
n

min
∈N (m)\n

(|Qn

m|)×

sign(Qn m). (3)

n ∈N (m)\n

Here, Rm nenw is normalized in the HNMS algorithm. The specific steps of the HNMS algorithm for LDPC decoding are
shown in Algorithm 1.

Implement the updating in order by m: For each variable node n of the m-th row in H, the formula for its internal message is

Qnm = Qn − Rmn.

(4)

Compute the messages Rm nenw with (3). Update the posterior probabilities in the current
row as follows:

Qnnew = Qnm + γRm nenw,

0.5 < γ < 1.

(5)

3 Decision trial: If the stopping rule is not satisfied, then Go back to position 2 End if

Considering the complexity and the performance, the decoder uses 8 bits to quantize the logarithmic likelihood ratios, including a 1-bit sign, a 4-bit integer, and a 3-bit fraction.
The QC-LDPC codes with code lengths of 648 in the IEEE 802.11n [16] are extended to mode (96 000, 1/2), factor γ = 0.625 = (1 1) + (1 3); mode (96 000, 2/3), γ = 0.5625 = (1 1) + (1 4); and mode (96 000, 3/4), γ = 0.625 = (1 1) + (1 3). The factors are obtained from the γ versus bit error ratio (BER) curves under different SNRs with the partition values of γ in (5). For hardware implementation, the accumulation of powers of two is used. The BER and average number of iterations curves with the codes under the AWGN channel are shown in Figs. 1 and 2, respectively. Expansion factor b = 4000. The maximum iterations are 20.
Figs. 1 and 2 show that the proposed decoding algorithm has good performance. When the SNR is high, the proposed algorithm obtains better performance and a higher convergence rate than the TPMP and TDMP strategies
III. DESIGN OF ITERATIVE PARALLEL DEGREE AND OFFSET ITERATIVE SEQUENCE RULE

Algorithm 1 HNMS algorithm for LDPC decoding

A. Design and Selection of Iterative Parallel Degree

1 Initialization: Rmn = 0. 2 Iteration:

To avoid temporarily restoring the messages in one check row, in the iteration, it is required to scan and update the messages of all variable nodes in this check row simultaneously.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

58

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

Fig. 3. Division of the common and individual areas.

Fig. 5. (a) Iterative sequence of the first block row in the first iteration. Fig. 4. Diagram for the characteristics of nonzero submatrices A1 and B1, (b) Iterative sequence of other block rows. and A2 and B2 in two adjacent block rows.

computation latency in the actual iteration. Thus, it will result

The expansion factors of the submatrices for the used QCLDPC codes are large; thus, we propose to split one block row into some subblock rows and carry out the iterations for the divided check rows to avoid the data correlation and memory access conflicts.
Assume that the iteration delays dL clock cycles, and there are same block columns in many two adjacent block rows; thus, at least two subblock rows should be updated before the next block row participates into the iteration. Therefore, the designed parallel degree for the iteration cannot exceed (b/(dL + 2)). Meanwhile, to reduce the required clock cycles for the iteration, the parallel degree also cannot be too small.

in memory access conflicts. Similarly, the iteration cannot proceed in full accordance
with the reverse order in the common area (iterative order 2). Otherwise, since the last several rows q(B2) in the common area of B2 coincidentally share some identical variable nodes with the last several rows q(A2) in the individual area of A2, it will also result in memory access conflicts.
To enable the iteration to be smooth with TDMP scheduling, the offset iterative sequence rule is proposed.
Offset iterative sequence rule: In the first iteration, the computation of the first block row can accord with the order in the common area, i.e., the starting point of the iteration Sp_next = 0. Whereas in the other iterative process, Sp_next should be the starting point of the iteration for the previous

B. Offset Iterative Sequence Rule
All the nonzero submatrices in the parity-check matrix are cyclic shift identity matrices. Thus, we can split the nonzero submatrices in each block row up into common and individual areas, and the division is shown in Fig. 3.
Fig. 3 shows that the expansion factor of the submatrices is large and that the maximum offset of the nonzero submatrices is relatively small; thus, each block row has a large common area.

block row plus the maximum offset of the nonzero submatrices

Fmax, i.e.,

⎧ ⎨⎪

0,

Sp_next = ⎪⎩ Sp_next+Fmax, Sp_next+Fmax −b,

the first block row
in the first iteration (Sp_next+Fmax +1) ≤ b others
(6)

where the starting point of the iteration for the first block row

To fulfill the iteration with TDMP scheduling, priority should be given to the update for the rows in the common area, and then, the rows in the individual area can join in the iteration.
The rows in the common area should be processed first, but the iteration cannot proceed in full accordance with the order in the parity-check matrix. For instance, nonzero submatrices A1 and B1, and A2 and B2 in two adjacent block rows are located in the same two block columns, as shown in Fig. 4.

in the next iteration should be that for the last block row when the present iterative cycle ends, plus Fmax with (6).
Thus, the proposed iterative sequence is shown in Fig. 5. In Fig. 5(a), block row 0 satisfies iterative order 0 and Sp_next = 0. In Fig. 5(b), block row (i + 1) satisfies iterative order (i + 1) and the starting point of the iteration Sp_next_i1 if block row i satisfies iterative order i and the starting point of the iteration Sp_next_i.

Fig. 4 indicates that, if the rows are proceeded according to Fig. 5 shows that the starting point of the iteration can just

the fixed format of the parity-check matrix (iterative order 1), avoid the shared but not finished updating variable nodes. In

then the iteration for p(B1) will not work until the iteration finishes the computation and update of the shared variable nodes since the first several rows p(B1) in the common area of B1 coincidentally share some identical variable nodes with the last several rows p(A1) in the individual area of A1 and there is

addition, when the iteration goes to these variable nodes, the updating of identical variable nodes in the previous block row has been completed. Thus, the iteration can proceed smoothly.
Meanwhile, the considered case for the iterative sequence is irrelevant to the specific iteration time. The timing diagram of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHAO et al.: DESIGN OF A HIGH-THROUGHPUT QC-LDPC DECODER WITH TDMP SCHEDULING

59

Fig. 6. Timing diagram of the iterations for different block rows.

the iterations for different block rows is shown in Fig. 6, where t0 is the starting time of the iteration for some block row i, and b0 is the iterative parallel degree of the divided submatrices.
Since there is computation latency in the actual iteration, before the next block row enters into the iteration, there are only (dL − 1) parity-check row groups with the depth of b0 in the present block row that have not yet obtained the final results. Fig. 6 demonstrates that, through the rational division for the submatrices and choosing for b0, during [t0, t0 + jb/b0 − 1], j = 1, 2, . . ., it is feasible to sequentially compute the paritycheck row groups with the depth of b0 using the pipeline method.
There is the same block column in two adjacent block rows, but the maximum offset of the submatrices is small; thus, through the rational iterative parallel degree and the offset iterative sequence, the iteration can use the updated values in the previous block row. Thus, the iteration can avoid the data correlation and memory access conflicts without the reordering of the base matrix.
Meanwhile, Fig. 6 indicates that, in an iterative process, the computation latency will be converted to the group delay of all the iterations when the whole operation ends. Consequently, the proposed rule can reduce the required clock cycles for the iteration, further improving the throughput of the decoder.
IV. OPTIMUM-STORAGE OFFSET GROUPED ARCHITECTURE FOR QC-LDPC DECODER

Fig. 7. Block diagram of the proposed decoder architecture.
can start. Then, according to the indexes of the divided paritycheck rows, the posterior probability messages and external messages of the corresponding variable nodes are read from VNS RAMs and EMC RAMs, respectively. Then, based on the cycle shift offsets of the nonzero submatrices in the block row, the read posterior probability messages are reformed with the interleaver, and the internal messages set with the depth of b0 are calculated.
Based on the HNMS algorithm, the calculated internal messages Qnm are fed into the CNU processors to obtain Rm nenw, and the updated Qnnew of the variable nodes are obtained with the adder while updating the corresponding message components in the EMC RAMs (MAG_R/POS/SIGN) with the acquired Rm nenw. Then, it updates the Qn of the corresponding variable nodes in the VNS RAMs.
Finally, according to the results of the parity checker, it updates the decisions in the VND RAMs and decides whether to continue the iteration. When the stopping rule is satisfied, the decisions will be exported to Out_Buffer with the decision output module.

The QC-LDPC decoder with an optimum-storage offset grouped architecture is proposed in Fig. 7. The decoder is made

V. IMPLEMENTATION RESULTS

up of a central controller, a bypass and cross module, register files, adders, an interleaver, a deinterleaver, CNU processors, a parity checker, and I/O modules.
In Fig. 7, read-only memories (ROMs) store the base matri-

The proposed QC-LDPC decoder is fabricated in the 90-nm 1-Poly 9-Metal (1P9M) CMOS process, which can perform three kinds of code modes, i.e., mode (96000, 1/2), mode (96000, 2/3), and mode (96000, 3/4). There are totally 545 I/O pins, with 459

ces of the QC-LDPC codes, In_Buffer caches the initial poste- signal pins and 86 power/ground pins, and 100 memory macros in

rior probability messages of the variable nodes, and Out_Buffer the implementation. All the memories of the same type are

caches the final decision values. Variable node sum (VNS) placed in the array format. To optimize the clock skew, the

random-access memories (RAMs) and variable node decision (VND) RAMs store the posterior probability messages and decision results of the variable nodes, respectively, and the external message component (EMC) RAMs (MAG_R/POS/SIGN) store the external message components corresponding to “1” in each row, i.e., min_1st, min_2nd, the position of min_1st,

clock network delay, the setup time, and the hold time, large
numbers of special cells are inserted into the design. Therefore,
the final chip utilization ratio after detail routing is about
85%. The maximum IR drop is about 56 mV (less than 5% of the working voltage). The chip area is 3.65 × 3.65 mm2, and the core area is 3.12 × 3.12 mm2. It has about 80% of

and the signs of all output values, where MAG_R represents the utilization of the chip. The extracted postlayout netlist has

min_1st and min_2nd. The CNU processors are the updating modules with the HNMS algorithm. The width of the input and the output follows the parallel degree.
First, the posterior probability messages of the variable nodes are read from In_Buffer to the VNS RAMs until the iteration

passed the functional verification and static timing analysis. The measured peak frequency for the proposed decoder is
100 MHz. The source voltages for the I/O and the core are 2.1 and 1.0 V, respectively. The working voltages are measured between the power pin and the ground pin of the chip. For

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

60

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—II: EXPRESS BRIEFS, VOL. 62, NO. 1, JANUARY 2015

TABLE I COMPARISON OF QC-LDPC DECODERS

all the QC-LDPC codes, the power consumed by the I/O is less those applications with high throughputs and long-code-length

than 20 mW. With the 8-bit quantization, the proposed decoder QC-LDPC decoder requirements.

needs 2 459 712-bit block memories, 184 318-bit logic register files, and 378 929 equivalent logic gates. The type of used block memories is dual-port RAM so that the iteration can be fulfilled through a pipeline operation.
Table I lists the comparison results among the different LDPC decoders for different systems. The power and power efficiency of the proposed decoder are the simulation results of the postlayout netlist.
The used QC-LDPC codes have long code lengths; thus, the proposed QC-LDPC decoder has relatively minimal decoding latency, and each iteration round only requires ≈ (240–480) clock cycles. Thus, when working in the case of 100 MHz and 10 iterations, it can nearly attain high throughputs of 1.7–3.0 Gb/s.
To simplify the comparison, the power efficiency of each decoder has been scaled up or down to the 90-nm process with a scaling factor of 2 or 0.5 for the 65-nm or 130-nm process, respectively. The scaled power efficiency of the designed decoder is higher than other decoders (17 pJ/bit/iteration). In particular, when compared with the decoder in [7], the proposed decoder has a relatively smaller chip area (13.32 mm2). Similar to the other decoder, the work frequency and the maximum iteration number can be adjusted to satisfy the throughput requirements of different systems.
VI. CONCLUSION
The HNMS algorithm with TDMP scheduling for QC-LDPC decoding is presented. The proposed algorithm can achieve good performance and a high convergence rate. The parallel degree optimization and the offset iterative sequence rule are proposed. Although there is computation latency in the actual iteration, the calculation with TDMP scheduling can be smoothly carried out using the proposed techniques without the complex reordering of the base matrix. An architecture with the proposed methods for the QC-LDPC decoder with a long code length is also proposed. The designed decoder can obtain high throughputs and can be power efficient compared with previously published works. Hence, our proposal is suitable for

REFERENCES
[1] D. J. C. Mackay and R.M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 6, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[2] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[3] M. M. Mansour, “A Turbo-decoding message-passing algorithm for sparse parity-check matrix codes,” IEEE Trans. Signal Process., vol. 54, no. 11, pp. 4376–4392, Nov. 2006.
[4] S. Myung, K. Yang, and J. Kim, “Quasi-cyclic LDPC codes for fast encoding,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 51, no. 8, pp. 2894–2901, Aug. 2005.
[5] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “A 690-mW l-Gb/s 1024-b rate-1/2 low-density parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[6] Z. Zhang, V. Anantharam, and M. J. Wainwright, “An efficient 10GBASET Ethernet LDPC decoder design with low error floors,” IEEE J. SolidState Circuits, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 843–855, Apr. 2010.
[7] P. Urard, E. Yeo, and L. Paumier, “A 135M/s DVB-S2 compliant codec based on 64800b LDPC and BCH codes,” Proc. IEEE ISSC, vol. 1, pp. 446–609, Feb. 2005.
[8] X.-Y. Shih, C.-Z. Zhan, C.-H. Lin, and A.-Y. Wu, “An 8.29 mm2 52mW multi-mode LDPC decoder design for mobile WiMAX system in 0.13 μm CMOS process,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 43, no. 3, pp. 672–683, Mar. 2008.
[9] M. P. C. Fossorier, M. Mihaljevic, and H. Imai, “Reduced complexity iterative decoding of low density parity check codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 673–680, May 1999.
[10] J. Chen and M.P.C. Fossorier, “Near optimum universal belief propagation based decoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, no. 3, pp. 406–414, Mar. 2002.
[11] Y. Chen and K. K. Parhi, “Overlapped message passing for quasi-cyclic low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 1106–1113, Jun. 2004.
[12] B. Xiang, D. Bao, S. Huang, and X. Zeng, “An 847–955 Mb/s 342– 397 mW dual-path fully-overlapped QC-LDPC decoder for WiMAX system in 0.13 μm CMOS,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 1416–1432, Jun. 2011.
[13] Y. L. Ueng, B. J. Yang, and C-J. Yang, “An efficient multi-standard LDPC decoder design using hardware-friendly shuffled decoding,” IEEE Trans. Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 60, no. 3, pp. 743–756, Mar. 2013.
[14] Y. Sun and J. R. Cavallaro, “VLSI architecture for layered decoding of QC-LDPC codes with high circulant weight,” IEEE Trans. VLSI Syst., vol. 21, no. 10, pp. 1960–1964, Oct. 2013.
[15] J. Zhang and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Shuffled iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 209–213, Feb. 2005.
[16] IEEE Standard for Information technology–Local and metropolitan area networks–Specific requirements–Part 11: Wireless LAN Medium Access Control (MAC) and Physical Layer (PHY) Specifications Amendment 5: Enhancements for Higher Throughput, IEEE P802.11n/2009, Oct. 29, 2009.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:20:19 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

