844

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Design Methodology for Highly Reliable, High Performance ReRAM and 3-Bit/Cell MLC NAND
Flash Solid-State Storage
Shuhei Tanakamaru, Member, IEEE, Hiroki Yamazawa, Student Member, IEEE, Tsukasa Tokutomi, Sheyang Ning, Student Member, IEEE, and Ken Takeuchi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper proposes design methodology for highly

reliable, high performance ReRAM and 3-bit/cell multi-level cell

(MLC) NAND flash solid-state storage. Six techniques, calibrated

(CR), flexible

(FR), adaptive asymmetric coding

(AAC), verify trials reduction (VTR), bits/cell optimization (BCO),

and balanced RAID-5/6 are proposed. CR, FR, AAC, and VTR

are for ReRAM. CR and FR change the read-reference resistance

to reduce the BER. AAC first increases the population

of Set and then Reset. The BER reduction with FR and AAC is

69 and 78% with 60 and 75% asymmetry, respectively. In VTR,

by changing the number of acceptable bit-errors, the total Reset

time is reduced by 97% at maximum with small ECC calculation

overhead. The reliability of 3-bit/cell MLC NAND flash memory

is improved by BCO and balanced RAID-5/6. BCO reallocates

3-bit/cell MLC to 2-bit/cell MLC and single-level cell (SLC)

and the write/erase cycle increases by over 22-times. Balanced

RAID-5/6 evenly allocates upper/middle/lower pages to a stripe to

reduce the RAID failure rate by 98%.

Index Terms—NAND flash memory, performance, reliability, ReRAM, storage, 3-bit/cell multi-level cell.

I. INTRODUCTION
S OLID-STATE storage (SSS) with NAND flash memories achieves high performance with small form factor. To further boost the performance, storage-class memories (SCMs) are paired with NAND flash memories (hybrid SSS) [1]. SCMs are expected to have both the cost and performance in between DRAMs and NAND flash memories with non-volatility. Resistive random-access memory (ReRAM) is one of the candidates as SCM because high capacity (16 Gb), high speed (200 MB/s write and 1 GB/s read) ReRAM is developed in 2014 [2]. [1] exploits the most-recently-used table. If a write is requested
Manuscript received June 09, 2014; revised October 14, 2014; accepted October 27, 2014. Date of publication December 08, 2014; date of current version February 23, 2015. This work was supported in part by CREST/JST. This paper was recommended by Associate Editor M. Seok.
S. Tanakamaru is with the Research and Development Initiative, Chuo University, Tokyo, 112-8551 Japan, and also with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 113-8656 Japan (e-mail: tanakamaru@takeuchi-lab.org).
H. Yamazawa, T. Tokutomi, and K. Takeuchi are with Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo 112-8551 Japan (e-mail: yamazawa@takeuchi-lab.org; tokutomi@takeuchi-lab.org; takeuchi@takeuchi-lab.org).
S. Ning is with Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Engineering, Chuo University, Tokyo, 112-8551 Japan, and also with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8656 Japan (e-mail: ning@takeuchi-lab.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCSI.2014.2370171

to a logical address that exists in the table, the data is consid-

ered as frequently written hot data and transferred to ReRAM.

Moreover, if the data size is smaller than the threshold, the data

is judged as fragmented random data and written to ReRAM.

Cold/sequential data are written to the NAND flash memory. [3]

analyzes the cost trade-offs with different applications. By set-

ting the cost ratio of NAND flash and SCM, the best capacity of

SCM is determined to achieve the required performance. How-

ever, ReRAM has reliability issues [4] which may limit its adop-

tion to the hybrid SSS. On the other hand, to reduce the cost of

the SSS, 3-bit/cell multi-level cell (MLC) NAND flash memo-

ries are preferred instead of 2-bit/cell MLC or single-level cell

(SLC, 1 bit/cell) [5]. However, 3-bit/cell MLC NAND flash

shows high bit-error rate (BER) due to the smaller memory

margin between each memory state than 2-bit/cell MLC [5].

Thus, extra reliability improvement is required for 3-bit/cell

MLC NAND flash.

Moreover, especially in the high-end data storage, data is pro-

tected by redundant arrays of independent disks (RAID) [6], [7],

in addition to error-correcting codes (ECCs). RAID is basically

an inter-disk data redundancy that can tolerate errors in some

disks, which is first developed for hard-disk drives (HDDs).

RAID concept can be extended as inter-page/block/chip redun-

dancy for NAND flash memories [8]–[10]. Among the various

types, RAID-5 or RAID-6 achieves high performance and reli-

ability with small storage overhead.

From the discussion above, ReRAM and 3-bit/cell NAND

flash with RAID-5/6 hybrid storage is considered to have high

performance with hybrid configuration [1] and low cost with

3-bit/cell NAND flash and RAID-5/6. However, the reliability

issues of both ReRAM and 3-bit/cell NAND flash are the bottle-

necks for realization. Note that the reliability issues also cause

performance problem because of the increase in the error-cor-

rection latency and verify trials. Therefore, the objective of this

paper is to develop techniques to solve the reliability/perfor-

mance issues of the hybrid SSS. Although the proposed tech-

niques are developed for the hybrid SSS, some of them can be

used in either hybrid, discrete ReRAM, or NAND flash memory

storage. Considering the cost of ReRAMs, the storage configu-

ration may be developed from NAND flash only (current) to

ReRAM/NAND flash hybrid (near future), and then to ReRAM

only (future) because the cost of ReRAM scales down when the

technology matures. Some of the proposed techniques are ap-

plicable to any of the configurations.

The proposed scheme in the storage controller enhances re-

liability and performance by six techniques. The first four ap-

proaches, i) calibrated

, ii) flexible

(FR) [11], iii)

1549-8328 © 2014 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. See http://www.ieee.org/publications_standards/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: DESIGN METHODOLOGY FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE, HIGH PERFORMANCE RERAM

845

adaptive asymmetric coding (AAC) [11], and iv) verify trials

reduction (VTR) [11] are applied to 50 nm ReRAM to improve

the bit-error rate (BER) by 69% and performance by 97%, v)

bits/cell optimization (BCO) [11], and vi) balanced RAID-5/6

[11] are applied to 2Xnm 3-bit/cell MLC NAND flash memory

to reduce the RAID failure rate by 98% and extend the lifetime Fig. 1. Schematic of ReRAM.

(write/erase cycles) by over 22 times, respectively. Similar con-

cepts are adopted in different memories; In NAND flash, read

reference voltage

is changed during write/erase cycling

[12] and asymmetric coding (AC) is used to reduce bit errors

[13]. However, this paper and [11] are the pioneering papers that

experimentally demonstrates the effectiveness of the proposals

with ReRAM. Moreover, the difference between the proposals

and the existing works are described in the following sections. Fig. 2. Pulse conditions of (a) verify Set and (b) verify Reset. This paper is organized as follows. Sections IIto V are for

ReRAM and Sections VI and VII are for 3-bit/cell MLC NAND

flash memory. In Section II, calibrated

(CR) and flex-

ible

(FR) are proposed. Then, adaptive asymmetric coding

(AAC) is introduced in Section III. All CR, FR, and AAC are

the techniques to decrease the BER. The co-optimization design

methodology of FR and AAC is also discussed. In Section IV,

verify trials reduction (VTR) is proposed to reduce the Set/Reset

times of ReRAM. Section V discusses the inconsistent behav-

iors of ReRAM observed in this paper and shows the measure-

ment results of ReRAM with other material

. Bits/cell

optimization (BCO) and balanced RAID-5/6 are proposed in Sections VI and VII, respectively. BCO and balanced RAID-5/6 Fig. 3. Measured ReRAM resistance during Set/Reset cycling.

can cooperate to improve the reliability. Finally, summary and conclusion are given in Section VIII.

pulse is applied. On the other hand, during Reset, 40 ns longer pulse with fixed 1.5 V height is applied from the source-line,

II. FLEXIBLE

starting from 500 ns width, when the cell resistance is lower

A. ReRAM Measurement Flow

than

.

Fig. 1 shows the schematic of ReRAM and Fig. 2 explains B. Calibrated

(CR)

the pulse conditions of verify Set/Reset programming (Note: The average and variance of measured Set/Reset resistances

Verify read condition cannot be disclosed.). The measurements during cycling are shown in Fig. 3. The bar of each data point

are based on a 50 nm,

prototype, in which verify pro- represents the variance of log-normal distribution out of 1 Kb

gramming is applied on write units of 1 Kb. The test flow con- data. When the resistance of a cell is over 10 , it is measured

sists of two major parts: i) Set/Reset endurance pulses are ap- as 10 due to the measurement system and thus the bars in

plied to stress the memory cells, and ii) verify Set/Reset pulses the Reset side may show relatively smaller results, which is not

are applied to measure the resistance of each cell

. i) the point of this paper. Since the bit-error remains, the verify

is a simplified flow from ii) without verify programming and loop counts are always 20 (max. value) except the Reset when

resistance read to accelerate the test time. The measurement the Set/Reset counts are 1 k and 2 k

. One

continues until the Set/Reset cycle reaches the pre-determined main observation is that the resistances of many of the Set and

value. In i) Set/Reset endurance flow, a single pulse is applied Reset bits are higher than the expected value:

for respective Set and Reset for times. in this paper are and

. To read data from the ReRAM cell,

1k(

to ), 10 k (

to ), 100 k (

to ), read-reference voltage

is introduced to judge if the cell

1M(

to ), and 10 M (

to ) for the total resistance is lower (“1”) or higher (“0”) than . On the other

46 measurement points. Then, to measure resistance character- hand, in the literature, the reliability of ReRAM is mainly evalu-

istics, ii) verify Set/Reset pulses are applied in total 46 mea- ated from the resistance of the memory cells. However, the BER

surement points after each set of Set/Reset cycles. After each should be analyzed for system-level perspective. As a baseline,

Set/Reset pulse, verify read checks that the resistances satisfy this paper assumes that

is same as the write threshold

the threshold levels

. The failed cells in levels ( and

) (default ). However, due to the

the write unit are subjected to increasingly stronger Set/Reset high Set/Reset resistance,

should be higher than the geo-

pulses (voltage-increase for Set, and pulse width-increase for metric mean of the Set/Reset write threshold levels (234 ).

Reset) [14] until the number of failed cells falls below the ac- Therefore, calibrated

(CR) is proposed to decrease BER.

ceptable error threshold

, or the maximum number of Fig. 4(a) shows the worst BER observed in the 46 measure-

verify trials (20) is reached. Note that the single pulses applied ment points (points in Fig. 3) during Set/Reset cycles versus

in the Set/Reset endurance flow are as same as the first pulses of

. Set or Reset error deteriorates the total BER when

the Set/Reset verify programming. The Set programming starts is too low or high, respectively. The worst BER is minimized

from 100 ns, 1.8 V pulse applied to the bit-line. If the resis- when

is 1.1 to 1.4 . To cover variations such as sense

tance of a cell is higher than

, 0.1 V higher amplifier mismatch, noise, etc., different

are used for Set

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

846

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

and Reset cells (

and

) which have 4.7-times

gap

. All of the

shown in this

paper are the geometric mean of

and

. Set

BER

and Reset BER

are independently measured by calculating the BER after Set

and Reset of full 1 Kb unit. Then, arithmetic mean of Set and

Reset BER is calculated as the overall BER to emulate the BER

of the random pattern. For example,

and

are 0.51 and 2.36 in CR [Fig. 4(b)], whereas the geo-

metric mean of

and

is 1.1 . Note that

and

are fixed and used during verify read opera-

tion, which are different from the . Fig. 4(b) compares the

BER of default

and CR. The worst BER is improved by

65% with CR. Flexible

(FR) in Fig. 4(b) is explained in

the following subsection.

The process-to-process or chip-to-chip variations may nega-

tively affect the BER improvement by CR. Therefore, the vari-

ation of the ReRAM should be extensively measured as a future

work. However, from Fig. 4(a), the BER is still low when the

is fluctuated. The BER difference is below 5% compared

with the optimum

when

is from 0.95 to1.6 .

In other words, if the optimum

changes from chip-to-chip,

etc., the BER may be still low enough.

Fig. 4. (a) Measured worst BER versus

. (b) Measured BER during Set/

Reset cycling with default

, CR, andFR.

Fig. 5. Optimum

and

of FR.

C. Flexible

(FR)

It can also be observed from Fig. 3 that the Set resistance vari-

ation increases during Set/Reset cycle, while Reset resistance

shows more complex behavior. This complicated behavior is

discussed in Section V. Fig. 5 depicts the optimum

to min-

imize the BER in each Set/Reset cycle and the proposed Flexible

(FR). Adopting a flexible 2-step scheme to track with

the increasing optimum

can further improve the BER. The

main point of FR is that the

is changed by the Set/Reset

cycles.

of the first and second steps are independently de-

Fig. 6. (a) Measured Set/Reset BER without FR. (b) BER with and without asymmetric coding (60 and 75% asymmetry).

termined to minimize the worst BER of each period as shown

III. ADAPTIVE ASYMMETRIC CODING (AAC)

in the upper part of Fig. 4(b). The improvement of the worst BER during the whole lifetime is almost the same (65%) as CR A. Asymmetric Coding for ReRAM

[Fig. 4(b)]. However, FR has a larger impact on reducing the Fig. 6(a) shows the Set and Reset BERs during Set/Reset

BER after cycles. The worst BER after cles is reduced by 44% from CR.

Set/Reset cy- cycle with the default average resistance of the Set state is close to

. Since the , the Set

Since the evaluation so far assumes the random pattern (the BER (“1” “0” error) is significantly higher than Reset BER

number of “1”s and “0”s are the same), CR and FR are effective (“0” “1” error). When the error characteristics of “1” and “0”

with randomization. Therefore, if randomization is adopted, the data have this kind of asymmetry, the asymmetric coding (AC)

reproducibility will become greater because the optimum

is effective to decrease the BER [13]. The AC can increase the

is not affected by the data pattern.

number of reliable (Reset) cells by bit-flipping the data. During

The overhead of using Set/Reset cycle information for FR AC, the input data is divided into -bit sections. To increase the

should be discussed. The number of Set/Reset cycles can be number of “1,” if the number of “1” in a section is equal to or

stored in the small DRAM or ReRAM itself. Since the latency of smaller than , then the section is bit-flipped and “1” flag is

DRAM is 10 ns, the performance penalty is negligibly small added. Otherwise the section is not flipped and “0” flag is added.

but special attention to the power failure not to lose the Set/Reset According to [13], in the random data, the population of “1” or

cycle information is required. On the other hand, if the infor- “0” can be increased to 60% and 75% when

and 2, and

mation is stored in ReRAM, the read access time of ReRAM is the memory overhead with the flag is 6.3 and 50%, respectively.

longer than that of DRAM and reading the Set/Reset cycle infor- The BER after AC

is represented as:

mation would be the potential performance problem. Using CR rather than FR can avoid the performance penalty because CR

(1)

does not require Set/Reset cycle information and can achieve the where , , and

are the probability of “1” or “0” after

similar worst BER reduction. Note that to use AAC and VTR AC, Set BER, and Reset BER, respectively. The dependence of

discussed in the following sections, Set/Reset cycle information the BER on the Set/Reset cycle with AC is shown in Fig. 6(b).

should be stored in either DRAM or ReRAM as well as FR, Due to the dominant Set error, the worst BER is decreased by

which requires the same overhead consideration.

20 and 49% by AC with 60 and 75% Reset cells, respectively.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: DESIGN METHODOLOGY FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE, HIGH PERFORMANCE RERAM

847

B. Adaptive Asymmetric Coding

When the AC is cooperated with FR, the conventional fixed AC becomes ineffective. Fig. 7(a) shows switching of the dominant error type with FR. Reset error dominates until around
cycles, after which, Set error is higher. Therefore, the proposed adaptive asymmetric coding (AAC) increases either Set or Reset population, depending on the dominant error mode. This is different from the conventional AC that only increases either Set or Reset cells.
The larger error asymmetry is preferable for efficient BER improvement with AC. However, FR tries to minimize the BER, regardless of the error asymmetry. For AAC, the BER is made intentionally asymmetric by the modified FR. Fig. 7(b) shows the error asymmetry for stand-alone FR (Section II-A) and modified FR for AAC. The error asymmetry is defined as,

Fig. 7. (a) Measured Set/Reset BER with FR. The change of the dominant error mode is observed. (b) Error asymmetry with stand-alone and optimized FR for AAC.

(2)

For AAC with 75% 1/0 asymmetry, FR proactively increases the

error asymmetry to 112 at maximum whereas the stand-alone

FR suppresses the asymmetry to 8.9. Considering that both FR

and AAC are applied, intentionally maximizing the error asym-

metry cannot minimize the total BER because the effect of FR

decreases. Therefore, parameters of both FR and AAC should

cooperate to minimize the BER.

Dependence of the BERs on Set/Reset cycle with stand-alone

FR, stand-alone FR + conventional AC, and AAC + FR for

AAC are shown in Fig. 8. Compared with the stand-alone FR

without AC, AC reduces the worst BER by 16%. When FR is

optimized for AAC, the worst BER is further reduced by 22%,

resulting in the total 35% BER improvement, compared with

stand-alone FR only method. AAC reduces the BER by 15 and

31%, compared with the stand-alone FR and conventional AC

(BER is even increased), respectively, after the Set error domi-

nates

. By combining FR and AAC with 60

and 75% asymmetry, the BER is reduced by 69 and 78%, re-

spectively, compared with the conventional scheme without FR

and AAC.

AAC is not the substitute of ECCs because AAC does not

eliminate all of the bit-errors. Therefore, AAC always accom-

panies ECCs. However, the total read latency (cell read and ECC

decoding) can be reduced by the continuous adaption to changes

of the dominant error type of AAC. According to [15], the de-

coding latency of BCH codes can be described as,

Fig. 8. BER with random pattern, conventional asymmetric coding, and proposed AAC with optimized FR.
Fig. 9. BER improvement with asymmetric coding versus error asymmetry.
C. Extension of AAC This subsection discusses the extension of AAC when
the BER improvement with AAC is substantially low (e.g., crossover region of the dominant error mode). The BER improvement can be derived from the 1/0 asymmetry ( : the imbalance of the number of 1 and 0 bits) and error asymmetry ( : the imbalance of the Set and Reset errors). The BER without AC is,
(4)

On the other hand, suppose the Reset BER is higher,

can

(3) be described as,

Here , , , , , and are the code length, the order of Ga-

(5)

lois-field, the number of correctable bits, the parallel factor, the folding factor, and the operation frequency. When , , and From (3), (4) and (5), the BER improvement is,

are set as 32, 12, 200 MHz as [15], and if the ECC can be simpli-

fied from 21 bit to 14 bit correction per 512 Byte ( 30% bit-er-

rors), the total read latency can be reduced by 16% (1.54

(6)

to 1.26 ). Note that the cell-read time is assumed to be 50 ns Fig. 9 illustrates the BER improvement versus error asym-

and the AAC calculation time is considered negligibly small due metry when the 1/0 asymmetry by AC is 60 and 75%.

to the extremely simple logic. Using low-density parity-check The other coding methods without relation with the error asym-

(LDPC) codes with the soft information (precise resistance in- metry can be applied to improve reliability, when the BER im-

formation) is the other direction but the total read latency will provement is relatively small (e.g., 10%) due to the low error

increase due to the increased number of sensing levels (for soft asymmetry. The redundant memory cells for AAC flags can be

information) and iterative decoding scheme.

reutilized as the parity bits for ECC or other codings.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

Fig. 11. Total Reset time with initial pulse width of 20, 100, and 500 ns.

Fig. 10. (a) Total Reset time versus with VTR.

. (b) Acceptable number of bit-errors

IV. VERIFY TRIALS REDUCTION (VTR)

A. Verify Trials Reduction (VTR)

Verify trials reduction (VTR) reduces Set/Reset times in

ReRAM. To extend endurance, low Reset voltages are main-

tained [1.5 V, as shown in Fig. 2(b)] and Reset pulse widths are

increased after every verify trial. As expected, the number of

bits that fail verify decreases as the verify trials increase. The

number of verify trials,

, can be reflected to the total

Reset time

as follows.

B. Discussion of Reset Pulse Width
Fig. 11 shows the total Reset time during Set/Reset cycle when is 20 with three different initial pulse width: 20, 100, and 500 ns. Counterintuitively, the total Reset time is shorter with the longer initial pulse width (500 ns) than with the shorter initial pulse width (20 ns). This is because uncorrectable bit errors remain even after 20 verify trials with 20 and 100 ns initial pulse programming in most of the lifetime, whereas the condition with the pulse starting from 500 ns only needs 1 verify trial. When the Reset pulse is too weak, extra oxygen vacancies are created during Set and the Reset resistance becomes low [18]. As a result, memory cells become difficult to be successfully Reset. The ReRAM behavior is further discussed in the next section. As a result, due to VTR, the initial pulse width is chosen to be 500 ns in this paper.

(7)

V. DISCUSSION

A. Behavior of ReRAM

is the verify read time, which is assumed to be 50 ns. The Set and Reset resistances during Set/Reset cycling shown

Conventionally, Reset completes when all of the write unit's se- in Fig. 3 show complex behavior. Set resistance shows increase

lected cells reach the resistance threshold,

, or the number in average and variation of the resistance while Reset resistance

of verify trials reaches the maximum value. Irregular cells can have both decreasing and increasing trends. The change of the

cause unacceptably long

Reset times. One approach cell resistance is explained in [18]. The general characteristic

to reduce Reset time or eliminate verify programming is to im- is mentioned to be the decrease in the Reset resistance (Reset

plement strong ECC to correct all of the irregular or unsuc- failure) during the Set/Reset cycling. During the cycling, defect

cessful bits [16]. As shown in measurements of Fig. 10(a), if like oxygen vacancies accumulate at or near the electrode-oxide

20 errors can be corrected by ECC

, then only a interface, filament, and the oxide matrix. The oxygen vacancies

single Reset verify trial is needed throughout the lifetime of the make the switching layer metal rich and therefore the resistance

ReRAM chip. This is a 97% improvement of the Reset time. decreases. According to [18], by applying a verify Reset oper-

However, although write time is reduced, this level of ECC ation, the oxygen is put back to the switching layer, resulting

impacts negatively on read power and read time

. in the recovered high Reset resistance. On the other hand, there

The smallest

to realize one verify-trial Reset shown in is also the increase in the Set resistance because the interfacial

Fig. 10(b) drastically changes during Set/Reset cycling; when oxide layer between the electrode and the oxide may be formed.

the Set/Reset cycle is around 10 k to 1 M, the required

is In addition to the single device analyses, the measurement of the

large (20) because the memory cells become difficult to Reset. array reports the up and down of the average Set/Reset resis-

In the proposed VTR, whose strategy is illustrated in Fig. 10(b), tance (1 Kb array) [19] and Set Resistance (256 Kb array) [20].

is dynamically adjusted based on the Set/Reset cycle to re- The measured Reset resistance behavior in Fig. 3 is analyzed

duce ECC calculation time and power with one Reset verify trial in Fig. 12, based on the knowledge in [18]. Two effects are

(97% Reset time reduction compared with 20 verify trials).

mixed: device wear-out effect and strong reset effect. Due to the

The peak ECC power consumption and the gate count are device wearing, extra oxygen vacancy is generated and thus the

not reduced because both fixed ECC strength scheme and VTR resistance decreases. On the other hand, strong Reset pulse with

should cover the same worst number of bit-errors. However, the 500 ns duration is applied to the ReRAM and the device wearing

total energy consumption during the whole chip lifetime of the is compensated by putting back oxygen to the switching layer.

ReRAM chip is reduced due to the simplified ECC. Suppose When the Reset resistance is decreasing, the device wear-out ef-

that the ECC power consumption is proportional to the decoding fect is larger than the strong reset effect and vice versa. The char-

latency, the power consumption can be reduced by 69% from acteristics of both Set/Reset asymmetry and the change of the

the worst (20 bit correction) to the best (3 bit correction). Note optimum

during Set/Reset cycling can also be explained

that this assumption does not consider the Set bit-errors for sim- from the temporal imbalance of the Set/Reset resistances. From

plicity. On the other hand, BCH encoder and decoder which has about to cycles, the Reset resistance is lower than the

the configurable error-correction capability is being researched other region, possibly due to the device wear-out with excessive

to reduce the hardware complexity [17].

oxygen vacancy. Since the Reset resistance is low and difficult

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: DESIGN METHODOLOGY FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE, HIGH PERFORMANCE RERAM

849

Fig. 12. Model of the complex Reset resistance behavior.

not common between the chips with other processes. However, the complicated trends can be understood from the physical perspective [18] and also are presented in other papers [19], [20]. Moreover, this paper reports similar characteristics with two different material configurations. Therefore, the proposed techniques are expected to be effective in the future mature ReRAMs. Furthermore, regardless of the physical origin of the device characteristics, FR, AAC, and VTR are effective to the memory devices, not limited to ReRAM, whenever the phenomena of changing resistance, error asymmetry, and decreasing BER with program pulses are found, respectively.

VI. BITS/CELL OPTIMIZATION (BCO)

A. Concept of Bits/Cell Optimization (BCO)

Fully utilizing 3-bit/cell MLC NAND flash memory is im-

Fig. 13. Measured read disturb after 10 k Set/Reset cycles.

portant for the cost effective storage. However, the acceptable write/erase cycle of the 3-bit/cell MLC NAND flash memory is

extremely small compared with 2-bit/cell MLC and SLC tech-

nologies due to the small margins. The proposed bits/cell

optimization (BCO) enhances the write/erase cycle of the 3-bit/

cell MLC NAND flash memory by re-allocating a worn 3-bit/

cell MLC as 2-bit/cell MLC or SLC. The idea of adjusting the

number of bits per cell itself was proposed in [21]. In 2-bit/cell

MLC NAND flash memory, the programming consists of two

Fig. 14. Measured resistance versus Set/Reset cycle with

ReRAM.

steps: first bit and second bit programming. Therefore, if the programming is stopped in the first step, 2-bit/cell MLC can be

used as SLC. Adjusting the number of bits per cell in the pro-

posed BCO is different from [21] in the following two perspec-

tives. First is that the best combinations of the four (2-bit/cell

MLC) or two (SLC) memory states out of eight (3-bit/cell MLC)

are derived from the measurement results. Compared with the

conventional method, the margins between the memory states

are larger in BCO. The second difference is that the memory-

state allocation is changed according to the write/erase cycle

Fig. 15. (a) Measured optimum ReRAM. (b) Set/Reset BER of

during Set/Reset cycling with ReRAM with optimum .

within each 2-bit/cell MLC and SLC mode. B. 2-Bit/Cell MLC Mode

to make it high, the Reset BER and the number of Reset verify trials in VTR naturally increases. After cycles, the variation of the Set resistance becomes larger which may be caused by the strong Reset pulse. As a result, the Set BER becomes larger and the number of Reset verify trials decreases. Fig. 13 shows the measured negligible read disturb after 10 k Set/Reset cycles. This result indicates that the decrease in the Reset resistance is not due to the read disturb during 20 verify reads.

Three patterns of memory-state allocations are tested as illustrated in Fig. 16: {E P3 P5 P7}, {E P1 P2 P3}, and {E P2 P4 P6}. Note that the eight memory states in 3-bit/cell MLC NAND flash memory are named E, P1 to P7 from the low to high . From the measurement of 3-bit/cell MLC NAND flash memory, it is found that the cells in P1 and P2 states have the high error rate as shown in Fig. 17(a). Thus, P1 and P2 states are eliminated in {E P3 P5 P7} mode, and all the four states are separated by

B. Measurements With

ReRAM

at least one memory state. The potential problem of this allocation is that since the highest memory state (P7) is used, the

This subsection shows the measurements of 50 nm

cells will be worn quickly during write/erase cycling. On the

ReRAM while 50 nm

device is used in the previous sec- other hand, {E P1 P2 P3} mode minimizes the write/erase stress,

tions. Fig. 14 shows the dependence of BER on Set/Reset cycle. while having the smallest memory margin. Memory states are

All of the measurement conditions are the same as that of

alternately allocated in {E P2 P4 P6} mode, which has large

device except the Reset pulse starting from 100 ns. Overall memory margin with smaller write/erase stress than {E P3 P5

resistance trend is similar to

device shown in Fig. 3. P7} mode. Fig. 17(b) shows the measured BER dependence on

Therefore, the optimum to minimize the BER also changes data pattern. It is observed that {E P1 P2 P3} shows the signif-

(Fig. 15(a)). Moreover, with optimum

, the Reset BER icantly high error rate due to the small memory window. Inter-

is first dominant and the Set BER becomes dominant during estingly, the BERs of {E P3 P5 P7} and {E P2 P4 P6} patterns

Set/Reset cycling as shown in Fig. 15(b). These results indicate intersect when the write/erase cycle is around 2000. Thus, the

that FR and AAC are effective with

ReRAM.

low BER will be realized by changing the allocation from {E

Note that the measured ReRAM chip in this paper is an P3 P5 P7} to {E P2 P4 P6} after the write/erase cycle is around

immature test chip that the resistance characteristics would be 2000. Same as the discussions above for ReRAM, keeping the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

850

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

BER as low as possible can lead to the smaller ECC calculation and power.

C. SLC Mode

Five SLC modes ({E P3} to {E P7}) are measured in Fig.

18(a). All of the measurement in Fig. 18(a) are cycled by {E

P7} pattern. {E P3} mode shows high BER and thus {E P1}

and {E P2} modes with smaller memory margin are not tested.

In the previous work [11], {E P6} mode is selected for the SLC

mode due to the large memory window with smaller stress than

{E P7} mode. However, it is found that {E P5} mode shows

smaller BER than {E P6} mode except when the write/erase

cycle is 15 k even with the same write/erase stress. Since the {E

P5} mode has the smaller write/erase stress than {E P6} mode,

{E P5} mode is chosen at 15 k write/erase cycle.

During write/erase cycling, the read reference voltage

is changed to minimize BER as shown in Fig. 18(b). The number

of the memory cells with lower

than the target

in-

creases during write/erase cycle, possibly because the damaged

tunneling oxide facilitates the electron detrap. Thus, lowering

is effective in the large write/erase cycle. The difference of

the completion times of the block read (to check BERs) and the

block program are measured ten times to analyze the detrapping

time. The average detrapping time is 1.45 s, which means that

some electrons are immediately detrapped to lower the .

Fig. 16. Three memory-state allocations tested as 2-bit/cell MLC mode with BCO.
Fig. 17. (a) Measured cell-error rate of each memory state with 2Xnm 3-bit/cell MLC NAND flash memory. (b) Measured BER versus data patterns with three 2-bit/cell MLC modes.

D. Dynamic Transition From 3-Bit/Cell MLC to 2-Bit/Cell MLC and SLC Modes

In the subsections above, various patterns of memory-state allocations are tested. Fig. 19 shows the measured BER with BCO. 3-bit/cell MLC NAND can only operate in 3-bit/cell MLC

Fig. 18. (a) Measured BER versus data patterns with five SLC modes. (b) Measured BER of {E P5} SLC mode with two different .

mode for about 900 write/erase cycles, due to the small

margins between memory states. In BCO, before reaching the

3-bit/cell MLC BER limit, the NAND flash memory is switched

to 2-bit/cell MLC mode-1 {E P3 P5 P7}. At 2500 cycles, 2-bit/

cell MLC mode-2 {E P2 P4 P6} improves BER further, by

shifting down the of the highest state. Finally, after 7000

W/E cycles, the NAND flash is operated as a SLC memory. At

9000 cycles in SLC mode, changing the read reference from

to

is effective to track the minimum BER. By

reusing the worn 3-bit/cell MLC, the measured NAND flash

chip's lifetime is extended by 7.8 times and over 22 times with Fig. 19. Measured BER during BCO. 2-bit/cell MLC and SLC modes, respectively.

BCO is especially effective in the chip-replaceable cloud

storage which has the enough large capacity with dominant hot

(frequently updated) data. In this case, the data do not stay for a

long time and the reallocation from 3-bit/cell MLC to 2-bit/cell

MLC/SLC becomes easier. Memory management software

can dynamically control allocation or the chip replacement

depending on the workload. Typically, SLC is used as cache,

and 2-bit/cell and 3-bit/cell MLC function as primary data

storage. Fig. 20 shows the concept of the storage with BCO.

The storage is divided into 3-bit/cell MLC, 2-bit/cell MLC,

and SLC mode zones. When a chip in SLC mode is disposed,

a new chip is added to 3-bit/cell MLC mode. When the chip Fig. 20. Concept of the storage with BCO.

in 3-bit/cell MLC mode is migrated to 2-bit/cell MLC mode,

the data in 3-bit/cell MLC are migrated within 3-bit/cell MLC each zone becomes roughly the same. The data intensity is the

mode chips. The controller controls the data intensity to each function of the number of chips in each zone, the chip capacity,

chip in each zone so that the frequency of the chip migration in data pattern, etc.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: DESIGN METHODOLOGY FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE, HIGH PERFORMANCE RERAM

851

Fig. 21. Concept of RAID-5/6.

Fig. 23. Proposed balanced RAID-5/6.

blocks are different among chips (units), unexpected page

types would be selected during balanced RAID-5/6 because

the copied pages cause the offset of the physical write address

(page offset). Thus, a stripe with only middle pages may occur.

Round robin writing with non-volatile buffer (ReRAM) scheme

can be one of the solutions. For example, if a stripe consists of

three units (NAND flash chips), the non-volatile buffer stores

Fig. 22. Measured BER of lower/middle/upper pages with (a) 3-bit/cell MLC mode and (b) 2-bit/cell MLC mode-1 with BCO.

three-page data and simultaneously issues write to the three chips. The writing order to pages is fixed (from the first to the last pages of a chip). GC is executed simultaneously in the

VII. BALANCED RAID-5/6

three NAND chips and the valid data is reallocated not within the chip but throughout the three chips. As a result, the page

A. Balanced RAID-5/6

offset is avoided. If the other GC policies are used, the other

Fig. 21 conceptually explains RAID-5 and RAID-6 (for NAND flash memories). A unit corresponds to a NAND flash chip (conventionally to a HDD), and a stripe consists of multiple NAND pages among different chips. One parity page
in a stripe is needed for RAID-5, and two parity pages ( and ) are required in RAID-6 to compensate one and two unit errors in a stripe, respectively. When the number of units is 20, the storage overhead is around 5 and 10% with RAID-5 and 6, respectively, which significantly reduces the cost from RAID-1 (mirroring: 100% overhead). Note that the proposed Balanced RAID-5/6 basically focuses on RAID-5 and RAID-6, but is not limited to RAID-5/6 adoption. For example, the concept of the balanced RAID-5/6 can be directly utilized

offset-elimination scheme is required: e.g., skipping a few pages can be accepted to resolve the offset.
Balanced RAID-5/6 is applicable for both ECC failure and chip/die catastrophic failures, although balancing the page types is only effective for recovering ECC failures. In case of chip failure, if all of the other existing pages can be correctly read, the unit can be recovered. If ECC failures are detected in the existing chips, the data would be irrecoverable. However, this is not specific in balanced RAID-5/6. The sector failures in HDD can also cause irrecoverable situation (latent sector errors [22]). In both conventional RAID and balanced RAID-5/6, using RAID-6 rather than RAID-5 will help avoid the RAID failure during whole chip/die recovery.

with other RAID schemes such as differential RAID [9]. In differential RAID, the parity sectors are unevenly distributed B. Theoretical Analysis

to units (e.g., (70% 10% 10% 10%) in four units) to realize the gradual wear (number of write/erase cycles) among the units.
Measured BERs for 3-bit/cell MLC mode and 2-bit/cell MLC mode-1 with BCO are shown in Fig. 22, based on page type (upper/middle/lower for 3-bit/cell MLC, upper/lower for 2-bit/cell MLC). The middle page BER is highest by 1.8 times in 3-bit/cell MLC-mode [Fig. 22(a)], and in 2-bit/cell MLC mode-1, the upper page BER is 5.4-times as high as the lower page BER [Fig. 22(b)]. The BER imbalance among page types causes reliability issue in conventional RAID-5/6. A RAID stripe can be composed only by the same type of pages. For

The RAID failure rates of the conventional RAID-5/6 and the

proposed balanced RAID-5/6 are analyzed in this subsection.

Although the RAID failure rate of the RAID-5/6 with “3-bit/cell

MLC” NAND flash memories is discussed below, the concept is

easily converted to the RAID-5/6 with “2-bit/cell MLC” mode

by considering 2 groups;

and

. The ECC failure

rates of the pages in

,

, and

in Fig. 23

are represented as , , and , respectively. The ECC failure

rate

is calculated from the BER of a page as follows

[23]:

example when 3-bit/cell MLC chips are used, a RAID stripe with only middle pages has significantly higher RAID failure

(8)

rate, compared with other stripes. The stripe with the worst

RAID failure rate determines the overall storage reliability. The where and are the code length and the number of correctable

proposed balanced RAID-5/6 evenly distributes data within a bit-errors of the ECC, and is the raw BER of the page in the

stripe among the upper/middle/lower pages as shown in Fig. 23. NAND flash memory.

As a result, each stripe has a similar failure rate, and the overall To calculate the RAID failure rates of both RAID-5 and

(worst) failure rate is decreased. The concept of the balanced RAID-6, four conditions should be considered: 1) No ECC

RAID-5/6 is still effective in the 2-bit/cell MLC mode with failure in a stripe. 2) One ECC failure in a stripe. 3-a) Two ECC

BCO.

failures in a stripe, both of which are in the same group. 3-b)

Garbage collection (GC) operation would destroy “the bal- Two ECC failures in a stripe, which are in the different group.

ance.” If the number of valid pages to be copied to the other To make the calculation simple, the number of units

is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS—I: REGULAR PAPERS, VOL. 62, NO. 3, MARCH 2015

considered to be multiples of three. 1) Probability of no ECC failure in a stripe is calculated as follows:
(9)
2) Probability of 1 ECC failure in a stripe is,

Fig. 24. Worst RAID failure rates of conventional RAID-5/6 and proposed balanced RAID-5/6.

(10)

3-a) Probability of 2 ECC failure occurring in a same group in

a stripe

is,

TABLE I SUMMARY OF THIS WORK

(11)

Finally, 3-b) Probability of 2 ECC failure occurring in different

groups in a stripe

is,

reduces the BER of ReRAM. By changing the

, BER

decreases by 65% with either CR or FR. AAC increases the

population of Set or Reset cells to further decrease the BER. By

combining FR and AAC, BER is reduced by 69% with 60% 1/0

asymmetry. The

of FR is modified for AAC to increase

Therefore, the RAID failure rate of RAID-5

(12) the error asymmetry and facilitate AAC. VTR stops the verify

programming with remaining bit-errors to be corrected by ECC.

is,

By dynamically changing the number of acceptable bit-errors

and that of RAID-6 is,

(13) during Set/Reset cycle, the Reset time is shortened by 97% with small ECC calculation overhead. BCO reallocates 3-bit/cell MLC to 2-bit/cell MLC and SLC,

(14)
To calculate the worst RAID failure rate of the conventional scheme, all of , , and are set as the ECC failure rate of Middle pages. The normalized worst RAID failure rates with conventional/proposed RAID are shown in Fig. 24. The worst case RAID failure rate improves by 98% with 2Xnm 3-bit/cell MLC NAND flash memory, and in 2-bit/cell MLC-mode,

based on the BER of the NAND flash memory. The write/erase

cycle is improved by over 22-times. The selections of the

memory states and read reference voltage

are changed.

Balanced RAID-5/6 eliminates the worst case that a RAID

stripe consists of only high BER pages. Upper/middle/lower

pages are evenly allocated to a stripe. The RAID failure rate is

reduced by 98%.

the improvement is 91%. The raw BER of the NAND flash memory significantly impacts the ECC failure rate according to

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

(8). Therefore, the ECC failure rates of upper/lower (2/3 of the The authors appreciate T.O. Iwasaki, K. Johguchi, S.

pages) and lower pages (half of the pages) can be considered Hachiya, and C. Sun for their support.

almost 0 compared with the other high BER pages in 3-bit/cell

and 2-bit/cell MLC NAND flash memories, respectively. As a result, the parity units need to care smaller number of data units in balanced RAID-5/6. This means that the effectiveness of the parity on the reliability becomes large. Thus in balanced RAID-5/6, the improvement of the worst RAID failure rate is larger with 3-bit/cell MLC NAND flash memories compared to 2-bit/cell MLC NAND flash memories. Moreover, since the proportion of the parity is larger, the improvement with RAID-6 is larger than that with RAID-5.
VIII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Design methodology for the highly reliable, high performance ReRAM and 3-bit/cell MLC NAND flash storage is proposed. Table I summarizes this work. CR, FR, and AAC

REFERENCES
[1] H. Fujii K. Miyaji, K. Johguchi, K. Higuchi, C. Sun, and K. Takeuchi, “x11 performance increase, x6.9 endurance enhancement, 93% energy reduction of 3D TSV-integrated hybrid ReRAM/MLC NAND SSDs by data fragmentation suppression,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. VLSI Circuits, Jun. 2012, pp. 134–135.
[2] R. Fackenthal et al., “A 16 Gb ReRAM with 200 MB/s write and 1 GB/s read in 27 nm technology,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2014, pp. 338–339.
[3] C. Sun, K. Miyaji, K. Johguchi, and K. Takeuchi, “SCM capacity and NAND over-provisioning requirements for SCM/NAND flash hybrid enterprise SSD,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop, May 2013, pp. 64–67.
[4] Y.-J. Song, G. Jeong, I.-G. Baek, and J. Choi, “What lies ahead for resistance-based memory technologies?,” IEEE Computer, vol. 46, no. 8, pp. 30–36, Aug. 2013.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANAKAMARU et al.: DESIGN METHODOLOGY FOR HIGHLY RELIABLE, HIGH PERFORMANCE RERAM

853

[5] S. Hachiya, K. Johguchi, K. Miyaji, and K. Takeuchi, “TLC/MLC

NAND flash mix-and-match design with exchangeable storage array,”

in Ext. Abst. 2013 Int. Conf. Solid State Devices Mater., Sep. 2013,

pp. 894–895.

[6] D. A. Patterson, G. Gibson, and R. H. Katz, “A case for redundant

arrays of inexpensive disks (RAID),” in Proc. ACM SIGMOD Conf.,

1988, pp. 109–116.

[7] M. Blaum, J. Brady, J. Bruck, and J. Menon, “EVENODD: An effi-

cient scheme for tolerating double disk failures in RAID architectures,”

IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 44, no. 2, pp. 192–202, Feb. 1995.

[8] S. Im and D. Shin, “Flash-aware RAID techniques for dependable and

high-performance flash memory SSD,” IEEE Trans. Comput., vol. 60,

no. 1, pp. 80–92, Jan. 2011.

[9] M. Balakrishnan, A. Kadav, V. Prabhakaran, and D. Malkhi, “Differ-

ential RAID: Rethinking RAID for SSD reliability,” in Proc. 5th Eur.

Conf. Comput. Syst., Apr. 2010.

[10] S. Tanakamaru, M. Doi, and K. Takeuchi, “NAND flash memory/

ReRAM hybrid unified solid-state-storage architecture,” IEEE Trans.

Circuits Syst. I, Reg. Papers, vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1119–1132, Apr. 2014.

[11] S. Tanakamaru, H. Yamazawa, T. Tokutomi, S. Y. Ning, and K.

Takeuchi, “Hybrid storage of ReRAM/TLC NAND flash with

RAID-5/6 for cloud data centers,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits

Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2014, pp. 336–337.

[12] Y. Cai, E. F. Haratsch, O. Mutlu, and K. Mai, “Threshold voltage distri-

bution in MLC NAND flash memory: Characterization, analysis, mod-

eling,” in Proc. Design, Autom., Test Eur., Mar. 2013, pp. 1285–1290.

[13] S. Tanakamaru, C. Hung, and K. Takeuchi, “Highly reliable and low

power SSD using asymmetric coding and stripe bitline-pattern elimi-

nation programming,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 47, no. 1, pp.

85–96, Jan. 2012.

[14] K. Higuchi, T. O. Iwasaki, and K. Takeuchi, “Investigation of

verify-programming methods to achieve 10 million cycles for 50 nm

ReRAM,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Memory Workshop, May 2012,

pp. 119–122.

[15] Y. Lee, H. Yoo, I. Yoo, and I.-C. Park, “6.4 Gb/s multi-threaded BCH

encoder and decoder for multi-channel SSD controllers,” in IEEE Int.

Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2012, pp. 426–427.

[16] A. Kawahara et al., “An 8 Mb multi-layered cross-point ReRAM macro

with 443 MB/s write throughput,” in IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits

Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2012, pp. 432–433.

[17] H. Yoo, Y. Lee, and I.-C. Park, “7.3 Gb/s universal BCH encoder

and decoder for SSD controllers,” in Proc. Asia South Pacific Design

Autom. Conf., Jan. 2014, pp. 37–38.

[18] H.-S. P. Wong et al., “Metal-oxide RRAM,” Proc. IEEE, vol. 100, no.

6, pp. 1951–1970, Jun. 2012.

[19] Y. S. Chen et al., “Challenges and opportunities for

based resis-

tive random access memory,” in IEEE Int. Electron Devices Meeting

Tech. Dig., Dec. 2011, pp. 717–720.

[20] A. Kawahara et al., “Filament scaling forming technique and level-

verify-write scheme with endurance over cycles in ReRAM,” in

IEEE Int. Solid-State Circuits Conf. Dig. Tech. Papers, Feb. 2013, pp.

220–221.

[21] X. Jimenez, D. Novo, and P. Ienne, “Software controlled cell bit-den-

sity to improve NAND flash lifetime,” in ACM/EDAC/IEEE Proc. De-

sign Autom. Conf., Jun. 2012, pp. 229–234.

[22] B. Schroeder, S. Damouras, and P. Gill, “Understanding latent sector

errors and how to protect against them,” in Proc. USENIX Conf. File

Storage Technol., Feb. 2010.

[23] N. Mielke et al., “Bit error rate in NAND flash memories,” in Proc.

IEEE Int. Rel. Phys. Symp., Apr. 2008, pp. 9–19.

Shuhei Tanakamaru (S'09–M'14) received the B.E. degree in electronic engineering and the M.E. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering and information systems in 2009, 2011, and 2014 from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, respectively.
He is currently a Visiting Researcher with the Research and Development Initiative, Chuo University, Tokyo. He has been engaged in a research on the low power DRAM, SRAM, and highly reliable solid-state storage system.

Hiroki Yamazawa (S'14) received the B.E. degree from the Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan, in 2014, where he is currently working toward the M.S. degree.
He has been engaged in research on the reliability of ReRAM.
Tsukasa Tokutomi received the B.E. degree from the Chuo University, Tokyo, Japan, in 2014, where he is currently working toward the M.S. degree.
He has been engaged in research on the reliability of NAND flash memory.
Sheyang Ning (S'14) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electronic engineering from the Xidian University, Xi'an, China, in 2005, and 2010, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information System, Graduate School of Engineering, University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. His research interests are performance and reliability improvement of next generation non-volatile memories.
Ken Takeuchi (M'01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in applied physics and the Ph.D. degree in electric engineering from the University of Tokyo, Japan, in 1991, 1993 and 2006, respectively. In 2003, he also received the M.B.A. degree from Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA.
He is currently a Professor at the Department of Electrical, Electronic, and Communication Engineering, Faculty of Science and Engineering of Chuo University, Japan. He is now working on the database storage system for big-data application, VLSI circuit design, signal processing and device such as the emerging non-volatile memories, 3D-integrated SSDs, low-power 3D-LSI circuits, and ultra low-voltage SRAMs. Since he joined Toshiba in 1993, he had been leading Toshiba's NAND flash memory circuit design for fourteen years. He was an Associate Professor at the Department of Electrical Engineering and Information Systems, Graduate School of Engineering of the University of Tokyo from 2007 till 2012. In 2012, he joined Chuo University. He designed six world's highest density NAND flash memory products such as 0.7 m 16 Mbit, 0.4 m 64 Mbit, 0.25 m 256 Mbit, 0.16 m 1 Gbit, 0.13 m 2 Gbit, and 56 nm 8 Gbit NAND flash memories. He holds 220 patents worldwide including 120 U.S. patents. Especially, with his invention, “multipage cell architecture,” presented at Symposium on VLSI Circuits in 1997, he successfully commercialized world's first multi-level cell NAND flash memory in 2001. He has authored numerous technical papers, one of which won the Takuo Sugano Award for Outstanding Paper at ISSCC 2007. He has served on the program committee member of International Solid-State Circuits Conference (ISSCC), Symposium on VLSI Circuits, Asian Solid-State Circuits Conference (A-SSCC), International Memory Workshop (IMW) and Non-Volatile Memory Technology Symposium (NVMTS). He served as a tutorial speaker at ISSCC 2008, SSD forum organizer at ISSCC 2009, 3D-LSI forum organizer at ISSCC 2010, Ultra-low voltage LSI forum organizer at ISSCC 2011 and Robust VLSI System forum organizer at ISSCC 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:33:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

