JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 33, NO. 7, APRIL 1, 2015

1275

Terminated and Tailbiting Spatially Coupled Codes With Optimized Bit Mappings for Spectrally Efficient Fiber-Optical Systems
Christian Ha┬Ęger, Student Member, IEEE, Alexandre Graell i Amat, Senior Member, IEEE, Fredrik Bra┬Ęnnstro┬Ęm, Member, IEEE, Alex Alvarado, Member, IEEE, and Erik Agrell, Senior Member, IEEE
(Invited Paper)

AbstractÔÇöWe study the design of spectrally efficient fiber-optical communication systems based on different spatially coupled (SC) forward error correction (FEC) schemes. In particular, we optimize the allocation of the coded bits from the FEC encoder to the modulation bits of the signal constellation. Two SC code classes are considered. The codes in the first class are protograph-based low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes which are decoded using iterative soft-decision decoding. The codes in the second class are generalized LDPC codes which are decoded using iterative harddecision decoding. For both code classes, the bit allocation is optimized for the terminated and tailbiting SC cases based on a density evolution analysis. An optimized bit allocation can significantly improve the performance of tailbiting SC codes over the baseline sequential allocation, up to the point where they have a comparable gap to capacity as their terminated counterparts, at a lower FEC overhead. For the considered terminated SC codes, the optimization only results in marginal performance improvements, suggesting that in this case a sequential allocation is close to optimal.
Index TermsÔÇöBit mapper optimization, coded modulation, forward error correction (FEC), hard-decision decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, soft-decision decoding (SDC), spatial coupling.
I. INTRODUCTION
D ESIGNING spectrally efficient fiber-optical systems that can operate close to the capacity limits [1] has become an important research topic [2]ÔÇô[4]. Such systems are often implemented according to the pragmatic bit-interleaved coded modulation (BICM) paradigm [5], where a single binary forward error
Manuscript received October 1, 2014; revised December 2, 2014; accepted January 2, 2015. Date of publication January 8, 2015; date of current version March 4, 2015. This work was presented at the European Conference on Optical Communication (ECOC), Cannes, France, September 2014. This work was supported in part by the Swedish Research Council under Grant #2011-5961 and by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC) project UNLOC (EP/J017582/1), United Kingdom. The simulations were performed in part on resources provided by the Swedish National Infrastructure for Computing (SNIC) at C3SE.
C. Ha┬Ęger, A. Graell i Amat, F. Bra┬Ęnnstro┬Ęm, and E. Agrell are with the Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of Technology, 412 58 Gothenburg, Sweden (e-mail: christian.haeger@chalmers.se; alexandre. graell@chalmers.se; fredrik.brannstrom@chalmers.se; agrell@chalmers.se).
A. Alvarado is with the Optical Networks Group, Department of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University College London, London WC1E7JE, U.K. (e-mail: alex.alvarado@ieee.org).
Color versions of one or more of the figures in this paper are available online at http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/JLT.2015.2390596

correction (FEC) encoder is used in combination with a nonbinary signal constellation. A random allocation (or interleaving) [5] of the coded bits from the FEC encoder to the modulation bits of the signal constellation is commonly assumed. In this paper, we optimize the allocation to the modulation bits for a coherent long-haul polarization-multiplexed (PM) fiber-optical system. In particular, we consider different spatially-coupled (SC) FEC schemes both with soft-decision decoding (SDD) and hard-decision decoding (HDD).
SC low-density parity-check (SC-LDPC) codes have attracted a great deal of attention in the recent years. They are considered as viable candidates for future spectrally efficient fiber-optical systems [3], [6], [7] due to their capacity-achieving performance for many communication channels [8]. SC-LDPC codes promise excellent belief propagation (BP) performance with a quasiregular node degree distribution and low node degrees. The BP performance of SC-LDPC codes can further be improved by increasing the node degrees, whereas the decoding performance for regular LDPC codes generally worsens if the node degrees are increased [8]. While irregular LDPC codes can also perform close to capacity [9], the optimal degree distribution depends on the code rate and/or the channel [10]. High node degrees are also often required for good performance which leads to a high decoding complexity.
We consider two different SC code classes taken from the literature. The codes in the first class are protograph-based SCLDPC codes [11], [12] which are decoded using iterative SDD in the form of BP decoding. BP is a message passing algorithm in which ÔÇťsoftÔÇŁ (i.e., real-valued) messages are exchanged between the variable nodes (VNs) and constraint nodes (CNs) in the Tanner graph representing the code. The codes in the second class are SC generalized LDPC (SC-GLDPC) codes where each coded bit is protected by two t-error correcting BoseÔÇô ChaudhuriÔÇôHocquenghem (BCH) component codes [13]. These codes are decoded using iterative HDD with bounded-distance decoding (BDD) of the component BCH codes. Iterative HDD can be seen as a message passing algorithm with ÔÇťhardÔÇŁ (i.e., binary) messages in the Tanner graph representing the GLDPC code and is significantly less complex than SDD [14].
The adoption of SDD is considered one of the most important factors for increasing the performance of fiber-optical systems [15]. However, SDD poses implementation challenges at very high data rates motivating the use of less complex FEC

0733-8724 ┬ę 2015 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission. Authorized licenSseeedhuttspe:/l/iwmwitewd.iteoe:eY.orngs/epiuUbnliicva. tDioonwsnslotaanddeadrdosn/pJubnleic2a4t,i2o0n2s/6riagth1ts7/:i2n2d:e4x3.hUtTmCl froormmIoErEeEinXfoprlomrea.tioRne.strictions apply.

1276

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 33, NO. 7, APRIL 1, 2015

Fig. 1. Block diagram of the considered PM transmission system.

schemes [14]. The SC-GLDPC codes we consider in this paper were proposed in [13], where it is shown that they can approach the capacity of the binary symmetric channel (BSC) under iterative HDD for high code rates [i.e., low FEC overheads (OHs)]. We use these codes because a density evolution (DE) analysis is readily available in [13]. This allows us to apply the optimization techniques for protograph-based SC-LDPC codes we previously presented in [16] to the practically relevant case of SC-GLDPC codes with iterative HDD. The SCGLDPC code ensemble in [13] is closely related to other recently proposed FEC schemes for optical transport networks, such as staircase codes [14] (which are themselves related to block-wise braided block code [17]), and the modified construction of tightly-braided block code proposed in [18]. For other related works on GLDPC codes for fiber-optical communications, we refer the interested reader to [19], [20] and references therein.
The outstanding performance of SC codes is due to a termination boundary effect which initiates a wave-like decoding behavior [8]. This behavior of terminated SC codes comes at the price of a rate loss, i.e., a larger FEC OH, compared to the underlying uncoupled codes. So-called tailbiting SC codes provide an interesting solution to this problem, since they do not suffer from an increased OH. However, by default, a tailbiting SC code behaves essentially the same as the underlying uncoupled code due to the absence of a termination boundary. The main aim of this paper is to demonstrate that the unequal error protection offered by the modulation bits of a nonbinary signal constellation can be exploited to create an artificial termination boundary. This significantly improves the performance of tailbiting SC codes, both in the case of SDD and HDD. With an optimized bit allocation, the capacity gap of the considered tailbiting SC codes is comparable to the gap of their terminated counterparts, at a lower FEC OH. For the considered terminated SC codes, the performance gain due to an optimized bit allocation is limited, in particular for the SC-GLDPC codes with HDD. Simulation results for both linear and nonlinear transmission scenarios confirm the DE analysis.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the assumed PM transmission system is described. The two SC FEC schemes are covered in Sections III and IV, where we explain the code construction, the decoding algorithms, and the DE analysis with the help of several examples. In Section V, we briefly review the optimization techniques for the bit allocation described in [16], which apply to the considered SC-LDPC codes with SDD. We also discuss how they are easily extended to the SC-GLDPC codes with HDD.

Results are presented and discussed in Section VI and the paper is concluded in Section VII.

II. SYSTEM MODEL

A block diagram of the considered PM fiber-optical transmis-

sion system is shown in Fig. 1. At each discrete time instant k,

the modulator ╬Ž takes m bits bi,k , i = 1, . . . , m, and maps them
to a symbol sk = (sx,k , sy,k ) taken with uniform probabilities from a signal constellation X ÔŐé C2 (|X | = 2m ) according to

the binary labeling. The modulo-2 addition of the independent

and uniformly distributed bits di,k (and the multiplication by d┬»i,k = (Ôłĺ1)di,k at the receiver) shown in Fig. 1 serves as a symmetrization technique [21].1

The baseband signal in polarization x is sx (t) =

k sx,k p(t Ôłĺ k/Rs ) with (real-valued) pulse shape p(t) and

symbol rate Rs (and similarly for polarization y). The trans-

mit power P = limT ÔćĺÔł×

T ÔłĺT

sx (t)2 dt/(2T )

is

assumed

to

be

equal in both polarizations. The PM signal s(t) = (sx (t), sy (t))

is launched into the fiber and propagates according to the

Manakov equation [23]. The optical link consists of Nsp spans

of standard single-mode fiber (SSMF) with attenuation coeffi-

cient ╬▒, group velocity dispersion ╬▓2, nonlinear Kerr parameter ╬│, length Lsp , and a lumped amplification scheme (no opti-

cal dispersion compensation is assumed). Each erbium-doped

fiber amplifier (EDFA) introduces circularly symmetric com-

plex Gaussian noise with two-sided power spectral density

NEDFA = (e╬▒Lsp Ôłĺ 1)h╬Żs nsp per polarization [1], where h is PlanckÔÇÖs constant, ╬Żs the carrier frequency, and nsp the sponta-

neous emission factor. A coherent linear receiver according to

rx,k = rx (t) ÔłŚ h(t) ÔłŚ p(Ôłĺt)|t=k/Rs is used in each polarization, where ÔłŚ denotes convolution and h(t) is the impulse response of

an equalizer which accounts for linear distortions due to chro-

matic dispersion. The frequency response of the equalizer is

given by H(f ) = exp(j2╬▓2 ¤Ç2 f 2 Nsp Lsp ). The received sym-

bols are denoted by rk = (rx,k , ry,k ). Two different demodulators ╬ŽÔłĺ1 are considered. For SDD,

the demodulator computes ÔÇťsoftÔÇŁ reliability information about

the bits bi,k in the form of log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) li,k . For

HDD, the demodulator performs a minimum distance symbol-

by-symbol detection of the received symbols with respect to the

signal constellation X and outputs the binary labeling associated

with the detected symbol. Both demodulators are based on the

assumption that the discrete-time channel from sk to rk is the

1The symmetrization makes the bit error probability independent of the transmitted bits. This is an important requirement for the all-zero codeword assumption which is commonly made in DE [22, p. 389].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HA┬Ę GER et al.: TERMINATED AND TAILBITING SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES WITH OPTIMIZED BIT MAPPINGS FOR SPECTRALLY EFFICIENT

1277

Fig. 2. Illustration of the Bit Mapper.

additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with signal-tonoise ratio (SNR) denoted by ¤ü. This assumption is accurate for linear transmission (i.e., ╬│ = 0) where ¤ü = P/(Nsp NEDFA Rs ). For the considered setup without optical inline dispersion compensation, it has been shown that this assumption is also justified, provided that dispersive effects are dominant and nonlinear effects are weak [24], [25]. For this case, ¤ü can be computed using [24, eq. (15)] assuming single channel transmission. Under the Gaussian Noise model assumption, see [25] and references therein, similar expressions for the SNR are also computable for wavelength-division multiplexing systems.
We consider a system according to the BICM paradigm, where a binary code C ÔŐé {0, 1}nC of length nC and dimension kC is employed and each codeword c = (c1 , . . . , cnC ) is transmitted using N = nC/m symbols sk . The allocation of the coded bits to the modulation bits is determined by a bit mapper2 as shown in Fig. 2, where u = (u1 , . . . , ukC ) is the information word. The bit mapper optimization is discussed in Section V. The optimization is based on the AWGN channel model because a direct optimization using DE for the optical channel defined by the nonlinear Schro┬Ędinger equation is not feasible. The accuracy of this approach is verified through simulation results for a nonlinear transmission scenario in Section VI-D. To the best of our knowledge, there are no comparable works by other authors on bit mapper optimization for SC codes. Hence, as a baseline for a comparison, we use a sequential mapper according to bi,k = c(kÔłĺ1)m +i for 1 ÔëĄ i ÔëĄ m, 1 ÔëĄ k ÔëĄ N . For the considered codes, a sequential mapper has the same expected performance as a random mapper.
III. PROTOGRAPH-BASED SC-LDPC CODES
A. Code Construction
An LDPC code of length nC and dimension kC is defined via a sparse parity-check matrix H = [hi,j ] Ôłł {0, 1}rC├ŚnC , where rC Ôëą nC Ôłĺ kC with equality if and only if H has full rank. One popular method to construct LDPC codes is by using protographs [11]. A protograph is a bipartite graph defined by an adjacency matrix P = [pi,j ] Ôłł N0rC├Ś nC , called the base matrix, where N0 is the set of nonnegative integers. Given P, the paritycheck matrix H is obtained by replacing each entry pi,j in P with a random binary M -by-M matrix which contains pi,j ones in each row and column. This procedure is called lifting and M Ôëą maxi,j pi,j is the so-called lifting factor. The design rate of the code is given by R = 1 Ôłĺ rC/nC = 1 Ôłĺ rC/nC, where rC = rCM and nC = nCM .

Fig. 3. Base matrices P for protograph-based SC-LDPC codes. (a) Terminated. (b) Tailbiting.

Fig. 4. Protographs for the SC-LDPC code with T = 5 in Example 1. The first step of the lifting procedure to obtain the Tanner graph (i.e., copying the protograph M times) is indicated in light gray. (a) terminated. (b) tailbiting.

SC-LDPC codes have parity-check matrices with a band-

diagonal structure and can be constructed using protographs

[12]. The base matrix of a (J, K) regular SC-LDPC code with

spatial length T is constructed by specifying matrices Pi, 0 ÔëĄ

i ÔëĄ ms, of dimension J by K , where ms is referred to as

the memory. The matrices are such that

ms i=0

Pi

has

column

weight J and row weight K for all columns and rows. Given

the matrices Pi and the spatial length T , one can construct P as

shown in Fig. 3(a) for the terminated case and in Fig. 3(b) for

the tailbiting case.3 Terminated and tailbiting SC-LDPC codes

have design rates R(T ) = 1 Ôłĺ J /K Ôłĺ msJ /(T K ) and R = 1 Ôłĺ J /K , respectively [12]. The rate loss for the terminated

code with respect to the tailbiting (or the underlying uncoupled

regular) code can be made arbitrary small by letting T Ôćĺ Ôł×,

but this also leads to very long block lengths nC = T K M (assuming a fixed lifting factor M ).

Example 1: Consider the (3, 6) regular SC-LDPC code with

P0 = P1 = P2 = (1, 1), T = 5, J = 1, K = 2, and ms = 2. The two protographs corresponding to the terminated and

2The bit mapper should not be confused with the modulator ╬Ž, which is sometimes also referred to as a mapper. In the literature, the term ÔÇťbit interleaverÔÇŁ is also frequently used instead of ÔÇťbit mapper.ÔÇŁ

3The terminology originates from the trellis representation of convolutional codes, where the initial and final states are either determined by known bits (terminated) or forced to be identical (tailbiting).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1278

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 33, NO. 7, APRIL 1, 2015

tailbiting cases are shown in Fig. 4 . The design rates are R(5) = 0.3 and R = 0.5, respectively.

B. Soft-Decision Decoding and DE

The protograph-based SC-LDPC codes are decoded using the standard BP decoding [22, Sec. 5.4]. In order to alleviate the long decoding delay and high decoding complexity of SC-LDPC codes under full BP decoding, we employ the windowed decoder (WD) with a window size W developed in [26]. The WD reduces the decoding delay for terminated SC-LDPC codes from T M K to W M K coded bits [26]. For tailbiting SC-LDPC codes, additional memory for (ms + W Ôłĺ 1)M K values is required compared to terminated SC-LDPC codes, in order to take the circular wrap-around of the parity-check matrix into account. In particular, assume that the decoding starts when the channel observations corresponding to spatial positions 1 to ms + W are received and the first targeted symbols are at position ms + 1. (Due to the circular structure, the last targeted symbols are at position ms.) Then, the observations corresponding to the first ms positions as well as the final LLRs for the bits at positions ms + 1 to ms + W Ôłĺ 1 have to be stored. We also point the interested reader to [27], where the decoding of tailbiting SC-LDPC codes based on a pipeline decoder architecture is discussed.
The main tool for the analysis of LDPC codes under BP decoding is DE [28]. DE mimics the decoding process under a cycle-free graph assumption by tracking how the densities of the LLRs evolve with iterations. Tracking the full densities (or quantized densities in practice) is computationally demanding and extrinsic information transfer (EXIT) functions [29] are usually considered to be a good compromise between computational efficiency and accuracy. For the protograph-based codes, we employ a modified protograph EXIT (P-EXIT) analysis [30] which accounts for the different protection levels of a nonbinary signal constellation and the WD [16, Algorithm 1].
Example 2: Consider the (3, 6) regular SC-LDPC code with P0 = (2, 2), P1 = (1, 1), T = 20, J = 1, K = 2, and ms = 1, with rates R(T ) = 0.475 and R = 0.5, respectively. This is a slightly different construction compared to the one in Example 1 and the resulting codes are better suited for the use of a WD [26, Design Rule 1]. Assume that transmission takes place using PM-QPSK in the linear regime and a WD with W = 10 and lmax = 7 is used. In Fig. 5 (a), we show the predicted bit error rate (BER) obtained via the protograph extrinsic information transfer (P-EXIT) analysis (solid lines) together with the actual performance of randomly generated codes (dashed lines) for two different lifting factors M = 2000 (crosses) and M = 10 000 (dots) for both the terminated (blue) and tailbiting (red) cases. Due to graph cycles, there is a mismatch between the actual performance and the DE prediction, in particular for the smaller lifting factor. However, the P-EXIT analysis accurately predicts the SNR region where the finite-length BER curves ÔÇťbendÔÇŁ into their characteristic waterfall behavior.
In Fig. 5(a), we also indicate the two points where the P-EXIT performance curves cross a BER of 10Ôłĺ5 . We refer to the SNR value of such a point as the decoding threshold ¤üÔłŚ for a target BER = 10Ôłĺ5 and a given finite number of decoding

Fig. 5. Predicted (solid lines) and finite-length (dashed lines) performance for the codes in Examples 2 (left) and 6 (right). The codes have lengths 80 000 (a, crosses), 400 000 (a, dots), 168 000 (b, crosses), and 1 260 000 (b, dots).
iterations. The thresholds can be numerically computed using a bisection search over a given SNR range. The thresholds are given by ¤üÔłŚ Ôëł 0.82 dB and ¤üÔłŚ Ôëł 1.19 dB for the terminated and tailbiting codes, respectively. The better decoding thresholds and finite-length performance of the terminated code can be explained by inspecting the structure of the base matrix Fig. 3(a). One may verify that the CN degrees corresponding to the first and last couple of rows are lower than the CN degrees corresponding to the rows in between [see also Fig. 4(a)]. The lower degree CNs lead to a locally better decoding capability, which is visualized by the colored scale (green indicates a better correction capability), at the expense of a rate loss. This termination boundary effect initiates the wave-like decoding behavior that is characteristic for terminated SC-LDPC codes [8]. On the other hand, for the tailbiting case, all CNs have the same degree J, hence no rate loss is incurred and all positions are protected equally. However, this also prevents the initiation of a decoding wave.
IV. SC-GLDPC CODES WITH BCH COMPONENT CODES
A. Code Construction
We consider the (B, mc, T, w) SC-GLDPC code ensemble proposed in [13], where B is a binary linear code of length nB and dimension kB that can correct all error patterns of weight at most t, mc is the number of CNs per spatial position, T is the spatial length, and w is the coupling size. In the following, we assume that B is a shortened primitive BCH code with parameters (nB, kB) = (2╬Ż Ôłĺ 1 Ôłĺ s, 2╬Ż Ôłĺ ╬Żt Ôłĺ 1 Ôłĺ s), where ╬Ż is the Galois field extension degree and s is the number of shortened information bits. The code B defines the constraints that have to be satisfied by all CNs in the Tanner graph representing the SC-GLDPC code.
For completeness, we review the construction of the terminated case described in [13, Def. 2] and explain the necessary modifications for the tailbiting case. Assume that mc CNs

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HA┬Ę GER et al.: TERMINATED AND TAILBITING SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES WITH OPTIMIZED BIT MAPPINGS FOR SPECTRALLY EFFICIENT

1279

Example 5: Consider the case where w = 2 and T = Ôł×. Let nB be even and mc = nB/2. If the edge permutations are such that the semi-infinite incidence matrix is the one shown in [32, p. 54], the code corresponds to a staircase code. In other words, staircase codes are contained in the terminated ensemble for a certain choice of parameters w, T , and mc.

B. Hard-Decision Decoding and DE

Fig. 6. Tanner graph for a code in the terminated SC-GLDPC ensemble with T = 5 and w = 2. Known VNs are shown in red.

with degree nB are placed at each of the spatial positions 1 to T + w Ôłĺ 1 and mcnB/2 VNs of degree 2 are placed at each of the spatial positions 1 to T . Additionally, mcnB/2 VNs initialized to a known value are placed at positions j < 1 and j > T to
terminate the code. The connections between CNs and VNs are
as follows. The mcnB VN and CN sockets at each position are partitioned into w groups of equal size mcnB/w via a uniform random permutation. The ith group at the jth VN position and the ith group at the jth CN position are denoted by Sj(,vi) and Sj(,ci), respectively, where i Ôłł {0, 1, . . . , w Ôłĺ 1}. The Tanner graph of one particular code in the ensemble is constructed by using a uniform random permutation to connect Sj(,vi) to Sj(+c)i,w ÔłĺiÔłĺ1 and mapping the mcnB/w edges between the two groups. For the tailbiting case, the position index j + i is interpreted modulo T
and no known VNs are present.
Example 3: Consider the case where T = 5 and w = 2. The
Tanner graph of a code in the terminated ensemble is shown in
Fig. 6 . The blocks ¤Ç spread out the edges from the VNs and
CNs according to the random permutations in the construction.
A code from the tailbiting ensemble is obtained by removing
the known VNs and the CNs at position 6, and connecting the
lose edges to the CNs at position 1.
The design rate for the terminated ensemble is lower bounded
by [31, eq. (2.2)]

R

(T )

Ôëą

R

Ôłĺ (1

Ôłĺ

R

w )

Ôłĺ 1,

(1)

T

where R = 2kB/nB Ôłĺ 1 is the design rate for the tailbiting ensemble. An exact expression for the design rate can be obtained by explicitly considering the possibility that certain CNs are connected exclusively to known VNs, similar to [8, Lemma 3]. However, for the high CN degrees and small coupling factors considered in this paper, one can safely ignore this possibility and we henceforth interpret (1) as an equality.
Example 4: Let B be a shortened BCH code with ╬Ż = 7, t = 3, and s = 43, i.e., B has rate 0.75. For the terminated and tailbiting ensembles in Example 3, the design rates are given by R (T ) = 0.4 and R = 0.5, respectively.
Similar to the parity-check matrix of an LDPC code, a GLDPC code can be specified by an incidence matrix [22, p. 220]. The dimensions of the incidence matrix are mc(T + w Ôłĺ 1) ├Ś T mcnB/2 and mcT ├Ś T mcnB/2 for the terminated and tailbiting ensembles, respectively.

We use the iterative HDD algorithm based on extrinsic message passing of binary messages that is proposed in [13, Sec. II-A] (see also [18, Sec. II-C]). Assume transmission over a BSC with crossover probability p. All outgoing VN messages are initialized to the channel observation. For each CN, the incoming messages from the VNs are collected in a candidate decoding vector, which is then decoded using BDD. The outgoing CN messages are computed based on the Hamming distance between the candidate vector and the decoded vector, cf. [18, Algorithm 1]. In the next iteration, the outgoing VN message on a particular edge corresponds to the incoming message on the other edge of that VN. Decoding continues for lmax iterations. The final decision for each VN is made based on the channel observation and the two incoming messages. If the two messages agree, the bit is set to the message value. If the messages disagree, the bit is set to the binary complement of the channel observation. As pointed out in [13], extrinsic message passing is different compared to the conventional approach of decoding product-like codes (referred to as intrinsic message passing in [13]) and can be rigorously analyzed via DE even in the event of miscorrection [13], i.e., when undetected errors remain after BDD.
We briefly summarize the DE analysis presented in [13]. Assume that the all-zero codeword is transmitted and let qj(l) be the average probability that a message emitted by a VN at position j is in error (i.e., the message is ÔÇť1ÔÇŁ) after the lth iteration. The DE recursion is given by [13, eq. (5)]

qj(l)

=

1 w

w Ôłĺ1
fn B

1 w

w Ôłĺ1

qj(lÔłĺÔłĺk1+) k ; p

,

(2)

k=0

k =0

with [13, eq. (2)]

fnB (x; p)

n B Ôłĺ1 i=0

nB Ôłĺ 1 xi (1 Ôłĺ x)nBÔłĺ1Ôłĺi i

┬Ě (pPnB (i) + (1 Ôłĺ p)QnB (i)) ,

(3)

where PnB (i) and QnB (i) are defined in [13, eq. (3)] and [13, eq. (4)]. The initial conditions are qj(0) = p for j Ôłł {1, . . . , T } and qj(l) = 0 for j Ôłł/ {1, . . . , T }. For tailbiting ensembles, the subscript j Ôłĺ k + k in (2) is calculated modulo T .
The analysis in [13] is presented for unshortened BCH codes,
i.e., s = 0. However, CNs connected to known VNs are treated
as shortened component codes by adjusting the effective er-
ror probability of the incoming messages through the boundary condition qj(l) = 0 for j Ôłł/ {1, . . . , T }. If the component codes are shortened BCH codes, one can therefore apply the
same analysis as before, where nB now denotes the length of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1280

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 33, NO. 7, APRIL 1, 2015

the unshortened code and the function fnB (x; p) is replaced by fnB (x(nB Ôłĺ s)/nB; p).
The BER for the VNs at position j after the lth iteration was
not derived in [13], but can be easily found as follows. First, we
rewrite (3) in the form

fn B

(x;

p)

=

pfn1BÔćĺ1

(x)

+

(1

Ôłĺ

p)fn0

Ôćĺ1
B

(x)

,

(4)

where

fn1

Ôćĺ1
B

(x)

and

fn0BÔćĺ1

(x)

are

implicitly

defined

via

(3).

We

introduce the two variables

aj(l)

fn1

Ôćĺ1
B

1 w

w Ôłĺ1

qj(lÔłĺ)k

, bj(l)

fn0

Ôćĺ1
B

1 w

w Ôłĺ1

qj(

l) Ôłĺk

k =0

k =0

(5)

and their averages

a┬»(jl)

1 w

w Ôłĺ1

a(jl+) k

and ┬»b(jl)

1 w

w Ôłĺ1

bj(l+) k .

(6)

k=0

k=0

With these definitions, the recursion (2) becomes

qj(l) = pa┬»j(lÔłĺ1) + (1 Ôłĺ p)┬»bj(lÔłĺ1)

(7)

and the decoding error probability after the lth iteration is

pe(l,)j = p

a┬»(jlÔłĺ1)

2
+ (1 Ôłĺ p)

1 Ôłĺ 1 Ôłĺ ┬»bj(lÔłĺ1) 2

.

(8)

The final BER after lmax steps of iterative HDD is computed as

pe

=

1 T

T j=1

p(el,mj

ax

).

Since we intend to use the DE analysis in an optimization rou-

tine,

we

approximate

the

two

functions

fn1

Ôćĺ1
B

(x)

and

fn0

Ôćĺ1
B

(x)

with their high-rate scaling limit versions (i.e., for nB Ôćĺ Ôł×)

which are easier to compute and given by [13]

fn1

Ôćĺ1
B

(x)

Ôëł

¤ć

(nB x;

t

Ôłĺ

1)

(9)

and

fn0BÔćĺ1

(x)

Ôëł

1 nB(t Ôłĺ

1)! ¤ć (nBx; t) ,

(10)

where ¤ć (╬╗; t) = 1 Ôłĺ

t i=0

╬╗i i!

eÔłĺ╬╗.

It is straightforward to modify the decoding algorithm and

the DE analysis if a similar WD as for the protograph-based

SC-LDPC codes is used and hence we omit the details.

Example 6: Consider the case where T = 20 and w = 2.

Let B be the same BCH code as in Example 3. The design

rates are R (T ) = 0.475 and R = 0.5, respectively. Assume

transmission using PM-QPSK in the linear regime and a WD

with W = 5 and lmax = 10. In Fig. 5(b), we show the pre-

dicted BER obtained via DE (solid lines) together with the

actual performance of randomly generated codes (dashed lines)

for mc = 200 (crosses) and mc = 1500 (dots) for both the ter-

minated (blue) and tailbiting (red) cases. The decoding thresholds at a BER of 10Ôłĺ5 are ¤üÔłŚ Ôëł 3.71 dB and ¤üÔłŚ Ôëł 3.94 dB,

respectively.

V. BIT MAPPER OPTIMIZATION
The different modulation bits of a nonbinary signal constellation have different protection levels, which can be taken

advantage of by optimizing the bit mapper. This concept is eas-

iest to understand for HDD, which we describe first.

For the ÔÇťhardÔÇŁ demodulator, the entire block diagram shown

in Fig. 1 can be replaced by m parallel BSCs with different

crossover probabilities pi, 1 ÔëĄ i ÔëĄ m, which depend on the

signal constellation, binary labeling, and SNR ¤ü. Each VN cor-

responds to a coded bit, and for the SC-GLDPC codes there are

mcnB/2 VNs at each spatial position (see Section IV-A). The baseline bit mapper (see Section II) allocates the same num-

ber of coded bits from each spatial position to the different

modulation bits (i.e., the m parallel BSCs). In this case, the

crossover probability for the VNs at an arbitrary spatial posi-

tion

is

simply

the

average

p┬»

=

1 m

m i=1

pi

.

More

generally,

the

bit mapper is modeled by specifying the assignment of VNs

to the modulation bits via a matrix A = [ai,j ] Ôłł Rm├ŚT , where

ai,j , 0 ÔëĄ ai,j ÔëĄ 1 ÔłÇi, j, denotes the proportional allocation of

the coded bits corresponding to the VNs at spatial position j

allocated to the ith modulation bit, and

m i=1

ai,j

=

1,

for

all

j. The effective crossover probability for the VNs at spatial po-

sition j is therefore a weighted average of the BSC crossover

probabilities according to ╬Áj =

m i=

1

ai,j

pi

.

To

account

for

dif-

ferent crossover probabilities at the spatial positions in the DE

analysis, we can simply replace p in (2) by ╬Áj .

For the protograph-based SC-LDPC codes with SDD, one

can make similar considerations. Each VN in the protograph

represents M VNs in the lifted Tanner graph, i.e., M coded

bits. If we assume for example that a given protograph is lifted

with a lifting factor M which is divisible by m, the baseline bit

mapper allocates M/m coded bits for each protograph VN to

each modulation bit. The bit mapper is modeled via a matrix A = [ai,j ] Ôłł Rm ├ŚnC , where ai,j now denotes the proportional

allocation of the coded bits corresponding to the jth column in

the base matrix allocated to the ith modulation bit. The matrix

A is then used in the modified P-EXIT analysis to predict the

iterative performance behavior under SDD [16, Algorithm 1].

We optimize A based on the decoding threshold with the help

of differential evolution [33]. For more details about the opti-

mization procedure, we refer the reader to [16], where we also

discuss several techniques to reduce the optimization complexity for SC codes. Once an optimized bit mapping matrix AÔłŚ is

found, the finite-length bit mapper is obtained via the rounded matrix (mcnB/2)AÔłŚ for the SC-GLDPC codes and via M AÔłŚ
for the SC-LDPC codes, from which the index assignment of

coded bits to modulation bits is determined.

VI. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
Since this paper does not deal with code design, we rely on code parameters that have been proposed elsewhere in the literature in order to illustrate the bit mapper optimization technique. For the numerical results, we consider protograph-based SC-LDPC codes with P0 = (1, 2, 1, 2) and P1 = (3, 2, 3, 2), where J = 1, K = 4, and ms = 1 [34]. The design rate of the tailbiting case is R = 0.75 (OH = 33%). For the SC-GLDPC codes, we restrict ourselves to w = 2 and use the BCH code parameters in [35, Table I] which are optimized for staircase codes. In particular, we consider ╬Ż = 9, t = 4, and s = 223,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HA┬Ę GER et al.: TERMINATED AND TAILBITING SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES WITH OPTIMIZED BIT MAPPINGS FOR SPECTRALLY EFFICIENT

1281

Fig. 7. Optimized allocation to the modulation bits with the best (green), worst (red), and intermediate (yellow, for PM-64-QAM) protection level for each spatial position of the tailbiting code in two scenarios. (a) SC-LDPC, R = 0.75, PM-64-QAM. (b) SC-GLDPC, R = 0.75, PM-16-QAM.
which again leads to R = 0.75. The staircase code for these parameters is estimated to perform approximately 1.38 dB away from the BSC capacity (at a BER of 10Ôłĺ15 ) [35, Table I]. We also consider an example with higher rate and performance closer to capacity. In particular, we consider ╬Ż = 10, t = 4, s = 143 where R = 0.91 (OH = 10%). The gap to capacity of the staircase code for these parameters is estimated to be 0.59 dB [35, Table I].
The bit mapper optimization is performed for the terminated and tailbiting cases of the three code examples for different spatial lengths T Ôłł {12, 21, 30, 39, 48, 57, 66, 75, 84, 300}. We consider Gray-labeled PM-16-QAM, PM-64-QAM, and PM256-QAM. In all scenarios, a WD is employed with a window size of W = 5 and lmax = 10 iterations per window. The target BER for the optimization is set to 10Ôłĺ5 . Setting a lower target BER (e.g., 10Ôłĺ15 ) has virtually no influence on the optimization outcome due to the steepness of the predicted DE performance curves (see Fig. 5). This assumes that there are no error floors due to harmful graph structures, which cannot be modeled using DE and are not considered in this paper. An analysis of the error floor for the considered SC-GLDPC codes is an interesting topic for future work and beyond the scope of this paper.
A. Structure of the Optimized Bit Mapper for Tailbiting Codes
For the tailbiting codes, the optimized bit mappers have an interesting structure, which is illustrated in Fig. 7 for two scenarios: (a) the SC-LDPC code with SDD, PM-64-QAM, and T = 30; (b) the SC-GLDPC code with HDD, R = 0.75, PM16-QAM, and T = 30. For PM-64-QAM and PM-16-QAM, the modulation bits have three and two different protection levels, respectively. Due to the tailbiting code structure, the bit allocation is invariant to a circular shift, assuming that the scheduling of the WD is modified according to the same shift. For the allocation shown in Fig. 7, it is assumed that the first decoding window begins at the first spatial position. The optimized bit mapper in both scenarios deviates significantly from the baseline mapper in the first few spatial positions. For the SC-LDPC code, the coded bits corresponding to the second, third, and fourth spatial position are proportionally more allocated to the best (green) and intermediate (yellow) protection level of PM-64-QAM. Similarly, for the SC-GLDPC code, the coded bits corresponding to the second and third spatial position are proportionally more

allocated to the best modulation bit of PM-16-QAM. In both cases, the optimized allocation leads to a locally improved decoding convergence and initiates a wave-like decoding behavior comparable to that of terminated codes, i.e., the unequal error protection of the signal constellation is exploited to create an artificial termination boundary.
The performance gain due to the optimized bit mapper (which is quantified in the next section) comes at the expense of some increase in system complexity. In particular, one has to account for additional buffering because a symbol cannot be transmitted until all its m bits are encoded. For simplicity, let us assume a model where the FEC encoder outputs coded bits in blocks of M K or mcnB/2 bits, i.e., the number of bits per spatial position, and symbols are immediately modulated as soon as all m modulation bits are available. Then, no buffering is required for the sequential baseline mapper. On the other hand, the ÔÇťworst-caseÔÇŁ bit mapper allocates 100% of the coded bits in the first T /m spatial positions to the first modulation bit, 100% in the next T /m positions to the second bit, and so on (i.e., ai,j = 1 for (i Ôłĺ 1)T /m + 1 ÔëĄ j ÔëĄ iT /m). Consequently, no bits are allocated to the last modulation bit until spatial position (m Ôłĺ 1)T /m + 1 and buffering of all coded bits up to position (m Ôłĺ 1)T /m is required. In all considered scenarios, however, the required additional buffer size (in terms of the number of spatial positions) due to the optimized bit mappers did not exceed 2.
B. Optimization Gain
In Fig. 8, we show the optimization gain (in dB) as a function of the spatial length T for all considered scenarios. The optimization gain is defined as the difference between the decoding threshold using the baseline bit mapper and the decoding threshold using the optimized bit mapper. The gain quantifies the performance improvement one can expect by employing the optimized bit mappers assuming long codes.
Regardless of the signal constellation or code class, the optimization gain decreases with T for the terminated codes and increases for the tailbiting codes. This behavior can be explained as follows. The optimization gain for the tailbiting codes comes from allocating more coded bits in the beginning of the spatial chain to good modulation bits in order to initiate a decoding wave. This, however, reduces the effective capacity for the bits in the middle part of the spatial chain. As T increases, this reduction becomes negligible and the optimization gain tends to a constant value. For terminated codes, a decoding wave is initiated by default and the optimized bit mapper increases the effective capacity for the bits in the middle part by allocating bits in the beginning and end of the chain proportionally more to modulation bits with lower protection levels. Again, as T increases, this effect becomes negligible and the gain approaches zero. As a result, while the tailbiting codes significantly benefit from the optimization, the gain for the considered terminated codes is limited, i.e., for T Ôëą 30 the gain is < 0.1 dB in all cases.
It can also be observed that the optimization gain generally depends on the signal constellation. The gain increases with the modulation order M due to the increased number of protection

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1282

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 33, NO. 7, APRIL 1, 2015

Fig. 8. Optimization gain as a function of the spatial length T . (a) SC-LDPC, R = 0.75. (b) SC-GLDPC, R = 0.75. (c) SC-GLDPC, R = 0.91.

Fig. 9. Capacity gap as a function of the spatial length T for PM-64-QAM. (a) SC-LDPC, R = 0.75. (b) SC-GLDPC, R = 0.75. (c) SC-GLDPC, R = 0.91.

levels and stronger unequal error protection. This gain increase can also be observed when optimizing bit mappers for irregular LDPC codes, see, e.g., [36]. It is also important to stress that the optimization relies on the availability of a signal constellation with different protection levels in order to provide a performance gain. In particular, the techniques do not apply to PM-BPSK or (Gray-labeled) PM-QPSK.

the optimized systems, it can be seen that the gap for the SCLDPC codes is virtually identical for terminated and tailbiting cases. For the SC-GLDPC codes, the tailbiting codes perform closer to capacity, albeit the difference to the terminated codes for T Ôëą 30 is small. For very long spatial lengths (i.e., T = 300), the capacity gap virtually overlaps also for the SCGLDPC codes.

C. Gap to Capacity
In order to gain some insight into the performance of the terminated and tailbiting codes relative to each other, the capacity gap (in dB) as a function of the spatial length T is shown in Fig. 9 for PM-64-QAM. For SDD of the SC-LDPC codes, the BICM capacity [5] is taken as a benchmark. For HDD of the GLDPC codes, the capacity of the BSC with averaged crossover probability is taken as a benchmark, similar to [37]. Alternatively, one may use the capacity of the sum of the m parallel BSCs as a benchmark, which is larger. The gains discussed in the previous section are indicated in Fig. 9 with arrows.
The decoding thresholds for the baseline systems are approximately independent of T . Therefore, the capacity gap for the tailbiting codes remains constant in all cases, while the capacity gap for the terminated codes decreases due to the vanishing rate loss. For the baseline systems, the performance difference between terminated and tailbiting codes is most significant for the SC-LDPC codes (up to 0.75 dB), while for the SC-GLDPC codes the difference is lower (up to 0.25 dB for R = 0.75 and up to 0.19 dB for R = 0.91). In all cases, the capacity gap is reduced by employing the optimized bit mappers. If we compare

D. Simulation Results
The results presented in the previous two sections are based on decoding thresholds, i.e., assume an infinite code length. The deviation of the DE analysis from the finite-length performance is determined by the lifting factor M and the number of CNs per position mc, see Fig. 5.
As an example, consider the SC-LDPC code with T = 30 and M = 3000 leading to a code length of nC = 360 000. The rates are R(30) Ôëł 0.742 and R = 0.75, respectively. In Fig. 10, we show simulation results (dashed lines with dots) and the analytical P-EXIT prediction (solid lines) for the AWGN channel, i.e., a linear transmission scenario, assuming PM-64-QAM. As predicted by the optimization gain in Fig. 8(a), the tailbiting code performs significantly better with an optimized bit mapper and a gain of Ôëł 0.55 dB is achieved at a BER of 10Ôłĺ5 . The terminated code performs better for the same SNR, but entails a smaller spectral efficiency due to the rate loss. The gap to the BER-constrained BICM capacity [22, p. 17] of the two optimized systems, as indicated by the arrows and predicted from Fig. 9(a), is approximately the same (as is the gap to the AWGN channel capacity, not shown).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HA┬Ę GER et al.: TERMINATED AND TAILBITING SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES WITH OPTIMIZED BIT MAPPINGS FOR SPECTRALLY EFFICIENT

1283

of a 1.2% decrease in spectral efficiency. The performance of the terminated code with the baseline bit mapper is very close to the performance of the tailbiting code with the optimized bit mapper and is therefore not shown in Figs. 10 and 11 for clarity.

Fig. 10. Simulation results for the SC-LDPC code with PM-64-QAM over the AWGN channel. The codes have length 360 000.

VII. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we considered the optimized allocation of the coded bits from the FEC encoder to the modulation bits for terminated and tailbiting SC FEC schemes, assuming both SDD and HDD, as well as different signal constellations. Terminated SC codes generally benefit little from the optimization, particularly for long spatial lengths. However, the performance of tailbiting SC-LDPC codes can be significantly improved. With an optimized bit allocation, the terminated and tailbiting codes are competitive, in the sense that spectral efficiency can be traded for transmission reach, at approximately the same gap to capacity.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank helpful discussions with H. D. Pfister regarding the SC-GLDPC ensemble.

Fig. 11. Simulation results for the SC-LDPC with PM-64-QAM over a dispersion uncompensated transmission link.
Lastly, we also present simulation results for a nonlinear transmission scenario. We set ╬▒ = 0.25 dB/km, ╬▓2 = Ôłĺ21.668 ps2 /km, ╬│ = 1.4 WÔłĺ1 kmÔłĺ1 , ╬Żs = 1.934 ├Ś 1014 Hz, nsp = 1.622, Rs = 40 GBaud, and Lsp = 70 km. A root-raised cosine pulse p(t) with a roll-off factor of 0.25 is used. We employ the symmetric split-step Fourier method with two samples per symbol and a fixed step size [38, Sec. 2.4.1]. The input power per polarization is set to P = Ôłĺ2.5 dBm. In the simulation model, the polarization state is assumed to be known and perfect timing and carrier synchronization is assumed. In Fig. 11, the simulated BER of the PM transmission systems is plotted as a function of the number of fiber spans Nsp . For the tailbiting code, the 0.55 dB gain obtained by using the optimized bit mapper translates into an increase of the transmission reach by roughly three additional spans or approximately 13%. This gain is obtained at almost no increased system complexity cost, i.e., by simply replacing the baseline bit mapper with an optimized one. This reach extension can also be approximately calculated using the analytical expression for the SNR ¤ü as a function of the number of spans presented in [24]. The terminated code enables a longer transmission reach of approximately one span, at the expense

REFERENCES
[1] R.-J. Essiambre, G. Kramer, P. J. Winzer, G. J. Foschini, and B. Goebel, ÔÇťCapacity limits of optical fiber networks,ÔÇŁ J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 662ÔÇô701, Feb. 2010.
[2] B. P. Smith and F. R. Kschischang, ÔÇť Future prospects for FEC in fiberoptic communications,ÔÇŁ IEEE J. Sel. Topics Quantum Electron., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 1245ÔÇô1257, Oct. 2010.
[3] L. Schmalen, A. J. de Lind van Wijngaarden, and S. ten Brink, ÔÇťForward error correction in optical core and optical access networks,ÔÇŁ Bell Labs Tech. J., vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 39ÔÇô66, Mar. 2013.
[4] L. Beygi, E. Agrell, J. M. Kahn, and M. Karlsson, ÔÇťCoded modulation for fiber-optic networks,ÔÇŁ IEEE Signal Process. Mag., vol. 31, no. 2, pp. 93ÔÇô103, Mar. 2014.
[5] G. Caire, G. Taricco, and E. Biglieri, ÔÇťBit-interleaved coded modulation,ÔÇŁ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 44, no. 3, pp. 927ÔÇô946, May 1998.
[6] A. Leven and L. Schmalen, ÔÇťStatus and recent advances on forward error correction technologies for lightwave systems,ÔÇŁ presented at the Eur. Conf. Opt. Commun., London, U.K., 2013, Paper We.2.C.1.
[7] Y. Miyata, T. Sugihara, K. Kubo, H. Yoshida, and W. Matsumoto, ÔÇťA spatially-coupled type LDPC code with an NCG of 12 dB for optical transmission beyond 100 Gb/s,ÔÇŁ presented at the Opt. Fiber Commun. Conf., Anaheim, CA, USA, Mar. 2013, Paper OM2B.4.
[8] S. Kudekar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, ÔÇťThreshold saturation via spatial coupling: Why convolutional LDPC ensembles perform so well over the BEC,ÔÇŁ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 57, no. 2, pp. 803ÔÇô834, Feb. 2011.
[9] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, ÔÇť On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,ÔÇŁ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 58ÔÇô60, Feb. 2001.
[10] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, ÔÇťDesign of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,ÔÇŁ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 619ÔÇô637, Feb. 2001.
[11] J. Thorpe, ÔÇťLow-density parity-check (LDPC) codes constructed from photographs,ÔÇŁ Jet Propulsion Lab., California Inst. Technol., Pasadena, CA, USA, IPN Progress Rep. 42-154, 2005.
[12] D. G. M. Mitchell, M. Lentmaier, and D. J. Costello, Jr., ÔÇťAWGN channel analysis of terminated LDPC convolutional codes,ÔÇŁ presented at the Inf. Theory Appl. Workshop, La Jolla, CA, USA, 2011.
[13] Y.-Y. Jian, H. D. Pfister, and K. R. Narayanan, ÔÇťApproaching capacity at high rates with iterative hard-decision decoding,ÔÇŁ presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inf. Theory, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2012.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1284

JOURNAL OF LIGHTWAVE TECHNOLOGY, VOL. 33, NO. 7, APRIL 1, 2015

[14] B. P. Smith, A. Farhood, A. Hunt, F. R. Kschischang, and J. Lodge, ÔÇťStaircase codes: FEC for 100 Gb/s OTN,ÔÇŁ J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 110ÔÇô117, Jan. 2012.
[15] A. Leven and L. Schmalen, ÔÇťStatus and recent advances on forward error correction technologies for lightwave systems,ÔÇŁ J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 32, no. 16, pp. 2735ÔÇô2750, Aug. 2014.
[16] C. Ha┬Ęger, A. Graell i Amat, F. Bra┬Ęnnstro┬Ęm, A. Alvarado, and E. Agrell, ÔÇťImproving soft FEC performance for higher-order modulations via optimized bit channel mappings,ÔÇŁ Opt. Exp., vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 14 544ÔÇô14 558, Jun. 2014.
[17] M. Lentmaier and G. P. Fettweis, ÔÇťOn the thresholds of generalized LDPC convolutional codes based on protographs,ÔÇŁ in presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Austin, TX, USA, 2010.
[18] Y.-Y. Jian, H. D. Pfister, K. R. Narayanan, R. Rao, and R. Matahreh, ÔÇťIterative hard-decision decoding of braided BCH codes for high-speed optical communication,ÔÇŁ in presented at the IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Atlanta, GA, USA, 2014.
[19] I. Djordjevic, O. Milenkovic, and B. Vasic, ÔÇťGeneralized low-density parity-check codes for optical communication systems,ÔÇŁ J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 1939ÔÇô1946, May 2005.
[20] I. Djordjevic, L. Xu, T. Wang, and M. Cvijetic, ÔÇťGLDPC codes with ReedMuller component codes suitable for optical communications,ÔÇŁ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 12, no. 9, pp. 684ÔÇô686, Sep. 2008.
[21] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, L. B. Milstein, and H. D. Pfister, ÔÇťCapacityapproaching bandwidth-efficient coded modulation schemes based on low-density parity-check codes,ÔÇŁ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 49, no. 9, pp. 2141ÔÇô2155, Sep. 2003.
[22] W. Ryan and S. Lin, Channel Codes Classical and Modern. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University, 2009.
[23] G. P. Agrawal, Lightwave Technology: Telecommunication Systems. New York, NY, USA: Wiley-Interscience, 2005.
[24] L. Beygi, E. Agrell, P. Johannisson, M. Karlsson, and H. Wymeersch, ÔÇťA discrete-time model for uncompensated single-channel fiber-optical links,ÔÇŁ IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 60, no. 11, pp. 3440ÔÇô3450, Nov. 2012.
[25] A. Carena, G. Bosco, V. Curri, Y. Jiang, P. Poggiolini, and F. Forghieri, ÔÇťEGN model of non-linear fiber propagation,ÔÇŁ Opt. Exp., vol. 22, no. 13, pp. 16335ÔÇô16362, Jun. 2014.
[26] A. R. Iyengar, M. Papaleo, P. H. Siegel, J. K. Wolf, A. Vanelli-Coralli, and G. E. Corazza, ÔÇťWindowed decoding of protograph-based LDPC convolutional codes over erasure channels,ÔÇŁ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 58, no. 4, pp. 2303ÔÇô2320, Apr. 2012.
[27] M. B. Tavares, K. S. Zigangirov, and G. P. Fettweis, ÔÇťTail-biting LDPC convolutional codes,ÔÇŁ presented at the IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Nice, Italy, 2007.
[28] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, ÔÇťThe capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,ÔÇŁ IEEE Trans. Inf. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599ÔÇô618, Feb. 2001.
[29] S. Ten Brink, ÔÇťConvergence of iterative decoding,ÔÇŁ Electron. Lett., vol. 35, no. 10, pp. 806ÔÇô808, May 1999.
[30] G. Liva and M. Chiani, ÔÇťProtograph LDPC codes design based on EXIT analysis,ÔÇŁ presented at the IEEE Global Commun. Conf., Washington, DC, USA, 2007.
[31] Y.-Y. Jian, ÔÇťOn the analysis of spatially-coupled GLDPC codes and the weighted min-sum algorithm,ÔÇŁ Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Comput. Eng., , Texas A&M Univ., College Station, TX, USA, 2013.
[32] B. P. Smith, ÔÇťError-correcting codes for fibre-optic communication systems,ÔÇŁ Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Comput. Eng., , Univ. Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, 2011.
[33] R. Storn and K. Price, ÔÇťDifferential evolutionÔÇôa simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces,ÔÇŁ J. Global Opt., vol. 11, pp. 341ÔÇô359, Nov. 1997.
[34] L. Schmalen and S. ten Brink, ÔÇťCombining spatially coupled LDPC codes with modulation and detection,ÔÇŁ presented at the Int. Conf. Syst., Commun. Coding, Munich, Germany, Jan. 2013.
[35] L. M. Zhang and F. R. Kschischang, ÔÇťStaircase codes with 6% to 33% overhead,ÔÇŁ J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 32, no. 10, pp. 1999ÔÇô2002, May 2014.
[36] T. Cheng, K. Peng, J. Song, and K. Yan, ÔÇťEXIT-aided bit mapping design for LDPC coded modulation with APSK constellations,ÔÇŁ IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 777ÔÇô780, Jun. 2012.
[37] B. Smith and F. R. Kschischang, ÔÇť A pragmatic coded modulation scheme for high-spectral-efficiency fiber-optic communications,ÔÇŁ J. Lightw. Technol., vol. 30, no. 13, pp. 2047ÔÇô2053, Jul. 2012.
[38] G. P. Agrawal, Nonlinear Fiber Optics, 4th ed. New York, NY, USA: Academic, 2006.

Christian Ha┬Ęger (SÔÇÖ11) was born in 1986 in Volkmarsen, Germany. He received the Dipl.-Ing. degree in electrical engineering from Ulm University, Ulm, Germany, in 2011, and the Lic.Eng. degree in communication theory from Chalmers University, Gothenburg, Sweden, in 2014. Since September 2011, he has been working toward the Ph.D. degree at the Department of Signals and Systems, Communication Systems Group, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, in the area of coded modulation for coherent fiber-optical communication systems. In 2010, he was with Bosch Security Systems GmbH in Munich, where he participated in the physical layer design of an OFDM-based communication system. His research interests include digital communication and channel coding theory.
Alexandre Graell i Amat (SÔÇÖ01ÔÇôMÔÇÖ05ÔÇôSMÔÇÖ10) received the M.Sc. degree in telecommunications engineering from the Universitat Polite`cnica de Catalunya, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain, in 2001, and the M.Sc. and the Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy, in 2000 and 2004, respectively. From September 2001 to May 2002, he was a Visiting Scholar at the University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA. From September 2002 to May 2003, he held a Visiting Appointment at the Universitat Pompeu Fabra and at the Telecommunications Technological Center of Catalonia, both in Barcelona. From 2001 to 2004, he also held a Part-Time Appointment at STMicroelectronics Data Storage Division, Milan, Italy, as a Consultant on coding for magnetic recording channels. From March 2004 to December 2005, he was a Visiting Professor at the Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona, Spain. From January 2006 to December 2010, he was with the Department of Electronics, TELECOM Bretagne (former ENST Bretagne), Brest, France. In January 2011, he joined the Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His research interests include the areas of coding and information theory and optical communications. He is currently an Associate Editor of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS. He was also an Associate Editor of the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS (2011ÔÇô2013) and Transactions on Emerging Telecommunications Technologies (2011ÔÇô2012). He was the General Co-Chair of the 7th International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Iterative Information Processing, Gothenburg, Sweden, August 2012. He received the postdoctoral Juan de la Cierva Fellowship from the Spanish Ministry of Education and Science and the Marie Curie Intra-European Fellowship from the European Commission. He received the runner-up of the IEEE Communications Society 2010 Europe, Middle East, and Africa Region Outstanding Young Researcher Award.
Fredrik Bra┬Ęnnstro┬Ęm (SÔÇÖ98ÔÇôMÔÇÖ05) received the M.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from the Lulea╦Ü University of Technology, Lulea╦Ü, Sweden, in 1998, the Lic.Eng. degree in communication theory, and the Ph.D. degree in communication theory from the Department of Computer Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden, in 2000 and 2004, respectively. In 2012, he received the Docent title in Communication Systems from the Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of Technology. He has spent periods of 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2005 as a Visiting Researcher at the Institute for Telecommunications Research, University of South Australia, Adelaide, Australia. From 2004 to 2006, he was a Postdoctoral Researcher in the Communication Systems Group at the Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of Technology. From 2006 to 2010, he was a Senior Algorithm Engineer and a Principal Design Engineer at Quantenna Communications, Fremont, CA, USA. At Quantenna, he was part of the system team that developed the PHY layer for the worldÔÇÖs first WiFi 802.11n chip with 4 ├Ś4 MIMO using dynamic digital beamforming together with LDPC codes operating at 600 Mb/s. In 2010, he joined the Department of Signals and Systems, Chalmers University of Technology, where he is currently an Associate Professor. His research interests include communication theory and information theory in code design, coded modulation, bit-to-symbol mappings, and efficient iterative processing, as well as algorithms, resource allocation, synchronization, and protocol design for vehicular communication systems.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

HA┬Ę GER et al.: TERMINATED AND TAILBITING SPATIALLY COUPLED CODES WITH OPTIMIZED BIT MAPPINGS FOR SPECTRALLY EFFICIENT

1285

Alex Alvarado (SÔÇÖ06ÔÇôMÔÇÖ11) was born in 1982 in Quello┬┤n, Chiloe┬┤, Chile. He received the Electronic Engineering Diploma (Ingeniero Civil Electro┬┤nico) and the Master of Science in electronic engineering (Mag┬┤─▒ster en Ciencias de la Ingenier┬┤─▒a Electro┬┤nica) from the Departamento de Electro┬┤nica, Universidad Te┬┤cnica Federico Santa Mar┬┤─▒a, Chile, in 2003 and 2005, respectively. He received the degree of Licentiate of Engineering (Teknologie Licentiatexamen) in 2008 and the Ph.D. degree in 2011, both of them from the Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg, Sweden. He is currently a Senior Research Associate at the Optical Networks Group, University College London, U.K. From 2012 to 2014, he was a Marie Curie Intra-European Fellow at the University of Cambridge, Cambridge, U.K., and during 2011ÔÇô2012 he was a Newton International Fellow at the same institution. His general research interests include areas of digital communications, coding, and information theory.

Erik Agrell (MÔÇÖ99ÔÇôSMÔÇÖ02) received the Ph.D. degree in information theory from the Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenberg, Sweden, in 1997. From 1997 to 1999, he was a Postdoctoral Researcher with the University of California, San Diego, CA, USA, and the University of Illinois at UrbanaChampaign, Champaign, IL, USA. In 1999, he joined the Faculty of Chalmers University of Technology, where he has been a Professor in communication systems since 2009. In 2010, he cofounded the Fiber-Optic Communications Research Center at Chalmers, where he leads the signals and systems research area. He has been a Visiting Professor at the University College London, U.K., since 2014. His research interests include the fields of information theory, coding theory, and digital communications, and his favorite applications are found in optical communications. He was the Publications Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY from 1999 to 2002 and has been an Associate Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS since 2012. He received the 1990 John Ericsson Medal, the 2009 ITW Best Poster Award, the 2011 GlobeCom Best Paper Award, the 2013 CTW Best Poster Award, and the 2013 Chalmers Supervisor of the Year Award.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 24,2026 at 17:22:43 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

