2098

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

Graph-Based Message-Passing Schedules for Decoding LDPC Codes
Hua Xiao and Amir H. Banihashemi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we study a wide range of graph-based message-passing schedules for iterative decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Using the Tanner graph (TG) of the code and for different nodes and edges of the graph, we relate the first iteration in which the corresponding messages deviate from their optimal value (corresponding to a cycle-free graph) to the girths and the lengths of the shortest closed walks in the graph. Using this result, we propose schedules, which are designed based on the distribution of girths and closed walks in the TG of the code, and categorize them as node based versus edge based, unidirectional versus bidirectional, and deterministic versus probabilistic. These schedules, in some cases, outperform the previously known schedules, and in other cases, provide less complex alternatives with more or less the same performance. The performance/complexity tradeoff and the best choice of schedule appear to depend not only on the girth and closed-walk distributions of the TG, but also on the iterative decoding algorithm and channel characteristics. We examine the application of schedules to belief propagation (sum–product) over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and Rayleigh fading channels, min-sum (max-sum) over an AWGN channel, and Gallager’s algorithm A over a binary symmetric channel.
Index Terms—Coding, decoding algorithms, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing schedules, Tanner graph (TG).

I. INTRODUCTION

L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes were first introduced by Gallager [1], in the 1960s. They are con-

structed based on sparse parity-check matrices (or sparse

bipartite graphs). LDPC codes were rediscovered in the

mid-to-late 1990s, and have since received a great deal of

attention due to their capacity-achieving error performance

and the low complexity of the associated iterative decoding

algorithms (see [2]–[5], and the references therein).

An LDPC code , like any other linear block code, can be

fully described by its parity-check matrix , through the parity-

check equations

. For LDPC codes, however,

the parity-check matrix is sparse (only a small fraction of ele-

ments are nonzero). This makes LDPC codes attractive for iter-

ative decoding. Iterative decoding algorithms are naturally de-

scribed using a graph of the code constructed based on . Such

Paper approved by T.-K. Truong, the Editor for Coding Theory and Techniques of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received July 28, 2003; revised April 13, 2004 and June 17, 2004. This paper was presented in part at the 21st Biennial Symposium on Communications, Kingston, ON, Canada, June 2002.
The authors are with the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Center, Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: huaxiao@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce. carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.838730

a graph is called a Tanner graph (TG) [6]. To describe TGs and the associated decoding algorithms, we assume that the codes are binary. A TG is a bipartite graph that contains two types of nodes, symbol nodes and check nodes, corresponding to the columns and the rows of the parity check matrix , respectively. A one located at position of corresponds to an edge between symbol node and check node .
Iterative decoding algorithms, also called “message-passing algorithms,” are performed by exchanging messages between check nodes and symbol nodes through the edges of the graph, in both directions and iteratively. The complexity per iteration of the algorithms is then proportional to the number of edges, and is relatively low due to the sparseness of . The messages could be “hard” and/or “soft” information, and the operations performed in symbol and check nodes to generate messages depend on the nature of the decoding algorithm and the message type(s). Generally speaking, an iterative decoding algorithm starts by creating initial (local) messages (weights) for each symbol node from the observations at the output of the channel and channel characteristics. As the first step, it then passes these initial messages to check nodes through the edges of the TG. Iterations then follow, with each iteration consisting of two steps: 1) check nodes processing the incoming information and passing new (extrinsic) messages to the symbol nodes. These messages usually measure the inference made by check nodes of the value and reliability of symbol nodes. 2) Symbol nodes processing the incoming messages sent by check nodes and sending updated (extrinsic) information about their value and the associated reliability to check nodes. Here, “extrinsic” means that the outgoing message sent along one edge does not depend on the incoming message along the same edge. At each iteration, a hard decision on the value of each bit (0 or 1) is made at symbol nodes. The algorithm stops if the hard-decision assignment for bits satisfies all the check equations, or a maximum number of iterations is reached.
There are a wide variety of iterative algorithms for decoding LDPC codes, each offering a particular tradeoff between error performance and decoding complexity. There are hard-decision algorithms such as Gallager’s algorithm A (GA) [1], and soft-decision algorithms such as the belief propagation (BP) or sum–product algorithm, and max-sum or min-sum (MS) [6], [7]. BP is known to result in the best error performance among iterative decoding algorithms. It is, however, the most complex to implement. Min-sum, on the other hand, has lower complexity and performs only slightly inferior to BP, particularly at high signal-to-noise ratios (SNRs). Hard-decision algorithms are of interest mainly due to their very low complexity and simple implementation.

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO AND BANIHASHEMI: GRAPH-BASED MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR DECODING LDPC CODES

2099

A message-passing schedule or schedule, in brief, is the

order of message passing between check nodes and symbol

nodes in a TG, also called the “updating rule.” Conventionally,

in the context of decoding LDPC codes, the message-passing

schedule for iterative decoding algorithms is the so-called

parallel or flooding schedule [7]. In flooding, at each itera-

tion, all the symbol nodes, and subsequently, all the check

nodes, pass new messages to all their neighboring nodes. For a

cycle-free TG, BP and MS algorithms with flooding schedule

result in the optimal a posteriori probability (APP) decoding

and maximum-likelihood sequence decoding, respectively [7].

However, for an LDPC code with short block length (less than

several thousand bits), since the TG often contains many small

cycles, these algorithms presumably perform far from optimal

[8]. In [9], Mao and Banihashemi presented the probabilistic

schedule as an alternate for the flooding schedule. The idea is

to randomly adjust the frequency of message passing in each

symbol node in accordance with the length of the shortest

cycle (girth) passing through the node, i.e., each symbol node

updates its outgoing messages with a probability proportional

to its girth. Simulation results based on BP for an additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, which demonstrate

the performance improvement of probabilistic schedule over

flooding, were also presented in [9].

In this paper, which is mainly based on the results of [10], we

present several new scheduling schemes based on the distribu-

tion of girths and closed walks in the TG, some outperforming

the probabilistic schedule of [9]. We also examine the applica-

tion of these schemes not only to BP, but also to MS and GA al-

gorithms. For the channel model, we consider AWGN, Rayleigh

fading, and binary symmetric channels (BSCs). Motivated by the

fact that the messages are, in fact, passed along the edges of the

graph, we introduce “edge-basedschedules,” which in some cases

appear to outperform the corresponding “node-based schedules.”

As one example, we apply an edge-based probabilistic schedule

to the GA algorithm for decoding a (1200, 600) regular LDPC

code, and show an improvement of more than 0.3 dB in

over flooding at the bit-error rate (BER) of . This is achieved

while the node-based probabilistic schedule of [9] performs al-

most the same as flooding in this case. We also introduce bidirec-

tional schedules which control the flow of messages in both direc-

tions on the TG, from symbol nodes to check nodes, and vice versa.

We provide an example of the application of an edge-based bidi-

rectional probabilistic schedule to the BP algorithm for decoding

an (8000, 4000) regular LDPC code over an AWGN channel. For

this example, while flooding demonstrates an early error floor,

and a BER of

at

dB, the new schedule

achieves BER

at the same

(more than two

orders of magnitude improvement in BER), and shows no sign of

error floor. We also present deterministic schedules that perform

very close to probabilistic ones, but are much simpler to imple-

ment. Our results show that a proper choice of schedule is not only

a function of the girth and closed-walk distributions of the TG,

but also depends on the iterative decoding algorithm, the channel

model, and the desirable performance/complexity tradeoff.

In the rest of this paper, we first study the relationship be-

tween the structure of the TG and the suboptimality of itera-

tive decoding algorithms in Section II. We then present mes-

sage-passing schedules in Section III, based on the analysis of Section II. In Section IV, simulation results are presented and discussed. Section V is devoted to some concluding remarks.
II. TG STRUCTURE AND SUBOPTIMALITY OF ITERATIVE ALGORITHMS
A. Suboptimality of Iterative Algorithms
Suppose that information bits are independent and an iterative decoding algorithm is used to decode an LDPC code over a memoryless channel. If the TG of the code is cycle-free, throughout the iteration process, for each node, all the incoming messages are independent of each other. Moreover, for a cycle-free TG, all the incoming messages are also independent of the local weight, in the case of symbol nodes. Indeed, it is precisely these independencies that guarantee the convergence of BP or MS to the optimal solution for cycle-free TGs [7]. In the case of graphs with cycles, dependencies are created when messages pass through cycles. The first time that the independence is violated, the algorithm begins to perform suboptimally.1 There are two cases in which an iterative algorithm fails to maintain its optimality: 1) when there are dependencies between at least one of the incoming messages to a symbol node and the symbol node’s initial weight(s) and 2) when there are dependencies among the incoming messages to a node (symbol or check).
Case 1) for a symbol node happens when the local weight(s) of are passed back to through some paths in the TG. Upon the occurrence of this, the optimality of at least one of the outgoing messages of , say the one along edge , and thus the optimality of iterative decoding at , is violated. Similarly, from the point of view of edge , the optimality is also violated. Case 2) for a node happens when there are at least two incoming messages to which are statistically dependent (all the incoming messages to node may still be independent of the local message of node , in the case that is a symbol node). As a result, at least one of the outgoing messages of node , say the one along edge , is not optimal. So, from the point of view of node
and edge , the optimality is violated. The idea of using schedules other than flooding is to preserve the optimality of iterative decoding algorithms in as many iterations as possible. One possible approach would be for each edge or node to stop updating its outgoing message(s) as soon as the optimality at this edge or node is violated. This corresponds to what we call a “deterministic schedule.”2 Then, depending on whether the schedule is controlled by nodes or by edges, we have node-based or edge-based schedules, respectively. If the updating is performed randomly, we call it “probabilistic,” following the nomenclature of [9]. In fact, the schedule of [9] is a probabilistic node-based schedule. To implement the schedules, we first need to answer the following question: “At which iteration is the optimality of the
1One should note that before the iteration in which dependencies are created is reached, the iterative algorithm is optimal in the sense that, for example, for BP, at iteration l, all the messages reflect the APPs of bits, given the observed values of all nodes in a neighborhood of depth 2l.
2Deterministic schedule was mentioned as an option in [9], but no simulation result or discussion on its performance and complexity was provided.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

Fig. 1. TGs of Examples 1, 2, 3 and 4.

outgoing message(s) of an edge or a node violated for the first the neighborhood of depth two of the directed edge (C1,

time?” As we will see later, the answer to this question is related S1) (again here,

). It is also part of the neighborhood

to the distribution of cycles and closed walks in the graph. The

, which also includes the edges {C1, S1}, {S1, C5}, and

following definitions are required for our analysis.

{S1, C2}. For edge

S1, C2

is the whole graph, but

is the whole graph excluding edge {S1, C2}.

B. Definitions

Girth of a node (an edge

), denoted by

,

is defined as the length of the shortest cycle in

that

A walk in a graph is defined as a sequence of directed edges

such that

, for

. Such a walk is said to start from and to

end at , and to have length . A walk is called a closed walk

if the start node is the same as the end node, i.e.,

.

A nontrivial walk is a walk that has at least one edge that is

traversed only once (in this definition, the edges are considered

undirected). A cycle is defined as a closed walk in which all

the nodes except for the start and the end nodes are distinct.

In this paper, the direction of a cycle is not important, so the

word “cycle” is used for an undirected closed walk with the

same start and end nodes and no other repeated nodes. We also

passes through . Note that, since TG is bipartite, each node or

edge has an even girth. For a node , we also use the notation

to denote the length of the shortest nontrivial closed walk

initiated from node . Similarly, for an edge

, we use

the notation to denote the length of the shortest nontrivial

closed walk in which is initiated from node , and whose

first edge is not . Since a cycle is a special case of a non-

trivial closed walk, we have

. Similarly,

.

Example 3: In Fig. 1(A),

. However, the shortest

nontrivial closed walk initiated from symbol node S1 is (S1, C1,

S5, C6, S6, C1, S1) which has length six, and thus

. For

the edge (S1, C1), we have

.

use the notation

for an undirected edge between

nodes and . In the rest of the paper, this notation, depending C. When Does the Algorithm Become Suboptimal?

on the context, may mean that the direction of the edge is not In this subsection, we find the answer to the question: “At

important, or it may imply that both directions are important. which iteration in the flooding schedule is the optimality of the

Example 1: In the TG shown in Fig. 1(A) (we use empty outgoing message(s) of an edge or a node violated for the first

circles to represent symbol nodes and shaded circles to represent time?”

check nodes), path {S1, C1, S5, C6, S6, C1, S1} is a nontrivial For a node , the optimality is violated when: 1) there are at

closed walk of length six, and path {C1, S5, C6, S6, C1} is a least two incoming messages that are statistically dependent, or

cycle of length four.

2) there is an incoming message which statistically depends on

The neighborhood of depth of an edge

, respec- the initial message of (in the case that is a symbol node).

tively

, denoted by , respectively , is defined Case 1) happens when the contribution of the “same” message

as the subgraph consisting of all the walks of length starting arrives at node through two edges connected to and in the

from that do not contain edge , respectively (note that in same cycle. For a given cycle, this happens at node for the first

both definitions, the direction of edge

is important time throughout the iteration process when a message passed

in the sense that all the walks start from ). In this paper, we by the farthest node in the cycle from reaches through the

are interested in and as collections of undirected edges. two semicycles of the cycle. The following lemma gives the

It is clear that

, as cannot contain edge . The corresponding iteration numbers for symbol and check nodes.

neighborhood of depth of a node , denoted by , is defined (A detailed proof can be found in Appendix A.)

as the subgraph consisting of all the walks of length starting Lemma 1: Assuming independent initial weights at symbol

from . Again, in this paper, we are interested in this subgraph nodes, a symbol (check) node in a cycle of length

as a collection of undirected edges.

, receives dependent messages via for the

Example 2: In the graph shown in Fig. 1(A), the subgraph on first time at iteration

, where is the

the left side of edge (S1, C1) is the neighborhood of depth smallest integer which is greater than or equal to .

four of the directed edge (S1, C1) (in this example, is the The following proposition then follows from Lemma 1.

same as , and is a subset of , which is, in fact, the whole Proposition 1: In a given TG, for a symbol (check) node

graph). The subgraph on the right side of edge (S1, C1) is with girth , the optimality of the algorithm is violated at due

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO AND BANIHASHEMI: GRAPH-BASED MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR DECODING LDPC CODES

2101

to the dependencies created among ’s incoming messages for 1) Symbol (Check)-Node-Based Schedules: To each symbol

the first time at iteration

.

(check) node with parameters and , we as-

For a symbol node , Case 2) happens when the local message sign a counter with the initial value equal to

of is passed back to through a nontrivial closed walk (may

. Then, throughout

also be a cycle at the same time) which is initiated at .

the algorithm, the counter is decreased by one after each itera-

Lemma 2: For a symbol node , with a nontrivial closed walk tion. When the counter reaches zero, node stops updating its

of length initiated at , the local message of will be passed outgoing messages until the counters for all the symbol (check)

back to through at iteration .

nodes reach zero. The counter is then reset to its initial value,

Proposition 2: In a given TG, for a symbol node with pa- and the process is repeated until the algorithm converges to a

rameter , the optimality of the algorithm is violated at node codeword or a maximum number of iterations is reached.

, due to the dependencies between incoming messages to and 2) Edge-Based Schedules: In a given direction on the TG

the local message of for the first time at iteration

. (from symbol nodes to check nodes or vice versa), for each edge

From Propositions 1 and 2, we have the following theorem.

with parameters and , we assign a counter with

Theorem 1: In a given TG, for a node , let denote the iter- the initial value , which is equal to

ation in which the optimality of the algorithm under the flooding or

, depending on being a symbol node or a

schedule is violated for the first time at node . Then, we have check node, respectively. The counter is decreased by one after

is a symbol node is a check node.

each iteration. When the counter reaches zero, the edge stops
(3.1) updating its outgoing message until the counters for all the edges in the same direction are zero. Then the counter is reset to the

For an edge

, using an analysis similar to the one initial value and the process is repeated until a code word or a

used for nodes, we have the following theorem.

maximum number of iterations is reached.

Theorem 2: In a given TG, for an edge

, let

denote the iteration in which the optimality of the algorithm B. Probabilistic Schedules

under the flooding schedule is violated for the first time at edge 1) Node-Based Schedules: To each symbol node , we as-

. Then, we have

sign a probability

(or

or

), where

is a symbol node is a check node.

is the maximum length of nontrivial closed walks initiated

(3.2) from symbol nodes in the graph, and

are the max-

imum girth and the maximum value of among all the symbol

As the following example shows, for an edge

is

generally not equal to

or

.

Example 4: In Fig. 1(B), for edge (S1,C1), we have

. However, for edge

(C1, S1), we have

.

And for nodes S1 and C1, we have

and

.

nodes in the graph.3 The algorithm initiates by all symbol nodes passing messages to check nodes, and subsequently, all check nodes passing messages back to symbol nodes. Beyond the initialization, at each iteration, symbol node updates its outgoing messages randomly with the assigned probability and independent of other symbol nodes. The check nodes operate as usual

III. MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES

(flooding). The algorithm continues until a code word or a maximum number of iterations is reached. Note that this is the same

In Theorems 1 and 2, we determined the first iteration in which the outgoing message of a node or an edge violates the optimality of an iterative algorithm. In this section, using these results, we present schedules that are designed to preserve the optimality of iterative algorithms for as many iterations as possible. The difference among different schedules is whether this is done from the point of view of nodes or edges, and whether the schedule is implemented deterministically or randomly. The schedules are designed such that the edge or the node whose optimality is longer preserved would have more opportunities to update its outgoing message(s). As we will see later, a proper choice of schedule depends on the TG structure, decoding algorithm, channel characteristics, and also the desirable tradeoff between performance and complexity.

schedule as the one presented in [9].

To implement the schedule at check nodes, the process is

similar, except that the assigned probability is

(or

), where and are the maximum girth and the

maximum among all the check nodes in the TG, respectively.

2) Edge-Based Schedules: Edge-based probabilistic sched-

ules are similar to corresponding node-based probabilistic

schedules, except that we assign probabilities to edges rather

than to nodes. For each edge

, we update its message

with probability

or

if is a symbol

node, and with probability

or

, if is a check

node. The parameters

, and are the maximum

values of

, and over all the edges of the graph in the

corresponding direction, respectively.

All the above schedules can be implemented either unidi-

A. Deterministic Schedules
In deterministic schedules, the order of message passing throughout the iteration process is predetermined. Each node

rectionally or bidirectionally. In unidirectional schedules, the schedule is applied only in one direction in the graph, while in the other direction, messages are passed based on the standard

or edge updates its outgoing message(s) until the value of an

associated counter is decreased to zero. The detailed description 3These different probabilities are, in general, very close, and thus do not result

follows.

in much difference in error performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2102

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

flooding. In bidirectional schedules, the schedule is applied in both directions.
It can be seen that, in general, edge-based schedules and probabilistic schedules are more complex to implement, compared with node-based schedules and deterministic schedules, respectively. Also, bidirectional schedules are roughly twice as complex as the corresponding unidirectional ones. In terms of performance, as we will see in the following section, in general, more complex schedules perform better. But the improvement in performance is a function of the TG, the decoding algorithm, and the channel model.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

To study the performance of different schedules, we present

simulation results on four LDPC codes. All codes are described

by their parity-check matrices. Codes I and II are regular. Code I is a (1200, 600) code constructed by computer random search. Code II is a (8000, 4000) code taken from [11]. For both codes, all

0 0 0 Fig. 2. BER (——) and FER (

) of Code I decoded by GA algorithm

with different schedules on BSC (AWGN channel plus a 1-bit quantizer).

the symbol nodes have degree three, and all the check nodes have

degree six, and there is no cycle of length four in the TG. Codes

III and IV are irregular. Code III is a (1268, 456) code constructed

by construction 2A [2] in [8], and also used in [9]. Code IV is a

(3072, 1024) code with degree distributions optimized for the

AWGN channel, but still performing very well on fading channels

(the code has the same degree distributions as “ir1” in [12], and

its parity-check matrix was obtained from [13]).

In our simulations, we use binary phase-shift keying (BPSK)

modulation. For channel models, we consider AWGN and un-

correlated flat Rayleigh fading channels with and without side

information. We use BP for the decoding of LDPC codes over

both channels (for the application of BP to AWGN and Rayleigh

fading channels, the reader can refer to [4] and [12], respec-

tively.). We also apply min-sum and GA to LDPC codes over an

AWGN channel and BSC,4 respectively. For all the simulations,

the maximum number of iterations is set to 500, and for each

value of

, up to codewords are simulated. To have a

fair comparison, the same received vectors are passed through

different decoders.

Fig. 3. Statistics of the number of iterations required for the convergence of GA algorithm with different schedules [flooding (white), node-based probabilistic (gray), edge-based probabilistic (black)] for Code I on BSC. (A) Mean. (B) Standard deviation (Std).

To demonstrate the improvement that edge-based schedules can provide over the corresponding node-based schedules, we have given in Fig. 2 BER and frame-error rate (FER) for Code I over BSC decoded by the GA algorithm when both schedules are applied probabilistically at the symbol-node side of the TG. The curves for the flooding schedule are also given as reference. As can be seen, while the edge-based schedule provides a considerable improvement over flooding, especially at high
’s, the node-based schedule of [9] performs almost the same as flooding. The larger improvement for the edge-based schedule can, in part, be attributed to the fact that the edge girth distribution for this code has larger percentages of larger girths (for the edges, 28%, 70%, and 2% have girths 6, 8, and 10, respectively, while for the nodes, these percentages are, respectively, equal to 40%, 59%, and 1%). The statistics for the number of iterations for the three schedules are also given in Fig. 3. As can be seen, the improvement in performance for the edge-based schedule comes at a cost in the average number

of iterations. Also, the implementation complexity of the edge-

based schedule is larger than that of the node-based schedule.

It is worth mentioning that for this code, the improvement of

the edge-based schedule over the node-based schedule is neg-

ligible when used with BP and MS algorithms over an AWGN

channel, and therefore, for these algorithms, using a node-based

schedule appears to be a better choice. Also, the application of

schedules bidirectionally does not provide much improvement

for this code, and thus, is not justified.

As an example where bidirectional scheduling provides non-

negligible improvement over unidirectional ones, we have given

in Fig. 4 BER and FER curves for unidirectional and bidirec-

tional edge-based probabilistic schedules applied to Code II.

The decoding algorithm is BP over an AWGN channel. As can

be seen, the performance is greatly improved at high

’s.

In particular, the early error floor that seems to be appearing for

flooding at around

dB has disappeared for both

schedules, with the bidirectional schedule improving the BER

4To create a BSC, we use an AWGN channel followed by a 1-bit quantizer. by more than two orders of magnitude, compared with flooding.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO AND BANIHASHEMI: GRAPH-BASED MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR DECODING LDPC CODES

2103

Fig. 4. BER (——) and FER (- – -) of Code II decoded by BP with different Fig. 5. BER (——) and FER (- - -) of Code III decoded by BP with different

schedules over an AWGN channel.

schedules over an AWGN channel.

The larger improvement by the bidirectional schedule over the

unidirectional one is to be expected, as the former applies a higher

degree of control over message passing than the latter does. This

is, however, at the expense of more complex scheduling and a

larger average number of iterations (at

dB, the av-

erage number of iterations for the unidirectional and bidirectional

schedules are 22 and 33, respectively). It is worth noting that for

Code II, the bidirectional node-based schedule provides only a

negligible performance improvement over the corresponding

unidirectional schedule. This can be partly justified by noticing

that the average girth of check nodes for this code is 8.3, which

is much smaller than the average girth of edges from the check

side (9.2). The corresponding numbers for the symbol side of

the graph are 8.9 (nodes) and 9.1 (edges), respectively. So, as the inclusion of control from the check side based on edge girths helps, since these girths are, on average, at least as large as the ones from the symbol side, for nodes, the situation is different, as

Fig. 6. Statistics of the number of iterations required for the convergence of BP with different schedules [flooding (white), symbol node-based deterministic (gray), symbol node-based probabilistic (black)] for Code III over an AWGN channel. (A) Mean. (B) Standard deviation (Std).

the node girths from check side are, on average, quite smaller than the ones from the symbol side. We have also observed that, for this code, unidirectional and bidirectional edge-based probabilistic schedules perform almost the same when applied to the MS and GA algorithms.
Fig. 5 shows the comparison between deterministic and probabilistic schedules for the BP algorithm applied to Code III over an AWGN channel. The performance of the flooding schedule is also given as reference. Both schedules are applied at symbol nodes, and as can be seen in Fig. 5, they both outperform the flooding schedule. Although the probabilistic schedule is superior to the deterministic schedule,5 the performance difference between them is small. The deterministic schedule does not require a random number generator at each symbol node and is

much simpler to implement. Note that, as reflected in Fig. 6,

both algorithms have more or less the same average and stan-

dard deviation for the number of iterations at different

’s.

The same trends in the relative performance and complexity of

deterministic and probabilistic schedules are also observed for

Codes I and II.

Fig. 7 shows the performance curves for Code I decoded by

the MS algorithm over an AWGN channel with a node-based

probabilistic schedule. For reference, we have also given the

curves of the flooding schedule for both BP and MS algorithms.

It can be seen that MS with probabilistic schedule outperforms

MS with flooding schedule, especially at high

’s. The

same trends are also observed for Codes II and III. Moreover, it

is interesting to note that although BP outperforms MS at lower

5One should note that there are other ways for implementing the deterministic schedule. One approach, for example, could be to postpone the message updating of the nodes with smaller girths for the first few iterations until more reliable information is available at their inputs. This would have the benefit of having more reliable information at the outputs of these nodes, but the disadvantage is that these nodes do not contribute as much to the decoding process in the first few iterations. The probabilistic schedule provides a good balance between these two contradictory goals in a random fashion, and thus performs better than the deterministic schedule.

’s, the trend changes at higher values of

(note

that MS is an approximation of BP in the log-likelihood-ratio

domain at large values of

, and thus the two algorithms

should perform very close, asymptotically). The statistics on the

number of iterations for the three algorithms is given in Fig. 8.

One can easily see the complexity cost associated with the im-

provement in performance in each case. Note that although the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

Fig. 7. BER (——) and FER (- - -) of Code I decoded by BP and MS with Fig. 9. BER (——) and FER (- - -) of Code IV decoded by BP with different

different schedules over an AWGN channel.

schedules on a Rayleigh flat-fading channel with and without SI.

the probabilistic schedule, not every node updates its outgoing messages at every iteration.

V. CONCLUSION

We studied the performance and complexity of a number

of TG-based schedules for the iterative decoding of LDPC

codes. By investigating the performance/complexity tradeoff

of these schedules for a few regular and irregular LDPC codes

decoded by different iterative decoding algorithms and over

BSC, AWGN, and Rayleigh fading channels, we showed that

the tradeoff depends not only on the girth and closed-walk

distributions of the TG, but also on the decoding algorithm and

the channel model. Although, in quite a few cases, the prime

Fig. 8. Statistics of the number of iterations required for the convergence of BP and MS with different schedules [BP with flooding (white), MS with flooding (gray), MS with node-based probabilistic (black)] for Code I over an AWGN channel. (a) Mean. (b) Standard deviation (Std).

choice seems to be the unidirectional node-based deterministic schedule, there also appear to be cases, where probabilistic, edge-based, and/or bidirectional schedules provide significant improvement in performance. We hope that these results

motivate more research in this area. In particular, it would be in-

average number of iterations for MS is larger than that of BP, the complexity per iteration for MS is much smaller. Moreover, although the probabilistic schedule has a larger number of iterations on average, unlike flooding, not every node updates its outgoing messages at every iteration.
To demonstrate the advantage of using scheduling in decoding LDPC codes over fading channels, we apply a node-based probabilistic schedule to BP decoding of Code IV on an uncorrelated flat Rayleigh fading channel with and without side information (SI). Fig. 9 shows the BER and

teresting to better understand the relationships among schedule, TG structure, decoding algorithm, and channel model. Such understanding would justify why a particular schedule for a particular TG performs well with a given decoding algorithm over a certain channel, and not so well with another decoding algorithm and/or over a different channel. Related to this, finding simple procedures for the inspection of the TG to reliably predict the performance of different schedules along with different decoding algorithms and over different channels would be of interest.

FER performance of probabilistic and flooding schedules.

As can be seen, the probabilistic schedule outperforms the

flooding schedule, especially at high

’s. Regarding

APPENDIX A PROOF OF LEMMA 1

the complexity, the probabilistic schedule consistently has a We prove the lemma for symbol nodes based on induction.

larger average number of iterations (at each

, for both The proof for check nodes is similar. It is easy to see that the

cases of with and without SI, the average number of iterations optimality at is first violated when the message from the fur-

for probabilistic schedule is about 50% larger than that of thest node in the cycle reaches through the two half-cycles.

flooding). From the point of view of the average number of It is easy to verify that the lemma holds for

and . As-

computations, however, this is being offset by the fact that for suming that the claim is true for cycle lengths

and , we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO AND BANIHASHEMI: GRAPH-BASED MESSAGE-PASSING SCHEDULES FOR DECODING LDPC CODES

2105

Fig. 10. Graphs for proof of Lemma 1.

prove that it is also true for a cycle of length

.

Suppose that node is the furthest node in the cycle from vari-

able node under consideration. We have two cases: either is

a symbol node (the left graph in Fig. 10), or it is a check node

(the right graph in Fig. 10). In the first case, since iterations start

at check nodes, the first iteration in which the optimality is vio-

lated is the same as the one for the case with a cycle of length

(the message from reaches C1 and C2 before the first iteration

starts, and thus we can treat C1 and C2 as one node). Now, by

assumption,

, where

. So,

. In the other case, after one

iteration the information passed by check node reaches check

nodes C1 and C2. Then, treating C1 and C2 as one node, the sit-

uation is similar to the case with a cycle of length , where

. By assumption,

.

So, we have

,6 which completes the proof.

[8] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, vol. 1, 2001, pp. 41–44.
[9] , “Decoding low-density parity-check codes with probabilistic schedule,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 414–416, Oct. 2001.
[10] H. Xiao, “Message-passing schedules for decoding low-density paritycheck codes,” Master’s thesis, Carleton Univ., Ottawa, ON, Canada, 2002.
[11] D. J. C. Mackay. Encyclopedia of Sparse Graph Codes [Online]. Available: http://www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay/codes/data.html#s14
[12] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, and L. B. Milstein, “Performance analysis and code optimization of low-density parity-check codes on Rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 924–934, May 2001.
[13] J. Hou, private communication, May 2002.
Hua Xiao received the B.Sc. degree in information science from Nankai University, Tianjin, China, in 1999, the M.Sc. degree in information and systems science from Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 2002, and is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering at Carleton University.
His research interests include information theory and coding theory, especially, efficient graph representations and low-complexity decoding algorithms for codes. Mr. Xiao was the recipient of the 2002–2003 and 2004–2005 Ontario Graduate Scholarship in science and technology. He was also the recipient of the 2003–2004 Ontario Graduate Scholarship.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank the Editor for handling this paper and the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 45, no. 6, pp. 457–458, Mar. 1997.
[3] D. J. C. Mackay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[6] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[7] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elec. Eng., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.
6Here, we assume that check node v’s degree is at least three, which is the case for most practical codes. If v has degree two, the optimality at u is violated when the messages from each of v’s neighboring symbol nodes reach u. This happens at iteration d(l + 4)=4e for a cycle of length l + 2.

Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03) was born in Isfahan, Iran. He received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, Iran, in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communication engineering from Tehran Univesity, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes. He received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada in 1997.
From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, IUT. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, where he was a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering at Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 1998, where he is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests are in the general area of digital and wireless communications and include coding, information theory, and theory and implementation of iterative coding schemes.
Dr. Banihashemi has served as an Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS since May 2003. He is also a member of the Board of Directors for the Canadian Society of Information Theory, and a member of the Advisory Committee for the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre at Carleton University. In 1995 and 1996, he was awarded Ontario Graduate Scholarships for international students.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:47 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

