IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

2087

Transactions Papers

Threshold Values and Convergence Properties of Majority-Based Algorithms for Decoding Regular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Pirouz Zarrinkhat, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a detailed study of a family of binary message-passing decoding algorithms for low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, referred to as “majority-based algorithms.” Both Gallager’s algorithm A ( ) and the standard majority decoding algorithm belong to this family. These algorithms, which are, in fact, the building blocks of Gallager’s algorithm B ( ), work based on a generalized majority-decision rule and are particularly attractive for their remarkably simple implementation. We investigate the dynamics of these algorithms using density evolution and compute their (noise) threshold values for regular LDPC codes over the binary symmetric channel. For certain ensembles of codes and certain orders of majority-based algorithms, we show that the threshold value can be characterized as the smallest positive root of a polynomial, and thus can be determined analytically. We also study the convergence properties of majority-based algorithms, including their (convergence) speed. Our analysis shows that the stand-alone version of some of these algorithms provides significantly better performance and/or convergence speed compared with . In particular, it is shown that for channel parameters below threshold, while for the error probability converges to zero exponentially with iteration number, this convergence for other majority-based algorithms is super-exponential.
Index Terms—Density evolution, hard-decision iterative decoding algorithms, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, majority-based iterative decoding algorithms, message-passing decoders.
I. INTRODUCTION
G ALLAGER introduced low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes in his thesis in the early 1960s [1]. They were soon forgotten, however, due to limited computational resources available at the time, which made the corresponding iterative decoding algorithms look impractical. It was not until the introduction of turbo codes [2] that researchers realized the
Paper approved by P. Hoeher, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received December 17, 2003; revised July 19, 2004. This work was supported in part by an Ontario Graduate Scholarship in Science and Technology (OGSST) and in part by an Ontario Graduate Scholarship (OGS). This paper was presented in part at the 40th Annual Allerton Conference on Communications, Control, and Computing, Allerton House, IL, October 2002.
The authors are with Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre, Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: pirouzz@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.838738

strength of iterative coding schemes and the attractive perfor-

mance/complexity tradeoff that they offer. Since then, turbo

codes and LDPC codes have been the subject of much research.

In particular, there has been a great amount of research devoted

to LDPC codes and the performance and the complexity of

associated iterative decoding algorithms [3]–[5].

LDPC codes are linear block codes, and therefore, can be

fully described by their parity-check matrices. In particular, a

binary

-regular LDPC code has a parity-check matrix

with and ones in each column and row, respectively.

In irregular LDPC codes, column and row weights are not con-

stant and are chosen according to some distribution. Iterative

decoding algorithms for LDPC codes can be naturally described

using bipartite graphs constructed based on [6]. Decoding

process is performed by exchanging messages between variable

nodes and check nodes along the edges of these graphs, itera-

tively. The corresponding decoding algorithms are thus referred

to as message-passing algorithms [7]. There is a wide range

of iterative message-passing algorithms for decoding LDPC

codes, each offering a particular tradeoff between error per-

formance and decoding complexity. The algorithms discussed

in this paper, which we call majority-based algorithms, also

belong to the category of message-passing algorithms. In a mes-

sage-passing decoder, messages are generated at the nodes of

the graph according to certain message maps and based on ex-

trinsic incoming messages, and possibly the channel message.

The channel, variable-node, and check-node message maps are

denoted by

,

and

, respectively, where

,

and represent the channel alphabet, the message alphabet, and

the iteration number, respectively. Majority-based algorithms

work with hard information (bits) (i.e., the message alphabet

is binary), and thus have a very low complexity (per iter-

ation). Gallager used these algorithms as the components of

his algorithm B

[1, p. 50], and showed that by properly

switching between them, a better threshold, compared with

algorithm A

[1, p. 47], is achievable. To the best of our

knowledge, however, he did not study the behavior of the

stand-alone version of these algorithms in detail. Subsequently,

other researchers also mainly focused on as a benchmark

for hard-decision iterative algorithms (see, e.g., [8]–[10]). In

this paper, by a detailed study of majority-based algorithms,

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2088

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

we show the great advantages that some of these algorithms are capable of offering over the well-known . In particular, we demonstrate that the error probability for these algorithms converges to zero very fast; in many cases, much faster than it does for . This makes such algorithms good candidates for very-high-speed applications, such as optical communication systems, where the processing delay has to be minimized. Moreover, our study shows that some of the majority-based algorithms appear to outperform by a large margin, in the sense that they offer much better (noise) threshold values. The faster convergence and the better performance offered by majority-based algorithms, other than , suggests a serious role for these algorithms in the future coding schemes where the system constraints require the use of binary (hard-decision) decoders.
The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section II, we give a formal definition of majority-based algorithms, and the recursive equation for average error probability of these algorithms over ensembles of regular LDPC codes. (This section does not contain any new results, and is just given to make the paper self-contained and to set out the stage for the following discussions.) We will then present the analysis based on density evolution [7] in Section III. This includes discussions on the fixed points of the majority-based algorithms and on the stability of the fixed point at zero (corresponding to average error probability of zero). We also investigate the speed of convergence and convergence properties of these algorithms in this section, and provide characterizations and tight upper bounds for the threshold. Section IV contains numerical results on threshold values of majority-based algorithms, and discussions on the convergence speed of these algorithms. Some concluding remarks are given in Section V.
II. MAJORITY-BASED ALGORITHMS AND DENSITY EVOLUTION
In the following, after a brief explanation of the terms, notations, and assumptions,1 we formally define majority-based algorithms and provide an analysis based on density evolution.

, based on a bipartite graph with variable nodes, each of de-

gree , and check nodes, each of degree , if the graph

does not contain parallel edges. The set of all such graphs, when

equipped with a uniform probability distribution, is called the

ensemble of

-regular graphs. Note that the ensembles

of

-regular LDPC codes and

-regular graphs are

essentially equivalent and can be used interchangeably.

B. Symmetry Conditions
In [7], it is shown that under certain symmetry conditions on the channel, and on the variable-node and the check-node message mappings, the conditional (bit or block) probability of error, given that a specific codeword has been transmitted, is independent of the codeword. The channel of interest in this paper is the memoryless binary symmetric channel (BSC) which satisfies the channel-symmetry condition of [7]. Moreover, all majority-based algorithms, defined in the following subsection, satisfy the symmetry conditions required for message mappings. As such, in our study, the bit- or the block-error performance does not depend on the transmitted codeword.

C. Majority-Based Algorithms: Formal Definition

Consider the ensemble of

-regular graphs

and let the channel be binary symmetric with output alphabet

. For a nonnegative integer

,

the majority-based algorithm of order , denoted by , is

defined by message maps

null mm

mm

m

m

mmm

m

m if m m m otherwise

A. Ensembles of LDPC Codes and Graphs

Consider a

-regular LDPC code of length , described

by a parity-check matrix , which has columns and

rows, of weights and , respectively. The en-

semble of

-regular LDPC codes of length is consid-

ered as the set of all parity-check matrices with columns and

rows, fulfilling the above column and row weight constraints.

We also assume that parity-check matrices from this set are se-

lected equally likely. For a given , we can construct a bipartite

graph with variable nodes and check nodes [6]. Each vari-

able node corresponds to one column of , and each check node

corresponds to one row of . An edge in the graph connects

variable node and check node if and only if a 1 is located

at position of . Such a graph has

edges,

edges incident to each variable node and edges incident to

where all messages, including the channel message m , have an

alphabet space of

.

In words, a variable node passes its channel message m to

a neighboring check node , unless and at least

of its

extrinsic incoming messages disagree with m , in

which case m is sent. A check node always passes the product

of its extrinsic incoming messages. The variable-node operation

of majority-based algorithms is based on the well-known ma-

jority-decision rule, hence, the name majority-based. Note that

the value of determines the strength of the disagreement re-

quired for the change. Extreme cases are standard majority-de-

coding algorithm

, and

.

(For the latter, a unanimous vote is required for the change.)

Majority-based algorithms are especially attractive for their re-

markably simple implementation (per iteration).

each check node. Conversely, we can construct a parity-check

matrix, and therefore, a

-regular LDPC code of length D. Majority-Based Algorithms: Density Evolution

We assume that majority-based algorithms are used to decode

1For definitions and notations, we mainly follow [7], to which the reader can the ensemble of

-regular LDPC codes over a BSC with

refer for a more detailed treatment.

crossover probability

. We use density evolution to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZARRINKHAT AND BANIHASHEMI: THRESHOLD VALUES AND CONVERGENCE PROPERTIES OF MAJORITY-BASED ALGORITHMS

2089

track the evolution of the average fraction of erroneous mes-

sages, i.e., messages whose signs do not agree with the signs of

their corresponding transmitted bits. In order to apply density

evolution, we assume a tree-like decoding neighborhood [7] to

guarantee statistical independence among messages throughout

the iterative process. Since the symmetry conditions are fulfilled

for this channel and for these algorithms, the decoding perfor-

mance is independent of the transmitted codeword. Therefore,

we assume that the all-one codeword is transmitted to simplify

the analysis.

Let

be the average probability that the

message traversing an edge of the ensemble of

-regular

graphs in iteration , from a variable node to a check node, is

equal to . Clearly,

and

. It can be shown

that under , the recursion

where

(1)

Fig. 1. Graphical interpretation of density evolution for the ensemble of (3, 6)
regular LDPC codes, decoded by MB , for " = 0:0350 and 0:0450.

(2) of convergence. The graphical approach, introduced originally

by Gallager [1, p. 48], has been used in similar contexts by

others, including ten Brink [11] and Divsalar et al. [12]. One

of the main results of this paper is Theorem 3, which provides

a tight upper bound on the threshold of majority-based algo-

(3) rithms. It should be noted that the approach taken in this paper to derive the bound is closely related to the approach of [9] in

describes the evolution of the average probability of error with deriving a similar bound for .

iteration number , if initiated by

[1, p. 50]. The

first term in (1) represents the cases where the channel mes- A. Fixed Points, Threshold Characterizations, and Bounds

sage is in error and less than

of

ex-

trinsic messages are correct. The second term, however, repre-

sents the cases where the channel message is correct, but at least

of

extrinsic messages are in error.

For a given ensemble of

-regular codes and a given

To investigate the evolution of (1) throughout the iteration

process and study the behavior of majority-based algorithms,

with polynomial functions

and

defined as (2) and

(3), respectively, we define the following function:2

order , the threshold

, or simply , is defined as

the supremum of all values of in the interval [0, 0.5], such that . We will see in the next section that is
an increasing function of . It then follows that for all values . The threshold, in general, can be
computed numerically. However, as we will show later, in some cases, the threshold can be determined analytically. (Similar results for are also presented in [8] and [9].) Note that although the density-evolution analysis is based on the assumption of random cycle-free graphs with given degrees for variable nodes and check nodes, concentration results of [7] will guarantee that for sufficiently large block lengths, almost every randomly generated code has a bit-error rate (BER) waterfall region very close to the threshold.

We are interested in the properties of

for

,

as

, and therefore the sequences

and

are

identical. We use this relationship to give a graphical interpre-

tation for density evolution. For a given order , and for a given

channel parameter , consider the curve

in the

plane. We start from the point

on the curve.

From this starting point, we move horizontally toward the line

to reach the point

on the line. We then

move vertically toward the curve

to reach the point

on the curve. By repeating these horizontal

and vertical steps consecutively, we obtain all the values in the

sequence

. Fig. 1 illustrates this graphical

III. DYNAMICS OF MAJORITY-BASED ALGORITHMS
In this section, we analyze the dynamics of majority-based algorithms via density evolution. We use a graphical approach to visualize the behavior of iterative algorithms. This approach is particularly helpful in discussing the threshold values and speed

interpretation for the ensemble of (3, 6) regular LDPC codes, decoded by , and for two channel parameters
2Clearly, the functions h (x); f (x), and g (x) also depend on node degrees d and d . In most cases, however, we deal with these dependencies im-
plicitly, as our focus is mainly on the dependency of these functions on param-
eter ! (and in the case of h (x), on parameter ", as well).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2090

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

Fig. 2. Ensemble of (4, 6) regular LDPC codes, decoded by MB , for " = 0:0800 and 0:1000. (a) Example of a decreasing trend of average error probability that does not converge to zero. (b) Example of an increasing trend.

and

. As can be seen, depending on the channel param-

converges to a crossing point (a point at which the curve

eter, we can have a decreasing

or an increasing

and the line

intersect). A crossing point is,

trend of average error probability with iterations. in fact, a fixed point of the recursion given in (1).

For a starting point on the line

, the algorithm is stuck Fig. 2(a) depicts a decreasing trend that does not converge to

right from the beginning, and there will be no decreasing or in- zero and is trapped at a crossing point, while Fig. 2(b) demon-

creasing trend.

strates an increasing trend, which also converges to a crossing

In the following, we discuss some of the properties of

point.

that are useful in understanding the dynamics of majority-based The following theorem describes the condition for the con-

algorithms.

vergence of average error probability to zero.

Lemma 1: For any given order

and any given Theorem 1: For a given order and a given channel pa-

is an increasing function of the channel rameter

is a decreasing sequence which con-

parameter , i.e.,

for all

.3

verges to zero if and only if the curve

is below the

Proof is provided in Appendix I.

line

.

Lemma 2: For any given order and any given channel

Proof: For sufficiency, if the curve

is below

parameter

is increasing with respect to the line

for all

, then combining Propositions 2

, i.e.,

for all

.

and 3, one can see that the probability of error decreases and will

Proof is provided in Appendix II.

converge to the only crossing point in the interval

, which

The next proposition follows from Lemmas 1 and 2 by finite is

. For necessity, we show that if the curve

induction.

is not below the line

for all

, then the se-

Proposition 1: For any given order

quence does not converge to zero. Suppose that the curve

is an increasing function of . In other words, majority-based

is not below the line

for all

.

algorithms respect physical degradation ordering of BSCs.

Then for some

the curve

is either

Also, the next two propositions follow from Lemma 2.

above or on the line

. If is amongst such , then ac-

Proposition 2: For a given

and for a given channel cording to Proposition 2, the trend is not decreasing. Otherwise,

parameter

, the sequence , or equivalently, the the starting point

is below the line

, and

sequence

, is strictly decreasing, constant,

or strictly increasing if the starting point

on the

curve

is below, on, or above the line

, respec-

tively.

It is noteworthy that having the starting point below the line

, as the next proposition implies, is no guarantee for the

decreasing average probability of error to converge to zero.

Proposition 3 (Convergence to Fixed Points): For a given

and a given channel parameter

, the sequence

3At the end points of a closed interval, derivative is defined as right-hand or left-hand derivative, accordingly.

since the curve

is continuous, there must exist at

least one crossing point in the interval

. In this case, ac-

cording to Propositions 2 and 3, the rightmost of such crossing

points entraps the decreasing average probability of error and

prevents it from converging to zero.

Combining Proposition 1 with the definition of threshold ,

one can see that for all values

. In

fact, to provide a slightly different perspective, one can com-

bine Theorem 1 with Lemma 1, to see if for a given

and

for a given channel parameter

, the sequence is

decreasing and converges to zero, then for every channel param-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZARRINKHAT AND BANIHASHEMI: THRESHOLD VALUES AND CONVERGENCE PROPERTIES OF MAJORITY-BASED ALGORITHMS

2091

eter

, the sequence is decreasing and converges

to zero. One can then provide an alternative definition for the

threshold of an

as the supremum of all

,

such that the curve

is below the line

for every

. A more precise statement is given in the following.

Proposition 4 (Characterization of Threshold): For any

with threshold , we have

It is noteworthy that the above characterization closely resem-

bles the alternative description of the threshold for on BSC

given in [9], and that of binary erasure channel (BEC) and its

associated iterative decoding algorithm presented in [13].

As

is always a fixed point of (1). The

following theorem describes the stability of this important fixed

point.

Theorem 2 (Stability of the Fixed Point of

Located

at Zero): Consider the ensemble of

-regular LDPC

codes. For any

, and for

any channel parameter

, there exists a constant

, such that for all

, i.e., the fixed point

is stable.4 For

, if

, or

provided that

, then there exists a constant

, such that for all

,

i.e., the fixed point

is stable. On the other hand, if

, or

and

,

then there exists a constant

, such that

for

, i.e., the fixed point

is

unstable.5

Proof: We know that

, and based on (II.1) in

Appendix II, we have

if otherwise.

For sufficiently small values of , the convergence behavior is

determined by the linear term in the Taylor series around zero.

For any

with

, we thus have

for sufficiently small

. For , this is only

the case if

, or

and

.

The following corollary, which is the same as the upper bound

on the threshold of given in [9] for the special case of regular

codes, follows from Theorems 1 and 2.

Corollary 1: For , the threshold satisfies

Fig. 3. Starting-point loci for two ensembles of regular LDPC codes with
(d ; d ) = (5; 10) and (3; 4), decoded by MB and MB , respectively.

in [0, 0.5], where the polynomial functions

and

are given by (2) and (3), respectively. We notice that

. The curve

is, in fact, the locus of the

starting points of

for different channel parameters . We

call any crossing point of the curve

and the line

a steady point. Obviously, the sequence

remains constant if the starting point is a steady point. The points

(0, 0) and (0.5, 0.5) are two steady points of all majority-based

algorithms for any ensemble of

-regular LDPC codes.

As the two coordinates for a steady point are equal, in the rest of

the paper, we identify a steady point with a single value. Fig. 3

depicts the loci of starting points for the ensembles of regular

LDPC codes with

and , decoded by

and , respectively. The figure shows that in general,

in addition to the points 0 and 0.5, there may exist other steady

points. The smallest positive steady point is denoted by , and

as we will see later, is an upper bound on the threshold.

We continue this section with a few results on

and the

steady points of majority-based algorithms. We start with the

following corollary, which follows from Lemmas 1 and 2, and

the fact that

, and thus

It should be clear to the reader by now that the starting point has a major role in the convergence properties of majority-based algorithms. In the following, we provide a concise discussion on this role. Consider the function

Corollary 2: For any given order

is increasing

with , i.e.,

.

We note that based on the discussions in Appendixes I and

II,

is a strictly increasing function of in the interval

(0, 0.5], i.e.,

. The only exception is when

is an even number, and

. In this case, the

4The stability condition can equivalently be expressed as the existence of a
positive constant , such that if for some `; p < , then p converges to zero as ` tends to infinity.
5Similar results for belief propagation can be found in [13]–[16].

derivative is zero.

Combining (I.1) and (II.1), it is easy to see that

and

. The

curve

also crosses the line

at

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2092

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

and

. Putting these together, we conclude that the

(continuous) curve

must cross the line

at least once more in the interval (0, 0.5), and therefore, in

addition to

and

, there exists at least one other

steady point. Thus,

.

For all

, the starting point is below the line

.

The next theorem then follows from Proposition 4.

Theorem 3: The smallest positive steady point is an upper

bound for the threshold , i.e.,

.

As we will see later, the upper bound of Theorem 3 is achieved

for many majority-based algorithms applied to a wide range of

regular LDPC code ensembles, i.e., we have

. This pro-

vides an alternative characterization for threshold and an easier

method to compute it. When the bound is not achieved, i.e.,

when

, then for

, the trend of the sequence

is decreasing, but

. [Refer

to Fig. 2(a).]

It is also worth mentioning that one can combine Corollary 1

and Theorem 3 to conclude the following.

Corollary 3 [9]: For

satisfies

B. Speed of Convergence

It is easy to see that for a given channel parameter , the

convergence speed of an

at any iteration depends on how

far the curve

is from the line

at that iteration.

The farther the curve, the faster the trend. This explains the slow

convergence of in decoding the ensemble of

-regular

LDPC codes over a channel with a parameter

and close

to

. In this case, there is only a narrow

tunnel between the curve and the line in the vicinity of

.

(Refer to Table II.)

The following theorem partially orders majority-based algo-

rithms in terms of their convergence speed.

Theorem 4: Suppose that for a given order , channel

parameter , and , we have

. Then

for all

and for all

.

To prove this theorem, we first state the following lemma.

Lemma 3: Given order , channel parameter , and , we

have the inequality

Fig. 4. Comparison of convergence speed of different orders of majority-based
decoding algorithm for the ensemble of (8, 10) regular LDPC codes and for " = 1=63, which is the threshold for MB .

faster at the later stages of decoding. Fig. 4 illustrates Theorem

4. In this figure, we have depicted the line

and the

curves

, for

,

and , and

(which is

the threshold for

, i.e., ). As can be seen, for

instance,

, and in accordance

with Theorem 4,

for all

. In fact, in the intervals

, and partial ordering of the curves are

, the

(4)

if and only if

.

Proof is provided in Appendix III.

respectively. Notice that the ordering of the curves in the vicinity

Proof of Theorem 4: Since

, ac- of

is

, while it is exactly the other way

cording to Lemma 3, the order , the channel parameter , around in the vicinity of

. It is also interesting to note

and the parameter satisfy (4). This inequality remains satis- that over a channel with this parameter, the average error prob-

fied if is increased or is decreased. Hence, according to ability of

is achieved after 3, 2, 4, and 28 567 iterations

Lemma 3 again,

for all

and for orders

, and , respectively. This enormous dif-

.

ference is expected, since unlike the other curves, the tunnel be-

It is noteworthy that for any given order and for any given tween the curve

and the line

is very narrow

channel parameter , (4) is satisfied for sufficiently small . in the vicinity of

. (Table II in Section IV presents similar

In other words, between two majority-based algorithms used to comparisons for more codes.)

decode the same ensemble of regular LDPC codes over the It is worth mentioning that in a hybrid decoding scenario

same channel, the one with smaller order eventually converges [17]–[21], where, for example, switching among different

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZARRINKHAT AND BANIHASHEMI: THRESHOLD VALUES AND CONVERGENCE PROPERTIES OF MAJORITY-BASED ALGORITHMS

2093

the initial condition

, it can then be seen that for

sufficiently small values of , we have

(5) We can rewrite the right-hand side of (5) as

Fig. 5. G as an example of hybrid decoding. The ensemble of (5, 10) regular LDPC codes is used over a BSC channel with parameter " = 0:0400. Switching
occurs from MB to MB at iteration 7.

majority-based algorithms is allowed throughout the iteration

process, curves such as those presented in Fig. 4 can be used

to decide which algorithm should be chosen at each iteration

for the fastest convergence. The proper choice is the

that has the smallest value of

, or in other words,

the algorithm whose associated curve is the furthest from the

line

[18]. In fact, this is exactly what does by finding

the smallest value of that satisfies (4) when is replaced

by

[1, p. 50]. Fig. 5 illustrates an example of . The

ensemble of (5, 10) regular LDPC codes is used over a BSC

channel with parameter

. It is easy to see that the

fastest algorithm to start with is . One should then switch

to

at iteration 7. Notice that using this simple hybrid

scheme has resulted in the convergence of the decoder over a

channel which is considerably worse than the worst channel

that either one of the two algorithms can handle. (The threshold

values for and are 0.0248 and 0.0277, respectively.)

More results on hybrid schemes can be found in [20] and [21].

We finish this section with the following theorem which dis-

cusses the convergence speed of majority-based algorithms in

the vicinity of the fixed point located at zero.

Theorem 5: For

, the probability of error goes to

zero exponentially with the number of iterations for , and

super-exponentially for other majority-based algorithms, pro-

vided that is large enough.6

Proof: Considering only the most dominant term in

the Taylor series of (1), it is easily verifiable that for suffi-

ciently small values of

can be approximated by

, where

if

or is odd,

and , otherwise, and .) Using

. (Note that , recursively with

for

, and

for

. It is now

clear that for

, the probability of error goes to zero

exponentially with the number of iterations, while for the other

majority-based algorithms, the convergence to zero is super-ex-

ponential.7 This is, of course, with the condition that the channel

parameter is less than the threshold, and is also small enough to

satisfy

. One can now see that

the above conditions on can be relaxed to only

by

noticing the fact that

if

, which implies

that if is large enough, we will be in the vicinity of

on

the curve, and thus the probability of error goes to zero with

the same exponent as in (5).

It should be noted that for lower order majority-based algo-

rithms, the asymptotic convergence of error probability to zero

is faster as the parameter in the exponent of (5) is larger.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS AND SPECIAL CASES

In this section, we compute the threshold values of majority-

based algorithms for some ensembles of

-regular LDPC

codes. We also show that in many cases

, and thus,

the threshold can be analytically computed. Moreover, we pro-

vide simulation results to compare majority-based algorithms in

terms of their speed of convergence.

As an example for analytical computation of the threshold,

consider the ensemble of (4, 5) regular LDPC codes decoded

by . For this case, as we will prove in Theorem 6,

.

The threshold is thus the smallest real root of

in the

interval (0, 0.5). Applying the change of variable

,

we rewrite

as

. Computing is

then equivalent to finding the largest real root of this new

polynomial in the interval (0, 1), i.e.,

. We

obtain

, and thus

.

Table I contains and for some

pairs and for

different orders of majority-based algorithms. It also lists the

values

for . As can be seen, for many

pairs,

is not the best choice in

terms of the threshold value. As a matter of fact, in some cases,

this algorithm has the smallest threshold value amongst all the

orders of majority-based decoding algorithm (refer to the last

6A preliminary version of this result was brought to our attention by one of

7Similar results for the special case of ! = 0 are given in [17]. Our results

the reviewers.

generalize those of [17] to the other orders of majority-based algorithms.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2094

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

TABLE I THRESHOLD AND SMALLEST STEADY-POINT VALUES FOR BSC AND DIFFERENT ORDERS OF MAJORITY-BASED DECODING ALGORITHMS

six rows of Table I). Moreover, as we will see later, other orders

also appear to be, in many cases, considerably faster than .

Table I also shows that for a large percentage of ensembles,

the bounds on the threshold value (given in Theorem 3 and

Corollary 3) are tight, i.e., we usually have

, for

, and

,

for

. It should be noted that although

for many cases the bounds are tight, there are also examples

where they cannot be achieved. (Refer to the underlined en-

tries in the last three rows of Table I. For these cases, the curve

touches the line

somewhere in the interval

.) The following theorems cover some of the cases for

which the bounds are achieved.

Theorem 6: Consider the ensemble of

-regular

LDPC codes, and suppose that this ensemble is decoded by

. If the variable-node degree is an even number, then

.

Proof is provided in Appendix IV.

For the ensembles of regular LDPC codes with odd variable-

node degrees, we could neither prove a similar general result,

nor find any counterexample. In the next theorem, however, we

prove that

for the special case of

.

Theorem 7: For the ensemble of

-regular LDPC

codes, decoded by

.

Proof is provided in Appendix V.

In Table I, we observe that for

, i.e.,

when is used, for all

pairs with

is equal

to

and is less than . It should be noted that

this is not the case in general. A counterexample is the ensemble

of (4, 11) regular LDPC codes, decoded by . In this case,

.

To compare the convergence speed of majority-based algo-

rithms, we proceed as follows. For a given

ensemble,

we compute the smallest number of iterations that each order of

the algorithm needs to achieve an average fraction of incorrect

messages equal to or less than when the channel parameter

is 90% of the smallest value amongst the thresholds of different

orders. (We choose 90% arbitrarily, with the consideration that

it results in both a relatively large channel parameter and a rela-

tively fast convergence, even for the algorithm with the smallest

threshold.) The results are listed in Table II. It can be seen that

those cases in which

enjoy a very fast convergence, in

general. The convergence speed of some of these cases is more

than 20 times faster than the cases for which

. On the

contrary, we see that usually has a slow convergence. This

happens when the curve

for touches the line

at zero, and the channel parameter is also close to .

In this case, the tunnel between

and

is very

narrow in the vicinity of

, resulting in the slow decrease

of error probability with iterations.8

Fig. 6 shows BER curves for a randomly constructed

regular LDPC code of length 100 000, with no cycle

of length four in the Tanner graph, decoded by

,

and

. For all simulation results, the maximum

8In Table II, it is observed that for cases with d = 4; MB , equivalent to G
algorithm, is faster than MB . The reason is that in these cases, the threshold
for MB , and thus the selected channel parameter, is much smaller than the
threshold of G . This means that for G , the tunnel between y = h (x) and
y = x is wide open in the whole interval (0; "), including the vicinity of 0.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZARRINKHAT AND BANIHASHEMI: THRESHOLD VALUES AND CONVERGENCE PROPERTIES OF MAJORITY-BASED ALGORITHMS

2095

TABLE II
NUMBER OF ITERATIONS REQUIRED TO ACHIEVE AN AVERAGE FRACTION OF ERRONEOUS MESSAGES EQUAL TO OR LESS THAN 10 . CHANNEL
PARAMETER IS 90% OF THE SMALLEST THRESHOLD VALUE AMONGST DIFFERENT ORDERS OF MAJORITY-BASED ALGORITHMS

(

dB),10 0.0453 (

dB), and

dB), respec-

tively. Fig. 6 shows that the waterfall regions of BER curves

associated with lower order majority-based algorithms are very

sharp, and occur at close proximity to the theoretical threshold

for these algorithms. For however, the waterfall region is

not nearly as sharp. At a BER of about

and

outperform by more than 2.7 and 0.5 dB, respectively. This

is while the theoretical threshold for

is even worse than

that of by more than 0.6 dB. This, which suggests that for

, the convergence of the ensemble performance to its average

by increasing the block length, predicted by concentration re-

sults of [7], happens much slower, compared with the other

two algorithms, can be loosely explained as follows. Amongst

majority-based algorithms, due to the shape of its curve,

has a relatively slow convergence speed and needs more

iterations to achieve a certain (low) error probability. For a

low error probability, therefore, the (cycle-free) supporting tree

[7] in decoding under has to be deeper. This exacerbates

the performance deviation from the asymptotic limit under

finite block lengths, where the graph inevitably has cycles with

relatively short lengths. It is worth mentioning that in some

applications, having a gradual slope in the waterfall region can

be considered an advantage. This is particularly the case for

wireless applications, where

could change over a rather

wide range.

At BER

, the average number of iterations for con-

verged cases for

, and are about 5.60, 9.21, and

13.29, respectively. These numbers are increased to about 6.19,

10.79, and 37.95, respectively, for a BER of about . These

results show the slower convergence of compared with the

other two algorithms.

V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

Fig. 6. BER curves for a randomly constructed (6, 10) regular LDPC code of length 100 000, decoded by different orders of majority-based algorithms. (Note
that MB is the same as G .)
number of iterations is set to 500, and for each point, enough codewords are simulated to generate at least ten codeword errors.9 The threshold values for these algorithms are 0.0155

Majority-based algorithms, which include Gallager’s algorithm A and standard majority decoding algorithm as special cases, are of interest mainly due to their low complexity (per iteration). By performing a detailed study of these algorithms through density evolution, we show that many of majority-based algorithms have larger noise thresholds, compared with and the standard majority decoding algorithm. We present tight analytical upper bounds on these thresholds and prove that in many cases, these bounds are achieved. We also highlight another attractive feature of majority-based algorithms, i.e., their generally fast convergence. We show that a majority-based algorithm’s convergence speed is determined by its order, and explain why many majority-based algorithms outpace substantially. In particular, we prove that while the asymptotic convergence speed of is exponential with iteration number, for the other majority-based algorithms, it is super-exponential. As a result of this work, we expect that more attention would be paid to majority-based algorithms other than the well-known and widely popular .
The fast convergence of majority-based algorithms, along with their relatively large noise thresholds, make them good candidates for hybrid algorithms in which different decoding

9For many simulation points at higher BERs, at least 200 codeword errors are generated. Reducing this to ten for just a few points at the bottom of the curves was due to the limitation in computational resources.

10This is the equivalent E =N assuming that the BSC is a model for an additive white Gaussian noise channel with binary phase-shift keying and a 1-bit quantizer.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2096

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

algorithms are combined to achieve better performance/complexity tradeoffs, compared with those achievable by individual algorithms [17]–[21]. An example is Gallager’s algorithm B , where majority-based algorithms are combined by switching between them through iterations. Another possibility is to combine these algorithms in each iteration and in a time-invariant fashion [20], [21]. This is shown to provide more robustness to the changes of channel conditions, compared with
[20], [21].

APPENDIX II

Proof of Lemma 2: It can be shown that with

and

defined as (I.2) and (I.3), respectively, we have

APPENDIX I

Proof of Lemma 1: It can be seen that

(II.1)

which is only a function of nonnegative, we first define

(I.1) which can be seen to be nonnegative in the interval of interest,

and . To show that (I.1) is (0, 0.5).

It should be noted that the derivative

for

all

. It is equal to zero at

for any value of

and , and also at

for any value of and any

(I.2) other than Gallager’s algorithm A

. For

Gallager’s algorithm A, the derivative at

(I.3)

.

is only zero for

Clearly, . Thus

, and

APPENDIX III Proof of Lemma 3:

(I.4) The above summation can be decomposed to three terms as

APPENDIX IV
Proof of Theorem 6: Using (2) and (3), it is easy to see that for even

(I.5)

in which the second term can be zero. (This only happens when

or when the upper limit of the second summation is

strictly smaller than its lower limit.) The first and the third terms

in (I.5), according to (2) and (3), are

and

, re-

spectively, and the second term is nonnegative. As such, we have

, or equivalently

(IV.1)

Therefore,

and

. Based on

the definitions of and , this means that must be equal to

.

It is worth noting that for even values,

uses the

channel messages only once at the beginning. When the initial-

ization is completed, these messages play no further role, and

the variable nodes only pass the majority decision of incoming

extrinsic messages. This independence of the decoding process

( curves) from , is, in fact, the underlying cause of the equality

of and .

It can be seen that

of

, i.e.,

is a strictly increasing function , if the second term in

APPENDIX V

(I.5) is not equal to zero, or equivalently, if

and the upper

Proof of Theorem 7: It is easily verifiable that for

limit of this summation is not smaller than its lower limit, i.e.,

, and , we have

. In the following, we prove the

either is an odd number or

.

equality for

. Assuming that

and by using

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZARRINKHAT AND BANIHASHEMI: THRESHOLD VALUES AND CONVERGENCE PROPERTIES OF MAJORITY-BASED ALGORITHMS

2097

Descartes’ rule of signs,11 one can show that for any

,

the polynomial

has at most three real zeros in [0,

0.5].12 If

, then, according to Proposition 4,

touches the line

in

at least once, and thus,

will have at least two zeros in

. Moreover, for

crosses the line

at two different points in

. It can also be shown that for all

is increasing with . Being increasing with , and , having

a derivative of zero at

, and having a value less than

at

, the curve

, for

, has no choice but

to cross the line

at two different points in

, in ad-

dition to the touch-induced zeros of

. Therefore, the

number of zeros will add up to at least four, which contradicts

Descartes’ rule of signs. The only way to avoid this contradic-

tion is to have

.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions, and Mr. H. Xiao for preparing the simulation results presented in Fig. 6.

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo codes (I),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[3] IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory Special Issue, Codes on Graphs, Iterative Algorithms, vol. 47, pp. 493–853, Feb. 2001.
[4] P. H. Siegel, D. Divsalar, E. Eleftheriou, J. Hagenauer, D. Rowitch, and W. H. Tranter, “The turbo principle: From theory to practice,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 793–799, May 2001.
[5] P. H. Siegel, D. Divsalar, E. Eleftheriou, J. Hagenauer, and D. Rowitch, “The turbo principle: From theory to practice II,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 1657–1661, Sept. 2001.
[6] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[7] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[8] L. Bazzi, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Exact thresholds and optimal codes for the binary symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algorithm A,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2000, p. 203.
[9] L. Bazzi, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Exact thresholds and optimal codes for the binary symmetric channel and Gallager’s decoding algorithm A,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 50, pp. 2010–2021, Sept. 2004.
[10] N. Miladinovic and M. Fossorier, “Improved bit flipping decoding of low-density parity check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2002, p. 229.
[11] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
[12] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Low complexity turbo-like codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp Turbo Codes, 2000, pp. 73–80.

 11Descartes’ rule of signs states that if (x) =

c x with 0 m <

1 1 1 6 m < < m and with all coefficients c = 0, then the number of positive

real zeros of  is upper bounded by the number of sign changes between con-

secutive coefficients c [22].

0 0 12By defining a new variable X = 1 2x; (x) = h (x) x can be

0 0 0 0 rewritten as (X) = (1 2") + 2X 2X

+ (1 2")X

.

Applying Descartes’ rule to (X), it is easy to see that (X) has at most three

positive real zeros for " < 0:5, and at most one positive real zero for " = 0:5.
01 This is equivalent to saying that (x) has at most three real zeros in ( ; 0:5),  and therefore, in [0; 0:5). As X = 0( x = 0:5) is a simple zero of (X)

for " = 0:5, and is not a zero of (X) otherwise, the interval [0; 0:5) can be

extended to [0; 0:5].

[13] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[14] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Bounds on the performance of belief propagation decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 112–122, Jan. 2002.
[15] A. Khandekar and R. McEliece. A lower bound on the iterative decoding threshold of irregular LDPC code ensembles. presented at Proc. CISS. [CD-ROM]
[16] C.-C. Wang, S. R. Kulkarni, and H. V. Poor, “Density evolution for asymmetric memoryless channels,” in Proc. Int. Symp Turbo Codes, 2003, pp. 121–124.
[17] K. Sh. Zigangirov and M. Lentmaier, “On the asymptotic iterative decoding performance of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp Turbo Codes, 2000, pp. 39–42.
[18] M. Ardakani and F. R. Kschischang, “Gear shift decoding,” in Proc. 21st Biennial Symp. Communications, Kingston, ON, Canada, June 2002, pp. 86–90.
[19] A. H. Banihashemi, A. Nouh, and P. Zarrinkhat, “Hybrid (multistage) decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes,” in Proc. 40th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control, Computing, Allerton, IL, Oct. 2002, pp. 1437–1438.
[20] P. Zarrinkhat and A. H. Banihashemi, “Hybrid hard-decision iterative decoding of regular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 250–252, Apr. 2004.
[21] P. Zarrinkhat, A. H. Banihashemi, and H. Xiao, “Time-invariant and switch-type hybrid iterative decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” Ann. Télécommun., to be published.
[22] P. Henrici, Applied and Computational Complex Analysis. New York: Wiley, 1974, vol. 1.
Pirouz Zarrinkhat (S’01) was born in Esfahan, Iran, in 1971. He received the B.Sc. degree from Isfahan University of Technology, Esfahan, Iran, in 1994, and the M.Sc. degree from Sharif University of Technology, Tehran, Iran, in 1997, both in electrical engineering. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada.
His research interests include information theory, wireless communications, and quantum computing.
Amir H. Banihashemi (S’90–A’98–M’03) was born in Isfahan, Iran. He received the B.A.Sc. degree in electrical engineering from Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, Iran, in 1988, and the M.A.Sc. degree in communication engineering from Tehran Univesity, Tehran, Iran, in 1991, with the highest academic rank in both classes. He received the Ph.D. degree from the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, ON, Canada in 1997.
From 1991 to 1994, he was with the Electrical Engineering Research Center and the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, IUT. In 1997, he joined the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON, Canada, where he was a Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) Postdoctoral Fellow. He joined the Faculty of Engineering at Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada, in 1998, where he is currently an Associate Professor in the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering. His research interests are in the general area of digital and wireless communications and include coding, information theory, and theory and implementation of iterative coding schemes.
Dr. Banihashemi has served as an Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS since May 2003. He is also a member of the Board of Directors for the Canadian Society of Information Theory, and a member of the Advisory Committee for the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre at Carleton University. In 1995 and 1996, he was awarded two Ontario Graduate Scholarships for international students.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:31:26 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

