IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

1225

Transactions Letters________________________________________________________________

Memory-Efficient Sum–Product Decoding of LDPC Codes
Hari Sankar, Student Member, IEEE, and Krishna R. Narayanan, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes perform very close to capacity for long lengths on several channels. However, the amount of memory (fixed-point numbers that need to be stored) required for implementing the message-passing algorithm increases linearly as the number of edges in the graph increases. In this letter, we propose a decoding algorithm for decoding LDPC codes that reduces the memory requirement at the decoder. The proposed decoding algorithm can be analyzed using density evolution; further, we show how to design good LDPC codes using this. Results show that this algorithm provides almost the same performance as the conventional sum-product decoding of LDPC codes.
Index Terms—Density evolution, Gaussian approximation, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, memories, sum–product algorithm, threshold, turbo-codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
C AREFULLY designed irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1]–[3] perform very close to capacity on additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels and can achieve capacity on the binary erasure channel (BEC) [4]. However, one disadvantage of LDPC codes is that the message-passing decoder requires a lot of memory (number of fixed-point numbers that need to be stored). The memory requirement at the decoder increases linearly with the number of edges in the graph of LDPC codes, which could turn out to be a bottleneck in many cases. In this letter, we propose a variation of the message-passing decoding algorithm, which is memory efficient, and analyze this algorithm. Recently, a similar decoding scheme has appeared in [9]. The proposed algorithm performs almost as well as the conventional LDPC code with sum-product decoding, in terms of bit-error rate (BER). The main idea is to split the LDPC code in two subcodes and decode them in a turbo fashion, instead of applying the message-passing algorithm to the entire graph. In splitting, we consider a semirandom approach, which is explained in detail later. We then analyze the performance of LDPC codes with the proposed decoding algorithm and show how to design good LDPC codes for the proposed scheme. We then show that LDPC codes designed for conventional sum-product decoding
Paper approved by W. E. Ryan, the Editor for Modulation, Coding, and Equalization of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received June 25, 2002; revised May 22, 2003; September 19, 2003; January 19, 2004.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX 77843 USA (e-mail: hari@ee.tamu.edu; krishna@ee.tamu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.833016

are asymptotically optimal for this scheme also, and they perform very close to each other.
II. LDPC CODE STRUCTURE
We briefly develop the notation used throughout this letter here. An LDPC code can be represented in terms of a bipartite graph. The variable or bit nodes correspond to components of the codeword, and the check or right nodes correspond to the set of parity-check constraints satisfied by the codewords of the code. The degree of a variable node is the number of check equations that it participates in. Similarly, degree of a check node is the number of variable nodes which take part in that particular check. If all variable (check) nodes have the same degree, then it is a regular LDPC code. If the degrees are different, then it is irregular [7]. The irregularity is typically specified using two polynomials called node- and check-degree profiles, respectively. That is
(1)
where and represent the fractions of edges that are connected to bit nodes of degree and check nodes of degree , respectively. LDPC codes are usually decoded with a soft-input/soft-output (SISO) algorithm called sum-product decoding. Sum-product decoding is optimal only when there are no cycles in the bipartite graph, yet it performs very close to optimal even if there are cycles. The problem with sum-product decoding, however, is that in an iteration, the number of fixed-point memory elements required is equal to the number of edges in the bipartite graph. This could turn out to be large. In order to alleviate this situation, the following decoding algorithm is proposed.
III. PROPOSED DECODING ALGORITHM
The object of the proposed decoding algorithm is to reduce memory requirements. This has been accomplished by splitting the graph in a semirandom fashion into two subgraphs, and then applying sum-product decoding algorithm on each of the subgraphs.
A. Proposed Splitting
1) Divide the check nodes into two halves (call them Half-1 and Half-2), such that the two halves contain approximately the same number of check nodes of each degree.

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1226

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

Fig. 1. LDPC code under the new semirandom construction. Circles represent variable nodes, and squares, check nodes. The numbers on the variable nodes denote their overall degrees.
2) In connecting variable nodes to check nodes, two possibilities arise: • if the degree of a variable node is even, distribute the edges of this node equally between Half-1 and Half-2; • if, on the other hand, the degree is odd, divide the edges among them in such a way that one of the halves gets one edge more than the other. For successive odd-degree variable nodes, the extra edge can be connected to different halves, so as to ensure that each half has approximately the same number of edges. This construction can be better understood from Fig. 1.
3) In each of the halves, the edges between the bit nodes and check nodes are placed at random, subject to the degree profile limitations.
4) Denote the degree of the variable node in Half-1 as , and that in Half-2 as .
5) For better performance, it must be ensured that the degree-2 variable nodes of the overall graph (Half-1 Half-2) do not form any loop of small lengths, as far as possible.
The recently proposed concatenated Gallager codes [8] can be seen to be a special case of this scheme.

where is the noise sample which is a zero-mean Gaussian random variable with variance . The decoding is done in the following fashion. Sum-product decoding is run on one of the halves for a fixed number of iterations (call these subiterations). Denote this fixed number of subiterations as . The extrinsics on each of the variable nodes are obtained. Sum-product decoding is run on the other half, with these extrinsics as a priori information. These steps are repeated a fixed number of times (call these superiterations and let there be superiterations), and the result on the nodes is declared. This scheme is similar to turbo decoding. Note that when a new set of subiterations is started on a half, the edge log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) are initialized to zero. So, over each subiteration of the decoding, there are just half the number of active edges as there are in conventional sum-product decoding and, hence, the memory requirement is reduced in half.
The algorithm is explained below in more detail. Let

denote the LLR passed from check to variable along the th edge incident on the th variable node during the
th superiteration, th subiteration, and in Half- ( 1 or

2). Similarly, let

denote the LLR passed from

variable to check node along the th edge on the th variable

node during the th superiteration, th subiteration, and in

Half- ( 1 or 2). Let us denote the extrinsics passed from

Half- to the other half, Half-

(

) at the th

superiteration as

. Also assume

without loss of generality that the decoding starts on Half-1.

The iterative procedure is given by the following.

• Initialization: Set

.

• For

to

— For

to

— Set edge LLRs to zero:

for

• For

to

• Bit-node update

(3) • Check-node update

(4)

• end

— The extrinsics passed on to the other half

is

given by

(5)

B. Decoding

— end

Assume transmission of bits with binary phase-shift

• end

keying (BPSK) modulation over an AWGN channel. If

• Final LLRs

is the transmitted codeword (after

modulation) and

is the received word,

(6)

then clearly

which are used to make a hard decision on transmitted

(2)

bit .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

1227

C. Quantifying Memory Savings

It can be easily observed that for

Let represent the total number of edges in the overall graph (Half-1 Half-2), and let the length of the code be
. Then, we have the following.

(1) even

1) Memory Required for Actual Sum-Product De-

coding: From Section II, it can be observed that in an iteration,

(10)

must be stored. Since each edge has an LLR as-

sociated with it, this amounts to fixed-point values. Apart

(2) odd

from these, the channel extrinsics have to be stored, which

account for fixed-point values. So, the memory required

from iteration to iteration is

(11)

fixed-point numbers

(7)

2) Memory Required for the Proposed Scheme: Using the same argument as for conventional sum-product decoding, we need fixed-point values for storing the edge LLRs (instead of fixed-point numbers as in the conventional scheme; this is where the memory saving comes in). We need another fixed-point numbers for storing the extrinsics which need to be passed between halves and channel LLRs. Therefore, the memory required is

These equations stem from the fact that a degree- variable

node in one of the halves can arise out of only three cases: a

variable-node degree of , , or

in the overall LDPC

code. If the overall degree is

, half of these nodes will

contribute to degree- in a half. If it is , all those nodes will

contribute to degree- . If it is

, again, half of these nodes

will contribute to degree- .

Represent the corresponding profile in the edge perspective

of each of the halves obtained from

as . Let be

the maximum degree of , and hence, of .

For the sake of simplicity of notation, assume that

is even from here on. The optimization discussed here

can be very easily extended to odd ’s, too. Define a

matrix as

(12) fixed-point numbers (8)
where
Therefore, the memory saving is

(9)

It is worthy of note at this point that the proposed construc-

tion can result in more savings, because the size of the address

mapping of the LDPC code (connects variable nodes to check

nodes) required at a time is reduced by half. Though it is not

quantified here, this could turn out to be considerable in some

cases. Hence, effectively can be greater than

.

IV. ANALYSIS AND OPTIMIZATION
In this section, we analyze the proposed sum-product decoding on an AWGN channel based on the Gaussian approximation [6] for the semirandom construction described earlier.

(13)

Let represent the th

element of the vector

. Note that in each half, a variable node of degree can be connected only to a variable node of degree , , or in the other half. The th component of the vector , namely, , represents the fraction of nodes of degree in any one half that are connected to nodes of degree , , and , respectively, in the other half.

B. Evolution of Probability Density Functions (pdfs)

A. Modified Degree Profiles

As in [6], we assume that the output of every bit node and check node is a random variable with a Gaussian distribution.

Let

represent the variable-node profile from the edge Due to the irregularity, the overall pdf of the messages passed

perspective of the overall LDPC code (Half-1 Half-2). It from bit node to check node, vice versa, and between the two

has a corresponding node perspective representation, which halves is a mixture of Gaussian densities. We assume that the

we represent as . It is straightforward to determine the right degree is concentrated (all the check nodes are either of

node and edge perspective variable-node profiles of each of the same degree or are of degree and ). Due to this, it is

the halves for the semirandom construction. Since both halves reasonable to assume that the messages passed from the check

are symmetric, it is also safe to assume that they have the node to the bit node have a Gaussian pdf rather than a mixture

same profiles. Represent this profile in the node perspective of Gaussian pdfs. A discussion of the notation used in this sub-

as

.

section is in order here.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1228

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

•

: pdf of the LLRs from the channel,

where

.

•

: mean of the message passed from a check node

of degree to a variable node during the th superitera-

tion and the th subiteration in the Half- .

•

: pdf of the mes-

sage passed from a check node to a variable node

during the th superiteration and the th subiteration

in the Half- . Note that the mean of the messages is

.

•

: th component of a Gaussian mixture pdf passed

from a variable node of degree to a check node during the

th superiteration and th subiteration in Half- .

•

: pdf of the messages passed from half to the other

half

during the th superiteration at a variable

node of degree in a half.

• : the means of the messages.

Consider the th subiteration during the th superiteration

in Half- . The pdf of the message arriving at a node of degree

[including the contribution of the channel and the extrinsic

information from the other Half-

] is given by

(14)

Then, the mean of the message passed from the check nodes to bit nodes is given by

(19)

The distribution of the messages passed from the check nodes to the bit nodes is

(20)

The distribution of the message passed from half to the

other half

at the end of the th subiteration at a node

of degree in half is given by

(21)

The threshold of an LDPC code is the signal-to-noise ratio

(SNR) above which the mean

as the superit-

erations progress. This can be easily determined for a given

using the above equations. Nonlinear optimization techniques

such as fmincon in MATLAB can be used for finding the best

profiles for a given rate, once the threshold can be calculated.

for the proposed scheme. The above expression results, since a

bit node of degree in one half is connected to a bit node of

degree , , or

with probability , , and ,

respectively.

The pdf of the messages at the output of a variable node of

degree that is passed to the check nodes is

, and can

be computed as follows:

V. RESULTS

Two sets of comparisons are presented here.

1) The optimum left degree profiles for a rate-1/2 LDPC code

with a constant right degree

was designed, as explained

in the previous section for the semirandom case for

,

, and

. The best profiles that could be obtained

for all these cases turned out to be the same, and is

(22)

(23)

(15) where

(16)

where

is the mean of the messages from the

check nodes to bit nodes during the

th superiteration,

th subiteration, and in half

, and represents con-

volution. The distribution at the input of a check node is then a

mixture of Gaussians given by

(17)
The output mean on an edge connected to a check node of degree is

(18)

where

, being a Gaussian random vari-

able with mean and variance .

The threshold for this profile with the semirandom scheme

is 0.4 dB for the case mentioned above, and is the same for

the scheme with conventional sum-product decoding. Also,

the threshold for this profile with conventional sum-product

decoding is the same as that of the best LDPC code, with

maximum left degree 20 and right nodes concentrated in one

degree, that was designed in [6]. This suggests that the de-

coding scheme proposed here is just a minor variation of actual

sum-product decoding and performs very close to it.

For the conventional scheme, a code of length

(number of edges is approximately 48000) was constructed at

random, corresponding to the profile given above. For the pro-

posed semirandom scheme, a bipartite graph was constructed

as explained in Section IV. The 5334 check nodes were split

into two (each half getting

nodes) and then

Half-1 and Half-2 were constructed. A total of 75 iterations

were used for both types of decoding (for the proposed con-

struction

and

was used). The

BER plot of the new semirandom and the conventional schemes

have been compared in Fig. 2. The same figure shows compar-

ison of the schemes at a lower number of total iterations of 25

(

,

) and 50 (

,

) also. It can

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

1229

Fig. 2. BER plot comparing the new semirandom (sr) scheme with Fig. 4. BER plot comparing the new semirandom (sr) scheme with

conventional LDPC (irregular) rate = 0:5, N = 10667.

conventional LDPC [regular (3,6)] rate = 0:5, N = 16000.

2) In order to show that the proposed decoding technique can be used with regular LDPC codes also, we have shown simulation results for a (3, 6) regular LDPC code of rate-1/2 and length
in Fig. 4, with the proposed semirandom construction and for the original code. Again, it can be seen that the proposed construction and decoding algorithms provide almost the same performance as conventional sum-product decoding.
For the particular LDPC codes experimented with above, memory saving is at least 23% for the irregular case, and at least 12.5% for the regular case. Note that this does not include the savings in memory from the address mapping of the LDPC code.

VI. CONCLUSION

The new scheme implemented here leads to savings in

memory with little sacrifice in performance. The analysis leads

us to conclude that the proposed decoding scheme is just a

Fig. 3. BER plot comparing the new semirandom (sr) scheme with minor variation of actual sum-product decoding, as the thresh-

conventional LDPC (irregular) rate = 0:5, N = 2000.

olds are the same, and the same deductions can be obtained

from simulations. Even though the convergence is slightly

be observed that the proposed scheme performs as well as conventional sum-product decoding, and reaches a BER of around
with 75 iterations, though the convergence is slower for the proposed scheme. The focus of this letter is on memory saving, and is aimed at applications which have reasonable computational capability and can tolerate slower convergence. It is evident from the simulation that the proposed algorithm is robust in terms of BER, while resulting in memory savings. However,

slower for the proposed scheme, the focus of this paper is on memory saving. This scheme will especially come in handy in instances where memory at the receiver is a bottleneck and complexity is not the issue. Splitting the graph into more than two halves will result in more memory saving, but the resulting decoding algorithm will be more suboptimal, as correlated information will have to be exchanged between the subcodes. This has been considered in [9].

depending on the implementation of the decoder and other fac-

tors, like the length of the code, amount of hardware available,

number of iterations, and target BER, the amount of savings in

memory or whether there is any savings at all can change.

The same set of comparisons for the same code have been

shown in Fig. 3 for a shorter block length of

. This

figure shows that the proposed scheme is robust for shorter

blocklengths, too.

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near-Shannon-limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elec. Eng., Linköping Univ., Linköping, Sweden, 1996.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1230

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

[4] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] T. J. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of provably good low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2000, p. 199.
[6] S. Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.

[7] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Analysis of low-density codes and improved designs using irregular graphs,” in Proc. 30th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, 1998, pp. 249–258.
[8] H. Behairy and S. Chang, “Parallel concatenated Gallager codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 36, no. 24, pp. 2025–2026, Nov. 2000.
[9] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Memory-efficient turbo decoder architectures for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Processing Systems, Oct. 2002, pp. 159–164.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:10 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

