IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

439

On Decoding of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Over the Binary Erasure Channel
Hossein Pishro-Nik, Student Member, IEEE, and Faramarz Fekri, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper investigates decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes over the binary erasure channel (BEC). We study the iterative and maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding of LDPC codes on this channel. We derive bounds on the ML decoding of LDPC codes on the BEC. We then present an improved decoding algorithm. The proposed algorithm has almost the same complexity as the standard iterative decoding. However, it has better performance. Simulations show that we can decrease the error rate by several orders of magnitude using the proposed algorithm. We also provide some graph-theoretic properties of different decoding algorithms of LDPC codes over the BEC which we think are useful to better understand the LDPC decoding methods, in particular, for finite-length codes.
Index Terms—Bipartite graphs, erasure channel, improved decoding, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding, performance bound.
I. INTRODUCTION
I N this paper we study decoding of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes when they are used over the binary erasure channel (BEC). The application of LDPC codes over BEC has been studied extensively [1]–[5]. When the message-passing algorithm is applied to an LDPC code over the BEC, it results in a very fast decoding algorithm [1]. However, the performance of this decoder is inferior to that of the maximum-likelihood (ML) decoder. Here, we derive some bounds on the performance of the ML decoder over the BEC. Then, we propose a technique to improve the performance of the message-passing decoder while keeping the speed of the decoding fast.
Asymptotic analysis of the performance of LDPC codes has been done successfully [6], [1], [7]. Capacity-achieving degree distributions for the binary erasure channel have been introduced in [1], [4], [3], and [5]. Although using the asymptotic analysis we can find good degree distributions, generating good finite-length LDPC codes has always been a challenge. Finitelength analysis of LDPC codes over the BEC was accomplished in [2]. In that paper, authors also proposed to use finite-length analysis in order to find good finite-length codes for the BEC. Here, we take a different approach. Instead of trying to find good LDPC codes we improve the decoding of the existing codes. The combination of the optimized codes using the fi-
Manuscript received January 23, 2003; revised May 30, 2003. This work was supported in part by the Air Force Office of Scientific Research under Grant F49620-02-1-0053, the National Science Foundation under Grant ANI0117840, and by the State of Georgia through Yamacraw.
The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, GA 30332, USA (email: hossein@ece. gatech.edu; fekri@ece.gatech.edu).
Communicated by S. Litsyn, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.824918

nite-length analysis and the improved decoding algorithm that

we present in this paper can result in good coding schemes over

the BEC. Although the method we propose can be applied to

any code length, its impact is more important for finite-length

codes because for large values of code lengths there exist codes

that achieve the capacity of the BEC. Thus, here we concen-

trate more on the moderate-length and short-length codes. More

specifically, we consider the lengths that are less than or equal

to . It is worth noting that the algorithm we present here for

the BEC can be generalized for other memoryless binary-input

output-symmetric (MBIOS) channels [8].

Throughout the paper, we assume the following terminology.

By a graph we mean a simple graph, i.e., a graph with no loops

(edges joining a vertex to itself) and no multiple edges (several

edges joining the same two vertices). However, a multigraph

may have loops or multiple edges. Let be a subset of the ver-

tices in the graph .

shows the set of neighbors of in

. Let be a subgraph of such that its vertex set is . We

say is induced by if contains all edges of that join two

vertices in . Let

be an edge in the graph . When we

say we contract we mean that we identify the vertices and

and remove all the resulting loops. Note that unlike the usual

definition of contraction, we do not remove the duplicate edges

resulting from identifying and . Let be a subgraph of . If

we contract all the edges in , we say that we have contracted

into a vertex. Let be a bipartite multigraph with bipartition

and , For any

, we define

as the

graph induced by the vertices in and their neighbors. For a set

, is the set of all subsets of .

II. BOUNDS ON THE PERFORMANCE OF ML DECODING

ML decoding has the best possible bit-error rate (BER).

Since we are concerned with improving the iterative decoding

of LDPC codes, ML decoding gives us the best possible

improvement we may get. Thus, it is useful to study the ML

decoder and its properties. Some properties of ML decoding

of LDPC codes have been studied before, see, for examples,

[9]–[11] and [2]. We first consider the asymptotic capacity

of LDPC codes over the BEC under ML decoding. LDPC

codes can be defined by their Tanner graphs [12]. Consider the

ensemble

of bipartite graphs defined by their degree

distributions. We define the ML capacity (threshold) of the

ensemble as the supremum value of the parameter such that

a randomly chosen code from the ensemble can achieve an

arbitrarily small BER for sufficiently large almost surely over

a BEC with erasure probability . There is no concentration

result known for ML decoding of LDPC codes over general

MBIOS channels, however, the ML capacity is well defined

0018-9448/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

440

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

and is always greater than or equal to the threshold of the

iterative decoding. With the above definition, we can find

simple lower and upper bounds on the ML capacity of an

ensemble. Since these upper and lower bounds are very close

to each other (they are practically the same at least for regular

codes), they provide an estimate of the ML capacity of the

codes. A simple lower bound can be found using the union

bound given in [2] and the asymptotic distance distributions

of the regular LDPC codes derived in [13]. Note that in [14],

the authors have independently derived the lower bound in the

context of the error exponent of ML decoding. Let

be

the ensemble of the regular LDPC codes with variable nodes

and check nodes of degrees and , respectively.

Let be the probability that randomly chosen columns of sum to zero. Therefore,
(5) As it is shown in [13]
Therefore,

Theorem 1: Let

be the only positive root of

approaches

as goes to zero. Let

(1)

Define

as

Using have

, it is easy to show that for sufficiently small we . Thus,

if is even or otherwise.

Now define (2) sion we have

(6) . From the preceding discus-

Then the ML capacity of the ensemble

is

lower-bounded by the supremum value of such that

as

for all

Proof: Let be the th column of an

parity-check

matrix . Suppose a codeword is transmitted over a BEC

channel with the erasure probability and let denote the set

of variable nodes that correspond to the erased bits. Further,

assume that

, where is the lower bound for the

ML capacity given by the theorem. Let be the event that

. We have

for all . The ML

decoder can decode the received word correctly if the columns

of that corresponds to the erased bits are independent. Let

be the set of indexes of the erased bits. We define

(3)

for

. Let be a random variable defined by

, where shows the cardinality of a set. The typical

minimum distance of LDPC codes from

with

increases linearly with the code length. More specifically, for

the ensemble

with

there exists

such that the probability that the minimum distance of a ran-

domly chosen code from the ensemble is less than or equal to

converges to zero as

[15], [16]. Thus, we

conclude that

Since

, using

inequality we conclude that

(7) and the Markov
. Since

we obtain

. Combining this with (4)

we conclude that the ML decoder can decode the received word

successfully almost always.

Let be the lower bound for the ML capacity given by The-

orem 1. As an example, of the

ensemble is equal

to

while the capacity under message passing (the

threshold found using density evolution) is

. Since

we always use LDPC codes below their threshold, we conclude

that for sufficiently large code lengths, the ML decoder is likely

to decode the received word even though the message-passing

decoder fails.

Using the distance distributions of the irregular codes, it is

possible to generalize the preceding argument for the irregular

codes. The distance distributions of irregular codes have been

found by several authors [17], [18], and [14]. As shown in [16],

if

the minimum distance of the expurgated en-

semble increases linearly with the code length. Thus, we find

the following bound for the expurgated ensemble.

Theorem 2: Consider the ensemble

that satisfies

.1 Let

be the average distance

(4)

1As commented by one of the reviewers, the condition   (1) < 1 can be

relaxed.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: ON DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

441

distribution as defined in [13]. Then the ML capacity of the ex- are independent and add an to the result. Now, obviously,

purgated ensemble

is lower-bounded by the supremum we have

. Considering the above

value of such that

discussion it is easy to show that

for all

.

It is useful to find an upper bound for the ML capacity. The bound would obviously be an upper bound for the iterative decoder as well. First, using Markov’s inequality, the following lemma can be easily obtained.

Lemma 1: Let

be a constant. Let also be a positive

integer such that for all

, the sequence of random vari-

ables , where

satisfies

.

Then, for all

there exist and

such that for all

we have

.

Let be the fraction of variable nodes of degree and be the fraction of check nodes of degree . Let us define

and

(9) For irregular codes using the inequality

(10)

for

, we obtain

(11)

Thus, we showed that if we pick a random integer between

and , with probability at least

we

have at least two rows in whose th element is and all the

other elements are . Any such reduces the rank of by at

least one. Therefore, if we define

, we have

By a simple observation, we can find the following upper bound

for the capacity of LDPC codes over the BEC.

(12)

Theorem 3: To have arbitrarily small bit error probability By defining

under ML decoding on a BEC with erasure probability , we

must have

(13)

(8)

Proof: Let us construct a matrix from the parity matrix

by selecting each column of with probability

in-

dependently and replacing it with the zero vector. The nonzero

columns of correspond to the erased bits. If we pick a row

from at random, this row is equal to zero in with proba-

bility

. Therefore, on the average, we have

zero rows in . We now prove the following lemma.

Lemma 2: If we peak a random integer between and ,

then with probability at least

we have

at least two rows in whose th element is and all their other

elements are .

Proof: Call the required probability . For clarity of ex-

position, consider the regular ensemble

. Let be the

event that the th column in be nonzero, thus,

.

There are rows

in whose th element is

one. Let be the set consisting of these rows. Thus, we have

. Let

be the event that only the th element of

the th row in is equal to . Since

, with high prob-

ability the positions of the ’s in all of the rows in do not

overlap except for the th position. Therefore, given that the th

column is preserved in , the events

are independent.

Since the probability of any event is less than or equal to one,

to obtain it suffices to consider only the case when ’s

we have
(14)
Now we show that for an arbitrarily small error probability we must have . Suppose . As previously shown

Let

be a constant. Then, by Lemma 1, there

exist and

such that for all

we have

. Therefore, with a strictly positive probability

that is independent of we have

. Hence,

the decoder can find the value of at most

erasures.

Consequently, at least

erasures remain after the

decoding. This implies that the overall error probability of the

decoder is at least

.Therefore, for reliable commu-

nication we must have

. Thus,

(15)

This completes the proof of the theorem.
In the preceding argument if we just consider the rows that are zero in and omit the discussion about the rows with weight one, we will get a slightly weaker bound as

(16)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

442

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

Fig. 1. Lower and upper bounds for the ML capacity of g(3; d ).

This is the same bound given in [4] for the iterative decoding

of the LDPC codes. Note that in [4], the bound is derived for

the iterative decoding but the preceding discussion shows that

the bound is also valid for ML decoding. It is also noteworthy

that examining the proof of Theorem 3, we find that the upper

bound given by (16) is valid for any individual code in the en-

semble while the one given in (8) is valid for typical codes.

This is because we made use of the cycle-free neighborhood as-

sumption. As an example, for the ensemble

, Theorem 3

gives the upper bound

while (16) provides a slightly

weaker bound

. Furthermore, the authors in [19] 2

have also obtained the upper bound

, that is, again

slightly weaker than the one given by Theorem 3. However, the

bound in [19] was proven for the individual codes.

Figs. 1 and 2 show the upper bound and the lower bound

that are given by Theorems 1 and 3 for

and

,

respectively. As suggested by the figures, the two bounds are

practically the same. As an example for irregular graphs, we

consider the ensemble of LDPC codes defined by

(17)

Using Theorems 2 and 3, we find that the ML capacity for the

given ensemble satisfies

. It is worth

noting that for the calculation of the lower bound we used [17]

to find the weight spectrum of the code. Again we conclude that

the bounds are sufficiently tight. Therefore, we can approximate

the ML capacity from the given bounds. Note that Theorem 3

2This paper appeared after the review of our manuscript in IEEE Transactions on Information Theory.

gives an upper bound that can be easily computed for any degree

distributions. However, for the lower bound we need to have the

distance distribution of the code.

Since we are interested in the finite-length LDPC codes, it

is desirable to choose the codes that satisfy

. This

is because as shown in [16] and [20], if we have

,

then the minimum stopping set and the minimum distance will

be sublinear with high probability and, therefore, we will have

small stopping sets in the graph which is not desirable for fi-

nite-length codes. In the above definition, we defined the ML

threshold for the bit erasure probability. It is mentioned in [2]

that the threshold for bit erasure probability and block erasure

probability may be different. Any upper bound for the threshold

for bit erasure probability is an upper bound for the threshold for

block erasure probability as well. Therefore, the upper bound in

Theorem 3 is also an upper bound for the threshold for the block

erasure probability. In the ensembles for which

, the

thresholds for the block erasure probability and the bit erasure

probability are the same. This is because for these ensembles

there is no codeword with weight less than or equal to

with a high probability. Therefore, if the ML decoder cannot

decode the received word, there will be at least

era-

sures that are left after the decoding is performed. Thus, the

BER is at least

times the block error rate. The same

argument works for the iterative decoder if we replace the min-

imum distance by the size of the minimum stopping set. Con-

sequently, the lower bounds in Theorems 1 and 2 are also valid

for the threshold for block erasure probability. In fact, although

we stated the theorem for the bit error probability threshold, in

the proof we showed that the block error rate goes to zero.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: ON DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

443

Fig. 2. Lower and upper bounds for the ML capacity of g(4; d ).

III. IMPROVING THE ITERATIVE DECODING

A. Description of Algorithms

The iterative decoding of LDPC codes over the BEC is much

faster than the ML decoding. However, it has higher error proba-

bility. Our aim in this section is to decrease the error probability

while keeping the decoding fast. We mostly focus on moderate

and short-length codes. We use the message-passing algorithm

with some modifications. Let

and

be the set of variable and

check nodes, respectively. A stopping set is defined in [2] as

a subset of such that all neighbors of are connected to

at least twice. Let be the subset of the set of variable nodes

that is erased by the channel. It is proved in [2] that the iterative

decoding fails if and only if contains a stopping set. In [2] it

is also shown that the set of the remaining erasures when the

decoder stops is equal to the unique maximal stopping set of .

Let

be the average time required for the standard itera-

tive decoding of an LDPC code of length when it is used over

a BEC with the erasure probability . Let be an improved

decoding method for the same code when used over the same

channel. Let

be the time that Algorithm B needs to

decode a received word and let

be the average time of

the decoding of the code using Algorithm B. We want to have

(18) (19)

pose in this section (Algorithm C) will achieve the above in-

equalities with

and

.

Theoretically, any LDPC code has a threshold such that

if

then the error probability of the standard iterative

decoding is bounded away from zero by a strictly positive con-

stant. On the other hand, if

, an arbitrarily small error

probability is attainable if , the length of the code, is large

enough [6], [1]. However, for finite-length codes the situation

is deferent. First, we may get an error floor and cannot decrease

the error probability as we want. Moreover, to decrease the error

probability, for example from to , we need to decrease

by a considerable amount. Here we propose a method for de-

coding LDPC codes over BEC that has the same complexity as

the message-passing decoder. However, its error rate is consid-

erably smaller.

The key idea is the following observation. Consider a BEC

with an erasure probability and an LDPC code of length

that has a small enough error probability. If the message-passing

decoder fails to decode a received word completely, then there

exists a few (usually less than or equal to 3 bits) undecoded bits

that if their values are exposed to the decoder, then the decoder

can finish the decoding successfully. Note that this is true only

when the BER is small enough (for example, less than ).

Simulations and intuitive arguments strongly confirm the above

statement for different LDPC codes.

Let us recall the message passing decoding of LDPC codes

over the BEC [1]. The algorithm can be stated as follows.

where is a small constant close to zero and is a sufficiently • For all unlabeled check nodes do the following. If the values small constant. Our simulations show that the algorithm we pro- of all but one of the variable nodes connected to the check
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

444

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

node are known, set the missing variable bit to the XOR of the other variable nodes and label that check node ’finished’. If all the variable nodes connected to the check node are known label the check node as finished.The procedure is done sequentially, i.e, one check node at a time. • Continue the above procedure until all check nodes are labeled as finished or the decoding cannot continue further.
We want to improve the above algorithm. Let us call the above algorithm A and the first improved Algorithm B. For the erasure patterns that Algorithm A finishes the decoding successfully, both algorithms are the same. The difference between the two algorithms is when Algorithm A fails to complete the decoding of a received codeword. In this case, Algorithm B continues the decoding as following. It chooses one of the unknown variable nodes (we will discuss how to choose this variable node) and guesses its value (for example, by setting its value to zero). Now it continues as follows.
• For all unlabeled check nodes do the following: If the value of all but one of the variable nodes connected to the check node are known, set the missing variable bit to the XOR of the other variable nodes and label it as a finished check node. If all the variable nodes connected to the check node are known then if the check node is satisfied label that check node “finished,” otherwise label it “contradicted.” The procedure is done sequentially, i.e, one check node at a time.
• Continue the above procedure until all check nodes are labeled or the decoding cannot continue further.

other than the guessed variable node will free a variable node.

Therefore, intuitively we expect that guessing a high-degree

variable node results in freeing more unknown variable nodes.

However, we can still improve our method of choosing ’s as

follows. First, we choose a high-degree unknown variable node

and examine its neighborhood. If guessing frees at least

unknown variable nodes for a suitable constant , we accept

as one of our guesses. Otherwise, we choose another high-de-

gree variable node. In our simulations we chose the value of

between

and

.

Algorithm B has two problems. First, the complexity of the

algorithm grows exponentially with the number of guesses. Al-

though the number of guesses is very small, this is undesirable.

In fact, if the complexity of the algorithm increased linearly with

the number of guesses we could increase and decrease the

error probability substantially. Second, it is possible that the al-

gorithm declares a wrong word as the output of the decoding.

However, this can happen only if the ML decoder cannot decode

the corresponding codeword. Since the ML decoder has a very

low error probability, this happens with a very small probability.

We now propose Algorithm C that copes with both problems.

Let be the first variable node that we guess. Let be the

value of . From now on, any variable node whose value is

determined by the algorithm can be represented in one of the

following forms: ,

, , or . In general, if the

algorithm makes guesses, any variable node that is determined

after the first guess can be represented as

Once the above procedure is finished, if all of the check nodes

are labeled and none of them is labeled “contradicted,” the de-

coder outputs the resulting word as the decoded word. If all of

the check nodes are labeled but some of them are labeled “con-

tradicted,” then it changes the value of , the guessed vari-

able node, and repeats the decoding from there. This time the

decoding finishes successfully because we have found the ac-

tual value of . But if the decoding stops again (i.e., some

of the check nodes are not labeled) we have to choose another

unknown variable node and guess its value to continue the

decoding. Again, if some check nodes are labeled as “contra-

dicted,” we have to go back and try other values for and

. Obviously, Algorithm B is efficient only if the number of

guesses is very small. Fortunately, simulation results show that

even if we limit the number of guesses to a very small number,

we can decrease the error rate by a considerable amount. Thus,

in practice we limit the number of guesses to a maximum value

. If after

guesses the decoding does not finish, we

claim a decoding failure. In fact, simulations show that with the

right choices of the variable nodes to guess, usually the decoding

finishes successfully by one or two guessed variable nodes. Note

that Algorithm B does not need any extra computation other than

the usual iterative decoding. Thus, the decoding is very fast.

Now let us consider the problem of choosing the variable

nodes ’s that we need to guess their values. One easy method

is to choose them from the set of variable nodes with the highest

degree. Note that a variable node of degree is present in equa-

tions. Therefore, when we assume that its value is known, any

parity-check equation that has only one unknown variable node

(20)

where

. Therefore, any variable node that is deter-

mined after the first guess can be represented by

.

After the first guess, Algorithm C continues as follows.

• For all unlabeled check nodes do the following: If the values of all but one of the variable nodes that are connected to the check node are known, compute the value of for the missing bit and label that check node as “finished.” If all the variable nodes that are connected to the check node are known then label that check node as a “basic equation.” The procedure is done sequentially, i.e, one check node at a time.
• Continue the above procedure until all check nodes are labeled or the decoding cannot continue further.

If necessary, Algorithm C makes other guesses. If after the

maximum possible number of guesses some of the variable

nodes are unlabeled, then we claim decoding failure. Suppose

that after

guesses all the check nodes are labeled.

Now we have the following.

Lemma 3: The received word is ML decodable if and only if

the set of basic equations have a unique solution.

Proof: By the labeling procedure, any choice for the

values of

satisfy all the parity-check equations

that are labeled “finished.” Therefore, decoding is possible if

and only if a unique choice of

satisfies all the

basic equations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: ON DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

445

Therefore, after all the check nodes are labeled, we examine

the set of basic equations. If they have a unique solution, we

determine

and then we find the values of all the

variable nodes. Otherwise, we claim decoding failure. Note that

since is a very small number, solving the basic equations is a

very simple task and can be done quickly. In fact, it is easy to

show that Algorithm C has complexity

. Sometimes,

although the set of basic equations does not have a unique solu-

tion, they still determine a subset of

uniquely.

In this case, we can replace the values of these variable nodes in

the expressions for unknown variable nodes and, consequently,

we may be able to recover some of the bits. This approach is

specifically useful when we deal with a code that has error floor

due to the small minimum distance. Note that the procedure of

finding a variable node for guessing in Algorithm C is the same

as Algorithm B. The following lemma determines the number

of basic equations.

Lemma 4: Let be the subset of the set of variable nodes that
are erased by the channel and be the unique maximal stopping Fig. 3. Construction of R(F ). set in . Then the number of basic equations is equal to

(21)

Proof: At the beginning of the guessing process there are

unlabeled check nodes. Any of these check nodes is ei-

ther a basic check node or determines exactly one variable node.

Since there are

variable nodes that are determined by the

check nodes,

check nodes are labeled as “basic

equations.”

Note that Algorithm C is equivalent to the ML decoder if we

do not limit the maximum number of guesses . In fact, in

this case Algorithm C is just an efficient implementation of the

ML decoder. It is worth noting that the set of basic equations

depends on the choice of variable nodes we guess.

An alternative method is to perform ML decoding on the

remaining erasures whenever iterative decoding fails. This de-

coding is much faster than the ordinary ML decoding and has

exactly the same performance as ML decoding. However, it has

two problems. First, it does not satisfy the requirement in (19),

because generally ML decoding of LDPC codes over the BEC

has time complexity

. Second, the ordinary ML decoding

of LDPC codes requires

space while Algorithms A, B,

and C require

space.

B. Bounds on the Number of Guesses in Algorithms B and C

Here we study the required number of guesses by Algorithms

B and C based on the properties of the Tanner graph of the code.

Instead of providing asymptotic results, we focus on graph-the-

oretic results that we think are useful in finite-length analysis.

To do that we need to extend the iterative decoding to bipar-

tite multigraphs. Let be a bipartite multigraph with bipar-

tition

and

, where

and

are the sets of variable and check

nodes, respectively. Iterative decoding works on as follows.

At the beginning, all the erased variable nodes are labeled “un-

known” and the following algorithm is repeated in each step.

• If only one of the edges that is connected to a check node is incident with an unknown variable node, label that variable node as “known.”

Note that the preceding algorithm is not a decoding algorithm

for a real code. We just define it to simplify our discussion. We

need here the following definitions. We define a set

to be sufficient if by knowing the values of the variable nodes in

, the iterative decoder can finish the decoding successfully. A

set

is called unnecessary if

is sufficient. In

other words,

is unnecessary if the iterative decoder

can determine the values of erased variable nodes, when the

variable nodes in are erased but all the other variable nodes are

known. Obviously, a set is unnecessary if it does not contain

a stopping set.

Assume the iterative algorithm A fails to decode a received

word on a graph . Let be the stoping set that remains after the

decoding stops and let

. We define an equivalence re-

lation on

in the following way. We write if there is

a path from to on that does not contain any check node of

a degree higher than two. Obviously, is an equivalence rela-

tion. Thus, this relation partitions

into equivalence

classes. Let

be the equivalence classes of .

Note that if the value of is exposed to the decoder, then the

decoder can find the values of all variable nodes in the equiva-

lence class of .

For a bipartite graph we construct the graph

as fol-

lows. For each equivalence class , we contract all the variable

nodes in and all the check nodes that do not have any neigh-

bors outside into one vertex . Fig. 3 shows an example

of this construction. Note that every check node in

has a

degree at least three. Assume the iterative Algorithm A fails to

decode a received word on a graph . Let be the stoping

set that remains after the decoding fails and let

. We

have the following.

Theorem 4: Let be ML decodable and be the random variable that is equal to the number of guesses that are required

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

446

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

by Algorithm B to finish the decoding. Let also

be the

minimum sufficient set in

and

be the number of

equivalent classes in . Then, we have

(22)

where is the element in the th row and the th column of

. Consider the case that the iterative decoder fails but the ML

decoder can decode the received word. Let be the set of

variable nodes that the iterative decoder cannot decode. Con-

sider a variable node

. In this case, there exist

and

such that

Moreover, the lower bound is always attainable by using the

right choices of the guessed variable nodes.

Proof: After each guess in Algorithm B, all the variable

nodes in at least one of the equivalence classes will be deter-

mined. Therefore, after guesses the values of all the vari-

able nodes are found. Let

be the min-

imum cardinality sufficient set in . Suppose, in each step

we choose a variable node in one of ’s such that

. Then

after

steps all the variable nodes are determined. Obvi-

ously, the number of guesses cannot be less than

.

For example, in Fig. 3,

is the minimum cardinality suf-

ficient set in

. Therefore, we have

. If we

choose our first guess from the vertices in , only one guess is

enough to finish the decoding successfully. Since

the

number of guesses satisfies

. However, it is easy to

show that the number of required guesses is always less than or

equal to two for this example.

The preceding discussion shows the connection between the

graph-theoretic properties and the number of guesses. It would

be nice if we could use these arguments to obtain some prob-

abilistic results such as finding the average number of guesses

for a specific code and channel. Note that we deal with a fi-

nite-length analysis and asymptotic analyses are not useful. In

fact, we need some discussion based on the BER of the iterative

decoder for a finite-length code to find the probabilistic proper-

ties of the given algorithm.

C. Improving Algorithms B and C by Reduction of Number of Guesses

Let be the Tanner graph of an LDPC code and be the

number of guesses required by Algorithm B or C when the iter-

ative algorithm A fails. Later we will show that is very small

(usually

). However, we can still reduce the number

of guesses. Here, we introduce one method to reduce . We

first need to give some results based on the two-edge-connected

components of the Tanner graph of LDPC codes.

Assume that all the vertices in , the Tanner graph of the code,

have a degree at least two. For any

we defined

as the graph induced by the vertices in and their neighbors.

The graph

is sparser than the graph in the sense that

the degree of each vertex in

is less than or equal to the

degree of that vertex in . Let

be a stopping set. Then,

obviously

has at least one cycle because any vertex in

has a degree at least two. Let be the th row of .

Suppose

is a codeword and is the bit

corresponding to the variable node . Any row can be written

as a parity-check equation in the form

(23)

(24)

We say that the set of parity checks corresponding to

frees the variable node and we call this set of parity checks

a freeing set for . Let be a subgraph of . We define

as the set of parity-check nodes in . For , we say a graph

is -edge-connected if it has at least two vertices and no set of

at most

edges separates it.

Theorem 5: Assume

be a nonempty stopping set such

that the ML decoder can decode the word when the set is

erased. Suppose we receive a word for which is the unique

maximum stopping set. Then there exists a two-edge-connected

subgraph of

, say , such that the set of parity checks in

, i.e.,

, frees an erased variable node.

Proof: Let be the word constructed from by marking

the variables in as erasures. Since the ML decoder can de-

code , there exists a freeing set for any of the variable nodes

in . Let be an arbitrary variable node in and be a min-

imum freeing set for . Define

, then is a

connected graph. Otherwise, has at least two components,

and . Note that all the variable nodes in except one (the vari-

able node ) have even degrees in . Thus, in at least one of

the two subgraphs and (assume ), all the variable nodes

have even degrees. Therefore,

is a freeing set for .

This contradicts the assumption that is minimum (note that

).

If is two-edge-connected we are done, so we may assume

is not two-edge connected. We consider two cases as shown

in Fig. 4.

• Case1:

, where

denotes the degree

of the vertex in the graph . In this case, the degree of

any variable node in is at least two. By our assump-

tion and definition of the degree of any check node

in is at least two. Since the degree of each vertex in

is at least two, contains at least one cycle. Thus,

contains at least one two-edge-connected component. Let

be a graph obtained by contracting any two-edge-con-

nected component of to a vertex. Then, is a tree.

This is because if had a cycle then that cycle would

be in a two-edge-connected component and would have

been contracted to a vertex. Note that has at least two

vertices otherwise would be two-edge-connected. Since

is a tree, it has at least two leaves (vertices of degree

one). Moreover, since

for all

,

these leaves must correspond to two-edge-connected com-

ponents and in . Since and are disjoint, for

at least one of them, say , we have

. Next we

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: ON DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

447

D Fig. 4. Construction of the graph .

show that

is a freeing set for a variable node. Ad-

ditionally, is two-edge-connected. The existence of

proves the theorem.

Let

be the only edge that is connected to in

. Assume

and

. If is a variable node then

will free because has degree one in

and

all the other variable nodes in

have even degree.

This is because the degrees of these variable nodes in

and are the same. Now if is a check node, then is

a variable node. Then

will free . This is because

by the above assumption

. Therefore,

is

even and

is an odd number.

• Case2:

. We construct the graph Similar

to Case 1 and will be one of the leaves in . But

has at least one more leaf that corresponds to a two-edge-

connected component. Call this leaf . Obviously

. Therefore, using the argument in Case 1,

is a

freeing set for a variable node.

Fig. 4 shows the above argument.

The immediate result of Theorem 5 is the following corollary.

Let

be the set of check nodes in ,

the Tanner graph of the parity-check matrix . We define the

set

as following. For any set

we have

if and only if

is a two-edge connected

subgraph of . Let

be the set of parity-check equations

that are obtained by adding the set of parity-check equations

from an element of . Recall from Theorem 5 that the equa-

tions in

are sufficient for ML decoding. However, the

number of these equations is extremely high and we cannot use

all of them in the iterative decoding. Note that all of these equa-

tions are redundant because they are obtained by adding some

parity-check equations in . However, it turns out that by using

a very small number of suitably chosen equations from this large

set of equations, we can reduce the number of guesses in Algo-

rithms B and C. Again we use these equations whenever Algo-

rithm A fails. Note that any two-edge-connected graph is com-

posed of several cycles. A cycle is the simplest two-edge-con-

nected graph. Here, we only consider short cycles. Let be

the number of cycles of length in

. It is shown in the

Appendix that the expected value of is equal to

Corollary 1: If we append all the parity-check equations that are formed by adding the parity-check equations in the twoedge-connected subgraphs of to , then the iterative decoding on the new is equivalent to the ML decoding.
Obviously, this is not feasible because there are lots of such equations. However, we will show in the following sections that we can exploit Theorem 5 in order to improve the iterative decoding.
Corollary 2: If we apply the message-passing algorithm to an acyclic graph it will be equivalent to ML decoding.

(25)

where

is the number of check nodes and

is the number of edges in the graph. For a constant

number we have

(26) and for

This is a well-known result that can be proved for the erasure

channel as follows. Let be the stopping set that remains after

the iterative decoding. For any set of check nodes in

,

the graph that is induced by the vertices in and their neighbors

in

has at least two leaves. Since any check node in has a

degree at least two in , these leaves must be variable nodes.

Therefore, the set cannot be a freeing set for any variable

node. Note that in any acyclic graph we have at least two variable

nodes of degree one (we are assuming that check nodes have

always degrees greater than one) and any stopping set in the

graph must contain at least two variable nodes of degree one.

(27)

where

. Therefore, the av-

erage number of the finite-length cycles is a constant and does

not increase with . Obviously, the same argument works for

irregular codes. In order to reduce the number of guesses in Al-

gorithm B or C we find some parity-check equations that con-

struct short cycles (cycles of lengths four or six) in the Tanner

graph and add them together to find new parity-check equations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

448

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

Fig. 5. Distribution of the number of guesses that is required for successful decoding at  = 0:36.

Note that these equations are used only if the iterative decoding

(Algorithm A) fails. We will show that using a small number of

these equations suffices to reduce the number of guesses. Using

(26) we can find the expected number of equations that we need

to consider. For example, in

, if we just take parity-check

equations that construct cycles of lengths four or six, on the av-

erage we will find around 192 equations.

dard iterative decoding (Algorithm A) fails to decode a received

word. For the length

, we considered the following de-

gree distribution:

(28)

D. Simulation Results

In this subsection, we provide some empirical results. First, we experimentally verify the main claim that we made in Section III-A (i.e., a very few number of guesses is enough to finish

the decoding). We then give simulation results for the LDPC

codes of lengths

and

and evaluate the

performances of Algorithms A, B, and C. We compare these al-

gorithms based on the BER, average speed, and the speed of

decoding for a specific received word. Notice that the LDPC

codes that we use here are not optimized for the corresponding length and rate. We did the simulations for half rate codes and for each length we picked a code with reasonable performance

and degree distributions. In fact, we observed that for a fixed

length and a maximum degree, the relative performances of the algorithms are roughly independent of the degree distribution of the code.

Let us first study the number of guesses in Algorithms B and C when Algorithm A fails. Again, let us define the random variable to be the number of required guesses when the stan-

To evaluate the number of required guesses we set

and decoded 10 bits that were transmitted over the BEC with

the erasure probability

. Fig. 5 shows the empirical

probability density function for the number of required guesses.

We note that in more than 70% of the cases for which the it-

erative decoder fails, only one guess is enough to complete the

decoding successfully. We also note that the number of required

guesses is always less than or equal to eight. The error rate of Al-

gorithm A is about . Even if we limit the maximum number

of guesses to four, using Algorithms B or C we can improve the

error rate by almost two orders of magnitude.

However, the situation changes when we increase . For ex-

ample, for

, the average BER of the standard iterative

decoder (Algorithm A) is

. Fig. 6 shows the empirical

probability density function for the number of required guesses.

The figure shows that the number of required guesses increases

as we increase . For example, if we limit the maximum number

of guesses to four, we can decrease the BER by only one

order of magnitude using Algorithms B or C. However, it is

worth noting that even for

, the average number of

required guesses is still very small (

).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: ON DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

449

Fig. 6. Distribution of the number of guesses that is required for successful decoding at  = 0:39.

Let us now examine the effect of the code length on the number of guesses. We picked an LDPC code of length with the following distributions:

(29)

Fig. 7 depicts the empirical probability density function of

for this code. Note again that the number of guesses is largely

concentrated on the small values (less than or equal to four).

Therefore, we conclude that the number of required guesses is

small for most of the practical code lengths. Therefore, Algo-

rithms B and C are efficient. Note that in the preceding example,

when the standard iterative decoding fails, there are about 3500

erasures left when the decoding stops. However, in most of the

cases by knowing the values of less than or equal to 4 erased

bits the decoder can find the value of all the 3500 erasures!

Now we examine the performance of the proposed algo-

rithms. Note that Algorithms B and C have almost the same

BER. In all simulations we set

to . Fig. 8 shows the

performance of Algorithms A and C for a code from the

ensemble

with the length . The figure shows

that the gap between the BER of the two algorithms increases

as decreases. At

, the BER of Algorithm A is 20 times

bigger than the BER of Algorithm C. This gap increases to

about three orders of magnitude when is reduced to . This

suggests that Algorithm C can alleviate the error floor problem

in LDPC codes. Specifically, this algorithm can be very useful

when very small BER is required. On the other hand, for

the large values of , the improvement due to Algorithm C

becomes negligible. Our simulations show that for the values

of that the BER of the iterative decoder is less than or equal to

, a good improvement is possible in the BER by applying

Algorithm C.

There are several stopping sets in a Tanner graph of an LDPC

code. Some stopping sets are weak in the sense that if the values

of one or two bits in the stoping set is exposed to the itera-

tive decoder, the decoder can finish the decoding successfully.

For these stopping sets,

is a very small

number. On the other hand, some stopping sets are very strong

and their

is a large number. When is close to , we usu-

ally face with strong stopping sets. For example, at

the

strongest stopping set (i.e., ) occurs. As we decrease , the

strong stopping sets become less probable while the weak sop-

ping sets become more probable. Therefore, a smaller number

of guesses is required to finish the decoding. This discussion ex-

plains why the gap between the BERs of Algorithms A and C

increases as decreases.

Table I shows the average number of required guesses by Al-

gorithm C for the received blocks that Algorithm A fails. The

table suggests that the average number of guesses is very small.

Note that the values in Table I are slightly smaller than the av-

erage values obtained by Figs. 5 and 6 because for those dia-

grams we have

, but Table I is obtained for

.

Fig. 9 shows the performance of Algorithms A and C for a

code from the ensemble

with a length of . We see

that the results are similar to that of the code with the length

. The above results are obtained when

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

450

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

Fig. 7. Distribution of the number of guesses that is required for successful decoding at  = 0:39 and code length = 10 .

TABLE I
THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF GUESSES FOR THE LDPC CODE OF LENGTH 1000

TABLE II
THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF GUESSES FOR THE LDPC CODE OF LENGTH 10 000 THAT HAS AN ERROR FLOOR

We note that, in both ensembles

and

, the

minimum distance grows linearly with the codes lengths. In fact,

when we generated codes from these ensembles, we made sure

that these codes did not have small stopping sets that could cause

an error floor. In order to see the effect of the error floor on

Algorithms B and C, we generated a code of length from

the ensemble defined by

(30)
We note that for this ensemble we have Thus, with high probability, a code generated from this en-
semble has a small minimum distance and shows an error floor. Fig. 10 shows the performance of Algorithms A and C for the code. We observe that for high BERs, Algorithm C shows some improvement over Algorithm A. However, as we approach the error floor region, the improvement decreases. This is because, for this code, even the ML decoder shows an error floor (be-

cause of small minimum distance) and thus, using improved de-

coding methods, does not help much in the error floor region.

Table II shows the average number of guesses for this code.

Now we present some experimental results for the running

time of the algorithms. Clearly, these results are dependent on

the specific computer program and the platform we use. How-

ever, a relative timing comparison can be made from these sim-

ulations. We give the results for a code of length from the

ensemble

and a code of length from the ensemble

. The erasure probability of the channel is chosen

such that the BER of Algorithm A is . In all cases, we de-

coded 10 bits and measured the average running time and the

maximum running time for the decoding of received blocks. Let

, and

show the average time of decoding

of the LDPC code of length from the given ensembles using

Algorithms A, B, and C, respectively. Table III shows the rel-

ative average time of Algorithms B and C with respect to the

standard iterative decoding. From the table we conclude that the

average running time of all the above algorithms are almost the

same.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: ON DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

451

Fig. 8. Comparisons of the BERs of Algorithms A and C for code length n = 10 .
Fig. 9. Comparisons of the BERs of Algorithms A and C for a code of length n = 10 .
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

452

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

Fig. 10. Comparisons of the BERs of Algorithms A and C for a code of length n = 10 that has an error floor.

Recall that we defined

as the time that Algorithm B

needs to decode a received word . Let

show the max-

imum value of

over all the received blocks. We define

TABLE III COMPARISON OF AVERAGE RUNNING TIME OF DIFFERENT ALGORITHMS

is defined similarly. Table IV shows the values of

and

. The table suggests that although Algorithm B has a

good average running time, it can be very slow for some specific

received blocks. However, the running time of Algorithm C for

any received block is always less than 10 times the running time

of the standard iterative decoder. Combining this with the fact

that the average running time of Algorithm C is almost the same

as that of the iterative decoder we conclude that Algorithm C is

efficient in terms of running time. Since Algorithm C is fast and

has a BER smaller than the standard iterative decoder, it can be

considered as an efficient way of decoding LDPC codes over

the BEC.

As we have already mentioned, it is possible to reduce the

average number of guesses using some redundant equations.

Again, we chose a code of length

from the ensemble

. As we discussed in the previous section, we looked

for cycles of lengths and in the Tanner graph of the

code. For any of these cycles we added the rows of corre-

sponding to the parity-check equations in the cycle and put

these parity-check equations as rows of a matrix . In total,

we chose 374 equations. Hence, had 374 rows. We set

and decoded 10 bits. In the first experiment, we

used Algorithm C. In the second experiment we used the same

TABLE IV MAXIMUM RATIO OF THE RUNNING TIMES OF ALGORITHMS B AND C
TO THE RUNNING TIME OF ALGORITHM A
TABLE V THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF REQUIRED GUESSES
algorithm. However, we also used the parity-check equations in whenever the iterative decoder failed and we needed to perform the guessing procedure. Let us call the second algorithm C . Table V shows the results. In this table, and are the average numbers of required guesses when we needed to perform the guessing process in Algorithms C and C . The table shows that the average number of guesses is substantially

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PISHRO-NIK AND FEKRI: ON DECODING OF LDPC CODES OVER THE BINARY ERASURE CHANNEL

453

Fig. 11. Cycle distribution in g(d ; d ).

smaller in Algorithm C . Note also that the average number of

guesses at

is less than . This is because sometimes

the parity-check equations in are sufficient to successfully

finish the decoding and we do not need any guesses.

IV. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we studied some properties of the ML and iterative decoding of LDPC codes when they are used over the BEC. We derived both lower and upper bounds on the ML capacity of the ensembles of LDPC codes. The tightness of the bounds was depicted for regular codes by using some examples. We proposed two algorithms for decoding LDPC codes over the BEC. It was shown by simulations that the proposed algorithms had a better BER than the standard iterative decoder. More specifically, the improvement up to three orders of magnitude was obtained in the BER. It was also demonstrated that the proposed algorithm (Algorithm C) has almost the same running time as the iterative decoder. Therefore, we conclude that Algorithm C can be considered as an efficient method for decoding LDPC codes over the BEC. Since finding good finite-length LDPC codes is still a challenging problem, the decoding scheme presented in this paper may compensate for this problem. We also provided some graph-theoretic results that are useful for bounding the complexity of the decoding algorithms and improving them. Although we demonstrated the superiority of Algorithm C for standard LDPC codes, we expect that the proposed algorithm can also improve the performance of other ensembles such as codes based on cascaded bipartite graphs [1].

APPENDIX NUMBER OF CYCLES

In this appendix, we calculate the average number of cycles

in a Tanner graph of LDPC codes. For clarity of exposition we

perform the computations for regular graphs. The generalization

to irregular graphs is trivial. Here we use the same ensemble

described in [6]. To each variable or check node we assign or

sockets, respectively. We label the variable nodes and check

nodes separately with the set

. We then pick a

random permutation on

letters. For each , we put

an edge between the socket and . Let

be

arbitrary variable nodes and

be arbitrary check

nodes. Let

be sockets such that belongs

to and let

be sockets such that belongs

to . Then the probability that these sockets construct the cycle

is equivalent to

(31)

Since any variable node has sockets and any check node has sockets, the probability of having the cycle in the Tanner graph is

(32)

Therefore, the probability that there exists a cycle of length

with vertices

and

is

(33)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

454

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

This proves (25). Evaluating (25) for a constant value of results in (26). Using the following equations:

(34)

we get (27). Fig. 11 shows the function for

. Note

that in the above model double edges are allowed. Therefore,

we may have double cycles. However, one can show that the

probability of having a double cycle is very small.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their helpful comments and suggestions. The authors are also grateful to Simon Litsyn, the Associate Editor, for handling the review.

REFERENCES

[1] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Effi-

cient erasure correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47,

pp. 569–584, Feb. 2001. [2] C. Di, D. Proietti, I˙. E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-

length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure

channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, June

2002.

[3] M. A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences,” IMA Volumes in

Mathematics and its Applications, vol. 123, pp. 153–166, 2000.

[4]

, “New sequences of linear time erasure codes approaching the

channel capacity,” AAECC, pp. 65–76, 1999.

[5] P. Oswald and M. A. Shokrollahi, “Capacity-achieving sequences for the erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 3019–3028, Dec. 2002.
[6] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[7] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[8] H. Pishro-Nik and F. Fekri, “Improved decoding algorithms for lowdensity parity-check codes,” in Proc. 3rd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2003.
[9] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[10] G. Miller and D. Burshtein, “Bounds on the maximum-likelihood decoding error probability of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2696–2710, Nov. 2001.
[11] D. Burshtein, M. Krivelevich, S. Litsyn, and G. Miller, “Upper bounds on the rate of ldpc codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 2437–2449, Sept. 2002.
[12] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[13] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “On ensembles of low-density parity-check codes: Asymptotic distance distributions,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 887–908, Apr. 2002.
[14] D. Burshtein and G. Miller, “Asymptotic enumeration method for analyzing LDPC codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[15] R. G. Galleger, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[16] C. Di, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Weight distributions: How deviant can you be?,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Washington, DC, 2001, p. 50.
[17] R. Urbanke. Unpublished research. [Online]. Available: http://lthcwww. epfl.ch/research/ldpcopt/
[18] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “Distance distributions in ensembles of irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[19] I. Sason and R. Urbanke, “Parity-check density versus perfprmance of binary linear block codes over memoryless symmetric channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 49, pp. 1611–1635, July 2003.
[20] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check ensembles for the binary erasure channel,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2001, p. 1.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:37 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

