IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

159

On Construction of Rate-Compatible Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Mohammad R. Yazdani, Student Member, IEEE, and Amir H. Banihashemi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this letter, we present a framework for constructing rate-compatible low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. The codes are linear-time encodable and are constructed from a mother code using puncturing and extending. Application of the proposed construction to a type-II hybrid automatic repeat
request (ARQ) scheme with information block length = 1024
and code rates 8/19 to 8/10, using an optimized irregular mother code of rate 8/13, results in a throughput which is only about 0.7 dB away from Shannon limit. This outperforms existing similar schemes based on turbo codes and LDPC codes by up to 0.5 dB.
Index Terms—Extending, hybrid automatic repeat request (ARQ) schemes, iterative coding schemes, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes, puncturing, rate-compatible codes, ratecompatible LDPC (RC-LDPC) codes.

distributions for RC-LDPC codes that optimize the threshold over a range of rates. Their results however focus mainly on asymptotic behavior of codes at very large block lengths.
In [5], the authors show that puncturing alone cannot provide a sequence of well-performing LDPC codes with a wide range of rates. The problem with puncturing occurs at higher rates where the large percentage of punctured bits (erasures) paralyzes the iterative soft-decision decoder. To overcome this, both puncturing and extending is used in [5] to create a sequence of RC codes from a regular LDPC code. In this work, we devise RC-LDPC codes that outperform codes constructed in [5] by up to 0.5 dB in throughput performance. In our construction, we also use both puncturing and extending. Our work however can be differentiated from that of [5] based on the following.

I. INTRODUCTION
R ATE-COMPATIBLE (RC) codes are a nested sequence of codes where the parity bits of higher rate codes are embedded in those of lower rate codes [1], [2], [5]–[7]. RC codes have many applications in packet data communications where adaptive coding and/or unequal error protection is required [2]. One of the main advantages of using RC schemes is that all the codes in the sequence can be encoded and decoded using a single encoder/decoder pair. In addition to having a low complexity, these schemes provide an efficient framework for the transmission of information using automatic repeat request/forward error correction (ARQ/FEC) protocols. In such a framework, referred to as type-II hybrid ARQ, incremental parity bits of the next lower rate code are transmitted in response to a negative acknowledgment (NACK) from the receiver, which indicates the failure of the last code in correcting the errors in the transmitted packet [2], [5]–[7]. Since 1970’s, RC convolutional and block codes have been designed using puncturing (for a list of references, see [2], [5]). More recently RC punctured turbo (RCPT) codes [6], [7] (for more references, see [5]), and RC low-density parity-check (RC-LDPC) codes [5] were also introduced. Both schemes provide near capacity performance with throughputs about 1 dB from the capacity of additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel. In another related work, Ha and McLaughlin [1] study the problem of finding puncturing
Manuscript received July 16, 2003. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Prof. K. Narayanan. This work has been supported in part by the National Capital Institute of Telecommunications (NCIT), Ottawa, ON, Canada.
The authors are with the Broadband Communications and Wireless Systems (BCWS) Centre, Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: ryazdani@sce.carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2004.825728

1) The structure used for extending the parity-check matrix is different. It provides a more uniform row weight distribution, and a stronger dependency between the columns of the parity-check matrix of the mother code and the newly added columns. These improve the performance of extended codes.
2) The proposed structure for extension is deterministic. This makes the design and implementation of the codes modular and simple.
3) We use an optimized irregular LDPC code, constructed based on progressive edge growth (PEG) [3], [4] as the mother code. Also, at each level of extension, the dependencies between the newly added rows and the newly added columns of the parity-check matrix are governed by a PEG-constructed sub-matrix (and an identity matrix). Both PEG constructions for the mother code and are linear-time encodable and are effectively deterministic [3], [4]. The former property makes all the codes in the sequence linear-time encodable. Moreover, using PEG construction for both the mother code and improves the girth distribution [3], [4] of the Tanner graphs (TGs) [8], and thus the performance of RC-LDPC codes.
4) For puncturing the PEG constructed irregular code, we first puncture bit nodes with degree 2. This minimizes the number of erasure messages initially propagated through the TG of the code for iterative decoding, and improves the performance of punctured codes.
In the following section, we explain our construction of RC-LDPC codes based on a particular example with design parameters similar to examples given in [5], [6]. The approach however is quite general and can be applied, with minor modifications, to different data block lengths, and sequence of rates.

1089-7798/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

160

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 3, MARCH 2004

LDPC codes. For a rate 1/2 code, they obtain the following optimized distribution:

(1)

Fig. 1. Extensions of rate-8/13 PEG-constructed LDPC code with k = 1024.

II. CONSTRUCTION OF RC-LDPC CODES

We consider an information block length of

, and

code rates

. Our experiments show that

good performance for puncturing is achievable for rates up to

about 30% higher than the rate of the mother code. We therefore

choose 8/13 as the rate of the mother code. As we will see later,

the mother code is constructed using PEG construction [3], [4],

and has a systematic encoder. To obtain rates

from the mother code, six levels of extension are required. We

use the parity-check structure in Fig. 1 for extension, where at

each level, 128 new columns and rows are added to the parity

check matrix of the mother code. To have the parity bits of

the higher rate codes embedded in those of lower rate codes,

the upper right part of the extended parity-check matrices is all

zero. The identity matrices at the lower left part are respon-

sible for creating dependencies between the bits of higher rate

codes and those of lower rate codes, while and identity

matrices at the lower right part complement those dependen-

cies, and are also responsible for creating a rather uniform row

weight distribution for extended matrices. This appears to im-

prove the performance of extended codes. We also construct

using PEG construction. This improves the girth distribu-

tion of added parity bits, which in turn improves the code and

the performance of iterative decoding. It should be also noted

that the location of the identity matrices is chosen such that they

do not generate any cycle of length 4 in the TG of the extended

codes. The only exception is the two side-by-side identity ma-

trices at the lower left part that can create cycles of length 4

among the bits of mother code. The number of such cycles how-

ever is generally very small. In our example, only four cycles

of length 4 are generated.

To construct good RC-LDPC codes, we need to start from

a mother code with good error correcting performance. Given

a symbol node degree distribution, PEG construction is known

to generate very good codes with rather uniform check degree

distribution [3], [4]. These codes considerably outperform ran-

domly constructed LDPC codes at finite block lengths [3], [4].

In [4], the authors also propose a tedious search algorithm for

finding good symbol degree distributions for PEG-constructed

in which is the fraction of symbol nodes with degree . In this

work, we use this degree distribution to construct our mother

code, as well as matrix using PEG construction. Although

the distribution is not optimized for the mother code (rate 8/13),

it appears to provide good performance across the desired range

of rates, which also includes

. In constructing the

mother code using PEG construction, we assign the left side of

the parity-check matrix in Fig. 1 to systematic bits, while we

enforce the lower triangular structure on the right side for parity

bits. (The rightmost column has weight one, which makes the

symbol degree distribution slightly deviate from (1). In prac-

tice however, this has a negligible effect on performance.) PEG

construction is used to fill out the matrix from right to left, and

by starting from lowest weight columns. All degree 2 nodes are

thus associated with parity bits. These are the nodes that are ran-

domly punctured, 128 at a time, to generate the rates 8/12, 8/11,

and 8/10 from the mother code. Similar to the parity bit part of

the parity check matrix of the mother code, is also con-

structed lower triangular using PEG construction (the column

weight distribution for this construction is also (1)). This results

in a lower triangular structure for the parity bit part of all the

parity check matrices of RC-LDPC codes. This structure allows

very efficient linear-time encoding of the codes by computing

the parity bits from left to right [3], [4].1

In the following section, we use the designed sequence of

RC-LDPC codes in a type-II hybrid ARQ scheme and show their

considerable improvement in throughput over similar existing

schemes.

III. SIMULATION RESULTS
We consider using the designed RC-LDPC codes in a type-II hybrid ARQ scheme based on selective-repeat ARQ protocol. We also assume that LDPC codes are transmitted over a binary input additive white Gaussian noise (BI-AWGN) channel with bipolar signaling, and are decoded using iterative belief propagation algorithm [8]. For decoding, we only need the decoder for the lowest rate code (8/19). To decode the higher rate codes, missing parity bits are replaced by erasures at the decoder. Packet combining (see, e.g., [5]) would be used to combine different copies of the same coded bits until the receiver successfully decodes the transmitted packet. We also use LDPC codes for both error correction and error detection, and thus no extra redundancy for error detection is required. Moreover, we consider noiseless feedback channel and infinite buffer size at both transmitter and receiver. Also, in this work, we are not concerned about transmission latency, and the traffic of feedback
1It is worth mentioning that assuming that the rates of LDPC codes are fixed, unlike our design, the encoder of [5] has a complexity which increases quadratically with k and the lengths of the codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YAZDANI AND BANIHASHEMI: ON CONSTRUCTION OF RATE-COMPATIBLE LOW-DENSITY PARITY-CHECK CODES

161

Fig. 3. Throughput performance of type-II hybrid-ARQ protocol based on the Fig. 2. FERs of RC-LDPC codes; rates from right to left: 8=10; 8=11; designed RC-LDPC codes, RC-LDPC codes of [5] and RCPT codes of [6]. . 8=12; . . . ; 8=18; 8=19

channel, and only consider throughput , defined below, as the measure of performance of the hybrid ARQ scheme [6].
(2)

In (2),

is the average total number of bits that must

be transmitted in order for the information block of length

to be accepted by the receiver. Parameters and are the

total number of transmitted bits and the frame (word) error rate

(FER) after the th transmission. As can be seen in (2), having

RC-LDPC codes with low FER’s can improve the throughput.

The FER curves for the designed RC-LDPC codes are given in

Fig. 2, while the throughput of the corresponding type-II hybrid

ARQ scheme, computed based on (2), is given in Fig. 3. In both

figures the curves are plotted versus

, where is the

average energy per transmitted symbol and

is the power

spectral density of AWGN. For all simulation results, the max-

imum number of iterations for decoder is equal to 500, and for

each signal to noise ratio, enough codewords are simulated to

generate at least 200 codeword errors. In Fig. 3, we have also

given the capacity of BI-AWGN channel as well as the through-

puts obtained in [5] and [6] for similar RC-LDPC and RCPT

schemes, respectively. It can be seen that our RC-LDPC codes

outperform the schemes of [5] and [6] by up to 0.5 dB and can

yield a throughput within 0.7 dB of the capacity.2

2It is worth mentioning that we have also tested the regular extension of [5] with irregular codes at the early stages of this work and the results were much worse than the presented results here. This indicates the importance of careful extension in the performance of RC-LDPC codes. The extension should be designed to properly maintain the irregular structure of the code, as well as to create good dependency among new rows and columns and old columns.

IV. CONCLUSIONS
Design guidelines for constructing RC-LDPC codes, which perform very well with iterative decoding and are also linear-time encodable are presented. Important features of the proposed design are i) finding the proper rate for the mother code, ii) properly extending and puncturing the mother code to preserve both performance and linear-time encodability, iii) constructing a good mother code which is also linear-time encodable.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Ha and S. W. McLaughlin, “Optimal puncturing distributions for rate-compatible low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[2] J. Hagenauer, “Rate-compatible punctured convolutional codes (RCPC codes) and their applications,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 36, pp. 389–400, Apr. 1988.
[3] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 995–1001.
[4] , “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[5] J. Li and K. Narayanan, “Rate-compatible low density parity check codes for capacity-approaching ARQ scheme in packet data communications,” presented at the Int. Conf. on Comm., Internet, and Info. Tech. (CIIT), Nov. 2002.
[6] R. Mantha and F. R. Kschischang, “A capacity-approaching hybrid ARQ scheme using turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM, 1999, pp. 2341–2345.
[7] D. N. Rowitch and L. B. Milstein, “On the performance of hybrid FEC/ARQ systems using rate compatible punctured turbo (RCPT) codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 948–959, June 2000.
[8] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:35:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

