2002

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2004

Mapping Interleaving Laws to Parallel Turbo and LDPC Decoder Architectures
Alberto Tarable, Member, IEEE, Sergio Benedetto, Fellow, IEEE, and Guido Montorsi, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—For high-data-rate applications, the implementation of iterative turbo-like decoders requires the use of parallel architectures posing some collision-free constraints to the reading/writing process from/into the memory. This consideration applies to the two main classes of turbo-like codes, i.e., turbo codes and low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes. Contrary to the literature belief, we prove in this paper that there is no need for an ad hoc code design to meet the parallelism requirement, because, for any code and any choice of the scheduling of the reading/writing operations, there is a suitable mapping of the variables in the memory that grants a collision-free access. The proof is constructive, i.e., it gives an algorithm that obtains the desired collision-free mapping. The algorithm is applied to two simple examples, one for turbo codes and one for LDPC codes, to illustrate how the algorithm works.
Index Terms—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, memory mapping, parallel implementation, turbo codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T URBO-like codes are universally recognized as the most successful known class of codes, yielding performance close to the theoretical Shannon bound [6], [13]. The common feature of all codes in this family is the feasibility of an iterative decoder, which performs close to the maximum-likelihood (ML) decoder, provided that the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is sufficiently high. Turbo-like codes include parallel concatenated convolutional codes (PCCC) [6], serially concatenated convolutional codes (SCCC) [3], low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [8], and other minor variations on the theme. A unified approach to the whole class of turbo-like codes can be found in [1].
The powerful error-correcting properties of turbo-like codes make them an attractive choice for all kinds of communication systems. However, in high-data-rate applications, there is a problem connected with the generally high latency of the iterative decoder. In fact, each frame has to be processed through several iterations, before estimating the corresponding data. Consequently, the decoder implementation has to be optimized, so as to keep the latency as low as possible.
The obvious solution for a low-latency decoder is a highly parallelized structure. In such a decoder, many operations are performed at the same time by different processors, according
Manuscript received October 9, 2003; revised March 18, 2004. This work was supported in part by MIUR under CERCOM and FIRB-PRIMO projects. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 3rd International Symposium on Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, September 2003.
The authors are with Politecnico di Torino, 10129 Turin, Italy (e-mail: alberto.tarable@polito.it; benedetto@polito.it; montorsi@polito.it).
Communicated by Ø. Ytrehus, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.833353

Fig. 1. (a) PCCC encoder. (b) SCCC encoder.

to the intrinsic parallelizability of the decoding algorithm. Provided a certain degree of parallelism, one of the most important problems to solve becomes the handling of memory access. In fact, if more concurrent accesses are attempted at the same time, the collision must be solved by serializing the colliding accesses, and thus spoiling parallelism.
The problem of handling the memory access is similar in the two main classes of turbo-like codes, i.e., PCCC/SCCC and LDPC codes. However, since the decoder structures for the two classes are quite different, it is better to consider them separately.

A. Handling Memory Access: PCCC and SCCC

In a PCCC, two constituent codes are concatenated in par-

allel, as in Fig. 1. Also shown in the figure is an SCCC, which

shares with the PCCC most properties that are important for our

discussion.

In the PCCC, an information sequence is encoded by encoder

1. The same sequence is interleaved (permuted) according to a

permutation and then encoded by encoder 2. In the SCCC,

the information sequence enters encoder 2, whose output is

interleaved (permuted) according to a permutation to form

the input to encoder 1. If the input to the interleaver is the

sequence

, then the output will be the sequence

.

The turbo decoder iterates for a certain number of iterations

between the two soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoders [4] of

the two constituent codes. In a given iteration, decoder 1 accepts

as its input what is output by decoder 2 in the previous itera-

tion (except in the first iteration, when no input from decoder

2 is available). In turn, decoder 1 sends its output to decoder

2, which accepts it as its input in the current iteration. Between

the two decoders, an interleaver and a deinterleaver rearrange

0018-9448/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TARABLE et al.: MAPPING INTERLEAVING LAWS TO PARALLEL TURBO AND LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURES

2003

Fig. 2. Turbo decoder.

the information according to permutation and to its inverse , respectively. In parallel concatenation, the information ex-
changed pertains to the input bits of both encoders, while in the SCCC, it pertains to the output of encoder 2 (the outer decoder), which is the input of encoder 1 (the inner encoder). The block diagram of the turbo decoder is shown in Fig. 2.
The most important design for turbo codes employs convolutional codes as constituent codes. In this case, the algorithm performed inside each SISO decoder is typically the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [2], which ideally requires two recursions on the code trellis, one forward from the beginning of the block, the other backward from the end of the block. Practically, in low-latency implementations, the algorithm is windowed by dividing the entire block into some subblocks and performing shorter recursions inside the subblocks, all assigned to distinct processors working in parallel.
Since every processor performs the same algorithm, they all access the memory at the same time instants. Then, collisions may occur, thus weakening the efficiency of the implementation. In the following, we will suppose that the memory is divided into a certain number of banks. A collision happens when two (or more) accesses at the same time are attempted to the same memory bank, while there is no collision when the contemporaneous accesses concern different memory banks. If there are processors and each processor accesses the memory once at a time, then there will be at most simultaneous accesses to the memory. To grant a collision-free implementation, there must be at least memory banks. A pictorial view of collisions is shown in Fig. 3.
Access to the memory is performed when the SISO decoder reads input variables and when it writes output variables. Actually, the output variables are an update of the input variables, and we suppose that the update of a given variable is written into the same memory cell in which it was stored. Also, we suppose that the scheduling of reading operations and of writing of the corresponding updates coincide, thus allowing us to consider reading and writing as equivalent from the point of the view of the memory access.
The problem of parallelism is that there are two different schedules of the reading/writing operations, one in connection with decoder 1, which reads and writes variables in natural order, the other connected with decoder 2, which reads and writes in interleaved (permuted) order. In other words, the two half-iterations of the turbo decoding algorithm pose different constraints on the mapping of the variables into the memory

Fig. 3. (a) Absence of collisions. (b) A collision happens.

banks. This is the main problem of parallelism in turbo de-

coders.

As it turns out from the above discussion, the main character

in this play is the interleaver. If the permutation defining the

interleaver is the identity permutation, i.e.,

, the

problem of parallelism becomes much simpler, provided that

decoder 1 and decoder 2 work in the same way, at least for

what concerns scheduling of the memory access. Both decoders

read/write in natural order. But in this case, the performance of

the turbo code is much worse than it could be with a better in-

terleaver design.

Until now, most researchers have attempted to find good in-

terleavers that allow for a collision-free parallel implementation

of the turbo decoder. Ad hoc designs can be found in [9], [11],

[15], [10]. In [17], the problem of handling collisions efficiently

is posed. In this paper, we will show that a parallel implementa-

tion exists for any interleaver, so that there is no need for an ad

hoc design. Flexibility and the need for a design rule which only

takes into account the performance of the turbo code, and not

other parameters, are the first consequences of this result. The

second advantage lies in the compatibility between new parallel

decoders and existing systems, which is rather important for al-

ready standardized applications.

The problem of the parallelization of PCCC/SCCC is an in-

stance of a more general problem, another application of which

resides in collision-free LDPC decoder implementations.

B. Handling Memory Access: LDPC Codes

LDPC codes are linear block codes characterized by a sparse

parity-check matrix. It is customary to define an LDPC code ei-

ther through the parity-check matrix itself, or through a bipartite

graph, like the one in Fig. 4. In this graph, the subset of nodes on

the left (represented by circles) is composed by the variable

nodes (VNs), each one corresponding to a bit of the codeword.

The subset of nodes on the right (represented by squares) consist

of the

check nodes (CNs), where is the code dimension,

and each of them corresponds to a parity equation satisfied by

the code. There is an edge connecting the th VN and the th

CN if the th parity equation involves the th coded bit.

The LDPC decoding algorithm is an example of the belief-

propagation (BP) algorithm [12]. Through some iterations, the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2004

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2004

Fig. 4. A bipartite graph defining an LDPC code.
set of VNs and the set of CNs exchange information along the edges that connect them. In an iteration, the sets of VNs and CNs are activated alternately. Each active node, either a VN or a CN, accepts from its incident edges the input variables, computes its outputs (in a different way, according to whether it is a VN or a CN), which are updates of the inputs, and restitutes them to the edges. They will be used in the following half-iteration as new inputs.
LDPC codes have a high intrinsic degree of parallelism in the decoder. Each node can, in principle, work in parallel with the others of the same kind. This is a favorable feature of LDPC codes, with respect to PCCC and SCCC. However, the average number of iterations needed is usually higher for LDPC codes (some tens to a hundred versus about ten for PCCC/SCCC).
The problem of parallelism in LDPC codes is analogous to that for concatenated codes. Consider the half-iteration in which CNs are active. There are a few processors, each having in charge a subset of the CNs. If the processors are working in parallel, they will have to access the memory whenever they read their input or write their output. If the (maximum) number of simultaneous accesses to the memory during this phase is
, there must be at least memory banks to avoid collisions among these accesses. The same is true when the VNs are active.
Just like in turbo decoding, we suppose that the operations of writing into the memory the updates of the input variables follow the same scheduling of reading from the memory the input variables themselves. Consequently, the writing and the reading operations pose the same constraints to the mapping of the variables into the memory, so that, for our purpose, they are equivalent.
The problem of the parallelism in LDPC codes arises from the fact that, usually, the scheduling of reading/writing operations at the VN side is different from that on the CN side. In other words, the two half-iterations of the LDPC decoding algorithm pose different constraints on the mapping of the variables into the memory banks. It is easy to see the analogy with PCCC/SCCC. The difference is that for LDPC decoders the scheduling is freer, because of the intrinsic nature of the algorithm. Processors may read some of their inputs in parallel. Some subsets of processors may be activated successively. What is really important, however, is the scheduling of the reading/writing operations, independently from which processor it concerns. It is the scheduling that defines which variables are read simultaneously (either at the VN or at the CN side) and must then be placed into different memory banks.

The same role played by the interleaver in the turbo decoder is played now, but in a less direct way, by the structure of the parity-check matrix, or analogously, by the bipartite graph defining the code. Also, for LDPC codes there exist ad hoc designs that try to solve the problem of parallelization at the root. Examples can be found in [14], [16], [18], where explicit rules to construct good LDPC codes satisfying certain conditions on the parity-check matrix are given. A more hardware-oriented treatment of the subject can be found in [7]. In our paper, collision-free LDPC decoders are obtained as a particular case of a more general design, without posing constraints on the parity-check matrix or even on the scheduling chosen for the VN and CN sides. This has the clear advantage of giving complete flexibility to the design of LDPC codes.
The parallelization of PCCC/SCCC and LDPC codes can be treated in a unified way, since the two classes of codes pose the same type of constraints. This problem can be seen as a particular case of a more general problem, which will be dealt with in abstract terms in the next section. (See also [19].)

II. MAPPING FUNCTIONS

Let us consider a set of elements

. Sup-

pose we are given two different partitions on , namely

and

with the
Note that is central.

following characteristic: all subsets

have the same number of elements

.

must be a divisor of . The following definition

Definition 1: Let , , and be defined as above. A

function

is a mapping function

for

if it satisfies the following conditions for every

,

for some

(1)

for some

(2)

or, in words, elements belonging to the same subset in either partition are mapped to different bins.

The connection between the problem of parallelism in

PCCC/SCCC and LDPC codes is clear. The set contains

the variables that are updated at every half-iteration. The two

partitions define the variables that may originate a collision,

i.e., variables that are read/written at the same time in one of

the two half-iterations. The mapping function gives then the

correspondence between variables and memory banks. If the

constraints (1), (2) are all satisfied, no collision in the memory

access takes place.

It is possible to see the problem of finding a mapping func-

tion as a graph coloring problem. In fact, consider a graph with

nodes corresponding to the elements

. There is an

edge connecting node to node if (and only if) and be-

long to the same subset in either partition. Then, the problem of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TARABLE et al.: MAPPING INTERLEAVING LAWS TO PARALLEL TURBO AND LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURES

2005

Fig. 5. Pictorial view of the annealing procedure. Every black dot represents an index. Every time a dot is reached, the corresponding value of the mapping function is changed.

finding a mapping function is equivalent to coloring the vertices of such a graph.
Another connection with known problems can be established when the following two hypothesis are satisfied:

•

, so that

, and

• the intersection between any two ,

one element.

contains exactly

By arranging the elements into a

matrix, such that

elements in the same row belong to the same subset in and

elements in the same column belong to the same subset in ,

we have reduced the problem of finding a mapping function in

this particular case to the problem of finding a

Latin

square.

Given a pair of partitions

of , the problem we want

to solve is to find a mapping function that satisfies (1) and (2). In

this section, an algorithm is presented, which gives the desired

mapping function for any

, as the explanation of the

algorithm will clarify. The algorithm can be divided into two

successive steps, described in the following.

First step: Any step that produces a preliminary mapping function with the following properties: no conditions in (1) and (2) are violated. However, there are some elements for which the mapping function is not determined yet, called blanks hereafter.

Second step: This step accepts the preliminary mapping function output in the first step and fills all blanks. This procedure of completing the mapping function is called annealing. The result is a valid mapping function satisfying (1) and (2).

is the nonempty set of blanks. At the th step of

the cycle, an updated preliminary mapping function is pro-

duced.1 To start the cycle, a blank is identified, say in position

. If the intersection between

and

is not empty, there is a value that fills the

blank in , without creating collisions. In this case,

will be found in this intersection, while for

. Since no collision is produced,

the cycle is over.

If, instead, the intersection between

and

is empty, pick at random two values

and

. Then assign

and

for

and repeat the following pair

of steps for

:

• Search for

such that If such a

and is found, assign

and for

Otherwise, stop the cycle. • Search for

Next, the annealing procedure, which is the core of the algorithm, is formalized. First, we define a collision as a single violation of one of the constraints in (1), (2). The annealing procedure purposely injects a collision and at each step solves it by possibly introducing another one.

A. Formal Description of the Annealing Procedure
The annealing procedure can be decomposed into several cycles, each of them starting with a blank, picked at random, and ending when no collisions are produced. After a cycle is ended, a new one starts if there are still blanks in the mapping function, otherwise, the annealing procedure is over.
A description of the operations performed by a single cycle requires the following definition.

Definition 2:

(resp.,

): the set of values in

that are not yet assigned to (resp., ).

such that

and

. If

such a is found, assign

and for

Otherwise, stop the cycle.

After the end of a cycle, the sets

and

,

, must be updated. Fig. 5 shows a pictorial view

of the annealing procedure.

A cycle is stopped when either

or

. Notice that there surely exists some index such that

. In fact, since

, there are fewer

than elements of mapped to . Since there are sub-

sets

and each subset can contain only one element

mapped to , there will be a subset , for some , that does not

At the beginning of a given cycle, a preliminary mapping 1Here and later, the apices (0); (1); . . . refer to variables in the corresponding

function

maps

into the set

. step of the cycle

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2006

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2004

contain any element mapped to yet. So

. Analo-

gously, there surely exists some index such that

.

Consequently, the cycle ends when it meets the subset (resp.,

) for which

(resp.,

).

A question may arise: does the cycle always end? From what

we have said, it is clear that the cycle is never ending if (and only

if) it loops inside a set of subsets that do not contain the ones that

would stop the cycle. The following proposition shows that this

case is impossible.

Proposition 1: A single cycle of the annealing procedure

cannot fall inside a loop.

Proof: Suppose

,

, and no other index

between and is equal to . Suppose is odd. Then,

it must be that

Fig. 6. The mapping matrix.
decoder 1 reads and writes in natural order, we obtain partition in the following way:

(3)

Since the cycle has already passed through , it means that

is even. On the contrary, if is even, must be odd.

Suppose is odd. Then

and, for the same reason,

, so that

all belong to . Before passing through the

th ele-

ment, we have

, while at the same time,

. Since

and

both belong

to and there is no collision in this subset at the

th

step,2 it must be

.

Applying the argument repeatedly, we obtain finally

which is impossible, due to the fact that

. So, the

loop is impossible and the cycle always reaches the end.

Since a single cycle cannot fall into a loop, it will sooner

or later meet the subset that makes it stop. If for a given par-

tition pair

we can find a preliminary mapping function

as defined above, the annealing procedure finds a valid map-

ping function. Since for all partition pairs a possible preliminary

mapping function is the one with all blanks, we have proved the

following corollary.

Corollary 2: Let be defined as in Definition 1. Let and

be any two partitions as in Definition 1. Then, there exists a

mapping function for

and it is found by applying the

algorithm described above.

III. APPLICATIONS OF THE MAPPING FUNCTION
In this section, we apply the algorithm to two examples, one for a PCCC, the other for an LDPC code. The examples will also clarify how the annealing procedure works.

A. Turbo Decoder
Before starting with the example for the turbo code, let us consider how the partitions are usually chosen in this case. Since

i.e., contains the variables read at time by the processors

working on the subblocks. At time , the processor working on

the first subblock reads variable , the one working on the second

subblock reads variable

, and so on.

Since decoder 2 reads and writes in permuted order, ac-

cording to , we obtain partition

in the

following way:

(4)

i.e., contains the variables read at time by the processors

working on the subblocks. At time , the processor working on

the first subblock reads variable , the one working on the

second subblock reads variable

, and so on. In these

terms, (1) and (2) become,

,

(5) (6)

where means “equal modulo .”

Since the partitions show a certain regularity, this regularity

can be exploited to obtain an intuitive pictorial view of the

problem. It is useful to represent the mapping function as a

rectangular matrix, the mapping matrix, whose th

element,

,

, represents the value of

, as shown in Fig. 6.

In this way, the subsets of partition become columns

of such a matrix, while the subsets of partition , which

depends on permutation , define a tiling of the mapping matrix.

This easy way of describing the mapping function is used in the

following example. We will refer in the example to the subsets

and as columns and tiles, respectively.

Example 1: Suppose

,

instance, that

. Suppose, for

0 0 2At the (k 1)th step there is only one collision and, since k 1 is even, it

V is found in the subset

.

The permutation induces the tiling shown in Fig. 7 on the mapping matrix (where letters are just labels for tiles).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TARABLE et al.: MAPPING INTERLEAVING LAWS TO PARALLEL TURBO AND LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURES

2007

Fig. 7. The tiling of the mapping matrix in Example 1.

Suppose the output of the first step is the following preliminary mapping matrix (a straightforward extension of the preliminary mapping function, defined in Section II):

which has blanks in its and elements. The procedure

of annealing starts from one of them, for example the latter, and

changes it to the value that is not represented in its column yet,

i.e., . This change causes a collision to happen, because

and

both belong to tile E and both have value . So

is changed to the value that is not represented in tile E yet, i.e.,

Now, there is a collision in the fourth column (the appears twice), so is changed to . This, in turn, is in collision with the in , which also belongs to tile A. This is changed to

Fig. 8. The LDPC code of the example.
their degrees, on the assignment of the nodes to the processors, on the available number of memory banks, and on how processors work. It is, however, recommendable that the number of memory accesses at each time instant be about a constant, since a collision-free implementation requires a number of distinct memory banks equal to the maximum number of simultaneous memory accesses. Keeping the number of memory accesses as constant as possible with time minimizes then the number of memory banks required for a collision-free implementation, if the duration of the single half-iteration is fixed.
Example 2: Suppose we have a code with six VNs, five CNs defined by the bipartite graph shown in Fig. 8. In the figure, an index is attached to every variable represented by an edge in the graph. Fig. 8 also shows a possible assignment of the nodes to two processors.
Let us suppose that the two processors work in parallel while each processor accesses sequentially the memory, i.e., it accesses the memory once at a time, and that, at each side, the variables are read/written in the order from the top downwards of the corresponding edges.
Since the first processor accesses eight variables and the second only seven, there will be a time instant in which only the first processor accesses the memory. To reduce the problem to the framework of Section II, we can introduce a dummy variable, which will be indexed . With these hypotheses, the partitions turn out to be

This produces no collision in the last column. The corresponding cycle is then over. By inspection, the matrix thus obtained still has the blank in . Changing it to , which is missing in the last column, creates no collision. Thus, the final and result is the following mapping matrix:

One can verify that constraints (5) and (6) are all satisfied.

Using the notation of Section II,

,

,

. We

can use again the formalism of the mapping matrix to this case.

By applying the annealing procedure already seen in the pre-

vious example, we have found the following mapping matrix:

B. LDPC Decoder
In the case of LDPC codes, as we have already noticed, the scheduling of decoding operations is not as standard as in turbo codes. It mostly depends on the number of CNs and VNs and on which satisfies the constraints (1) and (2), as it can be verified.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2008

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 9, SEPTEMBER 2004

Example 3: Consider the permutation and the mapping of

Example 1, with

,

.

The time-varying permutation can be read in a very

straightforward way.

is the

element of the mapping

matrix.

The time-varying permutation can be read by stacking the

rows of the mapping matrix in a vector, permuting it according

to permutation , and writing it again by rows as a

matrix

Fig. 9. Practical implementation of the writing and reading procedure.

IV. PRACTICAL IMPLEMENTATION

Given a mapping function, the practical implementation of the whole writing and reading procedure can be made by cascading three different layers of blocks, as shown in Fig. 9 [19].
The figure shows the process of information exchange in both turbo and LDPC decoder. According to the convention of the previous sections, for turbo decoders it represents the information going from decoder 1 to decoder 2 (see Fig. 2). In LDPC decoders, instead, the information flows from the VN side to the CN side.

• The block on the left consists of a crossbar with input

and output pins. The interconnection between input and

output at time

is given by the time-varying

permutation over the integers

. Precisely,

the th input pin is connected at time to the output

pin. According to the notation of the previous sections,

.

is the element of the above matrix.

Finally, the permutations

can be easily found as

Example 4: Consider the LDPC code of Example 2, with

,

,

.

As seen before,

is the

element of the mapping

matrix, shown in Example 6 (?).

To obtain , we construct the matrix whose columns cor-

respond to the subsets in

• The interleaver bank3 in the middle arranges information

according to the order it is needed from decoder 2. The

th interleaver,

, is defined by permutation

The element of the above matrix directly gives .

over the integers

. Permutation is defined Finally, the permutations and are given by

by considering the set of indices in

such

that

. Let us call this set

. Given a

, let be the integer in

for which

and be the integer in

. Then,

.

for which

V. CONCLUSION

• The block on the right consists of a crossbar with input

and output pins. The interconnection between input and

output at time

is given by the time-varying

permutation over the integers

. Precisely,

the th input pin is connected at time to the output

pin. According to the notation of the previous sections,

.

In the other half-iteration, i.e., when information goes from

decoder 2 to decoder 1 in turbo decoders and from the CN side

to the VN side in LDPC decoders, the order of the blocks is

inverted. The information flows first through the crossbar on the

right in Fig. 9. Then it is sent to a bank of interleavers defined

by permutations

. Finally, it passes through

the crossbar shown on the left in Fig. 9.

3This interleaver bank causes no problems in the parallel architecture.

In this paper, we have provided an algorithm that allows for a parallel implementation of turbo and LDPC decoder. There is no constraint imposed on the code itself, which can then be designed in such a way to optimize its performance. The algorithm output is the memory mapping of the variables exchanged in the decoder, so that no collisions take place when accessing the memory in the decoding process.
The algorithm we have described in the paper is balanced, in the sense that every memory bank has the same number of variables assigned to it (except for a slight unbalance in LDPC codes when the scheduling itself is unbalanced in time), and is optimal, in the sense that it provides a mapping for the minimum possible number of memory banks.
When the system, to follow time-varying channel conditions, needs for a versatile implementation in which the coder–decoder pair can be reconfigured according to higher level instructions after some data frames, the new mapping function must be

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TARABLE et al.: MAPPING INTERLEAVING LAWS TO PARALLEL TURBO AND LDPC DECODER ARCHITECTURES

2009

recomputed from the beginning. This can be done, for example, in a preprocessing step, because the complexity of the algorithm is quite low.
REFERENCES
[1] S. M. Aji and R. J. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.
[2] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[3] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Serial concatenation of interleaved codes: Performance analysis, design, and iterative decoding,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1186–1188, June 1996.
[4] , “Soft-input soft-output modules for the construction and distributed iterative decoding of code networks,” Europ. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 9, no. 2, Mar.-Apr. 1998.
[5] S. Benedetto and G. Montorsi, “Unveiling turbo codes: Some results on parallel concatenated coding schemes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 409–428, Mar. 1996.
[6] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit error-correction coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. 1993 Int. Conf. on Communications (ICC ’93), 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[7] A. J. Blanksby and C. J. Howland, “Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int Symp. Circuits and Systems 2001 (ISCAS01), vol. 4, Sydney, Australia, May 2001, pp. 742–745.
[8] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[9] A. Giulietti, L. Van der Perre, and A. Strum, “Parallel turbo coding interleavers: Avoiding collisions in accesses to storage elements,” Electron. Lett., vol. 38, pp. 232–234, Feb. 2002.

[10] D. Gnaedig, E. Boutillon, M. Jézéquel, V. C. Gaudet, and P. G. Gulak, “On multiple slice turbo codes,” in Proc. 3rd Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2003, pp. 343–346.
[11] J. Kwak and K. Lee, “Design of dividable interleaver for parallel decoding in turbo codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 38, pp. 1362–1364, Oct. 2002.
[12] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[13] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[14] M. M. Mansour and N. R. Shanbhag, “Memory-efficient turbo decoder architectures for LDPC codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems 2002 (SIPS02), San Diego, CA, Oct. 2002, pp. 159–164.
[15] A. Nimbalker, T. K. Blankenship, B. Classon, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello Jr., “Inter-window shuffle interleavers for high throughput turbo decoding,” in Proc. 3rd Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2003, pp. 355–358.
[16] A. Selvarathinam, G. Choi, K. Narayanan, A. Prabhakar, and E. Kim, “A massively scaleable decoder architecture for low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int Symp. Circuits and Systems 2003 (ISCAS03), vol. 2, Bangkok, Thailand, May 2003, pp. 61–64.
[17] M. J. Thul, N. Wehn, and L. P. Rao, “Enabling high-speed turbo-decoding through concurrent interleaving,” in Proc. IEEE Int Symp. Circuits and Systems 2002 (ISCAS02), vol. 1, Scottsdale, AZ, May 2002, pp. 897–900.
[18] F. Verdier and D. Declercq, “A LDPC parity-check matrix construction for parallel hardware decoding,” in Proc. 3rd Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2003, pp. 235–238.
[19] A. Tarable and S. Benedetto, “Mapping interleaving laws to parallel turbo decoder architectures,” IEEE Comm. Lett., vol. 8, pp. 162–164, Mar. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:29:45 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

