IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2004

1831

Abstracts of Forthcoming Manuscripts

Design and Performance of Turbo Gallager Codes Giulio Colavolpe

Performance Evaluation of List Sequence MAP Decoding Carl Fredrik Leanderson and Carl-Erik W. Sundberg

Abstract—The most powerful channel-coding schemes, namely those based on turbo codes and low-density parity-check (LDPC) Gallager codes, have in common the principle of iterative decoding. However, the relative coding structures and decoding algorithms are substantially different. This paper shows that recently proposed novel coding structures bridge the gap between these two schemes. In fact, with properly chosen component convolutional codes, a turbo code can be successfully decoded by means of the decoding algorithm used for LDPC codes, i.e., the belief-propagation algorithm working on the code Tanner graph. These new turbo codes are here nicknamed “turbo Gallager codes.” Besides being interesting from a conceptual viewpoint, these schemes are important on the practical side, because they can be decoded in a fully parallel manner. In addition to the encoding complexity advantage of turbo codes, the low decoding complexity allows the design of very efficient channel-coding schemes.
The author is with Universita di Parma, Dipartimento di Ingegneria dell’Informazione, Parma, Italy.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.836519
A Class of Nonlinear Signal Processing Schemes for Bandwidth-Efficient OFDM Transmission With Low Envelope Fluctuation
Rui Dinis and Antonio Gusmao

Abstract—List sequence (LS) decoding has the potential to yield significant coding gain additional to that of conventional single sequence decoding, and it can be implemented with full backward compatibility in systems where an error-detecting code is concatenated with an error-correcting code. LS maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding provides a list of estimated sequences in likelihood order. For convolutional codes, this list can be obtained with the serial list Viterbi algorithm (SLVA). Through modification of the metric increments of the SLVA, an LS maximum a posteriori (MAP) probability decoding algorithm is obtained that takes into account bitwise a priori probabilities, and produces an ordered list of sequence MAP estimates. The performance of the resulting LS-MAP decoding algorithm is studied in this paper. Computer simulations and approximate analytical expressions, based on geometrical considerations of the decisions domains of LS decoders, are presented. We focus on the frame-error performance of LS-MAP decoding, with genie-assisted error detection, on the additive white Gaussian noise channel. It is concluded that LS-MAP decoding exploits a priori information more efficiently, in order to achieve performance improvements, than does conventional single-sequence MAP decoding. Interestingly, LS-MAP decoding can provide significant improvements at low signal-to-noise ratios, compared with LS-ML decoding. In this environment, it is furthermore observed that feedback convolutional codes offer performance improvements over their feedforward counterparts. Since LS-MAP decoding can be implemented in existing systems at a modest complexity increase, it should have a wide area of applications, such as joint source-channel decoding and other kinds of iterative decoding.
C. F. Leanderson is with the Department of Electroscience, Lund University, SE-221 00 Lund, Sweden.
C.-E. W. Sundberg is at 25 Hickory Place, Chatham, NJ 07928 USA. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.836517

Abstract—This paper presents a wide class of digital signal processing schemes for orthogonal frequency-division multiplexing (OFDM) transmission which combine a nonlinear operation in the time domain, and a linear filtering operation in the frequency domain. The ultimate goal of these schemes is to reduce the envelope fluctuation of ordinary OFDM while keeping its high spectral efficiency and allowing a low-cost, power-efficient implementation. An appropriate statistical model concerning the transmitted frequency-domain blocks is developed, which is derived from well-established results on Gaussian stochastic processes distorted by memoryless nonlinearities. This model can be employed for performance evaluation by analytical means, with highly accurate results whenever the corresponding conventional OFDM signals exhibit quasi-Gaussian characteristics. Cases where the signal processing scheme is repeatedly used, in an iterative way, are treated through an extension of the proposed statistical modeling. A set of numerical results is presented and discussed, so as to show the practical interest of both the proposed schemes and the analytical methods for evaluation of their performance. For the sake of comparison, this paper includes numerical results concerning the “partial transmit sequence (PTS) technique,” which is an alternative peak-to-mean envelope power ratios-reducing technique of higher complexity, often recommended due to its “distortionless” nature. The superior performance/complexity tradeoffs through the proposed class of nonlinear signal processing schemes is emphasized.
The authors are with CAPS, Instituto Superior Tecnico, 1049-01 Lisboa, Portugal.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.836521

The Max-Log List Algorithm (MLLA)—A List Sequence Decoding Algorithm That Provides Soft Symbol Output
Carl Fredrik Leanderson and Carl-Erik W. Sundberg
Abstract—We present a soft decoding algorithm for convolutional codes that simultaneously yields soft sequence output, i.e., list sequence (LS) decoding, and soft symbol output. The max-log list algorithm (MLLA) introduced in this paper provides near-optimum soft symbol output equal to that of the max-log maximum a posteriori (MAP) probability algorithm. Simultaneously, the algorithm produces an order list containing LS-MAP estimates. The MLLA exists in optimum and suboptimum versions that are different in that the optimum version produces LS-MAP decoding for arbitrary list lengths, while the suboptimum, low-complexity version only provides the MAP, the second-order MAP, and the third-order MAP sequence estimates. For lists with more than three elements, MAP decoding is not guaranteed, but the LS decoding is close to the optimal. It is demonstrated that the suboptimum/optimum MLLA can be used to obtain the combination of soft symbol and soft sequence outputs at lower complexity than a previously published algorithm. Furthermore, the suboptimum MLLA is well suited for operation in an iterative list (turbo) decoder, since it is obtained by only minor

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:20 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

