IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

383

On General Linear Block Code Decoding Using the Sum–Product Iterative Decoder
Todd K. Moon, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—The sum–product iterative decoder, conventionally used for low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, hold promise as a decoder for general linear block code decoding. However, the promise is only partly fulfilled because, as we show experimentally, the decoder performance degrades rapidly as a function of parity check matrix weight. Even in the case of decoder failure, however, we demonstrate that there is information present in the decoder output probabilities that can still help with the decoding problem.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE sum–product iterative decoder (see, e.g., [1]), used for decoding low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, under some circumstances can be used for codes other than LDPC codes as a general-purpose soft-decision decoder. For example, [2] shows that the sum-product decoder can provide up to 1.5 dB of gain over conventional decoding for a (7, 4) Hamming code. The iterative decoder thus offers promise being a general linear block code decoder. However, for general linear block codes (as opposed to LDPC codes) the promise is only partially fulfilled because the decoder performance degrades so rapidly due to cycles in the Tanner graph associated with the code.
This letter conveys the results of two sets of experiments which reveal two aspects of iterative decoders relevant to the question of using iterative decoders for general linear block codes. The first experiment (Section II) examines how the decoder performance degrades as a function of the weight of the parity check matrix, for a fixed code. It is shown that there is a range of matrix weights over which the decoder performance is very good, but that after a weight threshold is exceeded the performance degrades dramatically. However, even in the case that the decoder fails, there is still residual information in the decoder output probabilities, as demonstrated by the experiments in Section III. Specifically, we demonstrate that the output probabilities for bits that are in error tend to be less certain (that is, having probabilities further away from 0 or 1) than the probabilities for bits that are correct. Thus, when the output probabilities are sorted, the errors tend to be concentrated with probabilities near the middle of the sorted list. The strength of the residual information depends upon the number of errors present in the signal and also on on the weight of the parity check matrix, with lighter matrices resulting in better concentration of errors.
Manuscript received October 24, 2003. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. M. Fossorier.
The author is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, Utah State University, Logan, UT 84322-4120 USA (e-mail: Todd.Moon@ece.usu.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2004.828183

We propose one way to use the concentrated probability information, by randomly selecting bits based on the distribution of the sorted decoder output probabilities. For our selection strategy, the work factor associated with decoding can be decreased by orders of magnitude in the best cases.
Typical analyses of iterative decoders (see, e.g., [3], [4]) operate under a long code assumption that makes it reasonable to assume that the effect of cycles is negligible. Other work examining the influence of cycles (e.g., [5]–[9]) have not examined the decoder performance as a function of matrix weight. It appears that the observation about the residual information is also unique.
II. REDUCTION IN DECODING EFFECTIVENESS AS A FUNCTION OF DECODER MATRIX WEIGHT
The performance of the iterative decoder depends on the matrix weight, since weightier matrices are associated with more cycles, which introduce more bias into the decoding algorithm. We describe here an experiment that was performed to gauge the degree to which the performance decreases for the same code, but as the weight of the parity check matrix for the code is increased.
A low-density parity check matrix with average column weight near 3 was generated at random (throwing away columns to eliminate cycles of length 4) for a (975, 475) binary block code. In the experiment, performance at each matrix weight was evaluated by generating 1000 codewords at random, then decoding them after they have been passed through a binary symmetric channel that garbles exactly 60 of the bits. Different matrix weights were obtained by performing some number of steps of Gaussian elimination (with pivoting as necessary), moving the parity check matrix incrementally toward a systematic (canonical) form. The elimination tends to increase the matrix weight.
Fig. 1 shows the probability of bit error as a function of the parity check matrix weight. Up to a certain matrix weight the decoder performs nearly perfectly. However, there is a matrix weight above which the performance drops precipitously. While these results are encouraging, in that there is some latitude in the weight of the matrix which will allow for good decoding results, they are also troubling: the matrix weight at which the decoding breaks down is far from the weight of a systematic matrix. Generally, the parity check matrix derived from an arbitrary generator matrix will be in systematic form, which is not necessarily the form with least weight. Furthermore, finding an equivalent parity check matrix with minimal weight is known

1089-7798/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

384

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

Fig. 1. Probability of correct block decoding as a function of matrix weight.

to be an NP-complete problem [10], [11]. To use the iterative decoder for a general linear block code, it is therefore necessary either to modify the decoder to push the breakdown threshold over for weightier matrices, or to find some way of using the decoder output for some follow-on processing.

III. RESIDUAL INFORMATION IN THE DECODER OUTPUT PROBABILITIES

Even in the case that the iterative decoder fails, there is still

residual information present in its output probabilities. We

demonstrate empirically that the decoder output probabilities

for bits which would be erroneously decoded are more likely to

be farther away from the boundary probabilities of 0 or 1 than

the probabilities for those bits that would be correctly decoded.

Unfortunately, as we show, the strength of this concentration

also depends on the weight of the parity check matrix employed

and the number of errors present.

Let

denote the decoder output probabilities, the ap-

proximation to the posteriors

. Let be

the sorted probabilities,

for a permutation such

that

. For low values of

is near 0—indicating a high probability that the corresponding

bit should decode to 0; for values of near

is near

1—indicating that the corresponding bit should decode to 1 with

high probability. For intermediate values of , the decoder is

less certain. Let be the true value of the error in the th posi-

tion (which is known in the simulation) and let

de-

note the errors reordered according to the sorting permutation.

Let be a histogram of the errors in the sorted locations. That

is,

. Fig. 2(a) shows the histogram of sorted

error locations for the (975, 475) LDPC code with sparse parity

matrix representation, transmitted through a channel that intro-

duced 100 errors. The 975 possible error locations are divided

into 20 histogram bins, and the histogram is scaled so that the

sum of the histogram bins is equal to the total number of errors,

100. As the figure shows, the errors are concentrated near the

Fig. 2. Histogram with sparse matrix. (a) 100 errors. (b) 150 errors.

middle of the sorted bins: nearly 50% of the errors occur in the middle two bins. We refer to the nonuniformity of the histogram, exhibiting the fact that the errors tend to be concentrated near the middle of the sorted probability values, as concentration. Fig. 2(b) shows the histogram for a channel with 150 errors. The concentration is not so great in this case, but is still very evident.
Unfortunately, the concentration is a function of the parity check matrix density. Fig. 3 shows the histogram for the 100error case for a check matrix having weight 33 363 (after 3000 steps of Gaussian elimination) and for a check matrix in systematic form, having weight 96 001 (after 10 190 steps of Gaussian elimination). The flattening of the histogram evidences the decreasing of the concentration.

IV. DECREASING THE AVERAGE NUMBER OF DRAWS

Let

be the probability that the th bin of the

sorted probabilities are in error. We will use a drawing strategy

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MOON: ON GENERAL LINEAR BLOCK CODE DECODING

385
tionally convenient.) Let denote the expected probability that a draw is correct, where the expectation is with respect to the distribution of the draws. Then

The probability of drawing items without error is ,

and the expected number of draws of items without

error is

. For example, suppose that er-

rors are uniformly distributed across the bins, so that

. Then

, and

. The

expected number of draws to obtain error-free draws is then

. The reduction in work factor of the

concentrated probabilities compared to the uniform probabil-

ities is

. For the 100-error case with the

sparse matrix, is approximately ; for the 150-error sparse

matrix case, is approximately .

Fig. 3. Histogram with 100 errors. (a) Non Systematic form: weight = 33 363. (b) Systematic form: weight = 96 001.

which draws the th bin with probability

,

and take

where is a normalizing constant, so that sorted bins having higher probability of error are less likely to be drawn. (This is not necessarily the the optimal selection strategy but, given the selection with replacement model employed here, is computa-

REFERENCES
[1] D. J. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory., vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[2] J. R. Barry, E. A. Lee, and D. G. Messerschmitt, Digital Communication. New York: Kluwer Academic, 2000, p. 614.
[3] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: M.I.T. Press, 1963.
[4] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, no. 2, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[5] Y. Weiss, “Correctness of local probability propagation in graphical models with loops,” Neural Computation, vol. 12, pp. 1–41, 2000.
[6] R. J. McEleice, D. J. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[7] R. J. McEliece, E. R. Rodemich, and J.-F. Cheng, “The turbo decision algorithm,” Proc. 33rd Annu. Allerton Conf. on Communication, Control, and Computing, pp. 366–379, 1995.
[8] Y. Weiss and W. T. Freeman, “Correctness of belief propagation in Gaussian graphical models of arbitrary topology,” Neural Computation, vol. 13, pp. 2173–3200, 2001.
[9] , “On the optimality of solutions of the max-product belief-propagation algorithm in arbitrary graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 736–744, Feb. 2001.
[10] D. Rose and R. Tarjan, “Algorithmic aspects of vertex elimination on directed graphs,” SIAM J. Appl. Math., vol. 34, pp. 176–197, 1978.
[11] G. Havas, D. F. Holt, and S. Rees, “Recognizing badly presented Z-modules,” Linear Algebra and Its Applications, vol. 192, pp. 137–163, 1993.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:37:34 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

