IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

1097

Information Geometry of Turbo and Low-Density Parity-Check Codes
Shiro Ikeda, Member, IEEE, Toshiyuki Tanaka, Member, IEEE, and Shun-ichi Amari, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Since the proposal of turbo codes in 1993, many studies have appeared on this simple and new type of codes which give a powerful and practical performance of error correction. Although experimental results strongly support the efficacy of turbo codes, further theoretical analysis is necessary, which is not straightforward. It is pointed out that the iterative decoding algorithm of turbo codes shares essentially similar ideas with low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, with Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm applied to a cyclic belief diagram, and with the Bethe approximation in statistical physics. Therefore, the analysis of the turbo decoding algorithm will reveal the mystery of those similar iterative methods. In this paper, we recapture and extend the geometrical framework initiated by Richardson to the information geometrical framework of dual affine connections, focusing on both of the turbo and LDPC decoding algorithms. The framework helps our intuitive understanding of the algorithms and opens a new prospect of further analysis. We reveal some properties of these codes in the proposed framework, including the stability and error analysis. Based on the error analysis, we finally propose a correction term for improving the approximation.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, information geometry, lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes, perturbation analysis, turbo codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
T HE properties of turbo codes have been extensively studied since they were introduced in 1993 [1], [2]. Although the encoding process and the iterative decoding algorithm are simple, theoretical analysis is not straightforward, and the main results obtained so far are mostly empirical. In addition to the experimental studies, clues have been sought in other methods. Since there are some iterative methods which are closely related to turbo codes, theoretical analyses of those methods were expected to give further understanding. One of them is another class of error-correcting codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, which were originally proposed
Manuscript received February 3, 2003; revised November 20, 2003. This work was supported in part by MEXT, Japan, under the Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research (14084208 and 14084209). The material in this paper was presented in part at the 15th Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, Vancouver, BC, Canada, December 2001 and at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002.
S. Ikeda is with the Gatsby Computational Neuroscience Unit, University College London, London WC1N 3AR, U.K., on leave from the Department of Statistical Methodology, Institute of Statistical Mathematics, Tokyo, 106-8569, Japan (e-mail: shiro@ism.ac.jp).
T. Tanaka is with the Department of Electronics and Information Engineering, Tokyo Metropolitan University, Tokyo, 192-0397, Japan (e-mail: tanaka@eei.metro-u.ac.jp).
S. Amari is with the RIKEN Brain Science Institute, Saitama, 351-0198, Japan (e-mail: amari@brain.riken.jp).
Communicated by K. Abdel-Ghaffar, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.828072

by Gallager [3], [4] and were rediscovered by MacKay [5]. Other methods have been found even in different fields, such as artificial intelligence and statistical physics. McEliece et al. showed that the turbo decoding algorithm is equivalent to Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm [6], applied to a belief diagram with loops [7], and MacKay demonstrated that the LDPC decoding algorithm (the sum–product algorithm) is also equivalent to the belief propagation algorithm [5], while Kabashima and Saad pointed out that the iterative process of the Bethe approximation in statistical physics is the same as that of the belief propagation algorithm [8]–[10] (see also Yedidia et al. [11]). Although these results have shown that the turbo decoding algorithm shares the same idea with these methods, the efficacies of them are not fully understood theoretically, either.
Recently, some pathways for theoretical analysis of the decoding algorithms have been shown. One is the geometrical framework of the turbo decoding algorithm initiated by Richardson [12]. The existence of fixed points, a condition of the fixed point to be unique, and its local stability are studied in this framework. Another pathway is the density evolution [13] applied to the LDPC decoding algorithm. The density evolution describes the time evolution of message distribution. The prospects of these studies are promising, and further studies along these approaches are necessary.
In this paper, we propose not only a new interpretation of the geometrical framework, but also an extension of it, with the help of information geometry [14], [15]. Information geometry studies intrinsic geometrical structures existing in families of probability distributions by using the two dual criteria of geometrical flatness (exponential or -flatness and mixture or -flatness) coupled with the Fisher information metric. We build a unified information-geometrical framework to analyze the decoding algorithms of turbo and LDPC codes, which helps our intuitive understanding. The framework is general so that main results are applicable to related iterative algorithms.
The ideal goal of turbo and LDPC decoding is the maximization of the posterior marginals (MPM), which achieves the minimum bit-error rate. However, since the exact MPM decoding is computationally intractable, it is approximated with iterative methods. The unified geometrical structure of the algorithms is elucidated by means of the - and -projections in information geometry together with the generalized Pythagorean theorem. Here, the Kullback–Leibler (KL) divergence, the Fisher information, and the skewness tensor play fundamental roles. The equilibrium of the iterative algorithms is analyzed and its local stability condition is given in information-geometrical terms. These are not only a new

0018-9448/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1098

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

these two decoders may differ initially, and a better inference is

searched for through iterative information exchanges.

Let us define the following variables corresponding to the

marginal log-likelihood ratios (see, for example, [12], [20]) with

the use of the conditional probabilities

and

,

Fig. 1. Structure of turbo codes.

formulation and elucidation of Richardson’s framework from a more general standpoint, but open a prospect to integrate wide varieties of iterative inference methods extensively studied recently in the areas of information theory, statistical physics, statistical inference, neural networks, and artificial intelligence.
We further analyze the accuracy of soft-decoding results of the iterative decoding algorithms in terms of the - and -curvatures. Hard-decoding results are of primary interest in many studies, but for some applications, such as multiple-user applications [16]–[19], the accuracy of soft-decoding results is also important. In this paper, the error will be given by asymptotic expansion, so that the terms can be used to improve the results. We give an explicit algorithm for the improvement. The error analysis also gives insights into a design principle of LDPC codes, and shows why LDPC codes work so well. We finally touch upon the “free energy” in the statistical physics approach [10], [11].
The outline of the paper is as follows. In Section II, we give the original schemes of turbo and LDPC codes. The basic strategy of the MPM decoding is given in Section III. Section IV introduces information geometry. Sections V and VI describe the information geometry of turbo and LDPC decodings, respectively. Decoding errors are analyzed in Section VII, and, finally, conclusion is given with some discussions for future perspectives in Section IX.

(1)

Here, the factor is introduced to have consistency with

our framework, and the function

is calculated

efficiently by Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm

[21]. The turbo decoding algorithm makes use of two slack

variables, and

, called the “extrinsic variables,” for

exchanging information between the decoders. The algorithm

is given as follows. Its meaning will be explained later from the

geometrical point of view.

Turbo Decoding (Original)

1) Set

and

.

2) Calculate

as follows:

from (1) and update

3) Calculate as follows:

from (1) and update

II. ORIGINAL DEFINITIONS OF TURBO AND LDPC CODES A. Turbo Codes

4) Iterate 2 and 3 by increasing by one, until

1) Encoding: The idea of turbo codes is illustrated in Fig. 1.

Let

,

be the information

bits to be transmitted. We assume a binary-symmetric channel

(BSC) with bit-error rate , and it is easy to generalize the results

to any memoryless channel (see Appendix I). Turbo codes use

two encoders, Encoders 1 and 2 in the figure, which generate

two sets of parity bits in the encoding process. We denote them

by

and

,,

. Each set of parity bits ,

, is a function

of and is represented as

when an explicit expression

is necessary. The set of these codes

are transmitted

through the BSC, and a receiver observes their noisy version,

,, ,

.

2) Decoding: Turbo codes handle the case where the direct

decoding with

as a single set of parity bits is intractable,

while the soft decoding with each of , is tractable. Two de-

coders are used for the decoding, Decoders 1 and 2 in the figure.

Decoder 1 infers the original information bits from

,

and Decoder 2 does the same from

. The inferences of

Ideally, steps 2 and step 3 would be iterated until convergence is achieved, but in practice, the number of iterations is fixed at less than 20.

B. LDPC Codes

1) Encoding: Fig. 2 illustrates the structure of LDPC codes.

Let

,

, be the information bits.

Although we use notations different from those of turbo codes,

it will soon become clear that the problems are formulated in a

unified view, i.e., estimating from an observed . To compose

the generator and parity-check matrices, two sparse matrices,

and

, are prepared where

is invertible in the modulo arithmetic. They are shared by

the sender and the receiver. The parity-check matrix is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IKEDA et al.: INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF TURBO AND LDPC CODES

1099

Fig. 2. Structure of LDPC codes.

where is given by

. The generator matrix

LDPC Decoding (Original)

Initialization:

Set

and

for pairs of indexes

such that

.

Horizontal step:

Update

as follows. Note that summations and

products are taken over pairs for which

where

is an identity matrix of size . The codeword is generated from as

From the definition of , the first bits of are identical to

, and is sent through a channel. We also assume a BSC with

bit-error rate . Codeword is disturbed and received as . Let

,

be the noise vector, and the

received codeword is

Vertical step: Update

as follows:

LDPC decoding estimates noise vector , which yields an esti-

mate of , since is given by the first bits of

.

In the decoding process, the parity-check matrix

is used; it satisfies the equality

. The syndrome vector

is calculated by

using

. When the noise vector is , the syndrome is

Convergence: Stop when the following ,

, converges

When the algorithm achieves convergence, the estimate of is obtained by the hard decision as

When is the observed syndrome, the decoding problem is to

estimate that satisfies

.

2) Decoding: Detailed descriptions of the iterative decoding

algorithm for LDPC codes are found elsewhere [3], [5], and we

describe it briefly here. The decoding algorithm consists of two

steps: the “horizontal step” and the “vertical step,” which are

iterated alternately. A set of probability distributions is updated

in each step, that is,

and

respectively, where

for pairs of indexes ,

,

, such that

. The quantity represents a guess of the probability

that is observed when

, where the distribution of

other than is assumed to be given by . The sum of

and is not necessarily , but it is normalized for simplicity.

The quantity is a guess of the probability of to be when

is observed. The updating rule is described as follows.

for for

III. FORMULATION OF MPM DECODING

A. Unified View of Turbo and LDPC Decoding

The goal for both of turbo and LDPC decodings is MPM de-

coding. We first define the MPM decoding in a unified setting,

and its specific form in each of turbo and LDPC decodings is

explained in Sections III-A–C. For the remainder of the paper,

we use the bipolar, i.e.,

, expression for each bit ,

, , and rather than the binary

.

The decoding problem is generally solved based on the pos-

terior distribution of conditioned on the observed codeword or

syndrome vector, i.e.,

in turbo codes and

in LDPC codes. The posterior distribution of is expressed as

(2)

where

consists of the linear terms of ; ,

, contain higher order interactions of , and the

terms depend on the observed information, , . In the case of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1100

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

turbo codes,

, and

and

represent interac-

tions in each of the two decoders, while in the case of LDPC

codes,

represents each parity bit. In the general graphical

model, they correspond to cliques. We assume

for

. Decoding is to estimate the information bits

based on . One natural approach is the MPM decoding. The

MPM estimator minimizes the expected number of wrong bits

in the decoded word. The MPM decoding in the bipolar case

is achieved by taking the expectation of with respect to .

Let

be the expectation of , and be the

decoded MPM estimator. Then

uniform prior, where distribution is derived as

, and the Bayes posterior

(5)

Since we consider BSC, where each bit is flipped independently

with probability ,

and

have the form of

(3)

where

works in a bitwise manner. The gives the “soft

decoding,” and the sign of each soft bit gives the “hard de-

coding” .

Let

be the marginal distribution of one component

in , and let denote the operator of the marginalization

that maps to a factorizable distribution having the same

marginal distributions

Here, is a positive real number called the inverse temperature in statistical physics and is related to by

where

as

, and

as

. Let us define

The soft bit depends only on the marginal distribution .

Since

is a Bernoulli distribution, has a one-to-one cor-

respondence to . Therefore, the soft decoding is equiva-

lent to the marginalization of . The marginalization of

generally needs summation over all possible but one , and it

is computationally not tractable in the case of turbo and LDPC

codes, where the length of is more than a few hundred. Instead

of marginalizing the entire in (2), we make use of simple

submodels

,

(4)

where

is the normalization factor. Each

in-

cludes only one nonlinear term , and the linear part

of is adjusted further through , which takes the effect of the

other

’s,

into account by approximating them by

the linear term

. We thus have component decoders,

each of which decodes

,

. The parameter

plays the role of a window through which information from

the other decoders, , is exchanged. The idea is to adjust

through iterative information exchange to approximate the

overall

with

. We assume that the marginal-

ization or the soft decoding is tractable for any

.

where

is linear in and

are polynomials in

, representing higher order correlational components of many

’s. The Bayes posterior distribution (5) is rewritten as

where is the normalization factor. This distribution corre-

sponds to in (2), where

.

In the turbo decoding algorithm, each of the two constituent

decoders marginalizes its own posterior distribution of derived

from

, where a prior distribution of

the form

is used for taking information from the other decoder. The vec-

tors ,

correspond to the extrinsic variables in the

original turbo decoding algorithm, that is,

and

.

The prior distribution

is a factorizable distribution in

which the guess of the other decoder is represented. The poste-

rior distribution of the decoder is defined as

B. Turbo Decoding

In this subsection, the concrete forms of (2) and (4) for turbo

codes are derived. In turbo codes, the receiver observes a noisy

version of

as

. We can easily derive the fol-

lowing relation from the assumption of a memoryless channel:

The Bayes posterior distribution

is defined with

a prior distribution

of . In this paper, we consider the

Here,

is the normalization factor which is a function of

. It is clear that plays the role of a window of information

exchange, and that the information is used as a prior. This dis-

tribution is of the form of (4).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IKEDA et al.: INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF TURBO AND LDPC CODES

1101

C. LDPC Decoding

We reformulate the LDPC decoding problem in this subsec-

tion. The vectors , , , , and are treated in the bipolar form,

while and are still in the binary, i.e.,

, form. Note

that in the binary form corresponds to in the bipolar form,

and vice versa. Each bit of a syndrome vector is written

as a higher order correlational product of in the bipolar

form, that is, as a monomial in

This coincides with the formulation in (4). The above argument shows that the LDPC decoding problem falls into the general framework given in Section III-A.

where are elements of the parity-check matrix . We now consider the “softened” probability distribution of
conditioned on

IV. INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS
The preliminaries from information geometry [14], [15] are given in this section.

(6)

In this paper, we discuss the “soft constraint” which infers

based on the probability distribution

in (6) where a posi-

tive-real number is finite. More precisely, the MPM decoding

is carried out by using

obtained from (6). However, the

LDPC decoding algorithm generally uses the “hard constraint”

which searches for the that exactly satisfies the parity-check

equations

As becomes larger, the probability

is concentrated on satisfying

, and the “soft con-

straint” approaches the “hard constraint.” See Appendix II for

an analysis on how hard decoding results depend on . Empirical

studies have shown that the “soft constraint” with a fixed has

sufficiently good performance [5]. The reason we introduce a fi-

nite is to keep

strictly positive for any

.

This is necessary to build a common information-geometrical

framework for turbo and LDPC decodings (see Section IV-A).

Note that noise is bitwise independent, and that its error rate

is given by

. Consequently, we have the

prior distribution

(7)

A. Manifolds of Probability Distributions: -Flat and -Flat Submanifolds
Consider the family of all the probability distributions over . We denote it by , i.e.,

This is the set of all the distributions over atoms . The

family has

degrees of freedom and is a

-di-

mensional manifold belonging to the exponential family [15],

[22].

In order to prove this, we introduce random variables

where

when otherwise

Any

is expanded as

(8)

where

which shows

is parameterized by variables

. Since

, the family has

degrees of freedom.

Similarly,

is expanded as

As a result, the Bayes posterior distribution becomes

Since there are

degrees of freedom, we set

This is equivalent to in (2).

In the horizontal and vertical steps of the LDPC decoding

algorithm, marginalization is carried out based on distribution

, which is calculated from

and prior

.

The parameter specifying the prior is obtained through the

window for taking information from the other decoders . We

have

and rewrite (8) as where

This shows is an exponential family whose natural, or canonical, coordinate system is .
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1102

The expectations of random variables

are

They form another coordinate system of that specifies

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

Consider two nearby distributions

and

,

specified by coordinates and

in any coordinate system.

From the Taylor expansion, their KL divergence is given by the

quadratic form

Since is an exponential family, it naturally has two affine

structures: the exponential—or -affine structure and the

mixture—or -affine structure. These structures were also

adopted implicitly by Richardson [12] without resorting to

the Riemannian structure and duality, stated in the following.

When manifold is regarded as an affine space in

, it is

-affine, and gives the -affine coordinate system. Similarly,

when manifold is regarded as an affine space in , it is

-affine, and gives the -affine coordinate system. They are

dually coupled with respect to the Riemannian structure given

by the Fisher information matrix, which will be introduced

later.

First, we define the -flat and -flat submanifolds of .

-flat submanifold:

Submanifold

is said to be -flat, when the

following

belongs to for all

,,

:

where

is the normalization factor. Obviously,

is an exponential family connecting

two distributions,

and . In particular, when an

-flat submanifold is a one-dimensional curve, it is called

an -geodesic. The above

is the

-geodesic connecting

and . In terms of the

-affine coordinates, , a submanifold is -flat when it

is linear in .

-flat submanifold:

Submanifold

is said to be -flat when the fol-

lowing mixture

belongs to for all

,,

:

When an -flat submanifold is a one-dimensional curve, it is called an -geodesic. Hence, the above mixture family is the -geodesic connecting them. In terms of the
-affine coordinates, , a submanifold is -flat when it is linear in .

where is the Fisher information matrix defined by

where represents the gradient operator (differentiation with respect to the components of ). When the squared distance of a small line element starting from is given by the quadratic form

the space is called a Riemannian manifold with the Riemannian

metric tensor , which is a positive-definite matrix de-

pending on . In the present case, the Fisher information matrix

plays the role of the Riemannian metric . Hence, the

infinitesimal KL divergence is regarded as a half the squared

Riemannian distance.

The Riemannian metric, giving a definition of the inner

product to the tangent spaces, also defines the orthogonality

of two intersecting curves. Let

and

be

two curves intersecting at

, that is,

. The

tangent vectors of the curves at

are represented by

and

by using the coordinates, where

.

The two curves are said to be orthogonal at their intersection

when their inner product with respect to the Riemannian

metric vanishes

Now we state the generalized Pythagoras theorem and the projection theorem, which hold in a general dually flat manifold [15], and show the dual nature of the - and -structures with the Riemannian metric.
Theorem 1: Let , , and be three distributions in . When the -geodesic connecting and is orthogonal at to the -geodesic connecting and , the following relation holds:

B. Kullback–Leibler (KL) Divergence, Fisher Metric, and Generalized Pythagorean Theorem

Manifold has a Riemannian metric given by the Fisher in-

formation matrix . We begin with the KL divergence

,

defined by

Next we define the -projection. The -projection is also

defined in a dual manner, by replacing

with

, but we do not state the details here.

The KL divergence satisfies

, and

when

and only when

holds for every . Although sym-

metry

does not hold generally, it is regarded

as an asymmetric squared distance.

Definition 1: Let be an -flat submanifold in , and let . The point in that minimizes the KL divergence
from to is denoted by
and is called the -projection of to .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IKEDA et al.: INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF TURBO AND LDPC CODES

1103

Finally, the -projection theorem follows.
Theorem 2: Let be an -flat submanifold in , and let . The -projection of to is unique and given
by the point in such that the -geodesic connecting and is orthogonal to at this point.

D. Important Submanifolds and Marginalization

Now, we consider a submanifold distribution is decomposed as

in which every joint

C. Legendre Transformation and Local Structure
Let be the -affine coordinate system of . Every exponential family has the form

All the bits of are independent for every distribution in .

Since each bit takes one of

,

is a Bernoulli dis-

tribution, and belongs to an exponential family of the form

The function is a convex function which is called the cu-

mulant-generating function in statistics, and the free energy in

statistical physics. The -affine coordinate system is given by

its gradient

, where

is the gradient op-

erator. There is a dualistic structure described by the Legendre

transformation; the dual potential is given by

and is the negative of the Shannon entropy

(9)

The submanifold

is -dimensional, with its -affine

coordinate system

, which are the nat-

ural or canonical parameters in . The other parameter

( -affine coordinate system) is the expectation parameter

defined by

The Fisher information matrix is given by the second derivative

of ,

, which is positive definite. We have shown This is equivalent to the soft decoding in (3). There is a simple

that the square of the local distance is given by

one-to-one correspondence between and

The third derivative of the potential ,

, is Proposition 1:

is an -flat submanifold of .

called the skewness tensor. It is a symmetric tensor of order

Proof:

is a submanifold of . Let ,

and

three, and its components are calculated as

,

. For any ,

where

denotes expectation with respect to

divergence is expanded as

where

. The KL Let

, and

belongs to .

We now define a number of -flat submanifolds which play

important roles in the decoding algorithms. The first is the sub-

manifold of

defined by

in the component form. This shows the local asymmetry of the KL divergence

Since

is linear in , is identical to . Let

, where

for turbo codes and

for LDPC codes. The new coordinate is obtained by shifting

the old one, , in (9) by

The skewness tensor plays a fundamental role in the analysis of We use the new coordinates as a coordinate system of , in

decoding error.

which information from the constituent decoders is integrated.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1104

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

We define the expectation parameter as coordinate system of and is dual to

, which is another (10)

Next, we consider the submanifold primarily responsible for

only one . The submanifold, ,

(

for turbo codes), is defined by

Here, is the -affine coordinate system or the natural param-

eters of through which information of the other decoders

is integrated. is also an -flat submanifold of . However,

and

,

, because

includes

higher order correlations of and

. The expec-

tation parameter for is defined as

(11)

Fig. 3. Information geometry of MPM decoding.

We show that the soft decoding is the -projection to of the

posterior distribution. Let us consider the -projection of

to . The derivative of

with respect to is

Turbo Decoding (Information Geometrical View)

1) Let

for . For

compose

with prior .

2) Perform the -projection of

to as

, and update by using

By the definition of the -projection, this vanishes at the pro-

jected point. Hence, the -affine coordinate of the projected 3) Compose

point is given by

,

to as

by using

(12)
. Perform the -projection of and update

which shows that the -projection of does not change the expectation of . This is equivalent to the soft decoding defined 4) If in (3) (Fig. 3).

(13) , go to step 1.

V. INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF TURBO DECODING

The goal of turbo decoding is to obtain a good approxima-

tion to the MPM decoding for

. Although

obtaining the -projection of to is not tractable, eval-

uation of the -projection of any distribution

,

to is tractable with the BCJR algorithm. Since

each

,

, is derived from

and a prior

, we can describe turbo decoding as a method to

approximate the -projection of to by evaluating the

prior of

iteratively and projecting

to .

A. Information-Geometrical Definition of Turbo Decoding

We rewrite the turbo decoding algorithm in Section II-A in

the information-geometrical framework. It is convenient to use

an adequate -affine coordinate system of for the -projec-

tion of to . Let

denote the coordinates of

corresponding to the -projected distribution

To clarify this procedure, we introduce three auxiliary parameters , , and

where and are equivalent to the extrinsic parameters in

Section II-A. The intuition behind this framework is as follows.

Each of the higher order correlation terms,

or , is in-

cluded only in Decoder 1 or Decoder 2, respectively. Decoders

1 and 2 calculate, using the -projection, the linear approxima-

tions

and

of

and , and send messages

and to the other decoders. In the interactive procedures, De-

coder 1 forms the distribution

, in which the nonlinear

effect other than

(that is,

in the turbo decoding case

of

) is replaced by the estimate , which is equal to the

message sent from Decoder 2. In the general case of

,

summarizes all the messages

from the other de-

coders. The same explanation holds for Decoder 2. The total

linear estimate to the overall higher order term

is

given by

. The idea of the turbo decoding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IKEDA et al.: INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF TURBO AND LDPC CODES

1105

Fig. 5. Equimarginal submanifold M ().

Fig. 4. Information-geometrical view of turbo decoding.

cides with

. In other words,

is the inverse image

of

of the -projection. For every , there exist unique

and

such that the expectations

of with respect to

and

satisfy

is schematically shown in Fig. 4. The projected distribution is We denote the parameters that satisfy this equation by

and

written as

. In other words, we define

and

B. Equilibrium of Turbo Decoding

Assume that the decoding algorithm converges to a distribu-

tion

, where is used to denote the equilibrium point.

The distribution

is the approximation of the -pro-

jection of to . The estimated parameter satisfies

and

from the definition of the algorithm.

The converged distributions

,

satisfy the following two conditions:

1) -condition:

, and

2) -condition: (14)
The -condition can be rewritten with the expectation parameter defined in (10) and (11) as

In order to give an information-geometrical view of these con-

ditions, we define two submanifolds in . The first is the -flat

submanifold

, which we call the equimarginal submani-

fold, attached to each

. It is defined by

Obviously,

,

, and

however, generally,

except for the equilib-

rium point . The projection theorem shows that

is or-

thogonal to , , and (Fig. 5), and that

is

the intersection of and

.

In order to elucidate the -condition, we next define an

-flat submanifold connecting

,

, and

in a log-linear manner

normalization factor

This manifold is a two-dimensional -affine subspace of .

Apparently,

,

, and

belong

to . Moreover, at the equilibrium , is included in

. This is easily proved by setting

,

,

and (14)

This discussion is summarized in the following theorem.

The expectation of is equal to Hence, the -projection of any

for any to

. coin-

Theorem 3: At the equilibrium of the turbo decoding

algorithm,

,

, and

belong to the

equimarginal submanifold

, while its -flat version

includes

,

,

, and .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1106

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

Note that are

is a diagonal matrix whose diagonal elements

In order to discuss the local stability, we give a sufficiently

small perturbation to and apply one step of the decoding

procedure. Let

be the parameter after one step of

the turbo decoding algorithm. From Step 2, we have

, such that

By a simple expansion, we have

Thus, in Step 2 becomes Following the same line for Step 3, is given by

( ) ( ) 5 ( ) Fig. 6. M  and E  of turbo decoding: q x is the direct m( ) projection of q x to M , which corresponds to the true “soft decoding” based ( ) ( ; ) on q x , while p x  is the equilibrium of turbo decoding. The discrepancy
between two submanifolds causes the decoding error.

The theorem shows the information-geometrical structure of

the equilibrium point. If

includes ,

gives

the MPM decoding based on , since the soft decoding of

is equivalent to the -projection of to , and

is orthogonal to at

. However, since the -flatness

and the -flatness do not coincide in general,

does not

necessarily include , while its -flat version

includes

instead of

. This shows that turbo decoding approx-

imates MPM decoding by replacing the -flat manifold

with the -flat manifold

. It should be noted that

is not the -projection of to either, because

is

not necessarily orthogonal to . When it is orthogonal, it min-

imizes the KL divergence

,

, which

gives the naive mean field approximation [23], [24]. The re-

placement of the -projection by the -projection shares a sim-

ilar idea of the mean field approximation [10], [23]–[26]. Gen-

erally, there is a discrepancy between

and

, which

causes a decoding error (Fig. 6). This suggests a possibility of

a new method to improve the iterative decoding. We will study

this in Section VII.

where

This shows that initial perturbation after one iteration.

becomes

Theorem 4: When values of the matrix stable.

for all , where are the eigen, the equilibrium point is locally

This theorem coincides with the result of Richardson [12].

VI. INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF LDPC DECODING
A. Information Geometry of Decoding Process The LDPC decoding algorithm in Section II-B is rewritten in
the information-geometrical framework as follows.

LDPC decoding (information geometrical view)

Initialization:

For , set

,

. For

,

compose

.

Horizontal step:

Calculate the projection of

to and define

,

as

(15)

Vertical step:

Update ,

and

C. Local Stability Analysis of the Equilibrium Point

We discuss the local stability condition in this subsection. Let

be the Fisher information matrix of

, and

be that of

,

. Since they belong to the exponen-

tial family, we have the following relations:

Convergence: If does not converge, repeat the process by incrementing by .

Here, is a message from decoder that expresses the con-

tribution of , and integrates all the messages. Each de-

coder summarizes the information from all the other decoders in

the form of the prior

. For turbo decoding, is equal to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IKEDA et al.: INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF TURBO AND LDPC CODES

1107

, and

and

. Therefore, (12) and (13) are both

equivalent to (15). The main difference between the turbo and

LDPC decodings is that the turbo decoding updates sequen-

tially, while the LDPC decoding updates them simultaneously.

B. Equilibrium and Stability
The equilibrium of the LDPC decoding algorithm satisfies the following two conditions:
1) -condition:

The local stability condition of the LDPC decoding is summarized as follows.
Theorem 5: The linearization of the dynamics of the LDPC decoding around the equilibrium is

...

...

where

which can be rewritten with the expectation parameters as

2) -condition:

...

...

...

...

, and

Theorem 3 holds for the LDPC decoding, in which the defini- when every eigenvalue ,

tions of submanifold must be extended as follows:

.

. The equilibrium is locally stable

, of

satisfies

where

is defined as

normalization factor

The local stability condition generally depends on the syn-

drome vector . However, intuitively speaking, if

, all the

eigenvalues of

are small, which leads to a stable and

quick convergence. When the final guess by the decoder is

close to the integrated guess by

, it is expected that

. From simulations of LDPC codes, we observe

good convergence in many cases which implies

. This

property originates from the sparsity of the parity-check matrix.

At the converged point, proved by setting

is included in ,

, which can be

The preceding equation proves that Theorem 3 holds for the

LDPC decoding.

We next show the local stability condition for the LDPC de-

coding. Consider a case in which a sufficiently small pertur-

bation is added to the equilibrium:

. The next

state after a vertical step and a horizontal step is denoted by

. After the perturbation is added, the vertical

step gives

, where

VII. ANALYSIS OF DECODING ERRORS
A. Framework of Error Analysis
We have described the information-geometrical framework of the decoding algorithms and have shown how the MPM decoding is approximated by these decoding algorithms. In this section, we analyze the error of the approximation and give a correction term for improving the approximation [27], [28]. We also provide an explanation why the sparsity,i.e., low density, of the parity-check matrix has an advantage.
For the following discussion, we define an extended family of distributions

by using two sets of parameters:

and

.

Following the horizontal step, we have

The family is a The manifolds

-dimensional exponential family.

and

are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1108

submanifolds of since

and

, where is the unit vector

It also includes , when we set

and

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004
where More explicitly, by using the index notation, we have

We denote the expectation parameter of , which is given by

by By replacing

in (18) with the result of (17), we get

B. Analysis of Equimarginal Submanifold

Let

be the distributions included in the

equimarginal submanifold

, where

We evaluate

and

at

and approximate with the second-order Taylor series ex-

pansion with respect to around the point. The differential op-

erator

at

is written as

This constraint makes an implicit function of , which is de- In the component form, it is

noted by . Note that

. More precisely

for any . We analyze how changes from as changes from and finally becomes . In the following, we resort to the
perturbation analysis and evaluate the derivatives of up to the second order. We start by introducing the derivative along

(16)

The structural quantities

and

are the parts of the

Fisher information matrix of , because

.

We use the index notation in which suffixes and are for

and and are for . In the component form,

and

are defined as

Following some calculations, we have

We denote the

component of by

that

while

The second-order approximation of

given by

. around

By plugging

into the formula, we have

. Note is

Note that

at

,

. From (16), , and

we have (19)

which gives the first-order derivative. We defined negative of it. Similarly, from

(17) as the

which shows the point at which

intersects the submodels

. Since is given by

,

is re-

lated to the discrepancy of and the iterative decoding result.

This result is based on the perturbation analysis, justification

of which is outlined below. When is small, the Taylor expan-

sion for function is

we have

When we rescale
(18)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IKEDA et al.: INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF TURBO AND LDPC CODES

1109

In our analysis of iterative decoding, corresponds to ,

where the th derivative is of order . We have assumed that the

effects of are small, and we take the expansion with respect to

in terms of . We finally set , and the results are valid in

the above sense.

So far, we have only considered the -condition in order to

obtain the perturbation expansion of . However, in view of

the small- expansion described above, as well as the -condi-

tion, itself is a small quantity. This is because the “true” pos-

terior

tends to

as

, so that the itera-

tive decoding result should also tends to in the limit

.

In order to obtain the expansion which readily shows that is

a small quantity in the sense mentioned above, we invoke the

-condition, which is expressed as

(20)

From the Taylor expansion, we have

(23)

Note that

is the expectation of with respect to

which is equivalent to the soft decoding based on . There-

fore, (23) shows the difference between the ultimate goal of the

decoding and the result of the iterative decoding.

We summarize the above analysis as follows.

Theorem 6: Let

be the expectation of

with respect to , and be the expectation with respect to

the distribution obtained by the iterative decoding. Then,

is approximated by the decoding result

as follows:

(24)

In order to conclude our analysis of the decoding error based on perturbation analysis, we consider two distributions

Note that

and

C. Remark on

We remark here that the error term is related to the curvature

of

without giving details about the definition of the -

and -curvatures. See Amari and Nagaoka [15] for the math-

ematical details. We have shown that

is -flat. This im-

plies that the embedding -curvature tensor vanishes; that is,

Let

,

the result of (19),

of

, be included in

. From

is approximated in the power series

On the other hand, vature is given by

is not -flat, so the embedding -cur-

This gives the approximation of

as

Its covariant version is given by

Hence, from (20), satisfies Consider another distribution

which shows that the error term is directly related to the -cur-

vature of

.

VIII. IMPROVING DECODING ERRORS FOR LDPC CODES (21) A. Structural Terms

The terms

are given by the structural tensors and

at

. For LDPC codes, they are given by

which is included in

. Note that

and that

is included in

to , becomes , and generally

is generally not included in

.

From the result of (19), we have

From (21) and (22), we have

. As increases from where denotes the expectation with respect to

, and

, which means

(22) Because the ’s are independent with respect to

, the

following relations hold and are used for further calculation:

when when

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1110

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

where

when

when

.

The explicit forms of and are given in Appendix III.

B. Algorithm to Calculate Correction Term
From the result of Theorem 6, the soft-decoded proved by

is im-

By calculating

for

(see Appendix IV), we give

the algorithm to calculate correction term

as follows.

1) Calculate

2) Given , search for the pair

which includes , that is,

and

. Calculate

than do not contribute to the decoding error at least via the principal term (although they may have effects via higher order terms). Many LDPC codes have been designed to satisfy this criterion [5]. The analysis presented here can be extended in a straightforward manner to higher order perturbation analysis in order to quantify these effects.
It should be noted that our approach is different from the approaches commonly used to analyze the properties of iterative decoders since we do not consider any ensemble of codes. Typical reasoning found in the literature (e.g., [4]) is first to consider an ensemble of random parity-check matrices and show that the probability (over the ensemble) of short loops in the associated graph decreases to zero as the code length tends to infinity while the column and row weights are kept finite. This means that the behavior of iterative decoders for codes with longer loops is the same as that in the loop-free case. The statistical-mechanical approach to performance analysis of Gallager-type codes [30] also assumes random ensembles. Our analysis, on the other hand, does not assume ensembles but allows the evaluation of the performance of the iterative decoders with any single instance of a the parity-check matrix with a finite code length.

3) Given , search for the pair Calculate

such that

(25)

and

.

(26) 4) The correction term is given by summing up over all in
the above two cases.

The summation in (25) runs over

, and that in

(26) runs over

. Thus, when the parity-check matrix

is designed such that, for any and

holds for at most one , that is, any two columns of the paritycheck matrix have at most one overlapping positions of , all the principal terms of the correction vanish [29], which leads to the following theorem for LDPC codes.
Theorem 7: The principal term of the decoding error vanishes when parity-check matrix has no pair of columns with an overlap of more than once.
It is believed [5] that the average probability of a decoding error is small when any two columns of parity-check matrix do not have an overlap of more than once. Intuitively, this avoidance prevents loops with length from appearing in the graphical representation. Results of many experiments indicate that short loops are harmful for iterative decodings; that is, they worsen the decoding errors. Our result in Theorem 7 analytically supports this indication: the principal term of the decoding error vanishes when the parity-check matrix is sparse and there are no two columns with an overlap of more than once. Loops longer

IX. DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION

We have discussed the mechanism of iterative decoding al-

gorithms from the information-geometrical viewpoint. We built

a framework for analyzing the algorithms and used it to reveal

their basic properties.

The problem of the turbo and LDPC decodings is summarized

as a unified problem of marginalizing the probability distribu-

tion in (2). This problem is common to the belief propa-

gation for the loopy belief diagram in artificial intelligence [7]

and the Bethe approximation in statistical physics [9]–[11]. In

all of them, the direct marginalization of is intractable,

and only the marginalization of partial distributions

,

, in (4), is possible.

The marginalization of is approximated through iterative

processes of adjusting , marginalizing

, and inte-

grating them into the approximated parameter . Both of the de-

coding algorithms were redefined with the information-geomet-

rical terms, and the conditions of the equilibrium were derived.

They revealed an intuitive information-geometrical meaning of

the equilibrium point, which is summarized in Theorem 3. In

the information-geometrical terms, the ideal goal is to have the

cross section of and an -flat submanifold

including

: however, instead of , an -flat manifold is used

to obtain the decoding result. A new prospect arose from the

theorem: the discrepancy between

and gives the de-

coding error.

The principal term of the discrepancy was obtained through

perturbation analysis, which is summarized in Theorem 6.

The decoding error was given in (24), and the correction term

gives a method for improving the existing decoding algorithms.

Moreover, since the correction term strongly depends on the

encoders, it gives a new suggestion for designing the codes.

We have done the perturbation analysis up to the second order,

and it is possible to extend it to higher order analysis in a

straightforward fashion.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IKEDA et al.: INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF TURBO AND LDPC CODES

1111

We also derived the local stability conditions in Theorems 4

and 5. Although Theorem 4 coincides with the results of

Richardson [12], Theorem 5 presents a new result for the local

stability condition of LDPC codes. The global convergence

property is another issue [31] which is one of our future works.

The belief propagation algorithm is not directly connected to

the gradient method of minimizing a cost function. It has been

pointed out that the final result is at the critical point of the Bethe

free energy [10], [11].

For

and , we define the following function of

and :

The first term is rewritten as

The second term is rewritten as

be found when we use different models of channels. It is easy to extend the result for any memoryless channel (see Appendix I), and by employing more complicated channels, which is one of our future works, we can derive wide varieties of the turbo and the LDPC type decoding algorithms.
This study is a first step toward information-geometrical understanding of turbo and LDPC codes. By using the framework presented in this paper, we expect that further understanding will occur and new improvements will emerge.
APPENDIX I EXTENSION TO GENERAL MEMORYLESS CHANNEL
The information-geometrical framework in this paper can be easily extended to the case where the channel is a general binary-input memoryless channel, which includes various important channels, such as additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) and Laplace channels. We show that the Bayes posterior distribution is expressed in the form of (2) for turbo codes. Its extension to LDPC codes is also simple.
The information bits

and two sets of parity bits

These three equations give

are transmitted through a memoryless channel. The receiver ob-

serves their noisy version as

. Since the channel is

memoryless the following relation holds:

(27)

The Bayes posterior with the uniform prior is

Since as

is a constant, we neglect it and redefine

(28)
For memoryless channels, each conditional distribution on the right-hand side of (27) is formulated as

(29)

for

. Let us view

is fixed. By defining as

as a function of , where

When the

, the last term vanishes,

and this function with either constraint

or

coincides with the free energy introduced by Kabashima

and Saad [10] from the statistical physical viewpoint.

The advantage of the information-geometrical framework

lies in its generality. The framework is common not only to

turbo and LDPC codes, but is also generally valid for the

Bethe approximation, the belief propagation applied to a loopy

belief diagram, and its variants such as tree reparameterization

(TRP) [32]. We have used this framework to integrate the

statistical–mechanical method and an interesting idea of the

convex concave computational procedure (CCCP) algorithm

[33] in a separate paper [34]. Another important extension will

is rewritten as
Note that is a function of as follows:
where

(30) . We can also rewrite
(31)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1112

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

From (29)–(31), we can rewrite (28) as

Let us define as a set of which satisfy

. As

,

concentrates on

, and is redefined

as

(32)

which has the identical form to (2), where

and

Now, is rewritten as

Other distributions

and

are also expressed

with

and

, which shows the information-geomet-

rical framework is valid for general binary-input memoryless

channels.

Finally, we give practical form of and for an AWGN

channel. Let the noise variance of an AWGN channel be and

becomes

(33)

Since

holds, it becomes

A component of is different from that of , when the second term in (33) dominates the first term with the opposite sign. Such a case cannot occur if

(34)

Following the same line for the uniform prior is
which is identical to (32).

, the Bayes posterior with where .

is the smallest absolute value of the components of

A. Strict Bound
Since is guaranteed for

for

and from (34),

, where is defined as

APPENDIX II SOFT CONSTRAINT AND HARD CONSTRAINT
The LDPC decoding was reformulated with a positive real number in Section III-C. Since the “soft constraint” defined with a finite differs from the “hard constraint,” it is important to discuss the influence of on the hard decoding results. In this appendix, we show both constraints give the same harddecoding result for a sufficiently large but finite .
The posterior probability of conditional to in (6) is rewritten as

Let be the expectation of with respect to the hard-decoding result

and be

Here,

is the prior of defined in (7). Roughly speaking,

as increases,

becomes negligible, and

is proportional to , and the positive number

grows in proportion to .

B. Approximate Stochastic Bound of for Large and
We show by probabilistic arguments that a finite , not increasing in proportion to , is sufficient to guarantee that a component of is equal to that of , when and are large. Let be the set of the typical sequences of

The ultimate goal of the LDPC decoding based on the “hard constraint” is to calculate defined as

If

holds for a finite , both constraints give the same

hard-decoding result.

the cardinality of which is

, where is the proba-

bility of each bit to be flipped through the BSC and

is the

entropy. It is known [5] that, when is large, with probability

almost equal to , the vector satisfying the “hard constraint” ex-

ists uniquely in . Let be the vector and

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IKEDA et al.: INFORMATION GEOMETRY OF TURBO AND LDPC CODES

1113

In the following, we neglect terms of relatively exponentially

small order,

, by stating “except for small order terms.”

We can rewrite (34) as

for :

(35)

Here, the summation is taken only for

by neglecting

exponentially small order terms, and

is used. Now, we

evaluate

. We consider a regular LDPC code, where

of the parity-check matrix is randomly chosen and nonzero

elements per row in are fixed to . Since

Skewness Tensor for :
where is equal to when it is diagonal;
for :

and otherwise. Hence,

it is when the number of

,

, is even, and

when it is odd. Let and

be the probability of

and

, respectively. Then, we can easily write

the probabilities which stay to be finite as

. Since

and are typical sequences, when is small, the probability

that does not include those for which

is given

by

The probability that the number of smaller. Hence, for a sufficiently small

is two is much

for

:

When

,

. For

three cases.

Case 1)

, : In this case, and

independent

(36) , we consider

,

are

Case 2)

,

: Careful calculation of (36) gives

Because of the law of large numbers Now, we rewrite (35) as

Case 3)

,

or

,

: Careful calcula-

tion gives

where that when

is the number of typical sequences. This shows

APPENDIX IV

EXPLICIT FORM OF

FOR

First, we give the form of

as follows:

the probability that a component of is different from that of For

,

:

is negligibly small. When and are small, this reduces to

for

,

:

Since and are of the same order, the right-hand side does

not grow with .

APPENDIX III EXPLICIT FORMS OF AND
Metric Tensor for :

which is the diagonal matrix

;

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1114

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

Hence,

which vanishes when

does not include any other than .

For

,

(or

,

):

Hence,

When

,

, which reduces to

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors wish to thank Chiranjib Bhattacharyya, Yoshiyuki Kabashima, and Motohiko Isaka for helpful discussions. The authors also wish to thank the Editor and the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments.

REFERENCES

[1] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon limit

error-correcting coding and decoding: Turbo-codes,” in Proc. IEEE

Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp.

1064–1070.

[2] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near optimum error correcting coding

and decoding: Turbo-codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp.

1261–1271, Oct. 1996.

[3] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[4]

, Low Density Parity Check Codes, ser. Research Mono-

graph. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.

[5] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[6] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of

Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.

[7] R. J. McEliece, D. J. C. MacKay, and J.-F. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an

instance of Pearl’s belief propagation algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas

Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.

[8] Y. Kabashima and D. Saad, “Belief propagation vs. TAP for decoding

corrupted messages,” Europhys. Lett., vol. 44, no. 5, pp. 668–674, Dec.

1998.

[9]

, “Statistical mechanics of error-correcting codes,” Europhys. Lett.,

vol. 45, no. 1, pp. 97–103, Jan. 1999.

[10]

, “The TAP approach to intensive and extensive connectivity

systems,” in Advanced Mean Field Methods—Theory and Practice, M.

Opper and D. Saad, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001, ch. 6,

pp. 65–84.

[11] J. S. Yedidia, W. T. Freeman, and Y. Weiss, “Bethe Free Energy, Kikuchi

Approximations, and Belief Propagation Algorithms,” Mitsubishi Elec-

tric Research Labs., Tech. Rep. TR2001-16, 2001.

[12] T. J. Richardson, “The geometry of turbo-decoding dynamics,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 9–23, Jan. 2000.

[13] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-

check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.

[14] S. Amari, Differential-Geometrical Methods in Statistics, ser. Lecture

Notes in Statistics. Berlin, Germany: Springer-Verlag, 1985, vol. 28.

[15] S. Amari and H. Nagaoka, Methods of Information Geom-

etry. Providence, RI: AMS and Oxford Univ. Press, 2000.

[16] A. Amraoui, S. Dusad, and R. Urbanke, “Achieving general points in the

2-user Gaussian MAC without time-sharing or rate-splitting by means

of iterative coding,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory,

Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002, p. 334.

[17] A. de Baynast and D. Declercq, “Gallager codes for multiple user appli-

cations,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne,

Switzerland, June/July 2002, p. 335.

[18] R. Müller, G. Caire, and T. Tanaka, “Density evolution and power pro-

file optimization for iterative multiuser decoders based on individually

optimum multiuser detectors,” in Proc. 40th Allerton Conf. Communi-

cation, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2002.

[19] G. Caire, R. Müller, and T. Tanaka, “Iterative multiuser joint decoding:

Optimal power allocation and low-complexity implementation,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.

[20] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and B. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary

block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42,

pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.

[21] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear

codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.

[22] S. Amari, “Information geometry on hierarchy of probability distribu-

tions,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 1701–1711, July 2001.

[23] T. Tanaka, “Information geometry of mean-field approximation,” Neural

Comput., vol. 12, no. 8, pp. 1951–1968, Aug. 2000.

[24]

, “Information geometry of mean-field approximation,” in Ad-

vanced Mean Field Methods—Theory and Practice, M. Opper and D.

Saad, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001, ch. 17, pp. 259–273.

[25] S. Amari, S. Ikeda, and H. Shimokawa, “Information geometry and
mean field approximation: The  -projection approach,” in Advanced

Mean Field Methods—Theory and Practice, M. Opper and D. Saad,

Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001, ch. 16, pp. 241–257.

[26] H. J. Kappen and W. J. Wiegerinck, “Mean field theory for graphical

models,” in Advanced Mean Field Methods—Theory and Practice, M.

Opper and D. Saad, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001, ch. 4, pp.

37–49.

[27] S. Ikeda, T. Tanaka, and S. Amari, “Information geometrical framework

for analyzing belief propagation decoder,” in Advances in Neural In-

formation Processing Systems 14, T. G. Dietterich, S. Becker, and Z.

Ghahramani, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002, pp. 407–414.

[28]

, “Information geometry of turbo codes,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Int.

Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June/Julu 2002, p.

114.

[29] T. Tanaka, S. Ikeda, and S. Amari, “Information-geometrical signifi-

cance of sparsity in Gallager codes,” in Advances in Neural Information

Processing Systems 14, T. G. Dietterich, S. Becker, and Z. Ghahramani,

Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002, pp. 527–534.

[30] T. Murayama, Y. Kabashima, D. Saad, and R. Vicente, “Statistical

physics of regular low-density parity-check error-correcting codes,”

Phys. Rev. E, vol. 62, no. 2, pp. 1577–1591, Aug. 2000.

[31] D. Agrawal and A. Vardy, “The turbo decoding algorithm and its phase

trajectories,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 699–722, Feb.

2001.

[32] M. Wainwright, T. Jaakkola, and A. Willsky, “Tree-based reparame-

terization for approximate inference on loopy graphs,” in Advances in

Neural Information Processing Systems 14, T. G. Dietterich, S. Becker,

and Z. Ghahramani, Eds. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2002, pp.

1001–1008.

[33] A. L. Yuille, “CCCP algorithms to minimize the Bethe and Kikuchi

free energies: Convergent alternatives to belief propagation,” Neural

Comput., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 1691–1722, July 2002.

[34] S. Ikeda, T. Tanaka, and S. Amari, “Stochastic reasoning, free energy

and information geometry,” Neural Comput., to be published.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:16 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

