2378

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2004

Explicit Construction of Families of LDPC Codes With No 4-Cycles
Jon-Lark Kim, Member, IEEE, Uri N. Peled, Irina Perepelitsa, Vera Pless, Senior Member, IEEE, and Shmuel Friedland

Abstract—Low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes are serious

contenders to turbo codes in terms of decoding performance. One

of the main problems is to give an explicit construction of such

codes whose Tanner graphs have known girth. For a prime power

and

2, Lazebnik and Ustimenko construct a -regular bi-

partite graph ( ) on 2 vertices, which has girth at least

2 2 + 4. We regard these graphs as Tanner graphs of binary

codes LU( ). We can determine the dimension and minimum

weight of LU(2 ), and show that the weight of its minimum stop-

ping set is at least + 2 for odd and exactly + 2 for even. We

know that (2 ) has girth 6 and diameter 4, whereas (3 )

has girth 8 and diameter 6. We prove that for an odd prime ,

LU(3 ) is a [ 3 ] code with

( 3 2 2 + 3 2) 2.

We show that the minimum weight and the weight of the minimum

stopping set of LU(3 ) are at least 2 and they are exactly 2 for

many LU(3 ) codes. We find some interesting LDPC codes by

our partial row construction. We also give simulation results for

some of our codes.

Index Terms—Large girth, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, Tanner graph.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were originally introduced by Gallager [1]. They have again become interesting because of the success of iterative decoding for turbo codes. LDPC codes are competitors of these codes in performance of iterative decoding algorithms, as their performance approaches the Shannon limit [2]. Tanner’s graphical representation of LDPC codes [3] influenced much of the current literature. Most of these codes are constructed randomly, but explicit constructions are needed for implementation purposes as well as for knowing the properties of these codes. We give such constructions based on constructions of graphs with good girth, since belief propagation decoding algorithms generally work better if the girth is larger than . A graph with a small diameter allows belief propagation to work faster.

Manuscript received June 13, 2003; revised May 5, 2004. This work was supported in part by the Caesarea Edmond Benjamin de Rothchild Foundation Institute of Interdisciplinary Application of Computer Science at the University of Haifa to U. N. Peled. The material in this paper was presented in part at the 40th Allerton Conference on Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, October 2002.
J.-L. Kim is with the Department of Mathematics, University of Nebraska–Lincoln, Lincoln, NE 68588-0130, USA (e-mail: jlkim@math.unl.edu).
U. N. Peled, I. Perepelitsa, V. Pless, and S. Friedland are with the Department of Mathematics, Statistics, and Computer Science, University of Illinois–Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607-7045, USA (e-mail: uripeled@uic.edu, irina@math.uic.edu; pless@math.uic.edu; friedlan@uic.edu).
Communicated by S. Litsyn, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.834760

Let

be an integer and a power of a prime. In [4],

Lazebnik and Ustimenko construct a family

of -reg-

ular bipartite graphs on vertices, with vertices called

points and vertices called lines. Points and lines are elements

of GF and equations are given in [4], which determine in-

cidence of points and lines. If a point is incident to a line, an

edge joins them in

. It is shown [4] that when is odd,

has girth at least

. It also follows from general

graph homomorphism results of [5] that the girth of

is

not less than the girth of

, so for even, the girth of

is at least

. Thus, for all , the girth of

is at least

. We let

be the incidence ma-

trix of lines and points of

, where rows are indexed by

lines and columns are indexed by points, and consider

and its transpose

to be parity-check matrices of bi-

nary codes of length called LU

codes. In other words,

we take

to be the Tanner graph [3] of the LDPC code

LU

and investigate the properties of these codes. As the

rows as well as the columns of

are linearly dependent,

the dimensions of these codes need to be determined.

It is shown in [4] that any two rows (columns) of

have a in at most one common column (row). This implies

that the girth of the graph is at least . We show that

has

girth and diameter . We derive the parameters of all LU .

When is even we obtain Euclidean geometry codes.

We have computed the dimension of LU codes through

. We prove that

has girth (already shown in [6]).

This implies that the minimum weight of LU is at least

[3]. We show that when LU is derived from

,

the minimum weight is exactly . For

, the diameter of

is [6]. We conjecture the dimension of LU to be

when is an odd prime power and prove

that it is at least

when is an odd prime.

When is odd we apparently have a family of codes whose rates

approach .

We examined some LU

codes for

and

and we give our observations. We give a lower bound on

the minimum weight of LU

in terms of and using

Tanner’s bound [3].

A stopping set in an LDPC code is the support of a binary

vector having the length of the code that does not have exactly

one in common with any row of the parity-check matrix. A

minimum stopping set is a nonzero stopping set with minimum

weight. In the following, we identify the support of a binary

vector with the vector. Note that any codeword is a stopping

set, and therefore the minimum weight of a code is at least the

0018-9448/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: EXPLICIT CONSTRUCTION OF FAMILIES OF LDPC CODES WITH NO -CYCLES

2379

weight of the minimum stopping set. The weight of the min-

imum stopping set is an important measure of the performance

of a code with iterative decoding over the binary erasure channel

[7]. We show that for LU the weight of the minimum stop-

ping set is at least . It follows from [3] that the weight of

the minimum stopping set of LU is at least . We show

that equality is achieved for LU obtained from

.

We use a new technique, the partial row construction, to ob-

tain codes with larger rate than LU

codes but not smaller

girth. We give lists of interesting codes found in this way.

The parity-check matrices of LU codes are block matrices

where blocks are powers of permutation matrices and are related

to array codes [8]. A high-girth code can be obtained from an

array code by a proper choice of the powers as suggested in [8]

or from a lattice code by a selection of slopes [9]. Milenkovic et

al. [10] gave an explicit construction of high-girth LDPC codes

with the structure similar to LU codes using cycle-invariant dif-

ference sets.

A preliminary version of this paper appeared in [11]. We

withdraw Proposition 1 of that paper as it is incorrect.

II. LU

CODES

Definition 1 ([4]): In

a point is on a line

if and only if

, where

are in GF .

We label the rows and columns of

with the pairs

and

ordered lexicographically under a fixed ordering of

GF . If is a prime, this is the usual ordering; if is a prime

power, we order the elements of GF in some way, say as

powers of a primitive element, with the element first. It can

be seen that

consists of

permutation matrices,

where each permutation matrix corresponds to a fixed and a

fixed . If is a prime, these permutation matrices are circulants.

So the first rows of

consist of permutation matrices,

similarly for the next rows, etc.

We call a row block the set of all rows with fixed , and a

column block the set of all columns with fixed .

We also note that the code whose parity-check matrix is is the same as the one with parity-check matrix
.

Theorem 1: For

, all

have girth . Also, all

have diameter .

Proof: By Proposition 1, the girth of

is at least .

We show that we can find a cycle of length . The first row of

has a common with the first row in the second row

block in a column . There is another column with a in

. Column has a in a unique row of the third row block.

Row must have a common with row , but not in (or else

and would have two common ’s) and not in (or else

and would have two common ’s). So there is a third column

having common ’s with and . Then

is a cycle of length in

.

Two rows in different row blocks have distance from each

other. Similarly for columns. A row and a column have distance

or , and two rows or columns in the same row or column

block have distance . Hence, the diameter of

is .

Theorem 2: If is odd, the two LU codes derived from

and

are the same

code, whose

group has order

.

Proof: We construct a canonical spanning set of

LU

. If we add all the rows in any row block of

,

we obtain the all-one vector. If we add up all the rows in

that have in a fixed column, we will be adding one row from

each row block. If, for example, the column is the first column,

the resulting sum will be

This is so since no two rows in a row block have a in common

by Proposition 2 and since is odd. Hence, LU

contains

all the rows of the following matrix:

Proposition 1 ([4]): Any two rows (columns) of have at most one in common, i.e., in the same column (row).

... ... ... ... ...

Proposition 2: No two rows in a row block have a in

common. Any two rows from different row blocks have exactly one in common. Similarly for columns.
Proof: This follows from Definition 1.
Example.

where

with the

identity matrix and the

all-one matrix, and where is the all-one row vector of

length .

As has rank

, generates a code of dimension

(the all-one vector of odd weight is not equal to

any sum of previous rows, as all such sums have even weight).

It is not hard to see that the rows of span LU

, as we

can express any row of

as a sum of these rows. Hence,

for odd, LU

.

From the generating set of LU

, we see that the group

of this code consists of

operating independently on each

column block of elements, and another

permuting the

column blocks. Hence, for odd, the group of LU has

order

.

where run over the index set

We can also determine the minimum weight of LU by looking at . The dual of each is the all-one vector of length

. But as the all-one vector of length is in LU

, every

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2380

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2004

vector in LU has even weight. So the minimum weight of spanned by the rows of

. Therefore, by the “further-

LU is . LU can be regarded as all even-weight row more” part, the weight of is at least

. Hence, LU

vectors made out of all- and all- blocks of length . As we is a

code.

also get as above for fact the same.

, the two LU

codes are in Theorem 4: The weight of the minimum stopping set of LU is at least .

When is even, we get interesting results.

Proof: We denote by and the th row and the th

Lemma 1:

is the incidence matrix of points

and lines consisting of parallel classes from the affine plane

AG

. Further, the code generated by

contains

all the lines of this affine plane. The same results hold for

.

Proof: Each row of

has weight , the weight of

a line in an affine geometry from a projective plane PG

of order . We regard these rows as lines of the geometry. By

Proposition 2, each row block is a parallel class of lines. There

are such blocks in

. The affine plane has

parallel classes of lines. This last parallel class consists of the

row vectors each of which is the all-one vector in a fixed column

block and zero outside the block. We show in what follows that

these vectors are in . If we add up all the rows of

that

have a in their first position, we get

column of

, respectively. Let be a minimum stopping

set of LU . Pick some component of that is equal to ,

say

. The column has ’s, say in rows

.

Since

have a common with in , each of them

has at least one other common with , and no two of them

can have the other common with in the same column by

Proposition 1. Therefore, we may assume that has a common

with in for

. For each

,

has a common with in , and, therefore, by Proposi-

tion 2 the belong to different column blocks from the column

block containing . There are only column blocks, and there-

fore two of

are in the same column block. By the

above, both of them are distinct from , so we may assume

that and are in the same column block. By Proposition

2, does not have a common with . Column must

have ’s in

, otherwise, it would have two common

’s with . Since it has weight , we may assume that it has

’s in

. Each of the

rows

has a common with in , and therefore must have an-

by Proposition 2 and since is even. Adding the all-one vector, other common with it, but not in (since already has its

which is the sum of the rows in any row block, we get

’s in

), and not in (since and do not have

common ’s). Furthermore, no two of these rows can have

a common with in the same column (since both of them al-

ready have a common with it in ). Therefore, at most

of them can have a common with in

, and one

which is a line in the missing parallel class. We can get the rest of them must have a common with outside

, say

of the lines similarly. The fact that this affine plane comes from in . Thus,

components of are .

PG

follows from the equations in Definition 1. The same It follows from Theorems 3 and 4 that for even, the weight

proof works for

.

of the minimum stopping set of LU is .

Theorem 3: LU

are

codes.

Proof: We only consider

. It is known [12] that

the incidence matrix of an affine plane of order generates

a

binary code . By Lemma 1, LU

is the code

. We generate an incidence matrix of a projective geometry

PG

by starting from

and adding

new

columns representing the points at . All lines in the same par-

allel class will have the same point at and any two lines in

different parallel classes will have different points at . We fur-

ther add a new row representing the line at whose points are

the points at . We also add rows representing the missing

In [14], families of LDPC codes with girth were constructed

from finite geometries. One of these families of Euclidean ge-

ometry codes has parameters

. We

extended two of these codes for

and

and (using

Magma [15]) found that they are equivalent to LU and

LU . This will be so in general since both families of codes

are constructed from PG

. However, the two families

could have different belief-propagation decoding performance

as the parity-check matrices used are different. In fact, the

parity-check matrices in [14] are cyclic, whereas ours are not.

We note that when is prime, LU codes are array codes.

parallel class of lines as described in Lemma 1, each containing

a different point at . It is known [13, Theorem 8.6.6] that the

ovals of PG

are precisely the supports of the codewords

III. LU

CODES

of weight

in PG

, the dual code of the code Definition 2 ([4]): In

, a point

is incident

generated by PG

; and furthermore, the minimum weight with a line

if and only if

and

,

of PG

is at least

. As there exist ovals dis- where

are in GF .

joint from the line at , the minimum weight of LU

is We investigated the parameters of the LU codes for

at most

. For the reverse inequality, take any codeword up to

by Magma. By [4], all the Tanner graphs of the

in LU

and extend it with

zeroes. We get a LU codes have girth at least

. We give a simple

vector orthogonal to the incidence matrix of PG

, because proof that the girth is exactly . By [6],

has diameter

as shown in Lemma 1, the rows in the missing parallel class are for .

is disconnected; it is a union of two -cycles.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: EXPLICIT CONSTRUCTION OF FAMILIES OF LDPC CODES WITH NO -CYCLES

2381

TABLE I PARAMETERS OF LU(3; q) CODES FOR q = 3; 4; 5

So LU is the direct sum of two which is an LU code.

codes, each of

Theorem 5 ([6]):

has girth . Its diameter is if

.

Proof: Since by [4] we know that the girth of

is at

least , finding one -cycle shows that the girth is . It is not hard

to check that

is an -cycle in

.

has

diameter for

[6, Theorem 3.9].

Theorem 6: For an odd prime, LU is a

code

with

.

Proof: See Appendix .

Conjecture : For odd , LU is a code.

We verified this for all of the LU codes for all odd from

until . If this is true, then the rates of these codes approach

as the odd gets large. We noticed that for

and ,

the two LU codes we obtain from

and its transpose

have different minimum weights. We checked by Magma that

for

the two codes are equivalent. See Table I. For

,

we were unable to determine the minimum weight of LU

derived from .

Theorem 7: The minimum weight and the weight of the minimum stopping set of LU are at least .
Proof: The bound on the minimum weight follows from [3, Theorem 2] since we know that the girth of LU is . However, Tanner’s proof in [3] also holds for the minimum stopping set.

Theorem 8: The minimum weight of LU obtained from is . Consequently, the weight of the minimum stopping set of LU obtained from is also .
Proof: By Theorem 7, the minimum weight of LU is at least . Therefore, finding a codeword of weight in LU obtained from will complete the proof of the theorem.
Let be a primitive element of GF . Consider a word containing the following points:

1)

, which lies only on lines of the form

;

2)

,

of the form

, which lies only on lines ;

3)

, which lies only on lines of the form

;

4)

,

of the form

, which lies only on lines .

These points are distinct, so has weight . We show that is a codeword.

Lines of the form 1) and 2) never coincide. Lines of the form

3) and 4) never coincide. A line of the form 1) coincides with a

line of the form 3) if and only if

; it coincides with a line

of the form 4) if and only if

. A line of the form 2) co-

incides with a line of the form 3) if and only if

; it co-

incides with a line of the form 4) if and only if

.

Now let be a line of the form 1). If

, then is also of

the form 3), but not of the forms 2) or 4). So contains only

two points of , namely,

and

. If

,

then coincides with a unique line of the form 4) given by the

unique such that

, but not with any line of the form 2)

or 3). So contains only two points of , namely

and

. Let be a line of the form 2). Then does

not coincide with any line of the form 1). If

, then co-

incides with a unique line of the form 3) given by the unique

such that

; in that case, cannot coincide with a line

of the form 4), since lines of the forms 3) and 4) never coincide.

So contains only two points of , namely,

and

. If

, then cannot coincide with a line of

the form 3), but it does coincide with a unique line of the form

4) given by

, so again contains only two points of .

Let be a line of the form 3). If

, then coincides with a

unique line of type 1) and no line of type 2) or 4). If

, then

coincides with a unique line of type 2) and no line of type 1)

or 4). In any case, contains only two points of . Let be

a line of type 4). If

, then coincides with a unique line

of type 1) and no line of type 2) or 3). If

, then coin-

cides with a unique line of type 2) and no line of type 1) or 3). In

any case, contains only two points of . We have shown that

each line containing a point of contains precisely two points

of . Therefore, is a codeword.

From the preceding examples for that for odd , LU derived from larger than .

and

, it seems

has minimum weight

IV. THE PARTIAL ROW CONSTRUCTION

In investigating the LU codes, we found many that have

low rates. We decided to consider those codes whose parity-

check matrices consist of the first rows of

, where

(we order the rows and columns lexicographically as

in Section II). We call this the partial row construction. If we

consider a code whose parity-check matrix consists of the

first rows of

, then the rate of may stay the same

or be higher than that of LU , the girth of its Tanner graph

may stay the same or go up, but the minimum weight might go

down. We found a number of interesting LDPC codes by the

partial row construction for

, which we list in Table II.

When

and the number of rows is 64, this code is

LU . Note that the

,

, and

codes

are optimal (i.e., have the highest minimum weight for their

length and dimension), whereas the

and

codes are just short of being optimal [16]. The other two

codes have minimum weight less than the optimal codes. The

parity-check matrix for the

code consists of the first six

rows of

given in the example in Section II.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2382

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2004

TABLE II LDPC CODES OBTAINED BY THE PARTIAL ROW CONSTRUCTION
FROM LU(2; q) CODES
TABLE III CODES FROM LU(3; q) CODES BY THE PARTIAL ROW CONSTRUCTION
USING H (3; q) OR H (3; q)

one onto the other, then for every two connected components

there is an automorphism mapping one onto the other.

We can reorder the rows and the columns of

by

putting the rows and the columns of the first connected com-

ponent first, the rows and the columns of the second connected

component second, etc. From this we can see that LU

is a

direct sum of codes. Codes corresponding to distinct connected

components are equivalent, since the connected components are

isomorphic.

We found directly that LU , a

code, is a direct

sum of four

codes of girth and diameter ; and that

LU , a

code, is a direct sum of four

codes of girth and diameter .

Since we have a lower bound of

on the girth, a

lower bound on the minimum weight can be obtained.

Theorem 10: The minimum weight of LU

satisfies

if

,

if

,

We also improve the rate while maintaining the minimum weight, girth, and diameter for LU codes by the partial row construction. We list them below as follows:
original new
We obtain interesting LDPC codes from LU codes by the partial row construction. They are listed in Table III. Many have larger girths than the LU code. We list only those where we were able to find the minimum weight.
V. THE CASES

otherwise.

When

, the fraction

is understood to

be

, and

to be

. The same

bound holds for the weight of the minimum stopping set.

Proof: This bound on the minimum weight follows di-

rectly from [3, proof of Theorem 2], using the fact that the

column sums of

are . However, Tanner’s proof in [3]

also holds for the minimum stopping set.

In particular, , and

for for
.

; ; and

for

;

for

The equations for

for

are consider-

ably more complicated than for

. They can be found in

[4].

is disconnected for

and . In [4], the

authors state that they and A. J. Woldar proved that for

,

all

are disconnected. In fact, in [6, p. 79] it is shown

that for

and for

,

has connected

components, where

, and for

has

connected components. So even though the graphs

have large girth (at least

), the large length of the

code and the disconnectedness makes them more difficult to use

as Tanner graphs of LDPC codes. We do know the following.

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS

Some of our codes were simulated with help of Dr. Marc Fos-

sorier and Chris Hruby. We give some explanation about our

simulation results appearing in Figs. 1 through 5. For

, we considered a

code, denoted

, which

was constructed by the partial row construction (see Table II).

For

, we tested four codes LU , denoted

where

and , all of which come from the trans-

pose of

. For our codes

and

, we consid-

ered the sum product/belief propagation (BP) algorithm, which

produces the best error performance under pure iterative de-

coding, a version of belief propagation based on ordered statis-

Theorem 9: When

is disconnected, it is a union of tics (BP-OSD1) described in [17], and maximum-likelihood de-

isomorphic connected subgraphs. In this case, LU

is a di- coding (MLD). We considered both word-error rate (WER) and

rect sum of equivalent codes each of which has its parity-check bit-error rate (BER) with a maximum of 500 iterations for BP

matrix from the incidence matrix of a connected component and a maximum of 50 iterations for OSD1. The simulations were

subgraph.

done over the additive white Gaussian noise ( AWGN) channel.

Proof: When

is disconnected, it is a union of iso- We compared

with random codes defined below using

morphic connected subgraphs since the group of

is BP with a maximum of 500 iterations. Our random codes are

edge-transitive [4]. This is so because if an automorphism of a denoted by

and where the attached number

graph maps an edge into an edge , then it maps the connected means that the corresponding parity-check matrix has the con-

component of onto the connected component of . So, if for stant column weight

and respectively. Each random

every two edges of

there is an automorphism mapping code has the same length as our compared code and has either

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: EXPLICIT CONSTRUCTION OF FAMILIES OF LDPC CODES WITH NO -CYCLES

2383

2 Fig. 1. A [64; 37; 10] code LU 28c from LU(2; 8) by partial row construction, maximum of 500 (50) iterations for BP (MLD), R3 (R4) is a [64; 37] ([64; 38])
code both with 64 27 HMatrix, HMatrix of R3 (R4) has three (13) rows of wt 8 (10) and 24 (14) rows of wt 7 (9), respectively.
2 Fig. 2. LU(3; 7) code from H(3; 7) , maximum of 500 (50) iterations for BP (OSD1), R3 (R4) is a [343; 132] ([343; 133]) code both with 343 211 HMatrix,
HMatrix of R3 (R4) has 185 (106) rows of wt 5(7), and 26 (105) rows of wt 4(6), respectively. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2384

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2004

2 Fig. 3. LU(3; 8) code from H(3; 8) , maximum of 500 (50) iterations for BP (OSD1), R3 (R4) is a [512; 230] ([512; 231]) code both with 512 282 HMatrix,
HMatrix of R3 (R4) has 126 (74) rows of wt 6 (8) and 156 (208) rows of wt 5 (7), respectively.
2 Fig. 4. LU(3; 9) code from H(3; 9) , maximum of 500 (50) iterations for BP (OSD1), R3 and R5 (R4) are [729; 296] ([729; 297]) codes all with 729 433
HMatrix, HMatrix of R3 (R4, R5) has 22 (318, 181) rows of wt 6(7; 9) and 411 (115, 252) rows of wt 5 (6; 8), respectively. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: EXPLICIT CONSTRUCTION OF FAMILIES OF LDPC CODES WITH NO -CYCLES

2385

2 Fig. 5. LU(3; 11) code from H(3; 11) , maximum of 500 (50) iterations for BP (OSD1), R3 and R5 (R4 and R6) are [1331; 560] ([1331; 561]) codes all with
1331 771 HMatrix, HMatrix of R3 (R4, R5, R6) has 138\; (698, 487, 276) rows of wt 6 (7; 9; 11) and 633 (73, 284, 495) rows of wt 5 (6; 8; 10), respectively.

the same dimension as our compared code or one more. Random

codes were not eliminated based on their girth.

It is seen that the codes

,

, and

perform

better than random codes with respect to both WER and BER,

whereas (in Fig. 4) performs better than

and (in

Fig. 5) performs better than

with respect to both WER

and BER, even though (in Fig. 5) performs much better than

for 1 dB less than with respect to WER.

We remark that since our

are by matrices,

whereas the random codes are by (

), the BP algo-

rithm has to do more calculations for the LU codes than for

the random codes due to more rows in the

matrix. Al-

though some random codes perform better than LU codes, LU

codes being constructive have implementation advantages.

over . Then

where

(1)

Proof: Consider the

Vandermonde

matrix with variables

, and substitute

.

The determinant of the resulting matrix is given by the right-

hand side of (1). If we subtract the first row from all other rows

and then expand the determinant by the first column, we see that

it is also equal to the left-hand side of (1).

Lemma 3: If is an indeterminate, then (2)

Proof: This is a special case of Lemma 2, where

for all

.

Lemma 4: Let

be a primitive th root of unity, and

APPENDIX PROOF OF THEOREM 6

consider the matrix

is

.

Proof: This is trivial for

. Then the rank of , where and

We begin by a series of lemmas determining the ranks of cer-

tain matrices. Then we proceed to obtain an upper bound on

the rank of

when is an odd prime, using the previous

results.

Lemma 2: Let

the

matrix

be indeterminates, and consider

, so we assume

. Our first case is

. Then

are all distinct, and so Lemma 3 shows that the rank

of

is . Our second case is

. Then row of

vanishes for each

that is divisible by .

If

is not divisible by , we write

with

, and then row of

is equal to row . It fol-

lows that the row-space of

is spanned by the first

rows, which are linearly independent by the first case. Hence,

the rank of

is .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2386

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2004

For a positive integer , we denote by an identity matrix

of order whose rows are cyclically shifted positions to the

right, i.e.,

if

, otherwise. For

example, with

, we have

Note that

for all integers (not necessarily positive, so,

for example, above is equal to ). For positive integers

and , we denote by the block matrix with block rows and

block columns, where the block is

of order .

For example, with

, we have

We now consider as a binary matrix, so that its

can be written as

.

block

Lemma 6: If is an odd positive integer, then the binary rank

of defined above is again given by (3).

Proof: Consider the polynomial

over GF .

Since is odd, we have

, so and are

relatively prime in GF , and so the roots of are simple.

Let be a finite extension field of GF such that splits

over :

. Thus,

are th

roots of unity in . They are distinct since has simple roots,

so they comprise all the th roots of unity in . We can then

repeat the entire argument from Lemma 2 through Lemma 5 in

instead of in , and we obtain that the rank of over is

given by (3). However, the rank over is the same as the binary

rank, since the entries of are in GF , and the rank is the

largest order of a nonzero minor.

Lemma 7: If is an odd prime and

binary rank of defined above is

.

Proof: This is a special case of Lemma 6.

, then the

where the subscripts in the can be reduced

if desired.

Recall that the Euler function is defined by

Lemma 5: With defined above, the rank of over is (3)

Proof: If is a th root of unity, then

is an eigenvector of with eigenvalue . Therefore, if

is the Vandermonde matrix corresponding to all the

th roots of unity

, then

where

(4)

Let be the

block-diagonal matrix

.

The matrix

has the same rank as . By (4), the

block of

is the diagonal matrix

. By permuting the rows of

so that

rows

come first, then rows

, and so on, and likewise for columns, we see

that

is permutationally similar to the block-diagonal

matrix

We now shift our attention to

. Its rows are indexed

by triples

with

GF , and we let

denote the row indexed by

. Similarly, the columns are

indexed by triples

with

GF , and we let

denote the corresponding column. As before, we call

a row block the set of all rows

with the same , and

we also call a row subblock a set of all rows

with the

same . Similarly, for column blocks and column subblocks.

Recall from Definition 2 that

meets

(i.e.,

has a in this row and column) if and only if

and

. It follows that the

intersection of

a row subblock and a column subblock is either zero or a per-

mutation matrix. In the latter case, we say that the row subblock

and the column subblock meet. Moreover, each row subblock

meets exactly one column subblock of each column block.

Lemma 8: For each

and each

, one has

(6)

Proof: We need to show that each column

meets

an even number of rows involved in the left-hand side of (6).

Column

meets

if and only if

and

. These two equations

can be satisfied by at most one value of , and such exists if

and only if

(5) Similarly,

meets

if and only

if

and

. Again, these two

(

blocks, block rows, and block columns). Thus, the equations can be satisfied by at most one value of , and such

rank of is the sum of the ranks of the diagonal blocks in (5). exists if and only if

To find the rank of the th diagonal block, let be a primitive

th root of unity, so that . By Lemma 4, the rank of the th

diagonal block is

. Since there are exactly

Since the conditions of existence of and of are equivalent,

primitive th roots of unity, the sum of the ranks of the diagonal

meets exactly zero or exactly two rows involved in the

blocks is given by (3).

left-hand side of (6).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

KIM et al.: EXPLICIT CONSTRUCTION OF FAMILIES OF LDPC CODES WITH NO -CYCLES

2387

From now on we assume that is an odd prime. Then any nonzero intersection of a row subblock and a column subblock has the form of a circulant of order .

Definition 3: A vector of the form

, i.e., the

sum of the rows in a given row subblock, is said to be of Type

I. A vector of the form

with

and

is said to be of Type II.

Lemma 9: The span of all vectors of Type I has dimension

.

Proof: Since is odd, and since each row subblock meets

exactly one column subblock of each column block, a vector of

Type I is the all-one vector in exactly one column subblock of

each column block, and is zero in all other column subblocks.

Therefore, the rank of the matrix whose rows are all the

vectors of Type I is the same as the rank of the matrix of order

obtained from by suppressing all but one column in each

column subblock. But by Definitions 1 and 2, the latter matrix

is precisely

, whose rank is

by Theorem 2.

form

with

, and the vectors of Type I

of the form

with

. We denote by the span

of the latter rows.

The basis of the induction for

follows directly from

Lemma 8. We assume now that , and apply Lemma 8 with

. Since the first summation in (6) is in , so is the

second:

for

(7)

In (7), let for

take two values in turn:

and

with

, then add the two resulting equations to obtain:

(8)

When takes the value in both summations of (8), the two terms cancel out. Furthermore, the terms involving such that
are in , and so: for
(9)

Let be the set of vectors consisting of all vectors of Type II and a basis of the span of the vectors of Type I.

Lemma 10: consists of

vectors.

Proof: There are

vectors of Type II, and

by Lemma 9 there are

vectors in the basis of the span

of the vectors of Type I, totaling

vectors.

Lemma 11: spans the row-space of

.

Proof: Consider a row subblock

satisfying

. Since all its rows

with

are of Type II, and

since

is of Type I and thus in span , it follows

that all the rows of this subblock are in span . Therefore, it

is enough to prove that all rows

with

are

spanned by the rows

with

and the vectors

of Type I. We do this by induction on . In fact, we prove that

for each , all the rows

with

are spanned by

the rows of the form

with

, the rows of the

Now given and

, choose

. Then

(9) represents linear equations (one equation for each value of

) in the

unknown rows

with

. If we let take each value in

, we

obtain a total of

equations in our

unknown

rows. It is not hard to check that the coefficient matrix of these

equations is the matrix appearing in Lemma 6.

For example, suppose

and

. For

and

, (9) reads

for

and

(9) reads

and so on. The coefficient matrix of all these equations is

displayed at the bottom of the page, where each column labeled

by

(where

) represents one

of the

unknowns

, and each row labeled

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2388

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 10, OCTOBER 2004

by

(where

) represents one of

the

equations. It is seen that in this example

confirming the general form of the matrix By Lemma 6, the rank of is
unknown rows also satisfy the additional
for

in Lemma 6. in general. Our
linear equations
(10)

expressing the fact that the sum on the left is a vector of Type I. The coefficient matrix of the (10) has rows, each having the all-one vector in one block column and zero in all other block columns. In our above example, where ,

Clearly, the rows of are linearly independent, and further-

more, they are not spanned by the rows of , since the rows of

have odd weights and the rows of have even weights. So

the combined coefficient matrix of the linear equations (9) and

(10) in our

unknown rows has rank

Therefore, (9) and (10) express all the unknown rows of the form

with

as members of .

The remaining unknown rows for the given have the form

. To deal with them, we make another choice of in

(9), namely,

. When was and we let run over

its allowed values in (9),

ran over

in order;

now that

, we see that

runs over

in order. In our example, where

,

, the matrix of

coefficients of the resulting equations is given by

and, in general, has the same shape of , but its block

is

. It follows that is obtained from by

reversing the order of the block columns, as well as the order of

the columns in each block column and the order of the rows in

each block row. Therefore, and have the same rank, and

the previous argument shows that all the unknown rows of the

form

with

are also members

of .

Proof of Theorem 6: The proof follows from Lemmas 10

and 11 and the fact that

has rows.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
We wish to thank Keith Mellinger for calling our attention
to [6] and a referee for pointing out that some LU codes are
array codes. We also thank Marc Fossorier at the University of
Hawaii at Manoa and Chris Hruby at the University of Nebraska
at Lincoln for simulating some of our codes (see Section VI) and
answering our questions.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low density parity check codes,” IRE Trans. Infom. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, 1996.
[3] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT–27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[4] F. Lazebnik and V. A. Ustimenko, “Explicit construction of graphs with arbitrary large girth and of large size,” Discr. Appl. Math., vol. 60, pp. 275–284, 1997.
[5] F. Lazebnik and A. J. Woldar, “General properties of some families of graphs defined by systems of equations,” J. Graph Theory, vol. 38, pp. 65–86, 2001.
[6] R. Viglione, “Properties of some algebraically defined graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Delaware, Newark, 2002.
[7] C. Di, D. Proietti, I˙. E. Telatar, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Finite-length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Infom. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, June 2002.
[8] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, 2000, pp. 543–546.
[9] B. Vasic, “A class of codes with orthogonal parity checks and its application in partial response channels with iterative decoding,” in Proc. 40th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2–4, 2002.
[10] O. Milenkovic, K. Prakash, and B. Vasic, “Regular and irregular low density parity check codes for iterative decoding based on cycle-invariant difference sets,” in Proc. 41st Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 1–3, 2003.
[11] J.-L. Kim, U. N. Peled, I. Perepelitsa, and V. Pless, “Explicit construction of families of LDPC codes of girth at least six,” in Proc. 40th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, P. G. Voulgaris and R. Srikant, Eds., Monticello, IL, Oct. 2–4, 2002, pp. 1024–1031.
[12] E. F. Assmus Jr. and J. D. Key, Designs and Their Codes. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1992.
[13] W. C. Huffman and V. Pless, Fundamentals of Error-Correcting Codes. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 2003.
[14] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[15] J. Cannon and C. Playoust, An Introduction to Magma. Sydney, Australia: Univ. Sydney Press, 1994.
[16] A. E. Brouwer, “Bounds on the size of linear codes,” in Handbook of Coding Theory, V. S. Pless and W. C. Huffman, Eds. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1998, pp. 295–452.
[17] M. P. C. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 41, pp. 1379–1396, Sept. 1995.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:30:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

