1242

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

Selective Avoidance of Cycles in Irregular LDPC Code Construction
Tao Tian, Christopher R. Jones, John D. Villasenor, and Richard D. Wesel, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—This letter explains the effect of graph connectivity on error-floor performance of low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes under message-passing decoding. A new metric, called extrinsic message degree (EMD), measures cycle connectivity in bipartite graphs of LDPC codes. Using an easily computed estimate of EMD, we propose a Viterbi-like algorithm that selectively avoids small cycle clusters that are isolated from the rest of the graph. This algorithm is different from conventional girth conditioning by emphasizing the connectivity as well as the length of cycles. The algorithm yields codes with error floors that are orders of magnitude below those of random codes with very small degradation in capacity-approaching capability.
Index Terms—Error floor, extrinsic message degree (EMD), graph cycles, irregular low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, iterative decoding, message passing, stopping sets, unstructured graph construction.

Fig. 1. Matrix and graph description of a (9,3) code. A stopping set fv ; v ; v g and its cycles are illustrated.

I. INTRODUCTION
R EGULAR low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes were proposed by Gallager in the early 1960s [1]. Luby et al. [2] formally showed that properly constructed irregular LDPC codes can approach capacity more closely than regular ones. Richardson et al. developed density evolution theory to analyze and synthesize optimal degree distributions in asymptotically large random bipartite graphs under a wide range of channel realizations.
Density evolution determines the performance threshold for infinitely long codes whose associated bipartite graphs are assumed to be tree-like. However, bipartite graphs of finite-length codes without singly connected nodes inevitably have cycles and are thus not tree-like. If cycles exist, neighbors of a node are not independent, in general, therefore, Pearl’s polytree algorithm [3] is inaccurate, and so is the commonly practiced message-passing decoding.
The tradeoff between threshold signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and error-floor bit-error rate (BER) has been observed for both turbo codes [4], [5] and LDPC codes [6]. At block size , rate-1/2 regular LDPC codes with variable-node degree larger than two [7] enjoy very low error floors, however, their threshold SNR is 0.6 dB worse than their irregular counterparts [8]. In this letter, we repeated the irregular code-construction method described in [8], and extended their simulation to a higher SNR
Paper approved by M. Fossorier, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received August 19, 2002; revised May 23, 2003 and December 27, 2003. This work was supported in part by the Office of Naval Research under Grant N00014-01-C-0016 and in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-0209110. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Conference on Communications, Anchorage, AK, May 2003.
The authors are with the Electrical Engineering Department, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095 USA (e-mail: ttian@icsl.ucla.edu; christop@icsl.ucla.edu; villa@icsl.ucla.edu; wesel@ee.ucla.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.833048

region. In the relatively unconditioned case, an error floor was observed at BERs of slightly below .
Conventional girth-conditioning techniques increase the girth (shortest cycle length) of LDPC codes [9], [10]. In this paper, we emphasize that not only the length, but also the connectivity, of cycles play important roles in error-floor performance. Since not all short cycles are equally harmful, selective treatment of more harmful cycles allows us to do cycle conditioning effectively. A minimum degree of connectivity is enforced among cycles shorter than a prescribed length. Some short cycles with good graph connectivity are allowed, while longer cycles with poor graph connectivity are precluded. This technique lowers the error floors of irregular LDPC codes significantly, while only slightly degrading the waterfall-region performance.
Di et al. [11] described stopping sets in the context of erasures. Message-passing decoding fails whenever all the variable nodes in a stopping set are erased. It is an open issue to find graph structures deterring message-passing decoding in additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels. As demonstrated by our simulations, we can reduce error floors in AWGN channels by generating codes from an expurgated ensemble that has good graph connectivity.
II. CYCLE CLUSTERING
The well-known matrix and bipartite graph descriptions of a rate-1/3 (9,3) code are given in Fig. 1. This code will be used in examples throughout the paper. One column in the parity-check matrix corresponds to one variable in the bipartite graph. The parity-check matrix is constructed such that its portion is invertible, which guarantees that is full rank. For systematic encoding, corresponds to information bits, and corresponds to parity bits.
Di et al. defined stopping sets as follows. Definition 1: A variable-node set is called a stopping set if all its neighbors are connected to this set at least twice.

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

1243

The number of nodes in the support tree grows exponentially

with the number of levels expanded. To be short-cycle-free, all

these nodes have to be different, so the longest cycle size we

can avoid increases only logarithmically with block size (see

[1]). Since the logarithm is a slowly increasing function, girth

conditioning of a finite-length LDPC code is severely limited by

block length.

High-degree nodes are common with degree distributions

produced by density evolution. They spawn many children in

the support tree, and pose a serious challenge to girth con-

ditioning. This can be alleviated by using alternative degree

Fig. 2. Generic stopping set.

distributions [9], [10], which deviate from those predicted by density evolution. It is easier to girth condition these alternative

Variable-node set

in Fig. 1 is a stopping set be-

cause all its neighbors , , , and are connected to this

set at least twice.

By default, we assume LDPC codes without singly connected

variables, such as one generated with a degree distribution given

by density evolution.

Lemma 1: In a bipartite graph free of degree-1 variables,

every stopping set contains cycles.

Proof: A stopping set (variable nodes) and its neighbors

(constraint nodes) form a nontree-like subgraph because a tree

has singly connected leaf nodes.

Stopping sets, in general, are comprised of multiple cycles.

The only stopping sets formed by a single cycle are those that

consist of all degree-2 variable nodes. Generically, a stopping

set is comprised of two types of variable nodes (see Fig. 2).

Variable nodes of the first type form cycles with other variable

nodes, variable nodes of the second type bind together different

cycles. Summarily, a stopping set occurs if, in an interconnected

set of cycles, none of the cycles possess singly connected con-

straint nodes.

distributions, but the use of such distributions comes at the

expense of asymptotic threshold performance. The following

arguments further discuss the easiness of cycle conditioning

with respect to the degree of variable nodes.

Definition 2: A variable-node set is called a cycle-free set if

no cycle exists among its constituent variables.

Lemma 2: A necessary and sufficient condition for a set of

degree-2 variable nodes to be a cycle-free set is that this set is

linearly independent.

Proof: All sets that are not linearly independent contain

codewords. Codewords are special stopping sets, and stopping

sets contain cycles (Lemma 1). For sufficiency, note that the con-

straint nodes taking part in a cycle among degree-2 nodes are

each shared by exactly two variable nodes. Therefore, the bi-

nary sum of columns (variables) taking place in the cycle is the

all-zero vector, and these columns are linearly dependent.

Corollary 1: A maximum of

degree-2 columns of

length

may be linearly independent (cycle-free).

Proof : Consider the

bidiagonal

matrix

For erasure channels, the effectiveness of message-passing

decoding depends primarily on how cycles are clustered to form

stopping sets (see Fig. 2). Our proposed parity matrix design algorithm ensures that short cycles contain at least a given minimum number of “extrinsic paths,” leading to an increase in the

...

...

...

...

(1)

minimum size of stopping sets.

Stopping sets entail codewords as a special case. An erasure

of all of the nonzero positions of a binary codeword cannot be

recovered under maximum-likelihood (ML) decoding or under

message-passing decoding. However, small stopping sets do not necessarily represent low-distance events. Indeed, an ML decoder can successfully decode an erased stopping set if a full column-rank submatrix is formed by the columns indexed by the stopping set variables.

This matrix forms a rank

basis of degree-2 columns,

each with dimension

. Any possible degree-2 column of

dimension

can be formed via a linear combination of

columns on the above basis.

Theorem 1: In an

code free of degree-1 variables,

a cycle-free variable-node set

must satisfy

III. HIGH-DEGREE VARIABLES AND GIRTH CONDITIONING

, where is the degree of . Proof : A degree- variable node whose constraints

Fig. 3 illustrates the support tree of variable node of Fig. 1. are

can be conceptually replaced by a

All the levels whose indexes are odd numbers consist of constraint nodes, and all the levels whose indexes are even numbers consist of variable nodes. A cycle occurs if two positions in the support tree represent the same node in the bipartite graph (e.g.,

cluster of

degree-2 nodes, whose constraints are

, respectively. As an example,

Fig. 4 shows how variable node in Fig. 1 may be replaced

by and , or how can be replaced by and .

in level 3). To detect cycles of length up to in the support Because the indexes of the constraints in a cluster are ordered,

tree of , we need to expand its support tree levels.

any cycle involving the degree- node is equivalent to a cycle

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1244

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

Fig. 3. Approximate cycle EMD (ACE) search tree associated with v in Fig. 1.  = 0. Bold lines represent active paths. ACE values are indicated on the interior of circles (variables) or squares (constraints), except on the lowest level, where they are described with a table.

and

to be the number of neighbors of . An

edge

expander of an

code is a graph that has

for all subsets with

.

Methods that realize regular graphs with good edge-expan-

sion properties were proposed by Margulis in [12]. However,

a construction that can simultaneously satisfy a given edge-ex-

panding property, as well as a given irregular degree distribution

has yet to be proposed.

An efficient way to suppress small stopping sets is to improve

the edge-expanding properties of cycles in an irregular LDPC

Fig. 4. Replace v by its cluster in a cycle.

code. Specifically, an ( ) edge expander is free of stopping sets with size below or equal to . This is because for

involving some of the degree-2 nodes in the cluster replacing

the original node. Fig. 4 shows an example.

Replace every variable in the set with its equivalent cluster.

According to Corollary 1, at most

of these resulting

degree-2 nodes can form a cycle-free set. Thus, the theorem is

proved.

Theorem 1 shows that lower degree variables allow a cycle-

free set to contain more variables. Specifically, the equality is

achieved with

independent degree-2 variable nodes.

Higher degree nodes may be considered as the superposition

of multiple degree-2 nodes. As a result, cycle conditioning on

high-degree nodes is more difficult than on low-degree nodes.

However, cycles involving higher degree nodes are actually less

problematic, because they have a higher extrinsic message de-

gree (EMD), as will be explained in the next section.

any variable subset with size below or equal to , its neighbors (constraints) are connected to the subset less than twice, on average, and therefore, at least one neighbor is singly connected to this subset. Constraint nodes singly connected to a variable-node set increase the expansion of the variable-node set effectively. Based on this observation, we propose a parameter of variable-node sets that we call the EMD. This parameter works for AWGN channels, because good edge expanders have been shown to perform well in various channel realizations.
Definition 4 (EMD): An extrinsic constraint node of a variable-node set is a constraint node that is singly connected to this set. The EMD of a variable-node set is the number of extrinsic constraint nodes of this set.
As was previously described, the performance of an iteratively decoded LDPC code in an erasure environment can be limited by the size of the smallest stopping set. The EMD of a

IV. LOW-DEGREE VARIABLES AND EMD

stopping set is zero. A set of variable nodes with large EMD will require additional concatenation of nodes to become a stopping

Low-degree variable nodes typically have high multiplicities set. We propose a conditioning algorithm that ensures all cycles

in density evolution-optimized irregular LDPC codes. As will less than a given length have an EMD greater than a given value.

be shown in this section, low-degree variables are susceptible to This technique statistically increases the smallest stopping-set

channel noise, because they contribute little to EMD and form size.

isolated subgraphs easily.

The algorithm that follows ignores cycles whose length is

We define the notion of an edge expander as presented in [11]. above a threshold. In the context of EMD, this is justified for two

Definition 3: Let be any subset of left nodes (variable reasons. First, large cycles necessarily contain many variable

nodes). Define

to be the number of edges connected to , nodes. Second, they tend toward high EMD by virtue of a level

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

1245

of graph connectivity that statistically surpasses that of small The GE process ultimately guarantees that the matrix has

cycles. We thus target the elimination of small cycles with low full rank by ensuring that the

columns of be linearly

EMD.

Consider the EMD of a generic cycle. If there are no variable

nodes in a cycle that share common constraint nodes outside

of the cycle, then the EMD of this cycle is

, where

is the degree of the th variable in this cycle. Otherwise, the

EMD is reduced through constraint node sharing. To provide a

calculable EMD metric, we neglect constraint node sharing and

define an approximate cycle EMD.

Definition 5 [Approximate Cycle EMD (ACE)]: The ACE of

independent. For degree-2 variable nodes, independence entails

freedom from cycles so that all degree-2 parity-check nodes will

be cycle-free.

The ACE detection method can be equivalently depicted in

two ways. The first one, based on support trees, is directly re-

lated to the graph structure. The second one, based on trellises,

is oriented for algorithm implementation.

The tree depiction of ACE detection (

) is given in

Fig. 3.

a length cycle is

, where is the degree of the

th variable in this cycle. We also say that the ACE of a degree- ACE Detection of

variable node is

, and the ACE of any constraint node is

zero.

for all variables and constraints;

Note that EMD is defined with respect to any set of variable

;

nodes, while ACE is defined with respect to variable nodes in Activate for level-0;

a given cycle. Furthermore, given a set of variable nodes in a for ( ;

;

)

cycle, ACE is an upper bound on the EMD of these variable begin

nodes. The code-conditioning algorithm to be proposed next for any active node in level-( )

is based on ACE instead of EMD. This approximation is rea- begin

sonable, since in this algorithm, all cycles shorter than a given length (including those formed through constraint node sharing) will be required to meet the ACE criteria.
As demonstrated above, the ACE value of low-degree variables is low. Particularly, the ACE value of a degree-2 variable is zero. Correspondingly, low-degree variables form cycles with low EMD easily, and low-EMD cycles have less connection with the rest of the graph. Poorly connected subgraphs are vulnerable to channel noise, because they do not have sufficient impinging message flow to correct errors.

Find its children set

;

for every child

begin

;

if

exit with failure;

elseif

Deactivate in level-l with respect to current parent ;

else

;

end

V. CONSTRUCTING LDPC CODES WITH ACE ALGORITHM

end end

An LDPC code has property

, if all the cy- exit with success;

cles whose length is

or less have ACE values of at least

. In our codes, information bits come before parity bits

(see Fig. 1). We assign column nodes such that degree decreases

monotonically (i.e.,

if

). Because high-degree

nodes converge faster, this arrangement provides more protec-

tion to information bits than to parity bits. The algorithm is as

follows.

Here, variable and constraint-node labels refer literally to

those of the example code in Fig. 1, and the support tree that

extends four levels below root node is portrayed. We define

to be the ACE of a path between root node and an

arbitrary node (it can be either a variable node or a constraint

node). Recall also that ACE

degree

if is a

variable, and ACE

if is a constraint.

for (

;

;

)

To explain the above algorithm, we need to recognize that a

begin

node should propagate descendants (be active) only if the path

redo:

leading to this node has the lowest ACE value that any path to

Randomly generate according to deg. distr.;

this node has had thus far. Therefore, linear cost is achieved

if

(i.e., is a parity bit)

instead of an exponential cost. Initially, all the path ACEs can

begin

be set to (which means “unvisited”). Note that cycles occur

Gaussian Elimination (GE) on ;

when a node is revisited or simultaneously visited. When a cycle

if

is formed by connecting two distinct paths from to , we

goto redo;

have calculated the cycle ACE as the sum of the two path ACEs

else

minus the doubly counted root and child ACE, i.e.,

the residue of after GE;

. Handling multiple simultaneous

end

arrivals to the same node is trivial, since ACE minimization is

ACE detection for ;

performed sequentially across all arrivals.

if

for a cycle of length

or less

In Fig. 3, bold lines at each level describe the current set of

goto redo;

active paths. In this example, “ties” are assigned the path whose

end

parent has the lowest index. For instance, the path ( - - - )

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1246

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

Fig. 5. Viterbi-like ACE algorithm.  = 0.

with ACE

survives, while ( - - - ), ( - - - ),

( - - - ), each also having ACE , perish. For an ex-

ample of pruning occurring due to cycle detection on differing

levels of the tree, observe that the path ( - - - ) with ACE

does not survive, since was visited at Level 1 and was

accordingly assigned ACE .

Fig. 5 provides a trellis depiction of the previous discussion

(with two more stages added). A trellis, instead of a full sup-

port tree, is adequate for ACE detection, because the ACE mini-

mization is performed sequentially, and only the minimum ACE

needs to be stored. Again, a path ACE is stored for every vari-

able node and every constraint node. An active path is a path

that connects the root variable node and any other node with

the lowest ACE value up to the current step. Active paths are

marked by solid lines in Fig. 5. An active node is a node that

connects to an active path at the current step.

Viterbi tree pruning yields a complexity at each root that is

upper bounded by

, where is the highest

degree of any node in the graph, because the support tree is

expanded

levels. For each level, we have to consider at

most nodes, and every node has at most

children. As

shown in Fig. 5, relatively few nodes at a level are active, thus,

the actual computational burden is reasonable, even for block

size on the order of bits.

The storage space needed is on the order of

,

because only the current trellis level has to be saved. To further

improve runtime, any active node with path ACE

can be deactivated, because all the paths stemming from this

node have an ACE value of at least . As a special appli-

cation of this argument, the user may generate columns for all

variable nodes with degree

or higher without checking

the ACE (since all descendants will have a path ACE of at least

).

Fig. 6. Results for (10000,5000) codes. The BPSK capacity bound at R = 0:5 is 0.188 dB.

Note that cycle detection is implicitly performed in the above

algorithm. Unvisited variables are initialized to

.

When a variable is first visited,

is assigned a fi-

nite value. Upon subsequent visits to the same variable,

ill-conditioned cycle detection is alarmed if the condition

is not satisfied.

imum variable-node degree

. The encoded bits were

sent through a binary-input AWGN channel. For each corrupted

codeword, a maximum of 200 iterations were performed. Each

simulation was stopped when 80 block errors were detected.

The BER results, and in one case, the word-error rate (WER)

[block-error rate (BLER)] results are plotted in Fig. 6.

VI. SIMULATION RESULTS

A

code in Fig. 6 means that in this code, all

cycles of length up to

have ACE of at least . Higher

We used the ACE algorithm to construct (10000,5000) codes

values ensure better properties for the conditioned cycles,

that have the irregular degree distribution given in [8] with max- and higher

values ensure that conditioning occurs for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

1247

longer cycles. There is a tradeoff between

and : in- irregular LDPC codes that have a specific ACE property for

creasing one parameter inevitably makes the other parameter short cycles, while maintaining the density-evolution-pre-

more difficult to implement. For

, the scribed degree distribution. Our simulation results show an

highest

values that we could achieve were

, improvement in the error-floor region of irregular LDPC codes

respectively.

by several orders of magnitude in BER over unconditioned

If all degree-2 variables are parity bits (which is possible if codes.

there are fewer than of them), then the full-rankness of the This letter assumes that asymptotically optimal degree distri-

parity matrix guarantees that no cycles exist between degree-2 butions provide a good starting point for designing codes with

variables (see Lemma 2). In this case, we can construct ( ) short block lengths. Graphs with lower maximum left degree

codes, since all cycles of any length must include nodes of at can achieve higher girth-conditioning numbers than graphs with

least degree 3 (and hence, have ACE of at least 1). Such codes higher maximum left degree. The absence of high-degree nodes,

have the lowest level of conditioning that we consider, and we however, leads to threshold degradation. In contrast to this, Ryan

use codes constructed in this manner to contrast the performance [13] advocates elimination of low-degree nodes from the distri-

of stronger

conditioning levels.

bution. The irregular LDPC code in [10] also picked a distribu-

As a benchmark, Richardson and Urbanke’s -bit code tion free of degree-2 variables. Though not explicitly described

[8] (referred to here as the RU code) is included in Fig. 6(a). in [13] and [10], removal of low-degree nodes from a distribu-

This RU code was constructed with the constraint that “all tion will raise the overall graph EMD, since low-degree nodes

the degree-two nodes were made loop-free.” Unfortunately, cannot substantially increase the EMD of any given cycle. Ac-

simulation results below BER are unavailable for the RU cording to density evolution, either rate or threshold is adversely

code. The ( ) code shown in Fig. 6(a) has a similar level of affected by removing low-degree nodes, since a small fraction

conditioning as the RU code and exhibits comparable perfor- of low-degree nodes can significantly raise code rate, while only

mance. The error-floor BER of the ( ) code is around . marginally degrading threshold.

Pure length-4 cycle removal improves BER by half an order of

magnitude over the ( ) code at highest SNR, and adversely

affects convergence. However, proper selection of

and

ACKNOWLEDGMENT

suppresses error floors significantly more. For example, the ACE conditioning code (9,4) achieves approximately BER
, three orders of magnitude below the ( ) code. Fig. 6(b) compares several ACE parameter sets with or

The authors would like to acknowledge the suggestions from many people, particularly P. Vontobel, K. Lakovic, A. Ramamoorthy, and M. Smith.

without explicit length-4 cycle removal. Note that the lowest

error floor was achieved at

and

with no

explicit removal of short cycles. As explained before, traditional

REFERENCES

girth conditioning treats all short cycles equally, thus making

the removal of longer, but still harmful, cycles difficult. On

the contrary, the ACE algorithm effectively removes low-ACE

cycles, while leaving shorter cycles with high ACE intact. By

doing this, participation of high degree variables in cycles is

encouraged.

We observe that there is a small penalty in the capacity-

approaching capability of our low-error-floor codes. With more

conditioning at this block size, the low-SNR performance of

the code is slightly degraded, possibly due to a decrease in the

randomness of the code structure. This tradeoff between error

floor and low-SNR performance is a well-known characteristic

of iteratively decoded codes [4]–[6]. Scheme (9,4) is approxi-

mately 0.07 dB away from the RU code at low SNR. However,

even with this mild penalty, these codes remain superior to reg-

ular codes in terms of their capacity-approaching performance.

For example, we tested MacKay’s (9972,3,6) regular LDPC

code described in [6]. Although no error floors were detected

for this code, it achieves BER

at SNR

dB, more

than 0.6 dB worse than our (9,4) code. Thus, the combination

of density-evolution-optimized degree distributions and ACE

construction achieves good performance over a wide SNR

operating range.

VII. CONCLUSION
We have discussed the effect of graph connectivity on error floors, and have introduced the ACE algorithm to construct

[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[3] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[4] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Serial concatenation of interleaved codes: Performance analysis, design, and iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 909–926, May 1998.
[5] C. Fragouli and R. D. Wesel, “Bit vs. symbol interleaving for parallel concatenated trellis-coded modulation,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf., vol. 2, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 931–935.
[6] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[7] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[8] T. Richardson, M. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[9] Y. Mao and A. H. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, vol. 1, Helsinki, Finland, June 2001, pp. 41–44.
[10] D. M. Arnold, E. Eleftheriou, and X. Y. Hu, “Progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf., vol. 2, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 995–1001.
[11] C. Di, D. Proietti, E. Telatar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finite length analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, June 2002.
[12] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit construction of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 71–78, 1982.
[13] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Lowering the error-rate floors of moderatelength high-rate irregular LDPC codes,” in IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, June 2003, p. 237.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:06 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

