564
Transactions Papers

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

Design of Efficiently Encodable Moderate-Length High-Rate Irregular LDPC Codes
Michael Yang, Student Member, IEEE, William E. Ryan, Senior Member, IEEE, and Yan Li, Student Member, IEEE

Abstract—This paper presents a new class of irregular low-den-

sity parity-check (LDPC) codes of moderate length (103

104) and high rate (

3 4). Codes in this class admit low-com-

plexity encoding and have lower error-rate floors than other irreg-

ular LDPC code-design approaches. It is also shown that this class

of LDPC codes is equivalent to a class of systematic serial turbo

codes and is an extension of irregular repeat-accumulate codes. A

code design algorithm based on the combination of density evolu-

tion and differential evolution optimization with a modified cost

function is presented. Moderate-length, high-rate codes with no
error-rate floors down to a bit-error rate of 10 9 are presented.

Although our focus is on moderate-length, high-rate codes, the pro-

posed coding scheme is applicable to irregular LDPC codes with

other lengths and rates.

Index Terms—Efficient encoding, error-rate floor, irregular repeat–accumulate codes, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

T HE recent literature in coding has seen an explosion of papers surrounding the design and implementation of low-

density parity-check (LDPC) codes [1], [2]. As has been well

reported, this class of codes is capable of operation within tenths

of a decibel of the capacity limit, given sufficiently long code-

word lengths, surpassing even turbo codes in many cases [3],

[4]. The pioneering work of Richardson et al. [3], [4] presented

very long rate-1/2 codes (codeword lengths

) which are

not appropriate for many applications (e.g., low-latency, band-

width-efficient applications). Further, such codes generally re-

quire high-complexity encoders, since they lack sufficient struc-

ture to allow simple encoding (with cyclic codes representing

the limit of simplicity), although Richardson et al. [5] have

proposed a clever encoding algorithm whose complexity is ap-

proximately linear in the code length . MacKay, on the other

Paper approved by M. Fossorier, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received August 19, 2002; revised May 23, 2003 and October 9, 2003. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-9814472 and Grant CCR-9979310, in part by NASA under Grant NAG5-10643, and in part by a gift from the NSIC EHDR program. This paper was presented in part at the 2002 Allerton Conference on Communication, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, October 2002, and in part at the 2003 IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Yokohama, Japan, June 29–July 4, 2003.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: yangsiz@ece.arizona.edu; ryan@ece.arizona.edu; yanli@ece.arizona.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.826367

hand, has designed high-rate LDPC codes of moderate lengths

(

) [16], but again, these codes generally re-

quire complex encoders. Important alternatives to these codes

are the cyclic and quasi-cyclic LDPC codes of Kou et al. [15]

based on finite geometries. This class of codes admits low-com-

plexity shift-register encoders, but the decoders for these codes

are generally of higher complexity as a result of their higher

density parity-check matrices or, in some cases, square ( )

parity-check matrices. These codes are also regular or near reg-

ular, which limits their performance in the low signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR) region.

In this paper, we focus on the design of moderate length

(

), high rate (

) irregular LDPC codes.

(The only other paper of which we are aware which focuses

on this regime is [10].) Our goal is the design of such codes

superior in performance to alternative approaches and which

allow low-complexity encoding and decoding. Our approach

starts with the work of Richardson et al. [3], but we make some

novel modifications to their design technique which constrains

our codes to a specialized class of irregular LDPC codes. These

modifications improve performance for the range of and

under consideration and lead to vastly simplified encoders. We

show that the complexity of these encoders is much smaller than

might be achieved with a typical LDPC code, even when the

technique proposed in [5] is used. We also show the connec-

tion between the proposed class of codes, serial turbo codes,

and irregular repeat-accumulate (IRA) codes [11]. In fact, we

call these codes extended IRA (eIRA) codes. These codes were

independently studied by Narayanaswami and Narayanan [12].

The remainder of the paper is outlined as follows. Section II

provides the necessary background and notation for the subse-

quent sections. Section III develops an important lemma which

leads to the introduction of the new class of irregular LDPC

codes introduced in Section IV. Section V briefly presents

the (computer-based) code-design algorithm, and Section VI

presents selected design results which demonstrate the validity

of the preceding sections. Finally, some concluding remarks

are presented in Section VII.

II. BACKGROUND
Following the literature (e.g., [3]), we let and represent the length and dimension, respectively, of an irregular LDPC

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: DESIGN OF EFFICIENTLY ENCODABLE MODERATE-LENGTH HIGH-RATE IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

565

code. (In the following, unless specified otherwise, when we

say LDPC code, we shall mean the general case of an irregular

LDPC code.) We also let

represent its code rate and

equal the number of parity bits. The generator and

parity-check matrices are denoted by and , respectively,

and encoding takes place according to the usual equation,

, where ( ) is the information (code) vector. Following

[3],

represents the variable node (v-node)

distribution in the code’s Tanner graph, and

represents the check node (c-node) distribution. Here, is the

fraction of edges connected to v-nodes of degree and similarly

for and c-nodes. For now, we assume , but later we will

allow a single v-node of degree one. It can be shown [3] that the

number of v-nodes of degree is (the integer part of)

(1)

and the number of c-nodes of degree is (the integer part of)
Fig. 1. Evolution of expected LLR magnitudes for code four of Example 2.
(2)

Thus, there are

columns in of Hamming weight and

is the number of rows in of weight . For v-nodes,

ranges from two to , and for c-nodes ranges from two to .

With LDPC codes so parameterized, it is shown in [3] and

[6] how optimum degree distributions

and

may be

obtained via algorithms centered on the evolution of the proba-

bility density functions (pdfs) of the messages passed between

the two node types in the belief-propagation decoder. These dis-

tributions are optimal in the limit as

and as the number

of iterations

. For the practical case of finite , the fol-

lowing additional design rules are proposed in [3]:

1) forbid short cycles involving only degree-two v-nodes; 2) degree-two v-nodes are made to correspond to nonsys-
tematic bits; 3) there exist no length-four cycles in the code’s graph.

III. ON DEGREE-TWO V-NODES

We assume the (log-) sum-product decoding algorithm

throughout (also called belief propagation) [1], [2]. The sum

of the messages received at the th v-node after a sufficient

number of decoding iterations is known to be an approximation

of the log a posteriori ratio (LAPR) [or log-likelihood ratio

(LLR)] of the th code bit given the received word. Degree-two

v-nodes represent the weakest link in the code in the following

sense. First, the bit LLRs for these v-nodes converge slower

than do larger degree v-nodes. This is discussed in [6] and [7] in

the context of density evolution, where it is noted that the slope

of the

versus

curve for v-nodes is equal to the

node degree minus one. Second, the LLRs for the degree-two

v-nodes converge (on average) to a smaller magnitude than do

larger degree v-nodes.

We demonstrate these characteristics in Fig. 1 for code four

of Example 2 below (the details of which are not important at

this point). The figure depicts the evolution of the expected LLR

magnitudes for each of the possible v-node degrees for this code

at

dB (corresponding to

). As

expected, the LLR magnitudes for the larger degrees converge

quickly (in about eight iterations) and to large values, whereas

the degree-two node is the worst in this regard (it converges in

about 14 iterations). Code four of Example 2 also has a single

degree-one v-node whose impact is negligible, as demonstrated

later.

The vulnerability of the degree-two bits was made evident

in the foregoing discussion. Still, as shown in [3], the presence

of degree-two v-nodes is necessary to ensure optimal irregu-

larity. Intuitively, low-degree v-nodes, which are “bad,” must be

present to balance out the presence of the low-degree c-nodes,

which are “good.” Low-degree c-nodes are advantageous be-

cause there is less opportunity for a check to fail when fewer

bits are involved in the check equation.

Because degree-two v-nodes represent the weakest link in a

code, we introduce in this section some results concerning the

degree-two v-nodes in a code’s Tanner graph (equivalently, the

weight-two columns in its matrix). Most crucial to the devel-

opment is the following lemma and its implications.

Lemma: In a given Tanner graph (equivalently, matrix),

the maximum number of degree-two v-nodes possible before

a cycle is created involving only these degree-two nodes is

. Furthermore, for codes

free of “degree-two cycles” and possessing this maximum, the

submatrix of composed of only its weight-two columns is

simply a permutation of the following

parent

matrix:

(3)

Proof: Because a Tanner graph is a bipartite graph, a

length- cycle in the graph corresponds to an

submatrix

of , in which each row and each column of that submatrix

contains at least two ones (corresponding to the intersection

of rows and columns in which need not be contiguous).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

566

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

The columns in corresponding to the

degree-two

v-nodes already contain two ones, so consider now the rows

in in which these ones are located, and suppose there are

such rows. It may be shown inductively that the

submatrix containing these rows and

columns (of

weight two) must contain a cycle if

. (Consider,

for example, such a submatrix with

columns,

columns, and so on. Consider also the form of

which contains no cycles and has one more row than it does

columns, as it must.) Thus, in order for to correspond to a

cycle-free part of the graph, we must have

.

But since

, we must have

. The second

statement in the lemma is evident at this point.

We are interested in the maximum number of cycle-free

weight-two columns, because the optimal v-node degree distri-

bution (large and large ) usually implies

,

as we will see in the case studies below. We know now from

the lemma that degree-two cycles in the Tanner graph will be

present when

. Thus, we focus on codes for

which

is not at its optimum, but is instead at the smaller

value prescribed by the lemma,

. Doing so will

ensure that cycles among the degree-two v-nodes are avoided.

Some of these points were also noted by Chiani and Ventura

[10] in the design of moderate-length, high-rate irregular LDPC

codes.

IV. NEW CLASS OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
A. Code Structure and Encoder
Motivated by the above lemma and surrounding discussion, we first consider the parity-check matrix of an
LDPC code of the form

(4)

where is a sparse

matrix (to be randomly gen-

erated by computer) containing no weight-two columns, and

is the

matrix given in (3). Note also that

so that it equals the maximum

prescribed by the lemma. However, we have not yet attained the

form of the matrix which permits efficient encoding. To pro-

ceed, we require the following claim which will be verified by

simulation below.

Claim: Given a randomly generated parity-check matrix for

an (

) code, appending a single weight-one column

on the right to produce an ( ) code changes the error rate only

negligibly.

Remarks: The veracity of this claim should be clear, because

the addition of a single weight-one column affects only one

check equation. In view of Fig. 1, we can expect the error rate

of this th bit to be quite large, since it corresponds to a de-

gree-one v-node. However, since it corresponds to a parity bit,

its error rate is of no concern. As our simulation results confirm,

its affect on the information bits is negligible.

Armed with the above claim, we modify the in (4) as

(5)

Fig. 2. Two efficient encoders for the proposed class of eIRA codes. (a) Original direct form. (b) Explicit serial turbo-code form.
where is unchanged from above, and is a full-rank matrix created from by appending to it (on the right) a
weight-one column vector with a “1” at the bottom

(6)

The

matrix in (5) achieves

and

corresponds to an ( ) irregular LDPC code which allows very

efficient encoding, as we now show.

Observe from the form of , in particular, the submatrix ,

that encoding may be performed directly from by solving for

the parity bits recursively: 1) the first check equation (first row)

involves only the first parity bit; 2) the second check equation

involves only the first two parity bits; 3) the third check equation

involves only the next two parity bits; and so on. Thus, the form

that we are forcing to take not only avoids degree-two cycles,

but it also achieves the ultimate situation in [5] in which a full

submatrix possesses the diagonal form which permits a

recursive solution of the parity bits.

An alternative way to look at encoding for this class of codes

is as follows. First, we have the following result.

Result: The systematic generator matrix for the parity-

check matrix of (5) is given by

Proof: It is trivial to check that

.

Now, it is easy to verify that

(7)

which is precisely the transformation matrix corresponding to a

differential encoder whose transfer function is

. Thus,

the encoder for this class of LDPC codes enjoys the low-com-

plexity configuration depicted in Fig. 2(a). Observe that this

encoder is indeed low complexity, for the computation of the

parity bits involves multiplication of the message word by the

low-density matrix followed by the differential encoding.

Observe that the encoder of Fig. 2(a) is the encoder for a type

of systematic serial turbo code. The interleaver that generally

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: DESIGN OF EFFICIENTLY ENCODABLE MODERATE-LENGTH HIGH-RATE IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

567

accompanies a serial turbo code may be made more explicit by

writing as the product , where is a permutation matrix

and is simply the low-density matrix

. This version

of the encoder is shown in Fig. 2(b). Note that while this class

of LDPC codes possesses the advantage of a low-complexity

encoder that a serial turbo code enjoys, it requires no interleaver

and has all the advantages of an LDPC code: a low error-rate

floor and a parallelizable decoder.

We remark that this class of efficiently encodable codes was

independently discovered by Narayanaswami and Narayanan

[12]. We mention also that these codes resemble the systematic

version of the IRA codes [11], except for systematic IRA codes,

the matrix in Fig. 2(a) which has dimension

is

replaced by a

low-density generator matrix

. For

this reason, we call these codes extended IRA (eIRA) codes.

While our focus has been on codes for which

so that degree-two cycles are avoided, certain of the results are

extendable to

, as we now discuss. First, it is

easy to show that the matrix for any irregular LDPC code

with

may be put in the form of (5), except

the submatrix in this case will contain weight-two columns

when

. From this, it is clear that the encoding

may be performed from the matrix as described above [or via

the encoder of Fig. 2(a)] when

.

B. Encoder Efficiency
Consider first the number of binary additions required to encode one eIRA codeword, assuming encoding is performed via the matrix. We assume the density of ones in to be . Then the number of binary additions required to compute the parity bits is approximately

[5, Tables I and II]). The first part requires, among other oper-

ations, multiplication by three sparse matrices whose sizes are

,

, and . (Here, is the gap

parameter defined in [5] where it was shown

with

probability near one when is large.) The second part requires,

among other operations, multiplication by two sparse matrices

whose sizes are

and

. Thus, as-

suming a common density of for each of these matrices (we re-

mark on this below), the number of binary additions required to

perform the various sparse matrix multiplications is (after some

simplification)

. The first term

in this expression is approximately the complexity of the

proposed class of codes, and so the second term represents the

additional number of binary additions required by the technique

in [5] just for sparse matrix multiplication. Beyond these addi-

tional addition operations, the technique in [5] requires multipli-

cation by a dense

matrix [complexity ], two vector

additions [each ], and two multiplications by a triangular

matrix [each ].

In the foregoing, we assumed that the density for the full

parity-check matrix

of an irregular LDPC code was ap-

proximately equal to that of the submatrix of the parity-

check matrix

for an eIRA code. We support this as fol-

lows. Note that, for high-rate codes for which is a small frac-

tion of

, the difference between the densities of and

are small (e.g., within 20%). Thus, since the row and

column weight distributions for

and

are similar

as seen in the examples below, we may conclude that the differ-

ence between the densities of

and are small.

V. CODE-DESIGN ALGORITHM

If we instead use the encoder of Fig. 2(a) to encode, multipli-

cation by the matrix results in

additions, and

differential encoding results in

additions, resulting in a

total of

, which is a small fraction larger than

.

For our first complexity comparison, consider encoding via a

generator matrix

which has been obtained from

by Gauss–Jordan elimination. In general, the

matrix

has a density of 0.5, and so the number of binary additions

required to perform the multiplication is approximately

Thus, the proposed class of codes provides a factor of

reduction in the number of computa-

tions required to encode a codeword. For example, for a (fairly

high) density of

, this complexity reduction factor is

50.

As a second, more involved, comparison, we consider the

encoding technique proposed in [5] assuming an arbitrary ir-

regular LDPC code parity-check matrix.1 Their technique in-

volves the computation of the parity vector in two parts (see

H 1In response to a comment of a reviewer, we acknowledge that the encoding
technique in [5] is exactly that of the -based technique described above when the code is eIRA. The encoding complexity comparison we seek here is that between an eIRA code and a typical (non-IRA) irregular LDPC code using the technique in [5].

Based on the discussion of the previous section, our design

algorithm involves (once the optimal degree distributions have

been determined) appending length- columns to the ma-

trix in accordance with the degree distributions and some addi-

tional design rules. Note that a cycle will be created with the

addition to of a column, and the addition of large-weight

columns tends to create shorter cycles. Thus, in the design al-

gorithm, we only append a column if it creates no length-four

cycles. Note also that, by starting with the matrix , we are

abiding by the other two design criteria of [3], namely, associ-

ating the weight-two columns with the nonsystematic bits and

eliminating all cycles associated with the degree-two nodes (see

Section II).

The goal is to design a

parity-check matrix

containing ones. The design algorithm is as follows. (A sim-

ilar computer random-search algorithm for regular codes was

presented in [8].)

Step 1) Use differential evolution [3], [9] to generate the global

optimal degree distributions and for the de-

sired code rate. The cost function is modified to force

. (A detailed differential evolution

algorithm is discribed in [13, Part V], and a source pro-

gram is available at [14].)

Step 2) Initialize the matrix with . Since contains

ones,

ones remain to be placed in

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

568

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

Step 3) For both node types and for all appropriate values of

, give each degree- node sockets [3]. Number the

sockets for the v-nodes and then for the c-nodes (there

are at this point

sockets of each type to be

assigned edges).

Step 4) Generate an initial permutation of

and use this permutation to connect the v-node

sockets to the c-node sockets.

Step 5) Modify the permutation to satisfy the optimal degree

distributions.

Step 6) Modify the permutation to eliminate the length-four

cycles, and after each modification, go back to Step 3

to ensure the degree distributions are still satisfied. ([8]

has provided detailed procedures for Step 3 and Step

4.)

Step 7) Convert the permutation into the remaining columns

of .

A. Remarks

1) We note that the codes presented in the next section were

obtained from the above algorithm without additional

“manual modification” for girth control; our design

prevents all length-four cycles, but ignores larger cycles.

We emphasize that none of the codes presented in this

paper contain length-four cycles, including the irregular

LDPC codes that are not eIRA codes presented in the

next section. In fact, it can be shown that for some of

the high-rate codes we have designed, graphs with girths

larger than six are not possible.

2) Although we have not made an effort to modify the cycle

structure of our codes beyond removing the length-four

cycles, we have made an effort to maximize the weight

of the codewords corresponding to weight-one and

weight-two encoder inputs. Considering Fig. 2(a), note

that a weight-one input simply selects a row of (a

column of ) which then acts as input to the differential

encoder. To maximize the weight of the differential

encoder output corresponding to weight-one inputs,

then, the ones in the columns of should be widely

separated. Similarly, for weight-two encoder inputs,

since such an input produces the sum of two columns

of as the input to the differential encoder, the ones

in all sums of pairs of columns of should be widely

separated. In principle, we could continue for weight-

inputs,

, but the algorithm becomes unwieldy at

this point, and, in any case, our results below show that

the error-rate floor is lower than

even when these

larger weight inputs are ignored in the design.

VI. CODE-DESIGN RESULTS
In this section, we present performance results for eIRA codes designed using the algorithm of the previous section. Comparisons are made to codes found in the literature. We note that computation of the bit-error rate (BER) and the codeworderror rate involve only the information bits.
Example 1: In this first example, we consider the design of two moderate-length rate-1/2 codes: one with ( ) parameters

Fig. 3. Performance of n = 4000 and n = 1000 rate-1/2 irregular LDPC
codes.

(4000, 2000), and one with parameters (1000, 500). The optimal

degree distributions for rate-1/2 codes with

(using

the Gaussian approximation [6]) are

Based on these distributions, we find for the (4000, 2000) code, the number of v-nodes of degree two is from (1)

Using (1) and (2) in similar computations, we find also

,

,

, and

. In par-

ticular,

, so that the condition required

by the lemma for cycle-free degree-two v-nodes is not satisfied.

For the (1000, 500) code, we find

so that the condition is again not satisfied. However,

does

not exceed the prescribed value of

by very much in ei-

ther case, so that we would not expect there to be very many

cycles among the degree-two v-nodes. Thus, we would not ex-

pect there to be much degradation due to such cycles for these

particular codes.

To verify this, we first designed a (4000, 2000) eIRA code

with

per the algorithm of the previous

section. We then designed a (4000, 2000) code with

using an algorithm much like the one in the previous sec-

tion, but without the

constraint (essentially the

algorithm in [3]). The two codes were simulated and had es-

sentially identical performance curves. We repeated this for the

(1000, 500) case and obtained the same result, thus confirming

our expectations. The (1000, 500) curve(s) also showed close

agreement with the one in [3], thus establishing the quality of

our design algorithm. The BER curves for the four codes are

shown in Fig. 3. The two codes designed using the technique in

[3] are labeled “R&U” in the figure, and two codes designed as

eIRA codes per the algorithm above are labeled “eIRA.”

Example 2: In this second example, we consider the fol-

lowing four rate-0.82 codes.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: DESIGN OF EFFICIENTLY ENCODABLE MODERATE-LENGTH HIGH-RATE IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

569

H w Fig. 4. Performance comparison of various n = 4161 rate-0.82 regular and Fig. 5. Performance comparison of various n = 4161 rate-0.82 eIRA codes

irregular LDPC codes.

with column weights = 3, 4, and 5.

1) A (4161, 3431) (nearly) regular LDPC code due to MacKay [16] having degree distributions

Note

.

2) A (4161, 3430) regular finite geometry-based LDPC due

to Kou et al. [15] having degree distributions

Note

.

3) A (4161, 3430) irregular LDPC code without the con-

straint

and with

and

. The optimal degree distributions were found to

be

From the v-node distribution, we compute

, which is far greater than

, and so we

can expect there to be many cycles associated with the

degree-two nodes, in light of the lemma.

4) A (4161, 3430) eIRA code (i.e., with the constraint

) and with

and

.

The optimal degree distributions were found to be

region simulated, since such cycles are avoided in the code de-

sign. The finite geometry code and the MacKay code possess no

such cycles, but they are inferior to code four in the region sim-

ulated, since they possess far from optimal degree distributions

(one is regular and the other is nearly regular). We remark that

the finite geometry code likely has the lowest error-rate floor

due to its large minimum distance, lower bounded as

in [15]. Last, we point out that a code which has a value of

between those of codes three and four (i.e.,

) will have a floor which lies between the floors of these

two codes.

Example 3: Whereas code four has a vastly improved

error-rate floor relative to code three in the previous example,

it starts to hit a floor in the vicinity of

(as will be

shown shortly). This is attributable to a somewhat small .

We conjecture that low-weight columns in (specifically,

the submatrix ) lead to a small . MacKay and Davey

[17] have also made this conjecture. Further, as demonstrated

in Section II, the LLR values for bits corresponding to low

column weights have smaller magnitudes than those with high

column weights. To study this conjecture, we designed two

(4161, 3430) eIRA codes whose column weights are

4 and 5, and compared their performance to code four above,

whose column weights are 3, 7, and 8. Degree distributions

for these two additional codes are

From this, we compute

and

so

that

equals the maximum prescribed by the lemma.

Fig. 4 presents the performance of these four codes, where

we first note that the unconstrained irregular code (code three)

suffers from a high error-rate floor due to its large number of de-

gree-two v-nodes and their associated cycles. The ( -con-

strained) eIRA code (code four) has the best performance in the

The error-rate curves (BER and codeword-error rate )

for these two codes are presented together with the performance

of code four in Fig. 5 (where code four is labeled

). We

observe that the floor decreases with increasing and that the

code with

has no floor down to

. Further, the

code is only about 0.2 dB inferior to the

code

(code four) at

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

570

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

REFERENCES

Fig. 6. Rate-0.9 eIRA code on the AWGN channel with low error-rate floor.

Example 4: As a final example which demonstrates the

utility of our approach, we have designed a rate-0.9 (4550,

4095) eIRA code with

. The degree distributions for

this code are

Its performance is presented in Fig. 6, where we observe the

absence of an error-rate floor down to

.

VII. CONCLUDING REMARKS

We have presented the class of extended IRA codes, making

connections to irregular LDPC codes and serial turbo codes.

We have presented an algorithm for the design of eIRA codes

of moderate length and high rate which possess no error-rate

floor down to

. To our knowledge, no other codes

with such characteristics can be found in the literature. This

paper represents a valuable step toward the design of codes

for magnetic and optical data storage where a BER of

is often quoted, or optical communications where error rates

below

are often quoted. Further research in this area in-

cludes support for the conjecture that low-weight columns in

(specifically, the submatrix ) lead to a small . Also, given

that we have avoided only length-four cycles, the experimental

results presented imply that short cycles (e.g., length six) and

other graphical configurations do not have as much of an influ-

ence on the level of the floor as does , at least for high-rate

codes. This was first pointed out by the work of Lin et al. [18].

It was shown in [19], however, that small girth values can have

a tremendous effect on the performance of the code when the

code rate is lower and/or the length is smaller than those con-

sidered here.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to acknowledge J. Hou and P. Siegel of the University of California, San Diego, for help with the initial density evolution program.

[1] D. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[2] “Special issue on codes on graphs and iterative algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 493–849, Feb. 2001.
[3] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[4] S. Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[5] T. J. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[6] S. Y. Chung, “On the construction of some capacity-approaching coding schemes,” Ph.D. dissertation, Dept. Elect. Eng., Mass. Inst. Technol., Cambridge, MA, 2000.
[7] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Iterative turbo decoder analysis based on density evolution,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 891–907, May 2001.
[8] H. X. Song, M. Richard, and J. Cruz, “Low-density parity-check codes for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 36, pp. 2183–2186, Sept. 2000.
[9] K. Rice and R. Storn, “Difference evolution—A simple and efficient heuristic for global optimization over continuous spaces,” J. Global Optimiz., vol. 11, pp. 341–359, Sept. 1997.
[10] M. Chiani and A. Ventura, “Design and performance evaluation of some high-rate irregular low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom Conf., Nov. 2001, pp. 990–994.
[11] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece, “Irregular repeat-accumulate codes,” in Proc. 2nd. Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2000, pp. 1–8.
[12] R. Narayanaswami, “Coded modulation with low-density parity-check codes,” M.S. thesis, Dept. Elect. Eng., Texas A&M Univ., College Station, TX, 2001.
[13] J. Hou, P. H. Siegel, and L. B. Milstein, “Performance analysis and code optimization of low-density parity-check codes on Rayleigh fading channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 924–934, May 2001.
[14] [Online]. Available: http://www.icsi.berkeley.edu/ storn/code.html [15] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes
based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001. [16] D. J. C. MacKay. Parity-check matrices. [Online]. Available: http://wol.ra.phy.cam.ac.uk/mackay [17] D. MacKay and M. Davey, “Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high-rate applications,” in Codes, Systems, and Graphical Models. New York: Spring-Verlag, 2000, vol. 123, IMA Vols. in Math. and Applicats., pp. 113–130. [18] H. Tang, J. Xu, S. Lin, and K. Abdel-Ghaffar, “Codes on finite geometries,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication. [19] J. Campello and D. S. Modha, “Extended bit-filling and LDPC code design,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommunications Conf., Nov. 2001, pp. 985–989.
Michael Yang (S’01) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical and communication systems from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics, Nanjing, China, in 1993 and 1996, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ.
From 1996 to 1999, he was with the Shenzhen Huawei Technology, Inc., Shenzhen, China, working on SDH optical transmission systems. He is currently a Research Assistant in the Digital Communication Systems Laboratory (DCSL), University of Arizona. His current research interests include digital communications and signal processing, with emphases on error-control coding on graphs and iterative algorithms, and its application to data storage and transmission.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

YANG et al.: DESIGN OF EFFICIENTLY ENCODABLE MODERATE-LENGTH HIGH-RATE IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

571

William E. Ryan (S’83–M’84–SM’01) received the B.S.E.E. degree from Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH, in 1981, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Virginia, Charlottesville, in 1984 and 1988, respectively.
He was with The Analytic Sciences Corporation, Ampex Corporation, and Applied Signal Technology prior to his positions in academia. From 1993 to 1998, he was with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department faculty at New Mexico State University, Las Cruces. Since August 1998, he has been with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department at the University of Arizona, Tucson, where he is an Associate Professor. His research interests are in coding and signal processing for data transmission and storage. Dr. Ryan is an Associate Editor of Modulation, Coding, and Equalization for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS.

Yan Li (S’02) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical and communication systems from Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an, China, in 1996 and 1999, respectively. He is currently working toward the Ph.D. degree in the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson.
Previously, he was with Huawei Technology, Inc., Shanghai, China, and worked on wideband code-division multiple-access systems. From 2000 to the present, he has been a Research Assistant in the Digital Communication Systems Laboratory (DCSL), University of Arizona. His current research interests include coding, modulation, and signal processing in digital communications.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

