New Implementation for the Scalable LDPC-Decoders

Li Yanping ,Moon Ho Lee,
GiYean Hwang, Ju Yong Park
Institute of Information & Communication
Chonbuk National University, Chonju 561-756, Korea
Email: lypgg@hotmail.com ,moonho, infoman@chonhuk.ac.h, jypark@seonam.ac.!a

Abstract-In this paper, trellis decoding of regular and
irregular lowdensity parity-check (LDPC) codes and the corresponding decoder architectures are considered. Moreover, we propose a new approach for computing reliability metrics based on the BCJR algorithm that reduces the message switching activity in the decoder compared to existing approaches. The trellis decoding schedule is employed to decode LDPC codes using constituent soft-input soft-output (SISO) decoders that communicate through interleavers. The proposed tunable schedule exhibits a faster convergence behavior (up to 50% less iterations), and hence lower decoding latency, than the commonly employed two-phase schedule, and the corresponding decoder architecture has significantly reduced memory requirement. Improvement in decoding gain (up to an order of magnitude for moderate-to-high SNR and small number of iterations), structural regularity features in the form of permutation matrices further reduce interconnect complexity and improve decoding throughput.
I. Introduction
Low-Density Parity-Check codes were introduced by Gallagcr 1962 [ I ] and rc-discovered in1996 by MacKac [Z] and Neal. Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes have gained interest due to their excellent error-correction capabilities. Due to their excellent error correction performance they arc considered for future telecommunication standards. It was shown that this class of codes is capable of approaching capacity limit at low decoding complexity. Compared to turbo codes [3], decoding LDPC codes requires simpler processing, however the message communication mechanism involved is in the form of a pseudo-random "internal interleaver”, which leads to implementation challenges.
Traditionally, the hardware implementation for LDPC decoder are using Gallager’s message-passing (MP) [4] algorithm based on a two-phase schedule. The algorithm computes iteratively the extrinsic probability values associated with each bit node using disjoint parity-check equations that the bit participates in [4]. Each iteration consists oftwo phases in which updates of all check nodes are done in phase I by sending messages ( pcu,),,to neighboring bit nodes, and then
updates of all hit nodes are done in phase 2 by sending messages (&+) to neighboring check nodes (Fig. 1). Updates
in each phase are independent and can be parallelized. Each iteration of the MP algorithm consists of a two-phase round of updates between check and bit nodes according to connectivity of the underlying graph.
The lack of any structllral regularity in the message communication mechanism of LDPC codes results in I ) complex interconnects that limits the amount of inherent parallelism that can he exploited efficiently in a parallel decoder implementation, and 2) stringent memoly

requirements in a serial decoder implementation that limits the applicability of LDPC codes in latency and power sensitive applications.
Therefore, in contrast to the above two problems, we proposed tunable decoder architecture, which is independent of the code design itself. This proposed architecture is scalable and code-programmable, and supports a tunable coderate depending on channel conditions. New decoder architecture implementing the proposed technique is developed which applies for randomly or explicitly constructed regular as well a s irregular LDPC codes.
In this paper, we present the new implementation for the scalable LDPC-decoders. Further, we will show that regularity features in the form of permutation matrices simplify the interconnect complexity and hence increase throughput.

11. The Review of Low-Density Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes
A. Graph Representation of LDPC C o d e s

An LDPC code is described by a bipartite graph (see Fig.1) whose reduccd adjacency matrix is ,y =[h,,],r having m

check

nodes ( c , , c2 r . . . , c,,,} and

n

bit

nodes {b,,bi,...,b,} corresponding to the nt rows and n

columns of H, respectively. A bit node b, is connected to a

check node c iif the entry hi,]of H is 1. In a regular (k, j ) -
LDPC code, bit nodes have degree j and check nodes have degree k in the graph. The number of edges in the corresponding bipartite graph is the Hamming weight of H given byw(H)=nj=mk, and the density of H is defined
a s d ( H ) = ~ ~ l m n = j l m = k l nIn. an irregular (K,J)-LDPC code the hit node and check node degees are drawn from the sets K and J. Typically, regular codes are easier to encode and have simpler decoder architecture than irregular codes.
Chckdri

Bit n&r
Fig.1 Bipanite graph and parity check matrix H of a regular LDPC code of length 9.

0-7803-8255-2/04/s20.00 02004 IEE.

343

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:59:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

B. Single Parity-Check (SPC) sub-block matrix

Gallager constructed ensembles of regular (/, k)-LDPC codes of length n by defining the parity-check matrix Hmxonf a code

C a s a concatenation o f j submatrices, each containing a single 1 in each column as Fig.2. The first of these submatrices

z x n H'having size

defines a sub-code C ' a s the direct sum

P of L=n/p parity-check sub-codes (p, y-I). The other sub-

matrices H ' , ...,H i a r e pseudo-random permutations ofH' ,

cach of which defines a super-code C'on the corresponding
subset of the parity-check equations. We give the example of a parity-check matrix of regular (3, 4)-LDPC code of length 16 as concatenation of 3 sub-matrices.

<

n

.

Fig. 2 a parity-check matrix defined as concatenation of 3 sub-matrices .

111. Scalable Decoder Architecture

A. Trellis-Decoder Message-Passing algorithm
The previous definition of LDPC codes is reminiscent of parallel-concatenated turbo codes [ 5 ] , and hence it is natural to apply the trellis-decoding technique to decode LDPC codes employing constituent SISO decoders based on the BCJR algorithm to decode each of the super-codes. From this observation, it follows that the decode memory requirements for LDPC,codes are reduced since most practical LDPC codes can be constructed from a small number of super-codes. For each bit, extrinsic probability values are computed given that
the hit belongs to the first code C' . This extrinsic information
is fed as a priori information through an interleaver ( X)ito
the SlSO decoder working onC'. Thc second SlSO decoder next generates updated extrinsic probability values considering
now the bits belong to C 2 .The process is repeated on all of
the remaining super-codes. A single update of messages based.on one super-code is
called sub-iteration, and around of updates across all the supercodes constitutes a single decoding iteration. At the final iteration, hard decisions are made based on the posterior probability values read (after de-interleaving) from the SlSO decoder operating on the last sub-code.

Fig. 3 the trellis-decoding algorithm for LDPC codes

The trellis [6] of each super-code is a direct sum of
n l p syndrome trellises of a single parity-check code as shown
in Fig. 2. Hence, the SISO decoders of the super-codes consist of independent simple SISO decoder that can operate in parallel on each of the constituent single parity-check super-
codes as shown in Fig. 3. Let 8 denote the received channel information about the bits, and A,,, = 1,...,C, denote the
extrinsic reliability information obtained by decoding the bits
assuming they belong only to the ith constituent code. Let y denote the total or posterior reliability information known
E' about the hits o r y , J+ 1,. Decoding proceeds according !=I
to the dual extrinsic principle, which assetts that decoder
citakes as input all information known so for about the bits
that was previously generated not using Cj(outer extrinsic),
and generates as output updated (inner) extrinsic i\,using the
constraints of the ith constituent code.

B. Simplified SlSO decoder suitable for implementation of LDPC codes

The SISO decoders can either implement Gallager's

message update equation as given in equation (G2) or the

BCJR algorithm [7]. It was shown that the BCJR algorithm is

better from an implementation point of view since it is less

prone to quantization noise. We employ the BCJR algorithm.

typically used in turbo codes, to compute the extrinsic message

namely check-to-bit message for TPMP algorithm by tailoring

it to the trellis o f a single parity check equation.

This BCJR algorithm has to perform the following

operations: Computation of branch metncs, from the prior

values and the LLR channel measurements; Perform fonvard

(equ.1) and backward (equ.2) state metric recursions

Computation of soft-output a-posteriori log-likelihood ratios.

The BCJR algorithm [7] computes a posteriori reliability

metrics on the trellis according to the following equations

(index-2):

a;= I n ( p 4 +

)

p' -ln(e4*A# +e"'")

I-

a'2 -- 1n(euh+4+ e v z , ) (1)

p'

+&%'4) (2)

1-

A = ln(eu#i&+e'4th)-ln(em#"'8 +e"'&)

(3)

Where M = 1,- 4 =pb+?and A =pc,a . In the context of

LDPC codes, the length of the trellis is the number of bits per bits per check node. To minimize the computation complexity, equations (I), (2) and (3) can be transformed so that metric
differences Aa'= a'>-a',,Ap=p,-p, and 1\ rather than

absolute metrics are involved.

344

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:59:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

= h ( e M+e'') -I~(+I eaniM)
Same way, we can get optimal format for Ap' and A .

=ln(e' +e'fl)-~n(~+e"*")

e#!-#,+e=>-o,

+e=

A = l n I+ e = 2 - m , E ~ z - 8 , -In- I + @ P

(6)

= In(e'# +eAn1- In(! +e"*'#)

We use the Jacobi logarithm [8] [9] to calculate these forwardhackward metrics differences:

+~")=MAx(x,Y)I+n([ +e'"-"I)

(7)

=MAX *(X.Y)

In order to simplify the hardware implementation, we use t he correction function f(x) = In(l+ exp(-.r)) to this operand.

It has been reported that excellent results are obtained by restri c1ing.r to between 0.0 and 6.0 in the Fig. 4.

1

Fig. 5 Compare-Select unit implementing A a
C . Programmable Decoder Architecture
A programmable decoder architecture implementing the TDMP algorithm for regular LDPC codes is shown in Fig. 6. The architecture is composed of six main components: 1 ) a set of SlSO decoder modules contain k MPU's for message computation, the architecture of an MPU module is shown in Fig. 5 implementing the BCJR algorithm in differential form,
2 ) k memory modules (/z -Memory) each of size j X p that
store the extrinsic messages pertaining to all constituent codes,
3) a dual-port memory module ( y -Memory) that stores the
posterior reliabilities of all bits, 4) a memory module (H-
Memory) of size j X p that stores the column positions of the
permutation matrices in H used to index- y -Memory, 5 ) two
networks (the router and the reverse router) for routing message between ,?-Memory and the MPU's, and 6 ) a dual-
port memory module ( Z -Memory) that stores the switch control for the networks.

Fig.4. Correction bnction and its approximation
We implemented this algorithm using 8-bit 2's complement arithmetic. Our numerical representation used 1 sign bit, 4 integer hits and 3 fiactional bits and therefore the smallest value of f(x) we can represents is 118, corresponding to a maximum value o f x of about 2.0. Our implementations of this decoder using BCJR algorithm have shown that function in Fig 4. can approximated by the following rule:
We do the lookup table for the above rule f(x) which can be reduced to simple logic circuit which either adds or not add a constant to the output ofmaximum selection circuit.
Therefore, the forwardhackward metrics differences can be implemented simply as an Add-Compare-Select (ACS) [IO] unit using a comparator, a multiplexer and a lookup table storing the correction function (Fig. 5). A similar argument
holds for Ap and AA

Control

H-Memory

y - MEMORY

Fig. 6 Aprogrammable decoder architecture for LDPC code
The decoder completes a decoding sub-iteration peltaining
to the ith code in @+4) cycles as follows: I - The MPU's read all the extrinsic messages /zj for code
i from /z -Memory.
2- The corresponding posterior messages are read from
Y -Memory and permuted using the router and reverse
router.
3- Updated /i messages are written back to 2 -Memory.
4- Updted ymessages are written back to Y-Memory
afler inverse permuting using the networks. A single decoding iteration is completed in @+4) C cycles.

0-7803-8255-2/04/320.00@ux)4 IEEE

345

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:59:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

D.Simulation and results

.

,

.

.....

7 6 1 6 I.,

IS 19 2 21 2 2 23 > 4 2 1 SNWO)

Fig. 7 BER and convergence rate VS. SNR curves using the trellis-decoding schedule and the two-phase schedule

An important advantage of the trellis-decoding algorithm is that it converges faster than the two-phase schedule since new messages are computed based on updated values from each sub-iteration rather than old messages from the previous iteration. At the same SNR, the algorithm requires 20%-50% fewer iterations to converge(Fig. 7), and can achieve up to an order of magnitude improvement in coding gain for a small number of iterations and moderate-to-high SNR’s.
This is obviously favorable from an implementation point of view since it improves decoding latency. Moreover, it was observed through simulations (Fig. 8) that the trellis-decoding algorithm performs always better than the two-phase schedule regardless of the code properties (e.g., regularlirregular, girth, expanding coefficient).

Fig. 8 Comparison of performance of the trellis-decoding and
the two-phase schedules
The major benefit of the trellis-decoding algorithm, besides the improved decoding latency due to its faster convergence characteristics, is its reduced intermediate message between bit nodes and check nodes in the underlying bipartite graph must be saved. only the partial bit messages that result from decoding each super-code need to be saved.
In fact, for C concatenated super-codes, only the partial bit messages from (C -I)of the super-codes need to be saved. In essence, since the overall code is decoded by decoding the super-codes in tandem in one iteration, newly generated bit messages from preceding super-codes are directly used to generate bit messages of succeeding super-codes on the same iteration. This eliminates the constraint of saving multiple bit and check messages.

VI. Conclusion
A new scalable decoder implementation for LDPC codes has been presented. Compared with existing approached, the proposed scheme exhibits faster convergence behavior, and requires less storage area in a decoder implementation. A memory eficient decoder architecture based on these proposed schedules has been presented for LDPC codes. The architecture is independent of the code’s parity-check matrix in the sense of Gallager’s construction, and has comparable complexity to the proposed architectures in terms of conventional decoder method messagc communication, but significantly simpler computational complexity.
Future work will include further optimizations of the message transport network of the decoder, as well as handling irregular LDPC codes.
References
[I] R.G Gallager, “Low Density Parity Check Codes”, IRE Trans. On Information Thheo,?, Vol.lT-8, pp. 21-28, Jan. 1962. [Z] D. .I.C. Mackay and R. M. Neal, “Near-Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Elecrron. Lerrer,Vol.32,no.IX,pp. 1645-1646, Mar.1996. [3] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near Shannon Limit Error-Correcting Coding and Decoding: Turbo Codes,”in IEEE ICC, 1993, pp. 1064-1070. [4] R.G Gallager, Lon Density Parity Check Codes, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,1963. [SI T.Miyauchi et al., “High-performance programmable SlSO decoder VLSl implementation for decoding turbo codes.” in proc. IEEE Globecom 2001, Son Antonio, TX.Nov.2001,pp.328-333. [6] F. R. Kshischang and V. Sorokine, “On the Trellis Structure of Block codes,”IEEE Trans. On Info. Theoq<VolA1,pp. 19241937,1995 [7] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate”, IEEE Trans. Onl.T.,pp.284-287. Mar. 1974. [8] J. A. Erfanian and S. Pasupathy, “Low-Complexity ParallelStructure Symbol-by-Symbol Detection for IS1 Channels,” IEEE Pacific Rim Conference on Communications. Computers andSignalPmcessing, pp. 350-353, June 1-2 1989.
[9] A. J. Viterbi, “An Intuitive Justification and a Simplified
Implementation of MAP Decoder for Covoutional Codes,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, pp.260264, February 1998. [lo] Warren J. Gross and P. Glenn Gulak, Simplified MAP Algorithm Suitable for Implementation of Turbo Decoders, ElectronicsLerters,Vol. 34. No. 16, pp. 1577-1578, 6th August 1998.
‘This paper was suppaned by University IT research center project.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 10:59:53 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

