IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

715

Improved Progressive-Edge-Growth (PEG) Construction of Irregular LDPC Codes
Hua Xiao and Amir H. Banihashemi, Member, IEEE

Abstract—Progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm is known to construct low-density parity-check codes at finite block lengths with very good performance. In this letter, we propose a very simple modification to PEG construction for irregular codes, which considerably improves the performance at high signal-tonoise (SNR) ratios with no sacrifice in low-SNR performance.
Index Terms—Error floor, irregular low density parity check (LDPC) codes, LDPC codes, LDPC codes at finite block lengths, near-codewords, progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm, short LDPC codes, trapping sets.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW density parity check (LDPC) codes [1] have attracted considerable attention due to their capacity approaching performance and low-complexity iterative decoding. In particular, construction of good LDPC codes at short and intermediate block lengths is of great practical importance. Among the existing methods, one of the most successful approaches for the construction of finite-length LDPC codes is the progressiveedge-growth (PEG) algorithm proposed by Hu et al. [3]–[5] (for more examples of PEG-constructed LDPC codes, see [6]). PEG construction builds up a Tanner graph (TG), or equivalently a parity-check matrix, for an LDPC code on an edge-by-edge basis and by maximizing the local girth at variable nodes in a greedy fashion. It is simple and also flexible in that it can be applied to construct codes of arbitrary length and rate. In addition, PEG algorithm can be used to construct linear-time encodable LDPC codes which also perform very well. Moreover, the construction can be used for both regular and irregular LDPC codes. For irregular codes, in particular, the results of [5] show that PEG construction with symbol-node degree distributions optimized by density evolution [9] results in very good performance, especially in the waterfall region. It is, however, well known that the good performance of highly optimized irregular codes in the waterfall region is usually counterbalanced by a relatively poor performance in the error-floor region. In this work, we propose a very simple modification to PEG algorithm which considerably improves the performance of constructed irregular codes at high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) region. In PEG algorithm it often happens that one has a few candidate check nodes to connect to a given symbol node (all such candidates result in the same local girth under the current graph structure). In the standard PEG algorithm, among such check-node candidates,

one chooses either the one with the smallest index or just one at random (both choices result in more or less the same performance [3], [5]).1 In the proposed modification, by borrowing an idea from [10] and [11], among the candidate check nodes, we select the one which maintains the highest degree of connectivity for the newly created cycles to the rest of the graph. This implies that these cycles will receive a large amount of extrinsic information from the rest of the graph and thus would not impose as much harm as they would if they were more isolated. The idea borrowed from [10], [11] is to quantify the connectivity of a cycle to the rest of the graph by a simple parameter called “approximate cycle extrinsic message degree (ACE).” This parameter, which will be defined in Section II, has been used in [10], [11] to design LDPC codes with low error floors. The codes constructed in [10], [11] however perform worse than the codes constructed by standard PEG algorithm in the waterfall region.2 This is while for our construction the performance is either similar (at low SNR) or better (at high SNR) than that of standard PEG. In Section III, we analyze the performance of PEG and modified PEG codes in the high-SNR region and show that the better performance of modified PEG in the error floor region is due to larger minimum distance as well as improved trapping sets [8] (near-codewords [7]).

II. IMPROVED PEG ALGORITHM

Using the same notations and definitions as in [3], [5], we

describe the standard PEG algorithm for constructing a TG with

variable nodes and check nodes in the following.

PEG algorithm [3],[5]

for

to

do

for

to

do

if

edge

, where

is the first

edge incident to symbol node , and is

one check node such that it has the lowest

check-node degree under the current graph

setting

else

expand a subgraph from symbol node

up to depth under the current graph

setting such that the cardinality of

stops increasing but is less than , or

but

, then

edge

,

Manuscript received April 10, 2004. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Dr. M. Fossorier
The authors are with the Department of Systems and Computer Engineering, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada (e-mail: huaxiao@sce. carleton.ca; ahashemi@sce.carleton.ca).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2004.839612

1Other versions of PEG algorithm (nongreedy and lookahead-enhanced) have also been discussed in [5], but none of them provides any nonnegligible performance improvement over the standard PEG.
2For an irregular LDPC code of length 4000 and rate 0.5, with maximum symbol-node degree 8, PEG-constructed code [3] outperforms the construction of [10], [11] by about 0.4 dB in the waterfall region.

1089-7798/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

716

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

where

is the th edge incident to ,

and is one check node picked from the

set

having the lowest check-node de-

gree.

In the above algorithm, both symbol nodes and check nodes

are ordered according to their degrees in nondecreasing order,

is the degree of symbol-node , and and denote the

set of all check nodes reached by a tree spreading from symbol-

node within depth , and its complement, respectively [3], [5].

In PEG algorithm, when a new edge is to be connected to

a symbol node, we may have multiple candidate check nodes

available.3 In the proposed modification, we focus on cases

where

and

but

. In such cases,

for each and every candidate check node in (all with the

lowest degree), the addition of the new edge to the graph

creates new cycles in the graph, all with length

. We

denote the set of candidate check nodes corresponding to the

th edge of symbol node by . In the modified algorithm,

Fig. 1. BER (—) and MER (– – –) curves for the PEG ( ; ) and modified PEG (5; 3) codes decoded by BP algorithm. [Upper (; 3) and lower (5; )
curves are for (504, 252) codes, and (1008, 504) codes, respectively].

from set , we select the check node whose associated cycles

have the highest degree of connectivity to the rest of the graph

under the current graph setting. As the measure of connectivity

for a cycle, we count the number of edges by which the cycle

is connected to the rest of the graph through its symbol nodes.

This is equal to

, where the summation is taken

over all the symbol nodes in the cycle and is the degree of the

th symbol node. This measure was first used in [10], [11], and

was referred to as approximate cycle extrinsic message degree

(ACE). To ensure a high degree of connectivity for the new

cycles, from set , we select the check node that maximizes

the minimum ACE for the new cycles. In the case that there is

more than one node in with this property, we select one

at random. As we will see in the Section III, the increase in

connectivity of the graph improves both the minimum distance

and the trapping sets of the code and thus results in a better

error-floor performance. Clearly, the modification proposed

here is only effective for the construction of irregular codes.

For regular codes, the ACE of all the newly created cycles is

the same regardless of the selected check node.

The success of proposed modification depends on the fre-

quency in which the cardinality of is greater than one

throughout the PEG algorithm. Based on our simulations, this

happens quite often. In fact, for both of the simulated codes,

more than half of the edges faced the situation in which the

cardinality of is greater than one. This has resulted in

considerable performance improvement over standard PEG as

demonstrated in the Section III.

other two are (1008, 504) codes. For each set of parameters, one code is constructed by standard PEG algorithm, and the other one by the modified PEG algorithm proposed here. To provide a comparison between the complexity of PEG and modified PEG algorithms, we measured the running time of both algorithms on a 1 GHz Pentium III processor. For the (504, 252) codes, PEG and modified PEG take about 0.35 and 0.39 s, respectively. These numbers for the (1008, 504) codes are 1.43 and 1.55, respectively. It can be seen that the proposed modification only results in a small increase in the running time.
Following [5], we use BPSK modulation over additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with belief propagation (BP) for iterative decoding. Similar to [5], the maximum number of iterations for the BP decoder is set to 80. For each SNR, the simulation continues until we get at least 100 code words in error. To have a fair comparison between PEG and modified PEG algorithms, the same noise vectors are used for the codes with the same block lengths.
Fig. 1 shows the bit error rate (BER) and the message error rate (MER) curves for the four codes. It can be seen that, for both block lengths, at high SNR values, the codes constructed by modified PEG algorithm outperform the corresponding PEG codes considerably. At lower SNR values the codes perform more or less the same, with modified PEG codes never performing worse.
To analyze the improvement in the error floor region by modified PEG construction, we examined the errors for both PEG and modified PEG codes in this region. We only report the results

III. SIMULATION RESULTS

for (1008, 504) codes here, where we focus on the errors at the

highest simulated

, which is 2.8 dB. Similar trends exist

In our simulations, we construct four irregular LDPC codes for (504, 252) codes. It is known that for the AWGN channel, er-

with the same block lengths, rate and symbol-node degree dis- rors in the error floor region are mainly due to low-weight code-

tribution as those in [5]. All four codes have rate 0.5, and are words as well as trapping sets [8], also referred to as near-code-

constructed based on the optimized symbol-node degree distri- words [7]. The former contribute to undetected errors while the

bution given in [9, Table II] with maximum symbol-node degree latter are responsible for detected errors. Following [7] and [8],

15. Two codes have parameters

, while the we use the notation

to denote a trapping set with vari-

3As mentioned before, although several approaches have been proposed in [3], [5] to deal with this issue, they all result in codes that perform more or less the same.

able nodes and unsatisfied check equations. Trapping sets with both small values of and are main contributors to the detected part of errors in the error floor region [7], [8].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

XIAO AND BANIHASHEMI: IMPROVED PEG CONSTRUCTION OF IRREGULAR LDPC CODES

717

For (1008, 504) PEG and modified PEG codes, the percentage

of undetected errors at 2.8 dB are 36% and 10%, respectively.

We have also observed that for the PEG code, the lowest code-

word weight (lowest weight of undetected error) is 12, while

for the modified PEG code, this value is increased to 15. For

the PEG code, as a relatively large percentage of the errors in

the error floor region are attributed to undetected errors, this in-

crease in the weight of lowest weight codewords for modified

PEG compared to standard PEG has made some contribution to

the better performance of modified PEG in the error floor re-

gion. Moreover, for the PEG code, the values of and for

trapping sets are on average smaller than those of the modified

PEG code. For example, for the PEG code, the trapping set with

the smallest and is (6,1). There are also several other trap-

ping sets with

and

. This is while for the modified

PEG, only one trapping set with

is observed, and even

for that set,

, which is larger than all the corresponding

values for the PEG code.4

IV. CONCLUSION
Progressive-edge-growth (PEG) algorithm is one of the best known methods for constructing LDPC codes at short and intermediate block lengths. In particular, for irregular codes, PEG-
4It should be noted that parity-check matrices for irregular PEG codes with parameters identical to those used in this letter are given in [6]. These codes, which perform better than the standard PEG codes reported here, are constructed by incorporating an extra search step in each stage of PEG algorithm to maximize the girth of the left-hand side subgraph [5] of the symbol nodes [2]. Similar steps can also be incorporated in our modified PEG algorithm at a cost of larger complexity. Even in their current form, our modified PEG codes outperform the codes given in [6]. For example, we have tested the (1008, 504) code given in
2 2 [6] at 2.8 dB. The BER and MER for this code are 8.2 10 and 2.4 10 , 2 2 respectively, compared to 4.8 10 and 1.4 10 , for our code. Also for the
code in [6], the lowest weight of undetected errors is 13 (compared to 15 for our code). Moreover, the code in [6] has many trapping sets with smaller values of
w and u compared to those of our (1008, 504) code.

constructed codes based on optimal symbol-node degree sequences perform very well in the waterfall region. The performance at higher SNR values however is usually impaired by an early error floor. Here, we propose a very simple modification to PEG algorithm which considerably enhances the performance at high SNR region without any degradation in the low-SNR performance. The modification is based on creating a higher degree of connectivity in the Tanner graph of the code without sacrificing the girth distribution. This appears to improve both the minimum distance and the trapping sets (near-codewords) of the code.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] X.-Y. Hu, private communication, Mar. 2004. [3] X.-Y. Hu, E. Eleftheriou, and D.-M. Arnold, “Progressive edge-growth
Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE GLOBECOM 2001, San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001, pp. 995–1001. [4] , “Irregular progressive edge-growth (PEG) Tanner graphs,” in Proc. IEEE ISIT 2002, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 30–July 5, 2002, pp. 480–480. [5] , “Regular and irregular progressive edge-growth Tanner graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication. [6] D. J. C. Mackay.. [Online]. Available: www.inference.phy.cam.ac.uk/ mackay/PEG_ECC.html [7] D. J. C. Mackay and M. S. Postol, “Weakness of Margulis and Ramanujan-Margulis low-density parity-check codes,” Electronic Notes in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 74, 2003. [8] T. Richardson, “Error floors of LDPC codes,” in Proc. 41st Annu. Allerton Conf. on Communication, Control, and Computing, Urbana-Champaign, Oct. 2003, pp. 1426–1435. [9] T. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacityapproaching irregular low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001. [10] T. Tian, C. Jones, J. D. Villasenor, and R. D. Wesel, “Construction of irregular LDPC codes with low error floors,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, vol. 5, Anchorage, AK, May 2003, pp. 3125–3129. [11] , “Selective avoidance of cycles in irregular LDPC code construction,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 52, pp. 1242–1247, Aug. 2004.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:26:14 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

