538

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

MacNeish–Mann Theorem Based Iteratively Decodable Codes for Optical Communication Systems
Ivan B. Djordjevic and Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—A novel family of low-density parity-check codes is proposed based on MacNeish–Mann theorem for construction of mutually orthogonal Latin squares. Codes from this family have high code rate, girth at least six, large minimum distance, and significantly outperform conventional forward error correction schemes based on Reed-Solomon (RS) and turbo codes.
Index Terms—Forward error correction (FEC), low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, MacNeish–Mann theorem, mutually orthogonal Latin squares (MOLS), optical communications.

I. INTRODUCTION

A DVANCED forward error correction (FEC) codes have started playing a key role in boosting performance of

dense wavelength-division multiplexing (DWDM) systems in

long-haul transmission. The coding gain allows to effectively

increase the amplifier spacing, the transmission distance and/or

data rates. The state-of-the-art optical communication systems

standardized by the ITU all employ Bose–Chaudhuri–Hoc-

quenghen (BCH) codes [1]: (

shortened BCH-3

code in the ITU-T G.707 standard,

Reed–Solomon

(RS) code in the digital wrapper of the ITU G.709 standard,

and

RS code in the ITU-T G.975 standard [2]). For

optical communication systems with bit rates beyond 10 Gb/s

more powerful FEC codes with larger coding gains and high

code rates are necessary. Two examples of such code include a

concatenated scheme with two RS codes proposed by Ait Sab

et al. [3], and block turbo codes proposed by Pyndiah [4] and

Ait Sab et al. [5].

Recently, we showed in [6]–[8] that the error performance

and hardware complexity of turbo codes can be outperformed

by low-density parity check (LDPC) codes. LDPC codes can

be designed in a pseudorandom fashion [9], but this leads to

encoders/decoders complexity that exceeds practical limits im-

posed on high-speed optical communication systems. A more

attractive approach applied here is to design LDPC codes based

on combinatorial objects that allow encoding and decoding to

be performed via fast and simple circuits (no permuter is necessary and the parity-check matrix has quasi-cyclic structure, see [8], for more details). Such high-speed FEC architectures are of crucial importance in optical communications, and there has been a great deal of activity in this area. For example, Agere Systems (see Azadet et al. [10]) reported an optical networking interface device with four parallel RS codecs, each operating at 2.5 Gb/s. Agere Systems (see [11], [12]) has also implemented a rate 1/2 block length 1024 LDPC code for optical networking, and Flarion [13] researchers developed codecs employing proprietary multi-edge type LDPC code of length 4096.
In this letter, a novel class of LDPC codes based on mutually orthogonal Latin squares (MOLS) constructed using MacNeish–Mann theorem is proposed. These codes have high code rate, large minimum distance, girth of at least six, low complexity itereative decoding algorithm and excellent BER performance. The performance of the proposed codes is assessed in a very realistic simulation environment (for more details the reader is referred to [7]) that includes impairments originating from amplified spontaneous emission (ASE) noise, pulse distortions due to fiber nonlinearities, chromatic dispersion, crosstalk effects, and intersymbol interference. We show that the coding gain of these LDPC codes is significantly higher than the coding gain of RS codes of larger redundancy and higher than coding gain of turbo codes of larger redundancy, which makes them excellent candidates for use in long-haul transmission systems.
II. CODE DESCRIPTION
The codes proposed in this paper are based on the theory of MOLS constructed using MacNeish–Mann theorem [15].
Recently [8], we gave a construction of LDPC codes using MOLS. In this section, we explain the method of constructing the complete system of MOLS (adopted from [15]) for any composite integer , which generalizes our previous construction [8].
Let the prime decomposition of an integer be

Manuscript received December 16, 2003. The associate editor coordinating the review of this letter and approving it for publication was Prof. C.-C. Chao. This work is supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant ITR 0325979 and Grant CCR 0208597.
I. B. Djordjevic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA, on leave from the Faculty of Computing, Engineering and Mathematical Sciences, University of the West of England, Bristol, U.K. (e-mail: ivan@ece.arizona.edu).
B. Vasic is with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona,Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/LCOMM.2004.833833

(1)

with

being the prime numbers. MacNeish

and Mann showed [15] that a complete set of

(2)

MOLS of order can always be constructed. The construction algorithm follows. Consider -tuples

(3)

1089-7798/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

DJORDJEVIC AND VASIC: MACNEISH–MANN THEOREM BASED ITERATIVELY DECODABLE CODES

539

where

,

, with addition and mul- of

are denoted by integers

);

tiplication operations defined by

respectively

(4)

(5)

wherein the operations in brackets are performed in the

corresponding Galois fields (e.g.,

and

are per-

formed in

). Denote the elements from

,

as

,

. The fol-

lowing elements possesses multiplicative inverses:

(6)

since they are composed of nonzero elements of corresponding

Galois fields, and

for

as well. Denote the first

element as

, the next as in (6), and the

rest

elements as

(7)

with combinations of components leading to (6) being excluded.

The arrays of elements, MOLS, ,

are further formed with th cell being filled by

;

;

. (The multiplication

is performed using (5), and the addition

using

(4).) To establish the connection between MOLS and BIBD, we

introduce the following one-to-one mapping

, with

being the MOLS and being the integer set of elements

(points) (for more details on BIBDs please refer to [8], [14]).

The simplest example of such mapping is the linear mapping

;

(therefore,

). (The numbers

are referred to as the cell labels.) Each

defines a set of blocks (lines)

. Each line

in

contains the labels of element from . These blocks are

equivalent to the sets of lines of slopes

in

the lattice design introduced in our earlier paper [6]. Labels of

every line of a design specify the positions of “1”s in a row of

parity check matrix. Namely, the incidence matrix of a design

is a

matrix

defined by

Blocks of the corresponding BIBD are given as rows of the array

if the th block contains the th point otherwise

and represents the parity-check matrix. The code length is ,

the code rate is determined by

, and

may be estimated as

.

Notice that when is a prime power, the construction pro-

posed here reduces to our previous construction [8].

Finding the minimum distance of BIBD codes is difficult in

general. However, it can be shown that a lower bound on min-

imum distance is .

Example: For

the number of

MOLS is

, and corresponding -elements are:

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

, For example, the first row in denotes the labels of element 1

,

,

, and from . (The labels in the first row of run from 1 to 12, in the

. (Primitive polynomials of

and

second from 13 to 24, etc.) The rows of specify positions of

used in this example are

and

, respec- nonzero elements in the rows of a parity-check matrix (elements

tively.) The two MOLS are (the elements of MOLS instead of run from 1 to ).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

540

IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS, VOL. 8, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

The LDPC code of redundancy 9.57% significantly outper-

forms

concatenation scheme [5],

while LDPC code of redundancy 12.59% outperforms the opti-

mized block turbo code [5] of redundancy 28%. Notice the com-

plexity of the turbo decoding algorithm is higher than that of

a decoder based on min-sum algorithm. (Encoding complexity

and the decoding hardware complexity of BIBD codes are dis-

cussed in [17].)

Fig. 1. BER performance of LDPC codes on MacNeish–Mann MOLS at 40 Gb/s with six iterations in min-sum algorithm.

III. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS

Fig. 1 plots the BER results obtained from Monte Carlo

simulations with six iterations in the min-sum decoding al-

gorithm for a MOLS (using MacMeish-Mann theorem for

) LDPC

code with code rate

(redundancy of 9.57%), and a MOLS based LDPC

with code rate 0.888 (redundancy of 12.59%), constructed for

. (Notice that here we use the definition of redundancy

commonly used for optical communications; see e.g., [16].) A

WDM system with 40-Gb/s bit-rate per channel and a channel

spacing of 100 GHz is considered. It is assumed that the ob-

served channel is located at 1552.524 nm (193.1 THz) and that

there exists a nonnegligible interaction with six neighboring

channels. The influence of optical and electrical filters is

taken into account as well. The dispersion map of considered

transmission system is composed of a SMF section (of length

80 km), followed by an EDFA to compensate the fiber losses,

and a DCF section to compensate both GVD and second-order

GVD, as well as another EDFA to compensate the fiber losses

in corresponding DCF section. Eight SMF-DCF sections are

observed, and Q-factor is additionally decreased by noise

loading. The average power per channel is set to be 0 dBm,

and the carrier-suppressed RZ signal format is assumed. (The

channel characteristics modeled according to our previous

papers [7] are used to create samples fed to iterative decoder.)

Using the expression

(8)

the bit-error rate of uncoded signal is converted to Q-factor to make the results comparable with previously reported ones.

IV. CONCLUSION
We proposed a novel class of LDPC codes, with high code rate, large minimum distance and girth at least six, based on MOLS constructed using MacNeish–Mann theorem.
The proposed LPDC codes perform very well in the presence of ASE noise, fiber nonlinearities, chromatic dispersion, and intersymbol interference. Since the proposed FEC scheme significantly outperforms traditional FEC schemes based on RS and turbo codes it is an excellent candidate for long-haul transmission.

REFERENCES

[1] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Ap-

plications. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1983.

[2] “ITU, Telecommunication Standardization Sector Forward Error Cor-

rection for Submarine Systems,”, Tech. Recommendation G.975/ G709.

[3] O. A. Sab et al., “Concatenated forward error correction schemes for

long-haul DWDM optical transmission systems,” in ECOC, 1999, pp.

II-290–II-290.

[4] R. M. Pyndiah, “Near optimum decoding of product codes,” IEEE Trans.

Commun., vol. 46, pp. 1003–1010, Aug. 1998.

[5] O. A. Sab and V. Lemarie, “Block turbo code performances for long-haul

DWDM optical transmission systems,” in Proc. Optical Fiber Commu-

nication Conf. (OFC ), vol. 3, 2001, pp. 280–282.

[6] B. Vasic and I. B. Djordjevic, “Low-Density parity check codes for long

haul optical communications systems,” IEEE Photon. Technol. Lett., vol.

14, pp. 1208–1210, 2002.

[7] I. B. Djordjevic and B. Vasic, “Projective geometry low-density parity-

check codes for ultra-long haul WDM high-speed transmission,” IEEE

Photon. Technol. Lett., vol. 15, pp. 784–786, May 2003.

[8] B. Vasic, I. B. Djordjevic, and R. Kostuk, “Low-density parity check

codes and iterative decoding for long haul optical communication sys-

tems,” J. Lightwave Technol., vol. 21, pp. 438–446, Feb. 2003.

[9] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error correcting codes based on very sparse

matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.

[10] K. Azadet et al., “Equalization and FEC techniques for optical trans-

ceivers,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 317–327, Mar. 2002.

[11] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “A 220 mW 1 Gb/s 1024-Bit rate-1/2

low density parity check code decoder,” in IEEE Conf. Custom Integ.

Circuits, May 2001, pp. 293–296.

[12]

, “Parallel decoding architectures for low density parity check

codes,” in ISCAS 2001, vol. 4, May 2001, pp. 742–745.

[13] Flarion. Vector LDPC technology. [Online]. Available: http://www.

flarion.com/products/products_vector.html

[14] I. Anderson, Combinatorial Designs: Construction Methods. Chich-

ester, U.K.: Ellis Horwood Ltd., 1990.

[15] D. Raghavarao, Constructions and Combinatorial Problems in Design

of Experiments. New York: Dover, 1988.

[16] O. A. Sab, “Forward error correction for optical transmission systems,”

in Proc. Optical Fiber Communication Conf. (OFC 2003), Atlanta, GA,

2003, pp. 83–104.

[17] R. Lynch et al., “The search for a practical iterative detector for magnetic

recording,” in TMRC 2003.

[18] M. Akita et al., “Third generation FEC employing turbo product code

for long-haul DWDM transmission systems,” in Tech. Dig. Optical Fiber

Communication Conf. (OFC 2002), Anaheim, CA, 2002, paper WP2.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:17 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

