IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

1253

Performance Evaluation of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes on Partial-Response Channels Using Density Evolution
Weijun Tan, Student Member, IEEE, and J. R. Cruz, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A method to evaluate the performance of a low-density parity-check (LDPC) code on partial-response (PR) channels in terms of the noise threshold and decoding error is presented. Given a particular codeword or assuming an independent and uniformly distributed (i.u.d.) codeword for transmission, the density-evolution algorithm is used to compute the probability density function of messages passing in the decoding process, from which the decoding error is extracted. This estimated i.u.d. decoding error is used to approximate the decoding error of an ensemble of LDPC codes on arbitrary PR channels. Comparison with simulation results shows that it is a very good approximation for the simulated codes, provided their length is large enough.
Index Terms—Density evolution, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, message-passing, partial-response (PR) channels.
I. INTRODUCTION
D ENSITY evolution [1] is a newly introduced and powerful technique to model the behavior of iterative decoding for low-density parity-check (LDPC) and turbo-like codes. This idea was first suggested by Gallager [2], and implemented by Luby et al. [3] for binary symmetric channels. Richardson and Urbanke [1] extended it to arbitrary binary-input symmetricaloutput channels. Specifically, for a given class of LDPC codes, it provides a way to compute the probability density functions (pdfs) of the messages in the iterative decoding process. From these pdfs, we can evaluate the asymptotic performance of this class of codes.
This technique was applied to partial-response (PR) channels in [4] with some modifications. Since the concatenation of a linear code and the PR channel is not a linear code any longer, we cannot assume that the all-zero codeword is transmitted. Another important point is that the consistency symmetry [1] does not hold for PR channels. So the Gaussian approximation simplification [5], which only requires that the mean of the messages be tracked, cannot be used, although the message densities may still be approximately Gaussian. Instead, the discretized pdf of the messages is tracked in the density evolution [6].
Using this technique, Kavcic et al. [4] derived performance bounds for an ensemble of LDPC codes on intersymbol interference (ISI) channels, given a particular codeword or assuming that an independent and uniformly distributed (i.u.d.) codeword is transmitted. These bounds are for message errors, i.e., the probability of erroneous variable messages in the message-passing decoding.

In this letter, we extend this result to the probability of symbol errors (bits in binary alphabets) and modify the analytical results in [4] accordingly. We note that although the system performance in terms of the probability of message errors already reflects the essence of iterative decoding, the performance in terms of probability of symbol error is a more commonly used metric and better understood. More importantly, we can estimate the average bit-error rate (BER) of a given ensemble of LDPC codes on a PR channel using this probability of symbol error, which can be validated by simulation and other analytical results, such as bounds [7], [8].
In Section II, we establish the background and the modifications necessary to perform density evolution of LDPC codes on PR channels. Numerical results are shown in Section III, where the simulations are used to validate the computation. Section IV concludes the paper.

II. LDPC CODES ON PR CHANNELS

A randomly constructed LDPC code can be specified by a

degree-distribution pair

, where

and

, with and being the fraction of edges

with variable degree and check degree , respectively. The rate

of this code is

.

A. Decoding
The decoder for this system consists of an a posteriori probability (APP) decoder, which is usually the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) decoder [9] matching the channel and the sum-product (or message-passing) decoder [2], [10] matching the LDPC code.
The message passing in an LDPC-coded PR channel can be represented in a joint code/channel graph, as in [4].
Let and be the variable (of degree ) and check (of degree ) messages in the th round, respectively. The sumproduct decoding can be written as [6]

(1)

(2)

Paper approved by M. Fossorier, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received May 22, 2002; revised February 16, 2003 and December 20, 2003.
The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA (e-mail: wjtan@ou.edu; jcruz@ou.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.833029

where the is computed by running the BCJR algorithm with a priori message , available from the previous round
(3)

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1254

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

This iteration process will continue unless a stopping criterion is met. If all checks are satisfied, all bits will be decided to either a digit one or a minus one, based on the sign of the message
(4)
which is the sum of the channel and the LDPC extrinsic messages.
B. Density Evolution After such iterations, the algorithm will produce the exact
log-likelihood ratios (LLRs) of all the bits if the bipartite graph contains no loops of length up to [11]. If we assume that the graph is loop-free, we can analyze the decoding algorithm directly by tracking the evolution of the message densities in the iterations, because the incoming messages to every node are independent. This algorithm is called density evolution in [1].
Using the same notation as above and letting the pdf of a random variable be , the density evolution for LDPC decoding corresponding to (1)–(4) can be written as
(5) (6) (7) (8)

This theorem was extended to PR channels in [4] by analyzing the neighbors and trees in the joint channel-code graph. It states that given a particular (or i.u.d.) transmitted codeword from a uniformly chosen ensemble code, the probability of erroneous messages can be approximated arbitrarily closely by the error-concentration probability, if the code length is larger than a certain value. This error-concentration probability can be easily computed in the density evolution [4].
Instead of message errors, we can modify this result to account for symbol errors, as described in the previous subsection, which is a more meaningful performance metric. Note that with this modification, all related parameters are changed accordingly, but the computed value difference is small, because when the message error goes to zero, the symbol error will go to zero as well, and vice versa. Since the concentration theorems can be stated and proved in a similar form as in [4], they are not repeated here.
D. Decoding Error Estimation
Using density evolution, we can compute the pdf of all the types of messages in the iterative decoding. Suppose an i.u.d. sequence is transmitted, the symbol-concentration error probability is just the integral of the symbol message in error, that is
(10)

and BCJR decoding on the PR channel can be expressed as

(9)

where is the pdf of the channel noise, is the transmitted

sequence, and denotes the channel trellis operation, which can

be approximated from the histogram of the output LLRs of the

channel using simulation, because no closed-form expression

is available, and

defined with

respect to the nodes [4]. Note that all the above equations with

pdf as an argument operate in the pdf domain. For mathematical

details, please see [4] and [6].

In the case where turbo equalization [12] is not used, the den-

sity evolution can be simplified straightforwardly. Specifically,

the channel trellis is only processed once, and the extrinsic mes-

sage from the LDPC code is not fed back to the channel detector.

Note that since the PR channel is not a symmetric memoryless

channel, the all-zero codeword cannot be used for reference.

Hence, we assume that an i.u.d. sequence is randomly chosen for

transmission [4]. This can be justified for high-rate linear codes.

The length of the sequence must be long enough to be able to

ignore the channel trellis-boundary effects. We will determine

it experimentally.

where is the average pdf of the symbol messages in round

. From the concentration theorem, the BER can be well approx-

imated by this concentration-error probability, given the block

length is greater than a certain number.

Here we simply use

as an approximation to the average

BER for a high-rate ensemble of LDPC codes on PR channels,

i.e.,

. This approximation can be validated by sim-

ulations. The results given below will show that this estimation

of decoding error is very good when the block length is long

enough.

E. Noise Threshold
The threshold phenomenon is observed in LDPC and turbo-like codes. For channels with white Gaussian noise, the threshold on the standard deviation of the noise is

(11)

For the specific system considered in this letter,

.

From the discussion in the preceding subsection, we know that

can be computed as the integral of , so

C. Concentration

By the general concentration theorem of [1], for almost all

(12)

the graphs in a code ensemble

and almost all inputs,

the decoder performance on a binary-input symmetrical-output The threshold phenomenon ensures that there exists a code

channel will converge to that of a corresponding loop-free graph for which the decoding error can be arbitrarily small if the noise

as the codeword length approaches infinity.

variance is below this threshold.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

1255

Fig. 1. Thresholds for the codes (3; k) on the dicode channel.

to the i.u.d. capacities. It can be seen that when the code

rate is increasing from 0 to 1.0, the threshold is approaching

the capacity curve whether a turbo equalizer is present or not.

The difference is that there is about 1.0 dB performance loss

for the system without a turbo equalizer when the code rate is

greater than 0.25. This is also observed in [4], where the defi-

nition of SNR is 3 dB offset from ours. Fig. 2 is the same com-

parison, but on a normalized

channel with

. We can draw similar con-

clusions from these figures, that the technique proposed above

works well for arbitrary PR channels. However, the performance

loss between the system with and without a turbo equalizer is

larger than that on the dicode channel. But the codes that we

are interested in are those of high rate, where the code loss is

approximately equal for these two channels. Note that the i.u.d.

capacity and BCJR-once bounds are computed using the method

introduced in [4] and [13].

We also computed the thresholds for LDPC codes with

(not shown) and compared them with codes with

. The

results are consistent with [14] and [15]. Furthermore, we com-

puted the thresholds of the codes on a precoded PR channel.

Here, we chose

as the precoder for the

channel. The SNR threshold on this combined channel is larger

than on the channel without the precoder, supporting the dis-

cussion in [16] that the precoder causes performance loss in an

LDPC-coded PR system.

B. Decoding Error

Using the density evolution, we can estimate the average de-

coding BER, as discussed in Section II. Here we use the code

(3,30) as an example. The PR targets considered are the dicode

Fig. 2. Thresholds for the codes (3; k) on the ME PR4 channel.

channel and the

channel. In order for the density evo-

lution to work properly, the code length is chosen to be large

enough, and we use

. From [1], we know that den-

A. Threshold

III. NUMERICAL RESULTS

sity evolution does not depend on the code length. However, in the case of PR channels, we must use the BCJR simulation or density evolution to compute the channel-to-variable mes-

With the assumption of an i.u.d. input sequence, we can com- sage, therefore, a large number must be used to avoid the trellis-

pute the threshold of any LDPC code with a specified degree boundary effect. The computed results are shown in Figs. 3 and

distribution, whether regular or irregular. Kavcic et al. [4] com- 4, where the SNR is defined as

. Since the

puted the thresholds of regular codes with variable-degree three coding gain from 50 to 500 iterations is very small, we use 50

on the dicode channel, and showed that the thresholds of high- as the maximum iteration number.

rate regular codes are very close to their i.u.d. capacity [13]. In order to check the validity of the estimation of symbol

We recompute the thresholds of these codes with the modifi- error, we performed simulations. While we use

for the

cations discussed in this letter. Furthermore, we also compute density evolution, we use

, , and in the simula-

them for other high-order PR channels. We are motivated to con- tions. It can be seen from Figs. 3 and 4 that the decoding-error

sider these channels, because the memory of the dicode channel estimation using density evolution works very well when the

is only one, and the presence of the random interleaver makes code length is larger than . The gap between the estima-

the channel almost memoryless. We use a modified extended tion and the simulation results for the code of length is

class-IV PR channel (

) as an example of high-order very small, less than 0.1 dB, and that for is only 0.2 dB.

channels.

As far as length is concerned, the bit-error estimation for

Denote a regular code with variable degree and check de- the system with turbo equalizer works better than without it. At

gree by . The computed thresholds for the codes , BER

, the gaps are about 0.5 dB. But the simulation

where is varying, are shown in Figs. 1 and 2. Fig. 1 shows a curve for the system with a turbo equalizer is sharper. So for

comparison of the thresholds of these codes with and without codes of length larger than , we can confidently use the BER

a turbo equalizer (“capacity” and “BCJR-once bound” in the estimation by density evolution as the probability of decoding

figures) on the normalized dicode channel with

error down to a low BER.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1256

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

where the i.u.d. error rate was used to approximate the average decoding BER.
The numerical threshold and i.u.d. error-estimation results are used to evaluate and compare codes with different specifications. It is shown that the new thresholds are consistent with other published results. The estimated average BER agrees very well with simulation results for codes of length larger than , and fairly well for codes of length .
Density evolution using i.u.d. sequences can also be used to design optimal codes for PR channels, some of which have already been designed by Varnica and Kavcic [17].

Fig. 3. Decoding-error estimation using density evolution versus simulation

for the codes (3,30) on the dicode channel. The parameters in the figure are code

lengths, and “DE” denotes estimation using density evolution. SNR and

SNR

are the turbo and nonturbo SNR thresholds. (The SNR thresholds

are overlapped with the BER estimate curves using density evolution in all cases.

They are shifted slightly to the left for viewing purposes.)

Fig. 4. Decoding-error estimation using density evolution versus simulation

for the codes (3,30) on the ME PR4 channel. The parameters in the figure are

code lengths, and “DE” denotes estimation using density evolution. SNR

and SNR

are the turbo and nonturbo SNR thresholds. (The SNR

thresholds are overlapped with the BER estimate curves using density evolution

in all cases. They are shifted slightly to the left for viewing purposes.)

IV. CONCLUSION
In this letter, we implemented density evolution for LDPC codes on PR channels. The performance of these systems was evaluated in terms of the SNR threshold and decoding BER.
The basic modification used in [4], namely, assuming an i.u.d. sequence is transmitted, was also used in this letter. However, we modified the concentration theorems, originally derived in terms of probability of message error, to be expressed in terms of probability of symbol error. A technique based on these concentration theorems is proposed for decoding error estimation,

REFERENCES
[1] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity-check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[4] A. Kavcic, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution, and code performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 49, pp. 1636–1652, July 2003.
[5] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[6] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[7] T. M. Duman and E. Kurtas, “Performance bounds for high-rate linear codes over partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 1201–1205, Mar. 2001.
[8] W. Tan, R. M. Todd, and J. R. Cruz, “Bounds for low-density paritycheck codes over partial-response channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, pp. 2310–2312, Sept. 2002.
[9] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol-error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[10] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[11] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb. 2001.
[12] C. Douillard, M. Jezequel, C. Berrou, A. Picart, P. Didier, and A. Glavieux, “Iterative correction of intersymbol interference: Turbo equalization,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 507–511, Sept./Oct. 1995.
[13] D. Arnold and H. A. Loeliger, “On the information rate of binary-input channels with memory,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, June 2001, pp. 2692–2695.
[14] A. Thangaraj and S. W. McLaughlin, “Thresholds for regular LDPC codes over PR channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, June 2001, p. 70.
[15] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and E. Pollara, “Iterative turbo decoder analysis based on density evolution,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 891–907, May 2001.
[16] J. Li, E. Kurtas, K. R. Narayanan, and C. N. Georghiades, “On the performance of turbo product codes and LDPC codes over partial response channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, June 2001, pp. 2176–2183.
[17] N. Varnica and A. Kavcic, “Optimized LDPC codes for partial response channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2002, p. 197.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:36:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

