3078

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 4, JULY 2004

Efficiency of Short LDPC Codes Combined With Long Reed–Solomon Codes for Magnetic Recording Channels
Toshihiko Morita, Member, IEEE, Mitsuhiko Ohta, and Takao Sugawara

Abstract—This paper proposes the use of low-density parity check (LDPC) codes with short block lengths such as 1-K bits for magnetic recording. In general, there is a degradation in bit error rate as the block length of the LDPC codes decreases. Yet, we show that short LDPC codes do not suffer from degraded sector-error-rate performance if the sector size is 32 K bits and if long Reed–Solomon codes over GF(212) are used. This is due to the unique error distribution of iterative decoding. Shorter codes significantly reduce the amount of buffer memory in the iterative decoder and make hardware implementation more feasible.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, low-density parity check codes, reduced complexity, Reed–Solomon codes.

Fig. 1. LDPC-coded magnetic recording channel.

I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity check (LDPC) codes based on iterative decoding have been receiving considerable attention as a next-generation coding scheme for magnetic recording [1]. The complexity of the iterative decoder, however, is still a major challenge for hardware implementation, and both the time complexity (computational steps) and space complexity (memory requirements) need to be reduced. Many methods have ever been proposed to reduce the time complexity [2], [3]. Various forms of structured LDPC codes [4], [5] have also been proposed to reduce the amount of memory for storing the parity check matrix. Yet, another problem remains concerning space complexity: The size of the buffer memory in the decoder is unacceptably large.
The iterative decoder requires a buffer memory of the same size as the block length of the LDPC codeword in order to store the log-likelihood ratio (LLR) information for each bit during the iteration. Since LDPC codes show better bit-error-rate (BER) performance as the block length increases, the block length is usually chosen to be same as the sector length, which is currently 4-K bits. For example, if five bits are used for the LLR value and four buffers are implemented to perform four iterations in a pipeline fashion, then the memory size amounts to 10-K bytes. This amount of memory occupies a large circuit area and is now the biggest obstacle to achieving a practical low-power decoder. The 32 K-bit sector format being considered recently might make it even more difficult.
Manuscript received October 16, 2003. T. Morita and M. Ohta are with the Fujitsu Laboratories Ltd., Atsugi 2430197, Japan (e-mail: tmorita@jp.fujitsu.com; ohtam@jp.fujitsu.com). T. Sugawara is with the Fujitsu Ltd., Kawasaki 211-8588, Japan (e-mail: t.sugawara@jp.fujitsu.com). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2004.829209

Since current hard disk drives employ Reed–Solomon (RS) codes as an outer error-correction code (ECC), it is natural to consider a combination of LDPC codes and RS codes. Assuming outer RS codes, we propose the use of LDPC codes with short block lengths such as 1-K bits in this paper. We show by simulation that short LDPC codes do not necessarily suffer from degraded sector-error-rate (SER) performance if the sector size is 32-K bits and if long RS codes over GF are used for the outer ECC. This is due to the unique error distribution of iterative decoding. Shorter codes significantly reduce the amount of buffer memory in the decoder and make hardware implementation more feasible.
II. LDPC-CODED MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS
The codes considered here consist of a rate 16/17 maximum-transition-run (MTR) code [6] and a rate 16/17 systematic LDPC code, as shown in Fig. 1. The parity check matrix is a randomly constructed regular matrix with a column weight of three. A sequence of LDPC parity bits is inserted with guard bits to satisfy the run-length constraint. The block length (information size) of the LDPC codes is set at 1-K bits as will be discussed later. When the sector size is 32-K bits, it consists of 32 blocks. To be more precise, the block length of the LDPC codes is slightly longer than 1-K bits since redundancy for the ECC and the MTR codes are included.
The decoder consists of an inner a posteriori probability (APP) decoder based on the MaxLogMAP method and an outer LDPC decoder based on the sum-product method. The number of iterations is four. We concentrate on the performance with a sector size of 32-K bits; thus, it is assumed that ECCs are noninterleaved RS codes over GF .
The PR channel we used for simulation consists of a modified Lorentzian channel with an isolated pulse of

0018-9464/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

MORITA et al.: EFFICIENCY OF SHORT LDPC CODES COMBINED WITH LONG RS CODES

3079

Fig. 2. BER of LDPC codes with different block lengths.

[7] and micro-track jitter noise, which

represents media noise. After the H transfer function of the

MR head [7] is applied, white Gaussian noise is added. The ratio

of media noise to white noise

is 1. The low-pass

filter used is a seventh-order equiripple filter. The channel is

equalized to the MEEPR4 target

. The

signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) is defined as

Fig. 3. SER of LDPC codes with different block lengths.

SNR

(1)

where is the peak amplitude of the isolated pulse,

is the

power spectral density of noise, and is the Nyquist frequency.

To take into account the code rate of the ECC, the extended user

density defined as follows is fixed at 2.63:

EUD

(2)

where is the user density defined at the MR head output, and Fig. 4. SER as a function of block length of LDPC codes. is the code rate of the ECC.

III. PERFORMANCE OF SHORT LDPC CODES

Fig. 2, shows the BER performance of LDPC codes with dif-

ferent block lengths. The figure confirms that the longer LDPC

codes perform better in terms of BER.

In contrast, Fig. 3 compares the post-ECC SER performance

of LDPC codes with three different block lengths: 32, 4, and

1-K bits. The sector size is 32-K bits, and the number of cor-

rectable symbol errors of the ECC is fixed at 100. The figure

indicates that the 4-K-bit code shows the best performance, and

even the 1-K-bit code outperforms the 32 K-bit code. Such re-

lationship can be summarized in Fig. 4, where the horizontal

axis is the block length of the LDPC code, and the vertical axis

is the SNR at SER

. Parameter is varied from 20 to

140. The plot clearly indicates that there exists an optimal block

length depending on , i.e., 8-K bits for 20 and 60, 4-K bits

for 100, and 2-K bits for = 140. The SNR at the optimal

length is about 0.1 dB better than that at the maximum length.

The most important observation to be noted here is that a block

length of 1-K bits retains the same performance as the maximum

Fig. 5. Bit-error probability distribution.
block length of 32-K bits. For minimizing the amount of buffer memory, it is therefore better to choose a block length of 1-K bits than to pursue a gain of 0.1 dB. Moreover, the number of iterations is fixed at four in the plots. Such a limited number of iterations might not be appropriate for codes with blocks as long as 32-K bits. It is difficult, however, to assume more iterations

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3080

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 4, JULY 2004

Fig. 6. Symbol-error probability distribution.

an MTR-coded channel is also plotted. Note that the SNRs are

chosen so that both channels yield the same BER. The figure re-

veals that the error distribution for the iterative decoder is more

widespread than that for the Viterbi decoder. This means that

the iterative decoder corrects most errors with high probability,

while leaving many errors with low probability.

When a sector consists of plural blocks, the error distribution

in the entire sector is determined by the combination of error

distributions for all blocks. Since each block has the error

distribution in Fig. 5, it is unlikely that many of the blocks

produce numerous errors. As a result, the probability of sectors

containing many errors becomes low. We can see such an

averaging effect in Fig. 6, which plots the sector probability

that symbol errors occur after a sector is decoded at

a certain SNR. Note that the sector length is 32-K bits and the

symbol length is 12 bits. Plot A corresponds to LDPC codes

with a block length of 32-K bits, while plot B corresponds

to LDPC codes with a block length of 1-K bits. The figure

clearly shows that the probability of producing more than 90

symbol errors decreases by incorporating shorter codes.

Fig. 6 can further be converted into Fig. 7, which plots the

sector probability

or the sector error rate

after the ECC with -symbol error-correction capability. It is

very important to note from the figure that plots A and B in-

tersect at point , where 80. This means that if the ECC

can correct more that 80 symbols, LDPC codes with a block

length of 1-K bits outperform LDPC codes with a block length

of 32-K bits. Therefore, the value of has to be large to reduce

the block length. It follows that the sector size also needs to be

large to suppress the rate loss due to the ECC overhead. In fact,

when the sector size is 4-K bits, it is difficult to shorten the block

length without decreasing performance.

V. CONCLUSION
It is possible to shorten the block length of LDPC codes without degrading SER performance if the sector size is 32-K bits, and long RS codes over GF are used. The shorter codes significantly reduce the amount of memory in the decoder and make hardware implementation more feasible.

Fig. 7. SER as a function of ECC power.

at this point of time, as we need to consider practical hardware implementation.

IV. AVERAGING EFFECT ON ERROR DISTRIBUTION

To explain the superior performance of short LDPC codes, we

need to evaluate the error characteristics of iterative decoding.

Fig. 5 plots the error distribution at the output of the iterative

decoder for the LDPC-coded channel. The horizontal axis rep-

resents the number of bit errors and the vertical axis is the

block probability

that bit errors occur after decoding

a single codeword block with a length of 4-K bits. For compar-

ison, the error distribution at the output of the Viterbi decoder for

REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.
[2] J. Hagenauer and P. Hoeher, “A viterbi algorithm with soft-decision outputs and its applications,” in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom, 1989, pp. 1680–1686.
[3] Z. Wu and J. M. Cioffi, “Turbo decision aided equalization for magnetic recording channels,” in Proc. IEEE GlobeCom, 1999, pp. 733–738.
[4] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[5] M. Blaum and R. M. Roth, “New array codes for multiple phased burst correction,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 39, pp. 66–77, Jan. 1993.
[6] T. Nishiya et al., “Rate 16/17 maximum transition run (3; 11) code on an EEPRML channel with an error-correcting postprocessor,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 35, pp. 4378–4385, Sept. 1999.
[7] T. Sugawara et al., “A nonlinear model for magnetic recording channel with an MR head,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 34, Jan. 1998.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:27:28 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

