A Throughput / Complexity Analysis for the VLSI Implementation of LDPC Decoder

Luca Fanucci' ,Francesco Ross?
TETlT National Research Council, via Caruso, 1-54122, Pisa, Italy
University of Pisa, Dep. of Information Engineering, via Caruso, 1-56122, Pisa, Italy Tel. +39 050 2217668, Fax. +39 050 2217522, {l.fanucci, f.rossi)@iet.unipi.it

- Abstract This paper presents an analysis of the VLSI complexityof
different LDPC decoder implementations. Both fully parallel and serial solutions are considered and compared in t e e of architechual issues, bardware complexity, power consumption and supported throughput. To provide numeric results a % rate,(3,6) regular LDPC code with a 2048 codeword has been considered and area Complexity estimations have been carried out with reference to a 0.18 pm standard-cellCMOS techoIogy.
Keywords - LDPC, VLSI,WLAN, decoder, complexity, throughput
1. INRODUCTION
LDPC codes were first introducedin 1963by Gallager [11 during his PhD study at MIT. At this early phase of the evolution of channel coding, this scheme, despite its impressive performance, made little impact on the research of the channel
coding community. This modest interest in LDPC codes was a
consequence of its high storage requirements and complexity in the light of the state-of-the-art in 1963. But the need in the modern digital transmission applications to adopt near Shannon limit channel coding lead to a new interest in LDPC codes, due also to the their highly parallelizable decoding scheme.
However the effective VLSI implementation of an LDPC de-
coder remains nowadays a big challenge because of the high hardware resources that are required In this paper we present an exploration of the LDPC decoder architecture focusing the attention on the hardware complexitythat each solutionrequire in order to support particular area and throughput constraints.
To provide numeric results a new class of code, namely Turbo GaUager Codes originally proposed in [2], has been considered and a VLSI synthesisimplementationhas been carried on for a fully parallel decoder solution. After this introduction in section 2 we presents the LDPC iterative decoding process using message passing algorithm. Section 3 deals with a comparison with the two main decoder implementation solutions: the fully parallel decoder solution and the serial (or partially paallel)
decoder solution in terms of architectural issues, hardware complexity, power consumption and supported throughput.
FmaIly, conclusionsare drawnin Section4.
2. LDPC DECODING
The LDPC codes are linear block codes characterized by a sparse binary parity check matrix H made up by m rows and n columns. The vector x is a vaiid codeword only if belongs to

the kernel of the H matrix, so the n parameter represents the codeword length and the m parameter the number of parity check equations that a codeword must satisfy.

H e x r = 0 , x = ( x ~ , x ~ , x,~._,x_x,~ )

(1)

The umber of informationbits per codeword is represented by the s parameterwhich is related to the m parameter by the simple equation m=n-s. Each element of the codeword, named a variable element, represents a11 the transmitted bits, including both mformation and redundancy (or parity) bits. Each row of
the H matrix represents a parity check equation and the ele-
ments of the codeword involved in each equation are defined by the position of the non-zero elements inside the row. For a
regular (&,a)LDPC code each equation is made up exactly by
d, vahable elements, and each variable element is involved exactly in d, check equations. A powerful graphic representation of an LDPC code is that based on the Tanner graphs [3] which is a bipartite graph made up by two types of nodes:the variable and the check nodes connected each other through a set of edges. Each check node on the graph represents a parity check equation, while each variable node represents a codeword element. An edge links the i-th check node to the j-th variable node only if the hij element of the parity check matrix is not zero.

n variable node

m check node

Fig.]. Tanner graph representation of m LDPC code
The decoding algorithm is the Pearl's belief propagation algorithm seen as an instance of the sum-product algorithm, a generic message passing algorithmthat operates on factor graphs [4]. The message passing is perforfried on the Tanner graph between the variable and the check nodes. Applying the sumproduct algorithmto a factor graph with cycle leads to an itera-

0-7803-8689-2/04/$20.0002004 IEEE

409

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

tive algorithm with no natural termhation, and this is also the case of a Tanner graph representingan LDPC code. The decoding process is carried on in the log domain considering the LLR (Log Likelihood Ratio) of the codeword defined in (2) as soft channel input

where y is the transmitted codeword and x is the received
codeword. The decodingsteps are the following:
A) Initiuiizdion The LLR values are sent fkom the variable nodes to the check nodes using the Qi messages. The Q,i message is the message sent fkom the j-th variable node to the i-th check node.
Q,j =LLR(xj) i E &) = {i :hG= l), j = 1,.....,n (3)
B) Checknodeprocarsing Each check node uses the Qji received messages to update the
hjmessages.The Rjmessage is the message sent f h mthe i-tb
checknode to thej-thvariablenode.

r

1

feature of these error correcting codes is their highly parallelizable decoding scheme. Indeed during the variable node processing all the operations involving each of the n variable nodes can be canid on simultaneously. The same considerationscan be done for the check node processing. Commonly two main processingelements are highlighted:the variable and the check processor. The former processes its input data according to the equations (5), while the latter according to the equations (4). For a regular LDPC code the number of messagesreceived and
processed is d,for the variable processor and d, for the check processor. The maximumexploitation of the above mentioned parallelism leads to the so-called hlly parallel architecture where each node of the Tanner graph is directly mapped into hardware. Consequentlythis archtecturalsolution is characterized by an high hardware complexity since n variable prucessors and m check processors are implemented. For short codeword ten& codes reference vdues for these parameters are n ~ 2 0 0 0and rw1OOO. In this structure the variable and check processors communicate through a complex network that reflects the Tanner graph connectivity for the specified code. From this wire communicationarises a routing congestionthat often is the main drawback of the My-parallel solution. On the other hand the main advantage is that this architecture can support the highest throughput. Equation (6) shows the supported throughput (fQ) as a functionof the clock hquency (&),
the codeword length n,the code rate r, the number of decoding
iteration performed Nit, and the latency of a decoding iteration in k m of clock cycleL,

c) Variablenodeprocessing Each variable node uses the Rj received messages to update
the Qi messagesand to estimatethej-th decoded bit.
(5)
1 LLR(Xi)+ Cl?@, j = 1,.....,II kv0)
The steps B) and C) are repeated to perform several iterations.
The specificationof the order in which during an iteration the messages are updatedin a fixtor graph is equivalentto adopt a particular message passing schedule. Usually it's chosen the so-mlledflooding schedule in which at first are computed a11 the check-to-variable messages and then all the variable-tocheck messages. This schedule has been applied during this work too.
3. SERIAI, vs. PARALLELARCHlTECTURES
To realize an LDPC decoder probably the most important

The n,r and N k parametas characterizethe selected code and its decoding implementation(Nk), while the L parameter is a function of the decoder architectm. Typically in a fidlyparallel decoder only one pipdine stage is used between check and variable processors and so a complete iteration is performed in one clock cycle, obtaining L=l whch is the lowest possible value for L. For a 2048 codeword length ?4rate code with a clock hquency of 32 MHz and performing 32 decoding iterations 1 GbWs data rate for a My-parallel solution it is obtained fiom equation (6). In order to reduce the hardware complexity due to the processing elements and to lighten the routing congestion the decoder architecture moves fiom a fully-pmlIeI to a partially-parallel solution (see Fig. 2) in which %<n variable processors and mp<m check processors are implemented. In a partially-parallel structure the two processingbarriers communicatethrough a memory holding all the message values. The memory requirement replaces the routing congestion as the main drawback of this architecture since it's
necessary to have at least a memory cell for each edge of the Tanner graph. For a regular LDPC code the edge memory is made up by Q.n words. Implementing a lower number of processing elements increases the overall decoding latency, and consequently the supported throughput decreases. With refmence to equation (6) the L parameter assumes values greater

410
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

than one accordingwith the padelism degree of the decoder. ciently group in 64 clusters all the variable and check proces-

More details on the throughput-cornp!exity analysis of this sors. A cluster is made up by 16 6-input check processors, 16

solution are presented in section 3.2. A partially parallel archi- 3-input variable processom, 16 2-input variable processor and

tecture needs also some control logic tb manage the use of 16 1-input variableprocessors. The clusters now communicate

I memory and the hardware sharing of the variable and check through a more regular network reducing the routing conges-

processors. Using two edge memories it’s possible to double tion, This decoder architecture has been synthesized on a 0.18

the supported throughput by pipelining the variable and check pm, 1.8 V, 6 metal level standard cells CMOS technology, tar-

processing within an itemtion. Table 1 summarizes the main geting a system clock kquency of 50 MHz compatible with

features of these decoder solutions.

lGbls data rate. The overalldecodercomplexityis about 2.1 M

gates, Table 2 summarizes the main decoder buildmg blocks
complexity. The a()fimction in equations(5) belongingto the

np variable
processor

check processing is implemented not using a LUT, as it is typi-

cally done, but via combinatorial logic. To notice that the 3-

A

input variable processor has B complexity greater than the 6-

input checkprocessor due to the presence of the register barrier

located in the variable processing and of some control logic.

Considainga routing factor percentageof the 70% the decoder

mpcheck
processor

core area occupation can be estimated in 42 mm2.An estima-
tion of the power consumption for a 50 MHz clock hquency and 1.8 Vpower supply is 367.5mW [SI.

Table 2. Fully parallel building btocks complexity

&input check processor

284

Feature

F d y Parallel

Psrtially Pardel

Throughput

High

LOW

Hw complexity:proc-

Low

essing element

HW complexity: coniml

LOW

High

logic

H W complexity: mem-

None

High

1 orvreouirement

I

I

I

Main drawback

Rouiing CQngeStion

3.1. Fuliy Parallel Decoder

Memory requjrement

As a case example for a fully-parallel implementation is a Turbo Gallager Codes have been considered 121. These are
turbo codes obtained by the concatenation through an interleaver of ad hoc component convolutional codes so that the overall code can be successfully decoded using the message passing algorithm of LDPC Gallager codes. In particular the chosen code is made up by a parallel concatenation of two identical convolutional codes through a 1024 length interleaver. The resulting code has the same Tanner graph of a % rate, (3,6) regular LDPC code with a 2048 codeword. The number of iterations performed is 48 and the messages are represented using 3 bit words [5]. In order to reduce the routing congestionthe decoderarchitecturecopies the coder symmetry by splitting the variable node associated with the information bits. As a consequence the variable node number raises from 2048 to 3072 and it’s necessary to implement three types of variable processors according to the number of messages they receive [5]. Thanks to this node splitting it’s possible to effi-

1-inputvariable processor

254

3.2.Partally ParallelDecoder
To provide a complexity comparison with the fuuy parallel solution detailed in section 3.1 also for a partially parallel implementation a % rate, (3,6) regular LDPC code with a 2048 codeword has been considered. As in the fully parallel decoder 48 iterations are performed and the messages are still represented using 3 bit words. In order to carry on a throughputcomplexity analysis it’s assumed to have a collision-fiee code st~~ctureads those in [63 which easily fits differentparallelism degree architectures. For such a code the control logic necessary to manage the use of memories and of the processing elements hardware sharing is significantly simplified, and its weight on the overall hardware complexity will not be taken into account. The processing elements architectures have been slightly changed adding the output registers to the check processor and removing some control logic in the variable processor. Table 3 shows the new estimated complexity for these buildingblocks.Consideringas the referencedecoder architecture that shown in figure 2 the total memory requirement is 4.5 Kbytes. Under these constraints the overalI compIexity depends essentiallyon the chosenparallelismdegree. Tmplemmting a low number of processing elements leads to a low complexity solution but doing so also the maxi” supported throughput decreases. Then it’s interesting to perform a thtoughput-complexityanalysis. The starting point is equation (6) where for a given clock frequency and for a given code

411
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Table 3. Partiallyparallel buildingblocks complexity

~~
Block Description

Nogates

&input check processor

411

3-input variableprocessor

404

to an area reduction percentage of 87% and 93% and to a power saving of 84% and 82% by considering a clock hquency of 50 and 100 MHz, respectively.
4. CONCLUSIONS

(i.e. fixing the n, r and Nit, parameters) the supported throughputdepends on the L parameter ody (fp = p(L) ). By

definingthe k parameteras k = - n = - m we obtain a measure

nP mP
of the reuse degree of variable and check processors. Indeed, the k parameter links the decoder hardware complexity (through np and q>to the supported throughput since the latency of a decoding iteration in terms of clock cycle, (given by the L parameter), depends on the considered parallelism de Fee. In particular L is proportional to k through the a me%cient which depends on the chosen hadware architecture
(fp = p(a A) ). The a coefficienttakes into account the num-

ber of clock cycles required to r d w r i t e data in the edge

memories, Using the decoder architecture sketched in figure 2

and a structuredcode as those proposed in [6] we achievea =1,

which is the lowest possible value for a, since each imple-

mented processor reads and writes data in a fully paralIe1 man-

ner. Based on theses consideration Fig. 3 shows the through-

putcomplexity curves for two different reference clock &-

quency (50 and 100 MHZ) both compatible with the critical

path delay of the proposed hardware architecture. The VLSI

technology is the same used for the fdly parallel implemmta-

tion where the considered memory density is 4.98 pm2 per bit

and the considered routing factor percentage is of the 50%.

Dynamic power consumption can be estimated as the s u m of

the gate contributionplus the memory one. The fomer can be

expressedas PGAms= a, .p .PIcATEs .f, where N O Arep~re-

sents the gate complexity, as the switching activity and p is a

- techology dependent fictor; while the latter can be expressed
as PmM = pmM .N,, fc ,where Nbit represents the memory

complexity and m Mis a technology dependent factor. For a

typical application on a 0.18 ptn, 1.8 V, standard cells CMOS

technology usual values are a&. 1, p=35 nW/GatdMHz and

-3.1

nW/Bit/MHz. Consequently the power estimation is

of 57.2 m W and of 62.6 mW for a clock equency of 50 and

100MHz, respectively.

3.3. ComplexiQ Comparison
The throughput-complexity resuftsachieved for the fully parallel architecture proposed in 3.1 and for the partially parallel architecture proposed in 3.2, and summarized in Fig. 3, show that for medium-low throughput applications a partially parallel decoder offers a great hardware complexitysaving,As a case example let us consider the forthcoming standard for high throughput WAN (wireless h l Area Network) which foresees a 250 Mbit/s throughput.For this applicationchoosing a partially paraltel instead of a M y parallel architecture leads

In this paper the VLSI complexity of a decoder for a !4 rate, 2048 codeword, (3,6) regular LDPC code has been analyzed Fully and partially parallel solutions have been compared in terms of architectural issues, hardware complexity,power consumption and supported throughput. As a case example, the results of this analysis have been applied to tbe forthcoming 250 Mbitls WAN application.
A h 5 0 Mhz .fc=100 Mhr
loo0

1
loo
a
c
1
cm
$ 10
c

1

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

h a [mm)

Fig. 3. ~ughputcompIexityanalysis

ACKNOWLEDGEMFNT
Discussionswith Prof. Colavolpeof Parma Universityare gratefully acknowledged. This work has been pastially supported by the FIR3 “Reconjgurubleplaybrms for wideband wireless communicutium” project fimded by the Italian Ministry for Instnrctioa,Universityand Research.
REFERENCES
R G.Gallager, I.uvl.Densi@ Pm’pCheck codes,MlT Press, C a m
bridge, MA, 1963.
0.Colavofpe, “Coding schemg based on convolutional utdes and messagepassing decoding”, Ik~lianptent R. M2002A001438,June 2002, h ~ o n a Platent Application n. PCT/EpO3/06337, June 2003. R M. Tanner, “A recursiveapproachto low complexity codes’’, LEEE Trms.Inform. 77woty,vol. IT-27,pp. 533-547, Sept.1981. Frank R Kshishang, Bmdan J. Frey, Hans-Andrea hefiger, Tactor Graphs and the Sum-product Algorithm”,IEEE lk”.h f o n fieoiy,vol. IT47,pp. 498-519, February 2001. P.Ciao, G. Colavolpe, L. Fanwi, “A Parallel VLSI Architecture €or lGb/s, 2048-b,Rate-l/2 Turbo Gallager Code De&’, Euromicro $wp” on Digital $stem Design 200d,pp.174-181, August 31- 3 September 2004, Rcnnes, France. Ha0 Zhong,Tong Zhang, “Design of VLSI Implementation-Orientcd LDPC Codes”,Proc. 0f58rh Vehicuh Technologv Conference, vol. 1, pp. 670473, October49,2003,Orlando, Ronda

412
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:04:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

