- MILCOM2004 2004 IEEE MifitaryCommunications Conference
A CLASS OF TURBO-LLkX CODES WITH EFFICIENT AND PRACTICAL HIGH-SPEED DECODERS

AIiazam Abbasfar Dept. of Elec. Eng., UCLA
Los Angeles, CA
abbasfar@,ee.ucla.edu

Dariush Divsalar Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
Pasadena, CA
Dariush.Divsalar@,inl.nasa.gov

Kung Yao Dept. of Elec. Eng., UCLA
Los Angeles, CA
yao@ee.ucIa.edu

ABSTRACT
Turbo-like codes not onb achieve near Shannon-capacity performance, but also have decoders with modest complexity, which is crucial for implementation.Recently some eflcient architectures for high-speed decoding of turbo and LDPC codes have been presented in the Eiterature. The memory access is the main problem in practical implementation of such decoders. This problem has also been solved by using interleavers with special structure. In this paper, a generalized class of turbo-like codes that have high-speed decoding capability, which is based on the graphical interpretation of their code, is introduced.It has been shown that previous codes are part of this elms. This class of codes not onay provides code structure for parallel processing, but also provides the interleuver structure for practical implementation. A general architecture for high-speed decoding of these codes is presented. Regularity and modularity of the decoder makes it the architecture of choice for KCSI implementation of very high-speed decoders.
INTRODUCTION
Recently, some new classes of channel encoders have been introduced that achieve- near Shannon-capacity ‘performance. Turbo codes [ l ] .and low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes are the most important examples. The basic property of these codes is the capability of iterative decoding. The iterative algorithms can be viewed as a probability or “belief’ propagation algorithm, which is also called message passing.
Although iterative decoding has a parallel nature for LDPC codes, for turbo codes it is very attractive in a serial way since they use BCJR algorithm, which is a recursive algorithm. In [3] an efficient architecture for parallel turbo decoder was presented. The memory access problem in parallel turbo decoder was addressed in [5][6][7]. The parallel turbo decoder architecture along with proper interleaver structure allows us to build efficient and practical high-speed turbo decoders.
This work is parh’allysupported by an UC COREsponsored by S T Microclech-onics.This work was partially performed at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology under contract with thc NASA.

In this paper, we first introduce the parallel turbo decoding architecture. Then, we extend the idea to a broader range
of turbo-like codes that constitute a generalized class of codes. All the codes in this class are not only regular and
parallelizable, but also have practical high-speed decoders. A general architecture for high-speed decoding of these codes is also presented.
The structure of the paper is as follows. In section 11, we describe the parallel turbo-decoding algorithm and the decoder architecture. In section 111, the graphical view of the parallel architecture is described and the concept of projected graph is introduced. In section IV, the generalized class of turbo-like codes are introduced that have the capability of high-speed decoding.
TURBO CODE AND PARALLEL TUFtBO
DECODER
Turbo code was introduced in [11. Berrou, et a1 presented
the Parallel Concatenated Convolutional Code, (PCCC) and the iterative decoding algorithm. Later Serial Concatenated Convolutional Codes (SCCC) was presented in [2]. PCCC has been remained the most popular type of turbo code, which has been adopted in UMTS standards as chamel coding scheme. In the following we briefly describe the PCCC encoder and its iterative decoder.
An efficient parallel turbo decoder was introduced in E31.
The algorithm is the following. First of all, the received data for each constituent codes are divided into several contiguous non-overlapping sub-blocks; so called windows. Then, each window is decoded separately in parallel using the BCJR algorithm [4].In other words, each window processor is a decoder for a block of the information bits. However, the initial values for alpha and beta variables come from previous iteration of adjacent windows. Since all the windows are being processed at the same time, in the next iteration the initial values are ready to load for all of them. Figure 1 shows the structure of the decoder.

0-7803-8847-W04/$20.00 02004 IEEE

245

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

Figure 1. Parallel turbo decoder structure
The optimum way to process a window is the serial processing using forward and backward recursions; i.e., BCJR algorithm. Therefore each window processor is a SISO [2].
The proposed structure stems from the message-passing algorithm itself. An example of the graph of a rat& 1/3 PCCC is depicted in Figure 2. Dark circle nodes represent the variable bits that are sent, i.e. the codeword bits (U, p l , and p2). Light circle nodes are state variabIes that are introduced just for efficient computation. The constraint nodes, depicted as squares with X, define the relation of two consecutive states and the input/output bits corresponding to that transition. The graph is partitioned into several (M = 2) sub-graphs, which correspond to different windows. Each sub-graph stilt represents a convolutional code, but their initial and end states are determined by adjacent windows.

computed in fonvard and backward recursion of the BCJR algorithm.
Partitioning of the graph of the code helps us to parallelize the decoding of one constituent code. The processing for each partition is usually done serially. This makes the algorithm more efficient [3]. Moreover, the hardware complexity is lowered. In fact, we have used a serialparallel scheduling for the message-passing algorithm. In other words, partitioning provides a method for serialparallel approach for iterative decoding, which achieves both speed gain and low complexity.
GRAPHICAL VIEW
In this section we look at the problem from a graphical point of view. The parallel turbo decoder comprises M window processors running in parallel that are associated with M identical sub-graphs or partitions. We put the partitions in parallel planes called pages. Therefore each partition constitutes one page of the whole graph. Then we look at the projected graph on one page. The projected graph €or turbo code of Figure 2 is shown in Figure 3 ,
The projected graph can be viewed as the vectorized version of the whole graph. In other words, there is a message vector associated with every edge in the projected graph. There are three types of edges in the projected graph. First type is the edges that are inside the partitions, which are shown in solid lines. The associated messages are internal messages that are not communicated with other partitions. In PCCC, these are alpha and beta variables in a SISO, Second type is the edges that connect adjacent partitions (neighboring pages), which are shown in dash-dot lines. The associated messages are communicated between adjacent partitions across their
border; we call them border messages. Third type is the
edges that connect two constituent codes. These edges are interleaved before reaching the other constituent code. The extrinsics are associated with these edges.

LI____-----_-__-------_I

L~~~~I~_---~~~~~~-----~l

Figure 2. Partitioned graph of a simple PCCC

-
I

There are two types of messages that are communicated between sub-graphs. First, the messages associated with the information bits, i.e., the extrinsic information, which is communicated between two constituent codes in the
traditional approach. Second, the messages that are related to the states in window boundaries - we call them state messages. In fact, we have introduced new messages that are passed between sub-graphs in each iteration. These messages are the same as alpha and beta variables that are

2 1

lnterleaver

I

I

I

c2

Figure 3. Projected graph

246
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

In the decoding process only one extrinsic vector is
accessed at a time. In order to have a RAM for extrinsics,
the interleaver should preserve the exsinsic vectors in its entirety and only permutes the elements of the vectors. The permutation within a vector is the permutation among the window processors; i.e. different pages in the overall graph. In other words, the interleaver consists of several independent permutations within the extrinsic vectors. It means that all u0 always go to one specific constraint node (say last node) in the C2 sub-graph in a different page.
The interesting property about the proposed interleaver is that it is viewed as some disjoint edges in the projected graph, therefore called edge interleaver. One example of the projected graph for the PCCC in Figure 2 is shown in Figure 4.The dashed edges indicate that the permutation is allowed within a vector.
I p l Q Q Q 91
c1

6

I

I

I

Figure 4. Projected graph with an edge interleaver
The way edges are connected between two component codes in the projected graph is another flexibiIity in the interleaver design.
Therefore, projected graph not only shows the structure of the code, but also shows the structure of its interleaver. In [S] a parallel turbo decoder architecture was introduced that decreases the latency. It is very instructive to note that the reverse interIeaver used for decreasing the latency in
[5], is clearly shown in Figure 4-connecting the edges of
two component graphs in reverse order.
A GENERALIZED CLASS OF TURBO-LIKE CODES
The idea of the projected graph for PCCC can be extended to other turbo and turbo-Iike codes. We introduce a generalized class of codes as those that have projected graphs. The general diagram of such a code is depicted in Figure 5.

Component Code 1

I-

Component Code 2
Figure 5. Projected graph with the proposed interleaver
In the sequel, design methodology for turbo-like codes based on the projected graph is presented. This approach is very appealing because the resuhing code is definitely parallelizable and its performance can be analyzed very efficiently by its component graphs using density evolution technique [SI. The following section explains how to design LDPC codes with parallel decoding capabilities.
There are two ways that could be pursued in order to design codes based on projected graphs. First approach is to parallelize an existing decoder. This is based on partitioning an existing code graph into some sub-graphs. This method works on any regular or semi-regular graph. The projected graph includes one partition of each component code, which is called component graph. The component graphs are connected with edges that represent independent interleavers. To show the broadness of this approach we have illustrated the projected graphs for a PCCC with three constituent codes, a simple SCCC,
repeat-accumulate (RA) and irregular-repeat-accumulate (IRA)codes in Figure 6.
The second approach is to design the code by designing its projected graph. In this method we should design some component graphs and the connections between them in order to have. good performance. ' In other words, the partitions are designed first and then put together to create constituent codes.
The most important example of this approach is LDPC codes with projected graphs. There are two component graphs: one contains only single parity check codes (variable degrees) and the other has only repetition codes (variable degrees). One example of such a code is shown in Figure 7.
There are some noticeable facts about this projected graph. All variable nodes are in one component graph, which means that all the observations is stored and processed in one kind of window processor. Variable and check node can have different degrees. Therefore this structure is capable of implementing regular and irregular LDPC codes. The degree distribution of variable and check nodes is known from the projected graph. There are no local

247
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

messages and no border messages are passed between adjacent sub-graphs. Therefore, the projected graph can.be represented graphically as a simple Tanner graph.

not provide an efficient encoder. Sometimes simple encoding is not possible for codes designed this way.
A M code is a double serially concatenated code that consists of an outer accumulator, repetition, and inner accumulator [ I 11. It can be viewed as an LDPC code too. The projected graph and the encoder of a rate 1/2 A M code with repetition 4are shown in Figure 8.

Figure 8. Projected graph of an ARA4 code
The performance of this code is shown in Figure 9. It is a testimony for excellence of codes in this class as far as performance is concerned.
Performance of rate = I Q A R M code

Figure 6. Projected graphs (a) PCCC with 3 constituent codes (b)
a simple SCCC (d) RA code (4=3) (d) LRA code (q=2,3)

10'"'

I

I

I

1

I

I

0.8

0.9

1

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

1.5

EbI"o

Figure 9. Performance of rate 1/2 ARA code with repetiton 4

I
Figure 7. A LDPC with projected graph
These codes have been discussed in [9][10]. The only disadvantage of this method for code design is that it does

GENERAL HARDWARE ARCHITECTURE
In this section, we present a general hardware architecture for the implementation of parallel turbo-like decoders. Without any loss of generality we focus on turbo-like codes with two constituent codes. This can be easiIy extended to codes with several constituent codes, see the appendix. The general hardware architecture is shown in Figure 10. EXT, denotes the external memory for the nth window processor.

248
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

.L

$.

Window + Window + processor processor
WO +- w, +-

J.t
I
t I

J-t
m,
J.t
Permutar
.Ct

. . . Window + Window +
processor processor
!a+ & +

t

f

Scheduling Controller

Address Permutation
k-l Select I

Window processor

Scheduling Controller

message passing for each component graph is not a recursive operation and can be done in parallel.
In this approach, only one element of each vector is accessed at a time. Therefore, each extrinsic vector is stored in a separate RAM and the permutation of the messages is simply done by accessing the extrinsics RAMS with proper addressing. In practice, one component code usually accesses the memory in sequential order and the other in permuted order, A block diagram of this architecture is shown in Figure 12. EXT, and P, denote the nth extrinsics vector memory and its permutation array used in one component code. If we have M pages in the graph, each extrinsics memory has M words. It wiIl take M cycles to perform the message passing for one component
graph-

Figure 10. Parallel decoder hardware architecture

Since the processors are identical and are running in parallel, the scheduling is the same for all of them. Therefore, there is only one scheduling controller needed for each constituent codes. The scheduling controller determines which message vector is accessed and what permutation is used. The permuter is a memory-less block that permutes the message vector on the fly. Since the message vectors are permuted differently, the permuter should be programmable. If M, the number of window processors, is large, the permuter can be the bottIeneck of the hardware design. The architecture of one window processor is depicted in Figure 11. AM and BM denote the registers which contains border messages. The observation memory is loaded at the beginning of the decoding and remains intact until end. This memory may not be necessary for all window processors.
Figure 1 1. Window processor hardware architecture There is an alternative architecture in which the entire message passing operation for one component graph in one page of the graph is performed simultaneously. This architecture is more suitable for LDPC codes because

u

c

I

Y

Figure 12. Window processor hardware architecture

Using this architecture, we have implemented the decoder for some A M codes on a Xilinx FPGA. We have achieved the decoding speed of 800 Mbpsliteration so far.

CONCLUSION
We have introduced a generalized class of turbo-like codes that can be decoded very fast, which are the codes with projected graph. This classification provides an alternative method to design turbo-like codes for high-speed decoding.
A general architecture for decoding this class of codes was
also presented. The regularity and simplicity of the
proposed architecture make it the architecture of choice for VLSI implementation of high-speed turbo-like codes.
APPENDIX
Turbo-like codes consist of two or more constituent codes connected with random or pseudo-random interleavers. The iterative decoding is performed by passing messages between these constituent codes.
In most cases there are only two constituent codes. However, it can be shown that we can almost always rearrange the code such that a turbo-Iike code with only two component codes is obtained.
The main idea is to align the interleavers in one line and divide the constituent codes into two sets, which comprise

249
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

the new component codes. This approach is explained with
some examples in Figure Z 3.
I

rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp.284287, Mar. 1974.
[5] A. Abbasfar and K. Yao, “Interleaver design for high speed turbo decoders,” SPIE 03, Aug. 2003.
[ 6 ] J. Kwak and K. Lee, “Design of dividable interleaver for parallel decoding in turbo codes,” Electronics Letters
, Vol, 38 ,Issue: 2 2 , pp. 1362-1364, Oct 2002
[7] A.Giulietti, L. van der Perre, and A. Strum, “Parallel turbo coding interleavers: avoiding collisions in accesses to
storage elements,”ElectronicsLetters ,Vol. 38 ,Issue: 5 ,
pp.232 - 234, Feb. 2002
[8] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of lowdensity parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599-618,2001.
[9] Jeremy Thorpe, “ Low Density Parity Check (LDPC)
Codes Constructed from Protographs,” JPL INP
Progress Report 42-154, August 15,2003.
[IO] kchardson , et al. , ‘I Methods and apparatus for decoding LDPC codes,’’ United States Patent 6,633,856, October 14,2003.
[ l l ] A. Abbasfar, D. DivsaIar, and K.
Yao,”Accumulate Repeat Accumulate Codes,” IEEE ISIT 2004, Chicago, IL, June 27-July 2,2004.

Figure 13. (a) Parallel Concatenatedcodes (b) Serial
Concatenated codes (c) Hybrid concatenated codes.
REFERENCES
El] C.Berroru, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimasjshima, “Near
Shannon limit error correcting coding and decoding:
Turbo codes (l),” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. CO”., Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp, 1064-1070. [2] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara,
“Soft-input Soft-output APP module for iterative decoding of concatenated codes,” IEEE Commu. Letters vol. 1, pp.22-24, Jan. 97.
[3] A. Abbasfar and K. Yao, “An Efficient Architecture
for High Speed Turbo Decoders,” ICASSP 2003, pp. IV-521-IV-524A,p d 2003. [4]L.R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error
250
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:16:32 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

