2966

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

LDPC Block and Convolutional Codes Based on Circulant Matrices
R. Michael Tanner, Fellow, IEEE, Deepak Sridhara, Arvind Sridharan, Thomas E. Fuja, Fellow, IEEE, and Daniel J. Costello, Jr., Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—A class of algebraically structured quasi-cyclic (QC) low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes and their convolutional counterparts is presented. The QC codes are described by sparse parity-check matrices comprised of blocks of circulant matrices. The sparse parity-check representation allows for practical graph-based iterative message-passing decoding. Based on the algebraic structure, bounds on the girth and minimum distance of the codes are found, and several possible encoding techniques are described. The performance of the QC LDPC block codes compares favorably with that of randomly constructed LDPC codes for short to moderate block lengths. The performance of the LDPC convolutional codes is superior to that of the QC codes on which they are based; this performance is the limiting performance obtained by increasing the circulant size of the base QC code. Finally, a continuous decoding procedure for the LDPC convolutional codes is described.
Index Terms—Circulant matrices, iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) block codes, LDPC convolutional codes, LDPC codes, message-passing, quasi-cyclic (QC) codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

L OW-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have attracted considerable attention in the coding community because

they can achieve near-capacity performance with iterative

message-passing decoding and sufficiently long block sizes.

For example, in [1], Chung et al. presented a block length

(ten million bits) rate- LDPC code that achieves reliable

performance—a

bit error rate (BER)—on an additive

white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel with a signal-to-noise

ratio (SNR)

within 0.04 dB of the Shannon limit.

For many practical applications, however, the design of

good codes with shorter block lengths is desired. Moreover,

Manuscript received December 15, 2003; revised August 20, 2004. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grants CCF0205310 and CCF-0231099 and by National Aeronautics and Space Administration under Grant NAG5-12792. The material in this paper was presented in part at the International Symposium on Communications Theory and Applications, Ambleside, U.K., July 2001; the Conference on Information Sciences and Systems Baltimore, MD, March 2001; and the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002.
R. M. Tanner is with the University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, IL 606077128 USA (e-mail: rmtanner@uic.edu).
D. Sridhara was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN. He is now with the Department of Mathematics, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore 560012, India (e-mail: dsridhar@ math.iisc.ernet.in).
A. Sridharan, T. E. Fuja, and D. J. Costello, Jr. are with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Notre Dame, Notre Dame, IN 46556 USA (e-mail: Arvind.Sridharan.1@nd.edu; Thomas.E.Fuja.1@nd.edu; Costello.2 @nd.edu).
Communicated by M. P. Fossorier, Associate Editor for Coding Techniques. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.838370

most methods for designing LDPC codes are based on random

construction techniques; the lack of structure implied by this

randomness presents serious disadvantages in terms of storing

and accessing a large parity-check matrix, encoding data,

and analyzing code performance (e.g., determining a code’s

distance properties). If the codes are designed with some (alge-

braic) structure, then some of these problems can be overcome.

In the recent literature, several algebraic methods for con-

structing LDPC codes have surfaced [2]–[7]. Among these, the

one most relevant to this paper is the

quasi-cyclic

(QC) LDPC code designed by Tanner [2]. This code’s minimum

distance of (determined by computer search using MAGMA)

compares well with that of the best code known with the same

block length and rate—a

code. Furthermore, the

code is -regular and has a sparse and elegant constraint

graph (or Tanner graph) representation that makes it well suited

to message-passing algorithms (for example, belief propaga-

tion (BP)). The parity-check matrix of the code is composed

of blocks of circulant matrices, giving the code a QC property,

which can potentially facilitate efficient encoder implementa-

tion. Further, the algebraic structure of the code allows for an

efficient high-speed very large scale integration (VLSI) imple-

mentation.

The main contribution of this paper is to generalize the

construction and obtain a large class of QC regular

LDPC codes with similar properties. Further, by exploiting the

close relationship between QC codes and convolutional codes

[8], [9], a convolutional representation is derived from the

QC block code. The convolutional representation has a LDPC

matrix that retains the graph structure of the original QC code.

Thus, the convolutional code is also well suited to decoding

with message passing. Moreover, with the convolutional code,

continuous encoding and decoding is possible—a desirable

feature in many applications.

The algebraically constructed QC LDPC codes perform quite

well compared to random regular LDPC codes at short to mod-

erate block lengths, while for long block lengths, a randomly

constructed regular LDPC code typically performs somewhat

better. Moreover, random regular LDPC codes of column weight

are asymptotically good. In [10], Gallager showed that the

cumulative distribution function of the minimum distance of a

random ensemble of

1 regular LDPC codes approaches

a step function at some fraction of the block length

as

—meaning, “almost all” codes from this ensemble

1An (N; j; k) regular LDPC code is a code of block length N that is described by a parity-check matrix containing j ones in every column and k ones in every row.

0018-9448/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER et al.: LDPC BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON CIRCULANT MATRICES

2967

have minimum distances at least as large as

when

is large. The algebraic LDPC codes designed in this paper are

not asymptotically good in this sense.

To emphasize the close relationship between the QC LDPC

block codes and the corresponding convolutional codes, this

paper describes the two in parallel. Section II introduces the

circulant-based code construction; it also shows how the con-

struction can be modified to generate irregular LDPC codes

[11]. Thresholds (i.e., the channel SNRs above which the BP de-

coder is guaranteed to converge on a cycle-free constraint graph

[11]) are better for the irregular LDPC codes than for the regular

ones. Section III describes some of the properties of the codes

and their constraint graphs, including girth, minimum distance,

and encoding procedures. The performance of the codes on an

AWGN channel with iterative message-passing decoding is ex-

amined in Section IV. Section V summarizes the results and con-

cludes the paper.

II. CODE CONSTRUCTION
This section describes the means by which the underlying structure of multiplicative groups in the set of integers modulo
may be used to construct LDPCs—both block codes and convolutional codes.

A. Construction of QC LDPC Block Codes

We use the structure of multiplicative groups in the set of

integers modulo to “place” circulant matrices within a parity-

check matrix so as to form regular QC LDPC block codes with

a variety of block lengths and rates. For prime , the integers

form a field under addition and multiplication

modulo —i.e., the Galois field GF . The nonzero elements

of GF form a cyclic multiplicative group. Let and be

two nonzero elements with multiplicative orders

and

, respectively.2 Then we form the

matrix of

elements from GF that has as its th element

as follows:

identity matrix to the left by places. The resulting binary

parity-check matrix is of size

, which means the asso-

ciated code has a rate

. (The rate may be greater

than

due to linear dependence among the rows of ; it

is easy to see that there are, in fact, at least dependent rows

in .) By construction, every column of contains ones and

every row contains ones, and so represents a

regular

LDPC code. (We observe here that for the case , our con-

struction yields the graph-theoretic error-correcting codes pro-

posed by Hakimi et al. in [12].)

The codes constructed using this technique are QC with

period —i.e., cyclically shifting a codeword by one position

within each of the blocks of circulant submatrices (where each

block consists of code bits) results in another codeword.3

This construction can be extended to nonprime . For any

integer , the set of nonnegative integers less than and rela-

tively prime to , , forms a multiplicative group. In general,

has order

i.e., the Euler “phi” function. Let and be two elements of

with orders and , respectively.4 Then the

matrix and

the corresponding parity-check matrix are obtained as above.

As earlier, the binary parity-check matrix is of size

and the associated code has rate

. Since every

column of contains ones and every row contains ones,

represents a

regular LDPC code. Examples of codes

constructed in this manner from a prime are shown in Table I

[13], and examples constructed from a nonprime are shown

in Table II.

• Example 1: A

QC code

[2]

Elements

,

are chosen from GF ; then

,

, and the parity-check matrix is given

by

(1)

(Here,

and

.)

The LDPC code is constructed by specifying its parity-check

matrix . Specifically, is made up of a array of circulant

submatrices as shown in the following:

(2)

where is a

identity matrix with rows shifted

cyclically to the left by positions. The parity-check ma-

trix has rank (determined using Gaussian elimina-

tion), so that describes a rate

code. The Tanner graph resulting from is shown in

Fig. 1, where the code bit nodes correspond to the columns

of and the constraint (parity-check) nodes correspond

to the rows of . (See [14] for an explanation of Tanner

graphs.) The length of the shortest cycle (i.e., the girth)

of the Tanner graph is . The sparse Tanner graph along

with the large girth for a code of this size makes the code

where is an

identity matrix with rows cyclically shifted

to the left by positions. The circulant submatrix in position

within is obtained by cyclically shifting the rows of the

0 2There exists such elements if k and j divide (m) = m 1, the order of
the multiplicative group.

3Strictly speaking, the word “quasi-cyclic” means the code has the property
that when a codeword is cyclically shifted by k positions another codeword is
obtained; to observe this property in the codes constructed above, the bit positions in each codeword must be permuted to a different order than the one indicated by the construction.
4As before, if j and k are prime factors of (m), then such elements always
exist.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2968 Fig. 1. Tanner graph for a [155; 64; 20] QC code.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

useful in what follows.) The associated code has min-

imum distance

and is a regular

LDPC

code. The best

linear code has

.

• Example 3: A

QC code with nonprime

.

Elements

,

are chosen from ; then

,

,

, and the parity-check matrix is

given by

Fig. 2. Tanner graph for a [21; 8; 6] QC code.

ideal for graph-based message-passing decoding. The as-

sociated code has minimum distance

(deter-

mined using MAGMA) and is a regular LDPC code.

As noted before, this compares well with the minimum

distance

of the best linear code known with the

same rate and block length. It can be shown that the Tanner

graph of this code has diameter , which is the best pos-

sible for a

regular bipartite graph of this size. Also,

the Tanner graph has girth , while an upper bound on girth

is (from the tree bound; see Section III-D).

• Example 2: A

QC code

.

Elements

,

are chosen from GF ; then

,

, and the parity-check matrix is given

by

where is a

identity matrix with rows cyclically

shifted to the left by positions. The resulting Tanner

graph has girth and is shown in Fig. 2. (Fig. 2 shows

both the “ring-like” structure characteristic of these con-

structions and a “flattened” representation that will be

where is a

identity matrix with rows shifted

cyclically to the left by positions. The code is a regular

LDPC code with minimum distance

(determined using MAGMA).

• Example 4: A

QC code

.

Elements

,

are chosen from GF

(note

that is a prime); then

,

, and

the parity-check matrix is given by the first matrix at the

bottom of the page, where is a

identity ma-

trix with rows cyclically shifted to the left by positions.

is a

matrix and describes a regular

LDPC code with minimum distance upper-bounded by

(see Section III-E).

These examples show that the construction technique de-

scribed above yields codes with a wide range of rates and block

lengths.

One possible modification to the above construction is now

proposed. We prune certain edges of the constraint graph ob-

tained from the above construction in a selective manner. We

begin by constructing a regular

parity-check matrix as

described above. For

, we then replace the last

circulant submatrices in the th row of circulant sub-

matrices with all-zero matrices.5 The modified parity-check ma-

trix is as shown in (3) at the bottom of the page, where is the

all-zero matrix and the LDPC code is now irregular. The

irregular codes are still QC, and hence their parity-check ma-

trices can be described efficiently and they can be used to gen-

erate LDPC convolutional codes (see Section II-B). We show

(in Section III-F) that these codes can be encoded efficiently

with complexity linear in the block length of the code. A sim-

ilar construction of LDPC codes that can be encoded efficiently

5The circulant rows are numbered beginning 0; 1; 2; . . . .

(3)
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER et al.: LDPC BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON CIRCULANT MATRICES
TABLE I EXAMPLES OF CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM (PRIME) CIRCULANT SIZES

2969

TABLE II EXAMPLES OF CODES CONSTRUCTED FROM (NONPRIME) CIRCULANT SIZES

has been proposed in [15]. We also note that the thresholds of the

Consider the

QC code of Example 1. The

irregular codes, described here, calculated using the technique

parity-check matrix of this

regular LDPC code is

described in [16], are superior to those of the regular codes of

obtained from the original construction. Hence, we can

the original construction.

obtain an irregular LDPC code with parity-check matrix

The rank of the parity-check matrix is

plus the

given by

number of linearly independent rows in the last rows of .

(The first

rows are linearly independent, and none of

the last rows can be expressed as a linear combination of the

first

rows.)

where is a

identity matrix with rows shifted

• Example 5: A

irregular QC code.

cyclically to the left by positions and is the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2970

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

all-zero matrix. is a rate minimum distance

matrix and describes a irregular LDPC code with (MAGMA).

B. Construction of LDPC Convolutional Codes

An LDPC convolutional code can be constructed by repli-

cating the constraint structure of the QC LDPC block code to in-

finity [8]. Naturally, the parity-check matrices (or, equivalently,

the associated constraint graphs) of the convolutional and QC

codes form the key link in this construction.

Each circulant in the parity-check matrix of a QC block code

can be specified by a unique polynomial; the polynomial repre-

sents the entries in the first column of the circulant matrix. For

example, a circulant matrix whose first column is

is represented by the polynomial

. Thus, the

binary parity-check matrix of a regular LDPC code ob-

tained from the construction described above can be expressed

in polynomial form (with indeterminate ) to obtain the fol-

lowing

matrix

Note that, since the circulant submatrices in the LDPC code

construction are all shifted identity matrices, the polynomials in

are all monomials; the power of indicates how many

places the identity matrix was shifted to form the corresponding

circulant submatrix.

is the parity-check matrix of a cor-

responding LDPC convolutional code in polynomial form. (The

indeterminate is now interpreted as the delay operator in the

convolutional code.) We note here that the parity-check matrix

of the QC code, when written in circulant form, is over the ring

, i.e., the polynomial ring

modulo the

ideal

, whereas the parity-check matrix of the convo-

lutional code is over the rational field

. In all cases that

were examined, the rate of the LDPC convolutional codes ob-

tained from the QC codes was equal to the design rate of the

original QC code, i.e.,

. This rate is slightly less

than the rate of the original QC code.

Since the irregular LDPC codes obtained from the modified

construction are also QC, the above procedure can also be ap-

plied on them to obtain corresponding irregular LDPC convolu-

tional codes.

• Example 6: A rate 2/5 LDPC convolutional code.

From the

QC code in Example 1, we can ob-

tain a rate– convolutional code with parity-check and

generator matrices given by

where

The generator matrix

was obtained from the parity-

check matrix

using Gaussian elimination. We con-

jecture that the above convolutional code has a free dis-

tance of . By choosing one of the information se-

quences equal to the denominator polynomial, i.e.,

, and the other informa-

tion sequence as the all-zero sequence, we obtain a code

sequence of weight . This only provides an upper bound

on the of this convolutional code, but we have been

unable to find any lower weight code sequences. Inter-

estingly, as we shall see, this is the same as the upper

bound obtained by MacKay and Davey [17] for LDPC ma-

trices constructed by using nonoverlapping permutation

matrices that commute with each other, as is the case here.

Further, the results of [8] guarantee that the minimum dis-

tance of the QC block code, in this case, provides a

lower bound on the free distance of the associated convo-

lutional code.

Note, however, that

above is not in minimal

form. The minimal-basic generator matrix [18] has the

minimum overall constraint length among all equivalent

rational and polynomial generator matrices and is thus of

interest. The minimal-basic form of

, with overall

constraint length

, is given by

where

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER et al.: LDPC BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON CIRCULANT MATRICES

2971

Fig. 3. Tanner graph for the rate–1=3 convolutional code of Example 7.

Several different LDPC convolutional codes can be obtained

from the same QC LDPC block code. For example, reordering

the rows of the parity-check matrix of the QC code within each

block of circulant submatrices will leave it unchanged but can

lead to a completely different LDPC convolutional code.6

Consider once again the

QC code. Let us cycli-

cally shift the first block of

rows above by one position,

the middle block of 31 rows by five positions, and the last block

of 31 rows by 25 positions, so that now the first row in each

block has a in the first column. The resulting LDPC matrix is

given by

In this case, the minimal basic generator matrix has overall

constraint length . The convolutional code has a free

distance

, equal to the minimum distance of the

original QC code.

In this manner, it is possible to construct numerous convolutional codes with a sparse constraint graph representation. For example, for every entry in Table I, it is possible to construct a convolutional code with an actual rate equal to the design rate indicated in the table.

III. PROPERTIES OF CONSTRUCTED CODES
This section describes the properties of the codes constructed in Section II. Specifically, the structure of the constraint graphs, the minimum distance of the codes, and encoding techniques are described.

A. Relation Between the Block and Convolutional Constraint

where again is a

identity matrix with rows cyclically

shifted to the left by positions. Clearly, the QC block code

and its associated constraint graph are unaffected by these row

shifts. However, the convolutional code obtained by following

the above procedure has the parity-check matrix

Graphs
Similar to the block codes, a constraint graph based on a parity-check matrix can be obtained for the convolutional codes. However, in the case of the convolutional codes, the constraint graph is infinite. The constraint graphs for the rate- convolutional code in Example 7 and the corresponding QC code (Ex-

ample 2) are shown in Fig. 3. We observe here that the con-

straint graph of the convolutional code is strikingly similar to

that of the QC code. This reflects the similarity in the QC and

Looking at the third constraint equation of

and

,

we see that that the two codes are in fact different. (Note that

the first and second constraint equations of

and

convolutional parity-check constraints. (The constraint graph of the convolutional code can be viewed as being unwrapped from that of the QC code.)

are equivalent, since the first and second rows of delayed versions of the first and second row of

are just .)

• Example 7: A rate– LDPC convolutional code. From the QC code of Example 2, a rate– convolutional code with the following parity-check and generator matrices is obtained:

B. QC Block Codes Viewed as Tail-Biting Convolutional Codes

Tail biting is a technique by which a convolutional code can

be used to construct a block code without any loss of rate [19],

[20]. An encoder for the tail-biting convolutional code is ob-

tained by reducing each polynomial entry in the generator ma-

trix of the convolutional code modulo

for some positive

integer and replacing each of the entries so obtained with cir-

culant matrices of size

. The block length of the block

code7 so derived depends on . Since the generator matrix con-

6Here we are only interested in those convolutional codes that have the same graph connectivity (i.e., nodes of the same degrees) as the base QC block code. For example, equivalent representations for the QC block code can be obtained by suitable linear combinations of rows of H. However, in such a case, the new representation(s) of the block code and that of the corresponding convolutional code will in general not have the same node degrees as the original representation of the QC code.

sists of circulant submatrices, the tail-biting convolutional code obtained is a QC block code. However, this tail-biting code has a rate equal to that of the convolutional code—which is less than or equal to the rate of the original QC code. As expected, the two
7With a feedforward encoder for the convolutional code, a tail-biting code of any block length may be obtained [21].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2972

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

QC codes, i.e., the original QC code and the tail-biting convolutional code are closely related, as the following theorem shows.

Theorem 3.1: Let be a length QC code with the

parity-check matrix , where is composed of

circulants (i.e., its period is ). Let be a convolutional code

obtained by unwrapping . Then the QC block code (tail-biting

convolutional code) of length constructed from is a

subcode of .

Proof: Since the tail-biting code is QC with period ,

any codeword in can be described by a set of polynomials in

the ring

. Therefore, any codeword in is of

the form

, where

is the gener-

ator matrix of the convolutional code and is an informa-

tion polynomial. Now, we know that the polynomial generator

matrix of the convolutional code satisfies the parity constraints

imposed by its parity-check matrix

, i.e.,

. Therefore,

. Since, by con-

struction,

is also the parity-check matrix of the original

QC block code , with the entries in

now interpreted as

being in the ring

, any codeword in satisfies

the constraints of the original QC code , i.e., the tail-biting

code is a subcode of .

block,

,

. For instance, for

the parity-check matrix in Example 1, the first bit node is

denoted by

. A constraint node is denoted by a tuple

, where only the th position is defined. This

represents the th parity-check equation in the th constraint

block,

,

. For the parity-check

matrix in Example 1, the th parity-check equation in the third

constraint block is denoted by8

, for

.

The constraint graph for the parity-check matrix in (2) has the

following graph automorphisms:

1) Bit nodes:

Constraint nodes: 2) Bit nodes:

If there were no rank reduction in the parity-check matrix of

Constraint nodes:

the original QC block code, it would have a rate equal to that of

the convolutional code. In such a case, it is easy to see that the

tail-biting convolutional code would be exactly the same as the original QC block code.

3) Bit nodes:

We have derived a rate- convolutional code (Example 5)

from the

QC block code (Example 1); from the

rate- convolutional code we can, in turn, derive a tail-biting

Constraint nodes:

convolutional code, i.e., another QC block code of block length

and 62 information bits (rate ), that is a subcode of the

th posn.

original

QC block code and has

.

where and are the elements of GF

th posn. (orders and ,

C. Graph Automorphisms

respectively) used to construct the parity-check matrix as de-

The structure of the multiplicative groups used in con-

structing the regular LDPC codes leads to certain graph

automorphisms in the constraint graphs of the constructed

codes. These symmetries are the topic of this subsection. A

node belonging to the vertex set of the graph is denoted

by

. If contains an edge between and , then the pair

is said to belong to the edge set of , i.e.,

.

A graph automorphism is a bijective map from to that

scribed earlier. The automorphism maps a bit node to another bit node in
the same bit block as the original node, whereas maps a bit node in one bit block to a bit node in another bit block. Likewise, maps a constraint node in one constraint block to a constraint node in another constraint block. All the bit nodes can be generated as an orbit of a single bit node under the group of automorphisms generated by and , i.e.,

preserves edges, i.e.,

iff

.

The bit nodes of the constraint graph correspond to the columns of the parity-check matrix (in (2)) and the constraint nodes correspond to the rows. The bit and constraint nodes can be divided into blocks of nodes, called bit blocks and constraint blocks, respectively, where the first columns

In Example 1, the bit nodes are the orbit of

. Similarly,

all the constraint nodes can be generated as an orbit of a single

constraint node under the group of automorphisms generated

by and , i.e.,

of correspond to the first bit block of nodes, the next

columns correspond to the second bit block of nodes,

and so on. Similarly, dividing the rows of , the first In Example 1, the constraint nodes are the orbit of

. We

rows correspond to the first constraint block of nodes, the also note that, using , , and , any edge of the constraint graph

next rows to the second constraint block, and so on. To can be mapped to any other edge.

illustrate the graph automorphisms, the bit nodes are labeled

as

; this notation denotes that a bit node

participates in th parity-check equation in the th constraint

8In the notation [1; 1; t], “1” denotes that the quantity is undefined, i.e., to denote the tth check equation in the third constraint block, since H contains three blocks of constraints, the first two components are undefined.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER et al.: LDPC BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON CIRCULANT MATRICES

2973

Fig. 4. A 12-cycle.

Fig. 5. A tree beginning at a constraint node for a (j; k) regular LDPC graph.

The map is just a restatement of the QC nature of the code in the constraint graph involving bit nodes through and

and is therefore valid for any QC code represented in circulant constraint nodes through . The structure of the circulant

form. Hence, it is also valid for constraint graphs of the irreg- submatrices in gives rise to numerous -cycles. Likewise,

ular LDPC codes of the modified construction. In addition, an the upper bound on the girth of the irregular LDPC constraint

automorphism analogous to is valid for the constraint graph graphs of in (3) is also .

of the convolutional code. This automorphism indicates the time An upper bound on the girth of a graph is obtained from the

invariance property of the convolutional codes.

well-known tree bound [10]. For a constraint graph representing

a

regular LDPC code, a tree is generated beginning at a

D. Girth

The BP decoding algorithm converges to the maximum a pos-

teriori (MAP) solution for graphs that are trees—i.e., have no

cycles; for graphs with cycles, there is no such optimality. The

girth of a graph is the length of the shortest cycle in the graph.

If the girth of the constraint graph is , then the iterative BP al-

gorithm is known to be exact for

iterations. (By exact,

constraint node (see Fig. 5). The first (constraint) level of the tree is a single constraint node. This is connected to bit nodes at the first bit level of the tree. Each of the bit nodes are then connected to other constraint nodes at the second constraint level of the tree, and so on.
Enumerating the nodes in this manner, the number of bit nodes counted up to the th bit level is

we mean that the messages exchanged between the nodes of the

graph during BP decoding are independent.) For prime circu-

lant sizes, , the constraint graph representing the parity-check matrix in (2), cannot have girth less than . This is seen by observing that the relative difference between the shifts across any two columns is different along different rows. For nonprime
, however, the girth can be as low as . Irrespective of prime or

If exceeds , the total number of bit nodes in the graph, then at least one of the bit nodes in the tree enumerated up to bit level must have occurred more than once, meaning there is a closed path (or a cycle). Hence, if

nonprime , the constraint graph of in (2) cannot have girth

larger than . Fig. 4 is a graphical illustration of why this is so (see also [6]). The dark diagonal lines in the figure represent the an upper bound on the girth of the graph is

nonzero entries of the parity-check matrix and the empty regions

if

represent the zeros. The dotted lines indicate a cycle of length

if

.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2974

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

Similarly, counting the number of constraint nodes enumer- [17]. The regular LDPC codes constructed here satisfy this con-

ated up to the th constraint level, we have

dition, so the upper bound in [17] on the minimum distance is

applicable. The result in [17] says that if a parity-check matrix

is composed of an

array of

nonoverlapping permutation submatrices that all commute with

If exceeds , the total number of constraint nodes in the graph, then this implies the existence of a cycle in the tree enumerated up to constraint level . Therefore, if

each other, then the minimum distance of the corresponding

code is at most

. For small column weight , the bound

imposes a stringent limitation on the code’s minimum distance,

especially for codes with large block lengths. Using the same

arguments as in [17], it can be shown that for the codes obtained

an upper bound on the girth of the graph is

using the modified irregular construction the minimum distance

is upper-bounded by 3

for

.

if

if

.

The definition of an “asymptotically good” code construction

is one that yields a sequence of codes whose minimum distances

grow linearly with the block length as

. In [10], Gal-

Therefore, the girth of the regular

LDPC codes is upper- lager considered an ensemble of regular

LDPC codes

bounded by the minimum of and .

and showed that, with high probability, a code chosen at random

For the parity-check matrix of the

code of from this ensemble has a minimum distance

,

Example 1, the tree bound is , whereas the actual girth of the where

is a parameter that is dependent on and

graph is . For the matrix of the

code of Example and independent of . In other words, this result shows the

2, the tree bound is and so is the actual girth. The tree bound existence of

regular LDPC codes in Gallager’s en-

is tight typically for short block lengths. As the circulant size semble that have minimum distance at least

. The reg-

increases, the girth of the constraint graphs of (2) tends to . ular LDPC codes described here cannot have a minimum dis-

The inherent algebraic structure in the parity-check matrices of tance larger than

, and hence they are not asymptotically

the constructed codes allows one to check for the presence of good. However, they may compare well with random

short cycles very efficiently.

LDPC codes for block lengths up to , where

The constraint graphs of the LDPC convolutional codes con- . For example, in the case of

LDPC codes,

structed herein have their girth lower-bounded by the girth of

, which means the algebraic LDPC codes of Section II

the corresponding QC LDPC constraint graph. For any cycle in are comparable in minimum distance to

random LDPC

the convolutional code constraint graph we can find an equiva- codes for block lengths up to around

. (This

lent cycle in the QC constraint graph. Say, a particular set of bit and constraint nodes form a cycle in the convolutional code constraint graph. Then the relative shifts between the bit nodes sum to zero. The corresponding sequence of bit and constraint nodes in the QC code (obtained by reducing indices modulo , where
is the circulant size in the QC code) have exactly the same relative shifts (now read modulo ) between the bit nodes, and

inference assumes that, as the block length increases, the min-

imum distance of the algebraically constructed LDPC codes in-

creases until the bound

is met—an assumption that has

not been shown to be true in general.)

Using simple graph-based analysis, lower bounds on the min-

imum distance of LDPC codes can be obtained [22]. For in-

stance, when the column weight

and the girth of the con-

hence sum to zero—i.e., in the QC code constraint graph, we find a corresponding cycle of the same length. However, a cycle in the QC constraint graph does not always lead to a cycle in the convolutional constraint graph. While the relative shifts between bit nodes may sum to zero modulo , the shift may be a nonzero multiple of , meaning the corresponding bit nodes in

straint graph is , then any

columns of the parity-check

matrix are linearly independent. This implies that

,

and in fact, it is exactly . For the

code of Example

2, the girth of the constraint graph is and the minimum dis-

tance is . Similar bounds can be obtained for column weight

, as in [23].

the convolutional code do not form a cycle. Hence, it is possible that the convolutional code constraint graph may have a larger girth than the QC code constraint graph. Observe, however, that in Fig. 4 the relative shifts between bit nodes sum to zero, so that the corresponding bit nodes in the convolutional code also form a -cycle. Hence, the girth of the convolutional codes is also upper-bounded by .

The results in [8] show that the LDPC convolutional codes obtained by unwrapping the constraint graph of the QC codes have their free distance lower-bounded by the minimum distance of the corresponding QC code. Essentially, this is because wrapping back any codeword of the convolutional code produces a valid codeword in the QC code. More succinctly, a codeword in the convolutional code reduced modulo

E. Minimum Distance

is a codeword in the QC code, as shown for the tail-biting codes in Theorem 3.1.

At high SNRs, the maximum-likelihood decoding performance of an error-correcting code is dominated by the code’s F. Encoding

minimum distance. MacKay and Davey obtained an upper With the use of iterative message-passing decoders with near-

bound on the minimum distance of certain LDPC codes whose optimal performance, decoding has become a simpler task re-

parity-check matrices are composed of nonoverlapping blocks quiring only

complexity [11], whereas traditional en-

of permutation submatrices that all commute with each other coding techniques require

complexity. The general pro-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER et al.: LDPC BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON CIRCULANT MATRICES

2975

cedure for encoding any linear block code, specified by a parity- rows. The additional rows can be found using Tanner’s trans-

check matrix, is to find a suitable generator matrix for the code. form theory approach (see [25] for details).

This is done by reducing the parity-check matrix to system- Consider the

code of Example 1. A generator

atic form using elementary row and column operations. The matrix of the corresponding convolutional code is the feedfor-

computational cost of reducing the matrix to systematic form ward minimal basic encoder shown in Example 6. The gener-

is in general

. Further, the cost of the actual encoding is ator matrix of a tail-biting subcode is obtained by reducing the

itself

.

entries in

modulo

, resulting in the matrix

In [24], Richardson et al. show how random LDPC codes can

. A binary matrix of size

is the binary equiv-

be encoded with almost linear cost. They exploit the sparseness alent of

when written in circulant form, and it has full

of the LDPC matrices to show that the complexity of encoding rank. forms a partial generator matrix for the

LDPC codes can be reduced from

to

, where QC code. Since the

code has 64 information bits,

is a number that depends on the particular LDPC ma- we are missing two linearly independent rows. The missing (lin-

trix. In the following subsections, we look at alternative ways early independent) rows are found from the transform theory

to encode the LDPC codes introduced in Section II—ways that approach.10 In this case, referring to Fig. 1, an all-one vector in

exploit the inherent algebraic structure of the codes.

any two of the five bit rings solves the constraint equations and

1) Encoding Based on the Structure of the Parity-Check Ma- those solutions complete the space. Note that the linear space

trix: The parity-check matrix of the QC regular LDPC codes spanned by the vectors that are all-one in any two of the five bit

written in polynomial form is

rings has dimension . However, since two of these dimensions

are already spanned by , as can be seen by inspection, we

need to add only a subset of the vectors that are all-one in any

two of the five bit rings. By contrast, these solutions do not exist

in the convolutional code.

Alternatively, by reducing the (nonminimal) generator ma-

trix

in Example 6 (written in nonsystematic feedforward

form) modulo

, a generator matrix of a different QC

In the above matrix, we observe that an entry along a row

is the th power of the previous entry in that row. (The en-

tries are modulo

.) Similarly, an entry along a column

is the th power of the previous entry in that column. Using

Tanner’s transform theory [25], it can be shown that this code

can be alternately described by a generator matrix composed of

a block of circulant submatrices, since the code is QC. Hence,

the code can be encoded using shift registers, as is done with

cyclic codes. A generator matrix composed of circulants can be

obtained as follows: a convolutional code can be derived from

the original QC code as described earlier. Then a systematic

parity-check matrix for the convolutional code, expressed over

the field of rationals

, where is the binary field, can

be obtained using elementary row and column operations. (This

step is simple because the parity-check matrix is of size .) A

systematic (in general, feedback) generator matrix of the convo-

lutional code is easily determined from the corresponding sys-

tematic parity-check matrix. Note that the convolutional code

can now be encoded as usual using shift registers. By rewriting

the generator matrix of the convolutional code in feedforward

form and reducing the entries modulo

, a polynomial

matrix with entries in the ring

is obtained. As

has already been shown (Theorem 3.1), this is the generator ma-

trix of a tail-biting convolutional code that is a subcode of the

original QC code.9 Rewriting the polynomial entries as

circulant matrices, a matrix of size

spanning the

tail-biting subcode is obtained. This matrix forms a partial gen-

erator matrix for the original QC code. The original QC code

is spanned by this partial generator matrix and a few additional

code is obtained. Rewriting this in circulant form, a

matrix is obtained. However, we find that is not of full

rank; there are two linearly dependent rows (and hence, it de-

scribes a

QC code).

The transform theory approach can also be used to find the

complete set of generators without having to obtain a partial set

of generators from the tail-biting code; however, we prefer the

above procedure since it is computationally simpler.

For the regular QC LDPC codes it has been observed that, in

most cases, the rank of is

less than full rank. Thus,

. However, it is possible that the rank

of is less than

. An example, of a

code

where the drop in the rank of is

for

is given in the Appendix. In either case, a partial

generator matrix for the QC code can be obtained from the rows

of the tail-biting generator matrix and the remaining (linearly

independent) rows can be obtained from the transform theory

approach. An efficient encoder based on shift registers can then

be implemented using this generator matrix.

2) Encoding by Erasure Decoding: Luby et al., in their pi-

oneering work on the design of codes for the binary erasure

channel [26] also showed how the graph-based message-passing

decoder can be exploited to encode their codes. In this subsec-

tion, we investigate their approach for encoding the algebraic

LDPC codes introduced in Section II.

To perform graph-based encoding, the bit nodes corre-

sponding to information bits are assumed to be known and

the bit nodes corresponding to parity bits are assumed to be

unknown, or, erased. The parity bits can potentially be re-

covered by simulating the graph-based decoder for an erasure

9The generator matrix of the convolutional code can either be in minimal

or nonminimal form. In either case, a (possibly different) QC code, which is

D + 1 a subcode of the original QC code (Theorem 3.1), is obtained by reducing the

entries of the convolutional generator matrix modulo h

i.

0 10In fact, in this case, the missing rows are obtained from just the th eigen-
value matrix of the transform [25].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2976

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

Fig. 6. Encoding the [21; 8; 6] QC LDPC code by erasure decoding.

channel. Recently, Di et al. in [27] introduced the notion of a duced graph is a single cycle of length . Since every constraint

stopping set in a constraint graph. The graph-based decoder node now has degree , assigning a value to the remaining infor-

cannot successfully recover all erasures if the erased bit nodes mation bit node determines the values of all the parity-bit nodes

contain a stopping set of the constraint graph. In the context of uniquely.

encoding, if none of the stopping sets of the LDPC constraint A natural question that arises is whether all the LDPC codes

graph contain only parity-bit nodes, then the result of erasure having the structure in (2) can be encoded in the above manner,

decoding on such a constraint graph is a successful recovery of and if so, how do we choose the nodes that represent information

all the parity bits, implying a successful encoding!

bits? The answer to this is not known in general; however, for

The constraint graphs of the algebraically designed LDPC a specific case, the question may be answered in the affirmative codes introduced in Section II have structure that can be ex- by the following lemma.

ploited in encoding. The code of Example 2 provides an illus-

tration of how the constraint graph itself can be used to perform

encoding without the need to find the generator matrix of the

code. The constraint graph of the

QC code in Fig. 2 can

be redrawn as in Fig. 6. Of the 21 bit nodes, eight correspond

to information bits and 13 correspond to parity bits. Suppose all

the bits in the first circulant block (the first seven nodes) and the

first bit in the second circulant block are chosen as information

bit nodes (as shown in the figure). Then, to encode, the values of

the remaining bit nodes must be determined. The values of the

information bit nodes are obtained from the bits to be encoded

and the parity-bit nodes are assumed to be erased. The numbers

on the nodes indicate the order in which the parity bits are recov-

ered by the erasure decoding procedure. The node labeled “1”

is an information bit node; the decoder will first recover nodes

labeled “2” and “3,” and then the nodes labeled “4” and “5,” and

so on.

Lemma 3.1: For all regular

LDPC codes constructed

as described, if

, then the code can

be encoded via erasure decoding with linear complexity.

Proof: If the code is designed from the multiplicative

group of the integer , then the block length of the code is .

Since the sum of all rows of is the zero vector, there is

at least one dependent row in the matrix. Moreover, because

it can be shown that the

submatrix comprised of the last columns of has a rank

of exactly

. Hence, the rank of is reduced by one

and consequently the dimension of the code is

.

We can let the last

columns of correspond to

parity-bit nodes and hence, the first

columns

of (2) represent information-bit nodes. By specifying the

values of the first

information bits, the values of the

adjoining constraint nodes can be updated and the

information-bit nodes can be deleted. The reduced graph now

The erasure decoding procedure can be described as follows. contains bit nodes and constraint nodes, where each

Each constraint node is assigned a value that equals the value of node is of degree . The claim is that all of these nodes are

the known adjoining bit node in the first circulant block; these connected by a single cycle of length . Given the claim, by

known bit nodes in the first circulant block are then deleted from specifying the value of one of the remaining bit nodes (i.e.,

the graph. Examining the reduced constraint graph shown at the the last information bit node), the

parity-bit nodes are

bottom of Fig. 6, it can be seen that there is now a single path of determined uniquely, thereby completing the encoding. The

length that traverses through all 14 nodes once, i.e., the re- claim is easily seen as follows: The matrix representing the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER et al.: LDPC BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON CIRCULANT MATRICES

2977

reduced constraint graph is a submatrix of the original matrix of the associated QC code) that needs to be inverted to com-

with all the rows present and some of the columns removed. plete encoding.

Therefore, the single dependent row in this submatrix is the

sum of the remaining rows. Since the column and row weights are two in the submatrix, the reduced graph itself is a single

IV. PERFORMANCE RESULTS

cycle of length connecting the nodes. Finally, we note In this section, the performance obtained with the QC and cor-

that the complexity of encoding, which is the complexity of responding convolutional LDPC codes introduced in Section II

erasure decoding on the constraint graph, is linear in the block is presented for a binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulated

length.

AWGN channel. In both cases, the iterative BP algorithm was

For prime , the condition

used for decoding.

is always true; in particular, all of the

LDPC codes in

Table I satisfy Lemma 3.1. However, this is not necessarily true

for nonprime .

We now show that the irregular LDPC codes obtained from

the modified construction technique proposed in Section II can

also be encoded, using their constraint graphs, by the above pro-

cedure.

A. LDPC QC Block Codes

The performance of a few regular LDPC codes, constructed

as described in Section II, with BP decoding is shown in

Fig. 7; the results are compared with regular randomly con-

structed LDPC codes11 of similar rates and block lengths for a

BPSK-modulated AWGN channel with SNR

. The BP

decoder was allowed a maximum of 50 decoding iterations.

Theorem 3.2: For an irregular LDPC code, from the modified The BP decoder stops when either a valid codeword is found

construction, if

, then the code can or the maximum number of decoding iterations is reached. All

be encoded via erasure decoding with linear complexity.

codes in the figure have

and

. The algebraic con-

Proof: Assume the code is originally designed as a

struction12 is seen to outperform the random construction for

regular LDPC code with block length . Then the irregular short to moderate block lengths (up to in the figure) [28].

code has a block length of and a parity-check matrix of However, at longer block lengths, the algebraic constructions

size

. The last rows of contain at least one de- are not as good as the random constructions.

pendent row. Since

it follows, as in The algebraic constructions show an error floor, which may

the proof of Lemma 3.1, that the rank of the parity-check ma- be due to their limited minimum distance. For

, the min-

trix is reduced by exactly one and consequently the dimension imum distance of the algebraically constructed codes is at most

of the code is

. Let the first

columns

[17]. The minimum distance of random

of represent

information bits. The structure of the codes, on the other hand, can grow linearly with the block length

parity-check matrix (3) is such that by specifying the values of [10], and the random codes in the figure do not exhibit an ob-

these

information bits, the next bits corresponding to vious error floor behavior.

the next columns of are determined uniquely from the first The performance of the

regular

code

row of circulant submatrices; knowing these bits, the next

of Example 8 (see Appendix A) is shown in Fig. 8. This

bits are then determined from the second row of circulant sub- code has atypical behavior compared to the other

LDPC

matrices. This procedure is repeated through the

th row codes; despite its good waterfall performance, the code’s small

of circulant submatrices, and in the process

parity minimum distance is reflected in the poor error floor behavior.

bits are recovered. The first

constraint nodes are now Because of the linear dependency among rows, there is a rate

deleted from the graph, the remaining constraint nodes are gain in this case that results in a waterfall performance better

updated with the values of the known adjoining bit nodes, and than what one would expect from the degree profile of the code.

the known bit nodes are then deleted. The reduced constraint In contrast, the

regular

code

has a

graph contains bit nodes and constraint nodes and the good minimum distance and its performance at high SNRs, as

graph is a single cycle of length connecting all the nodes. shown in Fig. 7, is superior to the performance of a block length

By the previous lemma, specifying the one remaining informa-

randomly constructed

regular LDPC code. We con-

tion bit node determines the remaining

parity-bit nodes jecture that the minimum distance of this code is (achieving

uniquely, thus completing the encoding. Here again, the com- the upper bound of

[17]), since it was observed during

plexity of encoding is linear in the block length.

simulations that whenever the BP decoder converged to a wrong

The encoding procedure described above for the block codes

can also be extended to the convolutional codes. If the graph-

based encoding does not directly apply to a regular LDPC

code constructed as described (i.e., one for which either

or

, but the rank drop in the parity-check matrix is larger

codeword, that wrong codeword was at a Hamming distance of

from the correct codeword.

Fig. 9 compares the performance of the algebraically con-

structed regular LDPC codes having

and

with

regular randomly constructed

LDPC codes; in this case,

than one, thus violating the condition for Lemma 3.1), then by a procedure akin to the one described in [24], the parity-check matrix can be reduced to a form where graph-based encoding almost works. This form of the parity-check matrix will contain

 0 11The regular random LDPC matrices were constructed using the online soft-
ware available at http : ==www:cs:toronto:edu= radford=software online:html: This program generates random regular LDPC codes of any specified rate and block length and is capable of expurgating four cycles in the
LDPC constraint graph.

an

matrix (where is much smaller than the block length 12It was observed that the algebraic construction yielded codes that perform

at least as well as random codes primarily for prime circulant sizes m.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2978

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

Fig. 7. Algebraic versus random construction of regular (3; 5) LDPC codes.

the algebraically constructed codes are found to perform as well so that decoding results are output continuously after an initial

as the random codes for block lengths up to around 100 000 delay. Let denote the memory order, i.e., the largest power of

and they clearly outperform the random codes at shorter block , in the syndrome former matrix13

. If decoding itera-

lengths [28]. Further, we do not see any evidence of the error tions are allowed, then the initial decoding delay is

.

floor problems observed in the longer

codes, possibly be- Further, decoding can be scheduled so that the iterations are

cause the

codes have larger minimum distances, consis- carried out independently and in parallel by identical proces-

tent with the larger bound of

.

sors [29].

Fig. 10 compares the performance of the original regular con- Consider the convolutional code defined by

struction with the modified irregular construction for codes de-

rived from

LDPC matrices. The irregular construction

gives rise to LDPC codes for which the BP decoder converges at

a smaller channel

. The thresholds of the irregular codes

are superior to the thresholds of the regular codes. The threshold

of the regular

codes is 2.65 dB, whereas the irregular

codes have a threshold of only 0.87 dB. Hence, the waterfall

regions of the BER performance curves for the irregular codes

occur at much lower SNR than those of the regular codes. How-

ever, the main drawback of the irregular construction is that it

can yield codes with poor minimum distance, resulting in high

error floors.

Fig. 11 shows a part of the constraint graph of this convolutional

code. The memory order of the syndrome former is

.

Suppose now that we allow a maximum of decoding iterations.

Then the decoding window, shown by dotted lines in the figure,

for iterations, is comprised of

time

units. Decoding results are output after an initial delay equal

to the decoding window size i.e.,

time

units. Channel values enter the decoding window from the left

B. LDPC Convolutional Codes
The LDPC convolutional codes obtained in this paper typically have large constraint lengths. Therefore, the use of trellisbased decoding algorithms is not feasible. As has been noted, the convolutional code constraint graphs are sparse, and hence the BP algorithm can be used for decoding. As described in [29],

and decoded results are output from the right. As the bits move

through the decoding window, successive iterations are carried

out by successive processors, i.e., the th iteration on a bit is

performed by the th processor. Further, each processor needs

to update only the

constraint nodes and

variable

nodes referred to as “active” nodes in the figure.

BP decoding of LDPC convolutional codes can be scheduled 13We assume here that there are no common factors in any column of H (D).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER et al.: LDPC BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON CIRCULANT MATRICES

2979

Fig. 8. Performance of two regular (3; 5) algebraically constructed LDPC codes: atypical behavior of the [755; 334] code.
Fig. 9. Algebraic versus random construction of (5; 7) LDPC codes. Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2980

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

Fig. 10. Rate–2=7 LDPC codes: Regular versus irregular constructions.

Fig. 11. Continuous decoding of an LDPC convolutional code with I iterations.

Fig. 12 shows the performance of the

LDPC convo- passed in BP decoding insured faster convergence, i.e., within

lutional codes and that of the corresponding QC codes for a 50 iterations).

BPSK-modulated AWGN channel assuming 50 BP iterations.

We see that the LDPC convolutional codes significantly outper-

form their block-code counterparts in the waterfall region [30].

At higher SNRs, the convolutional codes exhibit an error floor

and the improvement obtained with respect to the block code

is reduced. (Occasionally, with the

convolutional LDPCs,

Fig. 13 shows the performance of the

LDPC convolu-

tional codes and the corresponding QC block codes. Again, the

convolutional codes outperform the block codes. In this case,

there is no apparent error floor exhibited by the convolutional

codes. Observe that the waterfall for the

convolu-

tional code occurs at a lower SNR than the threshold for reg-

the BP algorithm needed 200–300 iterations to converge. We ular

LDPC block codes. This may be because the initial

found that using an ad hoc limiting factor on the reliabilities check nodes of the convolutional code have degree less than

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER et al.: LDPC BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON CIRCULANT MATRICES

2981

Fig. 12. The performance of convolutional LDPC codes versus the corresponding QC block LDPC codes for (3; 5) connectivity.

Fig. 13. The performance of convolutional LDPC codes versus the corresponding QC block LDPC codes for (5; 7) connectivity.

, resulting in a slightly irregular structure (see [31]). Fig. 14 The convolutional code can be viewed as being “unwrapped”

shows the performance of a rate-

, block length , by extending the size of each circulant block in the parity-check

regular QC LDPC code (Example 4) and that of the cor- matrix of the QC block code to infinity. This “unwrapping” is

responding rate-

LDPC convolutional code derived from the principal reason for the performance gain of the convolu-

this QC code.The figure shows that, for a maximum number tional code over the QC block code. To illustrate this, we form

of 100 BP iterations, the convolutional code performance again a class of block codes with parity-check matrices of increasing

surpasses that of the base QC code.

circulant sizes, while retaining the same structure within each

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2982

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

Fig. 14. The performance of convolutional LDPC codes versus the corresponding QC block LDPC codes for (3; 17) connectivity.

Fig. 15. Performance of regular (3; 5) QC block codes with increasing circulant size m.

circulant. As an example, consider the block length

gives QC codes of block lengths

and

,

regular QC code. The circulant submatrices are of size respectively. The performance of these block codes with BP de-

in this case. Increasing the circulant size to and coding is shown in Fig. 15. The figure also shows the perfor-

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TANNER et al.: LDPC BLOCK AND CONVOLUTIONAL CODES BASED ON CIRCULANT MATRICES

2983

Fig. 16. Performance of convolutional codes versus corresponding QC block codes for (5; 7) regular and irregular constructions.

mance of the corresponding convolutional code. The number of The proposed codes perform comparably to random LDPC

BP iterations is fixed at 50 in all cases.14 The gradual improve- codes at short to moderate block lengths—making them poten-

ment in performance of the block codes illustrates that the con- tial candidates for practical applications. The algebraic structure

volutional code represents the limiting case of the block codes of the codes makes them particularly suitable for high-speed

as the circulant size increases.

VLSI implementation [32].

In Fig. 16, the performance obtained with

regular and A modified construction to yield irregular LDPC codes has

irregular convolutional codes are compared. As for the block also been presented. The irregular LDPC codes perform well

codes, the irregular codes show a significant improvement in in the low-SNR regime, but some suffer from poor distance.

the waterfall performance. Moreover, as in Fig. 13, the waterfall Generalizations to the proposed construction may exist for

for the irregular convolutional codes derived from

regular designing irregular codes with good distance that retain the

convolutional codes appears before the threshold of irregular promising features of the original construction.

LDPC block codes having the same degree profile.

The LDPC convolutional codes that are obtained from this

construction are time-invariant convolutional codes with a va-

V. CONCLUSION
An algebraic construction based on circulant matrices for designing LDPC codes has been proposed. The properties of the LDPC codes resulting from this construction have been examined. Given the nature of the construction, the codes obtained are

riety of rates and constraint lengths. The performance of BP decoding on these codes has been illustrated using a continuous decoding procedure. A significant performance gain is obtained by considering the convolutional representations instead of the original QC versions.

QC, which allows for the possibility of deriving corresponding LDPC convolutional code representations. The convolutional representations allow for continuous encoding and decoding.

The following

APPENDIX LDPC code is designed from GF .

• Elements

,

are chosen from GF ; then

14Since we are limiting the number of iterations for the convolutional code to
2 50 and m in this case is 187, this implies that BP decoding for the convolutional
code occurs across nodes up to 50 (187 + 1) time units away. So its behavior is expected to be equivalent to that of a block code with a circulant size of m = 9400.

,

, and the LDPC matrix is given by

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

2984

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 12, DECEMBER 2004

The code shows atypical behavior in comparison with the

other regular

LDPC codes constructed here. The

rank drop in the parity-check matrix is and not

, as it is for most of the other

codes. Further, the

code has a small minimum distance

that

leads to a poor error floor behavior with belief propaga-

tion decoding. Despite the significant rank loss in the QC

code, the corresponding LDPC convolutional code has a

parity-check matrix with full rank, i.e., it is a rate– con-

volutional code.

REFERENCES
[1] S.-Y. Chung, G. D. Forney, Jr., T. J. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the Shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[2] R. M. Tanner, “A [155; 64; 20] sparse graph (LDPC) code,” presented at the Recent Results Session at IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Sorrento, Italy, June 2000.
[3] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. Fossorier, “Low density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.
[4] J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Constructions of LDPC codes using Ramanujam graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. 38th Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2000, pp. 248–257.
[5] R. M. Tanner, “On quasi-cyclic repeat accumulate codes,” in Proc. 37th Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 1999, pp. 249–259.
[6] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Quasi-cyclic low-density parity-check codes from circulant permutation matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, to be published.
[7] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2000, pp. 543–546.
[8] R. M. Tanner, “Convolutional codes from quasi-cyclic codes: A link between the theories of block and convolutional codes,” Univ. Calif. Santa Cruz, Tech. Rep., 1987.
[9] Y. Levy and D. J. Costello, Jr., “An algebraic approach to constructing convolutional codes from quasi-cyclic codes,” DIMACS Ser. Discr. Math. Theor. Comput. Sci., vol. 14, pp. 188–198, 1993.
[10] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[11] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[12] S. L. Hakimi and J. Bredeson, “Graph theoretic error-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-14, pp. 584–591, July 1968.
[13] R. M. Tanner, D. Sridhara, and T. E. Fuja, “A class of group-structured LDPC codes,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Communications Theory and Applications, Ambleside, U.K., July 2001.

[14] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[15] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Communications, vol. 47, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[16] S.-Y. Chung, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Analysis of sum-product decoding of low density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[17] D. J. C. MacKay and M. C. Davey, Evaluation of Gallager Codes for Short Block Length and High Rate Applications, 2001, vol. 123, IMA volumes in Mathematics and its Applications, ch. 5, pp. 113–130.
[18] R. Johannesson and K. S. Zigangirov, Fundamentals of Convolutional Coding. Piscataway, NJ: IEEE Press, 1999.
[19] H. H. Ma and J. K. Wolf, “On tail-biting convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. COM-34, pp. 104–111, Feb. 1986.
[20] G. Solomon and H. C. A. van Tilborg, “A connection between block and convolutional codes,” SIAM J. Appl. Math., vol. 37, no. 2, pp. 358–369, Oct. 1979.
[21] S. Lin and D. J. Costello, Jr., Error Control Coding: Fundamentals and Applications. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 2004.
[22] R. M. Tanner, “Minimum distance bounds by graph analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 808–821, Feb. 2001.
[23] A. Orlitsky, R. Urbanke, K. Vishwanathan, and J. Zhang, “Stopping sets and the girth of Tanner graphs,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002, p. 2.
[24] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[25] R. M. Tanner, “A transform theory for a class of group invariant codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 34, pp. 725–775, July 1988.
[26] M. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, D. Spielman, and V. Stemann, “Practical erasure resilient codes,” in Proc. 29th Annu. ACM Symp. Theory of Computing, (STOC), 1997, pp. 150–159.
[27] C. Di, D. Proietti, I˙. E. Teletar, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “Finitelength analysis of low-density parity-check codes on the binary erasure channel,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 1570–1579, June 2002.
[28] D. Sridhara, T. E. Fuja, and R. M. Tanner, “Low density parity check codes from permutation matrices,” in Proc. Conf. Information Sciences and Systems, Baltimore, MD, Mar. 2001, p. 142.
[29] A. J. Feltström and K. S. Zigangirov, “Time-varying periodic convolutional codes with low-density parity-check matrix,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2181–2191, Sept. 1999.
[30] A. Sridharan, D. J. Costello, Jr., D. Sridhara, T. E. Fuja, and R. M. Tanner, “A construction for low density parity check convolutional codes based on quasi-cyclic block codes,” in Proc. 2002 IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 2002, p. 481.
[31] A. Sridharan, M. Lentmaier, D. J. Costello, Jr., and K. S. Zigangirov, “Convergence analysis of a class of LDPC convolutional codes for the erasure channel,” in Proc. 42nd Allerton Conf. Communication, Control and Computing, Monticello, IL, Oct. 2004.
[32] K. Yoshida, J. Brockman, D. Costello, Jr., T. Fuja, and R. M. Tanner, “VLSI implementation of quasi-cyclic LDPC codes,” in Proc. 2004 Int. Symp. Information Theory and Its Applications, Parma, Italy, Oct. 10–13, 2004, pp. 551–556.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:41 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

