3084

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 4, JULY 2004

Large Girth Cycle Codes for Partial Response Channels
Hongwei Song, Member, IEEE, Jingfeng Liu, Member, IEEE, and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we present a general approach for constructing high-rate cycle codes having girth 12 which achieve the lower bound on the block length. An efficient encoding algorithm is also proposed for this class of codes. We estimate the word error rate of the cycle codes for additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels under maximum likelihood decoding, using the minimum distance and its multiplicity. These estimates are compared to simulation results with iterative soft decoding. The performance of these codes for partial response channels is studied under iterative soft decoding using computer simulations.
Index Terms—Cycle code, iterative soft decoding, low-density parity check (LDPC) code, partial response channel.

Fig. 1. Three-tier Tanner graph of a cycle code starting with a check node, with two cases leading to short cycles.

I. INTRODUCTION

G ALLAGER defined an ( , , ) low-density parity check (LDPC) code [1] with a matrix of columns that has

ones in each column, ones in each row, and zeros elsewhere. It

follows from this definition that an ( , , ) parity check matrix

has

rows. A bipartite graph with check nodes

and bit nodes can be created with an edge between the bit and

check nodes if there is a corresponding 1 in the parity check

matrix . Such a graph is frequently called a Tanner graph [2].

A cycle in a Tanner graph refers to a finite set of connected edges

that starts and ends at the same node, and satisfies the condition

that no node (except the initial and final node) appears more than

once. The length of the cycle is simply the number of edges it

contains. The length of the smallest cycle in the graph is called

the girth of the graph.

Despite extensive research on iterative decoding, LDPC

codes have not yet found their way into magnetic recording

systems because of the unfavorable compatibility with an

outer Reed–Solomon (RS) code [3], [4] as well as the lack of

analytical tools to predict performance at very-low error rates.

If the parity check matrix has 2 ones in each column, the LDPC

code reduces to one type of graph-theoretic codes named cycle

codes [5]. As reported in [4], [6], cycle codes concatenated

with a precoded partial response channel result in performance

close to or better than that of LDPC codes, while possessing

many features desirable for magnetic recording channels. Since

cycle-free Tanner graphs provide optimal decoding, it is natural

to seek a code with large girth as to minimize the influence

Manuscript received October 15, 2003. H. Song is with Agere Systems Incorporated, Longmont, CO 80504 USA (e-mail: hsong@agere.com). J. Liu is with Maxtor, Shrewsbury, MA 01545 USA (e-mail: jingfeng_liu@maxtor.com). B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar is with Data Storage Systems Center, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA (e-mail: kumar@ ece.cmu.edu). Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2004.829197

of the cycles in the iterative soft decoding. In this paper, we propose a general approach for constructing cycle codes whose Tanner graphs have the largest girths among the codes with the same block length and code rate.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we propose a method to construct large-girth cycle codes, and present an encoding algorithm. Section III estimates the performance of these codes for additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels and for partial response channels via computer simulations. Finally, Section IV contains a summary of the main results and conclusions.

II. LARGE-GIRTH CYCLE CODES

By representing a ( , , ) parity check matrix with a -tier

Tanner graph tree shown in Fig. 1 (for

), Gallager [1]

established a loose lower bound on the block length of ( , ,

) LDPC code given the girth of the associated Tanner graph.

For girth

(1)

For girth

(2)

To construct graphs having girth 12, all the bit nodes

(denoted by circles) on the three-tier graph must be distinct, as

shown in Fig. 1. For cycle codes, there are

bit nodes

on the third tier, which require

check nodes on the same

tier. We need to connect the bit nodes and the check nodes on

the third tier to build a graph of girth 12.

Two scenarios which may lead to cycles of length smaller

than 12 are shown in Fig. 1. First, a four-cycle or eight-cycle

results if any two bit nodes under the same branch share the

same check node on the third tier. We notice that each branch

has

bit nodes which are connected to

check

0018-9464/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

SONG et al.: LARGE GIRTH CYCLE CODES FOR PARTIAL RESPONSE CHANNELS

3085

nodes on the third tier. To avoid cycles of length ten or less, each

bit node under the same branch is connected to a distinct check

node on the third tier, which results in a one-to-one mapping

between the bit nodes and the check nodes. The mapping can

be represented by a

matrix

which contains all distinct integers

. Here

in indicates the connections to the bit nodes under the

branch,

denotes an edge between

th

bit node on the third tier and th check node. It is clear from

Fig. 1 that each column in contains the check nodes on the

third tier which are connected to the bit nodes sharing the same

check node on the second tier.

The second scenario which leads to cycles of length 8 can

be avoided by restricting that no pairs of integers

appear more than once in all the columns of

all matrices ,

. The following lemma proves

the existence of such mappings, and constructs codes of girth

12 with the smallest possible block length.

Lemma 1: A cycle code having girth 12, row weight

and block length

exists if

is a prime

number.

Proof: We need to construct mapping matrices ,

, which avoid the two scenarios leading to short

cycles of length 10 or less. Without loss of generality, suppose

Fig. 2. Three-tier Tanner graph of girth-12 cycle code, starting with a bit node.

and get a structured parity check matrix. The block length of

the 2 code is readily seen from inequality (1) for 12,

.

If we start with an arbitrary bit node, then Tanner graph of

the code constructed in Lemma 1 can be represented in another

form shown in Fig. 2. Lemma 2 proves that the code is linear

encodable.

Lemma 2: A cycle code constructed in Lemma 1 has

information bits, and can be encoded with linear complexity.

Proof: It is not difficult to see that the graph in Fig. 2 has

bit nodes on the bottom tier. Suppose the

bits

are given, then the bits on the second tier can be computed as

(3)

(6)

Let

, where stands for transpose. Clearly,

and satisfy both constraints. We find more connection ma-

trices as follows.

Since

is a prime, we can obtain a Galois feld (GF) with

elements, i.e.,

exists [7], where is a primitive element of

. We

define the following matrix operations for a column vector

(4) (5)

where

are the bits on the bottom tier sharing

the same check node with bit . In a similar fashion, the bits on

the first tier , can be computed from the bits s

(7)

where

are the bits on the second tier sharing

the same check node with bit . The top bit is obtained from

the s on either one of the two branches.

It is clear from (6) and (7), that all the other bits are func-

tions of the

bits on the bottom tier and no bit on the

bottom tier can be represented by the other bits on the bottom

tier only. Therefore, the

bits on the bottom tier are

information bits. To compute the parity bits using (6) and (7),

following number of XOR operations is required

where denotes circular shift operation, i.e., the th row vector

of is obtained by circular shifts of th row vector

of . The other mapping matrices are constructed in the form

of

,

. We will show that

,

, satisfy the two constraints.

Assume a pair of integers

in

column of is the same as another pair

in

column of . As

is related to

by

,

and

are obtained from

and

by

and

circular shifts. There-

fore,

, which implies

.

Once the edges between the bit nodes and check nodes on

the third tier are known, we may label the nodes in the graph

(8)
Hence, the codes can be encoded with linear complexity. As described above, the encoding of cycle codes is based on
a Tanner graph. This is important for iterative soft decoding, where the decoding process is also based on the graph. Thus, the encoding and decoding hardware can be unified without needing additional resources to compute the generator matrix which is often used for encoding.
It is generally difficult to calculate the distance spectrum of randomly constructed LDPC codes. However, the simple structure of cycle codes enables us to make exact statements about the minimum distance and its multiplicity, which is useful in analyzing code performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

3086

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 4, JULY 2004

8 Fig. 3. WER union bound estimates and simulation results of two cycle codes Fig. 4. BER performance of n = 5526 cycle code concatenated with EPR4

for AWGN channel.

channel, with and without precoder 1=1 D .

Lemma 3: A cycle code of row weight constructed as per

Lemma 1 has

number of

codewords with minimum distance

6.

Proof: The minimum distance of a cycle code is the same

as the number of bit nodes in its shortest cycle [7]. The code

constructed in Lemma 1 has girth 12, and thus,

6.

To determine the multiplicity

of the minimum-

distance codewords, we first determine the number of shortest

cycles which contain the top bit node in Fig. 2. Any 12-cycle

containing the top bit leaves from branch 1 and ends with

branch 2, and must pass one bit node on the bottom tier. It is

easily seen that there are

such 12-cycles with each

cycle containing a distinct bit node on the bottom tier. There

are

bit nodes in the graph. As the bit on

the top is arbitrary and each 12-cycle contains 6 bit nodes, the

total number of 12-cycles, which is the same as

, is

(9)

III. PERFORMANCE OF CYCLE CODES

Given the minimum distance and its multiplicity, we can ap-

proximate the maximum likelihood (ML) union bound on word

error rate (WER) for a cycle code on an AWGN channel with

mean zero and variance

as

(10)

Fig. 3 shows the WER ML estimates based on (10) for two

codes with minimum distance

6. One code is a rate 3/4

cycle code with block length 456, row weight 8, and

, and the other cycle code is a rate 8/9 code

with block length 5526, row weight 18, and

. Also presented in Fig. 3, are the simulated WER re-

sults of the two codes with iterative soft decoding, indicating

that the sum product algorithm’s performance is fairly close to

that of ML decoding for girth-12 cycle codes.

Fig. 4 compares the BER performance of the proposed cycle

code with that of a randomly constructed cycle code for an ideal

EPR4 channel, with and without precoder. Both codes have block length 5526 and code rate 8/9. For EPR4 channel with and without precoder, the two codes have similar performance in cliff BER region. However, the proposed code reaches error floor at lower BER than the random code due to its larger girth and minimum distance. Though not shown, most errors observed in the error floor region are less than 10 error bits in a block of 5526 bits, which is desirable in the presence of an outer RS code, unlike error statistics of LDPC codes which have typically tens-to-hundreds error bits in a block of 4000 bits [3], [4].
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a general approach for constructing cycle codes which achieve the smallest block length for girth
12. These codes can be encoded with linear complexity. Simulations indicate that these codes under iterative soft decoding may achieve ML union bound for AWGN channels. Cycle codes concatenated with ideal EPR4 channels provide significant coding gains over uncoded PR channels. Given the observed error statistics, it would be interesting to evaluate the overall performance of a cycle code concatenated with an outer Reed-Solomon code.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] N. Wiberg, “Codes and decoding on general graphs,” Ph.D. dissertation, Linkoping Univ., Sweden, 1996.
[3] H. Song, B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, E. Kurtas, Y. Yuan, L. L. McPheters, and S. W. McLaughlin, “Iterative decoding for partial response (PR) equalized magneto-optical (MO) data storage channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 774–883, Apr. 2001.
[4] J. Li, K. Narayanan, E. Kurtas, and C. N. Georghiades, “On the performance of high-rate TPC/SPC codes and LDPC codes over partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 50, pp. 723–734, May 2002.
[5] S. L. Hakimi and J. G. Bredeson, “Graph theoretic error-correcting codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-14, pp. 584–591, 1968.
[6] H. Song, J. Liu, and B. V. K. Vijaya Kumar, “Low complexity LDPC codes for partial response channels,” presented at the IEEE Globecom, Taiwan, R.O.C., 2002.
[7] W. W. Peterson and E. J. Weldon Jr., Error-Correcting Codes, 2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1972.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:59 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

