498

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 2, MARCH 2004

Signal-to-Noise Ratio Mismatch for Low-Density Parity-Check Coded Magnetic Recording Channels
Weijun Tan, Student Member, IEEE, and J. R. Cruz, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) mismatch is found in simulations to have great influence on the performance of low-density parity-check coded magnetic recording channels. While an inappropriate SNR mismatch degrades the performance dramatically, a properly selected optimum SNR mismatch can improve it significantly. In this paper we analyze the causes of this phenomenon and find optimum SNR mismatch values for specific magnetic recording systems with physical impairments such as electronic and media noise as well as erasures, using both density evolution analysis and Monte Carlo simulations. We observed that two characteristics of the probability density function (pdf) of the channel message, namely, the Gaussianity and the variance-to-mean ratio (VMR) have a major effect on the SNR mismatch. Generally speaking, if the channel message is approximately Gaussian-distributed and the VMR is larger than two, a negative SNR mismatch substantially improves the system performance. Numerical results show that for a magnetic recording channel with additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN), the optimum SNR mismatch is about 3 to 2 dB, while for a channel with 10% AWGN and 90% media noise, is about 10 to
8 dB, whether erasures are present or not.
Index Terms—Density evolution, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, magnetic recording channels (MRCs), partial response (PR) channels, SNR mismatch, SNR threshold.
I. INTRODUCTION
L OW-DENSITY parity-check (LDPC) codes are powerful codes that have attractive performance on many communication channels, including additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channels [1], [2] and magnetic recording channels (MRCs) [3], [4].
Other than the inherent random structure of the codes, the decoding algorithms, namely the message-passing (MP) algorithm for LDPC codes [1], [2] and the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) [5] algorithm for the MRCs equalized to a partial response (PR) target, are believed to be the determining factors of their excellent performance. These two algorithms are both softdecision a posteriori probability (APP) decoding algorithms. Since their decoding criterion is to maximize the APP, they are also called maximum a posteriori (MAP) algorithms. These algorithms can work in an iterative manner, in which part of the APP, called the extrinsic information, is fed back to the next iteration as the a priori probability.
Manuscript received March 23, 2003; revised November 17, 2003. The material in this paper was presented in part at the IEEE Global Telecommunications Conference, San Francisco, CA, December 2003.
The authors are with the School of Electrical and Computer Engineering, The University of Oklahoma, Norman, OK 73019 USA (e-mail: wjtan@ou.edu; jcruz@ou.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TMAG.2004.824130

One requirement for using these algorithms is knowledge of the variance of the noise. However, this variance is not always known, although there are means to estimate it. The problem is further compounded by the fact that even if the variance of the noise were perfectly known, the system performance may not be optimum. More specifically, if the variance of the noise used by the APP decoders is changed by some amount, either up or down, the system performance may improve. This phenomenon is referred to as the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) mismatch in the literature [6], [7] and has been observed in our simulations for LDPC coded MRCs.
The SNR mismatch effect for turbo codes on AWGN channels was discussed in [6]. It was observed that an SNR mismatch of 2 to 6 dB does not have much impact on system performance; however, a large negative SNR mismatch, beyond 2 dB, almost disables the system. It was further reported in [7] that an SNR mismatch has different effects when different implementations of the BCJR algorithm are used. They studied the SNR mismatch effects for both the basic BCJR algorithm, the log–MAP algorithm, and the simplified max–log–MAP algorithm [8]. Very interestingly, they proved that the max–log–MAP algorithm is not affected by the SNR mismatch by showing that the variance of the noise can be factored out from the APPs, thus making the hard decoding bit-error rate (BER) unchanged. Although this is not true for the log–MAP algorithm, the SNR mismatch does not change the BER much if it is kept within the range of 2 to 6 dB.
The SNR mismatch issue for LDPC codes was first raised in [9] on MRCs with erasures. It was observed that when a certain number of bits are erased, the codeword cannot be corrected unless the SNR is mismatched, and furthermore, with an appropriate mismatch the performance can be dramatically improved. This observation motivated us to look into the underlying mechanism and how to address this problem in a practical system.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, the system model is described and the problem formulated. In Section III, we establish the background for density evolution for LDPC codes on PR channels, and define SNR threshold and BER estimates. We show that the hard-decision BCJR channel detection algorithm is not sensitive to SNR mismatch in Section IV. In Section V, we identify the causes of SNR mismatch using density evolution on three different channels. Based on the results in Section V, we find the optimum values for SNR mismatch for practical MRCs in Section VI. Physical impairments such as electronic and media noise and erasures are considered in this section. Section VII concludes the paper.

0018-9464/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAN AND CRUZ: SNR MISMATCH FOR LDPC CODED MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

499

will use two approaches to tackle these issues. First, we will

use density evolution [10] to illustrate the asymptotic SNR mis-

match effect, and then use simulations to verify our results.

Note that unless specified otherwise, the LDPC codes used

in this paper are regular codes with column weight and row

weight , denoted as

, and the normalized channel

density for the MRC is

.

Fig. 1. Diagram of the system model.

III. DENSITY EVOLUTION FOR LDPC CODED PARTIAL RESPONSE CHANNELS

II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
The system model for our investigation is shown in Fig. 1, where is the isolated transition response, usually assumed Lorentzian or Lorentzian–Gaussian, and is the channel pulse response, where is the bit length. Specifically, an LDPC code is used on an extended PR class IV (EPR4) channel or on an MRC equalized to an EPR4 target. For PR channels, we usually assume that only AWGN (electronic noise) is present, and the SNR is defined as

SNR

(1)

where is the energy of the PR channel response to a single

transition and

is the power spectral density of the noise;

while for an MRC, both white electronic noise and media noise,

which is modeled as first-order transition jitter, are considered,

and the SNR is defined as

SNR

(2)

where is the amplitude of the isolated transition response of the channel.
The decoding system consists of two APP decoders: the BCJR decoder for the channel and the MP decoder for the LDPC code. The BCJR decoder may use either the log–MAP or the max–log–MAP algorithm. In this paper, we consider the case in which the BCJR decoder only runs once, which is the case of most practical interest, because of the small increase in performance and the large computational complexity required to run it more than once. Extending this work to iterative channel detection and LDPC decoding is straightforward.
A uniform random interleaver (not shown in Fig. 1) is employed between the LDPC encoder and the channel. Its role is to make the channel message identically distributed for all bits in a codeword such that the density evolution algorithm can be used. This interleaver is not used in the simulations.
The implementation of the BCJR and MP decoding algorithms requires knowledge of the variance of the noise
. Let the noise variance used by the decoder be , where is the SNR mismatch factor, and the corresponding SNR mismatch is defined as

SNR

(3)

If SNR , the SNR has been overestimated, otherwise we refer to it as being underestimated The issues with SNR mismatch are twofold: what causes the SNR mismatch effect, and how can we make use of it to improve system performance. We

Density evolution is a useful technique to analyze the

asymptotic performance of an ensemble of LDPC codes on

an arbitrary binary-input symmetric-output channel, given

the “local-tree assumption” is met [10]. However, it cannot

be applied to PR channels directly because they are not bi-

nary-input symmetric-output channels. This fact also makes

it not possible to use the all-zero codeword as a reference as

is usually done, although the PR channel can be treated as a

rate-one convolutional code.

This difficulty was circumvented first by Kavcic et al. [11].

The basic idea was to introduce the assumption that the se-

quence input to the channel is identically and independently dis-

tributed (i.i.d.). With this assumption, they developed a theoret-

ical framework to evaluate the performance of LDPC codes on

PR channels in terms of capacity and bounds for the message

error rate. This technique was extended in [12] to symbol error

rate, which is just the BER for binary codes. Furthermore, it

was also suggested to use the BER of a randomly selected i.i.d.

sequence as the average BER of a coded system. Simulations

showed that this estimation is very good provided that the code

length is large enough.

A randomly constructed LDPC code can be specified by a

degree distribution pair

, where

and

with

being the fraction of edges with

variable (check) degree . The rate of this code is

. Denote the probability density func-

tion (pdf) of a random variable by , and let and be

the average check and variable messages, respectively, then the

density evolution for this code on a PR channel can be written

as

(4) (5)

where “ ” denotes a convolution of pdf, and is the channel message, whose pdf is obtained using Monte Carlo simulations

(6)

with “ ” denoting the histogram of the BCJR operation on the

PR channel trellis, and

being the transmitted codeword,

which is assumed to be an i.i.d. sequence, and the a priori

message density.

From these message densities, we can estimate the average

BER for an ensemble of LDPC codes. Let the symbol message

of a variable node be the sum of and all the check messages

coming from all its neighbors. Then

(7)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

500

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 2, MARCH 2004

where

[11], and

BER

(8)

The threshold phenomenon in LDPC codes was first observed in [1] and generalized in [10]. When the noise variance is below a certain value, the decoding error will go to zero when the code length and iteration number go to infinity, i.e.,

where and are the previous and current channel states. The

forward and backward accumulated path metrics

are

computed similarly as for turbo codes

(15)

(16)

with initializations

, and

. Then, the log-APP is

BER
In terms of SNR SNR

(17) (9)
and the corresponding LLR of the APP is

(18)

(10) Note that the a priori probability

is computed as

Thresholds can be used to evaluate and compare codes. Generally, codes with larger thresholds or smaller SNR thresholds are better.

IV. SNR MISMATCH FOR BCJR CHANNEL DETECTION
Before we consider the density evolution analysis of the SNR mismatch effect on LDPC codes, we will consider its influence on channel detection using the BCJR algorithm.

A. Theory It was proved in [7] that when the

operation

if if
(19)

where

is the a priori probability, provided by the extrinsic

APP in the previous iteration, and

is the condi-

tional probability of the instant transmitted bit.

From (14), we see clearly that the computation of the APP

depends on the variance of the noise. However, if we use the

max to replace the

in (15)–(17), and use

(20)

(11)

typically used in a log–MAP algorithm, is replaced by the max

operation, used in a max–log–MAP algorithm, the variance of

the noise can be factored out from all three components of the

APP, namely, the forward and backward accumulated path met-

rics

and the instant path metric . So if hard-decision

decoding is used, the BER performance of the channel detection

is independent of .

We prove that the max–log–MAP or nonturbo-equalized

log–MAP algorithm is also independent of the SNR mismatch

following a similar derivation as in [7].

For a PR channel with channel response of length

(12)

the channel output is

(13)

where is the transmitted signal, and is Gaussian noise with

zero mean and variance

. The instant branch metric

with a priori probability

is

in (19),

becomes either 0,

, or

. Thus,

if it is assumed that

, then

,

so do and . Eventually,

and can be

factored out from

. In other words, the SNR mismatch

SNR is simply scaling the LLR. However, this does not imply

that the performance of a system employing the BCJR algo-

rithm for channel detection is independent of the SNR mismatch

because differently scaled LLRs may result in quite different

performance downstream.

Since

is the extrinsic information of the previous iter-

ation in the context of BCJR decoding, it can be easily seen that

by initializing

in the first iteration.

This finishes the proof that the max–log–MAP algorithm is in-

dependent of the SNR mismatch.

Note that (20) is a typical max–log–MAP operation. If the

log–MAP algorithm is used, the above derivation of

does not hold in general due to (19). This shows that a

log–MAP algorithm depends on the SNR mismatch. However,

for a PR channel with the log–MAP algorithm running only

once, which is called a nonturbo-equalized log–MAP algorithm,

and

, hence can be

factored out from

, and , and finally from

. This

proves that the nonturbo-equalized log–MAP algorithm is still

independent of the SNR mismatch.

B. Simulations of Uncoded MRCs

The proof given assures us that the hard decision max–log–MAP implementation of the BCJR algorithm is independent of the SNR mismatch, regardless of the number (14) of iterations. For the log–MAP implementation, since we only

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAN AND CRUZ: SNR MISMATCH FOR LDPC CODED MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

501

Fig. 3. SNR thresholds for channels with Gaussian density given in (9).

the channel detection is irrelevant. Actually, the LDPC decoder is sensitive to the input channel message produced by the soft channel detector.

A. Gaussian Channel

Fig. 2. Simulation results for an uncoded MRC with (a) AWGN and (b) 10% AWGN and 90% media noise.
run it once in our application, it is also independent of the SNR mismatch.
Two sets of simulations are carried out, in which the log–MAP algorithm is used and either AWGN or media noise are dominant. In both cases, several SNRs are used. The simulation results are shown in Fig. 2, from which it is found that the BER is independent of the SNR mismatch over a large range. This is in close agreement with the theoretical results.
However, the independence of the BCJR algorithm on the SNR mismatch does not imply that a system employing the BCJR channel detection is insensitive to the SNR mismatch because differently scaled LLRs may result in quite different performance of the LDPC decoder.
V. SNR MISMATCH FOR LDPC DECODING
Given the insensitivity of the BCJR channel detection to SNR mismatch, we can conclude that it is the LDPC MP decoding algorithm that is mostly affected by the SNR mismatch. However, we must emphasize again that this does not mean that

First, let us look at LDPC coded AWGN channels. For this

linear system, we can assume that the all-zero codeword is trans-

mitted without loss of generality. It is well known that the pdf of

the channel message, in terms of the LLR, is a Gaussian function

with mean and variance , i.e.,

.

In summary, the channel pdf has two important properties: 1)

it is Gaussian distributed and 2) its variance is twice the mean.

Or, in other words, the variance-to-mean ratio (VMR) equals

two. The combination of these two properties is called the con-

sistency condition in [10]. Simulations have shown that for this

system any SNR mismatch is detrimental. This motivated us to

investigate whether the violation of either or both of these two

properties is responsible for the SNR mismatch effect.

Now we consider channels that have a perfect Gaussian pdf.

For the baseline AWGN channel, we assume the channel pdf to

be exactly known with Gaussian density

(21)

where is the VMR. Note that such a channel may not exist in

practice, and that this assumption is used only for investigation

purposes.

For such channels with different VMR, we use a density evo-

lution similar to the one described in Section III to compute the

SNR threshold. Since this threshold is a typical parameter that

features the asymptotic behavior of an LDPC coded system, we

believe that it can highlight some essential properties of this

system. For

to , we computed their SNR thresh-

olds, as plotted in Fig. 3. The curve for the standard AWGN

channel with

confirms the observation that LDPC

codes on AWGN channels should not use any SNR mismatch.

For

and , despite the fact that the SNR threshold is

minimum when no SNR mismatch is used, the differences be-

tween no SNR mismatch and a 1-dB mismatch for

and a 1-dB for

, compared to those for

, are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

502

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 2, MARCH 2004

TABLE I VMRS OF CHANNEL LLR DENSITIES FOR EPR4
WITH WHITE AND CORRELATED NOISES

Fig. 4. SNR thresholds for LDPC (4,36) coded EPR4 channel with white and correlated noise.

small. For

and , it is clear that a 1-dB and a 1-dB

mismatch improves the SNR threshold slightly.

From the above analysis, we can conclude that the VMR is

one of the major contributing factors to the SNR mismatch ef-

fect. Overestimation or underestimation of the SNR, respec-

tively, improves the SNR thresholds when the VMR is larger

or smaller than two. Furthermore, the more the VMR deviates

from two, the larger the SNR mismatch. We observed numeri-

cally that the following value for the SNR mismatch:

VMR

(22)

is optimum if the channel message is approximately Gaussian distributed. Although we cannot prove it rigorously, we can check it using both the density evolution analysis and simulations.

B. EPR4 Channel
Next, we use the ideal EPR4 channel as our target, which is of more interest to us. Instead of using only AWGN noise as in the preceding section, both white and correlated additive Gaussian noise is considered. For the purpose of investigating the influence of correlated noise on the SNR mismatch, we use a very simple third-order low-pass finite impulse response (FIR) filter on the white noise to simulate correlated noise.
The density evolution described in Section III is used to compute the SNR thresholds for the (4,36) LDPC coded EPR4 channel. The results are shown in Fig. 4. We observe that, for white noise, no SNR mismatch is supposed to be used, while for correlated noise, a 1-dB mismatch is beneficial. It can also be seen that the coding loss due to the noise correlation is about 0.8 dB when no SNR mismatch is used. This indicates, as expected, that the BCJR algorithm is not optimum for correlated noise, and that some modification might be needed.
Recall that in this SNR threshold analysis of an LDPC coded PR channel, the channel pdf is obtained by approximating the histogram of the BCJR LLRs. A commonly used assumption

for this channel pdf is that it is Gaussian distributed. It is some-

times further assumed that the VMR equals two [13]. In our

simulations, we observed that this channel pdf is approximately

Gaussian; however, the VMRs are not equal to two, as shown in

Table I.

From Table I, we see that for white noise, the VMRs are very

close to two, such that

and SNR ; while for cor-

related noise, the VMRs are slightly larger than two, therefore

and SNR

dB. Regardless of whether the

channel pdf is Gaussian or not, the SNR mismatch effects due to

the VMRs are consistent with the results in the preceding sec-

tion. This means that the VMR produces a similar SNR mis-

match effect on PR channels as in AWGN channels.

C. EPR4 Channel With Erasures

Next, we attempt to use a non-Gaussian channel pdf to see

how it affects the SNR mismatch. Since the channel pdf of PR

channels with AWGN is usually approximately Gaussian with

VMR , we will use the EPR4 channel corrupted by erasures

as an example of a non-Gaussian channel pdf. In addition, we

will consider a channel pdf with a VMR to exclude the

SNR underestimation effect observed when VMR .

Erasures in MRCs are due to physical mechanisms such as

media defects (MDs) or thermal asperity (TA). It is assumed that

a certain percentage of the bits in the codeword are erased. First,

we assume that these erasures are not detected, i.e., the location

of the erasure is unknown and the noise is still present. From the

standpoint of the BCJR LLRs, the erased part of the codeword

generates a section of APPs that carry no useful information,

and the average channel pdf is no longer Gaussian; instead, it

has a small side pedestal on the left tail of the distribution.

In this paper, 3% of the bits are assumed to be erased and

only AWGN is present. Similarly as in (4) we use a Monte Carlo

simulation to obtain the average channel pdf. Plotted in Fig. 5

is an example of such a channel pdf. There is an obvious side

pedestal due to the erasures. We use such channel pdf as input to

the LDPC decoder to find out the influence of non-Gaussianity

on the SNR mismatch effect.

Let us first look at the VMRs of the channel pdfs listed in

Table II. Two SNRs, 7 and 5.2 dB, are used. When no SNR mis-

match is used, i.e., SNR dB, the VMRs are still greater

than two. However, when SNR

dB, the VMRs are

less than two. So we use these channel pdfs as test examples

to exclude the SNR mismatch effect observed for VMR .

This is equivalent to a hypothetical channel that has this pdf.

Using these channel pdfs, the SNR thresholds for an LDPC

(4,36) coded system are shown in Fig. 5. Note that since we

have the hypothetical channel as our target, the SNR mismatch

has a 1-dB shift from the original channel. Also shown in Fig. 6

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAN AND CRUZ: SNR MISMATCH FOR LDPC CODED MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

503

Fig. 5. Channel LLR density for the EPR4 channel with undetected erasures at SNR = 7 dB.
TABLE II VMRS OF CHANNEL LLR DENSITIES FOR EPR4 WITH UNDETECTED ERASURES

Fig. 7. Estimated BER with ten MP iterations using density evolution for LDPC (4,36) coded MRC with (a) AWGN and (b) 10% AWGN and 90% media noise.

Fig. 6. SNR thresholds for an LDPC coded EPR4 channel with a 3% of the bits in erasure.

decoding [14]–[16] is necessary. The key to erasure decoding is a reliable erasure insertion algorithm, which detects the loss of signal and flags it. By setting the LLRs of these erasures to zero, this algorithm can prevent the unreliable signals from propagating to other bits [14]–[16]. The SNR thresholds, already shown in Fig. 6, for such detected erasures are also computed using the density evolution algorithm. As expected, the SNR thresholds are reduce by about 2 dB. Also seen is that a 1-dB SNR mismatch is helpful.

are the SNR thresholds for EPR4 without erasures and with detected erasures.
From Fig. 6, we see that for this hypothetical channel, a 2-dB SNR mismatch improves the performance by 0.5 dB. This highlights the fact that the violation of the Gaussian property of the channel pdf is one of the causes of the SNR mismatch effect. Also seen is that the coding loss due to this 3% erasure is as large as 3 dB. Even if the optimum SNR mismatch can be used, the coding loss is still larger than 2 dB, which might not be acceptable. This implies that erasure

VI. FINDING THE OPTIMUM VALUES OF SNR MISMATCH FOR LDPC CODED MRCS
From the discussion in Section V, we conclude that the two properties, namely, the Gaussianity and the VMR of the channel pdf are the causes of the SNR mismatch effect. The combination of these two properties makes things even more complex. In fact, for a practical system, e.g., a magnetic recording system, we need to carefully analyze these two properties to find an optimum configuration.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

504

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 2, MARCH 2004

Fig. 8. Simulated BER with ten MP iterations for LDPC (4608,4,36) coded MRC with (a) AWGN and (b) 10% AWGN and 90% media noise.
Instead of using SNR thresholds, we use the BER as the performance criterion in this section. The asymptotical BER is estimated using (8).

Fig. 9. Estimated BER with ten MP iterations using density evolution for LDPC (4,36) coded MRC with 3% of the bits in erasure and (a) AWGN and (b) 10% AWGN and 90% media noise.

A. MRCs
Before estimating the BERs, we first look at the VMRs and the Gaussianity of the channel pdfs. Although not shown in this paper, we found that for practical MRCs, especially for those with dominant jitter noise, the VMRs are much larger than two. More specifically, for the cases with pure AWGN, the VMRs are around 3.0 and for those with 10% AWGN and 90% jitter noise, the VMRs are around 12.0. As far as the Gaussianity is concerned, there are no side pedestals as in the erasure-corrupted PR channels, but the shape of the distribution function is asymmetric. In other words, both properties described above are not met, which makes the SNR mismatch effect more prominent.
Shown in Fig. 7 are the estimated BERs for different configurations in which either AWGN or media noise is dominant. For each case, three SNRs are chosen. It is easily seen that for AWGN, 3 to 2 dB of SNR mismatch is optimum. Particularly, for MRCs that usually work at high SNR, 3 dB is the best choice. Similarly, for media noise, 10 to 8 dB of SNR

mismatch improved the system performance the most, and 10 dB is the best choice for high SNRs. At low SNRs, e.g., for
SNR 14.2 and 2.0 dB, the SNR mismatch is not so obvious, but it actually improves the system to some extent. From these figures, we can see the importance of SNR mismatch in reducing the BERs, especially at high SNRs.
Next, we use simulation to find the SNR mismatch effect for a practical system with an LDPC code with appropriate length and rate. Here, we still use the (4,36) code, but the length is 4608. We denote it as (4608,4,36). We also choose several sample SNRs and use different SNR mismatches. The simulated BERs versus SNR mismatch are depicted in Fig. 8.
Interestingly, we found almost the same optimum values for SNR mismatch as predicted by density evolution, 3 to 2 dB and 10 to 8 dB for the two cases. This confirms that the value computed using density evolution can be reliably used in a practical system. In summary, either of these two approaches is available for finding the optimum configuration for a given system.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

TAN AND CRUZ: SNR MISMATCH FOR LDPC CODED MAGNETIC RECORDING CHANNELS

505

reliably and agreed with the simulation results; they are 3 to 2 dB and 10 to 8 dB for AWGN and jitter noise domi-
nated MRCs. More interestingly, we observe that the shapes of the BER curves are very alike and the optimum values of SNR mismatch are quite consistent for MRCs with and without erasures, which is very important from the viewpoint of practical implementation. The coding losses due to the presence of the 3% erasures are 0.5–0.7 dB. These results agree well with those in [17].

VII. CONCLUSION

Fig. 10. Simulated BER with ten MP iterations for LDPC (4608,4,36) coded MRC with 138-bit erasures and (a) AWGN and (b) 10% AWGN and 90% media noise.
B. MRCs With Detected Erasures
In this section, we perform similar BER estimation and simulation for MRCs with erasures. From the discussion of Section V-C, an erasure insertion algorithm is necessary. In this section, we assume that all erasures are detected.
Similarly, we first look at the channel pdfs. Since the erasures are flagged, the corresponding channel LLRs are set to zero [14]–[16]. So the channel pdf is a combination of a smooth Gaussian-like function and a delta function. As far as the VMRs are concerned, they are usually around three for MRCs with pure AWGN and around 12 for those with 10% AWGN and 90% jitter noise, which are similar to those for the examples without erasures.
The estimated BERs for MRCs with 3% of the bits in erasure are shown in Fig. 9, while the simulated BERs for the same (4608,4,36) code are given in Fig. 10. Note that in both figures, (a) and (b) are AWGN and jitter noise dominated, respectively. The optimum values of SNR mismatch were predicted

In this paper, we addressed the effect of SNR mismatch on LDPC coded MRCs. First, we showed using simulations that the BCJR channel detection algorithm is not sensitive to SNR mismatch. When hard-decision decoding is used, the BER is almost independent of the SNR mismatch. Its only role is to scale the channel pdf, which is input to the LDPC decoder and affects the system performance.
Then, we investigated the causes of the SNR mismatch effect using SNR threshold analysis based on density evolution. From the observation of an AWGN channel, we conjectured that Gaussianity and VMR might be causation agents. Subsequently, we used two hypothetical channels: the Gaussian channel and the EPR4 channel with erasures, as testing cases to illustrate the influence of these two properties on the SNR mismatch effect. Results show that these two properties are responsible for the SNR mismatch. Generally speaking, if the channel pdf is approximately Gaussian, and the VMR , the SNR should be underestimated; while when the VMR , the SNR should be overestimated. We found numerically that VMR may be a good approximation. The effect of Gaussianity is more complex, and therefore no general rules are available.
Based on these conclusions, we used the BER estimation technique derived from density evolution to compute the optimum value of SNR mismatch for MRCs. It was expected that these values could be used as guidance in practical systems. The results show that the SNR mismatch can be computed very accurately using density evolution techniques. The values found for both AWGN and media noise dominated systems are highly consistent with the simulations, namely, 3 to 2 dB and 10 to 8 dB, respectively. For the cases with 3% of the bits in erasure, the values are consistent with those without erasures. This is important from a practical implementation perspective, because the same SNR mismatch value can be used for both cases with and without erasures.
However, we must note that these SNR mismatch values are only valid for the system specified in this paper. Generally speaking, SNR mismatch is closely dependent on the channel model. Model parameters, including the PR target, channel density, noise composition, equalization technique, and so on, must be specified before we determine the optimum SNR mismatch. For instance, if we use a modified extended EPR4 (ME PR4) target, the SNR mismatch value will change, or if a post-equalization noise whitening technique is used, the SNR mismatch effect is expected to be much smaller.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

506

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON MAGNETICS, VOL. 40, NO. 2, MARCH 2004

These optimum values for SNR mismatch can be employed in a practical system, in order to substantially improve its performance. The values can be determined by an appropriate calibration test of the given unit and stored for the decoder’s use.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[3] H. Song, R. M. Todd, and J. R. Cruz, “Applications of low-density parity-check codes to magnetic recording channels,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 918–923, May 2001.
[4] J. Fan, A. Friedmann, E. Kurtas, and S. McLaughlin, “Low density parity check codes for magnetic recording,” in Proc. 37th Allerton Conf. Commun., Control, and Computing, 1999.
[5] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[6] T. A. Summers and S. G. Wilson, “SNR mismatch and online estimation in turbo decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 46, pp. 421–423, Apr. 1998.
[7] A. Worm, P. Hoeher, and N. Wehn, “Turbo-decoding without SNR estimation,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 4, pp. 193–195, June 2000.

[8] P. Robertson, E. Villebrun, and P. Hoeher, “A comparison of optimal and sub-optimal MAP decoding algorithms operating in the log domain,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Commun. Conf., 1995, pp. 1009–1013.
[9] H. Song, “Application of iterative decoding to magnetic recording channels,” Ph.D. dissertation, The Univ. Oklahoma, Norman, 2002.
[10] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity—Check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[11] A. Kavcic, X. Ma, and M. Mitzenmacher, “Binary intersymbol interference channels: Gallager codes, density evolution and code performance bounds,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 49, pp. 1636–1652, Jul. 2003.
[12] W. Tan and J. R. Cruz, “Performance evaluation of low-density paritycheck codes on partial response channels using density evolution,” IEEE Trans. Commun., to be published.
[13] A. Thangaraj and S. W. McLaughlin, “Thresholds and scheduling for LDPC-coded partial response channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, pp. 2307–2309, Sept. 2002.
[14] T. Morita, Y. Sato, and T. Sugawara, “ECC-less LDPC coding for magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 38, pp. 2304–2306, Sept. 2002.
[15] W. Tan and J. R. Cruz, “Analyzing LDPC codes for partial response channels with erasures using density evolution,” IEEE Trans. Magn., submitted for publication.
[16] M. Yang and W. E. Ryan, “Performance of (quasi-)cyclic LDPC codes in noise bursts on the EPR4 channel,” in Proc. IEEE Global Telecommun. Conf., 2001, pp. 2961–2965.
[17] W. Tan and J. R. Cruz, “Array codes for erasure correction in magnetic recording channels,” IEEE Trans. Magn., vol. 39, pp. 2579–2581, Sept. 2003.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:42:35 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

