5c-4

Design methodology for IRA Codes
Frank Kienle, Norbert Wehn Microelectronic Systems Design Research Group
University of Kaiserslautem Erwin-Schrodinger-Stde 67663 Kaiserslautem, Germany {kienle, wehn} @eit.uni-kl.de

Ahstract- Channel coding is an important building block in communication systems since it ensures the quality of service. Irregular repeat-accumulate (IRA) codes belong tu the class of LowDensity Parity-Ceck (LDPC) codes and even outperform the recently introduced -rho-Codes of current communication standards. IRA cod= can he represented by a Tanner graph with arbitrary connections between nodes of given degrees. The implementation complexity of an IRA decoders is dominated by the randomness of these connections.
In this paper we present for the first time an IRA decoder architecture which can process any given IRA code. We developed a joint graph-decoder design methodology to construct the Tanner graph of a given IRA code which can he efficiently processed by this decoder architecture without any RAM access conflicts. We show that these constructed IRA codes can outperform the UMTS -rho-Codes.

stantiation of the Tanner graph in hardware. However for large blocksizes this becomes infeasible due to wire routing problems. Therefore partly parallel architectures become mandatory. Their complexity strongly depends on the randomness of the Tanner graph. Regularity in the Tanner graph simplifies the implementation but degrades the communications performance.
In this paper we present for the first time an IRA decoder architecture which can process any IRA code. One important building block of the decoder architecture is the permutation network which realizes the ’arbitrary connection’ between the two types of nodes in the graph. Therefore the underlying Tanner graph of an IRA code should be designed under the constraints of a dedicated permutation network.
We present a three step design methodology based on a joint
graph - decoder design:

I. INTRODUCTION
Sophisticated channel coding becomes an increasingly important building block of communication systems. Current communication standards already feature Turbo-Codes while for future standards the decision whether to use Turbo- or LowDensity Parity-Check (LDPC) Codes is still open. Implementation issues that determine how expensive it will be to deploy the channel coding schemes will have a major impact on the decision of standardization committees.
LDPC codes were introduced by Gallager 1963[ I ] and were re-discovered in 1996 by MacKay and Neal [5]. With the extension to so called irregular LDPC codes [4], these codes closely approach the Shannon limit and are thus the best known codes. The major drawback of LDPC codes is the encoding complexity. Even though an efficient encoding algorithm exists [7],its hardware realization is still an obstacle.
The irregular repeat-accumulate (IRA) codes were introduced in 2000 by Khandekar and McEliece [ 2 ] . These codes have a linear-time encoding complexity with a straight forward hardware realization, and outperform the currently deployed Turbo-Codes. Like LDPC codes, IRA codes can he represented by a Tanner graph with arbitrary connections between nodes. An IRA code is defined by the degree distribution of the nodes.
A fully parallel architecture corresponds to a one to one in-

I . Find an architecture template which can process all IRA code ensembles within the defined code parameters.
2. For a given permutation network define the constraints for the Tanner graph.
3. Find an IRA code within these constraints with a good communications performance.
We show that IRA codes designed with this methodology can outperform Turbo-Codes by 0.2dB.
The paper is structured as follows. IRA codes are explained
in Section 11. In Section 111a general IRA decoderarchitecture
is presented. The design method is explained in Section IV. Section V gives some results and Section VI concludes the paper.
11. IRA CODES
An IRA code [2] can be represented by a Tanner graph (Fig. I), with N variable nodes (open circles) and M check nodes (filled squares). The variable nodes (VN) can be partitioned in K = N M information nodes (IN) and A4 parity
~
x i nodes (PN). The INSare of varying degree. f, denotes the frac-
tion of INS with degree i , with fi = 1. Each check node
is connected to a information nodes. These a * M connec-
tions between CN and IN are ’arbitrary permutations’ (IIl). The check nodes are furthermore connected to parity nodes in

0-7803-8175-0/04r$17.00 gum4 IEEE.

459

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5C-4

0 ~ . ...f J. .. . IN
CN

~ . . . .f 3.. . .

K-1 . ~.. f ? . . .

f

Permu. CN zigzagnz

Fig. 2. Encoder for an IRA code

The message passing results in optimal decoding if the Tan-

PN

ner graph is cycle free [8]. However, for finite block sizes the

0

1

M-l

Fig. 1. Tanner graph for IRA code, with IN (Information Node),CN (Check Node), PN (Parity Node) and f,(fraction af nodes with degree i)

Tanner eraoh will contain cvcles. Once a message has com-

I.

I

pleted a cycle, the node updates Equation 1 and 2 becomes

suboptimal. Therefore, the longer the cycles the more you gain

from an increased number of iterations. By selecting IIl for a

given IRA code, the resulting graph should have cycles as long

a fixed zigzag pattern (IIz). The code can be described by the as possible. The shortest cycle is called girth, it should be > 4. degree distribution f = ( f ~f3,,. . . ,f ~ a)nd a.

Only systematic codes are treated here, with the codeword
+ (E-,@o) f length N = K M. The information sequence

C = ( U O ,. . . : U K - I ) is associated with the information nodes
(IN0, . . . ,I N K - I )andeachparitybitF= ( P O , .. . , p , , - l ) is

111. DECODER ARCHITECTURE

associated with one of the parity nodes ( P N o , . . ,P N M - ~ ) .

The resulting code rate is R = *.

A decoder architecture for an IRA code should allow a wide

A. Encoding

The Encoder, shown in Fig. 2, can be directly derived from the graph. The information sequence is first passed through a repetition unit. The repetition pattern follows the given degree distribution f . The highest degree comes first, i.e. uo is
repeated J times, U K - I two times. The expanded information sequence is interleaved by II,.
a values of the interleaved sequence participate in one parity check, which means a values are replaced by their binary sum (modulo 2). The resulting sequence is passed through an accumulator which leads to the zigzag connections between PN and ZN. C and F a r e transmitted. It is evident, that this encoding scheme has linear complexity.

B. Decoding

IRA codes can be decoded using the message passing algorithm [l]. It exchanges soft-information iteratively between variable and check nodes. The update of the nodes can he done in acanonical scheduling [11: In the first step all variable nodes must be updated and in the second step all check nodes. The processing of individual nodes within one step is independent,

and can thus be parallelized. The exchanged messages are assumed to be log-likelihood
ratios (LLR) X = log(p(O)/p(l)).Each variable node of de-

gree i calculates an update of message k according to:

i-1

+ X k = xch

XI,

(1)

I=O,l#k

with Xh, the corresponding channel LLR of the VN and X i the

LLRs of the incident edges. The check node LLR updates are

calculated with

ni - 1
~~

tanh(Xb/2) =

tanh(X1/2).

(2)

I=O,l#k

range of code parameters ( f , a). For practical applications the blocksize should be limited due to latency issues, also it is reasonable to limit the highest degrees fmoz and amas.For a partly parallel approach a fixed number of functional units for variable and check nodes is instantiated.
Fig. 3 shows an architecture template for a parallization P = 4. It features 4 functional units for CNs, INS and PNs, the permutation network III, the zigzag network I I 2 and sufficient memory banks for messages storage. The IN and PN processing can be done separately due to the disjunctive of Ill and IIz,denoted as IN and PN branch in the following (dotted line in Fig. 3). Due to the simple structure of 112 we focus on the IN branch which has to realize 'arbitrary' connections between INSand CNs.
The IN, PN functional units are implemented using a single input and output. Thus all incoming edges of one node are processed sequentially. The units can easily be pipelined. Hence, these processing units are not in the critical path. All messages
for a node must reside in the same memory at consecutive po-
sitions. Therefore, the correct sequence for message retrieval must be provided during storage. The costs to determine the right location for storage depends on the underlying Tanner graph of the code. These dependencies are explained in detail
in Section IV.
The number of messages handled by the IN branch is A4 . a
and by the PN branch M . 2. With a > 2 the IN branch re-
+ quires more cycles to process all data than the PN branch. The
CN functional units have to process M . a M . 2 messages.
Each CN unit accepts two data in parallel, one from the IN and one from the PN branch. It has to be ensured that the messages provided by both branches belong to the same check node. The results of the CN nodes are passed back deinterleaved (IIT'JI;') to the IN and PN branches.

460
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PNbranch

5c-4

zigzagnetworkn
Fig. 3. Basic architecture of an IRA code decoder

p..... ~ ........

"AM,

CNRAMP

CNRI\MJ

.....
I2 "AMI

Fig. 4. Mapping of information nodes Lo the IN RAMSand the cycle write
pattern to the CN RAMS

IV. JOINT GRAPH-DECODEDR ESIGN
The design of II1 is essential for code performance and architectural efficiency. A given permutation network defines constraints on the Tanner graph. If the permutation networks accepts any permutation, the decoder architecture can process any IRA code. However when accepting arbitrary permutations, concurrent accesses to the same memory can not be avoided. These access conflicts can be resolved at run-time using dedicated communication networks [3]or crossbars. But, for a high degree of parallization this solution is not feasible due to the wire routing complexity.
Providing only a set of permutations leeds to optimized networks, yielding an efficient hardware architecture. However, the randomness of the Tanner graph is restricted, hence the code performance can degrade. Thus, a trade offbetween code performance and optimized network design has to be found.
We propose a joint graph-decoder design method for IRA codes, which can be efficiently implemented on the partly parallel architecture of Section 111. We define two architectural constraints on the stmcture of the Tanner graph: First, the resulting permutation network should be a simple shuffling network. Second, the collisions when accessing momories should be minimized.
&, Consider a code with a degree distribution [f6 = f3 =
A , f i & ] = and a = 2. The code rate is R x 0.4 with
M = 20 check nodes, K = 13 information nodes and 40 edges between IN and CN. An architecture parallization of P = 4 is assumed. The construction of l I 1 consists of five steps:
step I : bin packing problem Map the values associated with the edges of the INSon the IN RAMs (Fig. 4). For a node of degree j , j successive positions for the messages have to be allocated in one RAM. The IN

RAMs are filled with a simple mapping scheme, starting with INSof highest degree. Target is that the RAMs are even filled.
step 2: ensure a shufling network Use a cyclic write sequence to the CN RAMs to ensure randomness of the message distribution. The P = 4 messages produced from the IN functional units can thus be written conflict free into distinct RAMs. In Fig. 4 the positions of the messages from IN0 are marked by an arrow. Due to the different number of data in the IN RAMs, conflicts in memory access can occur within the last 2 cycles when writing back to the IN RAMs. But these write conflicts are deterministic and can be avoided through appropriate scheduling. The number of data per CN RAM must be a multiple of a, since a successive entries belong to one CN node (this is indicated by the dashed lines).
step 3: mapping of rhe check nodes The messages associated with the CNs are mapped sequentially to the CN RAMs (Fig. 5). This mapping ensures that the PN branch can be processed without write conflicts with a deterministic addressing scheme. The addressing scheme of step 2 and 3 defines the communication between the nodes which are edges in the Tanner graph. However, the message passing algorithm on this graph (fixed by the shuffling network) will lead to bad communications performance, see Section IIB.
step 4: ensure cummunications performance To enhance the randomness of the resulting graph a row permutations of the IN entries can be applied. This permutation comply with the architectural constraints of the previous steps. To ensure communications performance the resulting graph has to fulfill certain constraints. Remove double edges between nodese removed. Furthermore, two successive CN must not have connections to the same IN node, otherwise a

46 1
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

5c-4

IN R*M 2 IN RAM 1 IN RAM 4

Sh"'"i"% nror*
r=
El%;;:

mr.r.gr rmm idr. IN "&

CN RAM 1 CN RAM 2 CN RAM3 CN RAM I

Fig. 5 . Mapping of the check nodes 10 the CN RAMs and the resulting row
permutation
cycle of length 4 exists, as the CNs are already connected by
n~ the zigzag network. The cycles of length 4 inside must be
eliminated. Heuristic methods are used to obtain a graph with a girth average as high as possible [6]. The resulting row permutation corresponds to the RAM addresses where the IN data are written in each cycle.
step 5: exrracr interleaverpattern III Each value in the IN RAMs is associated with a fixed edge index (Fig. 5). The edge index correspond to the position of the messages between the repetition unit of the encoder and
the interleaver II,. The interleaved positions of the messages
can be deduced from the resulting CN mapping. Starting with CNo to CN19 the corresponding edge indexes give the interleaver pattem.
V. PERFORMANCREESULTS
To investigate communications performance an IRA code is constructed, with code parameters f = (fI3 = 0.183,f12 = 0.051, fs = 0.037,fs= 0.3,fa = 0.429) and a = 3, with a resulting code rate of R = 1/3. The IRA code is optimized for an architecture with a parallization of P = 10. Fig. 6 shows the communications performance of this IRA code in comparison
with an UMTS compliant Turbo-Code. Both codes have an
information blocksize of 5000 bits and the same code rate. The parallized IRA code outperform the Turbo-Code by 0.2 dB at a FER of
VI. CONCLUSIONS
IRA codes are candidates for future communication systems. The complexity of an IRA decoder depends on the randomness of the Tanner graph. We have presented an partly

parallel decoder architecture which can process all IRA codes only restricted by the amount of the highest degree of a node. We have shown a joint graph-decoderdesign methodology which can be applied to IRA codes with any given degree distribution. The resulting IRA code can be efficiently implemented on the decoder architecture without any conflict in RAM accesses. An design example shows, that these IRA codes can outperform currently deployed Turbo-Codes by 0.2dB. This joint graph-decoder design can also be used for irregular LDPC codes with constant check node degree.
REFERENCES
[I] R. G. Gallager. Low-Densiry Pariry-Check Codes. M.I.T. Press, Cambridge,Massachusetts,1963.
[2] H. Jin, A. Khandekar, and R. McEliece. Irregular RepeatAccumulate Codes. In Proc. 2nd Inrernarional Symposium on Turbo Codes & Relared Topics, pages 1-8, Brest, France, Sept. 2000.
131 F. Kienle. M. J. Thul, and N.Wehn. Implementation Issues of Scalable LDPC Decoders. In Proc. 3rdh t e m t i o n o l Symposium on Turbo Codes & Related Topics,pages 291-294, Brest, France, Sept. 2003.
[41 M. Lubi, M. Mitzenmacher, A. Shokrollahi, and D. Spielmann. Analysis of low-densitycodes and improved designs using irregular graphs. In Pmc. 30th ACMSymp. on rhe Theory of Compuring, pages 249-258, 1998.
151 D. MacKav and R. Neal. Near Shannon limit verformance of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Elecrronic Lerrers, 32:16451646. 1996.
1.61_Y.Mao and A. Banihashemi. A Heuristic Search for Good LowDensity Parity-Check Codes at Shon Block Lengths. In Proc.
2001 lntemarional Conference on Communications (ICC '01). pages 11-14,Iune2001. 171 T. Richardson and R. Urbanke. Efficient Encodin-g of LowDensity Parity-Check Codes. IEEE Transaction on Informarion
Thee;, 47(2):638-556,Feb. 2001.
181 T. Richardson and R. Urbanke. The Cawcity of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Under Message-Passing-Decoding. IEEE Transacrion on Informorion Theory,47(2):599418, Feb. 2001.

462
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:25:23 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

