1132

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

A New Look at the Generalized Distributive Law
Payam Pakzad, Student Member, IEEE, and Venkat Anantharam, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we develop a measure-theoretic version of the junction tree algorithm to compute desired marginals of a product function. We reformulate the problem in a measure-theoretic framework, where the desired marginals are viewed as corresponding conditional expectations of a product of random variables. We generalize the notions of independence and junction trees to collections of -fields on a space with a signed measure. We provide an algorithm to find such a junction tree when one exists. We also give a general procedure to augment the -fields to create independencies, which we call “lifting.” This procedure is the counterpart of the moralization and triangulation procedure in the conventional generalized distributive law (GDL) framework, in order to guarantee the existence of a junction tree. Our procedure includes the conventional GDL procedure as a special case. However, it can take advantage of structures at the atomic level of the sample space to produce junction tree-based algorithms for computing the desired marginals that are less complex than those GDL can discover, as we argue through examples. Our formalism gives a new way by which one can hope to find low-complexity algorithms for marginalization problems.
Index Terms—Belief propagation, conditional independence, generalized distributive law (GDL), graphical models, iterative decoding, junction tree, signed measures.

ponent functions will be called “local kernels” in the sequel. Given such a problem, GDL makes use of the distributivity of the “product”’ operation over “summation” in an underlying semiring to reduce the complexity of the required calculations. In many cases, this translates to substantial savings over bruteforce computation. As we shall see in this paper, sometimes there is more structure available in the local kernels than the conventional way of thinking about GDL can discover. This is because GDL relies solely on the notion of variables. Any structure at a finer level than that of variables will be ignored by GDL. We illustrate these limitations in the following simple example.

Example 1: Let and be arbitrary real functions on

. Let

be a fixed real weight function for

, given by an

matrix with

.

We would like to calculate the weighted average of

I. INTRODUCTION
L OCAL message-passing algorithms on graphs have seen a resurgence of interest in the communications and coding communities because of the success of the recently invented turbo codes [1] and the older low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes [2] which use such decoding algorithms. They have also long been of interest to the artificial intelligence community [3]. A general framework for describing such algorithms was described by Shafer and Shenoy [4]. Aji and McEliece [5] gave an equivalent (and for our purposes, slightly more convenient) framework known as the generalized distributive law (GDL) to describe such algorithms. The Viterbi algorithm, the Bahl–Cocke–Jelinek–Raviv (BCJR) algorithm [6], belief propagation algorithms [7], and fast Fourier transform (FFT) over a finite field are among the prominent implementations of the junction tree algorithm or GDL.1
Local message-passing algorithms such as GDL aim to find the desired set of marginals of a product function, whose com-
Manuscript received November 26, 2001; revised September 22, 2002. This work was supported by ONR/MURI under Grant N00014-1-0637, the National Science Foundation under Grants ECS-9873086 and ECS-0123512, and by EPRI/DOD under Grant EPRI-W08333-04.
The authors are with the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, CA 94720 USA (e-mail: payamp@eecs.berkeley.edu; ananth@eecs.berkeley.edu).
Communicated by R. Koetter, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.828058

The general GDL-type algorithm (assuming no structure on the weight function ) will suggest the following:

requiring

multiplications and

additions.

But this is not always the simplest way to calculate .

Consider a “luckiest” case when the matrix has rank ,

i.e., the weight function

factors as

. In this

case

requiring only

multiplications and

additions.

Suppose next that

does not factor as above, but the

matrix has a low rank of , so that

. Then we can compute as follows:

1Throughout this paper we will use both names—GDL and the junction tree algorithm—interchangeably, but will use the GDL notation from [5] to show connections with this work.

This requires

multiplications and

additions.

0018-9448/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

1133

Next suppose that the fixed-weight matrix is sparse, for

example, with

, where is the

indicator function. Then

requiring only multiplications and

additions.

It would be nice to have an automatic procedure to discover

the existence of such complexity-reducing opportunities. The

goal of this paper is to develop such a procedure.

Note that in each case in Example 1, some (manual) introduction of hidden variables and/or redefinition of functions would allow the conventional GDL to also discover the best method of calculation. However, we do not consider this preprocessing phase as part of the GDL treatment. Our aim is to develop an automatic procedure that aims to discover such potentially useful structures in the data. We introduce a measure-theoretic framework which goes beyond the focus on “variables” to represent the states of the data. With the conventional GDL approach, once one chooses the set of variables to represent the state space, the consequent attempts to create independencies in order to find a junction tree (i.e., the moralization and triangulation procedure) are confined to working with that chosen set of variables. The primary advantage of our reformulation is to get rid of this restriction. The alternative we provide to the moralization and triangulation procedure, which we call “lifting,” automatically discovers a way to exploit structure that is not aligned to the variables, which the usual approach is unable to discover. For instance, in Example 1, we can automatically discover the advantage of the low rank of matrix .
Our measure-theoretic framework replaces GDL’s concept of “local domains” with -fields in an appropriate sample space. We also replace GDL’s “local kernels” with random variables measurable with respect to the corresponding -fields. The problem of finding the marginal with respect to a local domain is then naturally replaced by that of taking the conditional expectation given the corresponding -field. Our formalism includes the conventional GDL as a special case, in the sense that any junction tree that moralization and triangulation can produce in the conventional GDL can also be discovered using our framework. Although our results are generalizable to an arbitrary semifield,2 we focus on the sum-product algebra in order to avoid abstract distractions.
Here is an outline of this paper. In Section II, we review the GDL algorithm. In Section III, we develop the necessary concepts to work with the independence of -fields on a space supporting a signed measure. In Section IV, we reformulate the marginalization problem in our framework, define a notion of junction tree on a collection of -fields, and provide a messagepassing algorithm analogous to the GDL algorithm to solve this marginalization problem with linear complexity. We also provide an algorithm to find a junction tree on a given collection of -fields when one exists. Just as is the case with the ordinary GDL formulation, junction trees do not always exist. In

Section V,we discuss a method to construct a junction tree on the augmented -fields, which can be used to solve the original marginalization problem with low complexity. This procedure replaces the moralization and triangulation procedure of the conventional GDL, and offers a strictly larger set of alternatives than the GDL does. A discussion of the computational complexity of our methods is presented in Section VI. Several examples and applications are given in Section VII. Of particular interest is the observation that the minimal complexity trellis-based decoding algorithm for linear block codes can be very naturally described as an instance of lifting in our framework. In Section VIII, we further discuss and summarize our results.

II. GDL ALGORITHM

Definition 1: A (commutative) semiring is a set with operations and such that both and are commutative and associative and have identity elements in ( and , respectively), and is distributive over .

Let

be variables taking values in sets

, respectively. Let

be a collec-

tion of subsets of

, and for

, let

be a function of , taking value in some

semiring . The “marginalize a product function” (MPF)

problem is to find, for one or more of the indexes

,

the -marginalization of the product of the ’s, i.e.,

In the language of GDL, ’s are called the local kernels, and

the variable lists are called the local domains.

The GDL algorithm gives a message-passing solution to the

MPF problem when the sets

can be organized

into a junction tree. A junction tree is a tree with nodes corre-

sponding to

, and with the property that the sub-

graph on the nodes that contain any variable is connected.

An equivalent condition is that if

and are subsets of

such that and are separated by on the tree,

then

where

. As we will see in

Section IV, our definition of a junction tree will resemble this

latter definition.

Suppose is a junction tree on nodes

with local

kernels

. Let

be a message-passing

schedule, viz. the “message” along the (directed) edge of

the graph is updated at time iff

. The following

asynchronous message-passing algorithm (GDL) will solve the

MPF problem.

Algorithm 1: At each time and for all pairs of neigh-

boring nodes in the graph, let the “message” from to be a

function

. Initialize all messages to . At

each time

, if the edge

then update

the message from node to as follows:

2A semifield is an algebraic structure with addition and multiplication, both of

which are commutative and associative and have identity element. Further, mul-

tiplication is distributive over addition, and every nonzero element has a multiplicative inverse. Such useful algebras as the sum-product and the max-sum are

(1)

examples of semifields (see [8]).

where is the set of neighbors of in .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1134

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

This algorithm will converge in finite time, at which time we have
(2)
Proof: See [5]. III. PRELIMINARIES

function on , where for each in the range of ,

is measurable in . We write

, and denote by

the subset of

where is defined. We also denote by

the set of atoms of with nonzero measure:

.

Assuming

and that the sum exists, we define the

expectation of as

Let

be a discrete measurable space, i.e.,

nite or countable set and is a -field on . Let

be a signed measure on

, i.e.,

for any sequence

of disjoint sets in

is a fi-

and

(3)

When the sum exists, we define the conditional expectation

of given , as a partially defined random variable in ,

defined on

, as

where the infinite sum is implicitly assumed to exist. Then

is called a measure space. As a matter of notation,

we usually write

for

.

Also, given events and with

, we write

for

the ratio

.

Let

and

be sub- -fields of .

Atoms of a -Field: We define the set of atoms of to be the collection of the minimal nonempty measurable sets in with respect to (w.r.t.) inclusion

and

Augmentation of -Fields: We denote by the span of

and , i.e., the smallest -field containing both and . For a

set of indexes, we write for

, with

,

the trivial -field on . Note that the atoms of

are all in

the form

for some

and

.

(4)

It is important to note that (3) and (4) should not be taken at face value, as prescribing the way to carry out the summation; in many cases, such as the ones in Example 1, the calculation can be simplified. We will address this in detail in Section VI-A in the context of our general method to create independencies.

The signed conditional independence relation satisfies certain properties (inference rules) that we now state. See [7] and [3] for discussion of inference rules for the case when is a probability measure.3

Theorem 1: Let properties hold:

be -fields. Then the following

Conditional Independence: We say is conditionally inde- Symmetry:

pendent of given and write

w.r.t. when for

(5a)

any atom of

Decomposition:

• if

then

;

• if

then

(5b)

Contraction:

(5c)

.

Other properties:

When the underlying measure is obvious from the context,

(5d)

we omit the explicit mention of it.

(5e)

Similarly, we say a collection

of sub- -fields

are mutually conditionally independent given , and write (5f)

if

for all

.

Independence: We say is independent of or

w.r.t. when

.

Note that these definitions are consistent with the usual definitions of independence when is a probability measure.

Expectation and Conditional Expectation: Let and be

a -field with sets of atoms

and , respectively. A

partially defined random variable in is a partially defined

Proof: See Appendix A.
IV. PROBABILISTIC MPF AND JUNCTION TREES
We now formulate a probabilistic version of the MPF problem and introduce the corresponding concept of junction trees. We also describe a probabilistic version of the GDL algorithm to solve this MPF problem.
3Note that the signed conditional independence relation satisfies symmetry, decomposition, and contraction, but in general weak union does not hold. So this relation is not a semi-graphoid.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

1135

Throughout this paper, let

be a measure space,

be sub- -fields of , and let

be

a collection of partially defined random variables with

.

We will speak of the measure space

since

the choice of will not be relevant.

Probabilistic MPF Problem: For one or more

, find

, the conditional expec-

tation of the product, given .

Given a conventional MPF problem, one can choose a subset of local functions whose product is viewed as a measure function in our framework, and the other local functions can be viewed as random variables, each measurable w.r.t. the -field defined by the variables comprising its local domain. Then for a configuration of the variables corresponding to a local domain , we have

so that (s.t.) separates and on the tree, we have .

A. Probabilistic Junction Tree Algorithm

Suppose is a junction tree with nodes labeled by -fields

as defined above, and let

be random variables with

. Then the following

message-passing algorithm will solve the probabilistic MPF

problem.

Algorithm 2: For each edge

on the graph, define a

“message” from node to as a partially defined random

variable measurable w.r.t. , initialized to .

For each

, let denote the set of neighbors of

on , and for each edge in the tree, define

.

For each edge in the tree, update the message (asyn-

chronously) as

(7)

(6) This algorithm will converge in finite time, at which time we have

where, out of the local functions, the first were treated as

(8)

random variables, and the last

have been relegated to

the measure, so that

where as before

where

is the index set of the variables. Equa-

tion (6) shows that solving the probabilistic MPF problem with

this setup will in effect amount to a solution to the conventional

MPF problem.

In most applications, for a family of MPF problems the local

kernels can be categorized as either fixed or arbitrary. For ex-

ample, in an LDPC decoding problem, the code itself is fixed,

so the local kernels at the check nodes are fixed; we only re-

ceive new observations and try to find the most likely codeword

given each observation set. As another example, when finding

the Hadamard transform

is the objective random variable. Proof: See Appendix B.

Note that message can be viewed as a function

on

, where ranges over

. Then the update rule

(7) can be rewritten as

(9)

Similarly, (8) can be rewritten as (10)

of an arbitrary function , the functions

are fixed. Typ-

ically, we want to assign (some of) the fixed kernels as the mea-

sure function, and the arbitrary kernels as the marginalizable

random variables; this way, once a junction tree has been found

for one problem, it can be used to marginalize the product of

any arbitrary collection of random variables measurable in the

same -fields. See Section VII for more examples.

We define junction trees as follows.

One should note that rarely is the way suggested by (9) an

efficient way to carry out the summation (we will discuss this

further in Section VI-A). However, there may be some value to

seeing (7) and (8) written as (9) and (10), since in some sense the

language of -fields has been translated into one of “variables.”

However, it should be noted that the “variables”

for

do not in any sense play the role of what are

called variables in the original GDL algorithm.

We will discuss the computational complexity of Algorithm 2

in Section VI.

Definition 2: Let be a tree with nodes

. We

say subsets and of

areseparated by a node if

, the path from to contains . Then we call

a junction tree if

and

B. Existence of Junction Trees
In the conventional GDL formulation, given the local kernels there is a rather simple way to determine whether
a junction tree exists.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1136

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

As described in [5, Sec. 4], we can define a local domain

graph for the local domains. This is a weighted complete

graph with vertices, corresponding to the local domains,

with the weight of the edge given by

. Then

a junction tree exists on

iff

,

where is the weight of the maximum-weight spanning tree

of (see [5]). In case equality holds, any maximum weight

spanning tree of

will be a junction tree. Therefore, the

problem of existence of a junction tree can be solved using a

greedy algorithm (such as Prim’s algorithm or Kruskal’s algo-

rithms, see, e.g., [9]) to find a maximum-weight spanning tree

of .

In our measure-theoretic framework, on the other hand, this

problem is not as simple. The reason is that in the GDL frame-

work the conditional independence property is much easier to

verify: local domains and are conditionally independent

given iff

. In our framework, on the other hand,

the -fields in general may not be rectangular, -fields defined

as those generated by certain underlying variables, making it

harder to determine if conditional independencies exist.

In this section, we present an algorithm to determine whether

a junction tree exists on the given -fields, and to find one if it

does exist. We will prove results that will allow us to break down

the problem of finding a junction tree into smaller problems and

recursively build a junction tree from smaller trees.

Definition 3: A valid partition of

with re-

spect to a node is a partition

of

(i.e.,

and

for ) such

that s are mutually conditionally independent, given .

Definition 4: Let

be any partition of

. A tree with nodes

is called

compatible with partition at node if its subtrees hanging

from correspond to the elements of .

Lemma 2:

, there is a finest valid partition

w.r.t. , which we shall denote by , such that every other valid

partition w.r.t. is a coarsening of . Further, if is an element

of and is the disjoint union of nonempty sets and ,

then

.

Proof: Suppose

and

are valid partitions w.r.t. node . Now construct another parti-

tion,

. We claim that is also

a valid partition w.r.t. (finer than both and ): To see this,

we need to show that for each

,

.

Using simple manipulations like

we get

Fig. 1. Augmenting junction trees; Lemma 4.

Now suppose is an element of and is the disjoint union

of nonempty sets and , and

. We also have

. Then, from the last two relations and by

(5d) we get

, and hence

.

Then and would be elements in a finer valid partition

which is a contradiction.

Lemma 3: Given

, a tree with nodes

is a junction tree iff at each node it is compatible

with some valid partition of

w.r.t. .

Proof: Immediate from the definitions.

Lemma 4: Let be a subset of

and let be

its complement in

. Suppose there exist

and

such that

and

. Let

be any junction tree on and any junction tree on . Then,

the tree obtained by connecting and by adding an edge

between and is a junction tree on

(see Fig. 1).

Proof: Let be any node that separates and on the

resultant tree. We will show that

and hence we

have a junction tree.

Let

and

and without loss of generality (WLOG) suppose

. Then

at least one of and must be empty, or else would not

separate and . Suppose

.

First suppose

. Then we have

by j. t. property on

since

and

So by (5d), we have and we are done.
Next suppose rates from Then

, i.e.,
. Then we must also have that sepa(assuming WLOG that is nonempty.)

(11) (12)

where (12) holds since

We will show that

.

Let

and be arbitrary atoms of

and , respectively.

and

.

and hence

• Case

. Then from (12), we have that , and so we are done.

where the last implication follows from (5b). And, finally, the

last two relations and (5d) imply that

,

and hence,

. So a finest valid partition w.r.t.

exists, whose atoms are the intersections of atoms of all the

valid partitions w.r.t. .

• Case

and

. Then from (12) we have

But from (11),

since and we are done.

. Thus,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

1137

Fig. 2. Transformation of junction trees used in Theorem 5.

• Case that

and

. Then from (12) we have some of ’s. WLOG, assume that

where

,

and also assume that

.

Then, from the junction tree property, we have

(13)

and so we have the equality and we are done.

• Case

and

. Then from (12)

and from (11)

Since is a junction tree, the subtree on is also a junction

tree. Now

, and so by induction hypothesis there exists

a junction tree on compatible with , the finest valid partition

w.r.t. of

.

Now we claim that

is a

valid partition of

w.r.t. . To see this, let

for some

arbitrary

, and let

so

.

But one of and contains . Then by the properties of valid

partition w.r.t. , we have

Substituting the latter into the former, we obtain

But by (12),

,

so

and we are done.

We now state our main theorem on the existence of junction trees.

Therem 5: Given a set of -fields

, if

there exists a junction tree on

, then for every

there exists a junction tree compatible with ,

the finest valid partition w.r.t. .

Notice that Theorem 5 and Lemma 4 give an algorithm to find a junction tree, when one exists, as we shall describe in Section IV-D.

Proof: The claim is trivial for

. We will prove the

theorem for

by induction.

Let

with

and

for

. Let be a junction tree. Let

be the partition of

compatible

with . Let

be an arbitrary element of , and let

. Let

be the node in that

is neighbor to in tree . By Lemmas 2 and 3, is the union of

or

also,

since separates from on .

Then by (5f) followed by (5b), the last relations imply that

and we are done.

Next, we show that for all

(so that

),

is an element of . If not, then there exists a

,

with , s.t. is the disjoint union of some subsets and

and

. Also,

so by (5d) we

get

. We also have

since

and belongs to another set in the finest valid

partition w.r.t. . From the last two relations and by (5f) followed

by (5b) we get

. But by Lemma 2,

cannot

be so decomposed, so

and we have proved the

claim.

So we have shown, by induction, that there exists a junc-

tion tree on , where node has at least

neighbors

with subtrees corresponding to

. Now we

modify the original junction tree in

steps to get trees

as follows.

First, we form by replacing the subtree in on , with

above, connecting to with an edge. By Lemma 4, is a

junction tree on

.

Let be the subtree of after removing the subtrees

around on

. Then is also a junction

tree. For each

, let be the subtree of on

, and let be the node on that was connected to in .

Then at each step

we form by joining

and by adding the edge between and (see Fig. 2).

We now show inductively that each is a junction tree. By

induction hypothesis

is a junction tree. At the same time,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1138

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

, being a subtree of a junction tree, is also a junction tree. Further

since is a set in a valid partition w.r.t. .

Also,

, since on the junct-

ion tree , node separates from

. Then,

by Lemma 4, each is a junction tree. (Note that

is a

junction tree on

.)

Next, we perform the same transformation on

, starting

with other neighbors of . The resulting tree will be a junction

tree, and will be compatible with .

C. Algorithm to Find a Junction Tree

We will now give an algorithm to find a junction tree when

one exists.

Given a set of -fields

.

Algorithm 3: Pick any node

as the root.

• If

then the single edge

is a junction tree. Stop.

• Find the finest valid partition of

w.r.t. ,

(see notes below).

• For

to

• Find a node

s.t.

. If no such node

exists, then stop; no junction tree exists.

• Find a junction tree on with node as root. Attach this

tree, by adding edge .

• End For

Proof of Correctness of Algorithm 3: At each iteration, is

chosen so

. But we also had

.

By (5e), the last two relations imply

. But

we also have

. So by Lemma 4, we have a

junction tree at each step. Also, from Theorem 5, if the algorithm

fails, then there is no junction tree.

as defined in Section II, we define the moral graph for the

problem to be a undirected graph with vertices

, where

an edge

exists iff

for some

.

With this construction, each is the subset of at least one of

the (maximal) cliques of the moral graph and, hence, a junction

tree on the cliques of the moral graph can serve as a junction

tree for the local domains

.

It is further known that a junction tree of the cliques of a

graph exists iff is triangulated or chordal, i.e., every cycle

of length or more on has a chord (see, e.g., [3, Sec. 4.3]).

Then the general procedure to construct a junction tree is the

moralization and triangulation process: form the moral graph

and triangulate it; then a junction tree will exist on the cliques

of the triangulated graph. There are efficient algorithms to find

a triangulation of a given graph, although the general problem

of finding the optimal triangulation for moral graph of a GDL

problem is NP-hard (see [3]), where optimality is measured in

terms of the complexity of the message-passing algorithm on the

junction tree created from the cliques of the triangulated graph.

Note that the triangulation process in effect expands the

cliques of the moral graph—by adding variables—in a way

to create conditional independencies which are required on a

junction tree. We will see that our lifting procedure achieves

the same goal, with the added possibility of expansion of

-fields without adding a whole variable direction. In a sense,

this amounts to automatically discovering new hidden variables

in the space and using them to minimally expand the local

domains.

A. Lifting

Definition 5: Let

be a given measure

space. We call a measure space

a lifting

of

if there is a map

such that

• is consistent with under the map , i.e.,

Remark: In the general case of the signed conditional independence, we know of no better way to find the finest valid partition than an exhaustive search in an exponential subset of all the partitions. In the case of unsigned measures, however, we can show that when a junction tree exists, the finest valid partition coincides with the finest pairwise partition, which can be found in polynomial time, see [10]. Therefore, starting with a conventional MPF problem, the question of existence of a probabilistic junction tree can be answered in polynomial time, as long as a nonnegative measure is chosen.

V. CONSTRUCTION OF JUNCTION TREES – LIFTING

In the preceding section, we gave an algorithm to find a junc-

tion tree, when one exists. In this section, we deal with the case

when Algorithm 3 declares that no junction tree exists for the

given set of -fields. In particular, we would like to expand the

-fields in some minimal sense, so as to ensure that we can con-

struct a junction tree.

First, we review some methods used in the conventional GDL

framework to create junction trees (for details see [3]). Given the

GDL variables

and local domains

• for all

, is

-measurable, i.e.,

where for

In words, up to some renaming of the elements, each -field

is a sub- -field of , and is obtained from by splitting

some of the atoms.

We now describe the connection of the above concept with

our problem.

Let

be a lifting of

with the lifting map

as described in Definition 5. Let be a junction tree on

corresponding to -fields

. We

will construct a junction tree from such that running

Algorithm 2 on will produce the desired conditional

expectations at the appropriate nodes.

For each

, let be the -field on with atoms

and let

be the random variable with

for all

; so that up to a renaming of the atoms

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

1139

and elements,

and

are identical measure

spaces and and are identical random variables. Let

be a tree with nodes

—with

corresponding -fields

and

random variables

—which is gener-

ated by starting with and adding edges

for

each

. In words, is a graph obtained from

by adding and attaching each node with -fields for

(which are in turn equivalent to the original

’s) to the node with -field . Then, by Lemma 4, is

a junction tree and hence running Algorithm 2 on will

produce

at the node labeled

for each

. But these are equivalent to

for

and we have thus solved the probabilistic MPF

problem.

So we only need to establish how to lift a certain collection

of -fields to create the required independencies and form a

junction tree.

Suppose we have three -fields,

and , and

we would like to find a lifting

of

so as to have the conditional indepen-

dence relation

. Let

,

,

and

be arbitrary atoms. For each , let

be the matrix with

entry equal to

. Let

be an additive decomposition of . Then

this decomposition corresponds to a lifting of the measure

space obtained by splitting the atom of into two, say

and , where

and

are defined

as the

entries of and , respectively. We will use

this decomposition technique to obtain a lifting that makes

.

Remember first that in order to have this independence, if

, we must have

for all , i.e., the

matrix must be zero. Therefore, if is a nonzero matrix

with zero sum of entries, we first decompose it as the sum of

two matrices with nonzero sum of entries. This corresponds to

splitting atom in a way that the new atoms have nonzero

measure.

Next for each such matrix with nonzero sum of entries, the

independence condition corresponding to is exactly the con-

dition that is rank one. Then, if is not rank one, we can use

an “optimal” decomposition of as the sum of say rank-one

matrices (so that none of the matrices are zero sum).4 This corre-

sponds to splitting the atom into atoms,

where

each of ’s renders and independent; ’s are the new

atoms of the lifted -fields .

B. Algorithm to Construct a Junction Tree
Combining the above ideas with the Algorithm 3 we obtain the following.

• Find any5 valid partition of

w.r.t. ,

.

• For

to

• Find a node s.t.

. If no such node ex-

ists, then pick any

. Lift by splitting some or all

of its atoms as discussed above, so to have

• Find a junction tree on with node as root. Attach this

tree, by adding edge .

• End For

The resulting measure space

is a

lifting of the original measure space

,

and the tree generated by this algorithm is a junction tree

corresponding to this lifted collection of -fields.

Once a junction tree is available, Algorithm 2 can be applied

to solve the probabilistic MPF problem of Section IV. Note that

any algorithm obtained in this manner is simply a reformula-

tion of the original marginalization problem, and can be viewed

as a GDL-type algorithm after introduction of certain new vari-

ables and potentially unintuitive manipulation of the objective

functions. The advantage of our measure-theoretic framework

is that it allows for automation of this process, without the need

for discovering “hidden variables.”

The complexity of Algorithm 4 will be discussed in

Section VI.

C. Measure Theory Versus Variables
In Section IV-B, after presenting the measure-theoretic version of Algorithm 2, we emphasized the connection with the original GDL by rewriting Algorithm 2 in terms of “variables” representing atoms of each -field. The purpose of doing this was to show that, while the language of -fields might seem exotic, all our algorithms can be discussed in more conventional terms. We emphasize once again that the “variables” appearing in (9) and (10) bear no direct relation to the “variables” of the conventional GDL.
It would probably be useful if one could similarly describe Algorithm 4 in terms of some variables, in order to emphasize once again that our algorithms can be thought of in conventional terms. We now describe how to rephrase Algorithm 4 in the language of “variables.” One should note that the main step of Algorithm 4, namely, the splitting of atoms of a -field in order to create conditional independencies, in a sense introduces new “variables.” We illustrate how to think of Algorithm 4 in terms of variables by first considering a basic triangulation step in the conventional GDL along the lines of the basic step of our algorithm, and then describing how the basic step of our algorithm can be though of in terms of “variables.”
Consider state space

Algorithm 4: Pick any node

• If

, then the single edge

as the root. is a junction tree. Stop.

q A A 4This can always be done with = rank( ). Obviously rank( ) is also q a lower bound for . An optimal decomposition, however, not only aims to minq imize , but also involves minimizing the number of nonzero entries of the de-
composing matrices, as discussed in Section VI.

for integers

, with a uniform measure, i.e.,

for all

. Let and be subsets of

, and

define

. Define

and to be the -fields

5Although any valid partition will work, in general finer partitions should result in better and less complex algorithms (see Section VI).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1140

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

with atoms corresponding to (the level sets of)

and

respectively, so that for example

and so on. We will index the atoms of by

where

, and similarly for and . Note that for con-

venience we have overloaded symbol , as either an integer in

or, isomorphically, as an -tuple in

. The distinc-

tion will be apparent from the context.

For each atom of , let be the

matrix of

joint measure, with

entry equal to

, where

we use

as the shorthand for the measure of the

intersection of the th atom of , the th atom of , and the

th atom of . But is the uniform measure, so

is iff

and are consistent, i.e.,

(14)

But we showed earlier that

iff is rank one

for all , i.e., (14) factorizes as

. From (14), it

is obvious that this happens iff

is empty, i.e.,

. Remember from Section II that this is precisely the

condition for — — to be a (GDL) junction tree.

Now suppose that is not empty. Then, after possibly re-

ordering its rows and/or columns, will be a diagonal block

matrix, where each block is a

matrix, and where

the diagonal blocks are blocks of all ’s, and off-diagonal

blocks are matrices

...

. . . ...

(15)

Then the rank-one decomposition of corresponds to the decomposition where the diagonal blocks are separated

...

. . . ...

...

. . . ...

...

. . . ...

(16)

This corresponds to the following decomposition of (14):

The corresponding lifting is obtained by splitting atom of

by intersecting it with the level sets of , so the new atoms

can be represented by

. This means that the atoms of

are the level sets of

. This is precisely what

would be done in the GDL framework: in order for the local

domains

and to form a junction chain — — ,

we expand the domain to contain . We have, therefore,

shown that when the state space and the -fields are represented

in terms of orthogonal directions of variables, our condition for

independence reduces to that of GDL, and our lifting algorithm

will produce the same expansions as in the GDL framework.

Next consider the case when the sample space and the

underlying measure are arbitrary. For each

let

, and define variables

taking values in

and , respectively, corresponding to different

atoms of

and ; this means that

and

Once again, we use the shorthand

for the measure

of the intersection of the th atom of , and the th atom of

, and the th atom of .

As before, for each

denote by the matrix of the

joint measures

. Let denote the rank of . Corre-

spondingly, we decompose each as the sum of rank-one

matrices, which is equivalent to splitting the th atom of

into new atoms. To properly index these new atoms, we need

to invent a new “hidden variable” taking value in the set

. Then the new atoms of the lifted -field, can be in-

dexed by pairs of variables

. In particular,

will have

atoms, compared to the atoms of .

Note, however, that in general, the “directions” corresponding

to ’s are not aligned to those of variables or , and the

pair

does not take value in a product space. Considering

some special cases, however, may add some intuition into the

process of lifting.

If is full rank for some , then is aligned to either

or : Remember that is a

matrix. Suppose

, so that has full row rank. We then decompose

row-wise, into single-row matrices. But rows of corre-

spond to the atoms of , which are indexed precisely by the

variable . Therefore, for this particular value of , the variable

is identical to the variable , and the new atoms are indexed

by pairs

where

. This indeed is a product space. If

is full rank for all ’s, then creating the desired conditional

independence requires a full augmentation of and , i.e.,

, and atoms of correspond to the elements of

the product space

, indexed by pair .

More generally, if can be rearranged as a block matrix

with rank-one blocks such that each row and column of blocks

contains at most one nonzero block—such as in (15)—then the

“hidden variables” ’s will correspond to “subdirections” of

variables and , as determined by the position of the nonzero

blocks.

The other trivial case is when is rank one for some . In

this case, no splitting of the th atom of is needed, and the

corresponding atom of will be duplicated as an atom of .

We will close this section by showing that any junction tree

obtained using the moralization and triangulation procedure can

also be found using Algorithm 4.

Suppose we start with the conventional GDL problem dis-

cussed in Section II, with

local domains

.

Let be a junction tree of cliques of the triangulated moral

graph for the given MPF problem. For each node of , let

be the domain (subset of

) for the corresponding

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

1141

clique. Then, as discussed before, each of the original GDL

local domains is contained in the domain for a node of .

We can assume then that is a tree on

by iden-

tifying each node of with the index of a local domain it

contains (if an index

is left unaccounted for,

we will add a node as a neighbor of a node in which also

contained local domain , and we set

.) Therefore, we

will have

for each node of . Then, as before, we

let the state space to be represented by the GDL variables

, equipped with the uniform measure, and identify

as the -fields whose atoms are the level sets of

, respectively.

We will then run Algorithm 4, using the convention that each

time a lifting is required to create a conditional independence

relation

(where

), we lift

to , where the atoms of are the level sets of variables .

Note then that since the atoms of correspond to and

, we have

, confirming that atoms of are indeed

split to obtain those of . We will now show that with the above

choice for the liftings, Algorithm 4 can create as the junction

tree.

We start Algorithm 4 with a node as the root, where is a

leaf node of . Let be the neighbor of in and let

be the partition of

that is com-

patible with . We can assume WLOG that

. Also,

let

be the neighbor of in lying in , for each

. Then the first lifting will be a splitting of atoms

of to ensure

. We do this, according

to the above convention, by splitting atoms of to form ,

whose atoms correspond to the level sets of . But since is

a (GDL) junction tree on domains

, we must have

for all

Then, from earlier discussions in this section

holds, and in particular is now a valid partition of

w.r.t. (where has been replaced by

its lifting ). This valid partition can be used in the next

call to the algorithm to ensure that the neighboring subtrees

of in the junction tree will be identical to those in . It is

then easy to see that following similar choices in each step of

Algorithm 4, we will end up with as the junction tree, while

is lifted to

where

, is the uniform measure on , and is the

-field whose atoms are the level sets of variables . There-

fore, we have shown that using Algorithm 4 , one can always

retrieve a junction tree equivalent to any (GDL) junction tree

obtained using the moralization and triangulation procedure.

VI. COMPLEXITY ISSUES
In this section, we discuss the computational complexity of the methods proposed in this paper. We start by estimating the complexity of computing the conditional expectation of a random variable given a -field, with respect to a signed measure.

A. Computing Conditional Expectations

Consider the problem of efficiently computing the condi-

tional expectation

. Let

be the

atoms of with nonzero measure, and let denote the sigma

field generated by , with atoms

. Let

denote the

matrix of conditional measures, with

entry

. Also, define as an

column vector with

entries

. Then, calculating

is precisely

equivalent to computing

.

At first look it appears that calculating

requires

multiplications and

additions. However, using the fact

that matrix is known a priori, in many cases we can perform

the calculations with a lower number of operations, as suggested

in Example 1. To illustrate this in the context of Algorithm 2,

note that

is precisely the message sent from to , in

a junction “tree” in the form — . Now let

be the

trivial -field on the same state space . We will lift the space

so as to create the conditional independence

. We

will then have a junction chain — — . Then it is easy to

see that

will be the same as the message from to

on this junction tree (after message from has been received

at ).

Now to create the desired conditional independence, we need

the rank-one decomposition of (note that —the matrix of

conditional measures—is rank one iff —the matrix of joint

measures

is rank one).

Suppose now that has rank

. Denote the th

row of by , and define to be the number of nonzero

elements of . Let

be a linearly independent

subset of rows of , chosen so as to minimize the sum

. Then for each

,

for some matrix . Incidentally, this matrix has the property

that after possibly reordering its rows and/or columns, it has the

identity matrix as a submatrix. Denote by the number

of nonzero elements of the

submatrix of when this

identity submatrix has been removed.

We then have the following rank-one decomposition:

where is the th column of . Corresponding to this decom-

position,

can be computed as

.

Calculating

requires multiplications and

additions. Note that, as discussed before, while the vector is

arbitrary, the matrix is known a priori and hence we can

exclude multiplications and additions by ’s. To compute

, given scalars

, we need an ad-

ditional multiplications and

additions, where

was defined above for matrix .

Therefore, to compute

we need a total of

mul-

tiplications and

additions. Define

as the edge complexity associated with the hypothetical directed

edge from to , which is the number of additions and mul-

tiplications required for computing

. Note from defi-

nitions that

and

, and,

therefore,

. Therefore, using this technique,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1142

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

as compared to the straightforward multiplications and summa-

tions suggested by (3), depending on the structure of the matrix

, there is potential for a saving by a factor of in the total

operations required to carry out the computations.

Also note that one can always use a row-wise rank-one de-

composition (i.e.,

, where is an

column vector with a at the th position and ’s everywhere

else). Then an upper bound on is

, where variable

is defined to be the total number of nonzero elements in ma-

trix .

Next we will discuss the complexity of Algorithm 2.

B. Complexity of the Junction Tree Algorithm 2

First notice that, as discussed in Section V-C, any junction

tree obtained using the moralization and triangulation (possibly

after introduction of hidden variables), corresponds to a junc-

tion tree on a lifting of the original -fields—where liftings are

done in the whole-variable directions—which can also be dis-

covered by Algorithm 4. Algorithm 2 on this junction tree will

then be equivalent to GDL on the junction tree of cliques of the

triangulated graph. In this sense then, using our framework we

can always find a marginalization algorithm which is at least as

good as GDL.

With that point noted, in this subsection we will discuss the

complexity of Algorithm 2 in terms of the sizes of the -fields

on the junction tree, rather than those of the original -fields

before possible lifting. It is clear that the lifted -fields can be

substantially larger than the original ones. This is also the case in

the original GDL framework, where triangulation can produce

enormous cliques.

Let be a junction tree with -fields

, as de-

fined above, and let

be arbitrary random vari-

ables with

. Denote by the number of atoms of the

-field , so

.

It can be seen that, in general, the sample space can have

as many as

elements and thus full representation of

-fields and the measure function requires exponentially large

storage resources. Fortunately, however, a full representation is

not required. Along each edge

on the tree, Algorithm 2

only requires local computation of

for a random vari-

able

. This only requires a

table of the joint mea-

sures of the atoms of and . For an arbitrary edge , let

and

be the sets

of atoms of and . Define

to be the

ma-

trix with entry equal to

; note that from Lemma

6 (possibly after trivial simplification of the problem by elimi-

nating the events with measure zero), no atom of can have

measure , so

is defined for all atoms of . Then

once a junction tree has been found, we need only keep

such matrices (corresponding to the

edges of the tree) to

fully represent the algorithm, for a total of

storage units.

As defined in the previous section, for each directed edge

in let

be the corresponding edge complexity,

i.e., the arithmetic complexity of computing

. From

Algorithm 2, calculation of the conditional expectation of

the product given a single -field with the most efficient

schedule requires updating of the messages from the leaves

toward the node . Each edge is activated in one direction, and

at each nonleaf node the messages need to be multiplied to up-

date the message from to its neighbor in the direction of . This

requires, for each edge , an additional multiplications.

Thus, the grand total arithmetic operations needed to calculate

is

, where the summation

is taken over all the directed edges approaching .

The complexity of the full algorithm, in which

is calculated for all

, can also be found using

similar ideas. For each node , let denote the number of the

neighbors of on the tree. Then, for each directed edge ,

first the

messages from other neighbors of must be

multiplied by and then the conditional expectation given

must be taken. For each nonleaf node , calculating the product

of and all the products of

out of messages

incoming to requires

multiplications, using a

method similar to the one described in [5, Sec. 5]. So the total

number of operations required for the full algorithm is

In particular, if is a chain — — complexity of Algorithm 2 becomes

— , the

Using the upper bound

derived in the previous section, the above complexity of

Algorithm 2 on a chain is upper-bounded by

. Here, we have used the fact that

,

i.e., the number of nonzero elements of matrices

and

are equal.

C. Complexity of Lifting

In this subsection, we discuss the complexity of Algorithm

4. Recall that the lifting process at each step of Algorithm 4

can increase not only the number of atoms of the -field which

is being processed, but also the overall number of states in the

state space. As mentioned before, in general it is not possible

to a priori get a reasonable estimate of these figures, since the

rank-one decompositions can be arbitrarily irregular and un-

predictable. Rather, the complexity will depend on the choices

made in each lifting. Consider again the setup used above,

with -fields

and , where lifting is done to create

. Also for each

, let be the ma-

trix of joint measures

where

and

. Then clearly, as noted before, the number

of atoms of the lifted -field, is minimized by using a

decomposition of as the sum of rank-one matrices,

where

. However, this is not the only factor

determining the complexity of the algorithm. Each time a

nonzero entry of is decomposed as sum of nonzero num-

bers, in effect new states are added to the state space. It is,

therefore, preferable to choose decompositions that minimize

splitting of nonzero entries. For example, the splitting in (16)

does not create any new states, since the nonzero blocks are

nonoverlapping. As another example, suppose

.

Then decomposition

is preferable to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

1143

, since the latter results in creating four

new states in the state space.

An interesting observation is that in the GDL framework,

once a representation of the space is decided by the choice of

variables, the operations to create independencies (e.g., moral-

ization and triangulation) will never expand the state space; all

expansions of local domains are achieved by addition of whole

variables, equivalent to splitting of nonoverlapping rank-one

blocks in our framework.

The complexity of each lifting is related (polynomially) to the

number of states in the lifted state space; in the above setup, this

number is

. Algorithm 4 consists of liftings

at different stages, so the overall complexity of Algorithm 4 is

on the order of that of the most complex lifting in the process.

Now consider the case when the algorithm is run on the -fields

, each with atoms, and when the -fields are pro-

cessed in the order of their index to form a junction chain. It is

clear that the original state space can have as many as states,

indicating that the general algorithm is exponentially complex

in . Once the lifting has been done to create the independence

condition

, the number of atoms of can

grow to . The next lifting, however, will only involve -fields

through . Thus, the number of relevant states cannot ex-

ceed

. But

Fig. 3. GDL junction tree for Example 2.
example in detail. Note, however, that to generate the marginalization algorithms, no calculations were done manually and the entire process was automatic. The details are presented here simply to clarify the end result. In each example, we further compare the complexity of our message-passing algorithm with the naive implementation of GDL.
We note that there do exist other methods and techniques that deal with each specific class of problems. Such methods are tailored for a single class of problems and are not applicable to the general case. For instance, [11] gives a procedure that is somewhat more general than the conventional GDL for generation low-complexity algorithms, when the local functions are of specific form called “causally independent.” Our measure-theoretic framework, on the other hand, is general in handling all marginalization problems. It is also worth noting that in one of the examples considered—that of decoding linear block codes—our procedure is able to discover the minimal complexity trellis-based decoding algorithm.
Our Example 1 at the beginning of this paper can be generalized as follows.

In other words, the size of the relevant state space will not ex-

ceed , and hence, the complexity of none of the consequent

liftings will exceed that of the first lifting. An upper bound on

the complexity of Algorithm 4 is, therefore,

for a con-

stant , where

is an upper bound on the complexity of

rank-one decomposition of a matrix with elements.

However, even though the general form of Algorithm 4 is

complex, there are justifications for why it can be a useful prac-

tical tool. First, note that as mentioned in Section VI-B, a full de-

scription of the marginalization algorithm requires storing only

the

matrices of the conditional measures of the atoms

of the neighboring -fields, and a full representation of the ex-

ponentially large state space is unnecessary. Second, remember

that Algorithm 4 can be executed offline once and for all. Once

a junction tree has been created, the corresponding marginaliza-

tion algorithm can be used for all possible inputs, namely, the

random variables

. Therefore, the cost of creating

an efficient algorithm is amortized over many future uses.

As mentioned before, our framework is general enough to be

able to take advantage of partial independencies in the objective

functions; together with ideas of lifting, we have an automatic

algorithm for exploiting these structures.

VII. EXAMPLES
In this section, we consider several examples where GDLbased algorithms are applicable. We have created a MATLAB library containing the necessary functions to set up a general marginalization problem and create a junction tree. The examples in this section are processed using that code. To explain the algorithms resulting from our code, we have described each

Example 2: Let be a finite set of size , and for each , let be a real function on . Let be a
real (weight) function on . We would like to compute the weighted average of the product of ’s, namely

Suppose that the weight function is in the following form:

As long as the weight function is not in product form, the naive version of the GDL algorithm will prescribe

requiring

additions and multiplications, corresponding

to the junction tree in Fig. 3.

Now, let be the product space with signed measure ,

and for

, let be the -field containing the planes

, so

. Let

be the trivial -field. Then

the problem is to find the conditional expectation of the product

of the ’s given .

The best junction tree is obtained by lifting the space so that

given all other –fields are mutually conditionally indepen-

dent. To do this, we split the atom of into two atoms and

. In effect, for each element

of , the new space

has two elements

and

.

The new weight function is defined on as

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1144

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

and

Define

. Then, noting that

and that

for

, one can interpret the above

sum as the follows:

Then there is a star-shaped junction tree on

with

node at the center. The message-passing algorithm on this tree

is

Note that this requires only multiplications.

additions and

Example 3: Partition Function in a Circuit-Switched Network: In a circuit-switched network, one is interested in finding the invariant distribution of calls in progress along routes of the network. It can be shown (see [12]) that the invariant distribution has the form

Note, however, that even this simplified version requires

arithmetic operations.

We will now show that our Algorithm 4 creates a simple junc-

tion tree, and implementation of Algorithm 2 on that junction

tree substantially simplifies the marginalization problem.

Define a sample space

with uniform measure

for all

; here,

for ease of notation, we denote elements of by , and define

to be the th coordinate of . We also define, as before,

. When there is no risk of confusion, we

drop the explicit dependence of ’s and ’s on .

For each

, let be the -field with atoms

Define also -field with atoms

Here, is the number of calls along route ; is the total

number of routes;

is a known function (invariant distri-

bution of if the links had an infinite number of circuits); is

the number of links in the network; is the capacity of link ;

and

is the index set of routes that use link .

Finally, is a normalizing factor called the partition function,

and is defined by

Next we view local functions as random variables measurable

in the corresponding -field:

and

. The problem

is then to find

.

We now follow Algorithm 4 step by step to create a

junction tree. We pick as the root node and as the

neighboring node, and lift to create conditional independence

: For each atom

of , let be the

matrix with

entry

, where

and

for

are atoms of

and

, respectively, and

is the

-ary expansion of , so that

. Then it can be

seen that the entry

Therefore, in order to calculate the invariant distribution, one

only needs to calculate the partition function . Having this in

mind, we consider the following simplest case.

Let

be arbitrary functions with integer

variables

. Let

be an

arbitrary function of the integer variable , which vanishes when

. We would like to calculate the following

weighted marginalization:

where is the indicator function. Clearly, has rank

since it has precisely

nonzero (linearly independent)

rows; namely, rows through . Hence, we can split atom

into

new atoms, corresponding to row-wise decom-

position of . Let be the -field whose atoms are these

split atoms. Then

Relying on orthogonal directions of independent variables to represent the state space, a GDL algorithm will suggest

In particular, has

atoms.

Next we try to lift to create conditional independence

: For each atom

of

, let

entry

be the . Here,

matrix with ’s are the atoms of and

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

1145

Fig. 4. Junction tree for Example 3.

is a map from such that

to . Also

Fig. 5. Bayesian network of Example 4.

for

are atoms of

, and

expansion of , so that

that the

entry

is the -ary . Again, it can be seen

It is evident that this function only depends on row index

through

; for a given

, all the rows

with

are identical, and hence can be grouped to-

gether for rank-one decomposition. Also notice that

equal

when

, and be zero other-

wise. Then, indeed, GDL will come up with a form similar to

(17) (note that upper limits in the sums cannot depend on vari-

able ; a postprocessor can, however, realize that the terms that

correspond to

will vanish.)

Notice, however, the automatic nature of our procedure:

although we have introduced the auxiliary variables to

analytically express the atoms of each -field and to express the

algorithm of (17) in closed form, the automatic procedure of

Algorithm 4 does not rely on these variables. There is no need

for pre- or post-processing of data or introduction of variables.

Given a representation of the -fields and

,a

computer program will automatically come up with algorithm

of (17) without any assistance. This is the essence of our

method.

In the next example we show that Pearl’s treatment of the be-

lief propagation algorithm in the case of a node with disjunctive

interaction or noisy-or-gate causation ([7, Sec. 4.3.2]) can be

viewed as a special case of our algorithm.

Further, each has sponding to
new atoms. Let these split atoms. Then

such groups of rows, corre. Hence, we can split atom into
be the -field whose atoms are

Example 4: Bayesian Network With Disjunctive Interaction:

Let the binary inputs

be the parents of

the binary node in the Bayesian network of Fig. 5, interacting

on through a noisy-or-gate.

This means that there are parameters

so that

Note that

has

atoms.

This procedure will be repeated and it can be seen that the

lifted -fields will have atoms

The corresponding junction tree is the chain pictured in Fig. 4. Examining the matrices of joint measures along edges of this
chain, it can be verified that the corresponding junction tree algorithm is equivalent to the following:

where

.

A normal moralization and triangulation technique applied to

this graph will give a single clique with all the variables. How-

ever, because of the structure in the problem, a better solution

exists.

Let

be the -fields generated by the (in-

dependent) variables

, respectively. All variables

are binary so each of the -fields has precisely two atoms. In

our framework, let the “random variables” be (the function)

, and

(17)

for

This requires only

arithmetic operations.

The form given in (17) suggests that, after introduction of

variables , GDL can also produce (17). However, variables

as defined above are not independent, so GDL can never come

up with (17) exactly. To account for this problem in GDL, one

can take ’s to be free and independent variables taking value

in

, and then redefine functions

to

with the underlying joint measure on be

defined to

Then ’s are not mutually conditionally independent given

, however, the following simple lifting of space will create

the independence: Let a variable be defined to take value

in

, where the event

corresponds to

,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1146

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

and measure as follows:

correspond to

. Extend the
if if if

Then we see that in this lifted space, the -fields (generated by variables , respectively) are mutually conditionally independent given (the -field generated by variable ). Then we have a junction tree in the shape of a star, with corresponding to the central node. The junction tree algorithm will calculate the following marginalized random variable at the node corresponding to :

Fig. 6. Bayesian network for a probabilistic state machine.

Then the belief at is the function BEL

if

if

Note that can be stored in a

table.

if

Now we have a junction tree with only two nodes, corre-

sponding to and , and the marginalization is done as fol-

lows:

if

if

where we have merged the atoms

and

of to get

back . This is essentially the same as [7, eq. (4.57)].

Example 5: Hadamard Transform: Let

be binary

variables and let

be a real function of ’s. The

Hadamard transform of is defined as

where and

where

are binary variables.

Since our framework is particularly useful when the under-

lying functions are structured, we consider the case when is

a symmetric function of

, i.e., depends only on the

sum of the ’s. Then it is easy to verify that when is sym-

metric, its Hadamard transform is also a symmetric function.

We now set up the problem in our framework. Let be

with elements

. Let

and be the -fields in which, respectively, and are

measurable; in our case, of symmetric and

and

Next we note that all the factors involving terms

can

be summarized as a signed measure on

as follows:

This requires only additions and

each of

possible values of .

multiplications for

Example 6: Probabilistic State Machine: Consider the

Bayesian network depicted in Fig. 6, where

and

denote inputs, hidden states, and the outputs of a chain of

length . Let be the memory of the state machine, so that

each state can be taken to be

, where for

ease of notation we fix

so we will not

have to worry about stages

.

A specific device used to find the maximum-likelihood input

symbols given ’s is a trellis, which is equipped with an effi-

cient marginalization algorithm, namely, the BCJR algorithm on

the trellis (see [6]). As mentioned before, however, this is not a

general method, but rather a method tailored only for a specific

class of marginalization problems. Description of that algorithm

in GDL format with variables requires introduction of compli-

cated hidden variables (see Example 9).

The general and automatic GDL solution for this problem is

the BCJR algorithm on a junction chain (rather than a trellis).

The functions involved are

and

, so the GDL local domains for this chain

are , and and

for

.

Assuming binary inputs and outputs, the BCJR algorithm will

require about

operations, where ranges over

the GDL local domains, is the number of neighbors of ,

and

is the size of the set of possible values for the

variables in domain (see [5]). The complexity of GDL then

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW
TABLE I COMPARISON BETWEEN COMPLEXITY OF GDL AND PROBABILISTIC GDL

1147

Fig. 7. Junction tree created for chain of length 12 and memory 6.

grows roughly as

(the exact formula used in

Table I is

).

Now consider a case when the output of the state machine

depends on the input and state in a simple, but nonproduct form.

For the purposes of this example, we have chosen the output

to be the outcome of an “OR” gate on the state and input ,

passed through a binary symmetric channel, i.e.,

where “ ” indicates a logical “OR,” and is the indicator

function.

We formed the space as

, with elements

. Then each function

is mea-

surable in a -field , with two atoms

and

. Since we like to calculate the poste-

rior probabilities on each input , we also include -fields

each with two atoms

and

.

We then run our algorithm to create a junction tree on the

’s and the ’s, lifting the space whenever needed. The result

is a chain consisting of the ’s with each hanging from its

corresponding (see Fig. 7).

We have run the algorithm on chains with various values of

and . Table I compares the complexity of the message-passing

algorithm on the probabilistic junction tree and the normal GDL

(BCJR) algorithm. GDL complexity was estimated as discussed

above. The complexity of probabilistic algorithm on the lifted

chain, as discussed in Section VI, is at most

where “ ”

is the total number of nonzero entries in the tables of pairwise

joint measures. We add to this the number of additions required

to get the desired marginals at the level of atoms of the original

-fields to obtain the figures listed in the table.

The details of the case

,

have been por-

trayed in Fig. 7. The number underneath each is , the

number of atoms of

after lifting has been done. Note that

with our setup, originally

has two atoms, and all other

’s have three atoms. The numbers under the brackets de-

note

, the number of nonzero elements in the matrix

of joint measures between the atoms of adjacent nodes. Here we note that the pattern that can be seen in these sequences of numbers is not a coincidence. We will re-examine this general problem at the end of this section.

Example 7: Exact Decoding of LDPC Codes: In this ex-

ample, we apply our method to some LDPC codes of small

block size over a memoryless channel. The codes used in this

example are depicted in Fig. 8 as bipartite graphs, in which the

upper nodes correspond to the bits and the lower nodes corre-

spond to the parity checks (see [2]). In each case, we will ob-

tain an exact algorithm to find the a posteriori probabilities for

each bit. We then compare these algorithms with the exact algo-

rithms obtained under GDL using the triangulation method (see

[4] and [5]). As we will see, for a randomly generated LDPC

code, the cliques of the triangulated graph are almost as big as

the whole variable set, resulting in poor algorithms. On the other

hand, using our framework we are able to find exact algorithms

that are much less complex. In fact, as we will show later, the

algorithms derived using our method in this case are equivalent

to the best known exact decoding algorithms for linear block

codes, i.e., the BCJR on the minimal trellis of the code (see,

e.g., [13], [6]).

Let GF

be the parity-check matrix for a binary

linear block code with check nodes and block size . Then

the column vector

in GF is a codeword iff

it satisfies

. Given observations of , the a posteriori

joint probability of factors as

Here again, is a normalizing factor and is the th row of the

matrix . We are interested in finding

’s, the marginals

of for

.

To set up the problem in our framework, we define the sample

space to be the set of codewords, i.e.,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1148

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

Fig. 8. LDPC codes of Example 7.

We choose the uniform measure on , so that

for all

. For

, define -field with atoms

Finally, we define random variables

to equal

. Then the marginals

corre-

spond to the conditionals expectations

.

We ran our MATLAB lifting code for a number of randomly

chosen LDPC codes with small block size (Fig. 8), and in each

case formed a junction chain with lifted -fields

.

Table II summarizes each chain.

Each code is presented with block length and parity checks

, as well as code rate and parameter , the number of ’s per

each column of (checks per bit). For each code, we have listed

’s, the number of atoms of the lifted -fields . We have

also reported functions

, the number of nonzero en-

tries of the matrix of joint measures of the atoms of neighboring

-fields; as discussed in Section VI, total arithmetic complexity

of Algorithm 2 on the chain is at most

. Fi-

nally, to get the marginal

from the conditional expecta-

tion

, we need

additions. We have, there-

fore, calculated and reported the total arithmetic complexity of

our exact algorithm.

For each code, we also triangulated the moral graph and found

the junction tree of the cliques suitable for GDL-type algorithm.

Specifically, for each LDPC code we form the moral graph; this

is a graph with nodes corresponding to the bits of a codeword,

and where an edge exists iff bits and are involved in a

common parity constraint. We then triangulate this graph using

the algorithm given in [7, Sec. 3.2.4], by adding edges (chords)

in each unchorded cycle of the graph with length at least . The

cliques of this graph can be put on a junction tree.

In Table II, for each code we report the size of the cliques

of the triangulated graph; the clique sizes should be compared

with of the number of atoms of the lifted -fields in the

left column. We also report the “edge sizes,” i.e., the size of

the intersection of the cliques that are connected by an edge in

the junction tree of the cliques; these in turn should be com-

pared with of the functions

. Finally, we use

as the (approximate) arithmetic complexity

of GDL algorithm, where is the number of neighbors of

clique in the junction tree and

is the cardinality of

the set of possible values for variables in (see [5]).

It can be seen that the triangulation method is incapable of

recognizing the structure that exists within each parity-check

term

. It is, therefore, forced to treat each indi-

cator function as a complete function of the bit variables that

appear in that check. As a result of this and the interconnection

between the bits, clique sizes are almost as big as the block size

, resulting in very inefficient algorithms.

On the other hand, avoiding representation with variables, our

measure-theoretic approach is able to discover minimal liftings

that render the -fields independent, and hence come up with

much more efficient marginalization algorithms. Since the gen-

eral complexity bounds we have given on the lifting procedure

in Section VI-C are exponential, it is not clear for how large a

block size it will be practicable to have a complete implemen-

tation of the lifting algorithm. Our MATLAB implementations

were far from optimized, and were run on a 850-MHz Pentium

III Laptop, with 256 MB of memory. It took about half an

hour for the largest reported code size, namely,

This suggests that a highly optimized implementation on a

state-of-the-art computing cluster could carry out lifting for

much larger sized codes.

We will now show that applying Algorithm 4 to the problem

of decoding a linear block code will produce a junction tree

which is equivalent to the minimal trellis representing the code.

Let be a binary linear

code, with codewords

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

1149

TABLE II LDPC RESULTS FROM EXAMPLE 7 (SEE ALSO FIG. 8)

defined by

. As before, we define to be a uniform

measure on , so that

for all

, and for each

, define as the -field whose atoms are the level

sets of the th bit of , i.e.,

Let be a rank- trellis with binary labels. This is defined

as a graph whose vertices are partitioned into time stages,

, with

, such that any edge in

connects vertices from neighboring time stages. Further, each

edge is labeled with a symbol from the set

. We denote

by

the set of edges between and , and for each

edge , we denote by the label associated with edge .

More generally, we define

to be the collection of all

paths

between and , with

. Also, for each path

, we denote

by the

vector of the labels of the edges of . We will

further assume that if and are two different paths in ,

then

.

A trellis is said to represent code if the labeled paths of

from to are precisely the codewords of , i.e.,

. Therefore, we identify codewords of by

the paths

in . With this representation, we can view

measure function as a function of -tuples of edges, such that

iff is a path in . Also, using this representation

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1150

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

for , the two atoms of are precisely

for

.

Now note that each trellis representing can be viewed

as a lifting

of

, where for each

, is defined as the -field whose atoms corre-

spond to all the edges in

. Specifically

Then the atoms of

correspond in similar way to the

paths in

.

We now claim that for every trellis representing code , the

chain — — — is a junction chain. To see this, let

be an edge in

, corresponding to an atom of . Also

let

and

be representing atoms of

and

, respec-

tively. Then from definitions above,

is precisely

if

is a path in , and is zero otherwise. In other

words

where for an edge

, we define

and

as the initial and final vertices of , respectively.

This means precisely that for a fixed

,

factorizes as a product of functions of and , and hence,

This proves that — — — is a junction chain.

Finally, recall that for any linear block code there is a min-

imal representing trellis that has the smallest number of vertices

and edges at each time stage. The minimal trellis has the prop-

erty that for any two initial (or terminal) paths

(or

), we have

iff

.

This means that the atoms of

can be precisely identi-

fied by the paths in (which are also the atoms of

).

Similarly, the atoms of

can be precisely identified by

the paths in

(which are also the atoms of

).

Starting Algorithm 4 with the original -fields , the lifting

of will then amount to rank-one decomposition of a matrix of

’s and ’s with nonoverlapping blocks of ’s (as mentioned in

Section V-C). The lifted atoms will be none other than the edges

in

, and the lifted -field will be precisely . Therefore,

Algorithm 4 in this case will produce a junction chain which is

equivalent to the minimal trellis of the code. It is then easy to

verify that Algorithm 2 on this junction tree is the same as the

BCJR algorithm on the minimal trellis.

Fig. 9. Graph of CH-ASIA example.

lowing functions:

,

,

,

,

,

,

,

, and

.

Again, we set up measurable spaces, with -fields corre-

sponding to each of the above functions. We then ran the lifting

algorithm to find a junction tree in form of a chain, as in the

previous example. This time, however, due to lack of structure

at the level of the marginalizable functions (i.e., the afore-

mentioned conditional probabilities), the algorithm produced

exactly a junction tree that one could obtain by the process of

moralization and triangulation at the level of original variables.

In other words, all liftings were done by addition of one or more

“whole” orthogonal directions (i.e., GDL variables) of the

space to the -fields. After reconverting -fields to “variables,”

the junction tree we obtained is equivalent to the one shown on

Fig. 10. In this case, our algorithm has reduced to GDL.

Example 9: Probabilistic State Machine Revisited: In the au-

tomatic treatment of Example 6 it was seen that the lifted junc-

tion chains exhibit strong structures, suggesting that there is a

simple closed-form solution for the general problem. This in

fact is the case, and as will be seen shortly our marginaliza-

tion algorithm is equivalent to the trellis BCJR algorithm. Here,

we simply report the closed-form representation of the general

junction chain, and give the corresponding marginalization al-

gorithm. We have the same underlying sample space as in

Example 6. For compact representation, we continue to use vari-

ables, viewing each specific value of a variable as an event, i.e.,

a subset of . Now for each

we define a vari-

able taking value in

, as follows.

•

.

• For

:

if if

Note that here

.

• For

:

if if

with

.

• For

:

Example 8: CH-ASIA: Our next example is CH-ASIA from [3, pp. 110–111]. The chain graph of Fig. 9 describes the dependencies between the variables.
The problem is to find the marginals of , which is the product of the fol-

if , if

with

.

Once the lifting has been done, the resulting junction tree is

a chain similar to that of Fig. 7 where atoms of the -fields are

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

1151

Fig. 10. Junction tree for CH-ASIA example.

n m Fig. 11. Trellis of the state machine with = 9 and = 4. Solid and dashed lines correspond to 0 and 1 inputs, respectively.

given by the events

; more specifically, the th atom of

is

. Then , the number of atoms of

, is the number of possible values for as listed above.

Also, in this case

, the number of nonzero entries in

the matrix of joint measures of atoms of

and

is simply . The total arithmetic complexity of implementing

Algorithm 2 on this chain to solve the original marginalization

problem is

, which should

be compared to

operations required by naive

implementation of GDL.

Finally, we give the explicit message update rules of Algo-

rithm 2 on this chain. Note that the original form of Algorithm 2

will involve multiplying each term below by a fixed weight,

which we have simplified throughout the expressions. Also, for

compactness, here we are defining

to equal the product

, noting that both these functions are

measurable given : for a given value of , the corresponding

value for is if

, and is , otherwise; also, the

corresponding value for the term

is if

, and

is otherwise.

• For

:

if if
and

• For and

:
if if if

Careful examination of these expressions reveals that the

above algorithm is equivalent to the BCJR algorithm on the

trellis tailored for this problem. Fig. 11 shows the corresponding

trellis for

and

, and the connection with variables

above.

It is evident that the original general version of GDL relying

on variables is neither natural nor adequate in dealing with this

problem. Although, as shown above, a description of the optimal

marginalization algorithm in terms of some “variables” exists,

it requires a careful preprocessing phase to discover such vari-

ables. Of course, in practice this inadequacy is addressed by in-

vention of trellises, but that method is not a general method that

is applicable to all classes of problems. Our lifting algorithm, on

the other hand, is general and automatic in detecting the struc-

tures in any marginalization problem, and producing an effi-

cient algorithm, without the need to discover hidden variables

or to have any knowledge of trellises. Similarly, the eventual

marginalization algorithm does not run on any trellis nor does it

require complicated descriptions as shown in this example.

• For and

:

VIII. CONCLUSION

In this paper, we have developed a measure-theoretic version

if if

of the junction tree algorithm. We have generalized the notions of independence and junction trees at the level of -fields, and have produced algorithms to find or construct a junction tree

if

on a given set of -fields. By taking advantage of structures

at the atomic level of sample space , our lifting algorithm

is capable of automatically producing solutions less complex

than the GDL-type algorithms. Although one can typically in-

troduce new variables and redefine the local functions in a way

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1152

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

that GDL will also come up with the same efficient algorithm as our method, this requires an intelligent processor to examine the data and determine a good way of introducing these variables. This process, then, remains more of an art than science. As we saw through example, our framework is capable of automating this process.
The cost of generating a junction tree with Algorithm 4 is exponential in the size of the problem, and so is the size of any complete representation of the sample space . Once a junction tree has been constructed, however, the algorithm will only depend on the joint measure of the atoms of adjacent pairs of
-fields on the tree. This means that an algorithm which was build by considering an space, with exponentially many elements, can be stored compactly and efficiently and used for all combinations of input functions. Therefore, the cost of generating an efficient marginalization algorithm is amortized over many uses.
Using our framework, the tradeoff between the construction complexity of junction trees and the overall complexity of the marginalization algorithm can be made with an appropriate choice for the representation of the measurable spaces; at one extreme, one considers the complete sample space, taking advantage of all the possible structures, and at the other, one represents the sample space with independent variables (i.e., orthogonal directions), in which case our framework reduces to GDL, both in concept and in implementation
The validity of this theory for the signed measures is of enormous convenience; it allows for introduction of atoms of negative weight in order to create independencies. This greatly simplifies the task of lifting, which now can be done using standard techniques such as singular value decomposition. By contrast, the problem of finding a positive rank-one decomposition of a positive matrix (which would arise if one confined the problem to the positive measures functions) is a hard problem (see [14]). Meanwhile, the complexities and abstractions due to use of signed measure theory are transparent to the end user: the eventual marginalization algorithm will only consist of additions and multiplications of the original data.
The measure-theoretic framework is the natural choice that is capable of discovering all the structure inherent in a problem. The extension of the GDL to this framework is quite natural and mathematically elegant. Together with the lifting algorithm, we feel that this approach can have strong practical as well as theoretical significance.

for all choices of and in

and , respectively.

In particular, ranging over all atoms of and summing

the above equation yields the first part of result, since

and

Similarly, ranging over all atoms of and summing

yields the second part of the result.

(5c):

•

. Then from

, we get

for all . Then from

we get

for all and , and so we are done.

•

and

. Then from

we get

for all and , and so

and we

are done.

•

and

.Then from

we get

(18)

Also, from

we have

. Replacing this into (18) we obtain

and we are

done.

(5d):

•

. Then from

, we get

for all and , and so we are

done.

•

and

. Then from

we get

for all and , and in particular

and

so we have the desired equality

.

•

and

. We have

since

(19)

since

(20)

APPENDIX A PROOF OF THEOREM 1

since by (5b)

(21)

Replacing (21) into (19) and then into (20) we obtain

Let

and be arbitrary elements of

and ,

respectively. The proofs below consider all possible cases for

the value of the on these atoms.

(5a): Symmetry is obvious, since

.

(5b): If

, then

and if

,

then

(5e): • we get • have

and and

. Then from and we are done. . From
. Then from

are done.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

,
we ,
and we

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

1153

•

and

. Then from

,

Replacing each of these into (22) we obtain

we get both

and

, so

the desired equality hold and

•

and

we get

from

. Then from we have

, . Also,

and we are done.
APPENDIX B PROOF OF CORRECTNESS OF ALGORITHM 2

So we obtain the equality

In this appendix, we give a proof for the correctness of the Probabilistic Junction Tree Algorithm 2. We will use a proof that parallels that given in [5]. We will need the following lemmas.

Finally, decomposition applied to

yields

proved

this completes the proof.

(5f):

•

. Then from

and we are done.

•

and

. Then from

we have

. So we have and
we have

and so

. Also, after applying (5b) to

the above, we have

and

Lemma 6: Suppose there exists a junction tree with nodes

corresponding to -fields

. Then if is a zero-

measure atom of any of the ’s, and

is measurable in

, then

.

Proof: Node vacuously separates the empty subset of

from

. Thus,

Thus, by the definition of conditional independence, whenever has zero measure, all its subsets measurable in
also have measure zero.

Lemma 7: (cf. [5, Lemma A.1]) Let

and be

-fields such that

. Then for any partially defined

random variable

, the following equality holds:

So we have the equality

Proof: Let

. Then

and for

and we are done.

•

and

else from

. Then from

. Then also we would have
we get

or Then, for any nonzero-measure atom

and also after (5b) to the above, we get

Replacing the latter equation into the former we obtain

(22)

But from

and by (5b) we have both

and
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1154

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 6, JUNE 2004

where equality follows from the fact that

and follows from fact that

, so that

,

Proof of Correctness of Algorithm 2: We will show that

if is the schedule for activation of the nodes (i.e., a directed

edge

iff node updates its message to its neighbor

at time ) then the message from a node to a neighboring node

is

Lemma 8: (cf. [5, Lemma A.2]) Let

and be

-fields such that

are mutually conditionally in-

dependent given . For each

, let be a partially

defined random variable in . Then

where

(23)
is a subset of the nodes defined recursively by if if if

Proof: We shall proceed by induction. The statement is

vacuous for

. For

, let

. Then

. Also note that

is a

partially defined random variable in

with

We will prove this by induction on . Case

is clear from

the initialization. Now let

and assume that (23) holds for

. We can also assume that the

so the message

is being updated at time . Then

and that any atom of

can be written as

for

and

. Then for any

we have

where we have used the fact that

, so

For Then

assume inductively that the equality holds for

Here, equality follows from the induction hypothesis,

from the junction tree property and Lemma 8, from the junc-

tion tree property and Lemma 7, and from definition of

.

Indeed,

above is the set of all the nodes whose “in-

formation” has reached the edge by time . Similarly, with

,

is the collection of all the

nodes whose “information” has reached a node by time . As

in [5], we define a message trellis up to time , which is an

directed graph, where for any

. is always connected to

, and

and , is connected to

iff

. It follows that we will have

when there is a path from every initial node (i.e., at

) in

the trellis to the node . Then, since the tree has finite diam-

eter, any infinite schedule that activates all the edges infinitely

many times has a finite subschedule, say of length , such that

for all . At that time we have

since

by induction hypothesis

Using Lemmas 7 and 8, we are in position to prove a version of the scheduling [5, Theorem 3.1] for our measure-theoretic framework.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

PAKZAD AND ANANTHARAM: A NEW LOOK AT THE GENERALIZED DISTRIBUTIVE LAW

1155

where equality follows from (23), follows from the junction tree property and Lemma 8, and follows from the definition of . This completes the proof of correctness of Algorithm 2.
REFERENCES
[1] R. McEliece, D. MacKay, and J. Cheng, “Turbo decoding as an instance of pearl’s ‘belief propagation’ algorithm,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 140–152, Feb. 1998.
[2] D. MacKay and R. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Cryptography and Coding. 5th IMA Conf.. Berlin, Germany: Sprilnger-Verlag, 1995, vol. 1025, pp. 100–111.
[3] R. Cowell, A. Dawid, S. Lauritzen, and D. Spiegelhalter, Probabilistic Networks and Expert Systems. NewYork, NY: Springer-Verlag, 1999.

[4] G. Shafer and P. Shenoy, “Probability propagation,” Ann. Math. Artificial Intell., vol. 2, pp. 327–352, 1990.
[5] S. Aji and R. McEliece, “The generalized distributive law,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 325–343, Mar. 2000.
[6] L. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[7] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[8] F. Baccelli, G. Cohen, G. Olsder, and J. Quadrat, Synchronization and Linearity. New York: Wiley, 1992.
[9] T. Cormen, C. Leiserson, R. Rivest, and C. Stein, Introduction to Algorithms. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2001.
[10] P. Pakzad and V. Anantharam. (2002) Conditional Independence for Signed Measures. [Online]. Available: http://inst.eecs.berkeley.edu/ payamp/signedci.pdf
[11] N. Zhang and D. Poole, “Exploiting causal independence in bayesian network inference,” J. Artificial Intell. Res., vol. 5, pp. 301–328, 1996.
[12] J. Walrand and P. Varaiya, High-Performance Communication Networks. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1996.
[13] R. McEliece, “On the bcjr trellis for linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 1072–1092, July 1996.
[14] J. Cohen and U. Rothblum, “Nonnegative ranks, decompositions, and factorization of nonnegative matrices,” Linear Algebra Appl., vol. 190, pp. 149–168, 1993.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:44:18 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

