IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 5, MAY 2004

845

On the Suboptimality of Iterative Decoding for Turbo-Like and LDPC Codes With Cycles in Their Graph Representation
Motohiko Isaka, Member, IEEE, Marc P. C. Fossorier, Senior Member, IEEE, and Hideki Imai, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we focus on the suboptimality of iterative decoding on graphs with cycles, through examining the use of a reliability-based decoding algorithm for some concatenated codes with an interleaver, known as turbo-like codes. The a posteriori probabilities delivered by the iterative decoding are regarded as reliability information, and an efficient algorithm for the overall linear block code is applied at certain iterations. Simulation results show that the suboptimality of iterative decoding due to cycles can be at least partially compensated by this approach. Some insights about the potential additional coding gains achievable are investigated based on the characteristics of the constituent decoders. These characteristics are related to the nature of suboptimality in the overall iterative decoding. The effects of some code parameters and channel conditions on the behavior of iterative decoding are also studied for a better understanding of its suboptimality.
Index Terms—Iterative decoding, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, reliability-based decoding, turbo-like codes.

I. INTRODUCTION

F ROM information theory, it has been long known that almost all randomly constructed long codes are “good” in

terms of their error rate. However, while many efficient max-

imum-likelihood decoding (MLD) and near-optimal decoding

algorithms for relatively short linear

block codes have

been developed in the literature, such algorithms are, in gen-

eral, infeasible for long codes, since their decoding complexity

increases exponentially with

.

Recent results in capacity-approaching codes have their ori-

gins in low-complexity iterative probabilistic decoding. Both

the algorithm given by Gallager for low-density parity-check

(LDPC) codes, now also referred to as belief-propagation (BP)

decoding [1]–[3], and the iterative decoding for turbo codes [4],

[5] achieve impressive error performance when the code length

becomes very large. However, for moderate-length codes, the

Paper approved by H. El Gamal, the Editor for Space–Time Coding and Spread Spectrum of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received January 15, 2002; revised April 15, 2003. This work was supported in part by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-00-98029. This paper was presented in part at the IEEE International Conference on Communications, New York, NY, April 2002, and in part at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June 2002.
M. Isaka is with the Department of Informatics, Kwansei Gakuin University, Sanda 6691337, Japan (e-mail: isakam@ksc.kwansei.ac.jp).
M. P. C. Fossorier is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: marc@aravis.eng.hawaii.edu).
H. Imai is with the Institute of Industrial Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8505, Japan (e-mail: imai@iis.u-tokyo.ac.jp).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.826236

inevitable presence of short-length cycles in the graph representation of these codes [6], [7] degrades the iterative decoding error performance. Thus, for these codes, neither the theoretical limits of iterative decoding, assuming infinite codeword length, nor the MLD performance can be reached with iterative decoding methods which ignore the presence of cycles.
In this paper, we focus on the suboptimality of iterative decoding on graphs with cycles, and provide some insights about its behavior. First, we propose to apply the soft-decision reliability-based decoding algorithm of [8] in conjunction with iterative decoding to turbo-like codes which are inherently linear block codes, in order to overcome the suboptimality caused by cycles. This methodology uses the inexact a posteriori probability (APP) derived at each iteration as reliability information. This paper is motivated by the improvements achieved by this decoding approach for LDPC codes [9]. Importantly, the unification of this approach to turbo-like codes of moderate lengths allows one to further distinguish between good codes for iterative decoding and good codes for MLD. We also introduce alternative strategies which allow the use of more powerful reliability-based decoding algorithms and result in improved performance with reasonable decoding complexity. For turbo-like codes, improvements in word-error rate (WER) have been observed for all signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) values, but the additional coding gain provided by the decoding approach discussed strongly depends on the characteristics of the constituent soft-input/soft-output (SISO) decoders defined by the associated code structure. This fact is due to the reliability-based nature of the decoding algorithm considered, and the extent of performance improvement reflects the suboptimality of iterative decoding arising from cycles. We study the behavior of iterative decoding with respect to the choice of constituent codes by comparing various codes, including LDPC codes. It is also shown how code length, code rate, and channel conditions affect the error performance, and accordingly, the suboptimality of iterative decoding.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we briefly review some turbo-like codes and iterative decoding algorithms. Iterative reliability-based (IRB) decoding of turbo-like codes and its modifications are detailed in Section III. In Section IV, simulation results for some turbo-like codes illustrate the effectiveness of this decoding approach, and considerations on the suboptimality nature of iterative decoding are provided, together with LDPC codes. Section V finally concludes this paper.

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

846

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 5, MAY 2004

Fig. 1. Turbo encoder.

II. TURBO-LIKE CODES AND ITERATIVE DECODING

A. Turbo-Like Codes

The first and most representative codes in the family of

concatenated codes discussed in the paper are the turbo codes

or parallel concatenated convolutional codes (PCCC) [4], [5],

in which recursive systematic convolutional (RSC) encoders

are concatenated in parallel, as depicted in Fig. 1. Assuming

rate-1/2 constituent codes, the information bit vector of length

denoted by

is encoded by

one of the encoders, and the permuted version of is encoded

by the other encoder. While the overall rate of this turbo code

is

, the parity bits can be punctured to

increase the rate. Thus, if the overall codeword is defined as

,

for

,

and corresponds to the parity bits, for

.

Similarly constructed codes, either already known or found

after [4] and [5], are commonly called turbo-like codes. Among

them, we examine in later sections serially concatenated con-

volutional code (SCCC) with a RSC encoder as outer code and

a rate-1 accumulator as inner code [10], with an interleaver in

between. Particular focus is given to the serially concatenated

code with the four-state outer encoder depicted in Fig. 2(a).

B. Iterative (Turbo) Decoding

Since MLD of turbo-like codes is, in general, prohibi-

tively complex, the suboptimum iterative decoding [4], [5]

using symbol-by-symbol maximum a posteriori (MAP) [12]

decoders (or one of its suboptimal versions [13]) as SISO

decoders is usually assumed. We only summarize iterative

decoding for turbo codes next (see Fig. 3); the underlying

principle for decoding the serially concatenated codes of Fig. 2

is essentially the same [11].

Assuming binary phase-shift keying (BPSK) signaling

over an additive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel,

let the received vector be

with

, where is a Gaussian random vari-

able with zero mean and variance

. Following the

notations of [13], the channel value for symbol can

be expressed as

where

is

the SNR value, and the a priori information

indi-

cating the likelihood of the symbol value is defined as

. Based on

and ,

the SISO decoder computes for each information bit its APP,

or equivalently,

where

. The value

, called extrinsic in-

formation [4], [5], [13], is used as the a priori information in

the other decoder. This decoding procedure is iterated until

either a certain stopping criterion is satisfied or the number of

iteration reaches some predefined number. The final decision

about is made based on the sign of

if

, and

, otherwise. One iteration is usually

defined as the series of operations through decoder-1 and

decoder-2. The APPs for all the codeword bits can be simi-

larly defined as

,

.

The turbo decoding algorithm described above is essentially

a message-passing algorithm on the bipartite graph [6], [7] asso-

ciated with the code considered. When the code length is short,

the short cycles in the graph introduce correlations between the

variables and result in suboptimum decoding.

III. IRB DECODING OF TURBO-LIKE CODES

To address the suboptimality induced by the cycles of short

length in the graphical representation of the code, we propose to

use an efficient reliability-based decoding algorithm for linear

block codes in conjunction with iterative decoding.

The soft-decision decoding algorithm based on ordered sta-

tistics [8], abbreviated as OSD, consists of two main parts: 1)

construction of the most reliable information set [also referred to

as the most reliable basis (MRB)]; and 2) reprocessing of candi-

date codewords in the MRB. For an

binary linear block

code, the most reliable independent positions (MRIPs) de-

fine the MRB. The MRIPs are constructed in the following way.

Order the reliability values in a decreasing order, and permute

the columns of generator matrix according to that order; apply

Gaussian elimination on the new from left to right, and if de-

pendent columns are found during the process, position them

after the last independent column to obtain a matrix in sys-

tematic form [8]. Once the MRB has been identified, the order-

OSD algorithm is conducted as follows: 1) for

, make

all possible changes of out of the bits of the MRB in the

hard-decision decoding of the received noisy sequence; 2) for

each change, determine the corresponding codeword based on

, and compute its decoding metric; and 3) select the most

likely codewords among the

candidate codewords.

Each value of determines a reprocessing stage, called phase-

of order- reprocessing.

In the following, we first summarize the basic algorithm for

IRB decoding of turbo-like codes, and later propose two com-

putationally efficient options.

A. Tandem Decoding

In this paper, we execute OSD at certain iterations of itera-

tive decoding. The APPs of the codeword bits

delivered

by the iterative decoding at a given iteration are considered as

reliability values by OSD, and are used to construct the corre-

sponding MRB [9]. Phase-0 reprocessing delivers the codeword

defined by the hard decision associated with the APPs

in the MRB. Since phase- of order- reprocessing requires the

reprocessing of candidate codewords, and turbo-like codes

of hundreds of information bits are considered, we limit OSD to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISAKA et al.: ON THE SUBOPTIMALITY OF ITERATIVE DECODING FOR TURBO-LIKE AND LDPC CODES

847

Fig. 2. Serial concatenation of a four-state convolutional code and a rate-1 accumulator. (a) 7/1 outer encoder. (b) 7/5 outer encoder.

Fig. 3. Turbo decoder.

associated with encoder-2, and vice versa for the next half iteration. For the serially concatenated code of Fig. 2(a), the OSD phase is carried out based on the APPs obtained from the inner accumulator, at most at each iteration. The computational cost can also be reduced by skipping the OSD phase at some of the iterations with relatively small performance degradation, as discussed in [9].
The complexity of an OSD decoding for the overall code is much larger than that for one iteration of iterative decoding, and the reader is referred to [9] for further details. However, the twostage decoding approach proposed next significantly reduces the average complexity of IRB decoding.

B. Two-Stage Decoding

Fig. 4. Conventional iterative decoding and IRB decoding.

a few reprocessing orders, say one or two, to keep the overall de-

coding complexity manageable. After this decoding process is

completed with a predetermined number of iterations, the most

likely codeword recorded by the IRB decoding algorithm is de-

livered as the final solution. Indeed, the likelihood value for

each candidate codeword is computed from the original received

signal sequence (and not the APPs

) as for MLD. The

algorithm is illustrated in Fig. 4. Note that as opposed to iter-

ative decoding, which is inherently a symbol-wise processing,

this algorithm always delivers a codeword as its final estimate.

The WER performance is thus improved by the IRB decoding

approach, if OSD supplies the correct codeword among the can-

didate codewords when the turbo decoding algorithm fails to

converge.

A computationally more expensive option for turbo codes is

to conduct OSD decoding at every half iteration. Upon the use

of decoder-1, the APPs for the systematic bits and the parity bits

associated with encoder-1 have just been updated, and the APPs

derived from the other decoder at the previous half iteration are

used as reliability values in OSD for the rest of the parity bits

Since the IRB decoding approach described above is iterative

in nature, proper stopping criteria which recognize convergence

can reduce the average complexity significantly. A test called

for

is suggested in [9]: “If the most likely codeword

found by the IRB decoding algorithm at a given iteration is also

delivered by the OSD phase at previous iterations, then this

codeword is chosen as the final estimate.” Although this stop-

ping criterion for the IRB decoding can effectively reduce the

average cost [9], the decoding remains quite complex, since the

OSD phase is, in general, more computationally expensive than

one iteration of iterative decoding. This fact actually hindered

the use of order-2 reprocessing in [9].

Based on the fact that turbo decoding provides more cor-

rect codewords as the SNR value increases, we propose the fol-

lowing two-stage decoding strategy. First, conventional turbo

decoding is carried out up to a predetermined number of iter-

ations along with a certain stopping criterion . If this cri-

terion is satisfied, the decoding is halted and the result obtained

from the APP values is chosen as the final estimate. Otherwise,

the decoding is repeated with the IRB decoding approach using

the original received signal sequence as the initial value, pos-

sibly together with . Note that it is desirable in pursuing

the best performance to conduct the OSD phase whenever the

iterative decoding fails to converge to a valid codeword of the

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

848

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 5, MAY 2004

code considered. Obviously, the IRB decoding approach is used

less frequently than in Section III-A with this two-stage scheme,

and its frequency can be approximated by the WER when the

stopping criterion

is chosen appropriately. Consequently,

the computational complexity averaged over frames can be kept

only a little larger than that of conventional iterative decoding

at moderate and high SNR values.

IV. PERFORMANCE RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
In this section, some simulation results are presented to illustrate the performance of the IRB decoding approach.1 Based on the numerical results obtained, the nature of the suboptimality in conventional iterative decoding is then investigated for various codes and in different settings.

Next, we extend the hard-decision-aided (HDA) criterion in-

troduced in [14] and use it as

as follows: “The iterative

decoding is declared correct if the hard decisions from the APP

values remain unchanged for consecutive iterations and if it

corresponds to a valid codeword.” Both tests can be performed

with simple binary operations. We did not observe any notice-

able performance degradation for the conventional iterative de-

coding stage with , and applied this methodology in some

of the simulations presented in Section IV.

We finally mention that this two-stage decoding also particu-

larly fits the IRB decoding of many LDPC codes, in conjunction

with the syndrome test as stopping criterion [3].

C. Partial Reprocessing

While higher order reprocessing becomes computationally

feasible with the two-stage decoding proposed in Section III-B,

the cardinality of the list of candidate codewords to be generated

may become accordingly large. One efficient way to provide a

tradeoff between error performance and decoding complexity is

to restrict the reprocessing of the MRB only to its least reliable

positions. This approach is even more meaningful as the itera-

tion goes on, since in iterative decoding, the APPs in some parts

of a word may become rapidly more reliable than others, re-

sulting in many occurrences of linear dependencies in the most

reliable bits when constructing the MRB. Consequently, some

unreliable positions have to be included in the MRB, and only

these positions need to be reprocessed in that case.

For the notational simplicity, assume now that the symbols

in the MRB are ordered according to the associated reliability

values in nondecreasing order, and denote the positions in the

MRB to be flipped in the phase- of order- reprocessing by

with

.

We suggest conducting only partial reprocessing for the highest

phase of a given reprocessing order- , while full reprocessing is

assumed for the other phases, up to phase-

. The partial

phase- of order- reprocessing is defined by

,

in which

holds for every ,

. For example,

with

for

, one of the two positions flipped

is restricted to the 50 least reliable bits of the MRB, and the other

one is limited to the 100 least reliable bits of the MRB. Since all

the combinations of positions under the constraints are con-

sidered,

candidate

codewords are generated in this partial phase-2, which follows

one and

candidate generations for the phase-0 and

the full phase-1, respectively. Note that the full phase-2 corre-

sponds to

and generates candidates. As a

result, when is large, the partial phase- reprocessing reduces

the computational cost significantly, compared with the com-

plete phase- reprocessing.

A. Turbo Codes or PCCCs

The block length of the rate-1/2 turbo code examined in this

section has been fixed to

, for the purpose of com-

paring the results with that of the (3,6) regular LDPC code with

the same length obtained in [9]. This LDPC code has a Tanner

graph [6] with girth six, and the column and row weights of

their associated parity-check matrix are three and six, respec-

tively. Note that contrary to the convention, we truncated both

constituent encoders instead of terminating them with proper

tail sequences for a fair comparison in terms of code rate. The

lack of tail bits causes ambiguity for the initial values of all the

trellis states in the decoding backward recursion [12], but the

OSD phase in the IRB decoding is likely to compensate for this

loss without any bandwidth expansion.2

Throughout this paper, all the numerical results are shown for

WER, since the decoding algorithm considered is codeword ori-

ented. With respect to the WER, as observed in [15], RSC com-

ponent encoders with primitive feedback polynomial are de-

sired even in the waterfall region, in contrast to the bit-error rate

(BER). We set the target WER to and selected the 16-state

RSC code with a generator polynomial (1,23/35) in octal form

with proper puncturing. The interleaver in the encoder has been

carefully chosen in order to eliminate error events of low Ham-

ming weight and the resulting flattening of the error perfor-

mance curve. Despite the efforts in search of a good interleaver

for size

, it was hard to avoid such events above the

target WER for four- or eight-state constituent encoders and

16-state encoders with a nonprimitive feedback polynomial.

In Fig. 5, WER results over the AWGN channel are depicted

for turbo decoding and IRB decoding with the order-1 and

order-2 OSD phases conducted at every half iteration, with up to

ten or 20 iterations. We observe that the IRB decoding approach

achieves up to about 0.25 dB additional coding gain when the

number of iterations is ten. For reference, the sphere-packing

lower bound without input constraint [16], [17], for this code

length is around

dB at the WER , and the

performance limit for for a BPSK constellation would be even

closer to the results shown in Fig. 5. Note also that both turbo

decoding and IRB decoding with order-1 reprocessing still gain

1When the computationally efficient two-stage decoding scheme described in Section III-B is applied, the identical maximum number of iterations has been assumed for both stages. Note that an increase of iteration number for the first stage could be beneficial in some cases, since one iteration of iterative decoding is less complex than one OSD.
2We found that with termination, the performance of iterative decoding improves slightly, while that of IRB decoding does not. This fact supports the compensation of the ambiguity in the backward recursion by the IRB decoding. Also, the improvement of iterative decoding by termination is almost cancelled out by the corresponding rate loss, resulting in at most 0.05 dB effective improvement in the best simulated case.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISAKA et al.: ON THE SUBOPTIMALITY OF ITERATIVE DECODING FOR TURBO-LIKE AND LDPC CODES

849

Fig. 5. WERs for the rate-1/2 (504, 252) turbo code with 16-state constituent (23/35) encoders over the AWGN channel.

Fig. 6. Asymptotic behavior of PCCCs with 16-state constituent code at E =N = 1:0 dB, (3,6)-LDPC codes at E =N = 1:6 dB, and SCCCs in Fig. 2(a) at E =N = 1:25 dB, based on Gaussian density evolution.

when the number of iterations is increased from ten to 20, as

shown in Fig. 5. Around the WER

at

dB, error events of low Hamming weight are often found in

IRB decoding with order-1 reprocessing, which indicates the

decoding performance is approaching an error floor.

We observe that the improvements brought by IRB decoding

are less significant than that for the (504, 252) LDPC code re-

ported in [9] (see also Figs. 13 and 14, which are discussed

later). This fact can be explained as follows. Consider a frame

that could be corrected by the OSD phase of IRB decoding. In

this case, almost all the APP values

in the MRB whose

absolute values are relatively large offer correct hard decisions,

except in at most one or two positions, since we only assume

order-1 or order-2 reprocessing. For turbo codes with 16-state

23/35 constituent encoders, those APPs may result in excellent

new extrinsic information because of the strength of the con-

stituent codes. Consequently, many of the codewords corrected

by the OSD phase at a given iteration can also be corrected by

turbo decoding in the next or one of the next few subsequent it-

erations; therefore, for a sufficiently large number of iterations,

the improvement brought by the OSD phase is not very large.

On the other hand, this effect is weaker for (3,6)-LDPC codes, in

which the overall BP decoding consists of the repetition code of

rate-1/3 in the vertical processing, and the single-parity-check

(SPC) code of rate-5/6 in the horizontal processing.

This explanation can be confirmed by the Gaussian density

evolution analysis, assuming infinite codeword length [18],

[19], as depicted in Fig. 6 for the associated ensemble of turbo

and LDPC codes. The ensemble is defined by the constituent

codes for turbo-like codes and the degree distribution for

LDPC codes. The distribution of extrinsic information is ap-

proximately expressed by its SNR

, where the Gaussian

density is defined by its mean and variance under the

consistency condition [20]. For the PCCCs, the decoders are

labeled according to Fig. 3,3 while for the SCCCs,4 decoder-1

3With respect to Fig. 3, only L (u ) contributes to the input SNR for decoder-1, while both L (u ) and L 1 y contribute to the input SNR for decoder-2; reciprocally, only L (u^ ) is used to measure the output SNR for decoder-2, while both L (u^ ) and L 1 y are used to measure the output SNR for decoder-1 [19].
4The performance for the SCCCs is discussed in a later section.

and decoder-2 represent the inner and outer codes in Fig. 2(a),

respectively. The decoder-1 of the (3,6)-LDPC codes represents

the (3,1,3) repetition code, and the decoder-2 represents the

(6,5,2) SPC code. For decoder-1, the input SNR and output SNR

are represented in the horizontal and vertical axes, respectively,

and vice versa for decoder-2. Thus, ensuring a tunnel between

the two curves is the requirement for the iterative decoder to

converge [19]. The curves are depicted at

dB for

the PCCCs, at

dB for the LDPC codes, and at

dB for the SCCCs, each

value chosen

about 0.5-dB away from the associated iterative decoding

threshold (obtained by Gaussian density evolution). Focusing

on the comparison between the turbo and LDPC codes, we

first note that the curves for decoder-1 of both the turbo and

LDPC codes and decoder-2 of the turbo codes shift upward and

to the right, respectively, and become gradually steeper when

the value

increases, while the decoder-2 curve for the

LDPC codes does not move, since it does not directly receive

the channel output. The iterative decoding threshold for the

turbo codes with the 16-state 23/35 constituent code is about

0.6-dB lower than that for the (3,6)-LDPC codes with infinite

codeword length, which could still reflect the superiority of

the turbo codes over the (3,6)-LDPC codes under iterative

decoding for medium code lengths. From Fig. 6, we observe

that decoder-2 of the turbo codes performs significantly better

than the corresponding SPC decoder of the (3,6)-LDPC codes,

while the (3,6)-LDPC codes slightly outperform the turbo codes

with respect to the slope of decoder-1. Due to the resulting

larger spacings (both horizontally and vertically) between the

two curves for the turbo codes considered, the turbo decoder is

likely to converge, once the a priori information is reasonably

refined. However, since the curves are much closer for the

(3,6)-LDPC codes together with the effect of cycles, the BP

decoding often fails, even when almost all the reliable positions

are correct. As a result, the IRB decoding approach is likely

to improve BP decoding of the (3,6)-LDPC codes more than

turbo decoding of the PCCCs.

Another related reason for the smaller performance improve-

ments achieved by the IRB decoding for the turbo codes of

this length, compared with those of their LDPC counterparts,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

850

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 5, MAY 2004

is the following. The effect of cycles in the associated bipartite

graph is weak in very early iterations, but becomes more sig-

nificant subsequently and introduces correlations between vari-

ables. Since the change in APPs per iteration is typically large

in the turbo codes after the second iteration at moderate

values, the decoding trajectory could jump toward an undesir-

able direction due to the correlation introduced by cycles when

the distribution of extrinsic information is not refined enough.

This can result in the divergence of the decoding, and sometimes

in the convergence to an “indecisive fixed point” which contains

numerous decoding errors [21]. As a result, there is little pos-

sibility of success for OSD, since many erroneous symbols are

likely to be contained in the MRB, especially in the latter case,

in which the associated hard-decision errors are almost fixed.

On the other hand, the movement of the iterative decoding tra-

jectory for the LDPC codes is much slower, so that the event

of few erroneous positions in the MRB can still occur at some

iteration.

While the above discussion is rather qualitative, it is also pos-

sible to give a more quantitative analysis by observing the tra-

jectory of the actual iterative decoding process. It was addressed

in [21] that the iterative decoding performance for finite-length

codes can be largely classified into three regions: two regions

where in all the frames, the iterative decoding reaches some “in-

decisive” and “unequivocal” fixed point at low and high

values, respectively, and a waterfall region in between. In the

waterfall region, after the bifurcation, an indecisive fixed point

becomes unstable and the phase trajectory of turbo decoding is

quite irregular. Note that most of the chances for the IRB de-

coding to improve the WER performance are in this waterfall

region, since the “unequivocal” fixed point usually corresponds

to correct decoding [21]. To investigate the trajectory of itera-

tive decoding, we conducted extensive simulations based on a

signal vector with incrementally increasing

values at the

decoder input, as shown for a certain turbo code in [21]. From

the numerical results, we observed that in many frames, there is

a wider range of

values for the (504, 252) LDPC code

than for the turbo code in which the trajectory approaches the

correct codeword at certain iteration(s) (often in the first sev-

eral iterations), but does not really reach the unequivocal fixed

point at the subsequent iterations. On the other hand, even when

the trajectory for the turbo code is far from the correct code-

word, by giving a slight bias to the received vector, turbo de-

coding could often find the unequivocal fixed point. The latter

fact is attributed to the strong attraction by the unequivocal fixed

point which makes the convergence region large. This observa-

tion matches our simulation results on the additional coding gain

obtained by the IRB decoding approach, and validates quantita-

tively the explanation by the asymptotic Gaussian density evo-

lution for finite code length.

It should be noted that, compared with the example turbo code

treated in this section, the potential improvement due to IRB

decoding would be larger for four- or eight-state encoders and

some 16-state nonprimitive feedback polynomial encoders, de-

spite the relatively high error floor. These facts were verified

with a few examples and are supported by [19, Figs. 12 and 13].

The dependency between the IRB decoding approach and the

number of encoder states is considered in more detail for SCCCs

in Section IV-B.

Fig. 7. WERs for the serially concatenated (504, 252) code over the AWGN channel. Outer code: rate-1/2 convolutional code with (7/1) four-state encoder. Inner code: rate-1 accumulator.

B. Serially Concatenated Codes

In Fig. 7, simulation results for the serially concatenated code

of length 504 represented in Fig. 2(a) over the AWGN channel

are shown in terms of WER. Results are shown for 20, 50, and

100 iterations of turbo decoding, and for 20 and 50 iterations

of IRB decoding with order-1 and order-2 reprocessings. Both

the inner and outer encoders have been again truncated, and we

checked that the degradation due to the lack of termination is

quite small. Even with the four-state outer code, no special ef-

forts except for the use of an -random interleaver [22] were re-

quired to avoid the occurrences of error events of low Hamming

weight, as opposed to the turbo code case. The performance im-

provements due to the IRB decoding approach for this serially

concatenated code are larger than that for the turbo code repre-

sented in Fig. 5. Also, for order-1 and order-2 reprocessings, a

slight gain is still possible by increasing the number of iterations

from 20 to 50.

To reduce the average complexity with respect to the number

of iterations, the WERs for decoding with the stopping criterion

for order-1 and order-2 reprocessings and with

for

order-2 reprocessing are shown in Fig. 8, all with 20 iterations.

The performance degradation is reasonably small for order-1

combined with . For order-2, the degradation is more no-

ticeable for , since the size of the candidate codeword list

is much larger than for order-1, and it is more likely that code-

words which do not have the highest likelihood are found by

the OSD phase twice, even when turbo decoding still has the

possibility to approach the correct codeword. The degradation

is actually compensated when using

for a maximum of

20 iterations. The number of iterations required before a frame

satisfies

averaged only over the frames using the OSD

phase (as explained in Section III-B) is somewhere between five

and six for moderate

values. As the channel becomes

noisier, this value is reduced, since the iterative decoding tends

to quickly converge to the indecisive fixed point [21]. Similarly,

when the value

becomes rather large, it again decreases,

as for many frames, the decoding trajectory approaches the cor-

rect codeword in early iterations even when it fails to converge

to the unequivocal fixed point. Finally, recall that the proportion

of frames which use the OSD phase can be well approximated

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISAKA et al.: ON THE SUBOPTIMALITY OF ITERATIVE DECODING FOR TURBO-LIKE AND LDPC CODES

851

Fig. 8. WERs for the serially concatenated (504, 252) code over the AWGN channel with 20 iterations and the OSD phase using the stopping criteria T (2) and T (3).

Fig. 10. WERs for the serially concatenated (504, 252) code over the AWGN channel. Outer code: rate-1/2 convolutional codes with (7/1) and (7/5) four-state encoders and (23/35) 16-state encoder. Inner code: rate-1 accumulator.

Fig. 9. WERs for the serially concatenated (504, 252) code over the AWGN channel. Order-1 reprocessing with F (50) and F (100), and order-2 reprocessing with F (50; 100) and F (100; 150).

by the WER of the iterative decoding. From these results, we can

conclude that using or is an efficient way to obtain

good tradeoff between the error performance and the average

decoding complexity.

In Fig. 9, the use of the partial reprocessing proposed in

Section III-C has been examined. It is observed that

causes negligible performance loss with respect to order-1

reprocessing, while

also significantly improves order-0

reprocessing. This result indicates that if the MRB contains

one hard-decision error, it is found in the relatively unreliable

positions of the MRB. Similar observations can be made for

order-2 reprocessing using

and

.

Since the full phase-2 generates 31 626 candidates, the use of

with 3725 candidates, or of

with

9950 candidates, provides a good tradeoff between error perfor-

mance and computational cost, and the complexity reduction is

more significant than for order-1 reprocessing. We finally note

that skipping the OSD phase at certain iterations as proposed in

[9] may also be valuable.

One may wonder why the outer convolutional encoder

without feedforward taps expressed by 7/1 in octal form has

Fig. 11. Asymptotic behavior of serially concatenated codes based on Gaussian density evolution. SNR behavior for the inner rate-1 accumulator is for E =N = 0.95, 1.5, and 2.0 dB. Two four-state outer encoders (7/1 and 7/5) and a 16-state outer encoder (23/35).
been selected in Fig. 2(a). Actually, it can be replaced by the “better” (with respect to the free distance) code formed by the 7/5 RSC encoder in Fig. 2(b) whose performance over the AWGN channel is compared in Fig. 10 with that of the code with the 7/1 RSC outer encoder and that of the code with the 16-state 23/35 RSC outer encoder, for turbo decoding and IRB decoding with order-1 reprocessing. We observe that the turbo decoding of the 7/1 SCCC performs slightly better than that of the 7/5 SCCC, and much better than that of the 23/35 SCCC in the range of WER values shown.5 Moreover, the performance improvement due to the IRB decoding approach is more significant for the 7/1 SCCC than for the other two codes. As a result, interestingly, the outer code in Fig. 2(a) is unexpectedly a better choice for the WER values considered.
To provide insight about this fact, a Gaussian density evolution analysis for the ensemble of all three codes has been again represented in Fig. 11. For the inner decoder, the input SNR and
5At lower WER values, we observed that turbo decoding of the 7/5 SCCC slightly outperforms that of the 7/1 SCCC.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

852

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 5, MAY 2004

output SNR are represented in the horizontal and vertical axes,

respectively, and vice versa for the outer decoder. In Fig. 11,

the behavior for the inner accumulator is depicted for

0.95, 1.5, and 2.0 dB. As seen in Fig. 11, due to the sharper

initial curvature of the SNR curve for the 7/5 SCCCs, its iter-

ative decoding threshold is worse than that of the 7/1 SCCCs

by about 0.15 dB. This could affect the turbo decoding per-

formance of the medium-length codes shown in Figs. 7 and

10 at relatively low

values. On the other hand, as the

extrinsic information provided to the outer decoder improves,

the 7/5 SCCCs tend to provide better output SNR, as shown in

Fig. 11. This is attributed to its larger free distance [19], since in

this case, all the systematic and parity bits receive the extrinsic

information from the inner accumulator. Thus, as we have al-

ready outlined, when comparing turbo codes with LDPC codes,

once good a priori information has been obtained such that al-

most all the symbols in the MRB are correct, it is more likely

that turbo decoding of the 7/5 SCCCs converges to the unequiv-

ocal fixed point and provides the correct codeword. The code-

words corrected by the OSD phase are thus likely to be corrected

by the turbo decoding in subsequent iterations. Furthermore, at

low-to-moderate

values, due to the narrower spacing ob-

served in Fig. 11, extrinsic information after the first iteration for

the 7/5 SCCCs is, in general, less sophisticated than that for the

7/1 SCCCs. As a result, before correlation values due to cycles

in the graph representation of the code are introduced, the itera-

tive decoding of the 7/1 SCCCs is likely to have approached the

MLD codeword more closely than that of the 7/5 SCCCs, which

favors the likelihood of success of the OSD when iterative de-

coding fails. Consequently, the additional gain provided by the

IRB decoding approach is smaller for the 7/5 SCCCs than for

the 7/1 SCCCs, due to both a smaller refinement of extrinsic in-

formation in early iterations and a larger amount of correlation

values introduced in later iterations. Note that this effect is mag-

nified when the outer encoder is replaced by the 16-state 23/35

RSC encoder, as observed in Figs. 10 and 11. These observa-

tions further emphasize that once the correlation values influ-

ence the iterative decoding, the smaller the ratio between output

and input extrinsic SNR values, the larger the potential improve-

ment to be provided by IRB decoding. They also stress the dis-

tinction to be made between “good codes for MLD” and “good

codes for iterative decoding.”

In Fig. 12, the serially concatenated code with a 7/1 outer

code has been examined over the full-interleaved flat Rayleigh

fading channel with coherent detection and perfect channel state

information. Compared with the AWGN channel case, the per-

formance improvement due to the use of OSD is more signif-

icant. This fact is explained in the same manner as previously.

Due to the less-reliable received values and the associated ex-

trinsic information distributions, turbo decoding can still fail,

even when the number of hard-decision errors in the MRB is

restricted to at most two, which is more likely to occur for the

Rayleigh fading channel than for the AWGN channel.

C. Comparisons
The WER curves over the AWGN channel for the (504, 252) turbo code with 23/35 constituent encoders, the serially concatenated code with a 7/1 outer encoder, and the (3,6)-LDPC code are depicted for both iterative decoding only (dashed curves)

Fig. 12. WERs for the serially concatenated (504, 252) code over the fully interleaved flat Rayleigh fading channel with coherent detection and perfect channel state information.
Fig. 13. Comparison of WERs for (504, 252) codes over the AWGN channel. PCCC, SCCC, and LDPC codes with order-1 reprocessing in all the IRB decoding approaches.
and the IRB decoding approach (plain curves) in Fig. 13 for order-1 reprocessing and in Fig. 14 for order-2 reprocessing. The number of iterations is 20 for turbo decoding of the PCCC, ten for IRB decoding of the PCCC, 50 for turbo decoding of the SCCC, 20 for IRB decoding of the SCCC, 200 for BP decoding of the LDPC code, and 50 for IRB decoding of the LDPC code. These numbers have been selected so that additional iterations provide little performance improvement. Note again that the Gaussian density evolution analysis in Fig. 6 adequately explains the tradeoff between the curve spacing at high extrinsic SNR region (which also affects the convergence speed of finitelength codes) and the additional coding gain brought by the IRB decoding approach for these three types of codes. Although the vertical spacing between the two curves for the SCCCs seems at least as narrow as that for the LDPC codes, the horizontal spacing for the SCCCs is much larger than that for the LDPC codes.6
6For reference, in Fig. 6, the mean value of L(u^ ) for codeword bits of the
LDPC codes is given by the sum of the input and output extrinsic SNR values for decoder-1, and that for the outer codeword bits of the SCCCs is given similarly with respect to decoder-2, which represents the outer decoder.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ISAKA et al.: ON THE SUBOPTIMALITY OF ITERATIVE DECODING FOR TURBO-LIKE AND LDPC CODES

853

Fig. 14. Comparison of WERs for (504, 252) codes over the AWGN channel. PCCC, SCCC, and LDPC codes with order-2 reprocessing in all the IRB decoding approaches.

Fig. 16. Comparison of WERs for rate-2/3 (504, 336) codes over the AWGN channel. PCCC and SCCC with order-1 reprocessing in all the IRB decoding approaches.

in Fig. 16 for a PCCC and a SCCC with and without the order-1 OSD phase at each iteration. For the PCCC, the parity bits of each 23/35 constituent code were punctured to make it a rate-4/5 code. For the SCCC, half of the parity bits in the 7/1 outer code were punctured, and it was concatenated with the rate-1 accumulator. The potential additional gain due to IRB decoding is larger when the code rate is higher. This fact is again attributed to the behavior of the refined extrinsic information given to the constituent decoders, which is poorer in that case than that of lower-rate codes due to puncturing. However, we observe a higher error floor due to error events of low Hamming weight for this code length, especially for the PCCC.7 Accordingly, the gain becomes small as the value
becomes high.

Fig. 15. Comparison of WERs for (1 008 504) codes over the AWGN channel. PCCC, SCCC, and LDPC codes with order-1 reprocessing in all the IRB decoding approaches.
For all cases, BER performances show similar tendencies to the WER ones (although the numerical results have not been in-cluded). However, the extent of IRB decoding improvement over most of conventional iterative decoding is smaller. This is because the final estimate obtained from re-encoding in OSD contains more errors than the bit-by-bit hard decision of APPs when OSD fails to find the correct codeword.
In Fig. 15, similar results are shown for (1 008 504) codes in order to examine the effect of the code length, assuming order-1 reprocessing at each iteration for IRB decoding. We observe that the additional coding gain due to the IRB decoding approach is negligible for the PCCC, small for the SCCC, and reasonably good for the LDPC code. In each case, the gain is much smaller than that of the corresponding (504, 252) counterpart, since the suboptimality of the iterative decoding stemming from the short cycles in the bipartite graph becomes alleviated as the code length grows, so that less is left to be improved by IRB decoding. Another reason is that more than one erroneous symbol are more likely to be contained in the MRB (whose cardinality is twice as large) when iterative decoding fails.
To examine the effect of the code rate, WER results for rate-2/3 (504, 336) codes over the AWGN channel are shown

V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we examined the use of efficient reliability-based decoding in conjunction with iterative decoding of turbo-like codes. Simulation results indicate that for moderate code lengths, the error probability can be improved with the decoding approach discussed. In investigating the potential improvement due to the IRB decoding approach, we shed some light on the suboptimality of iterative decoding for different types of codes. It was shown that the characteristics of the constituent decoders strongly affect the behavior of the iterative decoding not only asymptotically, as discussed in [18]–[20], and [23], but also for finite code lengths. In general, the use of a constituent code with large free distance or large minimum distance can result in a poorer iterative decoding performance and a smaller additional gain provided by the reliability-based decoding. The effects of code length, code rate, and channel condition have also been studied, and the considerations on the suboptimality of the iterative decoding could be extended to each case.
7This performance is a consequence of the attempt for finding a good interleaver. With a longer code length, the error floor can be lowered due to the increased flexibility of interleaver design, despite the lack of WER interleaver gain for the PCCC ensemble [10].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

854

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 5, MAY 2004

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The parity-check matrices of the LDPC codes used in this
paper have been provided by D. J. C. MacKay through his web
page, which is gratefully acknowledged. The authors also wish
to thank R. M. Tanner for many inspiring discussions, as well
as the anonymous reviewers whose constructive comments were
very helpful in improving the presentation of this paper.
REFERENCES
[1] R. G. Gallager, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1963.
[2] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near-Shannon-limit performance of low-density parity-check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, no. 18, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[3] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[4] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near-Shannon-limit error-correcting coding: Turbo codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Communications, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[5] C. Berrou and A. Glavieux, “Near-optimum error-correction coding and decoding: Turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 44, pp. 1261–1271, Oct. 1996.
[6] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low-complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[7] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, no. 5, pp. 513–525, Sept.–Oct. 1995.
[8] M. P. C. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft-decision decoding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 41, pp. 1379–1396, Sept. 1995.
[9] M. P. C. Fossorier, “Iterative reliability-based decoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 908–917, May 2001.
[10] D. Divsalar, H. Jin, and R. J. McEliece, “Coding theorems for “turbolike” codes,” in Proc. 36th Allerton Conf., Monticello, IL, Sept. 1998, pp. 201–210.
[11] S. Benedetto, D. Divsalar, G. Montorsi, and F. Pollara, “Serial concatenation of interleaved codes: Performance analysis, design, and iterative decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 909–926, May 1998.
[12] L. R. Bahl, J. Cocke, F. Jelinek, and J. Raviv, “Optimal decoding of linear codes for minimizing symbol-error rate,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 284–287, Mar. 1974.
[13] J. Hagenauer, E. Offer, and L. Papke, “Iterative decoding of binary block and convolutional codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 429–445, Mar. 1996.
[14] R. Y. Shao, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Two simple stopping criteria for turbo decoding,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 1117–1120, Aug. 1999.
[15] O. Y. Takeshita, O. M. Collins, P. C. Massey, and D. J. Costello, Jr, “On the frame-error rate of concatenated turbo codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 602–608, Apr. 2001.
[16] C. E. Shannon, “Probability of error for optimal codes in a Gaussian channel,” Bell Syst. Tech. J., vol. 38, pp. 611–656, 1959.
[17] S. Dolinar, D. Divsalar, and F. Pollara, “Code performance as a function of block size,” Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, TMO Progress Rep. 42-133, 1998.
[18] H. El Gamal and A. R. Hammons, Jr, “Analyzing the turbo decoder using the Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 671–686, Feb. 2001.
[19] D. Divsalar, S. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Iterative turbo decoder analysis based on density evolution,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 19, pp. 891–907, May 2001.
[20] T. J. Richardson and R. L. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density paritycheck codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[21] D. Agrawal and A. Vardy, “The turbo decoding algorithm and its phase trajectories,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 699–722, Feb. 2001.
[22] D. Divsalar and F. Pollara, “Multiple turbo codes for deep-space communications,” Jet Propulsion Lab., Pasadena, CA, TDA Progress Rep. 42-121, 1995.

[23] S. ten Brink, “Convergence behavior of iteratively decoded parallel concatenated codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 49, pp. 1727–1737, Oct. 2001.
Motohiko Isaka (S’94–A’99–M’03) received the B.E., M.E., and Ph.D. degrees, all in electrical engineering, from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1994, 1996, and 1999, respectively.
Until March 2002, he was a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Institute of Industrial Science, the University of Tokyo. He is currently with the Department of Informatics, Kwansei Gakuin University, Sanda, Japan. His research interests are in coding and modulation techniques, and cryptography.
Marc P. C. Fossorier (S’90–M’95–SM’00) was born in Annemasse, France, on March 8, 1964. He received the B.E. degree from the National Institute of Applied Sciences (INSA), Lyon, France, in 1987, and the M.S. and Ph.D. degrees from the University of Hawaii at Manoa, Honolulu, in 1991 and 1994, all in electrical engineering.
In 1996, he joined the Faculty of the University of Hawaii, Honolulu, as an Assistant Professor of Electrical Engineering. He was promoted to Associate Professor in 1999. In 2002, he was a Visiting Professor at Ecole Nationale des Telecommunications (ENST), Paris, France, and is currently visiting the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. His research interests include decoding techniques for linear codes, communication algorithms, and statistics. He coauthored (with S. Lin, T. Kasami, and T. Fujiwara) the book, Trellises and Trellis-Based Decoding Algorithms (New York: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1998). Dr. Fossorier is a recipient of a 1998 NSF Career Development Award. He has served as Editor for the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS since 1996, as Associate Editor for the IEEE COMMUNICATIONS LETTERS since 1999, and is currently the Treasurer of the IEEE Information Theory Society. Since 2002, he has also been a member of the Board of Governors of the IEEE Information Theory Society. He was Program Co-Chairman for the 2000 International Symposium on Information Theory and Its Applications (ISITA) and Editor for the Proceedings of the 2003 and 1999 symposia on Applied Algebra, Algebraic Algorithms and Error Correcting Codes (AAECC). He is a member of the IEEE Information Theory and IEEE Communications Societies.
Hideki Imai (M’74–SM’88–F’92) was born in Shimane, Japan, on May 31, 1943. He received the B.E., M.E., and Ph.D. degrees in electrical engineering from the University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan, in 1966, 1968, and 1971, respectively.
From 1971 to 1992, he was on the faculty of Yokohama National University, Yokohama, Japan. In 1992, he joined the faculty of the University of Tokyo, where he is currently a Full Professor in the Institute of Industrial Science. His current research interests include information theory, coding theory, cryptography, and spread-spectrum systems and their applications. Dr. Imai received Best Book Awards from IEICE in 1976 and 1991, Best Paper Awards in 1992 and 2003, the Yonezawa Memorial Paper Award in 1992, the Achievement Award in 1995, and the Inose Award in 2003. In 1998, he was awarded the Golden Jubilee Paper Award by the IEEE Information Theory Society, and official Commendations from the Minster of Public Management, Home Affairs, Posts, and Telecommunications in June 2002, and from the Minister of Economy, Trade, and Industry in October 2002. In 1999, he was awarded an Honorary Doctor Degree from Soonchunhyang University, Korea, and Docteur Honoris Causa by the University of Toulon Var, France, in 2002. He was elected an IEICE Fellow in 2001. He has chaired several committees of scientific societies and chaired many international conferences, such as IEEE-ITW, IEEE-ISIT, AAECC, PKC, FSE, and WPMC. He was on the board of IEICE (1992–1994, 1996–1999), the IEEE Information Theory Society (1993–1998), the Japan Society of Security Management (1988–present), and the Society of Information Theory and Its Applications (SITA, 1981–1997). He served as the president of SITA (1997) and the IEICE Engineering Sciences Society (1998–1999), vice-president of the IEEE Information Theory Society (2002–present), and as the chairman of CRYPTREC (Cryptography Techniques Research and Evaluation Committee of Japan) (2000–present).

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:32:03 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

