1248

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

High-Rate Girth-Eight Low-Density Parity-Check Codes on Rectangular Integer Lattices
Bane Vasic, Senior Member, IEEE, Karunakar Pedagani, and Milos Ivkovic

Abstract—This letter introduces a combinatorial construction of girth-eight high-rate low-density parity-check codes based on integer lattices. The parity-check matrix of a code is defined as a point-line incidence matrix of a 1-configuration based on a rectangular integer lattice, and the girth-eight property is achieved by a judicious selection of sets of parallel lines included in a configuration. A class of codes with a wide range of lengths and column weights is obtained. The resulting matrix of parity checks is an array of circulant matrices.
Index Terms—Combinatorial designs, error-control coding, finite geometries, graph girth, iterative decoding, low-density paritycheck (LDPC) codes.
I. INTRODUCTION
C ODES on graphs, especially low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes, is a research area of great current interest. The theory of codes on graphs has not only yielded capacity-approaching codes, it has also opened new research avenues for investigating alternative optimal and suboptimal decoding schemes based on belief propagation. Applied on a Tanner graph of a linear block code [6], [12], the belief-propagation algorithm gives an exact a posteriori probability mass function for a given probability density function of the observed variables, but only if the factor graph is cycle free. Extensive simulation results of MacKay and Neal [14] showed that the message-passing algorithm also performs well in graphs with cycles. However, the presence of short cycles hurts the performance.
In this letter, we address the problem of finding codes with good cycle properties. We are interested in “deterministic” sparse parity-check matrices, as opposed to the common “random code” assumption that has been widely used in recent research [13]. One of the first attempts to design a deterministic LDPC for iterative decoding is due to Kou et al. [3], and it is based on projective and Euclidean geometries. The codes given in [3] are one-step majority logic decodable, and therefore, the girth of the associated Tanner graph [6] is six. Lucas et al. showed that such LDPC codes can be efficiently decoded by belief-propagation algorithms [15]. A first attempt to construct
Paper approved by M. Fossorier, the Editor for Coding and Communication Theory of the IEEE Communications Society. Manuscript received March 11, 2002; revised October 4, 2002 and December 2, 2003. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR 0208597.
B. Vasic and K. Pedagani are with the Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA (e-mail: vasic@ece.arizona.edu; karun@ece.arizona.edu).
M. Ivkovic was with the Instituto de Matemática, Estatística e Computação Científica, 13083-970 Campinas-SP, Brazil. He is now with the Department of Mathematics, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721 USA.
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TCOMM.2004.833037

deterministic codes with large girth is due to Margulis [18],

who introduced an explicit construction of LDPC codes using

-regular graphs obtained as Caley graphs of

, a spe-

cial linear group, and

, a projective general linear

group, of dimension two over , the finite field with elements

( power of a prime). By careful selection of transformation

matrices, the author was able to achieve good girth properties.

This idea was further developed by Rosenthal and Vontobel

[18]. They were able to construct a short code (of length less

than 5000) with girth 12. Recently, the explicit construction

of families of LDPC with girth at least six has been discussed

in Kim et al. [17]. The authors extended Lazebnik and Usti-

menko’s [19] method for explicit construction of graphs with

arbitrary large girth, based on regular graphs.

The code construction presented in this letter is based on bal-

anced incomplete block designs (BIBD) [1]. More specifically,

the codes are based on subdesigns of a 2-

design, where

is the number of parity bits, and is the column weight of

a parity-check matrix. The parity-check matrix is a point-block

incidence matrix of the design ( ), where is a set of points

and is a set of blocks of size . As we have shown in [7], the

removal of certain blocks from a design can result in eliminating

Pasch and generalized Pasch configurations and, consequently,

in increasing minimum distance of a code. In this letter, we ex-

ploit the idea that a judicious selection of disregarded blocks

can also increase the girth of a design. It is a desirable property

of a bipartite graph to have a large girth, because in the mes-

sage-passing decoding algorithm [10] on such graphs, it takes

more iterations until extrinsic information originating from dif-

ferent nodes in the bipartite graph becomes correlated. The con-

struction of designs with high girths appears to be a very difficult

problem, in general [8]. However, the designs based on rectan-

gular integer lattices introduced in [7] allow for a simple algo-

rithm for finding a girth-eight subdesign. In [23], a condition for

absence of cycles of lengths smaller than a given constant was

given for array codes, but no explicit construction is given for

girths larger than six. In this letter, we give an explicit construc-

tion for

, using arithmetically constrained sequences.

In this letter, we are interested in very-high-rate codes (

), for which the girth-eight property is much “rarer” than in

low-rate codes. We present a construction based on sets of par-

allel lines on a rectangular integer lattice, which is conceptually

simple and gives a large family of codes. The number of parity

bits is equal to

,

, and the blocks are defined as

lines of different slopes connecting points of an

integer

lattice.

Section II introduces some definitions necessary for dealing

with BIBDs. Section III introduces a construction of LDPC

codes using rectangular integer lattices, and construction of

0090-6778/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

1249

girth-eight codes. It also gives the bit-error rate (BER) performance of these codes in additive white Gaussian (AWGN) channels, obtained by computer simulations.

II. BIBDS AND LDPC CODES

In this section, we introduce some definitions. A BIBD is a

pair ( ) where is a -element set and is a collection of

-subsets of , called blocks, such that each element of is

contained in exactly blocks, and any 2-subset of is contained

in exactly blocks. The parameter is called the replication

number. The notation 2-

design is used for a BIBD on

points, block size , and index . We consider a slightly dif-

ferent class of combinatorial designs called -configurations. A

-configuration is an incidence structure of points and blocks

such that each block contains points, each point is incident

with blocks, and two different points are contained in at most

blocks. A -configuration can be obtained from a 2-

design by removing some of its blocks. Two blocks in a design

are referred to as parallel if they are disjoint. A design is called

resolvable if there exists a partition of its block set into par-

allel classes, each of which partitions the set . As we will show,

the lines on a lattice introduced in [7] and analyzed in [19] and

[20] form a resolvable 1-configuration. We define the point-block incidence matrix of ( ) as a

Fig. 1. Example of the rectangular grid for m = 5 and k = 3.

matrix

, in which

if the th element of

occurs in the th block of , and

, otherwise. It is easy

). Let

be a one-to-one mapping of the lattice

to see that is a matrix of parity checks of a Gallager code [2]. to the point set . An example of such mapping is a simple

The row weight is , column weight is , and the code rate is . We are interested in designs in which
no more than one block contains the same pair of points. Such codes are one-step majority logic decodable, or equivalently, there are no cycles of length four in a bipartite graph [6]. The main idea of this letter is that a 1-configuration with large girth can be constructed by removing whole classes of parallel blocks, rather than removing individual blocks.

linear mapping

. The numbers

are referred to as lattice-point labels.

A line with slope ,

, starting at the point

(0, ), is the set of points

, where

. We are concerned with

a 1-configuration which is an incidence structure comprised of

points on the integer lattice and all lines of slopes ,

. As mentioned earlier, two lines are referred to as parallel

if they do not have any common points. There are, therefore,

III. LATTICE CONSTRUCTION OF 2GIRTH-EIGHT 1-CONFIGURATIONS

In this section, we address the problem of construction of

resolvable l-configurations with a wide range of block sizes.

2-

designs naturally come as girth-six designs, because

no pair of points occurs in more than one block. In other words,

if

(i.e., if the design has the maximum pos-

sible number of blocks), then the girth is

. As we

will show, for every design ( ), there exists a 1-configuration

( ),

, such that

. In a 1-configuration,

there exist a pair of points that are disconnected, i.e., there is no

line incident with both of them. This is why the girth of a 1-con-

figuration can be larger than six. Our construction is based on

classes of parallel lines in our 1-configuration corresponding

to different slopes. Each class of parallel lines comprises

lines.

Example 3.1: Fig. 1 depicts the rectangular integer lattice

with

and

. It also shows two classes of parallel

lines (with slopes

and

).

In our example, the lines of slope one are {1,7,13}, {2,8,14},

{3,9,15}, etc. We assume that the lattice labels are periodic in

the vertical ( ) dimension, and therefore, the line comprising

points {4,10,11} also has the slope one. The examples of

lines with slope two are {1,8,15} and {2,9,11}. The slopes

can be defined analogously. Notice that no

vertical line belongs to the design. Each column in Table I gives

a set of parallel lines with slope . A set of parallel lines defines

the integer lattice construction given in [7], and briefly summa- a resolvability class.

rized as follows.

Remark 3.1: Notice that in general, there are parallel

We define a class of 1-configurations as sets of lines con- classes of blocks (lines), each corresponding to a different

necting the points of a rectangular integer lattice. Consider a slope.

rectangular integer lattice

Lemma 3.1: A set of all -element sets of obtained

, where is a prime. The construction can be by taking the labels of the points along the lines with slopes ,

readily generalized to the case when is a prime power (i.e.,

, is a 1-configuration.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1250

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

TABLE I RESOLVABILITY CLASSES OF LATTICE DESIGN IN FIG. 1

Proof: The design containing all -element sets of

points in obtained by taking labels of points along the lines

with slopes ,

, is a 1-configuration. It can be

readily verified by noticing that because is a prime, for each

lattice point

there cannot be more than one line with slope

that passes through .

Q.E.D.

Remark 3.2: The generalization to the case when is a

power of prime is straightforward.

Remark 3.3: The block size is , number of blocks is

and each point in the design occurs in exactly blocks. The

matrix of parity checks of a lattice code can be written in the

form

influences the code rate, i.e., the larger the slope-set cardinality, the higher the code rate.
The problem of finding a set of maximal cardinality for given integers and is generally difficult, i.e., the complexity of the algorithm for finding such a set of slopes is exponential in
. Instead of solving the hard problem of finding the maximal slope set, we give a polynomial algorithm that constructs a set of slopes , resulting in a girth-eight 1-configuration ( ). The algorithm is based on a select, check, and disregard procedure.

,

,

,

.

while

if

else
end end

The function

gives the girth of a graph for a

...

...

...

( ) design, and can be computed in time

time

(e.g., Dijkstra or Bellman–Ford algorithm; for more details, see

[16]).

Clearly, the algorithm is greedy in the sense that if a slope

wherein each submatrix is a circulant with column weight

equal to one. is a line-point incidence matrix of a 1-configu-

ration defined by the integer lattice defined above.

The position of the only nonzero position in the first column

of can be found by using

, the th element of the first

base block in the class of blocks corresponding to the th slope

(see [7]).

Remark 3.4: Notice a similarity of the structure of the above

parity-check matrix with that obtained in [17]. The codes de-

noted by

in [17] have a square matrix of parity checks,

while our codes have rectangular matrices of parity checks. This

is not surprising, since it was shown in [17] that

and

are equivalent to Euclidean geometry codes [3], while

a square lattice design (which includes the lines with infinity

slope) is equivalent to the Euclidean plane. Notice also the sim-

ilarity with a parity-check matrix of array codes [23].

Remark 3.5: The ensemble of integer-lattice codes defined

by matrices of parity checks obtained by random selection of

slopes and starting points has well-defined asymptotic distance

distribution. Litsyn and Shevelev [21] showed that such an en-

does not satisfy the girth-eight criterion, it checks for the imme-

diate next slope . Although this method does not result in a

maximal slope set, the simulation results of the different codes

obtained through this method have shown to yield good perfor-

mance (discussed later).

In [23], Fan gave a condition for the absence of cycles of an

arbitrary length in a Tanner graph of an array code, in terms of a

relation among powers of a permutation matrix used as blocks in

. Notice, however, that this condition still requires a search for

finding a desired set of powers, and is equivalent to a “triangle”

condition in this letter (see the Appendix).

Note that finding a set of slopes for

is trivial, because

is always a solution. However, for ,

we deduce a simple way of generating a slope set , such that

is a girth-eight design. The simplification

stems from the interesting relationship between the elements of

with the “arithmetic-constrained” sequences (see [22]).

Definition 3.1: Given a fixed positive integer , we define

the arithmetically constrained sequence as the sequence

of positive integers

by the conditions:

semble (they called it “Ensemble A”) has superior distance distribution, compared with other ensembles they considered in [21].

1)

;

2) having chosen

the least integer such that

(

), let

be

, and such that the

Denote by

a resolvability class corresponding to slope

, and by , a set of blocks of a subdesign composed of resolv-

sequence

contains no three terms

(not necessarily consecutive) in an arithmetic progression.

ability classes corresponding to the slopes from the set , i.e., Furthermore, we define the “earliest” sequence

. We are interested in the following problem.

such that

.

Find a maximum cardinality slope set , such that is a girth- It can be verified [23] that is an arithmetically constrained

eight design. We are concerned with finding a set of slopes of sequence with the property that the ternary expansion of

maximal cardinality, because the slope-set cardinality directly

has 0 or 1 [22, Th. 2] (“Earliest” corresponds to

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

1251

Fig. 2. Performance comparison of LDPC codes with maximal set slopes and

the linear time method.

Fig. 3. Performance of girth-eight codes in an AWGN channel.

“greedy” when it comes to choosing the terms, for example: for

the set {1, 2}, since 3 cannot be considered in the sequence, the

sequence considers the first possible number, i.e., 4).

Theorem 3.1: For arbitrary and

,

results in a girth-eight 1-configuration ( ),

where is the earliest sequence.

Proof: Given in the Appendix.

Theorem 3.1 is consequence of the fact that the sequence of

the set of slopes obtained from the algorithm is greedy, and so

is the earliest sequence. As we will show in the next section,

the codes obtained by the proposed slope-selection algorithm

or the above straightforward implication ( ), have perfor-

mance slightly worse than codes with a slope set with maximum

cardinality.

The lower bound on a minimum distance of a code with girth

, column weight code is given by the formula shown at the

bottom of the page [2]. The above bound can be aptly applied

for the above girth-eight codes with

.

IV. SIMULATION RESULTS

The first experiment deals with the performance of codes

obtained from the slope set generated using the above select-

and-discard procedure. (Note that we do not consider high-rate

codes, for the reason that we need to find a maximal slope

set, which is tough to obtain for high-rate codes, as it involves

large block length). For the specific case of

and

,

either with the proposed algorithm (or using Theorem 3.1),

we obtain a slope set

, resulting

in a code rate of

(and

). On the other

hand, with an extensive computer search for a maximal slope

set, we obtained

,

resulting in a code rate of

(and

). As we

can see from Fig. 2, the code constructed from the maximal

set of slopes is 2.8 dB away from its respective Shannon

limit, while the code constructed using the polynomial time

algorithm is 3.4 dB away from its respective Shannon limit,

which is not bad for such short codes. In this particular case,

the code constructed from the set with a maximal cardinality

slope set has better performance. However, we do not have

enough evidence to state this as a general conclusion.

The next simulation result gives the BER perfor-

mance of girth-eight codes obtained from rectangular

integer lattices in an AWGN channel. Fig. 3 shows the

comparison of girth-eight codes with randomly con-

structed codes with column weights three and four, re-

spectively. Girth-eight LDPC code with column weight

three (

), code rate

, with set of slopes

and

girth-eight code with parameters

and

are used.

The result shows that girth-eight codes constructed using the

above algorithm perform quite close to random codes. Random

codes are generated such that cycles of length four are omitted.

V. CONCLUSION

We have given a simple construction of girth-eight codes

using integer lattices. The construction is based on a judicious

selection of sets of parallel lines in the lattice subgeometry. The

construction gives a set of codes with a wide range of lengths

and rates. The algorithm used to create girth-eight codes can

be readily generalized to higher girths. In

, we have an

explicit construction using arithmetic sequences.

if is odd if is even.
Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1252

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON COMMUNICATIONS, VOL. 52, NO. 8, AUGUST 2004

APPENDIX PROOF OF THEOREM 3.1

Proof

Fan [23] derived the condition for occurrence of a cycle in a

particular class of Tanner graphs whose parity-check matrix

has the structure defined in Remark 3.1. For the specific case of

eliminating cycles of length six with

, the condition in

[23] reduces to the following triangle condition:

(1)

where

and

with the submatrices

(the indexes are associated ) such that

and

(2)

For , since

, we have the obvious inequality

(3)

Thus, the set of slopes must be a subset of the earliest se-

quence defined above. An arithmetic progression, where, for

example,

, corresponds to the case

,

.

Now we shall prove that cannot contain values bigger that

.

Let be the potential slope considered to be included in .

and are two elements already in .

We can add to

a number made out of zeros

and ones as digits, in the way that sum is a number that is made

out of zeros and ones. We do that simply by taking a digit of

to be one when a corresponding digit of is two. Note that

. If does not have any two as a digit, we

take to be zero. This result can be seen as a negative of a

number that has only ones and zeros as digits, and is smaller then

. We constructed , thus eliminating . This construction

corresponds to

,

.

REFERENCES
[1] L. M. Batten, Combinatorics of Finite Geometries. London, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1997.
[2] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1963.
[3] Y. Kou, S. Lin, and M. P. C. Fossorier, “Low-density parity-check codes based on finite geometries: A rediscovery and new results,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2711–2736, Nov. 2001.

[4] D. MacKay and M. Davey. Evaluation of Gallager codes for short block length and high rate applications. [Online]. Available: http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~mackay/CodesRegular.html.
[5] J. Pearl, Probabilistic Reasoning in Intelligent Systems: Networks of Plausible Inference. San Mateo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann, 1988.
[6] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[7] B. Vasic, “Combinatorial constructions of structured low-density paritycheck codes for iterative decoding,” in Proc. IEEE Information Theory Workshop, 2001, p. 134.
[8] R. A. Beezer, “The girth of a design,” J. Combinatorial Math. Combinatorial Comput., to be published.
[9] F. R. Kschischang and B. J. Frey, “Iterative decoding of compound codes by probability propagation in graphical models,” IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun., vol. 16, pp. 219–230, Feb. 1998.
[10] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[11] G. D. Forney, Jr., “Codes on graphs: Normal realizations,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 520–548, Feb. 2001.
[12] N. Wiberg, H.-A. Loeliger, and R. Kötter, “Codes and iterative decoding on general graphs,” Eur. Trans. Telecommun., vol. 6, pp. 513–525, Sept./Oct. 1995.
[13] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[14] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Good codes based on very sparse matrices,” in Proc. IMA Conf. Cryptography, Coding, vol. 1025, Lecture Notes Comput. Sci., C. Boyd, Ed., 1995, pp. 110–111.
[15] R. Lucas, M. Fossorier, Y. Kou, and S. Lin, “Iterative decoding of onestep majority logic decodable codes based on belief propagation,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 48, pp. 931–937, June 2000.
[16] T. H. Cormen, C. E. Leiserdon, and R. L. Rivest, Introduction to Algorithms. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1989.
[17] J.-L. Kim, U. N. Peled, I. Perepelitsa, and V. Pless, “Explicit construction of families of LDPC codes with girth at least six,” in Proc. 40th Annu. Allerton Conf. Communications, Control, Computing, Oct. 2002, pp. 1024–1031.
[18] I. J. Rosenthal and P. O. Vontobel, “Construction of LDPC codes using Ramanujan graphs and ideas from Margulis,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, 2001, p. 4.
[19] F. Lazebnik and V. A. Ustimenko, “Explicit construction of graphs with arbitrary large girth and of large size,” Discr. Appl. Math., vol. 60, pp. 275–284, 1997.
[20] B. Vasic, “Combinatorial construction of low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June–July 2002, p. 312.
[21] S. Litsyn and V. Shevelev, “On ensembles of low-density parity-check codes: Asymptotic distance distributions,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 887–908, Apr. 2002.
[22] M. Odlyzko and R. P. Stanley, “Some curious sequences constructed with the greedy algorithm,”, Bell Labs Internal Memo., 1978.
[23] J. L. Fan, “Array codes as low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes and Related Topics , Brest, France, Sept. 2000, pp. 543–546.
[24] M. A. Margulis, “Explicit group-theoretic constructions for combinatorial designs with applications to expanders and concentrators,” Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 51–60, 1988.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:41:24 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

