New Research on Unequal Error Protection (UEP) Property of Irregular LDPC Codes
Xiumei Yang, Dongfeng Yuan ( Senior Member, IEEE ), Piming Ma, Mingyan Jiang
School of Information Science and Engineering, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 250100, P. R. China

Abstract—A new scheme is proposed about how to make use of the unequal error protection (UEP) property of irregular LDPC codes. By means of the construction of weight-increasing parity-check matrix and systematic encoding, the mapping between the important information data and the elite bits of an irregular low-density paritycheck (LDPC) code becomes traceable and tractable. Thus the inherent UEP property of irregular LDPC codes is not the theoretical interest any more. The proposed scheme makes it practical in implementing UEP in system aaplications. Taking an irregular LDPC code with code length 10000 and code rate one half as an example, simulation results are presented over AWGN channels. Meanwhile, the validity of the proposed scheme is verified from the perspective of simulation.
I. INTRODUCTION
LDPC codes have attracted more and more attention in coding theory since its rediscovery by Mackey and Neal in 1990’s [1]. Much investigation has been carried on in its capacity approaching, modifications of the encoding and decoding algorithms, as well as some applications in communications and magnetic storage systems [4][5] [6][7]. Gallger first introduced LDPC codes in his seminal work in 1962 [2] and then Luby developed Gallager’s regular LDPC codes to irregular LDPC codes based on irregular Tanner graph and proved that irregular LDPC codes could achieve better performance when degrees of the bit nodes and check nodes are carefully chosen [3]. After that, [4][8] provided some near optimal degree distributions for codes with rate one half and one third over AWGN and Rayleigh fading channels. Some carefully constructed irregular LDPC codes can beat the best codes, Turbo codes. Howerver, besides the excellent near Shannon limit performance, irregular LDPC codes also take on another important inherent property — unequal error protection due to the different degrees [4][9]. But up to now, little work has been done on the investigation of this property except some papers addressed it in a simple way without further explanation on how to realize this property and how to implement it into parctical systems. Since some bits of an irregular LDPC code are more likely to be correctly decoded, we are motivated to explore this property by the possible complexity decreasing when code itself can provide this UEP capability.
In this paper, irregular LDPC codes are first introduced in Section 2. Then following it in Section 3 is the detailed description of the proposed scheme about how to construct a weight-increasing parity-check matrix and realize the UEP

mapping. Through analysis on simulation results in Section 4, conclusions are given in the next section.
II. IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
As a class of linear block codes, LDPC codes are defined by a very sparse parity-check matrix. There is a unique Tanner graph corresponsive to this matrix. Bit node and check node are two classes of nodes in a Tanner graph and a bit node corresponds to one column of the parity-check matrix, while a check node represents one row of the matrix. There is an edge between the check node and the bit node only when the element in the corresponsive intersection of the matrix is nonzero.
An ensemble of irregular LDPC codes can also be described by two polynomials, referred as bit node polynomial (1) and
check node polynomial (2). Here, λi and ρi represent the
percentage of edges emitting from bit nodes and check nodes
with degree i . dv and dc are the maximum degrees for bit nodes and check nodes respectively. For bit nodes, ‘degree i ’
means the same as the column of the parity-check matrix has
i nonzero elements, i.e., column weight is i .

∑ λ ( x ) =

λ x d l

i −1

i=2 i

(1)

∑ ρ ( x ) =

ρ x d r

i −1

i=2 i

(2)

For codes with code length N and number of check bits M ,
the number of bit nodes and check nodes with degree i can be
calculated by (3) and (4) respectively.

∑ ∫ N i = N ⋅

λi / i = N ⋅ λi / i

λ d v
i=2 i

/i

1 λ ( x ) dx
0

∑ ∫ M j = M ⋅

ρj/ j =M ⋅ ρj/ j

ρ d c
i=2 j

/

j

1 ρ ( x )dx
0

2 ≤ i ≤ d v (3) 2 ≤ j ≤ d c (4)

A. Systematic encoding In systematic encoding, the parity-check matrix H ' can be
divided into two parts as
H'= [P | P']

0-7803-8145-9/04/$17.00 ©2004 IEEE.

361

where, P is an identity matrix. From matrix H ' , a generation matrix G can be easily got. Check bits of the code is calculated based on G . The systematic part of the code is just the copy of the information bits. B. UEP ability of irregular LDPC codes
As described in [4], the bit node with high degree can get more information from its connected check nodes in decoding so that it can be corrected more efficiently, which leads to the UEP property of irregular LDPC codes. Those most powerful protected bits with highest degree are named as ‘elite’ bits.
III. WEIGHT-INCREASING PARITY-CHECK MATRIX AND SYSTEMATIC IRREGULAR LDPC CODES
Although irregular LDPC codes show apparent UEP property to nodes with different degrees, it is still challengable about how to map the important information data to the elite bits, which possesses the highest degree. There are two restrictions to its application. On the one hand, it becomes difficult to locate which bit node occupies the higher degree because of the randomness in construction of the parity-check matrix. On the other hand, some row and column permutations will be done during the generation of matrix G . It also leads to the intractability of the ‘elite’ bits’ location. Based on some basic knowledge on linear algebra and matrix theory, we propose one scheme to meet this challenge, i.e., try to find a way of constructing the parity-check matrix with traceable location for elite bits and make it undergo as few as possible permutations in the matrix transformation. This scheme includes the following four steps: Step 1: Random construction of the parity-check matrix
This is the conventional way for a construction of an irregular LDPC code, which leads to a fact that adjacent encoded bits carry random degrees. Step 2: Exchange of column order to get an weightincreasing parity-check matrix H from left to right
As a result, the left part of the matrix is much sparser than its right part, which also means that the bits in the right part have the higher column weight or degree than left part. Step 3: Matrix transformation on H to get H ' and then producing generation matrix G
Due to the sparsity of the left part matrix of H , most column permutations are being done in the left part and the order of the most columns in the right part remains unchanged. Although this transformation cann’t ensure all columns with highest column weight unchanged, this effect can be ignored indeed because only a very small number of columns in the right part is varied. Matrix G can be got from H ' directly. Step 4: Systematic encoding
In this encoding procedure, G is only used to produce check bits and the systematic part of a code is completely the copy of the information bits. When information bits are sent to the channel following the check bits, they correspond to the bits with high degree in the right part of the parity-check matrix. And the UEP mapping can be realized in this step. We calcuate the number of the elite bits and then the last same number of the information bits can enjoy the additional protection during decoding.

At the receiver’s end, an iterative decoder processes the corrupted codes, implementing a sum-product algorithm. Since this work is mostly focus on how to encode information bits in order to realize the UEP property, we don’t make much contribution to the decoding algorithm. For more, please refer to [1].
IV. SIMULATION AND ANALYSIS
Based on the above encoding procedure, simulation results are presented for an irregular LDPC code with code length 10000 and code rate one half over AWGN channels. This code follows the degree distribution:

λ ( x ) = 0 .23882 x + 0 .29515 x 2 + 0 .03261 x 3 + 0 .43342 x 10
ρ ( x ) = 0 . 43011 x 6 + 0 . 56989 x 7

As the first polynomial indicates, all bits can be divided into four groups, which have degrees 11, 4, 3 and 2 respectively. Then according to (3), the number of bits for each group can be calculated and is shown in Table 1.

TABLE 1 NUMBER OF BITS WITH DIFFERENT DEGREES

Degree 11 4 3 2

Number of bits 1485 307 3708 4500

Following the process of the encoding , the first 5000 bits of the encoded sequence will be the check bits, and the following 5000 bits will be the information bits. Using the proposed mapping strategy, the last 1485 information bits can be allocated to map the elite bits whose degree is 11 and these bits will get the most powerful error protection.
Firstly, we compare bit error rate (BER) performances of the irregular LDPC code produced by conventional random parity-check matrix and another code encoded by its weightincreasing parity-check matrix. BER vs Eb/No (dB) curves are figured in Fig.1. From this figure, it can be noted that the weight-increasing parity-check matrix results in trivial performance difference with the original random matrix at low Eb/No, while at high Eb/No, it shows better error-correting ability.
Fig.2 depicts performance of the unequal error protection of the irregular LDPC code whose parity-check matrix is weight increasing and encoded by a systematic way. It is apparent that bits with degree 11 has the strongest error-correcting ability, which is identical to the principle of the UEP property of irregular LDPC codes. It also implies that if the maximum degree of bit nodes is increased to a larger number, its corresponsive elite bits might achieve more remarkable UEP performance. The bits with degree 3 and 4 have similar performance since their degrees are near to each other. Since the number of bits with degree 2 is 4500, most of them are check bits and have no contribution to the informantion bits, we didn’t give their curve in this figure.

0-7803-8145-9/04/$17.00 ©2004 IEEE.

362

Fig.1 Performance of irregular LDPC codes produced by two different parity-check matrice
Fig.2 Unequal error protection of irregular LDPC Codes
V. CONCLUSIONS In this work, we propose a scheme that can efficiently realize the mapping between important information data and the elite bits of an irregular LDPC codes by means of the construction of weight-increasing parity-check matrix and systematic encoding. This investigation solves the problem about how to use the UPE property of irregular LDPC codes so that it is of significance to the wide UEP application of these competitive codes. In addition with the excellent performance of irregular LDPC codes, the system which can efficiently utilize the UEP property will achieve both whole and local superior performance without any other additional UEP structure so that the complexity of the error-resilient system can be reduced, which is very important in the realtime system.

Further work is being done to investigate irregular LDPC codes with other superior degree distributions which can provide more flexibility of the UPE property. Its application to hierarchical image transmission is also under consideration now. Some further results will be presented soon.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
This work is under the support of the following foundations:
1) Nature Scientific Foundation of Shandong Province (No.Y2000G14).
2) Visiting Scholar Foundation from State Key Lab on MobileCommunications, Southeast Univ. of China (No. V-99004).
3) China Education Ministry Foundation for Excellent Teacherin Chinese University ([2000] 65).
4) Opening Foundation from State Key Lab on Mobile Communications, Southeast Univ. of China (No. A0102).
REFERENCES
[1] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon Limit Performance of Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, Electronics Letters, vol. 32,pp 1645—1646, Aug.1996
[2] R. G. Gallager, “Low-Density Parity-Check Codes” , IRE Transactions on Information Theory, pp 21---28 ,Jan. 1962
[3] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved Low-Density Parity-Check Codes Using Irregular Graphs and Belief Propagation”, in proceedings of the 1998 international symposium on information theory
[4] T. J. Richardson, M. A. Shokrollahi, and R. L. Urbanke, “Design of Capacity-Approaching Irregular Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, IEEE Trans. on Info. Theory, vol. IT-47, pp. 619 - 637, February 2001.
[5] J.Chen, A.Dholakia, E.Eleftheriou, M.Fossorie, X.-Y.Hu, “Near Optimal Reduced-Complexity Decoding Algorithms for LDPC Codes”, ISIT’2002, June 30- July 5, 2002, Lausanne, Switcherland
[6] Ben Lu, Xiaodong Wang and Krishna R. Narayanan, “LDPC-Based space-Time coded OFDM Systems over correlated fading channels: Performance analysis and receiver design”, IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 50, no. 1, Jan 2002, pp. 74 – 88
[7] Hongxin Song, Richard M. Todd and J. R. Cruz, “Applications of lowdensity parity-check codes to magnetic recording channels”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 19, no. 5, pp. 918 – 923, May 2001
[8] Jilei Hou, Paul H. Siegel and Laurence B. Milstein, “Performance Analysis and Code Optimization of Low Density Parity-Check Codes on Rayleigh Fading Channels”, IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications, vol. 19, no. 5, May 2001, pp. 924 – 934
[9] Matthew C.Davey, “Error-correction using Low-Density Parity-Check Codes”, Ph.D dissertation, Conbille and Caius College Cambridge, December, 1999, pp.35-36

0-7803-8145-9/04/$17.00 ©2004 IEEE.

363

