796

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 5, MAY 2004

Box and Match Techniques Applied to Soft-Decision Decoding
Antoine Valembois and Marc Fossorier, Senior Member, IEEE

Abstract—In this paper, we improve the ordered statistics decoding algorithm by using matching techniques. This allows us:
• to reduce the worst case complexity of decoding (the error performance being fixed) or to improve the error performance (for a same complexity);
• to reduce the ratio between average complexity and worst case complexity;
• to achieve practically optimal decoding of rate-1 2 codes of lengths up to 128 (rate-1 2 codes are a traditional benchmark, for coding rates different from 1 2, the decoding is
easier);
• to achieve near-optimal decoding of a rate-1 2 code of length 192, which could never be performed before.
Index Terms—Block codes, maximum-likelihood decoding (MLD), order statistics, soft-decision decoding.
I. INTRODUCTION
M AXIMUM-likelihood decoding (MLD) and near-MLD algorithms have a time complexity that is conjectured to be exponential in the code length (the coding rate being fixed). As a consequence, the known algorithms are rapidly overwhelmed. They are unable for instance to perform MLD of rate- codes of length greater than . However, if time complexity is critical, other resources, like the memory, are usually available and not optimally used.
The “box and match algorithm” (BMA) is a soft-decision decoder that makes use of “matching techniques” to reduce time complexity at the cost of space complexity. One can consider the use of hash functions as an example of matching techniques. Such techniques are thus highly widespread in artificial intelligence, database management, or cryptological applications.
It is for cryptanalytical purposes, besides, that the “box and match technique” (BMT), which we consider in this work, has been applied to error correcting codes [1], [2]. Some cryptosystems such as the McEliece or the Niederreiter cryptosystems are actually based on the conjectured exponential complexity of decoding general binary linear codes or of finding minimumweight codewords. The BMT has been used to reduce this complexity in an attempt to break these cryptosystems.
Manuscript received April 15, 2002; revised August 7, 2003. This work was supported by the National Science Foundation under Grant CCR-0098029. The material in this paper was presented at the IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, Lausanne, Switzerland, June/July 2002.
A. Valembois (deceased) was with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA.
M. Fossorier is with the Department of Electrical Engineering, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, HI 96822 USA (e-mail: marc@spectra.eng.hawaii.edu).
Communicated by K. Abdel-Ghaffar, Associate Editor for Coding Theory. Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TIT.2004.826644

Only its counterpart, however, the “sort and match technique”

(SMT) has been applied to soft-decision decoding [3]–[5]. It can

be proved that the two techniques are interchangeable, though.

Used within the same main algorithm, they provide the same

performance. However, the time complexity with BMT is in

general lower by a factor linear in the code length, due to the

saving of the sorting of lists of exponential size. The space com-

plexity, on the other hand, will be higher by a factor that can vary

from a mere constant to a term exponential in the code length

depending on the main algorithm (in the case we study, it can

be proved that it is a constant less than ).

For any -linear code, and any integers

and

, we define in this paper the BMA

BMA . The design parameters and determine the

complexity and the error performance. The parameter refers

to an order of reprocessing as in the “order reprocessing”

algorithm of [6]. For any given , the time complexity is a

convex- function of . If , it stricly decreases with and

does not present any local minimum. For any

, however,

it does present a local minimum and

is defined as the

value of that yields the minimal complexity.

When

, BMA is perfectly equivalent to order

reprocessing. There is no particular memory requirements, the

obtained algorithm does not use matching at all. It can be con-

sidered as the reference algorithm to which matching techniques

are applied. The memory requirements of BMA grow as

. As for the time complexity, it is equal to that of order

reprocessing when

; it decreases with from

to

a minimum at

if

and then grows again. The

minimum complexity at

can be made comparable

to the complexity of order reprocessing. If

, the

obtained algorithm makes full use of the matching techniques

and the time and space complexities are then balanced.

After presenting a few preliminaries in Section II, we ex-

plain, in Section III, what the BMT consists of, and how it ac-

tually reduces the complexity of decoding, and give a simple

example. This section remains quite general on purpose, be-

cause matching techniques can be applied following any recipe,

yielding many degrees of freedom in the definition of an algo-

rithm (on top of the choice of a reference algorithm).

We nevertheless suggest a detailed algorithm in Section IV. A pragmatic approach has been taken rather than an asymptotical study. While our emphasis is on software implementation, the same advantages remain valid for hardware implementation. The purpose of having an algorithm uniquely defined for any binary linear code, whose error perfomance can be theoretically predicted, and that is able to handle near-MLD of a

0018-9448/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VALEMBOIS AND FOSSORIER: BOX AND MATCH TECHNIQUES APPLIED TO SOFT-DECISION DECODING

797

code was our guideline to chose among all the de-

grees of freedom.

In BMA , as we show in Section V, the three quantities:

maximum-time complexity, maximum-space complexity, and

block error probability (we consider the case of an addi-

tive white Gaussian noise (AWGN) channel, with a binary

phase-shift keying (BPSK) modulation), can be estimated

directly from the values of and .

We give simulation results in Section VI for the

,

,

, and

codes. The the-

oretical bounds on error performances and the values estimated

from the simulations are plotted together on the range of posi-

tive signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) values that yield an MLD block

error probability greater than . The actual achievement of

near-MLD of the

codes, in particular, proves in a

pragmatic way that this algorithm is a more efficient decoder

for general binary linear codes of rate than all its formally

defined competitors, since none of them could achieve the same

performance or even approach it.

Finally, the BMA is combined with an iterative information

set (IS) reduction technique in Section VII to provide fur-

ther refinement about the error performance between that of

BMA

and that of BMA

. With

this technique, practically MLD of the

code is

achieved for word error rates greater than .

that of and we never mention anyone of the

other

cosets. For that reason, we merely use “coset” and implicitly

mean “coset of .”

Definition 2.3: The reliability of the th symbol is the loglikelihood ratio associated to

From the definition of the reliabilities, it is readily seen that the higher is, the more reliable the hard-decision becomes.
Definition 2.4: The “ellipsoidal weight” (EW) of a vector is defined as
EW

The binary case is notationally economical because for all ,

, and

. Moreover, since

for all , the EW satisfies the usual properties of a metric

EW

EW

EW

EW

EW

II. PRELIMINARIES

A. System of Notations

In the sequel, we consider the case of an -binary linear

block code used over a memoryless channel. The results of

this paper and the decoding algorithm are equally valid with a

-ary linear code but the extension from the algebra to any

algebra is unambiguous, and the notations in the binary case

are much more concise.

A codeword

is mapped into a se-

quence

of channel symbols by an unspecified

modulation scheme; those are transmitted over the memoryless

channel, and a sequence

of noisy channel

symbols is available to the receiver. We assume that, for all ,

and for all

, the a priori probability that

is .

Knowing the transmission modulation scheme and the statistics

of the channel, the information brought by the received channel

symbols can be summarized into the log-likelihood ratios.

Definition 2.1: For all and all

, we define

Definition 2.2: The received word is the symbol-by-symbol

hard-decision vector

, each symbol

maximizing

in .

The received word is known to the decoder, whereas the

transmitted word has to be treated as a random variable. In the

sequel, we readily use the notion of transmission error , which

represents the random variable

. Actually, we focus our

search on an element of the coset of such that

is the

most likely transmitted codeword. The only coset of interest is

which makes the soft-decision problem very similar to its harddecision counterpart (the hard-decision problem corresponds to the case where all the reliabilities are equal, the EW being then equivalent to the Hamming weight).
This system of notations finds its most important convenience in the following fact.

Lemma 2.1: The probability that the transmission error is

equal to a coset element is a decreasing function of EW .

Proof: Let us consider the random variable . In calcu-

lating the probability that is a given word, we can use the in-

formation brought by and the fact that can a priori be any

codeword with a probability

. From the Bayes’s rule, we

obtain

if

else.

Therefore,

is proportional to

for any coset element . In

,

the code is not taken into account and the space words

are assumed to have the same a priori probability to be

transmitted.

With this hypothesis, the transmitted symbols ,

,

are statistically independent and can be any field symbol

with a priori probability . The channel being memoryless, it

also implies that the received channel symbol are statistically

independent. We have consequently

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

798

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 5, MAY 2004

the CB, and is thus precisely the set . If, on the other hand, it

does not contain an IS, it cannot contain the MRB and is not the

set .

Let be a generator matrix of the code. A set does not con-

tain an IS if and only if the submatrix of , whose columns

are indexed by , has rank less than . The lemma stems from

the well-known fact (see, for instance, [16, p. 455]) that the frac-

tion of deficient

binary matrices is less than

.

Therefore, the probability that the transmission error is equal

to , which is equal to

, is actually a

decreasing function of EW .

We finally notice that equivalent forms of Lemma 2.1 for the binary case have been derived in [7], [8].
In the sequel, we look for the coset element that corresponds to the most probable transmission error, rather than for the codeword that corresponds to the most probable transmitted one. The two frameworks are, of course, equivalent. A coset element with a smaller EW than another is said to be “lighter,” which implies that it corresponds more probably to the transmission error. The coset element that corresponds to the most probable transmission error is therefore the lightest one, also called the coset-leader (the definition of the coset-leader then depends on the reliability values).

B. Reference Algorithm
The reference algorithm has to belong to the family of decoding algorithms that encode a certain number of coset elements from their values over certain ISs of the code and chooses the lightest among them to be the error. An IS being chosen, a generator matrix of the code is diagonalized over it, and the Gaussian eliminations are pursued to calculate the coset element that is null over this IS. Any coset element can then be computed from its value over this IS by straightforward row additions.
An IS of particular importance is the so-called “most reliable basis” (MRB). It is the IS maximizing the sum of the reliabilities of its positions,1 and can be found by a greedy Gaussian elimination: order the positions by decreasing reliabilities, permute a generator matrix of the code accordingly, and put it in left-echelon form [9]. The MRB reprocessing algorithms of [6], [9]–[14], in spite of their different lists, are very competitive with each other in terms of decoding efficiency (error performance in terms of decoding complexity, cf. [15]). Nevertheless, the ordered statistics decoding of [6], by its simplicity and its predictability, is the best suited for our needs.

III. MATCHING TECHNIQUES

A. The Set

Let be an integer in

, let be the union of the

MRB and of the set, that we call the control band (CB), of the

most reliable positions outside the MRB.

Lemma 3.1: With probability greater than

, the set

is the set of the most reliable positions.

Proof: If the set of the most reliable positions contains an

IS, it contains the MRB. It is straightforward that it also contains

1This statement is readily proved by contradiction.

MRB reprocessing algorithms generate a list of candidates

only from the knowledge that the coset element corresponding

to the error has low weight on the MRB. In BMA , we use

the more complete knowledge that it has low weight on the set

. The difference might seem unimportant but the consideration

of a superset of an IS is fundamental. Actually, the total number

of coset elements is , whereas the total number of vectors

over is . Consequently, only one vector over out of

corresponds to a coset element. Matching techniques allow us

to consider only those and to simply ignore the great majority of

irrelevant patterns. It basically divides the number of generated

candidates by .

Order- reprocessing computes the

coset elements

that have a Hamming weight at most over the MRB, for an

approximate cost of

(where

stands for the

cost of the computation of a coset element [6]). In BMA ,

we further compute all the coset elements that have a Hamming

weight of at most over , for an approximate cost in time of

(cf. Section IV-D), and a cost in memory of is chosen to optimize the cost in time
tities

. When , the quan-

and

have comparable orders of magnitude and BMA has then

a time complexity comparable to that of order- reprocessing.

Considering the word error rate (WER), now, it is readily seen

that order- reprocessing performs better than BMA (or

identically if

), which performs better than order- repro-

cessing. When increases, the set includes more positions

(and potentially more transmission errors) and the WER deteri-

orates. It always remains better than that of order- reprocessing,

though (since order- reprocessing is performed as a preliminary

step), and can be rather close to that of order- reprocessing for

.

Before entering into a detailed explanation of matching tech-

niques, let us describe briefly how they work. The sum of any

odd number of coset elements is a coset element (whereas the

sum of an even number of coset elements is a codeword). Let

be the coset element that is null over the MRB. A coset element

of Hamming weight at most over also has Hamming weight

at most over the MRB. Therefore, it is necessarily the sum of

and of two coset elements, and , of Hamming weight at

most over the MRB. BMA computes the coset elements

of Hamming weight at most over the MRB, like order- repro-

cessing does, and stores along the way some information that

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VALEMBOIS AND FOSSORIER: BOX AND MATCH TECHNIQUES APPLIED TO SOFT-DECISION DECODING

799

allows us to “match” the pairs of coset elements

such that

has Hamming weight at most over . This infor-

mation is stored in “boxes.”

B. -Complement and Boxes
In the sequel, the vectors over the MRB are called the MRBpatterns. To each MRB-pattern , we associate the coset element whose restriciton to the MRB is equal to , and the
-tuple , that we call the “ -complement” of , which is the restriction of to the control band. In particular, is the -complement of the null MRB-pattern, i.e., the value taken by over the control band.
The BMT technique is based on the following lemma.
Lemma 3.2: For all MRB-patterns and we have

Proof: Let be the codeword whose restriction to the

MRB is equal to . We have

, and is the sum

of the rows of the generator matrix corresponding to the ’s in

. Define and

similarly. Then, indeed,

and we have

The projection over the -control-band of this identity gives the lemma.

BMA

makes use of

“boxes”

,

one for each value of the -complements. A box represents a

memory recipient in which one can store some information that

allows us to retrieve a given MRB-pattern. The “description” of

an MRB-pattern can be the -tuple in itself, for instance, but

we give a more convenient implementation of the boxes in the

Appendix.

If a pattern , of Hamming weight , examined by the order-

reprocessing part of the algorithm, has -complement , then

a description of is stored in the box

. If, later on, a

pattern , of Hamming weight at most , is considered, with

-complement , the algorithm explores the boxes to find the

patterns , previously examined and boxed, such that

has

Hamming weight at most over . This is the case if

Considering Lemma 3.2 and the fact that the boxed patterns

have Hamming weight , the interesting patterns are stored in

the boxes

,

,

,

and it is enough to consider only these boxes.

C. Example

We give here a simplified version of BMA

(the case

presents some difficulty, and requires a more subtle im-

plementation; we give it in the next section). The algorithm com-

putes all the coset elements that have Hamming weight or

over the MRB, and those that have Hamming weight , , or

over the set .

Consider a coset element of Hamming weight , , or over

. It has Hamming weight , , or over the MRB. If it has

Hamming weight or over the MRB, it is considered by

the order- reprocessing part of the algorithm. Else, if it has

Hamming weight over the MRB, then it must have Hamming

weight over the CB.

Now, if and are two MRB-patterns of Hamming weight

such that

has Hamming weight over the CB, then

, and thus, by Lemma 3.2,

. Let

us suppose, without loss of generality, that is considered be-

fore . The algorithm has stored in the box

. Then,

when is considered, is revealed by looking in the box

.

We are now ready to give a simplified version of the

BMA . A more complete version would include the

consideration of conditions for optimality that allows us to

reduce the average time complexity of a decoding process. This

is adressed in Section IV-A. In the following algorithm, the

best coset element among those considered by the algorithm is

recorded in , and its EW is recorded in

:

Diagonalize the generator matrix over the MRB; Compute
EW Compute For from to do
Define as the MRB pattern having a in the th position of the MRB only;
Compute If EW
EW

Compute

For all patterns in the box

do

Compute

If EW

EW

Store in the box

Let us observe that does not need to be stored in

.

Likewise, we show in the next section that when order- repro-

cessing underlies the BMA, the patterns of Hamming weight

do not need to be stored, and only those of Ham-

ming weight do.

In this algorithm, coset elements are computed from the

regular order- reprocessing. The patterns of Hamming weight

are dispatched in the boxes. Thus, when the the MRB-pat-

tern having a in the th position of the MRB is considered,

patterns of Hamming weight have already been consid-

ered and stored in their respective box, and each box contains an

average of patterns. The number of coset elements consid-

ered by BMA and not considered by order reprocessing

is thus on average

The total number of computed coset elements is thus

.

The time complexity is equal to that of order- reprocessing

for

(as well as the WER and the two algorithms are

equivalent), and decreases with , quickly converging to that of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

800

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 5, MAY 2004

order- reprocessing (there is no local minimum in this case). But with increasing , the WER gets further and further from that of order- reprocessing since the set is bound to contain more errors as gets larger.

IV. THE ALGORITHM

A. Conditions for Optimality

Conditions for optimality (C.O.) are usually separable into

two kinds of conditions; namely, the necessary C.O. and the suf-

ficient C.O.: if a candidate does not meet the necessary C.O., it

is useless to compute it and its computation cost can be saved;

if the best candidate found so far does meet the sufficient C.O.,

it can be proved that it is optimal and the decoding can be

stopped. C.O. consequently allow to reduce substantially the av-

erage time complexity at low SNR, and considerably at high

SNR, where the transmission error is very light on average. At

very high SNR, in particular, this average complexity is essen-

tially that of the diagonalization over the MRB (suppose that the

transmission error is null over the MRB; the C.O. allow most of

the time to detect it and to stop the decoding immediately after

the computation of ).

A coset element constitutes a better candidate than another if

its EW is lower. Let be the best candidate (with the lowest

EW) found so far and

be its EW. The principle of C.O. is

then the following.

• A not yet computed coset element can be optimal only if its

EW has a chance to be lower than

. This constitutes

a necessary C.O. for the not yet computed candidates.

and another coset element is a codeword, there are at least

positions where is zero and is nonzero. Thus, if

has Hamming weight inside , there are at least

positions outside in which is zero and is nonzero.

A possible lower bound of the EW of outside is thus the

sum of the reliabilities of the

least reliable

positions in which is zero. The resource then only depends

on the Hamming weight

of the pattern that is

considered (and it decreases with ). It is recorded in memory

as

, and must be updated everytime is itself

updated. For any MRB-pattern , then, the following holds:

EW

EW

EW

Thus, we define

EW

EW

EW

The processing of an MRB-pattern with the C.O. then consists of the following operations:

• If EW

Procedure Process : then

Compute

If EW

then

EW

Update the resource values

• Update GLB;

• If

GLB then

• If none of the remaining candidates can satisfy the necessary C.O., then no better candidate than can be found. This, consequently, provides a sufficient C.O. for .

Suppose that the algorithm is able to compute a lower bound

EW

on EW at a cost lower than that of the actual

computation of EW (which requires an encoding and a

loop of size ). Then the condition EW

consti-

tutes the necessary C.O. On top of a lower bound for individual

candidates, a global lower bound (GLB) for all the remaining

candidates can be updated. The quantity GLB should be such

that any MRB-pattern that is yet to be considered in the cur-

rent decoding process satisfies EW

GLB. If it turns

out that

GLB then no candidates strictly better than

can be found. This constitutes a sufficient C.O. that can

eventually be met,

being nonincreasing and GLB nonde-

creasing.

The lower bound EW , can be the sum of the EW over ,

that is known, and of a lower bound, called the “resource,” of

the EW outside . A trivial lower bound on the EW outside

is . For some instances of the soft-decoding problem, it might

be impossible to improve it. In many cases, however, especially

when the noise distortion has been weak, a greater resource can

easily be derived. The following approach was first proposed

in [17] for any soft-decision decoding algorithm and has been

specialized to order- reprocessing in [6]. We extend it to the

BMA by simply replacing the MRB by the set .

Suppose that has Hamming weight

where is

the minimum distance of the code. Since the difference between

stop the decoding and return

B. Definition of the Algorithm

It is desirable to attain as early as possible the sufficient

C.O., and thus, to make the GLB grow as fast as possible. For

this reason, we want all the candidates of lowest EW over

to be computed during the earliest stages of the algorithm.

To do so, we can for example run order- reprocessing first,

then BMA , then BMA

until BMA . More

precisely, we only run BMA , but this algorithm is divided

in

phases. Phase is equivalent to order reprocessing,

and in general, phase

of BMA computes the coset

elements of Hamming weight exactly over the MRB, and

those of Hamming weight at least

over the MRB and

exactly

or over , those of lower Hamming weight

being computed in an earlier stage. Hereafter, we only describe

a generic phase .

To compute the patterns of Hamming weight

over the

MRB,

, we decompose them into the sum of a pat-

tern of Hamming weight over the MRB, and of a pattern

of Hamming weight over the MRB, such that the positions

having a in are less reliable than those in (this way, the

decomposition is unique). Since we want

to have Ham-

ming weight exactly

or over ,

must have

Hamming weight

or

. Then we reprocess the

successive MRB patterns in an order such that, if the positions

having a in are less reliable than those in , then is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VALEMBOIS AND FOSSORIER: BOX AND MATCH TECHNIQUES APPLIED TO SOFT-DECISION DECODING

801

computed before , and we store the patterns of Hamming

weight in their boxes. The following algorithm allows us to

achieve this goal. We suppose the positions

of the

MRB are ordered by decreasing reliabilities and we denote an

MRB-pattern having ’s in positions

by

For from to by Match For from to Match For from to Match

do by do
by do

For from to

by do

Match

For from to

by do

Process

Match

Store

in its box;

The innermost loop differs from the others in that it does not

only match its pattern but also processes it and stores it into the

suitable box.

It is readily seen that when the MRB-pattern

is computed, all the MRB-patterns of weight exactly included

in

have already been computed and stored in

their boxes, which is what we wanted. To achieve the sought

objective, then, the procedure “Match

” has to per-

form the following operation:

already been considered; and since it has Hamming weight , it

has been stored in its box

. To match the pattern , the

algorithm considers all the

-tuples of Hamming weight

or

. In particular, it

considers all the

-tuples of Hamming weight , among

which figures

. The box associated to

is

thus explored. But by Lemma 3.2,

is precisely

the -complement of , and this box contains . Consequently,

is actually computed.

Note that to avoid computing patterns

where and

overlap, or more generally, to avoid computing several times

the same coset element through different decompositions

, one can check (inside the “Match” procedure) whether the

minimum nonzero position of is greater than the maximum

nonzero position of , so that only the decomposition of the

proof above is considered.

D. Worst Case Complexity
The algorithm runs order- reprocessing then phase until phase of BMA . Of course, the complexity of the th phase dominates the others. The time complexity (without considering the C.O.) of the global algorithm can be divided into three parts.

• The initial diagonalization of the generator matrix over the

MRB which can be made as small as

on

average (cf. [18]), where

is the coding rate.

• The total number of coset elements that are computed: There are

• for all or box

Procedure Match

:

-tuples of Hamming weight

, and for all MRB-pattern retrieved from the

, Process

;

coset elements from the standard order- reprocessing, and on average less than

C. Algorithm Proof

We verify that the coset elements

considered above

actually have Hamming weight at most over , and that all

the coset elements of Hamming weight

or over are

actually computed this way.

Since has Hamming weight and has Hamming weight

,

has Hamming weight at most

. Besides, from

Lemma 3.2,

has -complement

. Since

is chosen as

,

has -complement which

has Hamming weight

or . Thus, the coset element

has Hamming weight at most

over , which gives the first part of the algorithm proof.

Consider now a coset element whose Hamming weight is

over the MRB and over the control band, with

or

. Let us verify that is considered by the algorithm. If

then is considered by the standard order- reprocessing

phase regardless of . Let us suppose then, that

,

so that

or

. Let be the MRB-pattern

composed of the rightmost positions of the MRB such that

, and let be the MRB-pattern composed of the

other positions of the MRB such that

. We thus have

and

has Hamming weight . When the nested

loops arrive at the consideration of , the MRB-pattern has

from the enhancement (“less than” because only the coset elements of Hamming weight at least over the MRB are considered by the enhancement).

• The total number of

-tuples considered inside the

“Match” procedure:

Consider a particular MRB-pattern of Hamming weight

. It is given as an argument to the procedure “Match”

by phase , phase

, until phase . Phase only

considers

, phase

considers all the

-tuples of Hamming weight or , phase

considers those of Hamming weight or , and phase

considers all the

-tuples of Hamming weight

or .

For each MRB-pattern of Hamming weight

, thus,

-tuples are considered,

which makes a total of

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

802
The time complexity can thus be estimated as

Therefore,

is the value of that minimizes

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 5, MAY 2004
TABLE I
 HAMMING WEIGHTS OF ERROR PATTERNS PROCESSED SEQUENTIALLY BY BMA (i; s), i 3, OVER THE MRB AND THE CB

and if enough memory is available, should be chosen to be

equal to

. However, the inhomogeneities of the different

involved costs, and the implementation variations might give

rise to slightly different values for the optimal . Also, one

might want to choose a lower value for because it implies less

memory requirement, and a slightly better WER (at the expense

of increased time complexity). Let us mention, finally, that in

single-processing computer implementation, the two first parts

of the time complexity can be divided by the width of the bus

(currently or ) because they only involve bit operations that

can be performed in parallel.

showed that the value of that optimizes the worst case complexity also optimizes the average complexity when the latter is close to the complexity of the prior diagonalization.
V. PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS A. MLD and Near-MLD Algorithms

E. Average Complexity

When phase

of BMA starts, we know that all the

coset elements of Hamming weight at most

over

have been computed and that the not yet computed candidates

have Hamming weight at least

over . Consequently, the

C.O. applied during phase of BMA have a “strength”

comparable to that of the C.O. that would be applied in the main

phase of order-

reprocessing: even if a candidate has

Hamming weight only over the MRB, it is known that either

it has Hamming weight at least

over or it has already

been computed in a previous phase. This important feature of

BMA is illustrated in Table I, in which the error patterns

processed sequentially by BMA ,

, have been repre-

sented with their Hamming weight over the MRB and the CB. A

“?” indicates any valid weight, and “ ” (respectively, “ ”)

means at least (respectively, at most) weight . For example, at

the end of BMA , all error patterns of weight on the MRB

also need at least two errors on the CB. As a result, the C.O. ex-

ploit this fact and have (almost) the strength of the one which

would be used for order- reprocessing of the conventional OSD

algorithm.

As is illustrated in Section VI, this implies that many

more candidates are eliminated by BMA

than by

order- reprocessing, and it makes the average complexity of

BMA

much less than that of order- reprocessing

(whereas its worst case complexity is comprised between that

of order- reprocessing and that of order- reprocessing). It

also renders the worst case complexity much less likely to be

reached, but significantly increases its variance.

For codes of moderate lengths and for SNR values yielding

WERs of less than , the average number of candidates

that are actually processed makes the average complexity of de-

coding essentially equal to that of the prior diagonalization over

the MRB. It would be interesting to know which value of op-

timizes the average complexity. It is readily seen that it should

be at most equal to that suggested in the preceding section, but

an exact value is difficult to obtain theoretically. Moreover, it

clearly depends on the noise statistics. Finally, trials and errors

The most complete decoding algorithms are the MLD algo-

rithms. They are mathematically guaranteed to produce the most

likely transmitted word. Their definition is not probabilistic.

They solve a mathematic problem and are guaranteed to work

with any possible input. A sufficiently fast MLD algorithm and

a simulation of the channel allow to compute empirically the

value of

, provided it is not too small. It is usually con-

sidered that if 300 MLD block errors can be obtained, which re-

quires to simulate and achieve

decoding processes, then

the value obtained for

is reliable. It is usually not at-

tempted to measure empirically WERs lower than or bit-

error rates lower than .

Next in the hierarchy of decoding algorithms come the

near-MLD algorithms. They differ from MLD algorithms in

that their definition is probabilistic: their purpose is to perform

almost as well as MLD algorithms from the WER point of view

but at a lower cost. They are allowed to make decoding errors

where an MLD algorithm would decode correctly as long as

this remains rare enough so that the WER is not significantly

increased. An agreement has then to be made concerning the

extent of this degree of freedom, to define precisely whether

near-MLD is performed or not. In the sequel, an algorithm is

said to perform near-MLD whenever it yields a WER less than

twice that of an MLD algorithm. When the WER is less than

that of MLD, the algorithm is said to perform “practically

MLD.”

We consider the traditional AWGN channel with BPSK trans-

mission. Near-MLD-ness can be guaranteed theoretically for

any SNR value, and is verified empirically (by computer simu-

lations) in the range of SNR values for which these probabilities

are greater than .

B. Bounds on Error Performance

In this subsection, we are concerned with how to guarantee

theoretically and/or empirically that near-MLD is performed.

To guarantee near-MLD-ness theoretically, we use theoretical

bounds on

on the one hand and theoretical bounds on the

WER of the considered algorithm on the other hand. We

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VALEMBOIS AND FOSSORIER: BOX AND MATCH TECHNIQUES APPLIED TO SOFT-DECISION DECODING

803

lower-bound

by the sphere packing bound (SPB)

([19], [20]), and we upper-bound

by a “list proba-

bility” . Near-MLD is guaranteed if

since we

have then

the transmitted one. Since, in the same conditions, an MLD

algorithm would have made at least these errors, this provides

an empirical lower bound

on

.

VI. SIMULATIONS

and thus

A detailed description of an efficient and accurate way to derive

is given in [21], and we derive for the BMA next.

1) List Probability : Define as the WER of the con-

sidered algorithm and as the probability that the transmis-

sion error does not belong to the generated list of coset elements.

By the union bound, we have

. Whatever

the generated list is, it is always possible to upper-bound ;

and for some particular schemes it is even possible to compute

it exactly or to upper-bound it very tightly. Such is the case in

particular for order- reprocessing and BMA .

The list generated by order- reprocessing contains the trans-

mission error if and only if there are at most incorrect hard de-

cisions within the MRB. The associated probability is thus

the probability that the MRB contains errors or more, and

can be computed exactly as shown in [22] based on the statistics

proposed in [23]. One can also consider more simply the proba-

bility that the most reliable positions (the MRB consists of the

most reliable “independent” positions and is usually slightly

different from the set of the most reliable positions) contain

errors, which yields a probability lower than (hence, a lower

bound) but still quite close to . As for the list generated by

BMA , it contains the transmission error if there are at most

errors within the MRB, or if there are at most errors within

the set . Note that for large enough, Lemma 3.1 allows us

to assume that is the set of the most reliable positions. The

associated probability is thus the probability that, simulta-

neously, the MRB contains

errors or more, and that the

most reliable positions contain

errors or more. It can

also be computed exactly following the method of [24], or can

be upper-bounded by the mere probability, simpler to compute

[22], [23] that the most reliable positions contain

errors

or more. We superimpose the exact values of on the SNR

curves in Section VI.

It is thus possible to evaluate the performance of the obtained

algorithm, without resorting to simulations. This allows to de-

termine and necessary to achieve a desired WER (that of

near-MLD, for instance), and also to prove that near-MLD is

achieved for some suitable and for all SNR values (this would

be impossible to verify or prove empirically for some SNR value

corresponding to a WER of

, for instance, which is some-

times required in certain applications).

2) Empirical Bounds and Evaluation of “Near-MLD-

Ness”: Rather good upper bounds on

are known, for

instance, the “tangential-sperical bound” of [25], but the known

lower bounds might not be tight enough, i.e., might be lower

than

. However, there is a method, very easy to imple-

ment and quite accurate [10]. It consists, when simulating the

channel and the decoding, of counting the number of decoding

errors that would have also occurred with an MLD algorithm.

This is the case when the codeword returned by the algorithm is

actually more likely given the received word (closer to it) than

A. The Codes Considered in This Work

The random choice of a linear -code would provide

a good code (yielding an MLD error probability close to the

best possible for all SNR values) with high probability [26].

Choosing the code out of a particular family of codes, on the

other hand, might provide codes with especially poor spectral

properties and, consequently, error performance bounded away

from the optimal one after a given SNR value. This is for

instance the case for Reed–Muller codes of length greater

than , product codes, turbo codes, low-density parity-check

codes, and many others, that all present a marked error floor.

However, it is known that if a particular code has a good

minimal distance, or good spectral properties in a more general

case, compared to the average,2 then the error performance

for this code is guaranteed to be close to the optimal one for

all SNR values. Also, when we are concerned with the actual

implementation of MLD, a higher minimal distance gives rise

to more efficient C.O. and to a lower average complexity. For

these reasons, we attempt to decode codes with the highest

known minimal distance for the length and dimension we

consider.

The complexity of the decoding of codes of rate close to

is presumably close to represent an upper bound on the

complexity for all the rates (the length being fixed) [28]. For

this reason, we pay in this work a special interest to rate-

codes. Another reason to consider rate- codes with the

highest known minimal distance is that they provide a bench-

mark to compare the different MLD or near-MLD algorithms.

Near-MLD of the

extended Bose–Chaudhuri–Hoc-

quenghem (eBCH) code in the AWGN/BPSK framework has

been reported quite a few times in the literature, for example,

[6], [9], [12], [13], [24], [29].

Near-MLD has never been reported with rate- codes

longer that . This is done in this work with a

code, illustrating somewhat the fact that our algorithm allows to

save an exponential order in the time complexity of near-MLD.

This code [30] is obtained by concatenating a

extended Reed–Solomon code over GF with the

binary code, yielding a

binary code whose codewords are concatenations of -tuples

of even Hamming weight. Any word obtained by concatenating

-tuples of odd Hamming weight is thus at distance from

any codeword in this

code, and it is possible to

complete it with such a word without decreasing the minimal

distance of , yielding a

code. Near-MLD of

codes longer than can be performed at a reasonable com-

plexity with our algorithm if we consider coding rate different

from . We illustrate this possibility with the

and the

eBCH codes.

2Average spectral properties are easily derived from ensemble reasoning, see for example [27].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

804

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 5, MAY 2004

Fig. 1. Decoding of the [128; 64; 22] eBCH code.

B. Simulation Results

Fig. 1 depicts the WERs obtained from simulations when de-

coding the

eBCH code with BMA for

and

, as well as the corresponding values of

. As long as

, dominates the WER and

approximates it tightly. For

and inside the range of SNR

values we consider, is either lower or close to the SPB;

without any simulations then, the WER with

can be ex-

pected to be close to that of MLD, and indeed simulations prove

it is very close. The value of

has been obtained by run-

ning BMA

. Actually is then much lower than the

SPB, and all the decoding errors recorded during the simula-

tions (more than 500 word errors for each SNR value) were also

MLD errors. We have to say that BMA

performs only

practically-MLD, however, because it is still theoretically pos-

sible to construct some pathological non-MLD errors that are

not correctable by this algorithm. Let us mention that at the

WER , the SNR curve measured for

is 0.34 dB away

from the SPB, which makes it “twice more perfect” than most

turbo codes according to the criterion of [31] (most turbo codes

lie at 0.7 dB from the SPB).

The BMA proved to be very fast. At SNR values greater or

equal to 3 dB, BMA

performs more than 600 decodings

per second on a single 1.4-GHz computer, and BMA

more than 3000, allowing us to measure accurately (about

500 MLD errors) WERs of less than . To give an insight

about the improvement, we compare the BMA with order-

reprocessing and its improvement (denoted by order- *) from

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VALEMBOIS AND FOSSORIER: BOX AND MATCH TECHNIQUES APPLIED TO SOFT-DECISION DECODING

805

TABLE II NUMBER OF CANDIDATES PROCESSED TO PERFORM NEAR-MLD OF THE [128; 64; 22] EBCH CODE

TABLE III NUMBER OF CANDIDATES PROCESSED BY BMA (3; s) OF THE [128; 64; 22] EBCH CODE (500 WORD ERRORS RECORDED)

[29] in Table II. We consider the decoding of the

eBCH code. Near-MLD is achieved by order- , order- *, and

BMA

, whereas BMA

performs practical MLD.

Since all these algorithms need to diagonalize the generator

matrix over the MRB, we only compare the number of pro-

cessed candidates. We give this number in the worst case, then

we give the maximum number reached during the simulations,

and finally the average number. The worst case number is more

than ten times lower for BMA

than for order- , and the

error performance is slightly better. Moreover, whereas the

worst case number can be reached by both order- and order- *,

it has never been reached during the simulations by the BMA

due to the powerful C.O., as explained in Section IV-E. This

also confirms that the variance of the number of computation is

quite large for the BMA.

The improvement on the average complexity is even better:

on average, the BMA

exhibits a reduction factor greater

than 100 in the number of processed candidates compared to

order- at 2 dB, and greater than at 3 dB. With an average

of 49 processed candidates at 3 dB for BMA

, and 110 for

BMA

, the diagonalization cost is no longer negligible.

The ratio of the average number of processed candidates to

the worst case number is already quite low, but it would be re-

duced further if the BMA used the probabilistic C.O. of [29] as

order- * does, instead of the deterministic C.O. discussed ear-

lier. These deterministic C.O. are used only to ensure that the

theoretical WER is not degraded, even negligibly, and to have

a valid theoretical performance analysis (the effect on the WER

of the probabilistic C.O. has not been evaluated theoretically at

this time and it is possible that probabilistic C.O. introduce sub-

optimality at WERs lower than that simulated [12], [32]).

The tradeoffs between decoding complexity and memory are

illustrated in Table III. In this table, the average and maximum

number of processed candidates for simulation of 500 word

errors and the corresponding WERs have been recorded for

BMA

, BMA

, and BMA

. We observe

that as increases, significant savings in both average and

worst case complexities are achieved at the expense of little

performance degradation.

Considering the drastic savings that can be achieved, we have

applied BMA to a

code, with

, and

. The results are depicted in Fig. 2. A lower bound

on

has been obtained by counting only the decoding er-

rors, recorded during the simulations with , that were also

MLD errors. The WER obtained with

is less than twice

this lower bound, so we can say that near-MLD is achieved for

the range of SNR values depicted. However, the theoretical anal-

ysis of Section V-B1 shows that becomes larger than

around the WER

, and BMA

does not achieve

near-MLD at all SNR values.

By comparing the SPB with the lower and upper bounds on

obtained from BMA

, we observe that at the WER

, the curve for

lies between 0.35 and 0.38 dB from

the SPB. This seems surprising first, considering the gap of 0.34

dB for the

eBCH code, and the fact that this gap

is expected to decrease with the length of the code. However,

it simply illustrates the fact that the

code is more

“perfect” than the

code (that has a huge automor-

phism group and is constructed by concatenation).

We then applied the BMA to the

eBCH

code, with

and

. For each value of , once

again, we have plotted the simulation results and the theoretical

value for in Fig. 3. The solid curve without marker is the

lower bound on

obtained from BMA

. Near-MLD

is performed by BMA

until a WER of

at 3.5 dB.

After this SNR value, the WER wanders from MLD perfor-

mance and either a lower or a larger is needed to perform

near-MLD.

There is an important gap to the SPB, but the comparison be-

tween the WER and the SPB is relevant only for low-to-mod-

erate coding rate (up to ). Actually, the SPB of [19] does not

take the modulation into account and lower-bounds the WER

of the best possible code used with the most suitable modu-

lation scheme. If the constraint of a BPSK modulation does

not lower much the capacity of the AWGN channel for coding

rate less than , it does for higher coding rate. For a coding

rate of

, the gap between the SNR curve and

the SPB essentially measures the suboptimality of BPSK rather

than the imperfectness of the considered code. This could be

addressed by considering the SPB developed in [20] that also

takes modulation constraints into account. Only discrete-input

discrete-output channels are considered in [20], however, and

some adjustments are needed to make this bound available in the

unquantized AWGN/BPSK case. Such adjustments are given in

[21], as well as a sensible improvement of the lower bound. Un-

fortunately, for a coding rate of , the SPB of [20] becomes

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

806

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 5, MAY 2004

Fig. 2. Decoding of the [192; 96; 28] code.

better than that of [19] only for block lengths above (cf.

[21]), due to a slower convergence.

For the next considered code, however, longer and of higher

rate, it provides a much better reference than the SPB of [19].

We have applied the BMA to the

eBCH code

with

and

, and plotted the results along with

the SPB of [20] for comparison in Fig. 4. BMA

per-

forms near-MLD, and unlike the previous example, the ratio

seems quite stable with increasing SNR values.

VII. BMA WITH ITERATIVE INFORMATION SET REDUCTION
The BMA can, in principle, benefit from any improvement derived for the OSD algorithm: for example, the list purging method proposed in [12] for very large size integration (VLSI)

implementation, the multiple IS decoding method proposed

in [33] for low-rate codes, or the iterative IS reduction (IISR)

technique presented in [24]. In this section, we present the

BMA with IISR, which provides further refinement about the

error performance between that of BMA

and that of

BMA

.

Recently, the order statistic decoding (OSD) algorithm was refined by an IISR technique [24]. At the end of the OSD algorithm, some predetermined positions outside the MRB are assumed error free and the OSD algorithm is applied to the subcode punctured in these positions. This technique is then repeated iteratively. Again, the structured iterative strategy allows the derivation of tight upper bounds on the algorithm error performance.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VALEMBOIS AND FOSSORIER: BOX AND MATCH TECHNIQUES APPLIED TO SOFT-DECISION DECODING

807

Fig. 3. Decoding of the [256; 187; 20] eBCH code.

The BMA with IISR depends on three parameters , , and

with

. At the end of the conventional BMA, the

most reliable positions outside the MRB and the CB (i.e., out-

side the most reliable positions assuming they contain an IS)

are assumed error free and assigned an infinite (very large) re-

liability value. After constructing the corresponding MRB, the

BMA is processed again and the procedure is repeated until less

than positions in the MRB are not assumed error free. A ter-

mination step is then applied to these positions.

An upper bound on the value now requires the computa-

tions of six-fold integrals corresponding to the event that at least

errors are confined in the MRB, at least

errors are

confined in the CB, and at least

errors are confined in the

most reliable positions. Unfortunately, the numerical evalua-

tion of these integrals becomes very time consuming. Instead,

for small values of , considering the event that least

errors are confined in the MRB, and at least

errors are

confined in the MRPs still provides a tight upper bound.

Simulation results for BMA

of the

code and BMA

of the

eBCH code are

compared to IISR of the same BMA with

in Table IV

(two iterations) and Table V (five iterations), respectively. We

observe that at the cost of a larger average decoding complexity,

few iterations of IISR allow to obtain practical rather than

near-MLD at all simulated SNR values. Additional simulation

results of IISR have been reported in [34].

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

808

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 5, MAY 2004

Fig. 4. Decoding of the [512; 475; 10] eBCH code.
TABLE IV NUMBER OF MLD ERRORS AND NUMBER OF CANDIDATES PROCESSED TO PERFORM NEAR-MLD AND PRACTICALLY-MLD
OF THE [192; 96; 28] CODE (500 WORD ERRORS RECORDED)

VIII. CONCLUSION
We have applied the so-called “Box and Match Technique” (BMT) to order- reprocessing to balance the complexity in time and space (memory). To our knowledge, the obtained decoding algorithm proves much more efficient in time than any other

optimal or near-optimal decoding algorithm for codes of rate

to . Also, as it is the case with order- reprocessing, its

error performance can be foreseen by analytical computations.

Performing MLD on the

eBCH code proved

totally affordable. We could even approach MLD for a

code, which has a theoretical complexity equal

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

VALEMBOIS AND FOSSORIER: BOX AND MATCH TECHNIQUES APPLIED TO SOFT-DECISION DECODING

809

TABLE V
NUMBER OF MLD ERRORS AND NUMBER OF CANDIDATES PROCESSED TO PERFORM NEAR-MLD AND PRACTICALLY-MLD OF THE [256; 187; 20] EBCH CODE (500 WORD ERRORS RECORDED)

to that of MLD for the length raised to the power . At lengths such as , the average time complexity of this algorithm could be greatly reduced by more suited conditions for optimality.

APPENDIX BOXES IMPLEMENTATION

The memory allocation for the

boxes should be done

once and for all before the first decoding process, and not re-

peated for each of the following decoding processes. In a more

general fashion, one should be very careful to avoid any sys-

tematic procedure inside the decoding process that has a cost

proportional to , which would have dramatic effects on the

average time complexity. A foreseeable mistake, for instance,

would be to empty the boxes at the beginning or the end of each

decoding process, although it might seem necessary for the al-

gorithm to work. The particular implementation we suggest here

allows to avoid it, as well as any other maintenance routine.

Also, a box might contain any number of patterns. This makes

an efficient implementation not quite trivial, and this technical

appendix should interest all those who want to implement this

algorithm or some other application of the BMT.

For any decoding of reasonable time and space complexity,

32-bits integers are enough to represent the MRB patterns and

the

-tuples. For example, four indexes less than are

enough to describe an MRB pattern of Hamming weight , if

is less than , and they can be simply compressed into a

32-bits integer; also, if

is less than , the representation

of an

-tuple by an integer is straightforward.

During the global initialization (before the first decoding

process), prepare the variables as follows (this includes the

allocation of the boxes): index the MRB-patterns

, where is the first MRB-pattern to be

computed in the order- reprocessing routine, the second,

etc., and make sure, by creating an appropriate table, that the

pattern can be retrieved quickly from the integer (this is

only possible with a fixed reprocessing structure such as that

of order- reprocessing, independent of the received sequence).

Then allocate the following arrays:

• First Pattern:

;

• Next Pattern:

;

• -complement:

(

).

It is readily seen then, that the space complexity using this

implementation is

32-bits integers.

The meaning of these variables is the following:

means that the first MRB-pattern that has -complement

is ;

means that the next MRB-pattern after

that has the same -complement as is whereas

means that no MRB-pattern computed after

has the same -complement as ; and, finally,

means that has -complement .

The redundancy of this storage allows a check for consis-

tency: if it occurs for some that

or if

is

greater than the index of the current MRB-pattern, it just means

that the -complement is met for the first time in the current

decoding process, which is equivalent to say that the box asso-

ciated to is empty.

When only the or pattern has -complement , the array

NP is of no use; but when at least two patterns have -com-

plement , the first one can be found in

, and initiates a

chain inside the array NP:

until a is reached.

During the decoding, then, to store the description of the pat-

tern in the box associated to , proceed as follows:

•

;

• if

or

then (the box is empty, store in

)

–

;

• else (the box is not empty, store in , at the end of the

chain initiated by

)

– while

repeat

;

–

;

•

(this marks the end of the chain associated

to );

•

;

And to retrieve the MRB-patterns that have -complement , one can proceed the following way:

•

;

• repeat

– if

or

, then no more MRB-pattern has

-complement (exit the loop);

– else the next MRB-pattern that has -complement is

(process );

–

;

Let us mention that for optimal values of , is slightly

greater than and there is on average about one MRB-pattern

per -complement. The algorithm then makes an optimal use

of the matching technique. In that case, the two loops in the

routines above have an average length approximately equal to .

When the ratio

is significantly greater than , how-

ever, the average length of these loops increases, and a more

rigorous complexity analysis should consider them.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

810

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON INFORMATION THEORY, VOL. 50, NO. 5, MAY 2004

REFERENCES

[1] J. Stern, “A method for finding codewords of small weight,” in Coding

Theory and Applications, G. Cohen and J. Wolfmann, Eds. New York:

Springer-Verlag, 1989, pp. 106–113.

[2] A. Canteaut and F. Chabaud, “A new algorithm for finding minimum-

weight words in a linear code: Application to McEliece’s cryptosystem

and to narrow-sense BCH codes of length 511,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 44, pp. 367–378, Jan. 1998.

[3] I. I. Dumer, “On mimimum distance decoding of linear codes,” in Proc.

5th Joint Soviet-Swedish Int. Workshop Information Theory, Moscow,

Russia, Jan. 1991, pp. 50–52.

[4]

, “Sort-and-match algorithm for soft-decision decoding,” IEEE

Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 2333–2338, Nov. 1999.

[5]

, “Soft-decision decoding using punctured codes,” IEEE Trans. In-

form Theory, vol. 47, pp. 59–71, Jan. 2001.

[6] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Soft decision decoding of linear block codes

based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 41, pp.

1379–1396, Sept. 1995.

[7] J. Snyders and Y. Be’ery, “Maximum likelihood soft decision decoding

of binary block codes and decoders for the Golay codes,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 35, pp. 963–975, Sept. 1989.

[8] Y. S. Han, “A new treatment of priority-first search maximum-likeli-

hood soft-decision decoding of linear block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 44, pp. 3091–3096, Nov. 1998.

[9] Y. S. Han, C. R. P. Hartmann, and C. C. Chen, “Efficient priority-first

search maximum likelihood soft decision decoding of linear block

codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 39, pp. 1514–1523, Sept.

1993.
[10] B. G. Dorsch, “A decoding algorithm for binary block codes and J-ary

output channels,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. IT-20, pp. 391–394,

May 1974.

[11] G. Battail and J. Fang, “Décodage pondéré optimal des codes linéaires en

blocs,” Ann. Télécommun., vol. 41, no. 11-12, pp. 580–604, Nov.-Dec.

1986.

[12] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Computationally efficient soft decision de-

coding of linear block codes based on ordered statistics,” IEEE Trans.

Inform. Theory, vol. 42, pp. 738–750, May 1996.

[13] D. Gazelle and J. Snyders, “Reliability-based code search algorithms

for maximum likelihood decoding of block codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform.

Theory, vol. 43, pp. 239–249, Jan. 1997.

[14] Y. S. Han, C. R. P. Hartmann, and K. G. Mehrotra, “Decoding linear

block codes using a priority-first search: Performance analysis and sub-

optimal version,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 44, pp. 1233–1246,

May 1998.

[15] A. Valembois and M. Fossorier, “A comparison between most reliable

basis reprocessing strategies,” IEICE Trans. Fundamentals, vol. E85-A,

no. 7, pp. 1727–1741, July 2002.

[16] R. Lidl and H. Niederreiter, Finite Fields. Cambridge, U.K.: Cam-

bridge Univ. Press, 1983.

[17] D. J. Taipale and M. B. Pursley, “An improvement to generalized-minimum-distance decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 37, pp. 167–172, Jan. 1991.
[18] A. Valembois, “Décodage, détection et reconnaissance des codes linéaires binaires,” Ph.D. dissertation, Univ. Limoges, Limoges, France, 2000.
[19] C. E. Shannon, “Probability of error for optimal codes in a Gaussian channel,” Bell Labs Tech. J., vol. 38, no. 3, pp. 279–324, May 1959.
[20] C. E. Shannon, R. G. Gallager, and E. R. Berlekamp, “Lower bounds to error probability for coding on discrete memoryless channels I,” Inform. Contr., vol. 10, no. 1, pp. 65–103, Feb. 1967.
[21] A. Valembois and M. Fossorier, “Sphere packing bounds revisited for moderate block lengths,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, submitted for publication.
[22] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Error performance analysis for reliabilitybased decoding algorithms,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 287–293, Jan. 2002.
[23] D. Agrawal and A. Vardy, “Generalized-minimum-distance decoding in Euclidean space: Performance analysis,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 46, pp. 60–83, Jan. 2000.
[24] M. Fossorier, “Reliability-based soft-decision decoding with iterative information set reduction,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 48, pp. 3101–3106, Dec 2002.
[25] G. Poltyrev, “Bounds on the decoding error probability of binary linear codes via their spectra,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 40, pp. 1284–1292, July 1994.
[26] J. T. Coffey and R. M. Goodman, “Any code of which we cannot think is good,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 36, pp. 1453–1460, Nov. 1990.
[27] R. G. Gallager, Information Theory and Reliable Communication. New York: Wiley, 1968.
[28] A. Barg, “Complexity issues in coding theory,” in Handbook of Coding Theory. Amsterdam, The Netherlands: Elsevier, 1998, pp. 649–754.
[29] Y. Wu and C. Hadjicostis, “Soft decision decoding of linear block codes using ordered G-space encodings,” in Proc. 2001 IEEE Global Telecom. Conf., San Antonio, TX, Nov. 2001.
[30] E. L. Blokh and V. V. Zyablov, “Coding of generalized concatenated codes,” Probl. Inform. Transm., vol. 10, pp. 218–222, 1974.
[31] S. Dolinar, D. Dolinar, and F. Pollara, “Code performance as a function of block size,” Jet Propuksion Lab., Pasadena, CA, TMO Progr. Rep. 42–133, 1998.
[32] M. Fossorier, “Average and maximum computational complexities for information set decoding of block codes,” in Proc. 3rd Asian-European Workshop on Information Theory, Kamogawa, Japan, June 2003, pp. 75–78.
[33] M. Fossorier and S. Lin, “Reliability-based information set decoding of binary linear codes,” IEICE Trans. Fundamentals, vol. E82-A, pp. 2034–2042, Oct. 1999.
[34] M. Fossorier and A. Valembois, “Box and match soft decision decoding of linear block codes with iterative information set reduction,” in Proc. 2002 Information Theory Workshop, Bangalore, India, Oct. 2002, pp. 45–48.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:40:29 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

