IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

1065

Joint (3; k)-Regular LDPC Code and Decoder/Encoder Design
Tong Zhang, Member, IEEE, and Keshab K. Parhi, Fellow, IEEE

Abstract—Recently, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have attracted a lot of attention in the coding theory community. However, their real-world applications are still problematic mainly due to the lack of effective decoder/encoder hardware design approaches. In this paper, we present a joint (3 )-regular LDPC code and decoder/encoder design technique to construct a class of (3 )-regular LDPC codes that not only have very good error-correcting capability but also exactly fit to high-speed partly parallel decoder and low-complexity encoder implementations. We also develop two techniques to further modify this joint design scheme to achieve more flexible tradeoffs between decoder hardware complexity and decoding speed.
Index Terms—Architecture, decoding, encoding, low-density parity check.
I. INTRODUCTION
B ECAUSE of their excellent error-correcting capability and efficient decoding algorithm, low-density parity-check (LDPC) codes have recently received much attention and have been widely considered as next-generation error-correcting codes for many real-world applications, e.g., telecommunications and magnetic storage. Nearly 40 years ago, Gallager invented LDPC codes [1], [2], in which two innovative ideas were exploited: iterative decoding and constrained random code construction. However, except for the papers of Zyablov and Pinsker [3], Tanner [4], and Margulis [5], Gallager’s work was largely neglected by the scientific community for the next 30 years. A few years after the birth of Turbo codes [6], in which both of the above ideas are employed, LDPC codes were rediscovered by MacKay and Neal [7].
An LDPC code is defined as the null space of a very sparse parity check matrix and is typically represented by
a bipartite graph,1 which is usually called a Tanner graph, between variable (or message) nodes in one set and check (or constraint) nodes in another set. An LDPC code is called ( , )-regular if each variable node has a degree of and each check node has a degree of . The construction of an LDPC code (or its Tanner graph) is typically random. LDPC codes
Manuscript received January 22, 2002; revised May 28, 2003. The associate editor coordinating the review of this manuscript and approving it for publication was Dr. Chaitali Chakrabarti.
T. Zhang is with the Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY 12180 USA (tzhang@ ecse.rpi.edu).
K. K. Parhi is with the Electrical and Computer Engineering Department, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455 USA (parhi@ece.umn.edu).
Digital Object Identifier 10.1109/TSP.2004.823508
1A bipartite graph is one in which the nodes can be partitioned into two disjoint sets.

can be effectively decoded by the iterative belief propagation (BP) (also known as sum-product) algorithm [8], [9]. The structure of the BP decoding algorithm directly matches the Tanner graph: Decoding messages are iteratively computed by all the variable nodes and check nodes and exchanged through the edges between the neighboring nodes. It is well known that the BP decoding algorithm works well if the underlying Tanner graph does not contain too many short cycles. Thus, the random Tanner graph is typically restricted to be four-cycle free, which is easy to achieve. However, the construction of random Tanner graphs free of higher order cycles, e.g., 6 and 8, is not trivial.
The past few years experienced significant improvements on LDPC code construction and error-correcting capability analysis, see, e.g., [10]–[18], etc. Besides their excellent errorcorrecting capability, another important reason why LDPC codes attract so much attention is that the BP decoding algorithm is inherently fully parallelizable, and the computation associated with each node (variable node or check node) is very simple; thus, it is reasonable to expect a great potential decoding speed. In this work, we are interested in LDPC decoder and encoder hardware implementations. Howland and Blansby [19] implemented a 1024-bit, rate-1/2 LDPC decoder by directly mapping BP algorithm to the hardware: Each node is implemented as an individual processor, and all the processors are connected through an interconnection network reflecting the Tanner graph connectivity. By fully exploiting the parallelism of the BP decoding algorithm, this decoder can achieve up to 1 Gb/s symbol throughput. However, such fully parallel decoder design generally scales poorly with the block length: With the increase of LDPC code block length, both computation complexity due to the implementation of all the processors and communication complexity due to the implementation of the entire interconnection network will incur very high hardware complexity. As pointed out in [19], the routing overhead for implementing the entire interconnection network will especially become quite formidable due to the randomness of the Tanner graph. Therefore, such fully parallel design scheme may not be suitable for many practical purposes, even when a short block length (less than 10 000 bits) is used. Thus, partly parallel decoders that can achieve effective tradeoff between decoding speed and hardware complexity are highly desirable for many real-world applications.
In partly parallel decoding, the computations associated with a certain number of variable nodes or check nodes are time-multiplexed to a single processor. Meanwhile, since the computation associated with each node is not complicated, the fully parallel interconnection network should be correspondingly transformed to partly parallel ones to achieve

1053-587X/04$20.00 © 2004 IEEE Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1066

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

both the communication complexity reduction and high-speed

partly parallel decoding. Unfortunately, the randomness of

the Tanner graph makes it nearly impossible to develop such

a transformation. In other words, an arbitrary random LDPC

code has little chance to be suited for high-speed partly parallel

decoder hardware implementation. To circumvent this problem,

Boutillon et al. [21] proposed to reverse the conventional design

sequence: Instead of trying to develop a partly parallel decoder

for a given LDPC code, we can use an available partly parallel

decoder to define a constrained random LDPC code. This

methodology is called decoder-first code design, and a partly

parallel decoder architecture is presented in [21]. However,

that decoder contains many random number generators that

will incur extra hardware overhead and make the entire design

process rather complicated since all the random number gen-

erators should be jointly designed to make the corresponding

Tanner graph four-cycle free. Moreover, like the conventional

random LDPC codes, it is difficult to develop an efficient

systematic encoding scheme for the obtained LDPC codes.

Real-world applications always have certain constraints on

the decoding latency and hardware complexity, both of which

increase significantly with the block length. Thus, in this work,

we only consider LDPC codes with short block length (less

than 10 000 bits). We believe that these LDPC codes are of great

interest from a practical point of view. At short block lengths,

randomly constructed Tanner graphs more likely contain quite

a few short cycles, e.g., 6 and 8, and the performance usually

varies significantly over one code ensemble, especially at

high signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). Mao and Banihashemi [12]

proposed an effective heuristic method to find good short LDPC

codes under the intuitive assumption that LDPC codes with

fewer short cycles very likely have better performance. Inspired

by the criterion for fewer short cycles and the decoder-first code

design methodology [21], we propose a joint

-regular

LDPC code and decoder/encoder design approach to develop a

class of -regular LDPC codes that fit to high-speed partly

parallel decoder and efficient encoder implementations.

The design methodology can be briefly described as follows.

First, we propose a method to explicitly construct a high-girth2

-regular LDPC code that exactly fits to a high-speed

partly parallel decoder. Then, we extend this decoder to a

-regular LDPC partly parallel decoder that is configured

by a set of constrained random parameters. This decoder de-

fines a -regular LDPC code ensemble from which a good

code can be selected based on the criterion of fewer short cycles

and computer simulations. Finally, exploiting the specific

structures of such -regular LDPC codes, we develop an

efficient systematic encoding scheme to reduce the encoding

complexity. Since each code in such a code ensemble is actually

constructed by randomly inserting certain check nodes into the

deterministic high-girth

-regular LDPC code under the

constraint specified by the decoder, it is reasonable to expect

that the codes in this ensemble more likely do not contain

too many short cycles, and we can easily select a good code

from it. As demonstrated in two design examples presented in

this paper, the jointly developed

-regular LDPC codes

can achieve nearly the same error-correcting capability as

their conventional random counterparts. Compared with de-

coder-first code design, this joint design leads to more efficient

decoder that contains no random number generators, and the

jointly developed -regular LDPC code can be efficiently

encoded. Moreover, we develop two extension schemes for this

proposed joint design approach to achieve much more flexible

tradeoffs between decoder hardware complexity and decoding

speed.

This paper is an extended version of [22] and is organized

as follows. In Section II, a BP decoding algorithm suitable

for hardware implementation is described. We present the

joint

-regular LDPC code and decoder/encoder design

approach in Section III. In Section IV, we develop two schemes

to modify the original joint design approach to achieve more

flexible decoder complexity/speed tradeoffs. Conclusions and

directions for future work are given in Section V.

II. DECODING ALGORITHM

Since direct implementation of the BP algorithm involves

high hardware complexity due to a large number of multiplica-

tions, we introduce some logarithmic quantities to convert these

multiplications into additions, which leads to the Log-BP algo-

rithm [1], [23]: Both the BP and Log-BP algorithms realize the

same decoding rule.

Before presenting the Log-BP algorithm, we introduce some

definitions as follows: Let denote the

parity check

matrix and denote the entry of at the position ( , ).

We define the set of bits that participate in parity check

as

and the set of parity checks

in which bit participates as

.

Let

denote the set

with bit excluded and

denote the set

with parity check excluded.

Algorithm 2.1 Iterative Log-BP Decoding

Algorithm

Input: The channel observations

and

,

;

Output: Hard decision

;

Procedure:

1) Initialization: For each , compute

the channel message

and

for each

, compute

sign
where sign
2) Iterative Decoding • Horizontal (or check node processing) step: For each , compute

2Girth is the length of a shortest cycle in a graph.

sign

(1)

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PARHI: JOINT

-REGULAR LDPC CODE AND DECODER/ENCODER DESIGN

1067

Fig. 1. Fully parallel decoder structure directly obtained from Tanner graph.

where

.

• Vertical (or variable node pro-

cessing) step: For each

, compute

sign

(2)

where

.

For each , update the “pseudo-

posterior log-likelihood ratio

(LLR)” as

(3)

• Decision step.

a) Perform hard decision on

to obtain

such that

if

and

if

.

b) If

, then algorithm

terminates, else go to Hori-

zontal step. A failure will

be declared if pre-set max-

imum number of iterations

occurs without successful

decoding.

decoder can easily achieve a great decoding speed. However, even for the short LDPC codes (less than 10 000 bits) that are of our current interest, it may incur too high hardware complexity because of the following.

1) The hardware overhead for implementing all the proces-

sors will be very high due to the total number, i.e.,

,

of CNUs and VNUs.

2) Due to the large number of soft messages and the random-

ness of the Tanner graph, implementation of the entire

interconnection network will cause formidable routing

overhead.

Therefore, partly parallel decoders that can achieve appro-

priate tradeoff between hardware complexity and decoding

speed are highly desirable for many practical applications. Due

to the randomness of the LDPC codes, we believe that, inspired

by Boutillon et al. [21], jointly conceiving code construction

and decoder design is a key for practical partly parallel decoder

hardware implementations. In this paper, we propose such a

joint design approach for

-regular LDPC codes, which

also leads to low-complexity encoding scheme. Compared

with other regular LDPC codes, the

-regular ones are

usually preferred because of their very good performance,

highest code rate, and lowest complexity. However, the more

general joint design approach for ( , )-regular LDPC codes or

even irregular LDPC codes still remains as a challenging open

problem.

In the above algorithm, and are called variable-to-

check messages and check-to-variable messages, respectively.

The function

can be implemented as

a look-up table (LUT) in hardware.

Clearly, we can perform each decoding iteration in fully par-

allel by mapping each node to one individual processor as illus-

trated in Fig. 1: Each check node is realized by a check node

processing unit (CNU) to compute the check-to-variable mes-

sage

according to (1), and each variable node is realized

by a variable node processing unit (VNU) to compute the vari-

able-to-check message

and pseudo-posterior LLR ac-

cording to (2) and (3), respectively; in addition, generate by

performing hard decision on . If each variable node delivers

the hard decision together with the variable-to-check messages

to all its neighboring check nodes, the parity check operation

after each decoding iteration can be easily performed by

CNUs.

Since each CNU and VNU only involves several simple oper-

ations, i.e., addition and table lookup, such a fully parallel LDPC

III. JOINT

-REGULAR LDPC CODE AND

DECODER/ENCODER DESIGN

The proposed joint design methodology can be briefly described as follows. We first explicitly construct a high-girth
-regular LDPC code that exactly fits to a partly parallel decoder and then extend this decoder to a -regular LDPC partly parallel decoder that is configured by a set of constrained random parameters and defines a -regular LDPC code ensemble. Each code in the ensemble is constructed by randomly inserting certain check nodes into the deterministic high-girth
-regular LDPC code under the constraint specified by the decoder. Thus, it is reasonable to expect that the codes in this ensemble are unlikely to contain too many short cycles and, hence, have good error-correcting capability. This will be further illuminated by two design examples. The parity check matrix of each code in this ensemble can be transformed to an approximate upper triangular matrix, based on which we obtain an efficient encoding scheme.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1068

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

Fig. 2. Code and decoder/encoder joint design flow diagram.

Before presenting this joint design in more detail, we intro-

duce the concept of girth average [12]: Let denote the length

of the shortest cycle that passes node in graph . The girth

average of is defined as

, where

is the

total node number of .

We outline the joint design process as follows, and the corre-

sponding schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 2.

1) Explicitly construct two deterministic submatrices

and , and let

defines -regular

LDPC code, which is denoted as , whose Tanner graph

has a girth of 12.

2) Exploit the specific structure of to develop a partly

parallel decoder architecture for .

3) Extend the -regular LDPC decoder to a -reg-

ular LDPC decoder that is configured by a set of

constrained random parameters and defines a -reg-

ular LDPC code ensemble. The parity check matrix

of each code in this ensemble can be written as

.

4) Using the decoder, we randomly generate a certain

number of

-regular LDPC codes from which we

select a good code based on girth average comparison

and computer simulations.

5) Introduce a deterministic column permutation to trans-

form the parity check matrix of selected code to approxi-

mate the upper triangular form, the development of which

is based on an efficient systematic encoding scheme.

H H Fig. 3. Structures of submatrices and .
Fig. 4. Histograms of girth averages for (2,6)-regular LDPC codes with block length (a) 2304 and (b) 9216.

A. Construction of and

Since the first step is to construct high-girth

-regular

LDPC code that fits to partly parallel decoder hardware im-

plementation, it is necessary to examine the existing methods

of constructing high-girth

-regular LDPC codes. Tanner

[4] proposed to construct a -regular LDPC code with an

exact value of girth (less than or equal to 32) by inserting vari-

able nodes on the edges of a Moore graph [27] or a general-

ized polygon [28]. More generally, we can obtain a high-girth

-regular LDPC code by inserting variable nodes on the

edges of any high-girth -regular graphs, e.g., a Ramanujan

graph [29], where the girth is larger than a certain bound. How-

ever, whether the

-regular Tanner graphs constructed by

the above methods can lead to efficient partly parallel decoders

is still an open problem. Moreover, we note that all these con-

struction methods suffer from the very strict constraints on the

block length selection.

In this work, we propose a method to construct -regular

LDPC codes with the girth of 12. Although 12 is not a very large

girth value, our simulations show that it is sufficient for gener-

ating good -regular LDPC codes with short block lengths.

More importantly, this construction approach will lead to a de-

coder with extremely simple control mechanism and data path

structure and provide much more freedom on the selection of

block length: Given , any block length that could be factored

as

is permitted, where is any positive integer not con-

tained in the set

.

The parity check matrix of such -regular LDPC code

has the form

, where the structures of and

are shown in Fig. 3: Each block matrix in is an

identity matrix, and each block matrix in is obtained

by a cyclic shift of an

identity matrix. Let denote the

right cyclic shift operator, where

represents right cyclic

shifting matrix by columns; then,

, where

, and represents the

identity

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PARHI: JOINT

-REGULAR LDPC CODE AND DECODER/ENCODER DESIGN

1069

Fig. 5. (2; k)-regular LDPC partly parallel decoder architecture.

matrix, e.g., letting

,

, and

, we have

, and then

Clearly, in both and , each row contains 1’s, and each

column contains a single 1. Thus, matrix

de-

fines a -regular LDPC code, which is denoted as , with

variable nodes and check nodes. Letting denote the

Tanner graph of , we have the following theorem regarding

to the girth of .

Theorem 3.1: If cannot be factored as

, where ,

, then the girth of is 12, and there is at least

one 12-cycle passing each check node.

Proof: See Appendix A.

It is clear that the girth average of is always 12. For the

comparison between and random codes in terms of girth av-

erage, we randomly construct two four-cycle free (2, 6)-regular

LDPC code ensembles with block length of 2304 and 9216, re-

spectively. Each ensemble contains 500 codes and has the his-

togram of girth averages as shown in Fig. 4.

B.

-Regular LDPC Decoder Architecture

This decoder contains memory banks, which are denoted

as MEM BANK-( , ) for

,

. MEM BANK-( , )

stores all the -bit channel messages (in RAM ), -bit vari-

able-to-check and check-to-variable messages (in RAMs

and ), and hard decisions (in RAM ) associated with the

variable nodes in VG . In this decoder, the check-to-variable

message

and variable-to-check message

associated

with each pair of neighboring nodes alternatively occupy

the same memory location. The two check-to-variable or

variable-to-check messages associated with each variable node

are stored in and with the same address. This decoder

completes each decoding iteration in clock cycles, and in

each clock cycle, it performs the following.

1) In each memory bank, if all the check-to-variable

messages

associated with one variable node be-

come available after previous clock cycle, then do the

following.

a) Retrieve one channel message from RAM and

two check-to-variable messages

associated

with this variable node from RAM and .

b) VNU computes two variable-to-check messages

and LLR and obtains by performing

hard decision on .

c) Store the two variable-to-check messages

back to RAM and and to RAM .

In this section, we present a partly parallel decoder architec-

ture for . To facilitate the following description, we arrange

the variable nodes of into groups, where each group

VG (

,

) contains the variable nodes corre-

sponding to the columns in going through the block matrix

and . Notice that any two variable nodes in the same

group never connect to the same check node, and all the vari-

able nodes connected to the same check node, as specified by

, always come from groups with the same -index

( -index). Based on the above observations, we obtain a partly

parallel decoder architecture for , as shown in Fig. 5.

2) Retrieve variable-to-check messages

and hard

decisions (obtained in the previous iteration) from the

memory banks at the addresses provided by AG ’s.

3) Shuffle the variable-to-check messages and hard de-

cision by an one layer shuffle network. This shuffle net-

work is configured by the configuration bit , leading

to a fixed permutation (or reordering pattern), which is

denoted , if

, or to the identity permutation,

which is denoted Id, if

.

4) Each CNU computes check-to-variable messages

and performs the parity check on the hard decisions .

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1070

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

Fig. 6. (3; k)-regular LDPC partly parallel decoder architecture.

5) Unshuffle the check-to-variable messages , and store them back into the memory banks at the original locations.

Exploiting the specific properties of and and the above decoder architecture, we have that to realize the connectivity specified by and in the first and second clock cycles, respectively, this decoder needs to have the following features.

• Each address generator AG provides memory address

to and during the first and second clock cycles,

respectively. In order to access all the messages associ-

ated with the same check node in the same clock cycle, we

only need to implement each AG as a modulo- binary

counter set to initial value every clock cycles, i.e.,

at

, , where

(4)

• To realize the connectivity specified by during the

first clock cycles, each messages from memory

banks with the same -index should be sent to the same

CNU. Thus, we set the configuration bit

,

and make permute input data

to

, where

(5)
• To realize the connectivity specified by during the second clock cycles, each messages from memory banks with the same -index should be sent to the same CNU. Thanks to the arrangement of the MEM BANKs, we only need to bypass the shuffle network by setting .

Fig. 7. g-layer shuffle network.

C.

-Regular LDPC Decoder Architecture

As shown in Fig. 6, by introducing a few new blocks

into the above

-regular LDPC decoder, we obtain a

-regular LDPC partly parallel decoder. Configured by a

set of constrained random parameters, this decoder defines a

-regular LDPC code ensemble in which each code has

variable nodes and

check nodes and is essentially

constructed by randomly introducing

more check nodes

into .

In this decoder, a random permutation generator (RPG) and

-layer shuffle network are inserted between the one-layer

shuffle network ( or Id) and all the CNUs. As shown in

Fig. 7, the -layer shuffle network is realized in the same way

as proposed in [21]: Each layer is a single layer shuffle network

and configured by leading to a given permutation if

, or to the identity permutation (Id ) otherwise. Thus,

configured by the -bit word

generated by

RPG, the overall permutation pattern in each clock cycle is

the product of permutations:

.

This decoder completes each decoding iteration in clock

cycles. CNUs access the messages stored in , , and

in the first, second, and third clock cycles, respectively. We

denote the

check nodes associated with the messages

stored in and as deterministic check nodes and the other

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PARHI: JOINT

-REGULAR LDPC CODE AND DECODER/ENCODER DESIGN

1071

check nodes associated with the messages stored in as random check nodes.
During the first clock cycles, this decoder bypasses the -layer shuffle network by setting the output of RPG as a zero vector and works in the exactly same way as the above
-regular LDPC decoder. In other words, this decoder real-

izes the connectivity specified by

between all

variable nodes and the

deterministic check nodes during

the first clock cycles.

During the last clock cycles, this decoder realizes the con-

nectivity between all variable nodes and the random check

nodes, according to the following specifications.

• The RPG performs as a hash function :

, and its -bit output vector

configures the -layer shuffle network.

• The configuration bit

so that the one-layer shuffle

network performs the identity permutation.

• AG provides address to with the counter set to

at

, where

.

Letting matrix represent the connectivity realized in the last clock cycles, we easily have that is by and con-
tains 1’s in each row and a single 1 in each column. Thus, this decoder defines a -regular LDPC code ensemble, in which

each code has the parity check matrix

,

where and have the deterministic structures, as shown in

Fig. 3, and matrix is jointly specified by , the hash func-

tion , and the -layer shuffle network. In order to guarantee that

this code ensemble only contains four-cycle free codes and facil-

itate the design process, we propose to construct the hash func-

tion and the -layer shuffle network randomly and generate

the value of each randomly under the following constraints.

1) Given , 2) Given ,

,, .

. ,,

In the following, we briefly prove that the above two constraints are sufficient to generate four-cycle free LDPC codes. First, notice that existence of four-cycle is equivalent to existence of two variable nodes being connected to (or sharing) the same two check nodes. For each code defined by the above decoder, two variable nodes share one check node if and only if (iff) their messages are delivered to the same CNU in the same clock cycle. During the first clock cycles, if the messages associated with two variable nodes are delivered to the same CNU in the same clock cycle, they must be stored in the same address of in two memory banks with the same index. According to the first constraint, we have that any two messages associated with all such two variable nodes and stored in will never be accessed in the same clock cycle during the third clock cycles. Therefore, all such two variable nodes have no chance to share one random check node, no matter how we generate the hash function and the -layer shuffle network. Since the connectivity realized in the first clock cycles is specified by , we may conclude that the first constraint guarantees that any two variable nodes sharing one deterministic check node, as specified by submatrix , never share one random check node. Similarly, the second constraint guarantees that any two variable nodes sharing one deterministic check node, as specified

by submatrix , never share one random check node. Therefore, we know that each code defined by this decoder does not contain two variable nodes sharing the same two check nodes or that each code is four-cycle free.
We call the code ensemble defined by the above decoder the implementation-oriented -regular LDPC code ensemble. For real applications, we need to select a good code from this code ensemble. In this work, we propose to combine the girth average comparison and computer simulations together to effectively find a good code. First, randomly generate a certain number of implementation-oriented -regular LDPC codes, and then, pick a few codes with high girth averages; finally, select the one leading to the best simulation results.

D. Design Examples

Before presenting the efficient encoding scheme, in this

section, we develop two implementation-oriented (3, 6)-regular

LDPC codes with different block lengths to illustrate the above

design methodology. We select two values of :

and

, for both of which the requirement that

cannot be factored as , where ,

is satisfied. Next, we obtain two (3,6)-regular LDPC partly

parallel decoders that correspond to two different block lengths:

and

. Both decoders

contain three-layer random shuffle networks.

For each case, we independently generate 500 groups of hash

function , a three-layer shuffle network, and all at random

under the above two constraints on . Then, we apply these

parameters to the corresponding decoders and obtain two code

ensembles, each containing 500 codes. The histograms of girth

averages of these two ensembles are shown in Fig. 8(c) and (f).

For each case, we choose five codes with relatively high girth av-

erages and select the one leading to the best performance based

on the computer simulations. In the computer simulations, we

assume that the LDPC codes are modulated by BPSK and trans-

mitted over the AWGN channel.

We denote the selected implementation-oriented (3,6)-reg-

ular LDPC codes with the block length

and

as and , respectively. Since the parity check matrices

of both and contain two redundant checks, and are

(2304,1154) and (4608,2306) codes. For each block length, we

also randomly generate two four-cycle free (3,6)-regular LDPC

code ensembles, where one is generated in fully random, and an-

other is generated using the decoder-first code design approach.

Each code ensemble contains 500 codes, and the histograms of

girth averages are shown in Fig. 8. Denote the selected fully

random codes with the block length and as and

and the selected codes developed by decoder-first code design

approach with the block length and as

and .

Both and

are (2304, 1152) codes, and both and

are (4608, 2304) codes.

The finite precision simulation results of each , , and

are shown in Fig. 9, including the BER versus SNR and

average number of iterations versus SNR. In the finite preci-

sion simulations, we adopt the quantization scheme developed

in [30]: Received data is quantized with 4 bits, and

and

are represented with 6 bits with a variable precision

representation scheme proposed in [30]. Moreover, the channel

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1072

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

Fig. 8. Histograms of girth averages for (a) and (d) fully random codes, (b) and (e) codes developed by decoder-first code design, and (c) and (f) implementationoriented codes.

E. Efficient Systematic Encoding Scheme

Fig. 9. Finite precision simulation results, where solid lines correspond to C , dash lines and dash dot lines for C , and C , respectively.
message is also represented with 6 bits. The function is realized by a 32 32 LUT. In order to guar-
antee the accuracy of the simulation results, especially at high SNR, each point in the simulation results of BER versus SNR is obtained under the condition that the block error number at least exceeds 100. Finally, we note that only detected errors3 occurred during all the simulations.
3A detected error is an error in which the decoder knows that it has failed to find a valid codeword after the maximum decoding iterations and reports this failure.

For the random LDPC codes, the generator matrix is typically

used to perform encoding that has quadratic complexity in the

block length. One efficient encoding methodology, which was

suggested in [24] and [25], is to construct random LDPC code

using an approximate upper triangular parity check matrix to

significantly reduce the encoding complexity. In this section, we

show that we can apply the above idea to obtain an efficient en-

coding scheme for the implementation-oriented

-regular

LDPC codes. The developed encoding scheme is much more

efficient in the sense that it does not contain any back-substitu-

tion operations, which are extensively used in [24] and [25] for

general random LDPC codes and will incur very long encoding

latency.

In [25], the greedy algorithms are used to construct approxi-

mate upper triangular LDPC parity check matrix. Different from

that approach, based on the specific structure of implementa-

tion-oriented -regular LDPC code, we propose an efficient

systematic encoding approach. First, we obtain an approximate

upper triangular matrix

by introducing a de-

terministic column permutation , then obtain a pseudo-code-

word by performing efficient encoding based on , and,

finally, get the real codeword

.

Construction of : Recall that the parity check matrix

of implementation-oriented

-regular LDPC code can be

written as

, where and are shown

in Fig. 3, and is specified by the decoder. Denote the sub-

matrix consisting of all the columns of that go through the

block matrix in as

, e.g.,

, as shown in

Fig. 10. We introduce a column permutation to sequentially

move each

forward to the position exactly next to

,

where increases from 3 to successively. From the construc-

tion of described in Section III-A, we have that each

is actually an identity matrix. Therefore, the matrix

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PARHI: JOINT

-REGULAR LDPC CODE AND DECODER/ENCODER DESIGN

1073

H Fig. 10. Structure of matrix .

has the structure as shown in Fig. 10, and we can write matrix in block matrix form:
(6)

If matrix has redundant checks, let

the left by

submatrix of is

, and then,

trix-vector multiplications will be much smaller compared with

general sparse matrix-vector multiplications. Finally, we obtain

the real codeword

, and the information bits on the

decoder side can be easily obtained by performing the column

permutation on the decoder output.

IV. EXTENDED JOINT DESIGN SCHEMES

(7)

in which is a

by the

upper triangular

submatrix. As shown in Fig. 10, we can write the matrix as

from which we readily know that equals an identity matrix

or

. Notice that this property will be used to simplify

the encoding process, as described below.

Encoding Process: Next, we describe how the effi-

cient encoding is carried out based on the matrix . Let

be a pseudo-codeword decomposed according

to (6), where is the information bit with the length of

, and redundant bits and have the length of

and

, respectively.

Procedure 3.1:

1) Compute

and

, which is efficient

because both and are sparse.

2) Solve

. Since

, we have

,

which can be easily computed since is sparse.

3) Evaluate

, which is also efficient since

is sparse.

4) Compute

, where

. In

this step, the complexity scales with

.

5) Finally, we obtain by solving

.

Since

,

. This is efficient

since both and are sparse.

We note that the above encoding process is similar to that proposed in [25]. However, in [25], and have to be solved using the inefficient back-substitution method since in general cases. Moreover, since the nonzero entries in submatrices , , and are only contained in certain block matrices, the hardware routing overhead in the corresponding ma-

Given the parameter , the above partly parallel decoder only achieves a fixed tradeoff between hardware complexity and decoding speed by making variable nodes map to one memory bank and share the same computation resources. Intuitively, if we have certain flexibility on choosing the number of variable nodes (instead of the fixed number ) that map to one memory bank and share the same computation resources, we can correspondingly achieve different decoder complexity/speed tradeoffs, which is, of course, desirable for practical applications. In this section, we present the following two schemes to extend the original joint design to accomplish flexible complexity/speed tradeoffs:
• higher speed extension scheme (HSES) to trade hardware complexity for higher speed;
• reduced complexity extension scheme (RCES) to trade speed for reduced hardware complexity.

A. HSES

We can briefly describe this relatively straightforward exten-

sion scheme as follows: First, we directly split one memory bank

in the original design to

sub-banks, provided that

is divisible by , and then correspondingly modify the de-

coder architecture to make the variable nodes that map to each

sub-bank share the same computation resources. Using such

split-and-modification approach, we easily obtain a partly par-

allel decoder, as shown in Fig. 11, with higher parallelism (or

higher decoding speed) than the original one.

This decoder contains BK blocks, a one-layer shuffle

network ( or ), a -layer shuffle network configured by

a random permutation generator (RPG), and

CNUs.

Each block

contains memory banks and VNUs.

Each memory bank

stores all the decoding messages

associated with variable nodes. This decoder completes

each decoding iteration in clock cycles and, similar to the

original design, in the first clock cycles, it realizes the fixed

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1074

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

Fig. 11. (3; k)-regular LDPC partly parallel decoder architecture developed by HSES.

connectivity specified by and and defines a random-like

submatrix in the last clock cycles. To fulfill such require-

ments and make the jointly developed

-regular LDPC

codes four-cycle free, this modified decoder has the following

properties.

• As shown in Fig. 11, each address generator AG is implemented as a modulo- counter, which is set to initial value every clock cycles, i.e., at , , , where

• The RPG outputs a zero -bit vector during the first

clock cycles and performs as a hash function during the

last clock cycles. The structure of the -layer shuffle

network is the same as in the original design, except that

the data width is

instead of .

Notice that since the parity check matrix of the jointly developed -regular LDPC code has the same form as in the original design, the above efficient encoding scheme can be directly applied to this modified design.

(8) .

Each is chosen in random under the same constraints

as in the original design.

• The output of the comparator in each

, is 0

when the output of the counter (the address generated by

AG ) is less than ; otherwise, is to 1.

• As shown in Fig. 11, configured by

and ,

the array cyclic shifter in each

performs

the left cyclic shift on

and outputs

as

(9)

where the is defined as

div div

(10) .

• The one-layer shuffle network performs the permutation

(when

) or (when

) on the input data

:

.

— The permutation regroups the data in such a way that

the

with the same and indices are adjacent,

i.e., the output is

B. RCES

Contrary to the above HSES for higher decoding speed, the

RCES is developed to trade the decoding speed for reduced

hardware complexity: Given parameters and , provided that

is divisible by , and applying RCES, we can develop a de-

coder that completes each decoding iteration in

clock cy-

cles and consists of CNUs, VNUs, and several shuffle

networks with the routing complexity scaled by . Fig. 12

shows the design flow diagram of the modified joint design ap-

proach developed by RCES, which is very similar to the original

design, except that the introduction of a column permutation .

In the following, we first describe how to construct the column

permutation and then briefly present the developed partly par-

allel decoder architecture.

Contruction of

: Let

denote the submatrix

of consisting of all the columns going through the block ma-

trix in . Each

is referred as unit submatrix since it

will be treated as an indivisible unit in the column permutation

. Let each consecutive unit submatrices constitute a u-block

submatrix :

.

Provided that is divisible by , let

, and write matrix

in block matrix form:

, where each

block matrix consists of consecutive u-block submatrices

— The permutation regroups the data in such a way that We apply an unit submatrix permutation to each submatrix

the

with the same and indices are adjacent, and obtain

i.e., the output is

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PARHI: JOINT

-REGULAR LDPC CODE AND DECODER/ENCODER DESIGN

1075

Fig. 12. Modified joint design flow diagram developed by RCES.

H Fig. 13. Structure of each ^ .

where each submatrix consists of unit submatrices

(11)

Letting

, where

and

,

we construct the permutation in such a way that the index of

each unit submatrix ( , ) in (11) is obtained as

by a set of constrained random parameters, this decoder defines a -regular LDPC code ensemble. The parity check matrix of each code in this ensemble is by and has the form

.

This decoder contains

identical VN Blocks, a one-

layer shuffle network ( or Id), a -layer shuffle network con-

figured by a random permutation generator (RPG), and CNUs.

Each VN Block contains memory banks, where each

for

stores all the decoding messages associated with

the variable nodes in group VG . This decoder completes

each decoding iteration in

clock cycles: During the first

clock cycles, it realizes the connectivity specified by ;

during the last

clock cycles, it defines the connectivity,

which is represented by , between all the variable nodes and

random check nodes. We outline the specific architecture

properties of this decoder as follows.

• As shown in Fig. 14, each AG is realized by a modulo-

binary counter followed by an adder. Each counter is

preset with an initial value

every clock cy-

cles, i.e., at

, where

.

Each AG generates the output address by adding the

counter’s output with a parameter

. Each

is defined as

Applying with the same column permutation , we permute each to and denote the overall permutation as :
(12)

Each

.
is generated as follows: For each , let , and we first introduce an one-to-one mapping
, which is defined as

Modified

-regular LDPC Decoder: Each matrix

in (12) has the form as

, where each

consists of consecutive

columns. According to the

permutation pattern of , it is easy to show that each has

the structure as shown in Fig. 13.

Let denote the -regular LDPC code defined by .

We arrange the variable nodes of into groups, where

each group VG contains the variable nodes corresponding

to the columns of . Notice that in , each column

contains a single 1,

rows out of the

rows contain

a single 1, and all other rows are zero row vectors. Based on

the above observations and referring to the original joint design,

we develop a partly parallel decoder for and extend it to a

-regular LDPC decoder, as shown in Fig. 14. Configured

For each

, let as

, and obtain

(13)

where each constraints.

is chosen in random under the following

1) Given , 2) Given ,

,, .

. ,,

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1076

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

Fig. 14. (3; k)-regular LDPC partly parallel decoder architecture developed by RCES.

Fig. 15. Finite precision simulation results, where solid lines and dash lines correspond to C and C , respectively.

• Configured by

, the array cyclic shifter in each

VN Block performs left cyclic shift on

and outputs

as

.

• During the first

clock cycles, the output of RPG is

a zero vector, and during the last clock cycles, RPG

performs as a hash function :

.

• The one-layer shuffle network ( or Id) performs the

permutation

. permutes

to

:

(14)

• The 1-bit output of comparator

if

, and

otherwise.

Since is only a column permutation of , the jointly de-

veloped -regular LDPC codes can be efficiently encoded

by using the nearly same approach as described in Section III-E,

except that the approximate upper triangular matrix is obtained

as

.

Design Examples: Let us consider two different

:

,

and

;

,

and

. We set

in the decoder configurations. Thus,

we obtain two code ensembles with different block lengths and

code rates (

and

;

and

), where each en-

semble contains 500 codes. We denote the selected codes with

and

as and , respectively. More-

over, we generate two fully random four-cycle free -reg-

ular LDPC code ensembles with the same block lengths and

code rates as and , from which two good codes are se-

lected and are denoted as and , respectively. Fig. 15

shows the finite precision simulation results of each of and

. Again, in order to guarantee the accuracy, especially at high

SNR, each point in the BER simulation results is obtained under

the condition that the block error number at least exceeds 100,

and only detected errors occurred during all the simulations.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PARHI: JOINT

-REGULAR LDPC CODE AND DECODER/ENCODER DESIGN

1077

V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK

A joint

-regular LDPC code and decoder/encoder de-

sign approach has been presented in this paper. We first propose

a novel method to explicitly construct high-girth -regular

LDPC code that exactly fits a high-speed partly parallel de-

coder. Then, by extending this decoder, we obtain a -reg-

ular LDPC partly parallel decoder that is configured by a set

of constrained random parameters and defines a -regular

LDPC code ensemble. Each code in this ensemble is essentially

constructed by randomly inserting certain check nodes into the

high-girth -regular LDPC code. Thus, it is reasonable to

expect that codes in this code ensemble more likely do not con-

tain too many short cycles and achieve good error-correcting

capability, which has been illustrated by two design examples.

Based on the specific structure of their parity check matrices,

we develop an efficient systematic encoding scheme for the

jointly developed LDPC codes. Finally, we present two schemes

to modify the proposed joint design approach to achieve more

flexible tradeoffs between decoder hardware complexity and de-

coding speed.

We believe that such a joint design approach should be a key

for practical LDPC coding system implementations. Future re-

search work will be directed toward investigating the joint de-

sign approaches for the more general ( , )-regular LDPC codes

and irregular LDPC codes, where the latter one is much more

challenging and of great practical interest.

APPENDIX A PROOF OF THEOREM 3.1

First, we arrange all the check nodes in Tanner graph into

two disjoint sets and , where and contain the check

nodes corresponding to the

rows in and , respec-

tively. We label the check node in set

corresponding to the

th row in

as

, where

, and

.

Because each column in and contains a single 1, each

variable node in has degree of 2 and always connects to one

check node

and one check node

. Thus, if

we introduce a new graph that only consists of all the check

nodes in and two nodes are connected iff they connect to the

same variable node in , graph will be also a bipartite graph,

and each edge always connects

with

. The

original graph can be directly reconstructed from by in-

serting one variable node on each edge in . Thus, the girth of

is a two times of the girth of , and Theorem 3.1 is equivalent

to following theorem:

Theorem A-1: If cannot be factored as

, where

, then the girth of is always 6, and there

is at least one six-cycle passing each node in .

Proof: Based on the fact that the length of each cycle in a

bipartite graph is a multiple of 2, we prove the above theorem

in the following three steps.

3) Finally, show that there is at least one six-cycle passing

each node.

From the constructions of and in Section III-A and

the above computation rules for the index

of and

index

of , we know that the nonzero entries of the

row in corresponding to node have the column indices

for

, and each th

column goes through the block matrix

in . Node

connects to nodes in that correspond to distinct rows

of containing a 1 at column index for

.

Because each block matrix

is obtained through right

cyclic shifting an identity matrix by

columns,

it can be shown that iff

(A.1)

the entry at the position ( , ) in submatrix is 1. Moreover, the th row in submatrix corresponds to node , where

(A.2)

Therefore, letting node , we have

denote that node connects to

(A.3)

This completes the step 1.

Since graph is four-cycle free, we directly have that there

are no two-cycles in graph . In the following, based on (A.3),

we will prove that is four-cycle free by reduction to contra-

diction. Suppose there is a four-cycle in . Since is a bipartite

graph, this four-cycle must pass two nodes in , which are de-

noted

,

, and two nodes in , which are denoted as

and

. According to (A.3), we have

(A.4) (A.5)

and

(A.6) (A.7)

First, we show that

and

. Supposing

, then

(otherwise,

and

will be the same

node), and from (A.4) and (A.6), we have

(A.8)

However, from the condition that cannot be factored as

for

, we know that

. Since

, we may conclude that the (A.8) cannot hold for

any

. Therefore, we have

. Similarly, we also

have

.

From (A.4), (A.5), (A.6), and (A.7), we get

(A.9)

1) First, prove that whether two nodes

and

are connected is solely dependent on the relation be-

tween their indices:

and .

2) Then, prove that no two- or four-cycles exist in graph .

Since , , ,

,

, and

,

both

and

will be less than . Again, from

the condition that cannot be factored as

for ,

, we have

for

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

1078

IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, VOL. 52, NO. 4, APRIL 2004

all , , , and

, which is contradictory to

(A.9). Thus, we conclude that there are no four-cycles in graph

. This completes step 2.

Finally, we show that there is at least one six-cycle passing

each node in graph in a constructive approach. Notice that

for any

LDPC codes.

, if

, we have

and define

If

, we have

and define

Applying (A.3), we can easily verify that

The sequence ( ,

,

,

,

,

,

) forms a six-cycle in graph passing node

.

Similarly,

, if

, define

else define

Applying (A.3), we also can easily verify that

The sequence ( ,

,

,

,

) forms a six-cycle in graph passing node

completes the proof.

,

,

. This

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank the anonymous reviewers for their valuable comments and suggestions, which have greatly improved the quality and presentation of this paper.

REFERENCES

[1] R. G. Gallager, Low-Density Parity-Check Codes. Cambridge, MA:

M.I.T. Press, 1963.

[2]

, “Low-density parity-check codes,” IRE Trans. Inform. Theory,

vol. IT-8, pp. 21–28, Jan. 1962.

[3] V. Zyablov and M. Pinsker, “Estimation of the error-correction complexity of Gallager low-density codes,” Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, vol. 11, pp. 23–26, Jan. 1975.
[4] R. M. Tanner, “A recursive approach to low complexity codes,” IEEE Trans. Information Theory, vol. IT-27, pp. 533–547, Sept. 1981.
[5] G. A. Margulis, “Explicit constructions of graphs without short cycles and low density codes,” Combinatorica, vol. 2, pp. 71–78, 1982.
[6] C. Berrou, A. Glavieux, and P. Thitimajshima, “Near shannon limit error-correcting coding and decoding: turbo-codes,” in Proc. ICC, Geneva, Switzerland, May 1993, pp. 1064–1070.
[7] D. J. C. MacKay and R. M. Neal, “Near Shannon limit performance of low density parity check codes,” Electron. Lett., vol. 32, pp. 1645–1646, Aug. 1996.
[8] D. J. C. MacKay, “Good error-correcting codes based on very sparse matrices,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 45, pp. 399–431, Mar. 1999.
[9] F. R. Kschischang, B. J. Frey, and H.-A. Loeliger, “Factor graphs and the sum-product algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 498–519, Feb. 2001.
[10] M. C. Davey and D. J. C. MacKay, “Low-density parity check codes over GF (q),” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 2, pp. 165–167, June 1998.
[11] M. G. Luby, M. Shokrolloahi, M. A. Mizenmacher, and D. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs and belief propagation,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Inform. Theory, Cambridge, MA, Aug. 1998, p. 117.
[12] Y. Mao and A. Banihashemi, “A heuristic search for good low-density parity-check codes at short block lengths,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2001, pp. 41–44.
[13] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “The capacity of low-density parity check codes under message-passing decoding,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 599–618, Feb. 2001.
[14] T. Richardson, A. Shokrollahi, and R. Urbanke, “Design of capacity-approaching low-density parity check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 619–637, Feb..
[15] S.-Y. Chung, T. J. Richardson, and R. L. Urbanke, “Analysis of sumproduct decoding of low-density parity-check codes using a Gaussian approximation,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 657–670, Feb. 2001.
[16] M. G. Luby, M. Mitzenmacher, M. A. Shokrollahi, and D. A. Spielman, “Improved low-density parity-check codes using irregular graphs,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 585–598, Feb. 2001.
[17] S. Chung, G. D. Forney, T. Richardson, and R. Urbanke, “On the design of low-density parity-check codes within 0.0045 dB of the shannon limit,” IEEE Commun. Lett., vol. 5, pp. 58–60, Feb. 2001.
[18] G. Miller and D. Burshtein, “Bounds on the maximum-likelihood decoding error probability of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 2696–2710, Nov. 2001.
[19] C. Howland and A. Blanksby, “A 690-mw 1-gb/s 1024-b, rate-1/2 lowdensity parity-check code decoder,” IEEE J. Solid-State Circuits, vol. 37, pp. 404–412, Mar. 2002.
[20] K. K. Parhi, VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems: Design and Implementation. New York: Wiley, 1999.
[21] E. Boutillon, J. Castura, and F. R. Kschischang, “Decoder-first code design,” in Proc. 2nd Int. Symp. Turbo Codes Related Topics, Brest, France, Sept. 2000, pp. 459–462.
[22] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “VLSI implementation-oriented (3; k)-regular low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Workshop Signal Process. Syst., Sept. 2001, pp. 25–36.
[23] M. Chiani, A. Conti, and A. Ventura, “Evaluation of low-density parity-check codes over block fading channels,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., 2000, pp. 1183–1187.
[24] D. J. C. MacKay, S. T. Wilson, and M. C. Davey, “Comparison of constructions of irregular Gallager codes,” IEEE Trans. Commun., vol. 47, pp. 1449–1454, Oct. 1999.
[25] T. Richardson and R. Urbanke, “Efficient encoding of low-density parity-check codes,” IEEE Trans. Inform. Theory, vol. 47, pp. 638–656, Feb. 2001.
[26] T. Zhang and K. K. Parhi, “A class of efficient-encoding generalized low-density parity-check codes,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoust., Speech, Signal Processing, Salt Lake City, UT, May 2001.
[27] P. J. Cameron and J. H. Van Lint, Graph Theory, Coding Theory and Block Designs. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1975.
[28] H. V. Maldeghem, Generalized Polygons. Boston, MA: Birkhauser Verlag, 1998.
[29] A. Lubotzky, R. Philips, and P. Sarnak, “Ramanujan graphs,” Combinatorica, vol. 8, pp. 261–277, 1988.
[30] T. Zhang, Z. Wang, and K. K. Parhi, “On finite precision implementation of low-density parity-check codes decoder,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Symp. Circuits Syst., Sydney, Australia, May 2001.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

ZHANG AND PARHI: JOINT

-REGULAR LDPC CODE AND DECODER/ENCODER DESIGN

1079

Tong Zhang (S’98–M’03) received the B.S. and M.S. degrees in electrical engineering from the Xian Jiaotong University, Xian, China, in 1995 and 1998, respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in electrical engineering from the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, in 2002.
Currently, he is an assistant professor with the Electrical, Computer, and Systems Engineering Department, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY. His current research interests include the design of VLSI architectures and circuits for digital signal processing and communication systems, with emphasis on error-correcting coding, coded modulation, and multimedia processing.

Keshab K. Parhi (S’85–M’88–SM’91–F’96) received the B.Tech. degree from the Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur, India, in 1982, the M.S.E.E. degree form the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, in 1984, and the Ph.D. degree from the University of California, Berkeley, in 1988.
He is a Distinguished McKnight University Professor of electrical and computer engineering at the University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, where he holds the Edgar F. Johnson Professorship. His research interests include VLSI implementations of broadband access networks. He is currently working on VLSI adaptive digital filters, equalizers and beamformers, error control coders and crytography architectures, low-power digital systems, and computer arithmetic. He has published more than 320 papers in these areas. He is the author of the book VLSI Digital Processing Systems (New York: Wiley, 1999) and coedited the book Digital Signal Processing for Multimedia Systems (New York: Marcel Dekker, 1999). Dr. Parhi received the 2001 W. R. G. Baker Prize Paper Award from the IEEE, a Golden Jubilee Medal from the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society in 1999, a 1996 Design Automation Conference Best Paper Award, the 1994 Darlington and 1993 Guillemin-Cauer Best Paper Awards from the IEEE Circuits and Systems Society, the 1991 Paper Award from the IEEE Signal Processing Society, the 1991 Browder Thompson Prize Paper Award from the IEEE, and the 1992 Young Investigator Award from the National Science Foundation. He has served on the editorial boards of the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON SIGNAL PROCESSING, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS, PART II, ANALOG AND DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING, the IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON VLSI SYSTEMS, and the IEEE SIGNAL PROCESSING LETTERS. He is an editor of the IEEE JOURNAL OF VLSI SYSTEMS.

Authorized licensed use limited to: Yonsei Univ. Downloaded on June 23,2026 at 11:28:50 UTC from IEEE Xplore. Restrictions apply.

